A Complete COLLECTION OF Farewell Sermons, Preached by Mr. Calamy. Dr. Manton.
Mr. Caryl. Mr. Case. Mr. Jenkins. Mr. Baxter. Dr. Jacomb. Dr. Bates. Mr.
Watson. Mr. Lie. Mr. Mead. Dr. Seaman. Mr. Venning. Mr. Brooks. Mr. Collings.
Mr. Newcomen. Mr. Beerman. Mr. Cradacott Mr. Sclater. Mr. Pledger. Mr. Bull.
Mr. Lamb. Mr. Wadsworth. Mr. Cooper. Mr. G. N. Mr. Gaspine. Mr. Evank. Mr.
George Thorn.


TOGETHER, With Mr. Ash his Funeral Sermon, Mr. Nalton's Funeral Sermon, Mr.
Lye's Rehearsal at the conclusion of the last Morning Exercise, at Alhallowes
Lombard Street, Mr. Calamy's Sermon Preached at Aldermanbury, December. 28th.
last. And Mr. Watson's Sermon against Popery.

With their several Prayers.

Revised and Corrected from the many Faults of former Editions: and now
Collected into one entire Volume, more perfect than any other extant,
containing 42 Sermons.

London, Printed in the Year, 1663.

The CONTENTS.
MR. Calamy's Sermon on 2 Samuel 24.14 2 Dr. Manton on Heb. 12.1 3 Mr. Caryl on
Rev. 3. v. 4. latter part 4 Mr. Case on Rev. 2.5 5 Mr. Jenkin's forenoon Sermon
on Heb. 11.38. the former part of that Verse Mr. Jenkin's afternoon Sermon on
Exodus 3.2, 3, 4, 5. Verses. 6 Mr. Baxter on Colos. 2.6, 7 7 Dr. Jacomb's
forenoon Sermon on Joh. 8.28 Dr. Jacomb's afternoon Sermon on the same 8 Dr.
Bate's forenoon Sermon on Heb. 13.20, 21. Verses Dr. Bate's afternoon Sermon on
the same 9 Mr. Watson's forenoon Sermon on John 13.34 Mr. Watson's afternoon
Sermon on 2 Cor. 7.1. Mr. Watson's Sermon, August 19. on Esaias 3.10, 11 10 Mr.
Lies first Sermon on Phil. 4.1 Mr. Lies second Sermon on the same 11 Mr. Mead
on 1 Cor. 1.3 12 Mr. Galamie's Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Ash, on Esaias 57.1
13 Dr. Seaman on Heb. 13.20, 21. 14 Mr. Venning on Heb. 10.23 15 Mr. Newcomen
on Rev. 3.3 16 Mr. Brook's Sermon 17 Mr. Collins on Jude, ver. 3 18 Dr.
Horton's Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Nalton, on 2 Cor. 4.7 19 Mr. Beerman 20
Mr. Lie at Conclusion of the Morning Exercise in Lombard Street, on John 13.17
21 Mr. Cradacott on Phil. 4. latter part verse 9 22 Mr. Bull of Newington's
forenoon Sermon on John 14.16 Mr. Bull's afternoon Sermon, on Acts 20.32 23 Mr.
Pledger on Rev. 2.9, 10 24 Mr. Lamb on John 14.23 25 Mr. Sclater on 1 John 5.1
26 Mr. Calamy's Sermon December 28. on 1 Samuel 4.13 27 Mr. Gaspine's two Sermons
on Luke 12.32 28 Mr. Evank on Mat. 26.39 29 Mr. Cooper's two Sermons on Phil.
4.9. 30 Mr. Wadsworth on Rev. 2.5 31 Mr. G. N. on Romans 8.38, 39 32 Mr. Watson
against Popery, 1 Cor. 10.14 PRAYERS of several of these Divines 33 Mr Thorn of
Waymouth, on Psalm. 37.34
MASTER Calamys Sermon, Preached August 17. 1662.
2 Samuel 24.14. And David said unto Gad, I am in a great strait, let us fall now
into the hand of the Lord (for his mercies are great) and let me not fall into
the hand of man.
IN which words we have three Parts.

1. David's great perplexity and distress, I am in a great strait. 2. David's
Resolution. 1. Affirmative, Let us fall into the hands of the Lord. 2.
Negative, Let me not fall into the hands of man.
3. We have the Reasons of David's choice, for the Mercies of God are great. The
mercies of wicked men are cruel; therefore let me not fall into the hands of
men: but the mercies of God are many, and great; therefore let us now fall into
the hands of God.
1. For the first, that is, David's great distress, wherein we must speak.

1. To the distress it self: Then

2. To the person thus perplexed: I am in a great strait: David a great man,
David a Godly man.

1. In the perplexity it self we shall consider,

1. The reality of this perplexity.

2. The greatness of it.

1. For the reality of it: after David had sinned in numbering the people, God
sends the Prophet Gad to him, and puts three things to his choice, as you may
read in verse. 12. God was determined to make David smart for numbering the
people, but leaves it to David's liberty, whether he would have seven years
famine, or three months to flee before his enemies, or three days pestilence:
This was a posing question, and David had cause to be in a great strait; for
these objects are not amiable in their own nature, they are objects to be
avoided and declined; in the first view of them they seem to be equally
miserable, therefore David had cause to say he was in a strait.

2. This perplexity was not only real, but exceeding great: I am in a great
strait: and there were two things made this so great.

1. The greatness of the punishments proposed, Famine, Sword, and Plague: these
are the three Besomes with which God sweeps mankind from off the Earth: these
are Gods three Iron whips, by which he chastises sinful man: these are the
three Arrows shot out of the Quiver of Gods wrath, for the punishment of man;
they are as one calls them, Tonsurae humani generis. In Rev. 6. you shall
read of four Horses, when the four first Seals were opened, a white Horse, a
red Horse, a black Horse, and a pale Horse: After Christ had ridden on the
white Horse, propagating the Gospel, then follows the red Horse, a type of War;
then the black Horse, an Hieroglyphick of Famine: then the pale Horse, the
emblem of Pestilence. Now God was resolved to ride on one of these Horses, and
David must choose upon which God should ride: this is a great strait: let me
present David's lifting up his eyes to Heaven, and speaking to God thus; O my
God, what is this message thou have sent me? thou offerest me three things: I
am in a strait, I know which to resuse, but which to choose I know not: Shall
the Land of Canaan a Land flowing with milk and honey, shall this Land endure
seven years Famine, and be turned into a Wilderness, and dispeopled? and shall
I, whose hands thou have taught to fight, and whose fingers to war, shall I
that have subdued all mine enemies, shall I in my old age, and all my Captains,
fly three months before our enemies, and be driven to Caves and Rocks to hide
our selves? O thou my God, who art my refuge, shall I and my people be a prey
to the Pestilence, that walks in darkness and destruction, that walks at
noon day? O my God, I know not what to do, I am in a great strait.

2. The second reason why this strait was so great, was* because of the guilt
of sin that lay on David's spirit: for David knew that this severe message was
the fruit of the sin he committed in numbering the people. But you will say,
Why, was it a sin in David to number the people? Moses had often numbered the
people, three times, and it was not counted sin. Josephus answers, the sin of
David was, because he did not require the half shekel, which he was to have had
from all that were numbered, Exodus 30.12, 13.

Others say he sinned in numbering all ages, whereas he was to number but from
twenty years: but these are conjectural reasons. I conceive the sin of David
was, because he did it without a lawful call, and for an unlawful end: Sine
causa legitima; he sinned in the manner rather than in the matter; for there
was no cause for him to number the people but curiosity, and no end but
vainglory: Go through all the tribes of Israel, and number the people, that I
may know the number of my people, v. ^. David's heart was lifted up with pride,
and creature-confidence: he begins to boast of the multitude of his people, and
to trust in an arm of flesh: therefore God sends the Prophet to David, to prick
the bladder of his pride; as if God should say, I will teach you to number the
people by lessening the number of your people. Now the burden of his sin did
add much to the burden of this heavy message: verse. 13. After David had
numbered the people, his heart smote him: the message smites him, and his heart
smites him; and he said, I have sinned greatly in that which I have done: now I
beseech thee take away the iniquity of thy servant, for I have done very
foolishly. If David had been to suffer this great punishment out of love to
God, or for a good Conscience, he would not have been so distracted. There are
two sorts of straits in Scripture; some suffered for God and a good Conscience,
and there are straits suffered for sin.

1. There are straits suffered for God and a good Conscience, Heb. 11.36, 37.
those Martyrs there were driven to great straits: but these were straits for
God and a good Conscience, and these straits were the Saints greatest
enlargements, they were so sweetened to them by the consolations and
supportations of Gods Spirit; a Prison was a Paradise to them, Heb. 10.34. they
look joyfully at the spoiling of their goods, Acts 5.41. They departed from the
presence of the Council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer
shame for his Name. Straits for a good conscience are greatest enlargements;
therefore St. Paul glories in his strait, Paul a Prisoner, etc.

2. There are straits suffered for sin, and these are envenomed by the guilt of
sin: sin puts poison into all our distresses and perplexities. Now such was the
strait into which David was now driven, it was a strait caused by fin, and that
made it so unwelcome and uncomfortable: so that from hence I gather this
Observation.

Doctrine. That sin and iniquity brings persons and Nations into mavelous
labyrinths and perplexities; into time, real, and great molestations; and a man
free from sin, is free in the midst of straits; a man guilty of sin, is in a
strait in the midst of freedom.

After Adam had sinned in eating the forbidden fruit, the whole world was a
prison to him: Paradise it self was an Hell to him, he knew not where to hide
himself from the presence of God. After that Cain had murdered his Brother
Abel, he was brought into such a strait, that he was afraid that every one that
met him would slay him. Alas, poor Cain, how many there was then in the world?
We read, but his Father and Mother? yet such was his distress, teat he cries
out, every one that met him would slav him, Genesis 4.14. Into what a strait did
sin bring the old world? the deluge of sin, brought a deluge of water to drown
them. Into what a strait did sin bring Sodom and Gomorrah? the fire of Lust
reigning in Sodom and Gomorrah, brought down fire from Heaven to destroy them.
Sin brings external, internal, and eternal straits upon persons and Nations.

1. Sin brings external straits; Sin brings Famine, Sword, and Plague; Sin
brings Agues and Fevers, Go^t and Stone, and all manner of Diseases: yea Sin
brings death it self, which is the wages of sin. Read Lev. 26. and Deuteronomy. 23.
and you will see a black Roll of curses, which were the fruit of sin, Sin
brought Sion into Babylon; and when the Jews had murdered Christ, forty vears
after they were brought into that distress, when the City was besieged by Titus
Vespatian, that they did eat one another, the Mother did eat her Child, that
whereas David had a choice which of the three he would have, either Famine,
Plague or Sword, the poor Jews had all three concatenated together in the
siege. Sin brings all manner of external Plagues.

2. Sin brought persons and Nations into eternal straits: sin brings
soul-plagues, which are worse then bodily plagues: sin brings hardness of
heart, blindness of mind, a spirit of slumber, a reprobate sense: sin brings a
spiritual Famine upon a Land, it brings a Famine on the Word, Amos 8.11. Sin
causes God to take away the Gospel from a people; sin brings internal plagues:
sin awakens Conscience, and fills it full of perplexities. Into what a strait
did sin drive Judas after he had betrayed Christ? Into what a strait did sin
drive Spira? Saint Paul glorified in his tribulations for God; but when he
speaks of his sin, he cries out, O miserable man that I am, who shall deliver
me from this body of death? David a valiant man, when he speaks of sin, says,
they are too heavy a burden for him to bear? A wounded conscience who can bear?
says the wise Man.

3. Sin brings eternal straits. O the strait that a wicked man shall be
brought into at the great and dreadful day of Judgment, when all the world
shall be on fire about him! when he shall call to the Mountains to hide him,
and to the rocks to cover him from the wrath of God; then will he cry out with
David, I am, O Lord, in a great strait. And when the wicked shall be condemned
to Hell, who can express the straits they then shall be in? Bind them hand and
foot, and cast them into everlasting darkness, Mat. 25. When a wicked man shall
be bound with ever lasting chains of darkness, then he will cry out, I am in a
great strait, Consider what Dives says to Abraham; he desires that Lazarus
might but dip the tip of his finger in water, and that he might cool his
tongue; not his whole body, but his tongue; but that would not be granted.

It is impossible the tongue of man should set out the great straits the damned
suffer in Hell, both in regard of the greatness and everlastingness of them.

This is all I shall say for the Explication.

Use 1. I chiefly aim at the Application; Does sin bring Nations and Persons
into external, internal, and eternal straits? then this sadly reproves those
that choose to commit sin to avoid perplexity. There are thousands in England
guilty of this, that to avoid poverty, will lie, cheat and cousen, and to gain
an estate will sell God and a good conscience, and to avoid the loss of estate
and imprisonment, will do any thing; they will be sure to be of that Religion
which is uppermost, be it what it will. Now give me leave this morning to speak
three things to these sort of men, and O that my words might prevail with them.

1. Consider it is sin only that makes trouble deserve the name of trouble; for
when we suffer for Gods sake, or a good Conscience, these troubles are so
sweetened by the consolations of Heaven, that they are no troubles at all:
therefore in Queen Mary's days the Martyrs wrote to their friends out of
prison, If you knew the comforts we have in Prison, you would wish to be with
us. I am in Prison before I am in Prison, says Mr. Sanders.

Famous is the story of the three Children: they were in a great strait when
cast into the fiery Furnace: Bind them (...) and and foot, and cast them into
the Furnace; but when they were there, they were unbound, Dan. 3.25. says
Nebuchadnezzar, Did not we cast three men bound into the midst of the fire? and
lo I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and the form of the
fourth is like the Son of God. I have often told you when three are cast into
the fire for a good Conscience, God will make the fourth: therefore, I say,
straits and sufferings for God are not worth the name of straits. David was
often driven into straits, 1 Samuel 30.6. he was sore distressed when his Town
was burnt, and his Wives and Children taken captives by the Amalekites: I, but
that was a distress of danger, not of sin; therefore he encouraged himself in
the Lord his God. Jehosaphat was in a great strait, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. We know not
what to do, says he; this was a strait of danger, not caused by his sin; and
God quickly delivered him: but the strait that David was in, was caused by his
sin, and that made it so bitter. I am loath to enlarge here: St. Paul was in a
great strait, Phil. 3.23. but this was a blessed strait, an Evangelical strait,
says St. Chrysostom, He knew not whether to die for his own sake, or to live
for the Churches sake, were best: he was willing to adjourn his going to Heaven
for the good of the people of God. Nay, Christ was in a strait, Luke 12.15. I
have a baptism to be baptized withal, and how am I straightened till it be
accomplished? I am to shed my blood for my Elect; this is the baptism he speaks
of.

This was a strait of dear affection to the Elect of God: all these were
blessed straits: but now a strait caused by sin, these are imbittered and
envenomed by the guilt of sin, and sense of Gods wrath. It is sin that makes
straits deserve the name of straits; therefore you are spiritually mad that
commit sin to avoid straits.

2. There is more evil in the least sin, than in the greatest outward calamity
whatsoever: this the world will not believe; therefore St. Austin says, That a
man ought not to tell a lie, though he might save all the world from hell: for
there is more evil in one lie, than there is good in the salvation of all the
world. I have often told you the story of St. Austin, says he, If Hell were on
one side, and sin on the other, and I must choose one, I would choose hell rather
than sin: for God is the Author of Hell, but it is blasphemy to say he is the
Author of Sin. There is a famous story of Charles the ninth, King of France, he
sent a message to the Prince of Conde, a zealous Protestant, gives him three
things to choose, either to go to Mass, or to be put to death, or to suffer
banishment all his life long: says he, Primum Deo, juvante nunquam eligo: The
first (God helping) I will never choose, I abhor the Idolatry of the Mass; but
for the two other, I leave it to the choice of the King to do as he pleases:
there is more evil in the least sin, than the greatest misery.

3. The third thing I would have you consider, that whosoever goes out of Gods
way to avoid danger, shall certainly meet with greater danger. Balaam went out
of Gods way, Numb. 22.22. and God sent an Angel with a drawn sword, and he
riding upon an Ass, verse 26. the Angel stood in a narrow place, where was no
way to go from the right hand or from the left: if his Ass had not fallen
under him, he had been run through by the sword of the Angel. Jonah, for fear of
the King of Nineveh, went out of Gods way, but he met with a mighty tempest, he
met with a Whale. What do you do when you commit sin? you make way to be cast
into the eternal prison of Hell; you destroy your precious souls, to save your
perishing bodies.

Use 2. If sin be the father and mother of all perplexity and distresses, then
I beseech you, let us above all things in the world abhor sin: all the curses
of the Bible are all due only to a sinner; and all the curses not named in the
Bible: for that is observable, Deuteronomy. 28.36. every plague that is not written in
the Book shall light upon him: there are strange punishments to the workers of
iniquity, Job 31.3. Is not destruction to the wicked, a strange punishment to
the workers of iniquity? sin it brings the sinner to little ease: little ease
at death, little ease at the day of Judgment, and little ease in Hell,
tribulation and anguish: the word in the Greek is (...), little ease to every
soul that does iniquity: O my beloved, will you promise me to look upon sin,
and consider it in all its woeful consequence, as the Father, Mother, and Womb,
out of which come external, eternal, and internal straits? more particularly
there are twelve sins I especially command you to take heed of and avoid.

1. Take heed of Covetousness: the love of the world will pierce you through
with many sorrows? the love of money is the root of all evil; the love of the
world drowns men in perdition.

2. Take heed of the sin of Pride: into what a woeful strait did Pride bring
Haman! God crossed him in what he most desired: God made him hold the stirrup,
while Mordecay rode in Triumph; and God hanged him on the Gallows which he had
made for Mordecay.

3. Take heed of Drunkenness; Look not on the Wine when it gives its color in
the cup, etc. Drunkenness;will bring you into snares, in will bite like a
Serpent, and sting like an Adder.

4. Take heed of Disobedience and Rebellion against the Commandments of God: it
brought Jonah to the three nights and three days in the Whales belly.

5. Take heed of Fornication and Adultery, and all uncleanness; this brought
Sampson to a woeful strait: this brought David and Solomon into great perplexity.

6. Take heed of Oppression, and all acts of Injustice: this brought Ahab into
great straits insomuch that the Dogs licked his blood.

7. Take heed of unnecessary familiarity with wicked men: this brought
Jehosaphat into a great strait.

8. Take heed of mis-using the Prophets of God: this made God destroy the
children of Israel without remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16.

9. Take heed of coming profanely to the Lords Table: this brought the Church
of Corinth into a great distress, insomuch as the Apostle says, For this cause
many among you are sick, and many weak, and many fallen a sleep.

10. Take heed of loathing the Manna of your souls: this brought the children
of Israel into woeful misery, that God destroyed all their carcasses in the
wilderness, save Joshua and Caleb.

Take heed of slighting the Gospel: this brought Queen Mary's persecution, as
many godly and learned men that fled for Religions sake out of the Land; have
confessed their thankfulness for, and unfruitfulness under the Gospel in King
Edward the sixths time, brought the persecution in Queen Mary's time.

11. Take heed of losing your first love: that makes God threaten to take away
his Candlestick.

12. Take heed of profaning the Christian Sabbath, which is much profaned
every where; a day that Christ by his resurrection from the dead has
consecrated to be kept holy to God: Certainly if the Jews were so severely
punished for breaking the Sabbath, which was set a part in memory of the
Creation, surely God will severely punish those that break the Sabbath, set a
part in memory of Christ's Resurrection. May be same will say, I have committed
many of these sins, but am not brought into any strait. Remember it was nine
months after David had numbered the people, before he was in this strait; but
as sure as God is in Heaven, sin will bring straits sooner or latter; though
one sin a hundred years, yet shall he be accursed: may be thy prosperity makes
way for thy damnation; and this is thy greatest distress, that thou go on in
sin and prosperity.

Use 3. If sin brings a Nation into mavelous labyrinths, learn what great
cause we have to fear that God shall bring this Nation into great distress,
because of the great abominations are committed in the midst of it: Our King
and Sovereign was in a great strait in the days of his banishment, but God
has delivered him. God has delivered this Nation out of great straits; but
alas, we requite God evil for good, and in stead of repenting of old sins, we
commit new sins. I am told there are new Oaths invented, Oaths not fit to be
named in any place, much less here: Certainly the drunkenness and adultery, the
oppression and injustice, the bribery and Sabbath-breaking, the vain and wicked
swearing and forswearing this Nation is guilty of, must of necessity provoke
God to say of us, as he did of them in Jer. 15.29. Shall I not visit for these
things, says the Lord? shall not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this?
God will not only punish us, but be avenged on us. There is no way to avoid a
National Desolation, but by a National Reformation.

Lastly, Learn what cause you of this Congregation and Parish, what cause you
have to expect that God should bring you into great straits, because of your
great unthankfulness and unfruitfulness under the means of Grace, you that have
so long enjoyed the Gospel; you have had the Gospel in this place in great
abundance; Dr. Tailor he served an Apprenticeship in this place; Dr. Stoughton
served another Apprenticeship, and I, through Divine Mercy, have served three
Apprenticeships, and half another almost among you; you have had the Spirit of
God seven and thirty years in the faithful Ministry of the Word, knocking at
the door of your hearts, but many of you have hardened your hearts. Are there
not some of you, I only put the question, that begin to loath the Manna of your
Souls, and to look back toward Egypt again? Are there not some of you have
itching ears, and would fain have Preachers that would feed you with dainty
phrases, and begin not to care for a Minister that unrips your Consciences,
speaks to your hearts and souls, and would force you into Heaven by frighting
you out of your sins? Are there not some of you, that by often hearing Sermons,
are become Sermon-proof, that know how to sleep and scoff away Sermons? I would
be glad to say, there are but few such; but the Lord knows there are too too
many that by long preaching, get little good by preaching, insomuch that I have
often said it, and say it now again, there is hardly any way to raise the price
of the Gospel Ministry, but by the want of it: And that I may flatter not you,
you have not profited under the means you have enjoyed, therefore you may
justly expect God may bring you into a strait, and take away the Gospel from
you: God may justly take away your Ministers by death, or other ways. Have you
not lost your first love? Why did God take away the Gospel from the Church of
Ephesus, but because they lost their first love? Are you not like the Church of
Loadicea, that was neither hot nor cold? therefore God may justly spew you out
of his mouth: what God will do with you, I know not; a few weeks will
determine: God can make a great change in a little time; we leave all to God;
but in the mean time let me commend one Text of Scripture to you, Jer. 13.16.
Give glory to the Lord your God, before he cause darkness, and before your feet
stumble upon the dark Mountains, and while ye look for light, he turn it into
the shadow of death, and make it gross darkness. Verse 17. But if you will not
hear it, my soul shall weep in secret places for your pride, and mine eyes
shall weep sore, and run down with tears, because the Lords flock is carried
away captive. Give glory to God by confessing and repenting of your sins, by
humbling your souls before the Lord, before darkness come, and who knows but
this may prevent darkness?

Dr. Manton's Sermon.
Hebrews 12.1. Wherefore, seeing we are compassed about with so great a cloud
of Witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily
beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us.
IN the former Chapter you have a spiritual Chronicle, or a Catalogue of the
Lords Worthies, and all the eminent effects of their Faith; and now the Apostle
comes to make use of this History, that he had produced through so many
successions of Ages of all the holy men of God that excelled in Faith.
Wherefore seeing we are compassed about with so great a cloud of Witnesses, etc.

The Text is wholly Hortatory. In it observe, 1. The Premises, or principle
the Apostle works upon, seeing we are compassed about with, etc. 2. The
practical Inferences, which are deduced from thence, and they are two. 1. One
concerning the private part of our duty, Let us lay aside every weight, etc.
there is something external and without, like to clog us in our way to Heaven,
-- every weight, and something within that will hinder and trouble us within:
therefore he says, And the sin which does so easily beset us. 2. Here is the
positive part, Let us run with patience the race that is set before us. There Is
motion [Run] the manner [with patience] the stage or way [the race that is set
before us.]



My purpose is to give you some brief thoughts upon this useful and practical
inference of the Apostle, from the History of the faithful before recorded.
Therefore I will sum up the whole Text in this point.

Doct. The people of God that have such a multitude of examples of holy Men and
Women set before them, should prepare themselves to run the spiritual race with
more patience and cheerfulness.

There are two things in this Doctrine, the Encouragement and the Duty. I shall
open both with respect to the circumstances of the Text.

First, The Encouragement; A multitude of examples, or, as in the Text, Seeing
we are compassed about with so great a cloud of Witnesses. Mark here are
witnesses, a great cloud of witnesses, and these, compassing us round about.

First, Here are witnesses; by that term we are to understand those worthy
Saints mentioned and reckoned up in the former Chapter, Abel, Enoch, Noah,
Abraham, Moses, etc. All the Saints of God that have had experience of the
goodness of his providence to them, and the fulfilling of his promises, they
are all called Witnesses; why? because the depose a testimony for God, and to
speak to future generations to be constant, as they were, that they might
receive the like reward. This witness was partly in their Faith, and partly in
the fruit of their Faith.

1. They witnessed b^ their faith, ( John 3 33.) He that has received his
testimony, has set to his ^eal that God is true. A man that has soundly
digested the promises, that expresses his faith by cheerfulness and patience
under all difficulties, troubles, delays, and those sundry trials that he meets
with, he gives it under hand and seal, proclaims it to the world that he has
to do with the true God. And,

2. They witnessed in the fruits of their faith, as they give us an instance of
Gods fidelity toward them that faithfully adhere to, and firmly believe in his
promises; so it is said, Heb. 6.12. Be not slothful, but followers of them who
through faith and patience inherit the promise. Let Faith but set Patience a
work, do but hold out a little while with God, and you may learn by the example
of all those holy men, we shall inherit the promises, they shall be made good
to a tittle, and nor one thing fail of all that the Lord has spoken; as those
holy men were exercised and tossed to and fro, but it succeeded well with them
at the last. O then let us hearken to the deposition of these worthy witnesses
that are recorded in the Scripture, and with such an invincible resolution as
theirs was, let us hold out our course toward true happiness: If we do not,
they that are now propounded as Witnesses to us, will at the day of Judgment
be produced as witnesses against us. And pray also let us remember that we are
to continue and keep afoot that testimony to succeeding generations: for not
only the Prophets and holy men of God, were Gods witnesses, but all Gods people
also are his witnesses, Isai. 43.10. by their faith, patience, diligence,
constancy and cheerfulness under afflictions, they are to give it under hand
and seal to the world, that God is a true and faithful God. But now, if we
either by our sinful walking, or by our drooping discouragements, discredit
Christ and his profession, then we, are witnesses against him, we deny that
Religion which we would seem to profess and cry up, ( Tit. 1.16.) They profess
they know God, but in works they deny him; and the more dangerous, because
deeds are more deliberate than words, and so a greater evidence of what we
think in our hearts. If we by drooping discouragements and sinful walking
discredit Religion, we deny it, and do in effect put the lie upon Christ.
Therefore let us remember they were witnesses, and so must we.

Secondly, By a figurative speech they are called a Cloud, [having a cloud of
witnesses] why so? I might trouble you with many conceits Interpreters have had
of this word Cloud; say some, because of the raisedness of their spirits,
because Clouds fly aloft: Clouds, for the fruitfulness of their Doctrine, as
Clouds send down fruitful showers upon the earth; and Clouds, because they cool
and cover us from the heat; so some would gloss for our comfort: others with
more judgment say, a Cloud with allusion to the pillar of cloud which conducted
the Israelites to Canaan; yet neither does this come up fully to the scope of
the Apostle; for the Apostle speaks not of a Cloud that goes before us, but of
a Cloud that compasses us round about, and therefore a Cloud; the reason why
it is called so, is the number and multitude of those Witnesses, as a Cloud is
made up of a multitude of vapors gathered together, and condensed into one
body; and so the expression is often used, Ezekiel. 38.9. Thou shall be like a
cloud to cover the Land, etc. noting the increase of the people when God would
restore them, the multitude of Converts; and so in profane Authors, Livie has
such an expression, an army of men is called a cloud. But this is enough to
show the intent of this expression, that there are a multitude, a very great
number: though the godly comparatively, and with respect to the wicked, are a
few, yet considered in themselves, they are a great number; for, if the
Martyrs, and those glorious instances of Heroic says, and that under the Old
Testament, when Gods Interest was more confined to one People, if there were
such a Church then, of so great a number, what will the whole Church of the Old
and New Testament be, when we shall meet together in Heaven? We are often
discouraged with the paucity of Professors, and are apt to think our selves to
be left alone, 1 Kings 19.10. But let us remember there is a Cloud of
Witnesses, we are not solitary now, and certainly we shall not want company
when we come to Heaven, To the innumerable company of, etc.

Again, it meets with an ordinary and strong temptation which Satan suggests to
the heart of the godly, that they are singular and matchless in their
afflictions, that none of the people of God have ever under gone such
difficulties as they are exposed unto; and this makes them question their
Fathers affections, and put themselves out of the number of his children. I,
but all these things are accomplished in the Saints of God before you, here is
a Cloud of Witnesses that have been exercised and tried to purpose, 1 Pet. 4.9.
They are troubled with a busy Devil, a naughty world, a corrupt heart, all
have had their trial from Gods correcting hand, The same afflictions are
accomplished in your brethren, that are in the world. So that we have many
fellows, our lot is no harder than the Saints of God that have gone before us,
for there is a Cloud of Witnesses.

3. Observe, the Apostle calls it a Cloud that compasses us round about, i.e.
We have instances for every Trial, Temptation, Duty that we are put upon: Here
we have examples of those that have fulfilled the commands of Christ on this
side with an undaunted courage, and the examples of those that have born the
Cross of Christ with an invincible patience: here we have examples of those
that have conquered right hand temptations, that have despised the delights of
the world; and there are those that have conquered left hand temptations, that
have not been broken and affrighted with the terrors of the world; all the
Saints of God have trodden that way; the same paths wherein we are to walk
after them: we cannot look this way or that way, but we have instances of
Faith, confidence in God, and patience, we are compassed about, etc. In short,
here lies the encouragement that Christians should propound to themselves.

1. That there are examples. Christians of latter times have more to answer for
their infidelity, than those of former Ages; they that first believed the
promises, believed without such a cloud of witnesses, or multitude of examples;
many have gone before us that have broken the Ice, and that found good success
from their own experience, they have commended God to us, as a true and
faithful God, and will not you go on? When Jonathan and his Armor-bearer
climbed up the Rocks of the Philistines, then the people were encouraged to go
up after; so here are some that have gone before you, and it has succeeded
well with them.

2. These examples are many; not one or two that might be supposed to be
singularly assisted, and to have eminent Prerogatives above the rest of their
brethren, but many in every Age, a whole cloud of them,

3. There are examples of many rare and excellent men, the best that ever lived
under Heaven: Take (my brethren) the Prophets for an example, etc. Jam. 5.10.

4. They are propounded to us, not for their words only, and for their
profession, but for their deeds, for their bitter sufferings; and they
abundantly manifest to us, that there is nothing impossible in our duty, or any
thing so difficult but may be overcome through Christ's strength enabling us:
They all had the same nature we have; they were of the like passion with us,
flesh and bl^od as we are, of the same relations and concernments; and then on
the other side, we have the same cause with them, the same recompense of reward
to encourage us, the same God and Savior to recompense us; he suffered for us
as well as for them; therefore we should follow in their steps, and hold fast
our confidence to the end, for they have showed us, that poverty, reproaches,
death it self, and all those things that would look harsh, and with a ghastly
aspect upon the eyes of the world, are not such evils, but that a Believer may
rejoice in them, and triumph over them. I say, they have showed the
blandishments of the world have not such a charm, but they may be renounced
without any loss of considerable joy and contentment, and that the duties of
Christianity are not so hard, but that a little waiting upon God will bring in
grace enough to perform them; therefore says the Apostle, Seeing we have a
cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside, etc. And so I come to the Encouragement,
to the

Second thing, and that is the duty here pressed. 1. Here is the privative. 2.
The positive part of our duty: Here is Mortification and Vivification.
Mortification, Let us lay aside, etc. Vivification, Let us run with patience,
etc. In both the branches, he alludes to terms proper to Races: In a Race you
know men strip themselves of their clothes, and whatever is burdensome and
heavy, that they may be the more light of foot; and so the Apostle bids us lay
aside every weight; and they do withal diet themselves, that they might have no
clog from within, 1 Cor. 9.25. Every man that striveth for the mastery, is
temperate in all things, i.e. They took care that they did not clog and
indispose themselves for the race they were to run; but they verily run only
for a corruptible Crown, we for a Crown that is incorruptible and glorious: so
according to this double practice of Races, we are to cast aside every weight
from without, etc. So here is a double object, la^ing aside every weight, and of
sin, There Is onus externum, the weight without, that presses us down, and
hinders our speed; and then there is impedimentum internum, there is sin, that
which weakens within; by reason of the former, we make little speed; by reason
of the latter, we are often interrupted; and therefore we must do as they, that
they might be swift and expedite, lay aside ever weight, and be more temperate
in ^l^ things. Herein a Runner in a Race differs from a Traveller, a Traveller
strengthens himself for his Journey as well as he can, his clothes on,
sometimes carries a great burden with him; but a Runner of a Race makes himself
as light as he can. But to come more particularly to the words.

First, (lay aside every weight.) By weight is meant those things that burden
the soul, and make our heavenly progress more tedious and cumbersome: and by
weight is meant (I think) the delights and cares of the world, the multitude of
secular business, all our earthly contentments and affairs, so far as they are
a burden to us, hinder us in our way to heaven; these must all be put off, Luke
21.3, 4. says Christ, Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts
be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, etc.
The heart that is deprest, cannot be so free for God, and the Offices of our
heavenly Calling, when we give way to surfeiting, drunkenness, and cares of
this world,

1. The heart may be overcharged with the delights of the World; Surfeiting and
Drunkenness must not be taken in the gross notion; you must not think of
spewing, reeling, vomiting, as if to avoid these were a full compliance with
Christ's direction, the heart may be overcharged when the stomach is not; there
is a dry drunkenness, and a more refined surfeiting, and that is when the heart
grows heavy, unfit for Prayer, relishes not the things of the Spirit, when the
delights of the Flesh clog the wheel, abate that vigor and cheerfulness that
we should show forth in the worship of God and holy Actions, when the delights
of the flesh withdraw us from that watchfulness and diligence that is necessary
in taking care for our souls, then the heart is overcharged; voluptuous living
is a great sin, it choaks the seed of Piety so soon as planted in the heart, so
that they can bring nothing to perfection, it brings a brawn and a deadness
upon the Conscience and Affections; there is nothing that hardens the heart so
much, as the softness of carnal pleasure, ( Jude. 19.) Sensual, having not the
spirit; Sensuality quenches our natural bravery and briskness of spirit that
becomes a man; much more does it hinder the sublime operations of the spirit of
God. Well then, remember Christians, you are not only Travelers by the way,
but Runners in a Race: If we were to speak to you only under the notion of
Travelers in a way, this were enough to wean you from the delights of the
flesh, 1 Pet. 2.11. As strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts which
was against the soul. The more you indulge these fleshly lusts, the more you
hearten and strengthen the great enemy of your souls, and starve the better
parts; but you are as Runners in a Race: by this Metaphor the duty is more
bound upon you, much more should you beat down the body, and keep it in
subjection; the Apostle has a notable word, 1 Cor. 9.27. I keep under my body,
and bring it in subjection, etc. I heat down my body; you must either keep
under pleasures, or pleasures will keep you under; for a man is soon brought
under the power, dominion, and tyranny of evil customs, and me so brutish
pleasure, by indulging the lusts of the flesh, 1 Cor 6.12. Be but a little
addicted to an* one thing, and you are brought under the power of it; the flesh
waxes wanton and imperious, and a slavery grows upon you by degrees: The more
you cocker carnal affections, the more, they increase upon you; and therefore
you must hold the reins hard, exercise a powerful restraint. Solomon in his
Penitentials gives us an account of his own folly; and how fearfully he was
corrupthis way, Eccles. 2.20. Whatsoever mine eyes desired, I kept not from
them, I withheld not my heart from any joy, etc. This was that which brought
him to such a lawless excess, and at length to fall off from God. When we give
nature the full swing, and use pleasure with too free a license, the heart is
insensibly corrupted, and the necessities of life are turned into diseases, and
all that you do, it is but in compliance with your lusts; your eating and
drinking is but a mea-offering, and drink offering to lusts and carnal
appetites. I remember Solomon says, Prove. 29.21. He that delicately brings
up his servant from a child, shall have him become his Son at length, i.e.
allow a servant too much liberty, and he will no more know his condition, but
grow contemptuous, bold and troublesome, so it is here: We are all the worse
for license; natural desires, unless they feel fetters and prudent restraints,
grow unruly and excessive: And therefore it is good to abate the liberty of the
flesh, that the body may be a servant, and not a Master; when you deny your
selves in nothing, but satisfy every vain appetite, a custom grows upon the
foul, and Intemperance proves a Trade, and an habitual distemper, so that you
cannot when you would, upon prud^m and pious respects refrain and command your
desires; and therefore it is good sometimes to thwart and vex the flesh, as
David poured out the water of Bethelem that he longed for, 2 Samuel 23.17. not to
deny our selves in what we affect and covet; lust grows into a wanton, and
bold, and imperious, and so prescribes upon us, and we are brought under the
power of these things.

2. The business and cares of this world; for these immoderately followed, and
not in obedience to God, are a sore burden, and makes the soul heavy, and
allows no time and strength for God and his service, and those happy
opportunities of private communion with him, when we are encumbered with much
service, we neglect that one thing necessary, Luke 10.42. and therefore
Christians must take heed that the lean kind do not devour the fat; that Sarah
be not thrown out of doors in stead of Hagar; that Religion be not thrust to
the walls, which should be our prime and chief business, while every business
has its time and course. The Scriptures knowing the proneness of our hearts to
temporal things, deals with us as we do with a crooked stick, we bend it so
much the other way, and therefore sometimes they forbid necessary labor, John
6.28. Labor not for the meat which perishes, etc. the meaning is, not
chiefly; but it bends the stick another way, set not your affections on the
things of the earth: A man must have some kind of affection to hi^ work here
below; but we had need to be bent the other way. We may gather (...) is from
this Precept, it is better incroach upon the world, then the world should
incroach upon Godliness. In short, things are a burden and clog to us,
according as our delight and scope is; if the pomp and increase of the world be
our end and scope, then Religion will be looked upon as a burden, that will be
a weight, and all duties of godliness as a melancholy interruption, as they,
Amos 2.8. When will the Sabbath be over? The exercise of godliness will be a
troublesome thing, and we shall go about the work of Religion as if we went
about it not: But, on the other side, if Heaven and heavenly things be our
scope, then the world is a burden, and then we shall use it in the way, but
not abusing, as taking up our rest here, 1 Cor. 7.31, 32. Man has a body and
soul, and he does provide for both but for one in subordination; the soul is
the chief, and therefore we must not so look after the interests and
concernments of the bodily life as to forget the interests of the soul, or to
neglect them. Many will not so grossly idolize present things, so as to renounce
things to come; I but they so often follow the things of the world, that they
neglect their eternal concernments. The happiness of a people, in communion
with God, and therefore that must be looked after; we must take heed that the
cares of the world have not such a hand and power over us, as either to divert
us from or unfit us for these higher and nobler pursuits, the enjoyments of God
in Christ. This is the first thing the Apostle speaks to these spiritual
Racers, to lay aside every weight, that is, the delights of the flesh and the
cares of the world.

Secondly, The next thing to be laid aside, is sin, which does so easily beset
us. As we must guard against things without so we must mortify our corrupt
inclinations within: or else, it will soon make us weary of our heavenly Race,
or faint in it. Sin you know is two fold, Original and Actual. Actual sin is
not meant primarily, for that is not peccatum agens, the sin that easily besets
us, but peccatum transiens, the sin that passes from us; and original sin is
that which is semphatically called sin Romans 7.8 Now this original corruption
may be considered as merely native, or as acquired and improved into evil
customs and habits: for according to men's tempers and constitutions, as they
are severally disposed, so by the corruption of nature they are inclined to one
sin more than another: as the chanel is cut, so corrupt nature finds a vent
and issue: every man there in some predominant sin, and in every regenerate
person some relics of that sin, from whence is the greatest danger of his
soul: thus David speaks of his iniquity, Psalm. 18.23. Well then, this is that
sin that does easily boset us: original sin improved into some tyranny or evil
custom which does increase and prevail upon us more and more. Now this is said
(easily beset us) for three reasons: Partly, because it has a great power and
restraint over us, and implies the whole man, the members the body, the
faculties of the soul; so great an interest has it acquired in our affections,
it does easily beset us, it has great power and command over us. Partly,
because it sticks so close, that we cannot by our own strength lay it aside,
Jer. 13, 23 Can the Ethiopian change his skin? or the Leopard his sports? etc.
A man can as soon change his skin as lay aside his customs, that are so deeply
engraven as the blackness of an Ethiopian* or the spots of Leopard. And partly
because it mingles it self with all our motions and actions, Romans 7.21. etc. It
easily besets us, it is present with us, it impels us, and sollicits us, and
draws us to sin further and further and does make us negligent in what is Gods:
we cannot do or speak any thing, but it will infest us in all our duties of
Piety, Charity, Justice; on every side it is interposing, vexing, thwarting the
motions of the Spirit, and so abates our strength, vigor, and agility, and
retards our course toward heaven and glory: therefore, lay aside, as every
Weight, so every Sin, etc.

Quest. Now what is it to (lay aside?) or how can we lay aside, since sin
sticks so close to us, and is engraven in our natures?

Answ. Certainly, something may be done by us; for this is every where pressed
as our duty, Ephesians. 4.22. Put off the old man, and 1 Pet. 2.11 we may put it
off more and more, though we cannot lay it aside. Then we are said to lay aside
the sin that so easily besets us, when we prevent and break the dominion of it,
that it shall not reign over us, Rom 6 12. Let not sin reign, etc. Though it
dwells in us, lives in us; and works in us, yet it should not overcome us, and
bring us into bondage, and so it will not be imputed to our condemnation; and
at length when then the soul shall be separated from the body, we shall be
wholly free from it.

Quest. I, but what must we do that we may so repress it? (the question
returns) that we may break the dominion of it?

Answ. I answer this is the work of the Spirit of God; but we must know, the
Spirit of God does work the work of mortification two ways: by Regeneration,
and after Regeneration: By Regeneration, and so he does immediately without any
co-opperation of ours mortify the deeds of sin, gives sin its death-wound;
that which is left, is a thing mortified, it broken. The Scripture often speaks
of this first work of Regenration, Romans 6.6. Colos. 2.11. First, when we are
planted into Christ, then we put off the body of sin; and though it does not
presently die, yet it is weakened, that it cannot reign, though it be not
destroyed.

2. After Regeneration, the Spirit does more and more destroy sin, the relqiues
of sin, this crucified body of sin, till it dies wholly away; this he does in
us, but not without us Romans 8.13. Through the Spirit mortify the deeds of the
body: Not the Spirit without us, nor we without the Spirit, but ye through the
Spirit. What is then required of us?

1. Seriously purpose not to sin, and promise to God to yield him unfeigned
obedience. Especially should we make this promise in the use of those solemn
Rites by which the Covenant between God and us is confirmed. Take up a solemn
purpose not to grive the Spirit, nor to break his Law, Psalm. 119.106. I have
sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments: This
purpose of heart is the root of all good actions; therefore in the confidence
of Gods help, in the sense of thy own weakness, Psalm. 119.32. we cannot lay
wagers upon our own strength, yet it is our duty to engage our hearts to God. To
sin against the light of our own conscience, and illumination of the Spirit,
and the chastening and instruction of our own reins, that aggravates our sin:
but to sin against, and besides our fixed purpose of not sinning, that lightens
sin, for then it is a sin of weakness and infirmity, not of wilfulness and
malice; and then we can say as Paul Romans 7.19. When the heart is fixedly bent
toward God, The evil which I would not, that do I, Two ways may we be said to
sin against purpose; either when we are overborn besides our purpose, or our
purpose still remains to please God: As, when the water breaks over the bank,
the bank remaining, in such a case the fault is not in the bank, but in the
violence of the flood. Or 2. when we break off our purpose, or consent to do
evil; as when we cut through the band, the water may easily make through. There Is
a great deal of difference between sin dwelling in us, and sin entertained by
us; between sin remaining, and sin reserved: when you have a firm purpose
against all sin, there is sin remaining, but it is not reserved, it is not kept
and allowed.

2. Watch over thy self with a holy suspicion, because thou have sin within
thee that does easily beset thee; therefore consider thy ways, Psalm. 119 59.
Guard thy senses. Job. 31.1. but above all, keep thy heart, Prove. 4.23.
Conscience must stand Porter at the door, and examine what comes in aad what
goes out: watch over the strategems of Satan, and seducing motions of thy own
heart.

3. Resist and oppose strongly against the first risings of the flesh, and the
tickling and pleasing motions of sin that does easily beset us, when it does
entice us away from God, or do any thing that is unseemly, and contrary unto
the duties of our heavenly calling. Oh remember we are not debtors to the
flesh, Romans 8.20. Thou art tied to the Lord by all obligations and indulgencies
therefore break the force of sin by a serious resistance; check it, and let thy
soul rise up in indignation against it; my business is not to pleasure the
flesh but to please the Lord.

4. B. wail thy involuntary lapses and falls with penitential tears, as Peter
went ou^ and wept bitterly, Mat. 26.57. Godly sorrow is of great use for laying
aside of sin as salt potions kill worms. When Children are troubled with
worms, we give them salt potions; so these bitter penitential tears are the
means God has appointed to mortify sin; that is the reason the Apostle says,
2 Cor. 7.10. Godly sorrow works repentance to salvation, not to be
repentedoc: It Is not only a part of repentance but works preserving durable
resolutions, a walking closely with God: it is a means God has blessed to this
end and purpose.

5. Recover from thy falls, renew thy combat, as Israel when they were
overcome in battle they would try it again and again, ^ud^. 20 28. Take heed of
ceasing for the present for though thy enemy seems to prevail, though the flesh
seems to prevail against the spirit in the battle, yet thou shall have the best
of it in the war; by the power of grace thou shall have the victory.

Thus I have gone over the privative part of our duty. Let us lay aside every
weight, and the sin that does so easily beset us. I should have come to the
positive, Let us run with patience the race that is set before us: there is the
duty, Let us run the race that is set before us: and there is the manner of the
duty, Let us run with patience. I should have shown you, that a Christians life
is like a race from earth to heaven in a way of holiness, and exercise of
Grace. This Race it continues as long as we continue in the world, from our
Nativity, to our death; after death the strife is ended: Now in this race we
must run, and o run that we may obtain the crown, 1 Cor. 9.24. Running is a
motion, and a speedy motion; there is lying, sitting or standing, but still
there must be running: ^e must make a further progress in the way to heaven,
forge^ting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things
which are before Phil. 2, 13.

The Runner was not to enquire how much of the way already was past but to
strain himself to overcome what was yet behind. And so should we consider what
sin are yet to be mortifyed, what duties yet untouched, almost untouched; what
heard conflicts are yet to be undergone, and still to hold on our way without
wining aside, or halting because of difficulties, discouragements, stumbling
blocks. And there are fellows and copartners with us, that run this Race, with
whom we may strive in a holy emulation, who should go forwardest, who should be
most forward in the course of pleasing God. O Christians, there are many
contentions amongst us but when shall we have this holy contention? Heb 10 24.
In a Race there is the Agonetheta, the Judge of the sportes: so here God
observes all; no matter what the standers by say, the Judge of the sports must
decide who must have the Crown, 1 Cor. 14.3.4 And then at the end of the Race
there is the Crown, 2 Timothy 4.7.8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished
my course, I have kept the faith, henceforth three is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, etc. In a race there are spectators: so there are here, God,
Angels and men, 1 Cor. 4.9. We are a spectacle to the world, to angel, and to
men; etc.

Thus for the similitude of our Race, in our way to heaven. Now wherein it
differs.

This is a Race not undertaken out of wantonness, but out of necessity: God
has called us to this course, and if we run not in this Race we are undone for
ever. And in other Races, but one had the Crown; here all are crow^ed, 2 ^im.
4.8 though they be not so eminent as the Apostle; here all are ^rown'd that run
in the manner God has required: Henceforth is laid up^o me a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day; and
not to me only, but unto them that love his a^ pearing.

For the manner, (with patience) Let us run with patience: Patience is
necessary.

1. Partly because of the length of the Race, and the distance between us and
the promised reward. Our Race cannot be ended but after some degrees of time;
long waiting is troublesome to the flesh, and therefore we ^ave need of
patience.

2. Because we meet with many impediments, troubles and temptations by the way;
there are spiritual adversaries with whom we must fight; for we go on, we not
only run, but fight; therefore Run with patience, etc.

3. Because the spectators will be ready to discourage us: We are set forth not
only as a spectacle to God and Angels, but to the world, and they will be
ready to deride, scorn and oppose us for our Zeal to God, and out forewardness
in the ways of God, to discourage us b^ bitter mockings, etc. therefore let us
run with patience the race that is set before us*

Mr. Caryl's Sermon.
Rev. 3. latter part of Ver. 4. And they shall wall with me in white, for they
are worthy.
IN the former part of this Verse, you heard the commendation of those few
names in Sardis: it was this They had not defiled their garments. In this
latter part you have their encouragement in their reward: They shall walk with
me in white. In which encouragement I told you we might consider two things, or
take it into two parts.

First, That they should walk with Christ. Secondly, They should walk in White.
I have spoken to the former of these, ^hey shall walk with Christ, and that
the Scripture holds forth under a twofold notion:

First as matter of duty, It is a duty to walk with Christ. Secondly, it is
matter of promise: That they keep their garments undefiled, and live in thigh
favor with Christ, they shall walk with Christ: we favor those that walk with
us.
Walking with Christ notes to us three things.

1. That we have peace with him. 2. That we have intimacy with him. 3. That his
being so much above us, we should have this favor from him.
And hence I noted the great privilege of the people of God, that they shall
walk with Christ.

1. It notes the great satisfaction of the Saints to walk with Christ; they
shall be filled with his company.

2. How safe it is, and what safety there is to walk with Christ: he has a
wing to spread over them.

3. What opporunities such have as walk with Christ.

4. What liberty such have as walk with Christ.

5. Such as walk with Christ, may be sure he will commuicate his secrets to
them, he will show them what they have to do.

2. We showed you the great goodness of Jesus Christ, that he should take such
creatures to walk with him, such defiled creatures.

3. Then let us take heed of keeping our garments undefiled, lest Jesus Christ
cast us out of his company, and we can no longer walk with Christ any more. Oh
take heed of walking blameless in the ways of Christ.

These things were spoken from the first point. Now I come to the walking with
Christ in White.

In opening the Text, I told you white might be considered two ways.

1 As it respects our state, and so that by way of Justification, and thus they
shall walk with Christ; but this is not the walking in white, the Text means.
2. Here is a further walking in white, and that is matter of reward to the
people of God.
1. To walk with Christ in white, it is matter of honor, white garments are
matter of honor. Princes, great Kings walk in white garments, so the Saints of
God shall walk in white Christ will honor them, and give them honor among
them, because they have kept their garments undefiled. They shall walk in white
like great Princes, and honored persons. A good name is better then precious
ointment: they that are good indeed, they shall have a good name, they shall
walk in white. To keep the conscience ^ean, is to keep the credit clean; and
they who are careful not to blot their conversation, Christ will take care of
their reputations, that they be not blotted, that they walk with men in honor,

It was wor^hily spoken in the 11th. of the Hebrews, they kept their garments
undefiled; and it was by the power of faith, and they obtained a good report by
faith, keeping themselves from the pollutions of the world, they kept to
themselves a good report. This honor and good report which we get by keeping
our garments undefiled, is sure: Abraham had an honorable title, Abraham my
friend, and a man after mine own heart. Isd. 45 4. Since thou wast precious in
my sight, thou wast honorable And not only so, that the people of God are
honorable in his eyes, but they also sometimes walk in white, in the eyes of
the men of the world: he can give his people room in the opinions of men, he
moves their hearts to think well of them and he opens their mouths to speak
well of them; though indeed the honor which they, who keep their garments
undefiled, have in this world, it is most usually from good men, from godly
men, and indeed honor of them is most honorable.

It is not much to us hat others say or think of us, what the wicked world
judge of us, yet I say, God can and does sometimes raise a testimony of honor
for his people amongst carnal men of the world. Joseph would not defile his
garments, he walked in white amongst men: true, he was cast into prison, what
of that? he was respected by the keepers of ^he prison afterward he walked in
white.

In the whole Egyptian Court, Daniel was one that walked in white with ^^mmon
men of the world; first with the Princes of the Eunuchs, he had tender favor
with him, he told him, he would not disobey God, to Please men; yet he did not
rail against him, and call him a stubborn fellow, because he would not bow to
Baal; and afterward Daniel was as great a man as any in all that Province, he
walked in white. God has created testimonies of honor for his People from
some men of the world yea, they many times put white garments upon them: so it
was with Christ, in Mat. 27. and verse 4. common men put a good report upon
Christ, a white garment; Truly, says the Centurion, this was the Son of God.
Truth, this was a righteous man, says he; when he saw how he carried himself
at his death, he gave him a good report: thus it does come to pass, God does
sometimes keep up heir honor in the world, who will not defile their garments,
nor touch the sacrifice of Baal; and it follows so with them, that the Lord
shall clear up their credit and reputation and the shall walk in white, in
honor, before the men of the world, Rev. 6.11. where the souls under the Altar
are spoken of, who were miserably used in this world, white Robes were given
them, to every one of them, that is, their evidences were cleared.

This may tea^h us the readiest way to the white Robe, to the Robe of Honor it
is to keep us from being defiled with sinful practices: certainly they who
please God, he can make the world to honor them; if God approves us, he can
make the world approve us too yet we must not think to have all speak well of
us: yet this we may say, if we keep our garments undefiled, we shall walk in
white in the eyes of men; if God see our garments in the dire, and spotted with
the filth of the world, it will spoil the honor we should have in the world:
as it was said of Arius, when his garments were defiled, they called him
Satanar^us, that is to say, devilsh: thus it may be, for the Lord has a time
to take our good name from us, to cause our light of honor to be taken from us.

And as he has caused us to walk in the white of hon^r in the world, so he
does som^imes cause us to walk in reproach with the world: they who defile
their garments, lose their honor with men, and they lose their joy they should
have hereaf^er, Mal. 2.9 You have departed from my law, therefore will I make
y^u c^n^em^tible in the eyes of all men. It is a design of the spirit of
wickedness to draw men to sin, that they may upbraid them, that I conceive is
the sense of the Apostle, Gal. 6.13. For neither they themselves who are
circumcised keep the Law, but desire to have you circumcised, that they might
glory in your flesh, says he. Oh there are some of this wicked spirit, that
would draw men to such and such wickedness, not that they joy in their
returning but that they might glory in their flesh; when as they who stand
fast, do even force a good testimony from their enemies: So it was the unhappy
chance of Cranmer, the Pope did persuade him to subscribe, and did he get any
honor by it? No truly, they did upbraid him, and reproach him, and so he had
dyed in a raving condition, had not the Lord been merciful to him. I remember a
speech of St. Austin, about drinking of healths: Oh, say they, it is upon the
Kings Birthday, and we cannot avoid it; if we deny it, say they, we shall be
reproached and scorned of all men. He gives them many answers to it, one of
which (as I remember) was this; God will so work that if you will not comply
with them, they in their hearts will honor you; and whereas if you did comply
with them, they would dishonor you, and say you are base spirited. That is one
thing of this point, that keeping close to Jesus Christ will get you this
reward; you shall walk with him in the White of honor with his people, and it
may be with the World too.

2. They shall walk in White, in the White of peace and joy, and inward comfort.

I showed you in the opening of the Text, how the Scripture calls that walking
in White, then the point is this: Whatever becomes of the other White of honor
in the World, they shall be sure of this, that abundance of peace, and joy, and
comfort, shall possess their souls that keep their garments White; they shall
walk in the inward White of joy and peace with Jesus Christ, and this is a
blessed reward.

Indeed now this joy, this White of joy, arises in the Soul three ways.

1. From the testimony of their own Consciences, O they who have a good
testimony from their own consciences, walk in White, 2 Cor. 1.12. We have this
for our rejoicing, the testimony of our consciences, that in all simplicity,
and godly sincerity, we have our conversation in Heaven: that is, walking in
White: this is our rejoicing, our conscience speaks well of us, and kindly to
us; and who is able to express the sweetness of this thing? None can know what
this is, but they that have it, as it is said of the New Name written upon the
White Stone, Rev. 2.17. It Is a thing beyond expression, what the joy and peace
of a good Conscience is! Now this I say that our White garments, and our
walking in White, arises from the testimony of our Consciences.

2. As from the testimony of our Consciences, so from that testimony which is
greater than our Consciences, the Spirit shedding abroad of Divine Love, thus
it is with those that do not defile their garments, but endure any thing rather
than defile their garments, Romans 5.3, 4, 5.

And not only so, but we glory in tribulations, knowing tribulations works
patience, and patience experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not
ashamed, and whence was all this?) because of the Holy Ghost which was given to
us, this causes joy unspeakable, The Spirit it self bears witness with our
spirits, that we are the Children of God. This witness does cause wonderful
joy; much more than the witness of our own Consciences.

3. This joy does arise from a well-grounded hope, which that soul has that
keeps himself clean; hope of enjoying Heaven at last, hope of future glory is
our present joy, Romans 5.2. By whom also we have access by faith into his grace,
even we stand and rejoice in hope of the glory of God.

Now they who keep their garments white, have good ground of hope of the love
of God; therefore this must needs cause them to walk comfortably as they who
have this hope purify themselves; so they who purify themselves, have good
ground of their hope, and therein great cause to rejoice, 1 Pet. 1.5, 6. Who
are kept by the power of God through Faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed
in the last times, wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a season (if need
be) ye are in heaviness through many temptations.

We walk in white, in hope we have of that inheritance: now lay these three
things together; If they who keep their Garments undefiled, have the testimony
of their own consciences, and the testimony of the Spirit, shedding the love of
God in their hearts, and a well-grounded hope of future glory, how can it be
but these must walk in white with Jesus Christ? that is, in comfort and joy of
the Spirit, and of their own spirits.

Thus David walked, he had abundance of joy upon his conscience of his own
integrity, and of keeping his heart and hands clean from those iniquities his
enemies charged him with, Psalm. 3. The Lord shall judge his people. Judge me, O
Lord, according to my righteousness, and according to mine integrity that is in
me. He appeals to the Lord, the Lord shall judge his people: Judge me, O Lord,
according to my righteousness. Thus he appeals to God himself, he had so much
confidence, and his heart gave him, he kept himself from those sins.

So Job walked in white, though his friends black't him exceedingly, yet he
walked in white in his conscience, Job 16.10. Behold my witness is in Heaven,
and my record is on high: I have not only a witness in my conscience, but my
witness is above. He walked in white, notwithstanding all his afflictions from
God and his friends. Hezekiah walked in this white when death looked him in the
face: Lord, thou know I have walked uprightly with thee.

I need not stay in the proof of the thing, let me make some Use and
Improvement of it.

Use. Is this blessed reward to those who keep their garments white, to walk in
the white of peace and joy: then here we see the happiness of all those who are
true to Christ and his ways, Psalm. 119.1. Blessed are the undefiled in the way,
who walk in the Law of the Lord. It Is just in the language of the Text; they
indeed shall walk in white, it is a great part of our blessedness to have peace
of conscience, and inward joy. Oh how much better is it, than the peace and joy
of this world, and the comforts of this world? Prove. 15.13. A merry heart, or
as another translation says, A good conscience, and indeed a merry heart, and
a good conscience, do but one explain the other; a merry heart or a good
conscience, is a continual feast: Here is no surfeiting in this feast, but a
continual music, continual joy and comfort; Oh how blessed are they who are
undefiled in the way!

That which Christ said of the Lilly, Solomon in all his Glory was not arrayed
like one of these, so may I say of the Lilly-white soul that keeps himself
white in the world, who keeps himself white in matter of practice and worship,
Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these Lilly-white ones: Oh
the Rivers of Consolations that flows to them that keep themselves out of the
puddles of the world! if you keep your selves from the puddles of the world,
from the dung of the world, ye shall have rivers of joy flowing into your
souls. I may say to all such, as Solomon says, Eccles. 11.9. Go thy way: it is
a familiar speaking to them: Go thy way blessed soul, eat thy bread with joy,
though the world feed thee with the bread of adversity, and though the world
give thee nothing but the water of affliction, yet let thy Garments be always
White; though the World cloth thee in mourning, and cause thee to prophecy in
Sackcloth with the Witnesses, yet be of good comfort, O Lilly-white soul, for
God now accepts thy works; now drink thy Wine with a merry heart, thy labor,
thy ambitious labor is that, whether present or absent, thou may be
accepted of him, thou have the fruits of thy labor, the Lord accepts thy
works, therefore rejoice in it. Here is the happiness of those who keep
themselves clean from a defiled, and a defiling World.

2. This point gives us an account why the servants of Christ stand so strictly
upon their terms with the World, even while some call it peevishness, others
ignorance, others wilful stubbornness.

What is the reason? the reason is, because they understand in some measure,
and have had experience in some measure, what it is to walk in some measure
with Christ in white, and it has left such a relish upon their souls, that
they would not lose it for all the dainty morsels of this world; they had
rather indeed walk with Christ in White, than walk with the world in scarlet;
therefore they must stand upon their terms, Prove. 10.32. The lips of the
Righteous know what is acceptable: The lips are instruments of speech, not
faculties of knowledge. Ay, but there is a great deal of commerce and converse
between the speech and the understanding, and a righteous man will speak
nothing with his lips, but what he understands; therefore he is said to
understand. The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable: to whom? The
lips of the righteous know what is acceptable to God, for they are acquainted
with his rule, and God has shown them his Covenant, he has showed them the
pattern of his House, and the way of his Worship: now because they are pretty
well skilled, and know what is acceptable to God, therefore they will run any
hazard, undergo any affliction, rather than do any thing that will not please
God, or be hurtful to their own consciences; they are afraid of losing their
peace, and comfort, and joy with God, therefore they will not let go the ways
of God, as Job says, Job 26.6. I hold fast my integrity, and my heart shall
not reproach me so long as I live: as if he had said, You my friends have
reproached me, but I am resolved my heart shall not reproach me so long as I
live.

The heart or Conscience is a busy faculty, and has many offices, it records
what we do, and comes as a witness: the Conscience is Judge of what we do, and
accordingly reproves what we do amiss; therefore says Job, I Will take care of
this: I am more afraid of the reproach of Conscience, than of any man
whatsoever; therefore I will not do any thing that may cause my conscience to
reproach me as long as I live. This is upon the heart of Gods people, they are
resolved, let men reproach and rail against them as much as they will, their
hearts shall not reproach them.

3. In the third place, let it be a word of Caution, and Admonition to all at
this day, to take heed of defiling their garments: if you defile your garments,
Christ will pronounce another sentence, he will pronounce a sentence against
you; he has threatenings for those who defile their garments, in the place of
rewards, for those who keep them clean; they who defile garments, shall walk in
garments of black, in the black of dishonor, as Job says, I walk all day
mourning without the Sun: the Sun of Righteousness shall not shine upon them:
Oh what bitter and sore things have many tasted for defiling their garments,
when for favor of men, or to please men, they have stained their own garments!
What sad bitter things have been upon them, how has Conscience risen up
against them! O take heed of the After-claps of Conscience, I may say, take
heed of the Thunderclaps of conscience; for they will come upon you one time
or other, if you defile your garments: As they who to please men defile their
garments, often fall into their displeasure, whose favor they sought: so
oftentimes such fall into displeasure with themselves, or to be sure they shall
at last: there is many a one lives under the dis-favor of his own conscience,
many a one that his conscience will not give him a good word, or a good look,
whence has it been? they have defiled their garments. They who venture to do
things displeasing to God, shall not long be pleasing to themselves.

The story speaks of Francis Spira, that to please men, to save an estate, he
defiled his garments, and he presently fell into rebuke of himself, and lived
under the rebuke of his conscience a long time.

Job 8.15. speaking of the hypocrite, his hope shall be cut off, the word
signifies to loath, so some translate, his hope shall be a loathing to him, he
shall loath his hope. There is a twofold loathing: First, a loathing to
repentance, that is, a gracious loathing, a loathing our selves for our sins
against God. And there is a loathing of despair, and that is the loathing there
meant: the Hypocrite shall loath his own hope, that is, he shall loath it
despairingly. It Is an affliction to be loathed by men, but it is a dreadful
judgment to be loathed of our selves despairingly; this is the suburbs of
Hell, for this will be the portion of the damned for ever, for their vanity,
for their madness, it is next to the Regions of Hell, for their Worm dies not;
and than is the Worm of Conscience: Oh therefore, take heed, Conscience may be
silent, yea, it may flatter for a time, but when Conscience is provoked, it
will speak, yea thunder.

There is no such thundering Preacher in the World as Conscience is, the
thundering of Mount Sinai, is not like the thundering of our Conscience.

Fourthly and lastly, let it be for exhortation, and encouragement, for Christ
here makes it an encouragement, so let this be an encouragement to keep our
garments undefiled, the remembrance that we shall walk with him in White, in
the White of peace, and joy in this World: who would not walk in this White?
who would not be among those who keep their garments White in the midst of a
defiled and defiling World?

Let me give you but a threefold consideration. To stir you up to an exceeding
exactness and carefulness not to defile your garments, seeing there is such a
reward promised, such a habit of White promised, as this White, wherein we
shall walk with Jesus Christ. It is an Angelical happiness, so much Heaven is
come down upon ye, while you have this white. It Is heaven before heaven, Matthew.
28.3. the Angel that came down to the Sepulcher of Christ, his Raiment was
white as the light. The Martyrs when they had Angelical Apparitious, they
always appeared to them in white; as one upon the Rack thought he felt an Angel
supplying him, while his enemies tormented him.

Christ calls the Pharisees whited Sepulchers; they are whited, but whited
Sepulchers, that is a woeful condition to be whited like a Sepulcher. Thus it is
with those who defile themselves, they are whited Walls, and whited Sepulchers.
They that keep themselves White, shall walk in White, shall have Angelical
Glory.

Secondly, Consider this White, or walking in White, is such as conquers all
the blackness of this World: it is not possible for the World to alter the
color of this White, how much dirt soever they put upon it: this White will be
White still, they cannot turn it to be black; they cannot take away this
peace, this joy from us; they cannor strip us of this habit, they may pull off
your fine garments, but you cannot be stripped of this White. Your joy shall no
man take from you, 2 Cor. 6.20. As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor,
yet making many rich; as having nothing, yet freely possessing all things. The
World may put us into a sad estate, as to the World, yet we are not out of
our white garments, always rejoicing, Heb. 3.13. Although the Fig Tree shall
not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vines, the labor of the Olive
shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, and the flock shall be cut off
from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls, this cannot take away
the White garments, no, says the Prophet, Yet will I rejoice in the Lord, and
joy in the God of my Salvation; It Is a conquering joy, turns all sorrow into
joy, and blackness to White, therefore keep clean.

Thirdly, Consider this: this White of peace and joy, as it is a joy
unconquerable; so it is that will be with us most, when we most need it, when
VVorldly joys are farthest from us, then this joy will be near to us; that is a
mavelous comfort, to have comfort in its season. The Martyrs who have kept
themselves White, have had this White, and walked in this White; but when
they have most need of it, and come Actually to suffering, then they have had
most of it. This is a blessed thing! this the Martyrs of Jesus Christ has
given witness of, although they have had peace and joy in their consciences at
other times, yet never so much as in the hour of temptation. When they have
been cast into the Cole-house, they have had white garments, when they have
been cast into prisons and dungeons, how have they rejoiced? It Is said of Paul
and Silas, they were men that kept their garments undefiled, and they had a
great deal of peace and joy; when they were put in the flocks and dungeon, then
they sung at midnight: what an enlargement of heart had they at that time!

So in the stories of ancient and latter times, how have they rejoiced, and
gone triumphing to the Gibbet? for then Christ gives most of this White. It
has been the use of persecutors to put filthy garments upon the Martyrs,
drawing Pictures of Devils upon them; and as their malice has risen to the
height (that in the time of sufferings) to make them look like Devils, then the
love of Christ has risen to the height, and they have been full of peace and
joy at that time; therefore be encouraged to walk with Christ in this White.
This White is an Angelical Habit, it is an unconquerable Habit, and it is that
will be with us most when we have most need of it. I should have added a third,
that walking with Christ is an honor, and it is walking in the White of peace
and joy.

So thirdly, it is a truth of walking with Christ in the White of glory, as in
the Transfiguration, which was a Type of Heaven, his Raiment was White, so as
no Fuller on earth was able to whiten it; and that is it which I might have
spoken of to you, that they who keep their garments undesiled here, shall be
sure of that, to walk with Christ in glory hereafter. If we should miss of the
White of honor, and have not much of the White of joy, yet be sure we shall
walk with Christ in the White of Glory.

I would only say this to you, That as I have from this Text, and many more,
labored to bring poor souls into a White state, to a state of Justification,
to a state of Holiness; and as I have been pressing you to keep your garments
White, that you may be in the Habit of White, as your Reward: so it shall be
the desire and prayers of ray heart, that if I should have no more
opportunities among you, that as you have been stirred up to get into this
White of Grace, that you and I may meet in the White of Glory, where we shall
never part.

Here are three Whites: The White of Honor is good, the White of Peace and
Joy, is very good, the White of Glory is best of all; that is the answer of all
our prayers, and that is the issue of all our working, then we shall have as
much as we can hold for ever.

Mr. Case's Sermon.
Revel. 2.5. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do
thy first works; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove the
Candlestick out of his place, except thou repent.
CHrist here prescribes precious Physic for the healing of this languishing
Church of Ephesus; It Is compounded of a threefold ingredient.

1. Self reflection, Remember from, etc. 2. Holy contrition and humiliation
before the Lord, Repent. 3. Through Reformation, Do thy frst Works.
I left the last time upon the second of these; namely, Repentance; and that
which I did upon this part of Christ's advice was, not so much to open to you
the nature of Repentance, (which is not so proper for this place) as to give in
a Catalogue or List of such special sins, as Christ does expect that all his
people in these three Nations should lay to heart, and repent of before the
Lord, I gave you in a List of eleven special sins that we should repent of, and
humble our selves for before the Lord. As

1. Omission of Duty, Prayer, reading the Word, Meditation, etc. any thing will
be for excuse to say by duties, and we are secretly glad of an excuse.

2. Remisness of Duty. In things of the World we are all in all, and all in
every part; a man cannot thrust another thought into us; but in prayer, how
many things are we doing?

3. Hypocrisy. How unlike are we at home to what abroad? and in company to
what in secret?

4. Pride. In Apparel, Houses, Parts, Blood, Birthright, yea, of Grace it
self, of Humility, Ministers, Ordinances, etc.

5. Covetousness. Never did Covetousness invade the professing party as now:
The more goods men get, the less good they do.

6. Sensuality. Voluptuousness, Wantonness, Christians let themselves loose to
the Creature: lay out their affections on things below, as if part in the
Serpents curse as well as their own.

7. Animosities and Divisions among Christians: many have been active to
kindle, but few to quench Divisions.

8. Uncharitable censuring one another.

9. Formality in Duty. Witness, 1. Unprepared coming. 2. Unsuitableness of
spirit, to: And 3. want of reflection after duty, how we have sped, what we have
got; Sabbaths, Sacraments, comes and goes, Monday morning finds us the same as
before.


10. Misspent Sabbaths, some profane, others idle away the Sabbath, etc.

11. Neglect of our Bibles in our families and closets. I pray God it forego
not some great evil coming upon you, as before the massacre in Germany it was
observed, etc. I proceed.

12. That want of mutual forbearance among Christians. Alas Christians know not
how to bear one with another in the least kind of measure. Oh the
short-spiritedness among Christians, they cannot bear one another burdens,
they cannot bear with one another. It Is very sad, that we that stand in need of
so much forbearance, should express so little to our Brother: It Is an Argument
we know not of what spirit we are of, (as Christ told his Disciples) Oh! how
unlike to that God whom we profess to be our God? He is long suffering,
patient, full of goodness, gentleness, mercy, etc. we can bear nothing, we can
suffer nothing one from another.

13. Our great murmuring against Reformation and Reformers (God has heard the
voice of our murmuring; Exodus 2.6.) As if there had been nothing that would
have undone us but Reformation: and truly God seems to speak such a word as
that was, Numb. 7.5. in displeasure and anger, I will make your murmuring to
cease: I will take away the cause of your murmuring: I would have reformed you,
and you would not be reformed: As Christ to Jerusalem, I would, but you would
not, Mat. 23. The time may come when we would, and God will not: when we shall
cry, Other Lords have had dominion over us, etc. Isa. 26.13. but thou Lord, set
up thou thy Government: rule thou over u^^ and God may say, No, it is too late,
I would have healed you, and you would not be healed.

14. The great neglect of the care of our Families. Truly it is not the least
sin that threatens the removal of our Candle-stick. How generally have the
duties of Religion been let fall in our families, reading the word, singing
Psalms, etc. time was, when one could not have come through the streets of
London on an evening in the weekday, but we might hear the praises of God,
singing of Psalms: now it is a stranger in the City, even upon the Lords own
day. Oh! how have Governors of Families cast off the care of the souls that
God has committed to them? How careless are they of the souls of their
yoak-fellows that lie in their bosom, of their Children, the fruit of their
loins, Masters of their servants, etc. And in the mean time are ready to stand
up and justify themselves with the boldness of Cain; to say to God, Am I my
brothers keeper? Am I the keeper of my yoak-fellows, Childrens, servants souls?
Yes, thou art the keeper, etc. God has put them into thy trust, and if they
perish through thy fault, they may die in their sins, but their blood shall be
required at thy hand. God will say to thee as he did to Cain, Thy Brothers
blood cries in my ear.

15. Our indifferences as to matter of faith and doctrine: That we have not
been more zealous for the Truth of Christ, that great trust and depositum which
has been committed to us: We have accounted it no matter of what opinion or
judgment men be in these latter times. It Is an universal saying, No matter what
judgment men be of, so they be Saints: as if truth in the judgment, did not go
to the making up of a Saint, as well as holiness in the Will and Affections: As
if Christ had not come into the World to bear witness of the truth, which was
his great design: as if it were no matter, if God have the heart, so the devil
be in the head: as if no matter that be full of darkness, so the heart be for
God.

16. The unsuitableness of our conversation to the Gospel of Christ: It Is the
only thing the Apostles puts the Philippians in mind of, and commits to their
care, Phil. 1.27. and truly in these unhappy days it has been the only thing
men have neglected and despised: how little care that our conversations should
honor the Gospel, etc.

17. Our living by sense, and not by faith. Surely (my Brethren) among all the
sins in England that the people of God have cause to be humbled for, there is
not any whereby we have more provoked God than by that sin of our unbelief:
murmuring and infidelity have been our two great sins, for which, it is the
wonder of Gods mercy that he has not caused our carcasses to fall in the
Wilderness: he may take up that complaint of us, that he did of Israel, Number.
14.22. Because all those men which have seen my glory and my miracles which I
di^^^ Egypt and in the Wilderness, and have tempted me now these ten times, and
have not hearkened to my voice, surely they shall not see the Land, etc. And
this is the lamentation we may take up, that truly to this very day we have not
faith enough to carry us from one miracle to another, from one deliverance to
another, from one salvation to another: let one deliverance pass over our head,
and no sooner one Wave rises higher than another, but we are ready to cry out
with Peter, Lord save me, I perish: and well were it if our fears did issue
into tears, and cries after Christ: we rather are ready to cry out, as those in
Ezekiel. 37.11. Our bones are dried, and our hope is lost, we are out off for our
parts. We are a people that never knew how to honor God in any distress God
has brought us into; never learnt to glorify God by believing: if we cannot
see him, we cannot believe him: surely that which God has done for us in such
a succession of miracles, it might well at least have been found for our faith,
during our so journing: In our Pilgrimage we might have learned by all that we
have seen, to believe God: we might have made experience to be the food of our
faith: and upon all the Providence of Divine Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, we
might have discoursed our selves into belief, as David, 1 Samuel 17.37. The Lord
has delivered me out of the paw of the Lion, and of the Bear, he will deliver
me out of the hand of this Philistine. So Paul, He has delivered, and does
deliver, we trust he will also deliver.

Oh my Brethren, we dishonoun God, and starve our faith, by forgetting our
experience, while we proclaim by our own unbelief, that we have a God that we
dare not trust. If we perish we may thank our selves for it: surely if we
miscarry, that account may be given for it, that we find, Mat. 13 58. Because
of our unhelief. There is a rest of God before us: if we do not enter in, it is
because of our unbelief.

18. Went of sympathy with the bleeding, gasping, groaning, dying, Churches of
Jesus Christ. They have been in great afflictions round about; have called to
us, pity me! Oh pity me my friends! for the hand of God is gone out against
me. We cannot look any way but we see cause of bitter mourning; but we have not
laid the blood of Germany, Lituania, Piedmount, etc. to heart; therefore God
may justly lay it to our charge. Want of fellow-feeling, with our Brethren in
their afflictions, it is a kind of persecution, a kind of being accessory to
their sufferings. That we have not mourned, wept, bled with them; that we have
not lien in the dust smote on our thighs, etc. God may justly say to us, as
Ames 6.6, 7. They shall go captive with the first that go captive, because they
are not grieved for the afflictions of Joseph. The word in the Hebrew
signifies, none of them have been sick for the afflictions of Joseph. Oh my
Brethren! when did we go to bed sick for the afflictions of Gods people abroad?
when did their miseries cost us an hours sleep? or a meals mear? when did we
lie in the dust, and cry our, Ah Lord! their glory? because we have not shed
tears for their blood, God may justly say, The next turn of persecution shall
be yours, because you have not been afflicted in the afflictions of my people,
etc.

19. Our grievous unsensibleness of Gods dishonor. Religion never suffered the
like as it has done these latter days, by the Pride and Hypocrisy of some
pretenders to it. Gods name has been thereby blasphemed by an evil and
hypocritical generation, the people of God have lien under the greatest
reproaches and contempt that ever any did under the Heavens; and yet all this
while we have not been concerned in it, carried our selves as if unconcerned in
the reproaches of Religion: Blasphemies reflected upon the name of God, who in
these times of Blasphemy, have gone in secret, lien in the dust, and cried with
holy Joshua, What will thou do unto thy great name? Josh. 7.9. We have not
labored to preserve in our own souls, or stir up our brethren, a holy sense of
Gods name, as those Primitive Saints, Mal. 3.16. Where are they that have been
affected with, and afflicted for the sufferings of the name of God? O consider
how little is God and Religion beholding to us for our tears, sighs, or groans?
What is become of that child-like spirit that was wont to possess the spirits
of Gods people? It Is perished, and with it, without special timely repentance
we shall perish also.

20. That Epedemical sin of self-seeking, and self-pleasing. Oh my Brethren, we
may revive that complaint of the Apostle, All seek their own, not the things
which are Jesus Christ's, Phil. 2.21. This, this has been the sourse of all our
miseries. While some had power in their hands to have done great things for
God, what did they do, but neglect the interest and trust in their hands, and
fell a feathering their own nest, and building to themselves House and Names,
that they thought would continue for ever: and to divide the spoil among
themselves, as if their own game they hunted, and others in inferior station
began to divide, and every one began to snatch, as if the dust of the earth
would not serve every one for a handful: and in the mean time a Sea of Error
has been ready to over-turn us. Yea, all men seeking to be pleased, not to
please: whereas our duty is to study to please, nor to be pleased, etc.

You see in all this I have not mentioned one of those gross prophanenesses,
that stare heaven in the face, as Drunkenness, filthy and abominable Whoredom,
Fornication poured out in every place, horrible Blasphemy, contempt of God and
Religion, profanation of Gods Sabbath, etc. because I speak now to those that
are Professors: I have given in a Catalogue of the sins of those that profess
the Name of Christ, that relate to Chrst by a special Engagement and Relation:
these have been the sins of Gods family. And if we would have God repent of the
evil of punishment, we had need to make haste to repent of the evil of sin? We
have been a long time in sinning, we had need be a long time in repenting. I
tell you Christians, we have been these late twenty years doing nothing else
but sinning against God: and should God let us live twenty years more, it would
be too little to weep for the procreation thereof. Learn to lay these and other
sins to heart, that God may never lay them to your charge.

The third advice Christ gives here for the prevention of the removal of her
Candlestick, is Reformation, [do thy first works.] Reformation indeed is a
fruit and evidence of such repentance: repentance is nothing else but the
breaking of the heart for and from sin.

I have spoken of it merely as it is the contrition of the soul for sin: I come
to speak a word of the other part, as it consists in turning to God, and doing
our first works.

This is the method God prescribes his people, Lam. 3.39. Wherefore does a
living man complain, etc. under Gods afflicting hand? Instead of reforming, men
are prone to fall a complaining; not only naturally, as irrational creatures
may under some pinching extremity; but sinfully, i.e. when their natural grief
is let out in a distempered and inordinate manner; when natural groans are
accompanied with unscriptural affections, which vents it self, 1. Sometimes
upon the affliction, as if but one intolerable burden in the world, and God
must needs lay that upon them, Lam. 1.12. and 3.1. and 5.10. 2. Sometimes of
instruments; thus Esau complains of his brother; is he not rightly called
Jacob, a Supplanter? of his Father, have thou but one blessing, etc? Genesis 27.3,
4. of any thing rather than of himself; he does not say, Am not I rightly
called Esau? What a wretch am I that have despised and sold my blessing? Mostly
we complain of that which deserves no blame, the guilty of the innocent, 1
King. 18.7. Isa. 10.5. Jer. 8. or we pore too much upon second causes, or
complain of instruments, nor of our selves; or of wicked men, not of
wickedness; of their cruelty, more than of their blasphemy; of their injuries
against us, more than as Gods enemies; or more of revenge in our complaints
than murmuring; our complaints concerning their afflicting us; not accompanied
with our prayers for their conversion, etc. 3. Sometimes of God himself, not as
one of his children, who complains 1. To God, not of God: Thus Christ, My God,
my God, etc. 2. With a holy Confidence, my God, my God, two words of faith, for
one word of fear, etc. 3. In his complaints, is very tender of Gods glory,
afraid to think or speak a heard or uncomely thought or word of God. 4.
Carefully distinguishes between what God does, and what man does; observes and
separates the unrighteousness of men from the righteousness of God, 5. With
humble inquiry what cause may be of his dispensation, Job 10.2. and 34.31. 6.
With a disposition to bring up his will to God, not that God should bring down
his will to him; if it be possible let this cup pass; however glorify thy
name, provide for thy own glory, and do with me as thou please. But as a
sinful creature, sometimes ready to call Providence in question, Ezekiel. 8.12. or
to break forth and to charge God foolishly, either of too much severity, Ezekiel.
18.2, 25. or of too long delay, Isa. 49.14. or their mournings are turned into
murmurings, Number. 14.27. or their complaints are mixed with unbelief: Psalm.
78.19. or of their punishment, not of their sin; and nothing will satisfy them
but deliverance.



Now this is not the way; for this way of complaining is, 1. Fruitless, a house
on fire is not quenched with tears. Murmuring will not scatter the Clouds. 2.
Causeless: Thou have thy life for a prey, Jer. 4 5, 6. What, a living man, and
complain, and that when it is for the punishment of his sins? this kind of
complaining is causeless: if you compare sin and punishment together, there is
no proportion: for sin is a transaression against an infinite God; punishment
but an affliction upon the finite Creature: Sin is an evil against God;
punishment an evil against the Creature: Or if you consider what sin is in its
nature, it is a contrariety to Gods nature (God is holy, sin impurity.) A
contradiction to Gods will: God says, Do this; the sinner says, I will not:
God says, Do not this abominable thing which I hate: the sinner says, I will:
It Is the transgression of Gods pure and holy Law: nay, it is a practical
blaspheming against all the names of God, the rape of Gods mercy, and the dare
of Gods justice, the challenge of Gods power: Sin gives the lie to Gods truth,
and the fool to Gods wisdom: And what can sin do more than to take away Gods
good name? Gods being? And that sin would do. Or, it is causeless if you
consider against whom sin is, i.e. God himself, who is a jealous God: Now a
finner takes another lover into his bosom before his eyes; yea, he is a holy
righteous, omnipotent, almighty, living God: Thoughts of this may well keep us
from complaining. Indeed, whatever our affliction be, we have as much cause to
give thanks, as to mourn: if you consider, whatever the punishment be, it might
be worse; or do but look well into it, you will see more mercy than affliction,
Psalm. 119.75. 3. Sinful, there is in it 1. unthankfulness; while we complain of
one affliction, we overlook a thousand mercies: whereas true grace is
ingenious, and can see a little kindness mingled with a great deal of severity.
The Church of God in captivity comparing her afflictions with her mercies,
breaks forth, It is of the Lords mercy that we are not consumed, ^am. 3.22.
blessed be God, it is not yet so bad, but it might be worse, 2 Cor. 4.8. We are
troubled on every side, yet not distressed: though laid wait for; beset on
every side, put to strive and struggle, yet we escape; God gives an issue in
the temptation: We are perplexed, but not in despair: we are not so helpless
that we know not how to turn us: we have a God to go to as bad as things are,
the Lords name is a strong tower: persecuted, but not forsaken, we are shaken
out, but not to shivers; persecuted, but not conquered, our God has not quite
forsaken us: Cast down, but not destroyed, Psalm. 118.13. we are cast down, but
not cast off. So Luther, They may thrust me back, but they cannot thrust me
down; they may crush me, but they cannot kill me, or, they may kill me, but
they cannot hurt me: they may show their teeth, but they cannot devour. Is it a
fever? it might have been eternal flames: It is scarcity? it might be
universal famine: Is it the danger of losing the Gospel? it is the mercy of God
it is not done already: Are we in Captivity? we might have been in Hell: are we
in Prison? it might have been Tophet. The Lord has chastened me sore, but he
has not given me over unto death, Psalm. 118.18. Though men have lost their
bowels, Gods compassions fail not; God's as faithful as ever; he has taken
away some of our mercies, but he has not taken away all; he has left us more
than he has taken: They are new, they are renewed every morning; when old
mercies are spent, God sends us new; he is the Father of mercies, begets new
mercies every moment. Who can number or measure his mercies of one day?
whatever our fears are, O blessed be God he loads us with mercies.


Now the Complainer over-looks all these, there is much unthankfulness in it,
and that is a kind of Atheism. She knew not that I gave her corn and wine, etc.
Hos. 2.8.

2. Pride; only by pride comes contention: men never quarrel with God about
their condition, but it is long of the pride of their heart; proud man would
fain sin, and not hear from God; would take liberty to sin, but would not have
God take liberty to punish, Isa. 8.3. God must take notice of our duties, not
of our sins. God shall hear of it, if he take not notice of our prayers; but it
shall be by complaining if he take notice of our sins. A proud man, whatever he
has its no more than his due, and whatever he wants, God's his debtor, Hos. 6
14.

The want of a Complement undoeth him in the midst of honor: if we want but
one thing our hearts would have, surely nature is proud and ready to pick
quarrels with God on the least occasion; nay, if he will not give that mercy we
would, take all, etc.

3: Rebellion: God strikes him for sin, he strikes against God, Jer. 31.18. God
draws one way, and he another, etc.

4. Unbelief: He that complains of his punishment, never believed sin to be so
great an evil, or God to be such a one as revealed in the Word.

5. Interpretative Blasphemy.

1. While we dispute our afflictions, and wrangle with the present
dispensation, what is it but to make our selves wiser than God? We seem to
tell. God how it might have been better, and so we do as it were give God
counsel: When he calls for obedience, is not that Blasphemy to set up our
wisdom against Gods?

2. While we complain of punishment, we take sins part against God, we do as it
were justify sin, and judge God: God is unrighteous to punish such a sin as
this with such grievous afflictions.

3. By complaining we do as it were summon God to our Bar, to come and give an
account of his actions at our Tribunal: What poor miserable Creatures are we,
that in our afflictions are so far from helping our selves, that we commonly
add to our own misery?

No affliction is intolerable till sin come in it.

The yoke God has made easy, we make intolerable, and make God to be our
enemy, while he by affliction would become our friend.

Now this being found not to be the way; that which God counsels and advises,
is:

1. Self-examination, [Let us search and try our ways] Sin and Hypocrisy lies
close and deep; therefore we must take pains, dig to the bottom, set up a
tribunal in our own conscience, summon, try, judge our selves over and over in
Gods presence: He stands at our closet doors, to hear what we will say, Jer.
8.6. before execution; what indictment we will bring in against our selves.

We can tell what such a Drunkard, such an unclean person, etc. has done; but
no man says, what have I done? my pride, my unthankfulness, my unfruitfulness,
etc.

2. Reformation, [and turn again unto the Lord] Sin is aversio a Deo, and
conversio ad creaturam; Reformation is a turning again from the creature to God.

3. Frequent and fervent prayer, [let us lift up] There Is the frequency, let us
do nothing else but pray: let us be continually lifting up our prayers: make our
houses houses of prayer: Thus David, Thou foughtest against me without a cause:
(Did he take counsel against Princes to be disloyal? to take up arms? No.) But
I gave my self unto Prayer, Psalm. 109.4. Therefore if you prayed before, now do
nothing else: it notes habitual and constant prayer. [Our hearts with our
hands] to crave, and as it were to pull down mercy, as if we would wrestle with
God, and say, Nay, nay, I will not let thee go until thou bless me, Genesis 32.26.
it notes our fervency: And for our encouragement it is [Unto God in the
Heavens] which expresses his Sovereignty, Omnisciency, Omnipotency,
Everlastingness, etc.

4. Judging our selves, or confessing of sin [We have transgressed:]

5. Aggravating our sins, [and have rebelled] i.e. we have turned sin in-into
rebellion: rebellion has been the aggravation of our sin: we have sinned
against the clearest light, dearest love, etc. Neh. 9. Ezekiel. 9. Dan. 6.

6. Justifying God, [thou have not pardoned.] A word not of murmuring,
complaining, or accusing God of hard dealing, but by way of justifying God: we
have transgressed, therefore thou have not pardoned. Why should thou repent
of the evil of punishment, when we have not repented of the evil of sin? Thou
have punished us less than our iniquities deserve.

So in the Text, [Do thy first works.] Sin is a departure from God, Repentance
a coming back again to God: Turn thou to him from whom the Children of Israel
have deeply revolted. The soul has many turnings and windings, but there is the
best motion of all, when the soul (with the Dove) returns to God, from whom it
came.

Apostasy is the loss of our first love. Repentance is the recovery of it, and
Reformation is the doing of our first works. I have not time to enlarge as I
desire: I shall only offer a few things, that might help to quicken you to this
great duty.

My Brethren, we have no great cause to boast of Englands first love: Never so
good as it should be, yet many can remember when England has been much better
than it is.

Time was, when Doctrines have been more sound, Discipline more exercised for
the suppressing of sin and profaneness. Ordinances kept more pure from sinful
mixtures: when London kept Sabbaths better than now, loved their godly
Ministers more than now, honored them that were set over her for their works
sake; would have thought nothing too good for a faithful Minister: when
Christians loved one another with a dear, hearty, fervent love: when there was
less complement, but more real love and affection among Christians: when
Christians improved their meetings, converse, Christian Conference, and other
soul duties to better purpose than now: not to foolish disputations, or wanton
sensual excess, but to their mutual edification: when they improved their times
for comparing their evidences, communicating their experiences, and building up
one another in their most holy faith: when there was more industry in
Professors than now, to bring in Converts, when private Christians thought it
their duty to be subservient to the works of their Ministers, to bring in
others to Christ, especially their family.

Time was, when more care of young Converts than now, when none could have
looked out after Religion, but some or other ready to lend them their hand, and
show them the way, explaining it clearly to them; but now young Converts may be
snapt into separation and error, and none look after them.

Time was, when more care of the truly godly poor; when error was more odious;
when Popery was more hated than now: when the name of a tolleration would have
made Christians to have trembled; when Christians were better acquainted with
their Bibles: when more time spent in secret prayer: when more tender of one
another names and honors, would heal one another reputations, and would
spread the lap of charity over those mis-reports and scandals that might be
cast upon then: when Christians rejoiced more in one another good, and mourned
in one another sufferings: when Christians did more earnestly contend for the
faith once delivered to the Saints, etc.

Oh do you not only your first works, but our forefathers first works: be as
zealous for God and his truths, as tender, mutually careful of one another as
they.

Our fears be very great, and truly our provocations be greater: our dangers
are great, but our sins greater: yet here is a word, here is matter of
encouragement, that yet there is Balm in Gilead, Physic of Christ's own
composition, for the reviving and healing of a backsliding people, Christians,
Christ Jesus is become your Physician, he has prescribed you a potion made up
of these three ingredients, Self-reflection, Holy Contrition, Through
Reformation. Christiians, now take this Receipt, Christ advises you, if you
will not, there is no way but one, Or else I will come unto thee quickly, and
will remove thy Candlestick.

There is yet a means or two I find in Scripture for the preventing of
threatened ruin that has been very near, that God has prescribed for a people
or person in great danger, when ready to be cut off and destroyed.

Now that which I would commend to you in reference to what you would beg of
God for England, is,

First, in your addressing your self to God for that mercy your souls are set
upon, and you wrestle with God for, that you would make some special vow to
God. I find the Saints have done so, when reduced to great straits, not knowing
what to do: Thus Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me, and will
keep me on this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to
put on, so that I come again to my Fathers house in peace, then shall the Lord
be my God. And this Stone which I here set for a pillar, shall be Gods house,
Genesis 28.20, 21, 22. The special thing Jacob vows, is, that he would continue in
the pure worship of his forefathers, that he would still honor God as his
God, in that way he would be worshipped; the specia^ thing is, that he would
build a house for the worship of God; here he would erect a place of public
worship. And thus Israel vowed a vow unto the Lord, and said, If thou will
indeed deliver this people into my hand, then will I utterly destroy their
Cities, Numb. 21.2. They vowed they would not spare any of the enemies of God,
if he would deliver them into their hands. Thus Jeptha, Hannah, David, etc.
Judge. 11.31. 1 Samuel 1.11. Psalm. 132.1, 2. Certainly in times of great distress,
it is nor improper or uncomely, but that which God may expect and take well,
that you make some special vow, if God would prevent your fears, if God would
continue forfeited mercies, dearer to you than your lives, you would set apart
some special thing for God, something for the propagation of the Gospel abroad,
for the maintenance of a godly Ministry at home, for setting up the preaching
of the Gospel in the dark corners of the Kingdom, etc. This must have some
cautions with it: As,

1. We must be sure our vow be of what is in our own power, we must not make
vows of that which is none of our own. I hate robbery for burnt-offerings.

We must not make a vow to God of that which has been unjustly or
unrighteously taken away, or withheld from any. It Is Sacrilege instead of a
Sacrifice.

2. It must be of things warrantable and justifiable by the Word.

3. It must be of such things that we are not bound to do, before vows, by the
standing obligation of Religion, and of our profession: but of something that
is in our own choice, that we will voluntarily make a free will offering of it
to God.

4. We must take heed that we do not entertain a superstitious thought of our
own vows, as if we had merited a mercy at Gods hands by our vows: God looks for
some special vow at our hands, that we may show how much we prize and value the
mercy we would have, that we would be content to part with any thing, though to
the half of our estate for it.

2. Another thing I find, is, that in the mean time we should do something by
way of extraordinary bounty and charity to the relief of Gods indigent
servants. Thus the Prophet Daniel: Wherefore, O King, let my counsel be
acceptable to thee; break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities
by showing mercy to the poor, if it may be a lengthning of thy tranquillity,
Dan. 4.27.

The Prophet advises him to break off his sins by Righteousness, there is
Reformation: and besides Reformation, that he would do something in an
extraordinary way to the relief of the poor. Mercy to the poor, what is that?

Interpreters conceive, by the poor, here he understands Gods poor, i.e. the
poor Jews that were now in the Babylonian Captivity: he advises, he would do
something by way of sympathy to the Jews, to ease their yoaks and oppressions:
break off thine iniquities by pitying and showing mercy to thy poor Captives,
under thy power now at this time; take off their yoke; ease their burdens, and
restore them to their liberties again. Thus do you, and those that have been
the instruments of your conversation, or edification, set apart something
extraordinary for their relief and supply: The Prophet Daniel seems to advise
this to the King, as it were by way of satisfaction.

There be two things in repentance; in wrongs we have done, there must be
confession, and satisfaction, or restoration: he seems to advise this to make
up complete repentance; namely, to make restoration and retribution of what he
had injuriously taken from the Jews. Oh then! let me say, without breach of
charity, that whatsoever, except it be in this case of extraordinary supplies
for his poor, it will be found but making restitution and satisfaction. It may
be upon a twofold ground.

1. With some it may be truly restitution and restoration of what he has taken
away by unjust means, God knows how; that is between God and their own souls;
what unlawful means have been used to augment the heap, and swell their Estate.

If there be any that hear me this day, whose consciences shall tell them that
they have increased their estate by undue and unwarrantable means; Oh Restore,
Restore, break off your iniquities by showing mercy, etc. by making reparation
as you can: it will be but like Zacheus giving half his goods to the poor, and
restoring fourfold, etc. in a liberal Contribution to the poor.

2. It will be restitution in another sense, in reference to an unjust
withholding: some have injuriously, and I am afraid too too many have kept
injuriously. Have we not robbed the poor by an unjust denying of what God has
commanded us to distribute to their necessties? there is that withholdeth more
than is meet, etc. Prove. 3.17. and 11.24. It may be God has given you so much:
there is Gods share, there is the Ministers portion, etc. Now all that you have
withheld beyond the Rule of Scripture, is all stolen goods, and is like a
Wheat-sheaf on fire, will burn down the whole Barn of Corn.

That which I would exhort you to, is, for every one to set a part some
considerable part of your Estate, and account it as a hollow thing, dedicated
to God, as a thing, which to touch, were sacrilege; that you may be ready on
all occasions, in all regular and due ways, to bring out for the relief of the
poor, you know objects abounding in every place, and you may expect warrantable
means for dispensing of what God shall put into your hearts in this matter.

Mr. Jenkin's Forenoon Sermon.
Heb. 11.38. The former part of that Verse. Of whom the world was not worthy.
THe Apostle in this excellent Chapter, (that by some is deservedly called a
little Book of Martyrs) discovers the triumph of faith, or victory against all
difficulty we meet with.

1. Faith it assents to truths be they never so improbable.

2. It puts men upon duties, be they never so irrational, or against carnal
interest.

3. It enables to sufferings, be they never so afflictive. These Worthies went
through all by the victory that overcame the world, the bitterness as well as
the sweetness thereof.

In these verses the Apostle does two things: First, he sets down the greatness
and smartness of their sufferings, which are by some learned men reduced to
three heads.

First, those sufferings that were to tempt them, and draw them from God, by
those pains and tortures they were to undergo.

Secondly, Those sufferings they underwent in dying.

Thirdly, their sufferings in regard of wandering, and leaving their comforts,
rather than they would lose God.

There were all kind of persecutions laid upon these Saints, through all which
they waded, and never would be brought to forsake God and his truth, for any of
them. 2. We have here the excellency of the sufferers, and that is in that
expression, These men, or, these persons, when they were under all these
distresses from the world, yet they were such of whom the world was not worthy.

Brethren, the excellency of these saints and servants of God is considerable
two ways, that we may proceed distinctly and clearly.

First, in reference to the wicked; their excellency was so great that the
wicked World was not worthy of them.

Secondly, their excellency is discovered from the estimate or judgment that
the Apostle passes upon them, who tells us, that he accounted them to be such;
though they were under such distresses, and troubles, yet they were a people of
whom the world was not worthy.

I shall fall upon the due estimation the blessed Apostle raises upon these
persecuted Saints, who was enlightened by the Spirit of God, and so was able to
pass a right sentence upon these persecuted Saints; from this I raise this
ensuing observation.

Observe. That a godly man does see a very great worth and excellency in the
people of God in the midst of all their troubles and distresses; or, That a
godly man; a gracious heart, one that has spiritual spectacles, does see an
excellency and worth in the people of God, in the midst of all trouble and
persecution that can befall them.

Here I shall handle it first doctrinally, according to my constant method,
then come to improve it by way of Application* For the doctrinal handling of
it, there are two things must be discovered.

First, wherein the high estimation of a gracious heart does appear, wherein it
does discover it self, wherein they show they have such an high estimation.
Secondly, whence it is, and how it comes to pass, that Godly men have this high
and honorable esteem of the Saints and people of God in their troubles and
distresses which befall them.
For the first, wherein the high estimation of a gracious heart does appear, I
shall show it in five or six following particulars.

First, it appears in this, in that they are not ashamed of owning their
persons and faith, that they profess in their troubles and distresses: the
society of the people of God, and the fellowship of the faith and profession,
is highly respected by a gracious heart, let the Saints lie under never so
great distresses. This is manifested in Moses, in the 25. and 26. verses of
this Chapter; He chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then
to enjoy all the pleasures and preferments of Pharaohs Court. The Israelites
Religion, the profession of the truth of God, and owning the faith and those
truths the Israelites stood up for, this was that which Moses would not desert:
and thence it was he did not desert their company and society, but went and
visited them when they lay under those burdens under which they lay. Secondly,
the second thing wherein is discovered so high an estimation of the Saints and
people of God in suffering, is, their sympathizing and fellow-feeling with them
in their suffering: If it goes ill with the Church and people of God, all the
rest sympathize with them; if one member suffers, all the rest suffers.
Instance Nehemiah (who had the greatest favor of the greatest Prince then on
the earth) he looks with a sad countenance because of the sufferings of the
Saints and people of God, Nehem. 2.2. Wherefore, the King said unto me, Why is
thy countenance sad, seeing thou art not sick: This is nothing else but sorrow
of heart. Then I was very sore afraid, and answered the King, because of the
distresses the people of God lie under. The pleasure of Music should never be
with him says David in Psalm. 137.6. If I do not remember thee, let my tongue
cleave to the roof of my mouth, If I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy.
As it is with two strings in an instrument rightly tuned, if one be touched the
other trembles: if one servant of Christ be in a suffering condition, the rest
suffers with him: this is the damp of all worldly delight, if it be ill with
any of the people of God, the rest suffers in the way of compassion. Thirdly,
in that they can plead for them, and take their parts, when they are never so
much out of favor, when they are never so much despised and abused: This was
in the case of Jonathan, how he pleaded for poor David before his cruel father
Saul, though Saul called him a cursed Son, and fell soul on his Mother because
of him. See this in the case of Esther, though it was death to go into the King
to plead for the Jews, yet for all this she says, If I perish, I perish:
resolved I am, come what will come of it, in I will go, I can dye, but I cannot
be silent. Fourthly, in that they will relieve them, and help and supply them
with all needful good things they can, if they cannot do what they would, they
will do for them what they can: See this in the case of Jeremiah, Chap. 28. v.
8 11, 12, 13. Ebedmelech went forth of the Kings house and spoke to the King --
So Ebedmelech took the man with him, and went into the house of the King under
the Treasury, and took thence old clouts, and old rotten rags and let them down
by cords into the Dungeon to Jeremiah. And Ebedmelech the Ethiopian said unto
Jeremiah, Put now these old cast clouts, and rotten rags under thine arm-holes,
under the cords. And Jeremiah did so, So they drew up Jeremiah with cords, and
took him up out of the Dungeon, and Jeremiah remained in the court of the
Prison. He would never be quiet till he got the Prophet out of the Dungeon, and
though the cords were lined with rags, yet more with love and this favor of
Ebedmelech, God remembered. 1 King. 18.4. Obediahs master was not only an
oppressor of the Saints and Prophets of God, but a very great Persecutor: This
good man Obediah took and hid 400 Prophets of the Lord, and led them with bread
and water: (I will not undertake to prophecy to you this day, yet time may
come when bread and water may be good food for a faithful Prophet.) Here note
the gracious disposition of good Obediah, as well as the providence of God in
this act, 2 Timothy 1.16, 17, 18. The Lord give mercy unto the douse of
Onesiphorus, for be often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain. But when
he was in Rome, he sought me out very gently, and found me. The Lord grant unto
him, that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day: and in how many things he
ministered unto me at Ephesus, thou know very well. A most admirable
Scripture to this purpose: blessed Paul being thrown into prison; being in
bonds, Onesiphorus often refresht him, and was not ashamed of his chains: How
did he show this? When he was in Rome, he sought him out diligently. By the way
note, That Rome was the place where the cruel Nero was Emperor, it was the
place where much blood of the Martyrs was spilt, yet there this good man sought
out Paul diligenly: Mark what follows, which is the prayer of Paul, The Lord
grant to him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day. I profess Sirs, I
had rather have the prayer of Paul, than the preferments of the greatest Court
on earth. Christians, it is the greatest treasure in your house, to have the
prayers of good men to God for you: you that have shown your great and abundant
love to the Saints and servants of God in distress, I do from my soul beg the
mercy for you, that whatever you have done for his, may be ten thousand times
made up by him, that you may find mercy in that day; and truly Sirs, in that
day mercy will be worth receiving. Fifthly, They supplicate to God for them;
they do not go to the throne of Grace for themselves, but Sion is in their
thoughts. I am confident it is so with some, and am persuaded it is so with
all; they never beg daily bread for themselves, but they remember Sion. In the
51. Psalm David was under trouble of conscience, soul-trouble, which is the
soul of trouble; yet at the latter end of the 51. Psalm he breaks out into this
earnest supplication to God; Do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion, build thou
up the walls of Jerusalem. So long as it is ill with the people of God, so long
they are earnest with God: and though they cannot overcome men with their
prayers (which by the way they are to endeavor) yet they will never leave
supplicating the Almighty, till they have overcome. As the sufferings of Gods
people are precious in the sight of God, so they are in the fight of the people
of God.
I come now to show whence it is, that there is such an high esteem in the
people of God, of the people of God, when under trouble and distress: for this
take two heads of reasons.

First, In regard of those people of God that do behold their sufferings.
Secondly, In regard of those people of God that are in sufferings.
First, In regard of those people of God that do behold their sufferings,
troubles, and distresses, in three regards.

First, Those of the people of God that look upon others in trouble, though
they are such as may differ from them in regard of outward estate: one may be
in honor, the other in dishonor, yet they have an interest in the same head,
and do belong to the same body that they do, they are not wooden legs, not
glass eyes: therefore Christ is called the common Savior, and the Savior of
the body, the whole Church: Faith, it is called, the like precious Faith, 2
Pet. 1. Chap. in the beginning. The Faith of one Believer does as truly lay
hold on Christ, as the Faith of another. This Salvation is called common
salvation: my meaning is, this outward disproportion as the birth and
education, puts no difference at all in a spiritual respect between Believer
and Believer: a King and a Beggar are all one in Christ; a Jew, or a Greek, a
great Scholar or a poor ignorant man, as to the spiritual state, all are made
happy the same way. Secondly, because these look at Spiritual excellency, and
are able to discern Spiritual excellency: they have a renewed judgment, as
they look upon their old courses and sins with a new eye, so they look upon
their company with a new eye: those that before they highly esteemed, they now
dis-esteem: those persons that before they esteemed a damp to their mirth, they
now look upon them as the excellent ones of the earth, Prove. 12.26. The
righteous is more excellent than his neighbor. In the sixteenth psalm, says
David, My goodness extends not to thee, but to the Saints, the excellent ones,
in whom is all my delight. Here was a renewed estimation; David saw excellency
in those which Worldlings despised. A carnal eye sees no glory but in carnal
objects: Worldlings bless the covetous, whom the Lord abhors. A gracious heart
sees a spiritual worth in a man divested of worldly enjoyments, as a curious
eye may, and does see a great deal of Art and curiosity in a Picture, though in
a broken frame. A beast can see the shining of a Diamond, but knows not the
worth of it: A Beast will rather lick up a lock of hay, than a Diamond, though
of never so great value. A wicked man wants a spirit of discerning. The people
of God are the workmanship of God, which a godly man is very much taken withal,
not with the greatness, but with the goodness that is in them. The four
Monarchs of the earth is expressed by four Beasts, which shows their cruelty, not
their curiosity, in observing that of God which may be observed. A Child is
taken with the Gay, but a learned man is taken with the learning and art of a
Lesson. Thirdly, A Child of God is one that highly esteems the people of God,
judging of them as God judges. The child esteems as the father esteems: if the
father cannot love any one, the ingenious Child cannot endure that he should
come into the House. The Courtier follows the favorite of the King; whom the
King honors, they cringe to. But to be sure it is true as to spirituals: God
judges not by the Gold Ring, or Silken suit: a sinner is a vile person in Gods
account, and so he is in a godly man's account: God is more taken with a broken
hearted sigh, then with all the gaudery in Solomon's Temple. He did not choose
the Eagle, or Lion for Sacrifice, but the Lamb and the Dove: not many noble,
not many rich, but the poor has God chosen: he that has the choice of God,
has the life of God.
The second Reason is from the people of God that are beheld. And this will
appear in five or six particulars.

First, The people of God, those that are truly such, let their present
condition be what it will, their end shall be happy. Men are not regarded in
reference to what they have in possession, but what they shall have in
reversion: the poor here are rich in Faith, and shall be rich in Glory, 1 Pet.
3. The people of God are Heirs of Glory, coheirs with Christ: when he shall
appear, they shall appear with him in Glory: they are not possessors here, but
they are heirs; and are to be looked upon as what they shall be hereafter: Here
they are Princes going to their Crown, hereafter they shall be possessed of it:
Here they may be oppressed, banished, disgraced, libelled, hereafter they shall
shine as the Sun in glory.

Secondly, They are not only such as shall be happy, but they are very useful
and beneficial in the world; they are those, for whose sake the world was made,
they are the great common blessings of the World, like fire and water, they are
those for whose sake God spares the world. If God would have spared the City
for ten righteous persons sakes, surely for many tens God spares the world;
those that are pulled down by the world, are those for whose sake God does not
pull down the world; they are the soul of the world, as I may so say: If God
has gathered in all his Elect, the world would not continue one hour longer.

Thirdly, the excellency of their performances is highly esteemed, there is a
worth in every holy work that worldlings are not able to discern; every
heavenly Prayer, and sincerely bestowed Alms, has a worth that a carnal man
does not see. Luther says, I had rather do the least truly good work, than
obtain all the Conquests of Caesar and Alexander: If their good works shall be
so rewarded, do you think a holy man can see them and not be taken with them?
Many a wicked man when he hears a holy man make an excellent Oration, wishes
that he could do so too, it is not from the goodness he observes in it, or the
principle from whence it comes, but from something of natural accomplishments
that he is taken with it; so a godly man when he hears another pray
excellently, and live holily, he wishes from his heart that he could do so too,
his aim is to grow in holiness.

Fourthly, The present privileges of the people of God, not only what they
shall have hereafter, but what they have here, they are freed from a world of
evils that worldlings lie under, whatever befalls them turns to their benefit;
they may be afflicted, but not hurt by affliction; the greatest hurt the world
does to them; tends to their greatest good. Worldlings may take away their
heads, they cannot their crowns: there is a real communication of a blessed
interest in all that is good, for they have an interest in all that God has,
or is; the power of God is theirs to protect them, the love of God is set upon
them, the righteousness of God imputed to them, so as to acquit them from sin;
so that a Child of God may not only appeal to the bowels of Gods mercy, but to
the bar of his justice, all the providence of God shall tend to their good. In
Psalm. 25.10. the Holy Ghost says, All the ways of God are mercy and truth, to
them that are in covenant with him: they are mercy, because they are appointed
to do them good; and truth, because they shall certainly do them good: Christ,
and God, and all is laid out for the good of a godly man.

In this world they may go to God, and tell him wherein they are troubled,
pained, or afflicted, and they are never more welcome then when they ask most
from him; if thou ask great things from God, God is well taken with such
requests; but if thou ask Riches and Honors, these are the low things of the
footstool: God is exceedingly taken with thee when thou ask Peace and
Pardon, Peace of Conscience, Pardon of sin, strength against sin, power to
overcome thy Lusts, to withstand temptations. The people of God may have from
God all that they want, and all that they can regularly wish.

Fifthly, These are such as have an incomparable dear and near relation to God;
they are his delight, they are set apart by God as his own, his peculiar
people: though God have a propriety in all, yet he has a peculiar propriety
in, and a relation to these; therefore they are called his children, his house,
his jewels, his garden: Gods whole treasure and portion is his people; as God
is his peoples portion, so his people are his portion; they are those he has
been at a great deal of cost to purchase.

Sixthly, They are such as have the image of God imprinted upon them; take
notice of this word image, for the image of God appears in holiness: Now an
image does not represent any thing of imperfection or deformity, but of
excellency. If a man takes the picture of a man, he will not take it of his
backside, or leg, or hand, or the like, but of his face, his beautifullest
part is chiefly aimed at in the picture. Wicked men discover Gods bounty in
having wit and wealth; this is not the image of God; the image of God is that
which is most excellent in a man, which is holiness: the power of God is the
hand of God, the wisdom of God is the eye of God, the holiness of God is the
face, the beauty of God; the people of God resemble God in purity. Be ye holy,
as your heavenly Father is holy, there is the pattern, they have the Divine
Nature: 2 Pet. 1.4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious
promises, that by these you might be partakers of the Divine Nature, having
escaped the corruption that is in the world; as it is in Ephesians. 4.18. Having
the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through the
ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart: Romans 3.23.
For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God. There is more of God
in grace, then in all the works that ever God did in the world beside: there is
much of God seen in making the Sun, Moon, and Stars; but in giving a man a new
nature, a renewed understanding, in changing of a man from being a vessel of
wrath and vessel of Satan, in making of him become a new man, a vessel of
glory, God shows more of himself, then in making ten thousand worlds.

Use. Here I shall raise these following inferences. If it be so, that there is
such an excellency in the people of God here, then first, what excellency shall
there be seen on the people of God in heaven? If they are so beautiful in their
Rags, what will they be when they appear in their Robes? The glory of Christ
shall be admired in them that believe. Oh what a Head is he that has such
Members? what a Lord is he that has such attendance? The people of God are in
a state of nonappearance now, hereafter it shall appear what they are; the
very wicked themselves shall admire them.

2. Inference. What have we to think of those that have no regard either for
Religion, or for Religious ones, any farther forth then it is decked and
adorned with advantageous beauty, and outward glory? If Religion be not looked
upon with a favorable eye from Authority, farewell Religion, and Religiousness.
These love the child for the Nurses sake; what is the thing in fashion these
are for; what Authority commands, they will creep and cringe to, when the Deer is
shot, the Herd flies from her; when Religion is shot at, then farewell
Religion. What is this but to have the Faith of God in respect of persons? If I
love Religion for the countenance of Authority, then it is certain I love
Reliligion for the Authorities sake: this is a sign thou shall not have
communion with those hereafter, that thou contemnest here. If the people of God
are too bad for thee when they are in trouble and affliction, they will be too
good for thee in glory.

3. Inference. Note here the excellency of holiness above worldly glory: Here a
man is dignified by what is conferred upon him; when outward honor cease,
the man is contemned; but holiness it dignifies a man, and shall remain here
and hereafter. Set a Giant in a valley, he is a Giant still, a Pearl is a Pearl
though on a Dunghill; a holy man is a holy man, though never so much disgraced
and contemned by men. John Baptist had a leathern girdle, and had locusts for
his food, yet there was not a greater than John Baptist born of women: He was
the forerunner of Christ, the friend of the Bridegroom. On the other side,
Herod, that was like the voice of God, and not of man, what was he in Gods
account? the Angel smote him, and he became worms-meat. There is a silent
dignity in reproached piety, and a silent ignominy in advanced iniquity. As it
was with Christ, so it is with the servants of Christ; when he was on earth, no
man had more ignominy poured upon him; yet there was a secret glory attended
him in all that befell him: though born in a manger, yet worshipped there:
sometimes he was driven to be hungry, the fish brought him money: sometimes a
weary, at that very time converts a woman; sometimes laid hold on by his
enemies, at that very time his enemies fell down before him. Look through the
whole course of his life, there was a secret glory under all ignominy: Just
thus it is with the servants of Christ, they are in trouble and disgrace, but
there is a secret glory and dignity shines in them, the Spirit of God and of
glory rests upon them: If ye suffer for righteousness sake, blessed are ye. To
be in high place, and yet to be a Drunkard, a Swearer, a Whoremaster, or
Profane, this spoils all thy glory, be thou never so high.

4. Inference. This is the way for a man to have a good name: would thou gain
a good report living and dying? Take heed of sin, take heed of dishonouring
God; then God will have thee in everlasting remembrance.

5. Inference. Note here the certain happiness of those beholders, that do see
certain excellency in holiness, though disgraced and under valued; if there be
any thing in the world that is a sign of sincerity, it is this, to love
holiness when disgraced, abused, and spit upon; to cross the stream, and thwart
the multitude, is a sign of the truth of grace, and strength of grace: this is
a sign of true sight, and strong sight. To see beauty in a godly man in
sufferings, the Lord will certainly have an eye upon thee in times of trouble.
Here is comfort in thine infirmities. Do thou love holiness when compassed
about with sufferings and persecution? God will take notice of thy grace,
though compassed about with abundance of infirmities; the Lord will take notice
of a little of his, in a great deal of ours. Here Is comfort in sufferings; if
you regard his in their sufferings, the Lord will remember you in your
sufferings; the Lord will remember what thou did for such and such a servant
of his own in trouble or distress. God does not cast away any in their lowness,
that have kept clofe to him in their highness; and this will be comfort in
inward trouble, when thou can find nothing from which to fetch comfort. And
this will be comfort in the last day; though we can say nothing in that day, by
way of merit, yet will it be comfort to be able sincerely to say that thou have
owned God and his people in the midst of sufferings. Do ye think that Judge
would not save that Malefactor that had saved the life of his wife? If thou
have owned Christ when he was in his Rags, do not fear but he will own thee
when he comes in his Robes.

6. Inference and last, The people of God should learn not to be discouraged
under any misery or affliction that can befall them in this world; at this very
time God has a high esteem of you; at this time you are his delight, his
Garden, his Spouse. The Saints of God are the wise men of the world, they have
chosen that which cannot be taken from them: I profess, Sirs, the love of one
Saint makes amends for all the hatred you undergo for sinners: the very wicked
themselves have a good opinion of you, when you do not basely comply; their
Consciences cannot but have an high esteem of you, when peradventure their
tongues might speak against you. If all this will not do, remember, your own
consciences are more than a thousand witnesses for you, will then comfort you:
no man is a miserable man for any thing in the world that is done to him, or
said of him: No, it is a good Conscience that will give the best acquittance;
for thee to have the whole number of Gods people to look upon thee as an
unworthy wretch, and as a vile person, I look upon it as a greater ignominy and
disgrace, then to have all the disgraces of wicked men cast upon thee: That man
that has a godly man to be afraid of him, had need to he very much afraid of
himself. I shall conclude all with this one word, There is great reason to look
narrowly to your hearts and ways, when they stand at a distance from you, and
are afraid to come near you.

Mr. Jenkin's Afternoon Sermon.
Exodus 3.2, 3, 4, 5. And the Angel of the Lord appeard unto him in a flame of
fire out of the midst of a bush, and he looked, and behold, the bush burned
with fire, and the bush was not consumed. And Moses said, I will now turn
aside, and see this great sight, why the bush is not burnt. And when the Lord
saw that he turned aside to see, God called unto him out of the midst of the
bush, and said, Moses, Moses, And he said, Here am I. And he said, Draw not
night hither: put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon
thoustandest as holy ground.
LEt us take a short view of the foregoing Verses: and that this may be the
more useful and profitable to us, we may take notice, That as in the former
chapter there is described Moses preservation to his future employment: so in
this Chapter there is described his preparation, and his sitting for that
employment, i.e. by a Vision, or rather (...) suitable Apparition, in which God
discovered unto Moses his care of his people, of whom Moses was to be a speedy
deliverer: You have here in the words read unto you, the preparation afforded
to Moses for the great work of being called to be Isreal's deliverer; and in
this preparation you may take notice of three principal parts.

1. An Apparition that is here presented to the view of Moses, a burning,
though not a consumed bush. 2. Moses care to observe it, I will turn aside and
see this great sight, why the bush is not burned. And then, 3. Gods Monitory
Precept, or Admonition, which he afforded unto Moses, when he was drawing near
to see this wonder, in which we have principally considered two parts. 1. This
Precept propounded. 1. Negatively, That he should not draw near. 2.
Affirmatively, That he should put off his shoes from off his feet.
2. You have considerable the Reason or Argument, whereby God does back this
Precept or Admonition, i.e. because the place whereon he stood was holy ground.
The time would fail me if I should go over all these parts, we shall only
touch on the two former. The Apparition which Moses saw, and Moses's desire to
observe it: of the first I shall only speak transitorily, and insist on the
latter more fully, which I chiefly intend.

1. For the Apparition, or emblematical discovery of the estate of the Church
in the burning, and yet unconsumed Bush. And herein take notice of three things.

1. The lowness and weakness of the Church, represented by a Bush.

2. The cruelty of the Churches enemies, signified and represented by Fire.

1. The eminency of its preservation, though in the Fire, yet unconsumed

And in this only take notice, that the Church is compared to a Bush, for two
reasons: 1. In regard of its deformity and blackness, and imcomeliness. 2. In
regard of its weakness and brittleness.
The Church is uncomely in regard of sin, and weak in regard of suffering; and
God sees it best that it should be thus with them to humble them, and to show
his goodness to accept them, and to love them; and make them long for their
future beauty: and hereby God makes them more conformable to their Head, hereby
he makes them endeavor to look after inward beauty and glory: hereby he puts
them on a life of faith, and takes them off from living by sense, and
creature comforts, and from being entangled with creature comforts. And hereby
he shows how little he regards the beauty and glory of this life, which he
denies to the best of his people: And hereby he shows, that there is a better
state of appearance and glory approaching: and therefore the people of God are
not to be censured under their blackness and deformity, either in regard of fin
or suffering: their happiness is not to be judged by its outward appearance:
because this life is but the obscurity of the Church: we see them like the
Tents of Kedar, but we do not see how like the Curtains of Solomon they shall
be. 2. The people of God should take heed of expecting that glory of this
world, which is not promised to them, and to set their hearts on heaven. And
you may see the reason why wicked men stumble so much at the outside of Gods
worship, because there is no outward bravery and beauty to allure them to the
true worship.

2. The Church is compared to a Bush, in regard of its weakness and
brittleness. Note, that it is not compared to a strong sturdy Oak, but to a
weak brittle Bush. God loves to bring his Church into a low estate and weak
condition; as it is here compared to a Bush, so other-where to a Vine, a Dove,
a Lamb, and a Sheep, all weak creatures. Sometimes the Church is said to be
fatherless and destitute; and as our Lord Jesus Christ the head of the Church,
was said to be weak, a worm, and no man; and as the Apostle said, suffered
through weakness. And this makes them to trust in God, and puts them to rest on
his strength; When we are weak, then we are strong; outward weakness will make
us look the more to Christ for spiritual strength; the weakness of our state
does show the spiritual strength God gives to his people for the upholding of
them. And this weakness of his Church does exceedingly confound his enemies,
when so weak a company shall be delivered, not only against, but by the
strength of men: and hereby God does gain to himself the greater glory in their
deliverance, for remembering them in their weak estate. Hereby the people of God
are made the more thankful, both for their preservation in, and deliverance
from their powerful adversaries. You see, here is a large field opened unto me,
for the discoursing upon the Churches weakness, which whether it be more
suitable to the Text, or to the Times, I leave to you to judge.

2. Consider the cruelty of their opposition, that is set forth and represented
by the fire that burned in the Bush. Afflictions, and especially persecuting
ones, are in the Scripture frequently set out by fire, as, The fiery trial, the
fire of afflictions. This does not only discover the rage and cruelty of men,
but also the benefit and utility that comes to the Church by affliction: for
the afflictions of the Church are not as consuming, but trying fire: as the
fire in the furnace is to Gold, it only takes away the dross: not like the fire
of Hell, which has heat without light, but the School of persecution has
light as well as heat; the School of affliction is the School of teaching. God
teaches his Saints excellent Lessons by the light of that fire. But I pass by
that, I might now insist upon the third thing.

3. Consider the eminence of th^^^ ^reservation, It was not consumed; the
Church of God was hot, but not altogether and wholly consumed: let the fire be
never so hot and spreading, the Church of God shall have a being: if the Church
be less in one place, it will be greater in another; what it looses in one
place, it gets in another: And God will have a Name among his people on earth:
A man may as well attempt to blow out the light of the Sun with a pair of
bellows, or batter it with snow-balls, as to root the Church out of the world;
for it is impossible to root Christ's Church out of the world. And if you take
notice of particular Believers, it is not consumed in a way of hurting and
destroying them; and consider, their graces are not consumed, their welfare is
not destroyed: this fire cannot burn them up, though it burn upon them: but as
he will mitigate and allay the fire, so as that it shall not decrease their
strength, so he will cleanse his people by the fire, so as it shall burn up
nothing but their dross, and what makes them offensive unto God, and what may
make them hurtful to one another. But I pass by these things to the second
general Part, viz.

2. Moses care to observe Gods admonition, That he would turn aside and see
this great sight, why the Bush was not burnt. Moses was an excellent
Naturalist, and yet here he was posed; he could see no reason in nature by all
the learning of the Egyptians, how this thing should come to pass, that a
flaming fire should be in a brittle Bush, and yet the Bush not consumed: And
yet I do not conceive (as some Jesuitical Expositors upon the place do) that
Moses did turn aside so much out of curiosity, as to understand what it was
that God did intend by it, and would have him to learn by it. And doubtless
when Gods works are great, our observations should not be small; when his
providence is eminently lifted up, we should not be cast down; when the hand of
God is upon us, we must not shut our eyes. I am very far from being a Fanatic,
and to give credit, or be led by unscriptural Revelations; but yet let me tell
you, the times wherein we live are strange times, in regard of strange sights
and apparitions, and I question if there have not been some as wonderful as
this in our times; but I shall not now mention them; though it be a forfeiture
of your modesty to give a reason for them, yet they do portend some strange
things; the hand of God is not to be neglected, though it cannot be perfectly
conceived; and it is the nature of a wicked man to have Gods work far out of
his sight; be sure to lay them up in your hearts. And thus far you may take
notice of them, To trust the God that has all the elementary Meteors in his
power, and at his command; and this learn, to tremble and dread before that God
that has you in his power, and can do with you and all other things, as he
pleases.

3. You have here considerable, the admonition of God, or the Monitory Precept
God lays down to Moses, i. e. he forbids him to draw nigher, and then bids him
to pull off his shoes: the reason of the former will be easily understood in
the opening of the latter: I shall therefore in it briefly take notice of two
things.

1. An Injunction, Put off thy shoes. 2. The Argument whereby he does back
this, Because the place whereon he stood was holy ground.
For the opening of the former, the Injunction, Put off thy shoes, I shall not
give the diverse glosses, and diverse interpretations, which men, with more wit
than weight, have endeavored to make of this Scripture; the plain meaning is
this, which is given us by Theodoret, Put off thy shoes, Gods scope, and
drift, and intent hereby was, to require of Moses reverence, when he was to
receive a message of very great concernment and importance about his Church;
the design of God was in this, to prepare him to obedience, therefore God
required that of him then, which servants were wont to do when they came to
their Lord and Master, to show their reverence to them: Servants use to come
barefoot to their Masters, to testify reverence to the commands of them on
whom they waited: Nudare pedes signum reverentiae. And the putting on the
shoes is in Scripture, as well as among other Writers, held a token of
denomination or masterly power. Hence some conceive, John spoke of Christ, as
one that had his shoes on; and of himself, as one that was unworthy to unite
his shoes. And the prophet Isaiah, by a sign of putting off his shoes, is
commanded by God to put off his shoes from off his feet, and to walk naked and
barefoot, and he did so, Isai. 20.2. which denotes the servility of the
people, in token that Gods people were to be in a low condition in captivity.
So we read of Mourners, in Ezekiel. 24.17. that were of a low spirit, they are
said to go without shoes, or unshod. And my Brethren, on the other side, when
God would show the freedom of his people, and their deliverance from servitude,
he is said to put shoes on their feet, Ezekiel. 16.10. and the reception of the
Prodigal into his fathers house, and the freedom and privilege his father
intended him, (according to some learned men, intended by that expression in
Luke 15.22.) is set forth by putting on shoes upon his feet. So that I take the
meaning of this command to be so much; Show by this thy reverence, thy
humility, thy due submissiveness, thy subjection of spirit, together with thy
servile readiness to do whatsoever I shall command thee. Calvin has this Note
upon the Text: If so excellent a servant of God as Moses, had need to be
quickened to reverence and obedience by such a Ceremony, certainly we that are
more backward to humility and obedience, should by our reverent behavior, when
we come into the presence of God, signify both the reverence of our souls by
our outward expressions, and likewise quicken and fortify the inward graces of
our souls by the inward gestures of the body; especially in prayer, as
kneeling, and lifting up the hands, uncovering of the head, and the like: for
the presence of God is great, and it is the presence of the great God indeed. We
that are not only by the Law of Creation, so infinitely below him, but also in
regard of that illegal Law of sin, so much against him, should testify our
humility before him, and subjection to him, when he calls for it by our
reverence.

2. The reason by which this is backed, Because the place whereon Moses did
stand, was holy ground. The meaning I take to be this, it is holy in regard of
that visible and miraculous token, symbol, and sign of his presence, that is
here discovered in this place; not because the place was (as I do not
understand how any place is) of its own nature holy, but God did testify, that
the place being the place of his special presence, had thereby a holiness;
there being now a sign given by God to Moses, that he was extraordinarily and
miraculously there. And thus I have opened the second Branch, whereon this
Injunction was backed, This place was holy; so it was then. Now I do not
understand how I can discourse of this so profitably unto you, concerning the
holiness of places, unless we take notice of the holiness of places in the time
of the Gospel, and consider, whether, and how in these times, one place may be
said to be holy, or holier then another. And truly I am not put on this
employment willingly, nor the handling of this subject; and if it were not
extorted from me by something, I do not say that I have seen, but that I have
read, that was written by men, and those none of the meanest neither, the
learned of the Papists, I should not now have chosen to have entered upon this
Task, concerning the holiness of places; in opposition to whom, I have entered
upon this Discourse: I will give you expressions, which one of the devoutest,
and the other of the learned of them has: the learned of them, accounted
so at least, (though blessed be God, his weapons have not been formidable to
the Church) is Bellarmine, his words are these: Templum consecrandum merito
venerabile and divina virtute preaeditum est: The Temple consecrated is
deservedly holy, and venerable in worship, and endowed with divine virtue and
efficacy; the Temple ought to be looked upon as honorable and venerable. And
for the other, Durandus he tells us; So great is the Religion and holiness of
Churches, that those things should be, and may be forbidden to be done in them,
(he means perpetually, or else he said nothing, for we grant as much) which in
other places may duly and lawfully be done.

In the handling of this question, How are we to judge and conceive of the
holiness of places, in the time of the Gospel? I shall endeavor, first, to
explain it, and then faithfully and truly endeavor to resolve and determine
the same.

First then, for explanation, I shall here endeavor to open these two things
to you: first, what it is for a place to be holy, or wherein the nature of the
holiness of the places consists; secondly, what that is, that is foundation or
cause of the holiness of places; and both these must in our discourse, and
likewise apprehension, be accurately distinguished.

1. What it is for a place to be holy, this is two ways to be considered: 1.
Generally; 2. More particularly.


1. More generally, The holiness of a place does consist in the separation
thereof, the setting it apart, the distinction and discrimination in the way of
some excellent pre-eminence, or the exalting of it before and above all other
places. Thus the notion of the holiness of places is taken in Scripture, Exodus
30.31, 37, 38. you shall there read, that the Lord tells them in the 31 verse,
concerning the ointment that he prescribed, and likewise the composition of it
for his service: This shall be an holy anointing oil unto me throughout your
generations. Now see how God does discover this to be holy; On man's flesh it
shall not be poured, neither sha-you make any other like it, after the
composition of it. Here was a discrimination, as well to the using of it, as to
the making and composition of it; as none was to make such an ointment as this
was, so none was to use it in their ordinary and common employment, so that now
the holiness thereof did consist in the distinction and discrimination of it
from other uses, and likewise from all other ointment. And this is further
expressed concerning the holy perfumes, in the 37 and 38 verses, there was to
be a difference betwixt this and other perfume; and this was the holiness
thereof. And so you shall find it not only concerning holy things, but likewise
concerning holy persons, Lev. 20.24, 25. I am the Lord your God, which have
separated you from other people; you shall therefore put a difference between
clean beasts, and unelean. Mark ye, herein is the holiness of the people, that
they were a differenced and severed people. And hence it is you read in Deuteronomy.
26.18, 19. that God is there said to avouch his people, openly to discover
himself, to assert it, that they are his people; their holiness was a
discrimination, a separation from the rest of the people. And in Deuteronomy. 7.6. and
14.2. you have there the very same things described and discovered unto you.
And now for this, I shall desire you to take notice of comparing two places of
Scripture, which discovers the holiness of places; in Deuteronomy. 19.2, 3. Thou shall
separate three cities for the in thee midst of thy land, which the Lord thy God
gives thee to possess it. And at the seventh verse, Wherefore I command thee,
saying, Thou shall separate three cities for thee. Now you shall have this
again propounded to you in Josh. 20.7. And they sanctified Kadesh in Galilee in
Napthali, and Sichem in mount Ephraim, and Kiriath-arba (which is Hebron) in
the mountain of Judah. Mark, the Scripture that was called Separation in Deuteronomy.
9.2.7. is here called Sanctification; therefore the word in the Hebrew is, And
you shall sanctify, or make holy these places; that is, holy by the separation
of them unto that employment that I shall appoint. Hence a thing is said to be
unholy in Scripture, when it is common, is not separated and set apart to holy
employments and services; and from every thing that is of a civil concernment.
And hence you read in Acts 10.14. in the vision that Peter had, God bids Peter,
Kill and eat. But Peter said, Not so, Lord; for I have never eaten any thing
that is common or unclean. That that is unclean and unholy, in a way of legal
unholiness, is said to be common, not set apart, Heb. 10.29. you shall there
read this notion clearly discovered to you in the New Testament: Of how much
sorer punishment suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under
foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the covenant wherewith he
was sanctified, an unholy thing? An unholy thing is a common thing. So that now
what is sanctification in the former part of the verse, is called commonness
and uncleanness in the latter part. But not to give you any more instances of
this nature, the general nature of holiness is discrimination or separation.

2. To answer it more particularly, this setting apart, or discrimination, or
separation of places for holy uses, must have these two properties.

1. A place that is holy must have such a separation from other places, as that
it must be alienated from all uses but holy uses, it must not at all be
employed to civil uses; for the employing of it unto civil uses, must be looked
upon as sinful and unlawful. Thus in the Scripture, when times, things, persons
are reputed as holy, they are to be exempted from common employment: the
Sabbath Day, a holy day, In it thou must not do any manner of work. The Vessels
and Utensils of the Temple were holy, and therefore were not to be used to
ordinary uses; and this as some do think, was the great sin of Belshazzar, that
he would offer to drink in the vessels of the Temple. And so the garments of
the Priests were holy, and not to be used by secular persons. And the
Tabernacle and the Temple were holy, and not to be used in civil employment.

2. More particularly, concerning this holiness, I desire to show you what it
is, by showing you, it must be such a holiness and separation as that the
service done to God in those places must be accounted and looked upon as a
better service, and more acceptable, then if so be it had been elsewhere, more
acceptable to God, and advantageous to our selves Now, as places are said to be
holy in regard they are only to be for holy services; so

2. Holy, in regard that holy services are only to be done there, with
acceptance or advantage, at least with so great acceptance. And therefore I
desire you to take notice, that places in Scripture are said to be holy, which
did sanctify the Worship which was done in them, and sanctify the
Worshippers, and so the very places are part of Worship; and so not only
places in which God was worshipped, but by which God was worshipped. And thus
the Sabbath was sanctified, and so the performance of Gods Worship therein,
made Gods service more acceptable and sanctified. And so the Altar, when it was
holy, it made the gift the more holy and sanctified, and so the more
acceptable, the Altar sanctified the gift, Mat. 23.18, 19. And so the incense
was acceptable to God, as being put into such a censer: And so the service done
to God in such Garments, was more acceptable, because done in them which God
had instituted and appointed for Aaron and his Sons to wear. And so I have
opened the first thing in explanation, and that is to show you wherein holiness
consists, and how it is that places or things may be said to be holy; and I
think I have sufficiently cleared the notion to you.

2. To show what the cause or the foundation of this holiness is; for this my
Brethren, I shall desire you also to take notice of it more generally, and then
more particularly.

1. More generally, That the cause and the foundation of a place, or any other
thing's holiness, it is its belonging to God, Gods peculiar relation to it, and
propriety in it, declared as he shall please, and therefore to be holy, and to
be Gods, are the words of the like importance, or equivolence; its being Gods,
and his having a relation to it, is the foundation and cause of its holiness.
And therefore if you look into Exodus 15.2. you shall there find God commands,
that they should sanctify to him all the firstborn, it is mine; there now is
that which is the cause, and reason, and ground of its being sanctified, or
holy, it is God himself; God has a propriety in it. And therefore I desire you
to look into Luk 2.23. it will open this notion to you; there you shall see
that this command is again repeated, but yet in other words; And therefore he
says, As it is written in the Law of the Lord, Every male that opens the
womb shall be called holy to the Lord; that which is said in one place to be
sanctified or separated, is here said to be holy, and therefore holy because
separated to God, Levit. 27.30. All the tithes of the Land is the Lords, it is
holy unto the Lord; it is holy, and therefore holy because it is the Lords. So
that here is the general answer. This is the foundation, ground, and cause of
its holiness, Gods peculiar propriety in it, it is the Lords.

2. More particularly, That the declared propriety that God has in any place,
or his relation to a place, or its belonging unto God, that is the foundation
of its holiness. This belonging unto God, or Gods propriety in it, is declared
two ways.

Its belonging unto God is declared,

1. From his presence. 2. From his precept.
1. By his presence. Now the presence of God, that was the foundation of the
holiness of a place, was twofold.

1. Extraordinary. 2. Ordinary.
1. The extraordinary presence of God was by his miraculous apparitions, and
discovering himself by some miraculous token, vision, sign, or manifestation of
his presence, as now here in this burning, and not consuming Bush; here was a
miraculous token of Gods presence. We shall find in the fifth of Joshua, and
the last verse, God commands Joshua to put off his shoes, Loose thy shoes
from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou stand is holy ground. And
Joshua did so. And therefore, as I conceive, hence it is, the Mountain in which
Christ was transfigured, is called, The holy Mountain, 2 Pet. 1.18. And this
voice which came from Heaven, we heard when we were with him in the holy Mount.
Why holy? Not as if it were holy at that time when the Apostle writ that
Epistle, but it were manifest, there was an extraordinary manifestation and
sign of Gods presence, and so long as this extraordinary manifestation of Gods
presence continued, it was called holy. And this miraculous manifestation of
the gloriousness of Christ's Godhead ceasing, the holiness of the place ceased
also. And remember this place now, of Gods extraordinary miraculous
manifestation of himself in the Bush, was holy for that time, and no longer,
wherein he did manifest himself; for otherwise in the time of the Law, it were
unholy to offer up sacrifice there.

2. As the presence of God was extraordinary, so it is ordinary, which is
twofold.

1. The presence of his standing residence in a place, by some visible or
external Symbol; or else 2. The Presence of God, is a spiritual Presence, in
the Religious services and performances of his people, in the place of their
Meetings, and Assemblies. Now concerning the first of these:
1. The presence of God by the more visible and lasting tokens of his Presence,
which was chiefly afforded in the time of the Levitical Pedagogue; So the
Altar, Temple, Ark, and Mercy-seat, were symboles of Gods presence among that
people, by them God signified his presence, he recorded his Name there by those
visible tokens of his Presence; and therefore the Ark was said to be Gods face:
and when the Ark was lifted up, it was said, Let God arise, and let his enemies
be scattered. Hence they so much rejoiced when the Ark came into the city of
David, because it was the sign of Gods presence, and mourned when it was taken
away captive. And God is said to deliver his glory into captivity, that is, the
token of his glorious presence: and as long as this continued, God was looked
upon as there present; and thither the people went to pray, and offer
sacrifice. And thus God more fixedly declared his durable relation to a place
by these to (...) and while these continued in a place, he was looked upon to
be there.

2. Gods ordinary presence is considerable in the Religious service of his
people, and this I call the rather the more spiritual Presence of God; that is
that presence of God in the Ordinances, which we have, we hope this day, and
which Christ did promise, Matthew. 18.20. Where ever two or three are met
together in my Name, there am I present in the midst of them: not in the midst
of the place, but of them, when they do perform holy and institute Worship.
This spiritual presence of God is that, that is afforded in the use of those
Ordinances of Praying, Hearing, and Administration of Sacraments, his Presence
is there to accept of these, and bless them, and make them operative, and to
assist in these, and to enable both Minister and people to go through their
duty by his own power. Nor can Gods Presence be ordinarily expected, but in
this his own way. Now then,

2. You must know, that as the presence of God is the foundation of a places
sanctity, and as it is several, so you must know, Gods propriety in, and
relation to a place is declared by his Precept; the precept of God is Gods
propriety in a place, as well as his Presence; thus it belongs to him by
command to make it holy, he may do what he will, and choose out what places he
will to be holy. He to whom all things belong, surely may have some places and
things more proper to himself und peculiar; so the Temple of old, and the
Tabernacle, those Places of Levitical and Ceremonial Worship was separated and
set apart by God by Divine institution. Hence we have many commands.

1. God commands that such a House, and such a Tabernacle shall be built, and
this had been unlawful to do had it not been commanded.

2. He directs the manner, and the mode, and that all things should exactly be
done according to the pattern in the Mount. And

3. God does command it should be in such a place, in the threshing-floor of
Araunah the Jebusite, and that place that himself had chosen.

4. He commands that he will be served in these places peculiarly, rather than
in any other place, he would not have these places changed for others. Herein
this place tipifi'd Christ, one that is only able to make our services
acceptable. Hence it is said, Exodus 23.17. Three times in the year all thy
Males shall appear before the Lord. And Acts 27. the Eunuch there went unto
that place that God had commanded.

5. He does command, that he would have these places reverenced, and no civil
employments used there when the holy service was doing, and that after the
service was done, at that very time the place should be only for God.

6. And lastly, He annexed a promise unto that place, that he would accept of a
duty done there rather than in any other place, even because it was done there;
hence they prayed in the Temple, rather than in their private houses, Luke
2.27. and when they could not be present, by reason of Gods providence, in the
Temple, if they do but look to the City and the temple, God accepted of their
duty, 1 Kings 8.48. So that God did promise that that place that he had
instituted for his worship and service, that the service performed there should
be more acceptable to him than elsewhere. This shows the reason and foundation
of a places holiness, the precept of God, and the promise and presence of God.
And thus I have opened to you the second thing. Now having thus explained and
opened the Question to you;

2. I come to resolve the Question, according to what I think in my conscience
to be the truth of God; and this I shall do two ways.

1. By granting that which must not be denied. 2. By denying what must not be
granted.
1. By granting what must not be denied: and here I grant willingly these four
things.

1. That in the time of the Gospel; it is not only lawful, but it is often
very commendable and necessary, to design and dedicate places unto God. Now
when I say, it is lawful to design them and to dedicate them; I pray you bear
me witness, I do not say it is lawful to consecrate them, or to sanctify them;
but I say it is lawful to design and dedicate them. Now for this take notice,
That between 1. The designing and appointing of a place; 2. the dedication of a
place: and 3. the consecrating of a place, there are these differences.


1. Concerning the designation of a place, then is a place designed, when it is
appointed to be made use of for the most convenience for such a service, as
Tuesday and Wednesday may be appointed for Lecture-days, not consecrated. Now
you must know, that this designation of a day may be altered, and so may a
place: if such a place be designed, it is in our power to make use of it, so as
to leave off the use of it when we please.

2. As to dedication, I mean so lawfully to dedicate a place, which is of our
own right to dispose of; so to dedicate it, as not again to be able to revoke
it, or call it back from such a use and purpose. It is lawful and commendable
for a rich man to dedicate so much ground, or money, for building a House for a
Free School, or for the poor, and to give it away from our selves, and from our
own right and power: and if so be that a man has power or propriety over a
place or thing, it is lawful for a man to alienate such a thing. And yet this
you must know by the way, that this Dedication that now is in the time of the
Gospel, does very much differ from that dedication of Free-will-offering unto
God in the time of the Law; for they were dedicated to God in the time of the
Law immediately, that is, to his immediate Worship; it was part of Gods
Worship, it was a part of Religion to do that thing: whereas it is not now
dedicated to the immediate Worship of God, but it is dedicated immediately to
such a Priest, or Minister, or Place, or company of people, that we have a good
will to gratify; and so it more remotely redounds to Gods glory not
immediately. For God has not declared in his Word the same acceptance in the
Gospel of things done in an immediate way, as he had in the time of the Law, of
which acceptance now we have no such promise. And therefore it is observable,
as one speaks concerning that Benefactor in the Gospel to the Jews, He has
loved our Nation, and builded us a Synagogue; it is not said, for God, but for
us: This man out of love to us has bestowed these things to God; which though
a giving our selves out of our own power, yet it does differ from the
Free-will-offering in the time of the Law. Ay, but now, Sirs, ye must know,
that sanctification, or consecration, that is a great deal more; when we
sanctify a thing, or consecrate a thing, this thing that is so consecrated, it
is so holy, that there must nothing at all of unholiness, or of a civil or
secular employment and concernment be done in it. Now we do not dedicate a
thing, but there may be secular things in an ordinary and civil way done in
them; and our services are not more acceptable for the place, nor the places
less holy because of those civil employments. There is the first concession,
that in the time of the Gospel there may be a designment and dedication of
places, and it is not only lawful, but commendable.

2. I grant, that in times of the Gospel, some places are to have Religious
services performed in them, rather than in other places; I mean places of
natural convenience, and fitness for the meeting of people together, whereby
they may be free from disturbance, from the violence of Enemies, and from
tempestuous weather. As public meetings, whereby we have the society of Gods
people, their examples to stir us up to zeal, and their joint help in prayer
and holy performances, to go along with us, that we may join our forces
together, and with a great force wrestle with God, and overcome him which is
invincible. And therefore, my Brethren, I desire you to bear me witness this
day, that I plead for public Ordinances, and for the purity of Gods Ordinances
to be administered in public places, rather than other places; so that I do
here profess, that I do avowedly and openly declare my judgment to be for
public meetings in public places, and the purity of Gods Ordinances, if they
may be enjoyed without humane mixture, which may hurt and pollute them.

3. I grant, that in the time of holy service, we are not then to use secular
employments at that time in those places, as eating, drinking, and talking, it
being unsuitable to the work in hand; and howsoever they may be lawful at
another time, yet unlawful then, because against the Apostles command, Let all
things be done in decency, and in order; and that which is unsuitable to the
commands of God, the taking his Name in vain. My Brethren, I will go further
with you, we are to abstain from all other Religious Services, when not in
season; and therefore when the Minister is in Preaching, we must not run into
our places and kneel down, as some people do, and fall a praying. And I cannot
but wonder, that they that do so much cry up Uniformity and Sanctity of places,
that yet they should consure their judgment by their practice, that they should
pray secretly, when the whole Congregation is a praying vocally; and it may be
the Congregation is singing a Psalm, or the Minister Preaching, and then they
go to their Prayers; I pray where is the Uniformity, Decency, and Order they so
much stand for?

Lastly, I grant, that after the performances of holy duties, in places wherein
we meet for the Worship and Service of God, it is our duty to abstain, not only
from filthy and indecent actions of a natural or moral filthiness, unseemly, as
looked upon by men against Gods Laws; but from all those civil, moral, lawful
actions, at other times, they may reflect any dishonor upon the work that has
been done, or upon the work that shall be done, or that may render the place
unmeet for Religious Services afterward: And this is that that one calls a
Negative, or private reverence, a reverence or not doing something, not because
the place is more holy, but for decency and order, considering the Religious
Duties performed in that place. So that things subservient to Religion, call
for a Negative reverence, and are not so to be used, as that the Religious
Services which are there performed and transacted, should be made disgraceful
and dishonorable; as the Bread of the Sacrament, after the Sacrament is done,
is not lawful to be cast unto unreasonable creatures, because it reflects
dishonor upon the Religious Service which we were before doing; so, dirty
water is not to be put into the Communion-Cup, not that the Cup is holy, but
because it is a reflection of disgrace upon that holy Service wherein that Cup
is made use of; and that Cup is not to be made use of to drunkenness. But in
all this bear me witness that I say, all this is but a civil reverence, and so
due to any place where there is any Honorable Convention, as in the
Parliament House, or Presence Chamber, or the like. Having yielded this:

2. I must come now to deny what must not be granted: and I likewise deny four
thing.

1. It is not now in the times of the Gospel in any man's power to set apart a
place for Religious duties, so as that it should be unlawful upon a due
occasion to use it for civil employments, or that it should be always unlawful
to alienate to other uses, besides those uses that are Divine; the Bread and
Wine sanctified by Gods own institution, by the Minister, after the public use
and administration of them in the Ordinance, are not now holy, but they may be
eaten in a civil use and way as our ordinary and common food. The Synagogues
among the Jews were as holy as our Churches, they were for Holy duties, as
Prayer, Preaching, and the like, and dedicated to Gods Worship, and yet you
must know there were Civil employments used in those places after the Religious
Worship was done; and therefore in Mat. 23.34. says our Savior, Some of them
you shall scourge in your Synagogues. Hence we use to keep Courts and
Consistories in Churches amongst us, and some of them none of the best, and we
use here among us in this City constantly in our Churches, (and I doubt not but
it is lawful) for an Alderman in his Ward to meet about secular business, as to
choose Common-Council-men, or the like. But where there has been a dedication
of a place to Gods Worship, it is only God that can make it so holy, as that
it should be sinful to employ it to other uses, and if the Governors of the
Church upon due occasion and reason shall substitute other places more fit than
the former for Divine Worship, then the former places may return to their
former proper uses; but it is not so in things consecrated by God: If the Font,
Table, or Pulpit wax old, they may be laid aside and looked upon as common
things, and may be used for other employments; and suppose the Surplice be a
lawful Garment in Gods Worship, (which yet I am persuaded none of you believe)
doubtless it is not to be burned, when it is old and past wearing, and the
ashes put into a pot or some such like thing, and be buried under the Altar,
but it may be used as other linen may. And so the common Utensils, as the Cup,
and the like, when they are come to be old, they may be used for other
employments, without fear of sin. And therefore it is an excellent speech of
one, says he; So to Consecrate moveable or immovable goods, as that it should
be a sin for the Church to use them in any secular employments, it is an
execrable and abominable superstition: God has not consecrated any thing in
the Gospel so, as that it is a sin to use it otherwise. It was a sin in them to
make use of the Cups, in the Temple, in any secular way, but it is not so for
us: the reason is, because those things were set apart by Gods own institution:
but there can be nothing so consecrated by men, as that it may not be made use
of in secular things without sin.

2. A second thing I deny is, That no place now in the time of the Gospel has
such an holiness either from Institution or Use, as to sanctify or make more
acceptable or effectual the Services therein performed: This is not in the time
of the Gospel; God is present at places of Religious performances, not with
respect unto the place, but the performance by him instituted and enjoined; and
therefore he does not say, Where two or three are met together, I will be in
the midst of that place, but among them. God will be present in the place for
the Duties sake, not among them for the Places sake, but the Duties sake in the
place, to bless the Ordinance for his own Institution sake. Prayers and other
Duties in the Ceremonial Law were regarded for the Places sake, but now we must
abhor this piece of Judaism: For a man to set a place apart by Consecration,
that this place makes the Duty any thing the more excellent, or acceptable to
God, this is to make the Traditions of men equal to the Institution of God. The
Temple sanctified the Duty, but not the Synagogue; and the Altar did sanctify
the Gift, and the Person and Service, because it was by Gods Institution, and
so the Temple and Altar did add efficacy and worth to the work; but for men to
Consecrate the Church, it is to make the appointment of men equal with the
Institution of God. Our Churches and Meeting-places, are not holy (if they be
holy at all) without relation to the Duties performed, but our Duties are holy
without relation to the Church or the Place. None but God can Consecrate a
place to be an effectual means of Worship. The Jews worshipped God by the
Temple, but we worship God in the Church, as the place does afford a natural
convenience for our meeting together; the place then has no influence at all
upon our duties, and if any of you should think so, you do err exceedingly: It
is but only a Physical act of Duty, or a natural Adjunct of duty, which is but
at the most helpful to the bodies convenience.

3. The third thing I deny is this, That there is no place so holy as to
exclude another place from being as holy in a way of proper sanctity and
holiness, which we have been now opening. God now makes not one place properly
more holy than another; there is not now properly any Religious difference of
places. We have not now the precept of God to sanctify and separate one place
from another, to prefer one place before another; we have not now the
miraculous Presence of God, his appearing as at the Bush. God has not given us
under the Gospel those Symboles of his standing Presence and Residency, as by
the Ark, and Mercy-Seat, and Altar of old, he gave unto his People. And as for
his Ordinances, if they make a place holy in regard of performance of Duty to
God there, and his spiritual presence in that place, then my Parlour, Chamber,
or Closet are holy where I use to pray; and where God does afford his assisting
blessing, and comforting presence: So that if you make the spiritual presence
of God to make a thing holy, in regard of Gods spiritual presence going along
with those services, then your Houses are holy, and the Field is holy where you
walk when you meditate, and praying by the River side makes it holy: Humane
Consecration makes no place truly holy. If the spiritual presence of Christ
makes one place more holy than another, then the Communion Table and Font are
more holy than any other place in the Temple. And so when Gods presence has
been enjoyed at the Font, that is more holy than the Communion Table; and so
when the presence of God has been enjoyed at the Communion Table, that is more
holy than the Font, and so you must bring in Judaism. If the presence of God
makes a thing holy, a new Communion Table, upon which the Sacraments was never
administered, cannot be so holy as the old Table. Nay, by this the mouths of the
Communicants are holy, having eaten the Bread, and drank the Wine which was
dedicated to an holy use, and so it will be sinful for you to eat any other
food. I conclude all with this, That the difference and holiness of Religious
places in the times of the Gospel, is not given, but taken away by the Gospel,
1 Timothy 2.8. I will therefore that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands
without wrath and doubting. You may pray, and that with as much acceptableness
to God in one place as in another, John 4.21. Christ says, The time comes when
you shall neither in this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father:
That is, Gods Worship and Service shall not be confined and limited to those
places, as if others were not as good and holy as they. 1 Cor. 1.2. To them
that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, with all that in
every place call upon the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both theirs and ours.
One place for the calling upon Christ is as good as another; and therefore,
Where two or three are gathered together, I will be in the midst of them. And
this is foretold in Zeph. 2.11. and in Mal. 1.11. So that this is the sum of
all, Gods Institution makes the Sabbath holy; and the Bread and the Wine set
apart by Gods own Institution, after the duty, may be used in secular uses

But fourthly and lastly, to name no more, No place is so sanctified by God, as
that after the ceasing of that presence of God, any holiness should belong unto
it; as now when the signs and tokens of Gods presence ceased and was gone, the
holiness of that place was gone, and then it was lawful for Moses to put on his
shoes. And so when Gods presence ceased in the Ark, the Altar, and Mercy-seat,
the places became no other than secular, and civil. And now for us to go about
(as the Papists do) a Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, as if that place had any more
holiness than others, is a foolish and abominable thing: How many bloody
Battles have been fought, to the disgrace, as well as the loss of Christianity,
for the regaining of the Holy Land.

Nay, let me add, those places where the presence of God has been formerly,
when it has taken away, and those places have been used to Idolatry, they are
the worse, and the more unholy; for this is turning the House of God into
vanity.

The conclusion of all is this: whatever places are in holy duties, out of them
they lose and leave all their holiness; and therefore I say it is boldness for
us to go about to tie Gods presence to a place where God has never tied it: I
cannot but wonder how it is possible for men of reason and learning to be so
blind, as to hold that the Lords day (which was set apart by God for the
Sabbath, as you may see in the fourth Commandment, and afterward by Christ and
his Apostles, which does amount to no less than an Institution) is not holy
after the Service or Sermon is ended, but then you may go play at Football,
and Cudgels, and Drinking, and what not; and yet they should say that the place
of performing Religious duties in, is so holy after Religious performances, as
that you cannot come into it without bowing the knee, and putting off the hat,
and bowing to the Altar and Communion Table, and the like; this I cannot
apprehend how it should be, and I wish any of you that are of this mind, would
privately give me your reasons for it, why it should be so.

Now having explained the Point, and given you a resolution of the question, in
these particulars, give me leave to wind up all with some Uses.

First, We infer the great difference that is between sanctity of places under
the Old Testament, and sanctity and holiness of places under the New Testament:
they under the Old Testament had the immediate presence of God, the standing
Symbols, and visible signs of his presence, so long as these lasted: which was
set apart by Gods special Commandment, and so they were holy, though they were
not employed in a way of worship; but you cannot say so now, our places for
performance of holy duties have no such holiness; places now differ from places
then.

Secondly, by way of inference, I note the great goodness of God to give us
such a sweet and gracious indulgent dispensation in the time of the Gospel
under the New Testament, as that he does not tie us to Ceremonies or places; he
does not bind us as he did the Jews to go three times in the year to the
furthermost part of the Nation to worship: No my Brethren, no Land, no ground
is now unholy, as famous old Doctor Reynolds said, every place is now a Judea,
no Coast but is a Judea, every house is a Jerusalem, every Congregation is now
a Sion: See here the goodness of God in indulging of us so far as to take any
service done by us in a solemn and real manner, as if it had been done in those
places which were formerly appointed for it to be done in.

Thirdly, I infer hence, there are several persons to be reproved.

1. We find hereby that all the holiness of Relics of Saints does fall to the
ground, and we see the folly of those that make Pilgrimages unto Saints and
Relics as the Papists do: there was a time (say they) when such a Saints
Relics were laid up in such a place, and these are more holy then other
places: so that this you see falls to the ground in its self: I might tell you
concerning their lying about their Relics, as one said, that there were as
many Relics as would fill an hundred Carts: but supposing so, all that would
not make that place the more holy. 2. Hence the superstition of those is to be
reproved, which put holiness in place of Burial, and make it more holy to be
buried in one place then in another: it is more holy (say they) to be buried in
the Church then in the Churchyard; and more holy under the Communion Table
then in any other part of the Church. 3. This reproves them which cannot pray
any where but in the Temple, and they that use private prayers in Churches: if
you have houses and Rooms at home, what is the reason that if Paul's or any
other Church stand open you must run in thither, and drop down behind a Pillar
to say your Prayers. 4. This reproves them that have reverence toward any
place more then another, as if they did deserve more holiness in one part then
another, as bowing to the Altar, or Communion Table, or the like. 5. It
reproves those that have reverence for situation of these places, they must
stand East and West, and why not North and South? All these things fall off,
like Fig Leaves: if what I have said be true, that there is no holiness in
places; and this I have made known to you not only as my judgment, but as my
duty.
Now for exhortation, I shall desire you to take notice of four things, and I
have done, and shall leave you to God, and commit you to the word of his grace.
If this be so, that there is no holiness in places, then first of all, be the
more encouraged to serve God in your Families, in those places where God has
set you, where God is as well pleased with your service as in public places,
serve God upon your knees with devotion, humility and reverence. And therefore,
though I am against Superstition, and Popish practices, and those wicked cursed
traps of innovations, that the men of the World have disturbed the Church of
God with; yet I am against putting on your Hats in prayer; and sitting in
Prayer. Those that are for holiness of places, do not, with Abraham, in every
place they come build God an Altar. But let us in every closet and room build
God an Altar; let no morning nor evening go without a Prayer in thy Family,
pray often, and pray continually, let your houses be as so many Churches, as
you read in Romans 16.5. Likewise greet the Church that is in their House: and in
the second verse of Philemons Epistle, To the Church that is in thy House;
There the Houses of the Saints are called Churches. This will bring a blessing
upon your Families: And if you be not willing to have that curse denounced
against you, (in Jer. 10.25. Pour out fury upon the Heathen that know thee not,
and upon the families that call not upon thy Name) then neglect not
Family-Prayers, be much in Prayer, and pray with frequency and encouragement,
because God binds you to no place.

The second Exhortation is this, labor to promote personal holiness, as well
as Family Devotion: I am against local holiness: As one said, (that I heared
once when I was a Youth) Happy are those garments that can carry away any of
the dust of the Temple; but they think not that any of their Garments are
unclean in wallowing in the mire of sin. But I say, do you labor to promote
holiness in your lives, in your hearts and conversations. The Holy Ghost says,
Unless you be pure in heart you shall not see God. And therefore put away sin,
for if you regard iniquity; God will not hear your prayers: It is not your
ducking, or bowing, or cringing never so much, or your going with your Hat off
through the Church that will make God hear your Prayers, these will but
dishonor you, because you live not accordingly.

3. Love the holiness of the living Members, be not so much in love with the
Holiness of Wood and Timber, Bricks and Stones; but wheresoever you see the
Image of Christ, be in love with that soul; where ever the Presence of God
shines, and where ever thou see one that gives up himself to God in holy
duties, do thou say, Oh! my soul, delight to come into the company of these
men, The Righteous is more excellent then his neighbor. If there be a Heaven
upon earth, I tell you, it is in the company of godly men. I remember a famous
man has this expression, says he, When I was in the company of the Saints and
people of God, I was as a living coal; but when I was separated from them, and
was among the wicked Swearers and Drunkards, methoughts there was a spiritual
coldness and frozenness went over my soul. Though the People of God are best
company in Heaven, yet they are very good company here on earth: And Christians
should stir up one another, and be provoking one another to love and good
works; and where ever you have grace, be sure to impart it to others. Endeavor
to love the holiness of Saints, and be willing to impart your experiences to
others, for this is your duty. Do not make a Monopoly of Holiness, but carry
company with you to Heaven.

Lastly, to name no more, labor to preserve the holiness of Gods true
Institutions, those things which are of divine Consecration. What is humane
Consecration without divine Institution? The Sabbath day is of divine
Institution, labor to keep it holy; this is a Holy day indeed, and this labor
to keep your families from profaning of; but for other holy days, and holy
things, they are much alike for holiness: The Lords day is a holy day indeed,
and for shame, do not let your children gad abroad on this day. Truly, I do
verily believe, that though here be a great company of people in the
Congregation, yet they are but a handful in comparison of what are drinking in
Alehouses, and whoring, and walking in the Fields, that one can hardly get
home to their house for the crowd of the people that are going thither. For
shame let not this be told in Gath, nor published in Askelon. What! shall we
stand up for the holiness of places, and yet oppose the holiness of the Lords
day, which God has enjoined and instituted? Oh! that the Magistrates of
London; Oh! that Englands King; Oh! that Englands Parliament would do something
for the Reformation of this, to oppose wickedness and profaneness, which will
otherwise bring upon us the judgments of Sodom and Gomorrah, and make us guilty
and worthy of a thousand punishments. And labor by Prayer in your Families to
overcome that flood of profaneness, which you cannot by your strength prevent.
And then for the Sacraments of Christ, Baptism and the Lords Supper, these are
Ordinances of Gods appointment, they are holy, and therefore should not be
given to those that are unholy; and yet those who are so much for the holiness
of places, do not care who come to the Sacrament, if they have but a Nose on
their Face, they shall come and partake of the Ordinances, let them be what
they will; this is to prefer man's Institution before Gods Institution. And then
for the Lords Message and Word, that is a holy thing, and therefore love his
Messengers: the Messengers of God delivering his message with fear and
reverence, you are to hear them with the same fear, reverence, and resolution
to be holy, as if Christ were present. And for the Word of God, it is not
enough for you to have a choice Sentence written upon the Walls of your
Churches, but let Gods Law be written in your hearts and consciences, and
practiced in your lives, that all the world may see you live as men dedicated
to the true God, in all the duties of his ways and obedience. Many of these
things might have been enlarged. What I have give you with the right hand, I
pray you Christians, do not take with the left; for if you do, you will make
your selves guilty of a double sin.

First, Because you do not obey the truth you hear.

And secondly, For putting a wrong construction upon it.

But I have better hopes of you, my beloved hearers, and hope that the Lord
will be better unto your souls than his Ministers, than his Word, or any thing
else can be. God bless you and his Ordinances, and discover his mind and will
at this time to you.

Mr. Baxter's Sermon.
Coloss. 2.6, 7. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk
in him. Rooted and built in him, and established in the faith, as ye have been
taught, abunding therein with thanksgiving.
OMitting the division, and in part the opening of the words, the Observations
is; That those that have received Christ Jesus the Lord, must accordingly be
rooted, built up in him, and established in the Faith; and walk in him as they
have been taught, and abound therein with thanksgiving.

This receiving of Christ signifies to believe in him. It is not only to
receive his Doctrine or Benefits, but to receive his person, to receive him as
related to us, for the uses and end for which he came into the World, and for
which he offers himself to souls, by the Preaching of the Gospel. Sinners have
lost and undone themselves; Christ comes to be the Physician of Souls; he will
not save the unwilling, and Despisers of his Grace, while they continue in
their unwillingness. He will save them by the way of covenant, while he
consents and tenders them his Grace, he will have them consent to the terms of
his Covenant. The consent of the heart expressed by our covenanting with him, is
this receiving of Jesus Christ. He is willing to be our Physician, and when we
take him to be so, we receive him. He is willing to save us from the guilt and
power of sin, willing to be our Lord, Head, Intercessor with God, Justifier,
and all unto us; and if we consent to this, and take him as offered, this is
receiving Christ; with whom his benefits are also received, the remission of
sins, in-dwelling, renewing, comforting spirit, title to everlasting life, etc.
In receiving Christ all this is received.

Receiving of Christ contains these two things, or these two things are
essentially contained to make up the nature of saving Faith, that is, to
believe the Doctrine of the Gospel concerning Jesus Christ to be true, and to
consent that the goodness that is therein revealed and proposed, shall be ours.
To believe what Christ is, and what he has done; so far to believe it, as here
we are resolved to venture our souls, (though there may be some weakness
through our Faiths imperfection) and believing the Gospel to be the certain
Word of God: Then next, to entertain the Christ that is offered in this Gospel
to be ours, with all the benefits that accompany, and to all the blessed ends
to which he is revealed: Thus the Water of Life is freely tendered to all that
are athirst, and there is no more required, but come and drink.

Then there is two things employed, that are the immediate products of saving
Faith, and inseparable from it, that is, trusting on him as the Redeemer, and
obeying him as a Lord. To rest upon him as a Redeemer, Romans 15.12. And here
as far as the soul feels entertainment and encouragement by Christ, overcoming
his doubts that Christ will reject him, etc. so far he has quietness of soul
in Christ, and will trust his soul upon Christ. And then, the obeying of him in
order to our full recovery, as a Patient must obey his Physician in using his
Remedies, and Means he prescribes for killing our sins, restoring our souls to
Gods love, and being with him to eternity.

The nature of Faith is to receive Christ; the sincerity of it lies in the
suitableness of the act to the object; that we receive him as he is: Now, in
Christ there is something essential to this act; that he be a Savior, and our
Savior, etc. and there is something makes unto the well-being and fuller
attaining of the end: The first are the objects of Faith it self, as it is of
absolute necessity to Salvation: The second sort are the objects of Faith as it
is strong, and makes to the well being of a Christian. All that is essential to
Christ, as a Savior, and Redeemer, is to be believed by him that will approve
himself a true Believer. And thus to receive Christ as the eternal Son of God,
made man, the Redeemer of the World, ruling us upon the right of Redemption,
justifying us before God, bringing us to God, and interceding for us: And thus
Christ must be received according to his Offices, and as those uses for which
he is given to the soul do import and imply.

For the Application of this Point;

First, Let us begin with those that our business at present does not mainly
lie on. Must men walk in Christ as they have received him? What shall we say to
those that have not, will not receive him? stop us at the door, that we cannot
bring in the doctrine of Christ; that will not receive the principles of
Christ? How can we bring them, and build them up, that will not suffer the
Foundation to be laid, the Seed to be received? Have thou not received Christ?
then thou have refused Christ, been a despiser of the Gospel of Christ, which
will prove thy great condemnation. What is it for thee to hear the Name, and
not to have the Spirit of Christ? Do not go upon conjectures; its one thing to
number thy self with those that are Christians, as to outward appearanc^, and
another thing to open thy heart, and deliver up thy self to Christ's Government,
and as a lost Sinner, to receive him to those ends a Savior must be received.
And remember, this was no small work, Gods sending Christ into the world no
small thing to fetch thee, from Hell and Satan, to wash guilty souls from all
their sins, and to bring them to everlasting glory. If these great things be
rightly understood and believed by thee, if Christ be understood well as
Christ, it must be done with a weakened, humbled, self-resigned heart, making
the greatest matter in the world of these things: Has thy soul been seriously
taken up about thy own recovery? And have thou received Christ as a man that
was ready to be damned; as one that had a load on his Soul heavier than all the
Mountains of the Earth, to ease and deliver him? as one that was under the
frowns of God in a state of enmity, receives reconciliation? Have thou received
Christ, as if thou had received Heaven in him? Believe it, these are great
transactions, and will affect thy heart; and it is not a sleepy or jesting
matter thus to receive Christ. Consider what it is to receive Christ.

1. If you have received Christ, you have received the great Reconciler that
binds up the broken hearted, quiets those that tremble under the threatenings
of God, for fear he should forsake and cast them off for ever.

2. If thou have received Christ, thou have received a perfect enmity to all
sin, that will never let thee rest in sin, but be persuading thee from it, and
conflicting in thee against sin in thy soul: If thou have received Christ, thou
have not received a friend for sin, that will plead for, or give thee leave to
commit sin; but one, that though he bear with thee in thy weakness, yet
abominates thy sin. If thou have received a Lord and Master to rule, to be
consented and subjected to him, and to be ruled by none but in subordination to
him, who will break those in pieces that refuse his Government: Obedience, and
not verbal profession, is the thing he requires. Have thou entertained Christ
to be the Master of thy words, thoughts, and deeds, whose Government thou
live under, more than under any in the world?

3. If you have received Christ, you have then received the beginning of
felicity, and full contentment to your souls; having found none in your sins,
you have it discovered to you where it is: therefore with gladness go you on;
and so far as you have hopes of attaining it, so far you have great
contentment, etc.

4. In a word, if you have received Christ, you have fallen out with sin,
sujected pleasures, prosits and honors to him; and you have received h^s
Spirit, and this has made you new, and maintains the way within you against
the flesh, etc. If this be not thy case, Oh that thou knew what a case thou
art in! For then, 1. What the better art thou for all his blood shed as yet, if
thou were this day to dye? What would Christ's blood do to the cleansing and
saving of thy soul? 2. How can thou look thy sins in the face, and think on
what thou have done, and art! How can thou look inward into thy defiled
heart, and not tremble, when thou have no more shelter from the wrath of God?
3. How can thou look God in the face who is a hater of sin? How can thou
read his Attributes, think on his threatenings? 4. How can thou think to have
any Duty accepted, and Prayer heard, or rewarded, etc. 5. How can thou think
on the Day of Judgment, on the time when thou must receive thy final sentence,
if thou have not received Christ? Oh what a thing is a Christless heart! etc.


Q. What shall I do that I may receive Christ?

A. 1. Till Christ be thine, and has brought peace from Heaven to thy Soul,
let no peace be there to keep him out: I do not say, overwhelm thy self with
sorrow, but let sorrow dwell there, and let holy cares and solicitousness about
thy spiritual state be there, till Christ come and quiet, and reconcile thee to
God.

2. Read and believe the Gospel; see there what Christ is, and thy necesty of
him: Believing, will open the door to entertain him; assent will procure thy
consent.

3. Keep up no Idol in thy heart against him. Turn out that that keeps out
Christ, how dear soever it seems now, at last thou will see it more necessary
to detest then keep it.

I come now to exhort all poor weak Christians, that they would make after
confirmation, and grow to a greater measure in Grace, as they have received
Christ. It is not enough to be conceited that you have been converted; and it
will not be enough to the assurance of your conversation, or safety of your
souls, that you think you are converted, and you sit down there: He that is
content with the opinion he has Grace; therefore desires to have no more,
because the promise of salvation is made to the Truth of Grace, it is a sign he
never had Grace; Strength in Grace is your own felicity, it is part of your
happiness: Your eternal happiness will partly consist in your personal
perfection; and without personal perfection, all Heavenly glory will not be a
perfect felicity. If you have fixed your Anchor in Gods promises, this engages
you to look up, make after, and proceed, etc.

Take these Motives.

1. Consider, there is the same reason to move thee to grow, and proceed, as
there was to move thee to thy first believing. Why do you become Christians,
but because of the necessity of the Riches and Excellencies of Christ's, and
that there was better things in Christ, then in the World? And are they not so
still? Is che case changed? If Christianity was reasonable then, it is
reasonable now; If it was necessary to begin, it is necessary to hold on, and
proceed in your Race till you have obtained the Crown. 2. Your receiving Christ
essentially, contains in it an obligation to proceed and go further; actually
to trust and obey him, whom you have taken for your Lord and Savior, from the
very Offices and Relations of Christ received.
If I be a Father, where is my fear? If I be a Master, where is my honor? If I
be a Savior, where is your confidence in me, submission to nay saving work,
obedience to my healing precepts? If I be your Lord and Master, why do you not
learn of me your Master, etc.

Your first Covenant engages you to proceed in fulfilling the things promised
in your Covenant, etc. Better not have promised to be his people, than to
promise and break this promise. The very mercies also you have received from
him, pardoning your former sin, entertainment in his Church, and all the
blessings there found, are as so many obligations to proceed.

3. Ever since we came home to Christ, we have had an addition of Reasons,
besides the first Reasons we had to believe: Every day brings in new, etc.
Certainly if a little were desirable, more were more desirable: If the people
that stood afar off, and never tried what Christ and Grace is, were bid to come
in, those that have tried and tasted are bound to proceed much more: You have
the Spirit of God, experiences of his love, tasted the bitterness of sin, have
had some trial of the truth of such things of which we speak, when others have
eyes and see not, etc. and will you turn back that have tasted, etc.

4. Consider how much has been lost upon many a soul for want of care to take
rooting and to proceed; how much labor of the Ministry, mercies of God, pains
and care of their own? I speak of those that have seemed sincere, not indeed
so; that have many times comforted the hearts of their Ministers and Friends,
and have had some kind of comfort to themselves in that taste they have had of
the good word of God. How many times has the Preacher been gladded to see such
a one come to him, seemingly with a broken heart, seeming to set themselves in
the way of life! yet the flesh prevailed for want of confirmation. How many
years have some spent in duty, in hearing, prayer, gracious society, profession
of Religion! yet afterward the world has drowned all. What cause have you to
see, you lose not the thing you have wrought.

5. Consider how much of the works of your own salvation when you are
converted, is yet undone. Though you are sure your conversion is true, how many
temptations to resist, enemies to conquer, duties to perform, and Heaven to be
taken upon all those terms, as the tenor of your Christianity! therefore you
had need to stand fast, and having done all, to stand, you have need not only
to believe, but to wait and be patient in believing; and to proceed in the way
you have chosen.

6. The want of strength and building up, makes the lives of many full of
lamentable languishing weaknesses, scandals unto others; pain, calamity, and
trouble to themselves. How long in healing? And how much smart and pain, while
the fruit of their own folly is cured? How little, and how frequently do
temptations prevail? And hence as in a wilderness, they are going one step
forward, another backward; no evident keeping in God, and all through the fruit
of their own languishing weakness; the fruits of the sins of Professors have
been such, that it should make you do all you can possible to escape the
troubles at home, and reproaches abroad.

7. A life of spiritual weakness, is usually a burden unto him that has it, it
does not only occasion his falling into sin, and so renews the wounds of his
Soul, but is a constant burden to him; not that any measure of Grace is
troublesome, but that which consists with so great a measure of remaining
corruption; this is the burden: sickness is burdensome, though there be life.
Methinks you should not then be recondiled to your fears; you should methinks
see so great difference between the sick and the well, that for your own peace
sake you should seek after confirmation. Every duty they do is their pain,
which is another pleasure, prayer, etc. their burden; sometimes tired,
wearied, dull, etc. presently overwhelmed with temptation: every duty is a
grievance to them through the weakness of their grade and their corruption.

8. Christians that are weak and not confirmed, lose abundance of the fruit of
Gods Ordinances that are improved by others. How many a truth that taste
exceeding sweet to others, have no great relish to them, nor growth by it? A
healthy man has more relish in ordinary fare, than a sick person in varieties,
the full stomach loathes the Honeycomb.

9. The weak and unconfirmed Christian is unprofitable comparatively unto
others; not that the Church would wish the weakest member out, but
comparatively unconfirmed Christians are very unprofitable unto others; like
little children in the Family that must be looked to, make work for a great
many more about them. What does a sick person, but the work of others is to
feed, support, and be a help to him. The Church of God has need of strong
Christians that can pray in Faith servently for others, and you scarcely pray
son your selves. Consider when the Church needs a great deal of help, will you
sit down with low seize, and little things, when so many hundred about
you need so great assistance?

10. Weak persons are many times the troublers, and very dangers of the Church;
many calamities have been occasioned by them; the sins of professors have
occasioned the displeasure of God on the Church; their errors hindered truth,
and made divisions. When Christians have not so much strength as to know Truth
from Error, that hearkens to every one that speaks with likeness: What have
these Christians done in the Church? what mercies have been driven away, so
far, that I think the Church of God, from the Apostles days till now, have
suffered more by the sins of Professors, then the malice of their Enemies! and
how can thou expect God will save thy soul, when thou have set the Church on
fire, and been so great hindrance to others, that many should perish
occasionally by thy example? etc. The greatest sufferings of the Church have
come from the miscarriages of the Church.

11. Such have been the great dishonours of Christ: but the Graces of ancient
Christians, the glory of their professions, their Charity Self-denial,
Heavenly-mindedness, Patience, etc. have preached the Gospel to the World more
effectually then ever their words could do. God expects your lives should be a
considerable means for the conversion of wicked men: the same God that has
commanded Ministers to teach others by their Doctrine, has commanded you
should live for the conversion of the World, that you zeal, humility, patience,
charity, self-denial should win souls to God: and if it be a sin to give over
preaching when we may, surely so to give over living, etc. If woe unto me if I
preach not the Gospel, then woe unto you if you by your lives preach not the
Gospel. How many sinners have you about you? and how do you wrong and rob the
ungodly of that Ordinance God has appointed for their conversion and
salvation? You are the persons that take the bread out of their mouths, the
means that should save them out of their hands, while you deny them one of the
commanded means of salvation, that is, the eminent example of your lives: And
if it be so great a sin to stop Preachers mouths, how great a sin to neglect
this Ordinance? Nay, are you not a dishonor and disgrace to the Church? Is it
not because of Professors ill lives, that the profane deride Religion, while
they see not the glory in it that should overpower an unbelieving and denying
soul, and should indeed effectually manifest its excellency? Are these the
Professors, that are proud, stubborn, passionate, censorious, self-conceited,
contemptuous, and envious as any others? I know the World is apt enough to
slander, and the Servants of God to bear a world of unjust reproaches: but oh!
that there were not this occasion, etc.

12. Those that are not confirmed and established in grace, the devil, when he
has prevailed by a temptation on themselves, can easily make them his
instruments to draw and tempt others from their duty, to discourage them in
their Religion, and to do that mischief in the world he has done by temptation
of their own soul. It Is ordinary for Satan to make use of lapsed, distempered
Christians, to be the instruments of his temptations to those that are better,
etc. An honest Christian will not so easily hearken to a Drunkard, Swearer, as
to a Professor he had good thoughts of, Gal. 2.23.

13. For want of strength and establishment in grace, poor weak Christians are
a very great encouragement to the carnal hopes of wicked men. I think scarce
any thing in the world hinders our Preaching more than this; when the wicked
see those that make the greatest profession no better than themselves, and in
some things worse, this hardens him against all the convictions that can be
brought against him: tell him he cannot be saved without conversion, he looks
upon professors, sees them contentious, worldly, peevish, passionate, etc. sees
some sin or other, this makes him think he is as well as they: must there be so
much ado to bring men to this state? is this the difference, etc.

14. Methinks it should be some trouble to an honest heart, that yet we must be
so like to the children of the wicked ones; and the weakest Christians are the
likest to the wicked; I do not not mean weakness in gifts or knowledge, etc.
but a weakness in practical saving knowledge, love of God, self-denial,
mortification, heavenly mindedness, etc. they that are in these the weakest
Christians, are the next and likest to the wicked: and does not this grieve
thee, that though thou art not a child of the Devil, thou art so like one. We
should not be conformed to the world, nor like to them in any thing, no not in
outward vainities; but to imitate the fashion of the world, as to outward
corruptions, to go in their garb, when a palpable vanity; to have so much of
their pride, peevishness, malice, worldliness: Oh look upon thy heart with
humiliation.

15. Consider what a dangerous and lamentable standing those have that be not
established, etc. you stand, but it is as unrooted plants or trees that stand
shaking in the wind; beholders are always looking when they fall, you stand,
but it is as a sick man, wavering, reeling; like Lots wife, looking back, and
always upon every occasion ready to repent, you have been believers; little
things perplex and trouble you; little tribulations and afflictions discompose
and disturb you, little temptations make you question the Scripture, the
providence of God, his love and care of his people, and the great foundations
of Religion: Foundation seems to shake, because you are shaking and tottering,
etc. And what is like to become of such a soul; If thou stand shaking under
small temptations for want of confirmation, what will thou do when a Papist or
Quaker, etc. shall so speak concerning Religion which thou art not able to
answer? and so the surest foundation seems nothing when thou have so weak hold:
our greatest afflictions next to the misery of the ungodly, is to think of our
weak ones, what will become of them: and verily we do expect a considerable
part of our Congregation should be carried away, those that are Christians, and
know not why, yet have not humility enough to make use of others, and to keep
close to those that should assist them: Remember when you see such times, when
Seducers are able to say the worst, shall make the strongest assaults on the
weak ones, how many will be like to fall? Again, sickness, death, dying times
will come, when you shall find a little grace will not easily do your work; and
though you perish not, yet you may faint, and to your sorrow find the want of
confirmation. You cannot but know how the strongest are put to it in trying
hours, or at death. Will slack unsettled hopes of another life, such distempered
hearts fight and encounter with such trials? Never think of dying comfortably,
if you follow not after confirming grace.

16. It should humble you the more, that you have been so long, so many years
in the School of Christ, and love God, etc. no better: Should not you in this
apprentiship have learned better your Religion, and been teachers of others,
when perhaps, if in the principles you are assaulted, you will show your
weakness as soon as any? May not Christ say, Have I been so long time with you,
and yet have you known, lived, etc. no better? reached no higher, attained no
further? weaklings still? Nay, confider in this time what advantage you have
had for growth? A tree planted on a barren Wilderness may not grow so much as
in a fruitful place; but you have had the plenty and power of the Ordinances of
God, the choicest of the means and helps of salvation.

17. Consider, the nature of true Grace tends to this: will you cross the
nature of it? shall we be such weaklings in Religion, which cross so the nature
of Grace? for Grace the more it is exercised, the more it increases.

18. Heaven it self is perfection, and the work of a Christian is to press
toward Heaven, and therefore it is to press toward perfection. You should make
toward the end in a manner and way that is suitable to the end. Persons that
enjoy so much already, and hope for so much greater, should not put off God
with such little things.

19. Little grace shall have but little glory. You know not how great a
difference there is between the least and highest in the kingdom of God: Nay,
it is not only for a Christian to desire to be glorified, but to enjoy the
higest degree in glory: to serve God with the best, and improve his talent to
the utmost, that his heavenly reward may be according. A Christian should not
slight it when it is tendered to him, and in his eye.

Q. But how shall I know I have attained this confirming grace?

A. These signs following, show a Christian confirmed and strong in grace,
which I will name that you may know what to aim at, and what to desire. There
is not so great a difference between a King and a Beggar, between the greatest
health and fickliest man, as between a strong useful Christian, and a poor
languishing soul, etc.

1. A confirmed Christian is one, that can resist many subtle and strong
temptations, not only a single temptation, but when Satan assaults on every
side, with errors on both extremes, with importunities of several parties, with
temptations of prosperity offered, of adversity felt or feared; strong
temptations that seem to lay a necessity of yielding on a weakling, that makes
him say, I must do it to save my liberty, family, life, etc. A strong Christian
can say, there is no necessity; he can make light of those temptations that
seem to be a necessity to other persons: he can confute a subtle Sophister, and
deal with a cunning Adversary: Satan cannot so easily go beyond and out-wit him.

2. He can do great, excellent, and useful work, is serviceable to God, if he
have opportunity in business of greatest consequence: he does not serve God
only in some little and inconsiderable thing, but in his place sets himself to
the work of God, does the great work of his Majesty faithfully. The service of
God to him is more easy and deligtful: as to go ten miles is more easy to the
healthful, then one to a sickly person, he can go through Gods service with
pleasure, ease, and delight, without tiring, fainting, sitting down, or giving
over.

3. He can digest the hard truths and providence of God, that are ready to
puzzle, perplex, and over-set the stomach of a weak Christian, he has laid his
foundation, to which he reduces all things of difficulty, and by the help of
those great truths he has received, he can easily see through the difficulties
that are yet before him. He can tell how to reconcile those things in Scripture
that seem contradictions: where he meets with a difficulty, he can easily
discern the cause is in himself, and that there is an undoubted way of
reconciling them, though he has not attained to it. He can easily quiet his
soul under the most difficult providence, and interpret them so as is
consistent with the truths of God, which must expound them: he reconciles
providence with providence: and providence with Scripture, whereas a weak
Christian is ready to say, A hard saying, who can bear this and that: and it is
the difficulty of these kind of truths that makes so many turn their Religion,
because not able to digest the hardest Truths of God. Cross providence makes
them question Gods love, etc.

4. He is one that can exercise various graces without setting one against
another, destroying or contradicting one another: He can do many works, believe
many truths, perform many duties at once. He can rejoice and sorrow at once,
and make his sorrow a help to his joy, and his joy a help to his sorrow, and so
exercise both in that nature as will not directly hinder or weaken one another.
He can tell how in such a time as we are in to rejoice, yet to be humble, to be
cast down at Gods feet in the sense of the sins we have committed, and of Gods
displeasure, etc. yet to rejoice in the mercies we have and do expect to
possess. He does not look all upon sin, all upon affliction, or all upon mercy,
but can eye every thing, and give every thing its part: can exercise graces
methodically, give Truths and Providence their proper place in his meditations
and affections: and this makes his life orderly, beautiful, regular, and
useful; whereas a weak Christian, let him set himself against one temptation,
he is taken in another; if he humble himself in soul, he can do nothing but
humble, weep, grieve, fear, and be ready to cast away all comfort, all sense of
the love of God: if he set himself to the consideration of the grace of Christ,
he is apt to forget humiliation, and to be puffed up with spiritual pride, etc.
Thus he has not skill, strength, and ability to carry on all the whole work of
Grace together.

5. A strong Christian sinks not under those burdens that would press down and
overwhelm a weak Christian; he can bear heavy burdens, and more easily away
with them, making it a Recreation to bear some things that another would sink
under, and cannot bear, It Is thy weakness that makes thee make such a stir,
when God lays on thee Personal, Family, public affections, that makes thee
shrink under them; strength of grace would enable thee to see God and Glory in
the midst of them, and to say, All shall work for my good: it would enable thee
to get advantage, and be bettered by them. Had thou strength enough to
improve them, thou would take comfort from them, and support thy self under
them; but when thou had not strength enough to understand Gods meaning, to
see the Duty then called for, to improve all for God, to do that service to God
thou should do in such a condition: no wonder if thou have not grace to
support and comfort thee in that condition. Whereas the confirmed Christian by
strong faith, love, and patience, can carry great burdens, etc.

6. Is helpful to many, and troublesome unto few. They are the useful persons
in the family and place where they live: it is they can counsel others in their
doubts, help them in their straits; that can bear up the weak when ready to
sink, that can hold others by the arm when not able to go up-right; that tend
Gods little ones: and if it were not for these, what would Gods little ones do?
They are so furnished with Patience, which God has given them for the use of
the weak ones in his Family, and though they are troublesome, or do that which
might be a disturbance to them, they will not thrust them out: it is they that
comfort the feeble, support, provide for, strengthen and confirm the rest: and
were it not for these, what backsliding hearts should we have? etc. And they
are comparatively troublesome to few (though while corruption cleaves to them,
they shall sometimes:) It is not they that are censuring their brethren, that
are stirring up divisions, and make all that feud that is in the Church. If
they might be hearkened unto, and regarded, there would be quietness and
composure, (for if ever there be peace, it will be by the strong ones:) but
weak ones in grace are the burdens and troublers of the Family: you may know
they are the weak ones in Gods house, in that they are those that are always
crying, complaining, making firework in the Family, backbiting, censuring
their Brethren, quarrelling with one or other, etc. these peevish troublesome
souls, are the weak ones, etc.

7. The strongest in grace are the best able to stand, work, and suffer alone.
Though in duty they should not be alone when they can have society, and though
the rest are most humble, therefore are sensible they have need of others, and
will not throw away any of their helps; yet if all forsake them, they will
stand to it still: they go not to Heaven merely for company sake; they be not
Christians merely because such and such are Christians; If all the world
forsake Christ they will stick to him, unless Christ leave them to their own
weakness. But the weak Christian has a great deal more need of comfort and
support, and lives a more dependent life: they cannot stand, work, suffer
alone; if their Minister fall, they fall: if their Relations change, they
change: if there be not some body at hand to confute an Adversary, they yield;
if there be not some body to keep life and warmth, they grow cold in every
duty; in affliction they can step on no longer then led by the hand, etc. Have
Christians to support, and to quiet, and to moderate their passions, and to
teach them the Doctrine of patience: they can hold up no longer then they are
refreshed with Cordials: what would become of you, should God let you stand by
your selves, etc.

8. The strong Christian is one that can best live without creatures upon God
alone (and a weak Christian is one that has most need of the creature, and can
least live upon God alone) under the censures of the godly, frowns of the
wicked, without riches, honors, pleasures; can have the quietness and
contentment in God, whether he have any thing or nothing where ever he is, etc.
The more necessity thou art in of having something besides God for thy
consolation, the more weak thou art there must be supply: I know not how to be
poor, disgraced, etc. this impatient soul is the feeble soul, Impatience is
nothing but the fruit of weakness. The strong Christian can live upon God
alone: therefore if men make as if they were undone, if lost in their estates;
it is a certain sign of a lamentable weakness of a sick soul.

9. That is the best and strongest Christian, and most confirmed in grace, who
is most employed and abides in the love of God, in love to God: That has the
fear of God, but goes beyond fear, and loves most, and abides most in the love
of God: That makes it his great business to feed upon, and study the love of
God to him, and to return love to him again. The more Gods love is on thy
heart, and the more thou love in the fruit of that love, the stronger
Christian. But he that lives most by a kind of constraining fear, though he may
be sincere, he is but weak: where there is nothing but fear and no love, there
is no sincerity; but where there is some little measure of love, fear is such a
tyrant, that it will many times cloud it, so that almost all his life seems to
be moved and managed by fear: and in this there is much loathness and
unwillingness, and they had rather do otherwise then they do: according to the
measure of love is the strength of grace.

10. He is the strongest Christian that has most pure and most universal love
to others, that can love all men, even an enemy, with true unfeined love, even
with such love as belongs to a Christian: that can love every Christian, and
not a party only, with the pure and fervent love which belongs to Believers:
that can love every child of God, and not those only that are of his opinion,
or have done him good, but all, because they are children of God, with a
sincere and special hearty love: That is the weak Christian that picks and
chooses, that is staggering when he comes to loving an enemy; that takes in
those that agree with him in judgment, and makes those almost only the object
of his love; that would confine his affections to some narrow society, some
little sect, party, or parcel of Believers, and cannot love Christians as
Christians: And hence it is, division is the effect of enmity, or of weakness
in Grace, for want of the universality of love. I would make no question to
prognostic the healing of all divisions within this Nation, could I but
advance all that are concerned in it to the right temper of Christian love:
It Is the weak children in Christ's Family that falls out, when we have not
enough love to reach to all and to love a Christian as a Christian, etc.

Q. What must be done by those that are converted, to keep them where they are,
to help them unto growth, to make them better, to further their confirmation,
to secure their salvation; that they may after all attain the Crown?

A. I shall leave with you twenty directions; and as many as there are, there
are not more than you must practice; and take them as if they were the last
directions I shall give you; and take them as practicals, not as notionals,
that you must live upon as long as you live.

1. See that the foundation be surely laid in your head and heart, in matters
of your Religion: In your head, that is, that you well understand what Religion
is, what the Christian Religion is: what God is, what it is for God to be
yours, in his Attributes and Relations unto you: what he is, and will be unto
you: what you are, and must be unto him: what sin is, how odious, wherein its
evil consists: what is sin, and what not: what sin has done in the world, and
what estate it has brought transgressors into: what Christ is, what he has
done for man's recovery and redemption: what he has wrought, gives and offers
to the world: The end and design of God in the work of man's Redemption: The
tender of the Gospel Covenant of Grace, freeness, largeness, and excellency of
the grace of this Covenant: The end of our Religion, the everlasting glory that
is revealed in the Gospel, what it is, how sure, and how great. When you
understand these things, get a sound and redicated belief concerning the Truths
of the holy Scripture, revealing all these things: And think it not enough that
the Scripture is true, or that you are resolved so to believe, but get the best
grounds for your belief: be well established on those grounds: Read the
Scripture much, till you are acquainted with, and relish the matter and
language, and feel the power, and till all be delightful to your souls in
reading: And be not ashamed to understand the Fundamentals: look to your
Catechism: The Fundamentals of Religion you must understand and receive. And
when you have got them into your head, be sure you get them into your heart,
and never think any truth received as it ought, till it has done some special
work on your heart; till you believe that God is Almighty, Just, Holy, etc. and
all the Attributes of God have made their holy impression on your heart: that
the sanctifying knowledge of God has warmed your affections, captivated your
souls, that God be in throned in your hearts by the belief and knowledge of
your minds: Know your selves so as to be humble: know Christ so as he may be
sweet unto you, and exalted by you: set up Christ in your souls nearest to your
hearts: know sin so as to hate it, etc. It Is the entertainment of the good
things of the Gospel by the will, that is the principal part of your Religion.
It Is a matter of lamentable consequence in all your lives, when there is not a
sound work at the heart: how little life will there be from any truth in
reading or hearing? The Fundamentals of Religion must be so received, as not
only to have an old heart mended, but a new heart made. Thus understand,
believe, and give up thy heart to that thou believe and understandest.

2 Know and remember the work of your Salvation, must be as long as your lives,
and that you have never done, till you have done living. I give this direction,
because I find something in Christianity, the remains of earnality is apt to
hinder, etc. And some professors, when converted, they are reconciled to God,
and safe, etc. but there is a great deal to be done after, etc.

3. Understand well wherein it is your confirmation, stability, rootedness and
growth in Religion does consist. The chief part of your growth in grace is not
to know more things then you knew before; but to grow in the knowledge, belief,
entertainment, and improvement of the same truths, that at first you did
receive: (not that you may not, or should not know more, for the clear
knowledge of the fundamentals, guide you unavoidably to the sight of many other
Truths, which a darker knowledge of those Fundamentals will not discover to
you.) It Is not additional to your former knowledge, but the clearer known,
sounder believing, heartier entertaining and improving of the Truths you know
at first; as the health of a man consists not in having every day variety of
food, but in the parting and digestion of the same food, that is fittest for
him: get but a more perfect conviction, or concoction of what you knew before,
and this is your growth. You may grow in the knowledge of Gods Attributes by
knowing them more clearly, orderly, distinctly, satisfactorily and believingly
then before. There is a world of difference in the manner of knowledge, between
a dark and clear knowing things: grow in greater love to them, and greater
skill in entertainment, improvement and practice of them.

4 Grow downward in humility, and inward in the knowledge of your selves; and
above all, maintain a constant abhorrence and jealousy of the sin of pride:
grow in humility, and fly from man: keep a constant apprehension of your
unworthiness and weakness, of the odiousness and danger of sin, of spiritual
pride (so called, because exercised about spiritual things:) of being puffed up
with pride of any thing in your selves, of being too confident in your selves:
be low in your own, and expect not, nor desire others good thoughts of you.
Humility lies not in humility of opinion, of speech, garb, or carriage: but in
opposition to high thoughts of our own parts; gifts, godliness, when we think
of these above their worth: still remember, Psalm. 25. Prove. 26.19. Isa. 57.15.
John 20.29. as ever you would grow in grace and be confirmed Christians, keep a
low esteem of your selves, be mean in your own eyes, be content to be mean in
others, and hearken not to secret flatterers, that would puff you up. Take heed
of any thing that would puff you up, etc.

5. You must understand that you are Disciples in Christ's School, where
Ministers are his teachers and guides: the Ordinances his means for his peoples
good, and the Scripture, the book you must learn: therefore keep in this order
keep under these guides, commit your souls to those that are faithful, and fit
for souls to be entrusted with: and when you have done, with humble
submissiveness to their teaching, keep in this School under those Officers in
their Discipline, and dwell in the Catholic Church and Communion of Saints,
and understand the duty of Pastors and people, Heb. 13.17, 18. 1 These. 5.12.
Obey them, that have the rule over you: If God had seen the poor Christians
sufficient to support themselves, he would never have made it the duty of all
to be marshalled and rankt in several schools, ranks, orders, and all to walk
in this order to heaven. If you withdraw from under Christ's Officers, and
Ordinances, you are in danger of being snatched up as straglers.

Q. What shall we do? who shall we take for our guides, if God take them away?
etc.

A. It Is not the denial of public liberty that loses that relation between a
Pastor and his flock, nor any word from man should cause a poor soul to trust
its self for guidance of salvation to one that is not able: a man's soul is not
to be hazarded upon damnation, by being deprived of the Officers and Ordinances
of Christ, and cast upon the conduct of a blind guide, merely for the
pleasuring of a mere man.

6. Be sure you understand the nature of Church-union, and necessity of
maintaining it, and abhor all ways that are truly Schismatical, that would rent
and divide the Church of Christ. As you must not under pretense of avoiding
Schism, cast your soul upon apparent hazard of Damnation, so you must maintain
the necessity of Church-union and Communion: when Christ's Members walk in
Communion with Christ's Members, supposing that which is singular to the
generality of judicious men; Take heed of any thing that would withdraw you
from the communion of the generality of those that are found in the faith. Take
heed of withdrawing from the main body of Believers. Christ is the head of his
Church, he will never condemn his Church; walk in those substantials Christ's
Church has walked in Divisions amongst Christians is a sin God has described
as odious and tending to the Ruin of Christians. Be very suspicious of any
that would draw you from the main Body of Believers, and keep communion with
the Universal Church of Christ, with the generality of the godly in love and
affection, etc.

7. Be sure your own hearts and ways be the matter of your daily study; and
when hypocrites have their work abroad, let yours be much at home; while they
make it their business to censure this and that man, let the main of your
business be in pressing the inward of your own hearts, in keeping all right
between God and you. Observe your hearts inclinations. If any inordinate
inclination after any thing, set a special guard: mark which way your thoughts
go, that you may know your inclinations by your thoughts. In an especial manner
preserve tenderness of conscience, fear of sin, loathfulness to displease God.
Let Truth have the mastery; maintain such a conscience that dares not sin to
save your lives. Be sure you sin not wilfully Obey the light.

8. Be sure to keep up continually a lively apprehension of the state and place
of your everlasting happiness, to live by faith upon the unseen world. Know
where your happiness lies, and what it is, that you grow not to carnal
apprehensions of your happiness, live upon Heaven, and let that be it that
shall animate your faith to duty, and all that you may still be weary of
vexation, and sensible of the vanities here below: Let your conversation be
above. Be confirmed in your apprehensions of the certainty and excellency of
eternal blessedness; grow more in heavenly mindednes, and in satisfaction of
soul, in the hopes you have of these things.

9 Understand the nature, method, and power of temptations, how to resist them,
and live in watchfulness. Be not a stranger to Satan and his methods of
tempting, what you have to watch against and oppose, where you must be armed.
Understand the nature of Christian watchfulness; keep up a constant resolution
and courage in resisting, especially the temptations you carry about with you,
of your calling, constitution, company, and of the times: set them down,
remember them, keep a special observation of them all; and say, this and this
it is I am in danger of; and it is my integrity and Salvation that is in danger,
and here place special guard, and make it your business to resist. The
principal cause of Christians negligence in this, is the security of their
consciences, and love of their sins; did you know your danger, you would better
look after your safety, 2 Cor. 2.11.

10. Especially understand how much the flesh and carnal self is an enemy to
God and your Souls, and how much you are engaged by the Christian Covenant to
live in a warfare against your selves, and against your flesh. You must not
think the life of life-pleasing is consistent with Religion; understand how you
are bound to take the flesh for your enemy, to watch against it, and to live in
a continual combat with it, Col. 3.5. The flesh is your chiefest enemy: the
very senses themselves are all grown inordinate, and the work of Faith is very
much seen in its exercise this way: If you get an opinion, that you may eat,
and drink, and cloth, etc. and do all things to gratify your selves, etc.
then no wonder if you find but little increase in spirituals, while you grow so
carnal. Understand and practice the duty of self-denial, self is the very heart
of sin; read i^ not under pretense of liberty in Religion.

11. Give not way to a formal, heartless, seeming Religiousness, customariness,
without the life: but keep your souls in a continual seriousness and awakedness
about God, immortality, and your great concernment. If Duty be dead, take heed
lest that incline you to a deadness in another, and so grow a customary
deadness. Take heed of spiritual sloathfulness, that makes you keep your hands
in your bosom, when you should be doing for your soul; stir up to, and in
duty, when you have but little time for life eternal: do not pray as if you
prayed not, nor hear as though you heard not; but when upon Duty, doing Gods
service, do it with all the seriousness and vigor you can. To grow lazy and
negligent is the declining way: use such considerations as may stir you up,
Romans 12.11. Tit. 2.14.

12. Remember always the worth of time, and greatness of your work, and
therefore so value time, as not negligently or sloathfully to lose a moment; it
will quickly be gone, and when you are at the last, you will better know its
worth: hearken to no temptation that will draw you to any trifling, abusing,
wasting of your precious time; if thou have no argument against thy sports,
trifling pleasures, etc. but this, it loses my time, take it for a greater
argument then if it lose thee thy money, friends, or any thing in the world,
your youth, your morning hours, especially the Lords day; lose not any part of
it, but improve it with your selves and families; lose not a moment of the
Lords day, nor any of thy precious time, thou can spare and redeem: if thou
have lost any be humbled for it, and be careful to redeem the rest: look back;
do you approve of the time that is past? could you not have spent it better?
remember what you have, let that quicken you; look before you, remember what is
to be done, and do the first which must be done; and then leave trifles to that
time you have to spare: it is ignorance and idleness, and not want of work,
that makes any think they have time to spare, Ephesians. 5.16 Col. 4.5.

13. Make a careful choice of your company; you cannot travel well to heaven
alone, especially when you may have company, thrust not your selves into every
company, Ephesians. 5.7. converse as much as you can with those that will help you,
that are warm when you are cold, knowing when you are ignorant, believing when
you are doubtful, etc. especially for your constant companions, live with those
that will be a frequent help to you; Masters, choose the best servants, that
fear God: servants choose to live with those that will help you in the fear of
God; For Husbands and Wives make choice of those that will intend upon
Religion; take heed of being unequally yoaked, and of thinking to get well to
Heaven, while you presume to unite your selves with those that with great
advantage will hinder, not help your Salvation.

14. Keep a constant guard upon the tongue, especially take heed of those
common sins that disgrace has not driven out of the World, but have got some
kind of credit amongst some Professors; namely idle talk; that wastes precious
time, maks us unfruitful to one another, backbiting especially, can they put
but a Religious pretense upon it, or if they back-bite those that differ in
opinion. Remember that terrible passage, Prove. 18.28. James 1.26. Psalm. 39. and
35.28. avoid idle talk, backbiting, etc. watch over your tongues; and if they
are by nature addicted to a laxity of tongue, and multitude of words, there
lies a double obligation on you in point of danger and necessity above all
others to keep a careful watch over your tongues, you should rather speak fewer
words than others: and if you find your selves inclined to speak against and
behind his back, reprehend your selves and avoid it.

15. Learn the holy skill of improving every condition that God shall cast you
into; learn how to live to God in every condition: if you have skill and heart,
there is advantave to be got by all; that prosperity may strengthen you in God,
encourage you in his service, that adversity may wean you from the world, help
you to repentance, raise you to God, and give you more then it took away, know
the danger and duty of every condition, study them before they come upon you,
that they do not surprise you; learn to know what is the danger, duty, and
particular temptation of every condition, and in that condition you are most
likely to expect a fall into: prepare for affliction as the common lot of the
Saints, take it as no strange thing when it overtakes you; know how to abound
and how to want. A great deal of a Christians safety and comfort lies in this,
to study the temptations and duty of every condition before it come, that so
you may have your remedy at hand, and fall to your work, and commit your selves
to God.

16. Be as conscionable and strict in the duties of your relations, and
dealings with men, proportionably as in the duties of holiness, more directly
to be performed to God; make as much conscience, care, study, diligence, about
being just that you wrong no man in buying or selling, as you do in duties of
holiness, hearing, praying, receiving. In your trading make conscience of
justice and faithfulness, as well as in the Worship of God, and in your own
personal behavior; in your calling be diligent, not sloathful in business,
etc. And so in the duties of your Relations; O that Parents knew what a charge
lies on them concerning the soul of their children, etc. so Masters, look to
your servants, and be as conscionable in doing your duty for their souls good,
and being faithful to them, and compassionate over them, as in your duty to
God: keep up family duties with life, seriousness, diligence, and vigor: the
life of Religion in the world must be kept up very much in families.

17. Make it your study and care to do all the good you can in the world, let
doing good be the principal part of your business, think that the safest and
happiest life in which you can do greatest good, suffer not opportunities to
slip out of your hands; take them where you have them, and seek where you may
have them; look not only where you may get a good, but where you may have
opportunity to do good to others: every Talent must be answered for, your
knowledge, health, etc. use it as you will answer for it, and know, it is one of
the greatest mercies in the world, for God to give you hearts in doing good
with that he has given, Heb. 13.16. not for applause, but be good husbands for
God, and consider which way you may attain your ends best, by what you give or
do. Thus be rich in good works.

18. Live still as before the living God, approve your hearts to him, as
knowing you stand or fall unto his judgment: Avoid carefully all offenses unto
men, for the Lords sake, and their conscience sake, take heed of scandal, and
receive all the good from others you can, but stick not too much on man's
approbation: dis-regard not suspicions, or reproofs of godly men, but make not
man's praise to be any part of your reward; it is a small thing for me to be
judged of men. Be not much troubled at it if you cannot please all: the
bawlings of the malicious should not disturb a soul that is quietly housed with
God: that soul is not well stablished in faith, that can be so disturbed and
distempered by the wrath or words of malicious men. Remember, God himself
pleases not all: the most of the world are enemies to their Maker, upon the
account of his holiness, justice, etc. and can thou think to please all?
withdraw from the world and your selves unto God, for the consolation of his
approbation, and for your felicity: this will save you from hypocrifie, and
keep you from the temptations and vexations of the censorious world.

19. Be every day as serious in your preparations for death and judgment, as
those that are always certain that it will come, and know not the moment when
it will come, ( Mat. 24.29.) Use often to think seriously beforehand, what
death is, what thoughts, what trials death will put a man upon: what
temptations usually accompany our approaching death: what you shall most need
at such a time as that: what thoughts are likeliest to possess you then: what
you are likeliest to wish for when you must needs dye, about spending your
time, expending your estate, conversing with others, etc. Ask your selves, What
will I wish I had done, or been when I come to dye? Think what will be most
dreadful to a dying man, for thus you have time to escape his judgment. Will
it not be to think on a life lost in vanity, drencht in worldliness,
unreconciled to God, or at least in utter uncertainty of his love? God has not
fore-shewed what will be a dying man's terror to torment thee, but to get out
that terror; that which will be most terrible at death, conquer and destroy it
presently. They that were ready went in with the Bridegroom, and the door was
shut, (Mat. 25.10.) Oh happy thou, if while the door is open, thou be found
ready to go in; woe, if when the door be shut, thou have thy preparation to
make, thy graces to seek. Bethink what you will, either wish, or fear when you
come to dye, and when you will say, this should have been done, etc. let it be
now done.

20. Rise speedily after every fall by sound repentance, and a fresh recourse
to the Blood of Christ, Covenant of Grace, and his intercession. Lie not secure
in any sin, into which thou art lapsed, take heed of delaying and trifling,
when thy particular repentance should be exercised. Renew thy Covenant, and
after thy rising deal faithfully with thy self and God, favor not thy sin, nor
flesh, go to the quick, leave no corruption at the bottom: If called to make
restitution, to shame thy self before men by confession, stick not at it: take
the plainest course, that is the way of God: And let not any thought of shame,
dishonor, or loss hinder it: for the more it costs thee to rise from sin, the
likelier it is thou art sound in thy Conversion, and the more comfort thou will
have, otherwise the fears and pains of thy disease will be upon thee, when the
through cure would have prevented it: quarrel not at any man's reproof, though
they miscarry in it, have mentioned thy faults with passion, etc. take that
which is good and be thankful. And after every fall sit not down in perpetual
distress, but as Christ takes the honor of thy cure, take thou the comfort of
thy cure when recovered. See thou art truly risen by repentance, and returned
to him whom thou have dishonored. -- Thy care must be to see thou be sincere
in thy-return, and then walk comfortably. See that Satan make not thee walk so
as to rob thee of thy comfort, and God of his honor.

Thus having given you twenty Directions, I shall reduce all to these eight
Particulars.

1. Do not think strength of grace will be got with ease: you must do that,
that in other things is done for the attaining of strength, increase and
confirmation: A man cannot attain knowledge in Law, Physic, or any Art,
without studying, diligence, unwearied labor and patience through that time
that is necessary to attain it. Set your selves to the reading of the Scripture
and other good Books; study good truths: think not to attain mastery in a day:
And if ever such a conceit come in your minds, that you are strong confirmed
Christians, do not easily entertain it, there must be time, industry, and
diligence: ordinarily suspect the conceit you may have of strength and
confirmation; you must grow by degrees: Gods method is to begin like a grain of
mustard seed: we are not born men: labor in the proper means with patience,
infused gifts are given according to the manner of acquitting them: God gives
as if our acquisition did attain it; never think of having this without
patience, labor, and diligence. 2. Grow up in the Church of God, and under his
Officers and Ordinance, and among his people: Do not transplant your selves
from the Garden and Vineyard of the Lord, if you will thrive; no prospering in
the Commons where weeds will choke, etc. Keep within the Church of God, in the
communion of his People, among his Servants, under the guidance of his
Ministers, for that is the duty of Ministers; to bring up, train up, and help
the weak ones, till they grow to be strong: they are to be Gods Nurses, and
helpers of the weak in the House of God: do not think to prosper by breaking
over the hedge, under pretense of any right of holiness whatsoever, following
any party that would draw you to separation. 3. Make it amongst others, the
principal study of your lives, to study the love of God in the Redeemer: the
nature of the New Covenant, and the infinite goodness revealed in the face of a
Mediator: how it was his design to attract the hearts of men to the love of
God, by revealing his infinite love in the Redeemer, unto which end Christ came
for, even to represent Gods goodness in sinners hearts, of their being
reconciled to him, and ravishing them with his love: Study the glory and
ravishing love of God, and unspeakable goodness in a Redeemer. 4. Live not by
sense, or upon worldly hopes, nor in the exercise of it: See that you live a
mortified life; take heed of glutting your selves with creatures, or letting
your hearts out to any creature, or letting any creature be too dear to you:
live not too much on any sensible thing, or upon any worldly hopes or
expectations. Shut your eyes to the world, let not your desires run out to the
world, and live as much as you can upon the world to come. 5. Let holy
self-suspicion always make you fearful of temptation, and keep you out of the
Devils way: Would you keep your standing? grow better and strong in grace; let
not the pride of your hearts, or confidence of your strength, make you meet
among any unlawful communion, see any enticing spectacle, or thrust your selves
upon temptation: you are never safe if you thrust your selves upon temptation:
think with your self, my weaknese is great, I must not gaze upon this enticing
object, lest my heart take fire; I am not so strong as to be able to stand
against such, etc. 6. When you cannot attain to that heat of internal affection
you would, be sure you walk uprightly with God: sin not wilfully; keep your
garments clean: set his Law before your eyes; Sin not wilfully for a world: be
but found in the way of duty, and God will bless you, and meet you in that way:
be as exact in obedience, as if you had that frame of soul you desire. 7. In a
special manner keep all your bodily senses and desires in subjection; mortify
the flesh, keep under your carnal desires in a due subjection to the spirit;
let none of your senses take the reins out of your hands; keep a dominion over
your senses.
Lastly, all your life long be longing to die: Let the work of your life be to
learn to die. Consider what necessity to the safety and comfort of death, to
consider frequently, what assaults will be made upon dying men, that you may
every day fortify against it; to consider what graces and duties will be most
needful and useful then, that you may be most conversing with, and exercising
those graces and duties. He that has well learnt to dye, is no weak Christian.
The strength of your Grace lies in the exercise of these things; faithfully
practice them, and you will stand when others fall; you will have comfort when
others cast away their comfort, you will dye in peace when others dye in
horror.

Dr. Jacomb's Forenoon Sermon.
John 8.29. And he that sent me, is with me: the Father hat not left me alone:
for I do always those things that please him.
THese are the words of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are
spoken by himself: and they are spoken of himself; though yet in a sober and
modest sense they are applicable to all his Members: that which Christ here
affirms, is that the presence of God was always with him, and this is first
propounded, He that sent me is with me, and then it is amplified, and the
Father has not left me alone; and then thirdly, the reason of this is annexed,
for I always do those things that please him.

I shall speak but very little of the words as they do refer to Christ: he
tells us where his Father was with him, he did not leave him alone in all the
troubles and difficulties that he met withal in the finishing the great work of
man's Redemption; still God was with him: It is true, there was a time when
Christ was without the sensible manifestation of his Fathers presence, when he
cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Why, but yet even then in
truth and in reality his Father did not leave him; for though he had not the
evidences of his Fathers presence, yet he had the influences of his Fathers
presence. It would take up much time to show you how in all particulars the
Father was present with Christ; I will only speak this one word, and instance
in this one thing, Gods assisting presence was always with him, both in his
active, and also in his passive obedience; and indeed he had that work to do,
and those miseries to suffer, that if God had left him, if he had not been
mightily assisted by the Divine Nature, Christ as mere man, could neither have
done, nor have suffered what he did; but the Father was with him, and to
support him, Isa. 42.1. Behold my servant whom I uphold. You shall find that
Christ did act faith upon this, in Isai. 50.7. The Lord God will help me,
therefore shall I not be confounded, verse 9. The Lord will help me. So to the
same effect is Psalm. 16.9. And you shall find this made good to him in
Scripture, in his greatest necessities.

Take a double instance.

In the first place, after he bad been engaged in the combat with Satan, you
read in Mat. 4. the strongest combat or duel that ever was fought; wherein you
have the Prince of Peace and the Prince of darkness; the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, and the roaring Lion that seeks how to devour; both of them putting
forth their utmost strength, and endeavoring to overcome each other: Now I say
in this combat, the Father did not leave Christ, but he helps him; for he
sends an Angel to minister unto him, Mat. 4.11.

So in Christ's bitter Agony in the Garden, just before his bitter Passion and
death upon the Cross, the Father did not leave him alone, for he sent an Angel
unto him to strengthen him, Luke 22.43. and so in several other places, and in
several other things I might instance; but I shall pass this by. I but now why
did the Father thus stand by Christ? he gives you the reason of it in the Text,
because he always did the things that pleased him: This I shall open in a
double respect.

First, Christ's undertaking of the work of our Redemption; it was very well
pleasing unto his Father, that poor lost undone sinners should be brought back
again unto God, and restored unto his love and favor: I say the Father was
infinitely well pleased with Christ in this undertaking. Isa. 35.10. The
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand; the pleasure of the Lord, that
is the work of our Redemption; wherein God the Father took great pleasure or
delight; therefore when Christ was publicly in the eye of the world to enter
upon this great work, the Father sends him out with this witness. This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. He speaks not of this well-pleasing
only to his person, but also of his well-pleasing as unto his undertaking.

Secondly, as the work it self was well pleasing unto God, so Christ managing
of this work, was all along pleasing unto his Father; and that does appear in
this, that Christ in all things kept to his Fathers Commission, and to his
Fathers Command: I say in all things he kept to his Fathers Commission: he did
nothing here upon earth, but what was within the compass of his Commission; for
says he in the verse before the Text, I do nothing of my self, but as my
Father bids me: So also he acted in conformity to his Fathers will; that was
the rule and square by which Christ ordered all his actions; his eye was still
upon his Fathers will; whatever he willed him to do, that he did; whatever he
willed him to suffer, that he suffered; and thus he always did the things that
were pleasing to his Father: but I do not intend further upon the words in this
reference; for my design is to bring down the words unto our selves, to those
that are the Members of Christ; for there is the same disposition of heart in
all Believers to please God: In all things to please God; this was the frame
and temper and carriage of Christ; so it is the frame and temper of every true
believer: and this is a part of our likeness unto Christ; as you know there is
a blessed resemblance and similitude between Christ and his Members; they have
the same Spirit that Christ had, only in a different proportion; for he had it
without measure; they have the same Grace as Christ had for substance, though
not for degree; Of his fullness we all have received grace for grace; that is,
as many interpret it, Grace answerable unto grace: As the print in the wax
answers to the print in the Seal, and as face answers to face; so grace in
believers answers unto that grace that was in Christ; they are to show forth
the virtues of Christ, 1 Pet. 2.11. Now this was the grace and virtue and
holiness of Christ, that he always did the things that pleased his Father. Why
this is in all believers, only with this difference; it was actual performance
in the one, it is but endeavor in the other; it was perfect in the one, it is
sincere, but imperfect in the other.

Christ always did things that pleased God, a Believer endeavors always to do
the things that please God, he does not always do so; witness David in the case
of his uncleanness, when he displeased the Lord, as it is in 2 Samuel 11.

The Observation I intend to speak to, shall be this:

They that please God, and endeavor always to do the things that please God,
such God will be with; such the Father will not leave alone; especially in
times of suffering and trouble, for I will bring it that at case.

Indeed God will not leave such at any time; for that promise is exceeding
full, Heb. 13.5. I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. I do not know any
one promise in all the Bible, that is expressed with such an Emphasis as that
promise is; such a multiplication of Negatives in the Original. But especially
God will not leave such in an afflicted and suffering condition.

In the prosecution of this, I will speak to four things:

First, I will show you when a man may be said to do the things that please
God. 2. I will confirm the truth of the doctrine. 3. I will show you in what
respects God will be with them that desire to please him in a suffering
condition. 4. I will give you the grounds and reasons of it; and then I shall
come to an Application.


For the first, We please God in what we do, when we act. 1. In a suitableness
to Gods nature. And 2. In subjection to Gods Law: For pleasing of God lies in
these two things. As that pleases a man which is suitable to his disposition,
and is correspondent with his command: We do the things that please God, when
we do the things that God does; and when we do that which God commands: when we
hate sin, as God hates sin; when we are holy as God is holy. You shall find it
in Col. 1.10. That you may walk worthy of God, unto all well pleasing. Observe,
This walking worthy of God, is walking suitably, or walking answerably to God,
Mat. 3.8. Bring forth fruit worthy of Repentance, or bring forth fruit
answerable to Repentance; So to walk worthy of God, is to walk suitable to God,
to his nature: Now then observe what follows, that you might walk worthy of God
to all well-pleasing, then we please God when we walk suitably unto God: So
also when we act in a blessed conformity to God, to his law; for nothing can
please the good God, but what is good: Now the Law being the measure, and
standard of all goodness, nothing can be good, but what bears conformity to
this Law, which is the will of God. God is wel-pleased, when his will is
observed: As you know, you that are Masters, your servants please you when they
do your will. That inference of the Apostle, for this is very opposite, Romans
8.8. So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God. What is this same
inference grounded upon, because the carnal mind is enmity against God: for it
is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be; so that they that are
in the flesh, cannot please God. Why? because there is that principle in them,
as carries out a real enmity to the Law and Will of God; it is as if the
Apostle had said, They will not be subject to Gods will, not obedient to Gods
command; there is a principle of enmity in them against these things, and so
cannot please God: God is pleased when his will is fulfilled, and his commands
observed; to please God, is in all things so to act, that whatever we do, we
may express a likeness to Gods na^^^ and a blessed subjection to Gods revealed
will, and this is the first thing.

A second thing is the proof of the Doctrine; they that thus please God, he
will be with them, he will not leave them alone; especially in an hour of
trial: For, my Brethren, assure your selves of this, that which the Father did
for Christ, he will do for all his Members, it is true, Christ's sufferings being
greater then ours possibly can be, and so his relation to God being higher then
ours is; he a Son by eternal Generation, we only by adoption; he had the
presence of God in a more glorious manner then we can expect; but yet in our
Sphere according to the measure of our trials, and according to our capacity,
we shall as really have the presence of God with us, as Christ had with him;
that as we are partakers of Christ's sufferings, so we also shall be partakers
of Christ's support; he that will be present with believers in heaven, as he is
with Christ, he will be present with believers here on earth, as he is with
Christ in all his sorrows and sufferings.

Now for the confirming of this comfortable truth, I need not speak much: Many
promises you have in Scripture for it, and what ever God has promised, he will
certainly make good: Turn to that one promise in stead of many, Isa. 43.2. When
thou passest through the water, I will be with thee; through the Rivers, they
shall not overflow thee; when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be
burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. And you shall find too that
the Saints have experienced it in all ages, God has made it good.

Jacob was a man that met with many sharp trials, God exercised him with many
troubles, you shall find that when he was going to Padan-Aram, and was in a
very afflicted condition, Genesis 28 15. God comes to him, and says, Behold I am
with thee. Genesis 31.5. His father frowned upon him, but the God of his father
helped him: Joseph, Genesis 22.20. his master took him, put him into prison, a
place where the Kings prisoners were bound; he was in the Prison, but the Lord
was with Joseph. The Prophet Jeremy was thrown into a Dungeon, but the
Scripture says, God was with him. The three Children was thrown into the
Furnace of fire, but there was a fourth with them, and that was the Son of God,
Dan. 3.25. Paul when he was brought to his trial, all men forsook him, but God
stood by him. 2 Timothy 4.16. So the Christians in all their sharp sufferings, 2
Cor. 4.9. they were persecuted, but not forsaken; persecuted by men, but not
forsaken by God. God has abundantly made out this, and does so still that he
will never leave those alone in a time of suffering, who desire u^^^ignedly in
all things to please God.

N^^ the third thing is to show you in what respect God is with such: why this
presence of God is an active presence: God is not merely with his people, but
he is with them in an active way: for this is a certain truth, God is working
when the Saints are suffering, I will open this in several particulars.

First, God is with such in his teaching presence. Gods correction and Gods
instruction they usually go together: and where there is the chastenings of
Gods hand, there is also the teaching of Gods Spirit. Psalm. 90.12. Blessed is
the man whom thou chastenest, and whom thou teach. Christ though he were a
Son, yet learned obedience by the things that he suffered: God teaches his
upright ones many lessons in a time of adversity, which they never learned in a
time of prosperity. For we are like idle boys, or bad Scholars that learn best
when the rod is over us: In a prosperous condition God speaks to us, and we
mind him not, Jer. 22.21. Ispoke to thee in thy prosperity, but thou would
not hear: and this has been thy manner from thy youth upwards: in prosperity
God speaks once and twice, as Job speaks, but we will not hear; but in the time
of adversity God opens the ears, Jud. 8.16. As Gideon taught the men of Succoth
with thorns and briers; so does God teach his people, by affliction, and oh the
many blessed truths that they learn, when they are under the Rod, when they
want liberty! Oh what a mercy is it to have liberty then, when they have not
Ordinances as before! what a mercy is it to have Ordinances then! Oh what an
evil thing is it then for them, that they have departed from God! God teaches
them these things then: sin is never so bitter, mercy is never so sweet as in a
time of suffering: Oh how vain and empty is the creature then! Oh how sweet is
communion with God then! I say such things as these God teaches then.

Secondly, God is with such in his guiding presence, Psalm. 73.24. Thou will
guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me unto glory. When Israel
was in the Wilderness, then they had the cloud to guide them. It is a blessed
thing to live under the conduct and direction of the wise God; we never have so
much of this as in an hour of trial: indeed the people of God never fly so much
to God for direction, as as such a ^ime: as Saul, when he was in distress then
he calls for the Ephod; and thus it is with us under affliction, then we look
to God.

Thirdly, God is with them in his preserving and hiding presence. God is the
Saints hiding place, their shield, their buckler, their rock, their defense;
the Scripture expressions are many to hold out Gods protection as to his
people: God has a constant care over them to preserve them and save them; oh
but especially in a time of trouble: as the Mariner is never so careful of the
Ship, as under a storm; and God is never so careful of his Church and people,
as under affliction. Jeremy is in Dungeon, now God saves him: Daniel is in the
Den, now God saves him: The three Children in the Fire, now God saves them:
Peter is in Prison, now God saves him: The mother never tends the child so
carefully as when the child is sick; and Providence is never so tender to the
People of God, as under a suffering condition.

Fourthly, God is with them in his comforting Presence, 2 Cor. 4.1. Who
comfort us in all our tribulation, and usually we have most of consolation
from God, when we have most of tribulation from without; as our sufferings do
abound, so our consolations does abound much more: The child that is beaten
when it is well, is cherished when it is ill; when persons are sick, then you
give them Cordials: God gives the best of comforts in the worst of times; when
the burden is heavy upon the back, then the peace of conscience is great
within, the worse it is without, the better it is within: when men discover
most of anger, God discovers most of love.

Fifthly, God is with such in his strengthening presence, to enable them and to
support them to undergo what ever he is pleased to call them unto; this is the
way of our good and gracious God; he always gives out strength, as he lays on
affliction, he never leaves his children alone in this respect, he will be with
them to support them: though it may be not to deliver, yet he will certainly be
with them to support: the Rod and the staff they go together, Psalm. 23.4. the
afflicting Rod and the supporting staff: when one is upon the Saint to afflict,
then the other hand is underneath the Saint to support: Isa. 41 10. I will
uphold thee, I will strengthen thee, fear not, I will help thee: yea I will
uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness. This David found, I cried
unto the Lord in my distress he answered me, and strengthened me in my inward
man, Psalm. 138.3. Oh! when men afflict, God supports: when men puts the
children of God into the deep waters, then God takes them by the chin, and
holds them up, that they shall not sink and be drowned.

Sixthly, God is with them in his sympathizing presence: Oh he has a tender
sense of all the sorrows and calamities of his people! Oh it grieves him that
they are grieved! they that touch thim touches the apple of his eye: in all
their afflictions he is afflicted: Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? every
blow that is given to them, God bears a part of it himself: as they are
sensible of Gods dishonor, so God is sensible of their suffering; it pains him
to the very heart to see his children wronged and abused by a malicious World.

Seventhly, He is with them by his sanctifying presence: all their troubles are
to do them good, and to make them good: and therefore the Furnace it is but to
refine them from their dross: the pruning-hook of affliction it is but to cut
off their luxuriant Branches: God takes the sharp knife into his hand and
lances them, but it is only to fetch out their corruption. By this shall the
iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit, to take away his sin.

Eighthly, God is with them by his quickening presence, to make their Prayers
more fervent, to make their requests to the Throne of Grace more Importunate.
The Children of God cry most to him when they suffer most from men, and their
prayers are best when their condition is worst: Prayer shortens Affliction, and
Affliction heightens Prayer: God is with them to hear their Prayers. Oh the
prayer of the Afflicted that comes up to Heaven! God hears the sighs and groans
of his oppressed ones, their tears pierce the Heavens, they call upon God in
time of trouble, and pour out their sorrows before the Lord, and he does hear
them.

Ninthly, God is with them by his raising presence, to raise up their hearts
higher, to elevate their souls, and bring them more near to himself. Gods
people when they meet with troubles in the World, Oh! nothing so sweet unto
them as the enjoyment of God: then no life so sweet unto them as the life of
Faith; then they relish a sweetness in the promise: then every smile of God, oh
how welcome is it? then all the affections of their souls center in God, and
run to God: as in Wintertime all the sap of the Tree runs to the root: in
Summertime it spreads it self in the body, but in the Winter goes to the root:
when a man is sick, all the blood goes to the heart; so in a suffering
condition, all the affections of the soul go to God.

But now what are the reasons why God will not leave his people that thus
desire to please him?

Why, God loves them, therefore he will not leave them; persons we love, we
cannot leave, especially when they are in a distressed condition; and as God
has set his love upon them, so they have set their love upon him; they love
him, Psalm. 91.15. you have there an expression, Because he has set his love
upon me, therefore I will deliver him: He shall call upon me, and I will answer
him, I will be with him in trouble. God is a God of bowels, of great pity and
compassion, and therefore he will not leave his people in a time of distress;
you know bowels how they stand in you toward them that are in misery; it goes
to the heart of a merciful man to leave a person in misery: Oh how great are
the bowels and compassions of God! It Ephraim my Son, is he a pleasant Child?
Oh my bowels are turned within me, I will have mercy on him.

2. Such as please God, shall have his presence under sufferings, because now
they need God most: if God will not leave his people as to temporal supplies,
because they need such and such things: they need meat, and they need
clothing: surely much more God will not leave his children, as to spiritual
supplies, under times of distress, because then they need God. Oh what can a
Believer do, or what can a Believer suffer when God leaves him, his strength is
in God; his support is in God, his comfort is in God, his All is in God: and
therefore if God now leave him, what will become of him, he needs God at all
times, but never so much as when his condition is dark and troubled. What was
Sampson, that man of so great strength, when his hair was gone? and what is a
Believer, when his God is gone?

3. God loves to see his people cheerful in a time of suffering, and therefore
he is with them; he loves not that they should walk dejectedly. When God is
present, Paul and Silas can sing in Prison: the Apostles can rejoice, that God
honors them to be reproached for him. When God is present, the people of God
are not only cheerful under tribulation, but can glory, their cross is their
Crown; but if God be withdrawn, what can there be? drooping hearts and pensive
sorrows.

4. God will not leave them, because they will not leave him; God will not
leave them, because they suffer for his sake: were they not tender of Gods
glory, and careful to please him, they might be free from suffering as well as
others; but it is for Gods sake they suffer: For thy sake we are killed like
sheep, all the day long.

Lastly, It is thus, because God will make it appear to all the World, that he
puts a difference between them that desire to please him, and other men; God
has a value for such: do but see how Mases argues the case with God, Exodus
33.13. and so on, where he comes to God with a great request, that God will
show him his way, that he might know it; Why, says God to him, My presenes
shall go with thee. M^ses said unto him, It is well thou art pleased to promise
so great a mercy; If thy presence go not with me, carry us not hence: for
wherein shall it be know that I and thy people have found grace in thy sight?
It is not in this, that thou go with us? Observe, Moses pleads with God, how
his favor and love, and mercy should be with them, unless he were present with
them! and so God he walks with his people in trouble; for how should the world
see God regarded them and did favor them, unless he manifested his presence
unto them in a time of trouble and affliction!

Dr. Jacomb's Afternoon Sermon.
John 8.29. And he that sent me is with me: the Father has not left me alone:
for I do always those things that please him.
I Was upon these words in the morning; having spoken something to them as they
refer to Christ, who spoke them here of himself; I then brought them down to
his Members, Believers, and so propounded this observation from them. That
whoever they are that desire to please God, to do the things that are pleasing
to him, God will be with such, and the Father will not leave such alone,
especially in a time of suffering, and trouble. In the prosecuting of this
point, I spoke to four things, which I shall not now repeat, but come to the
mark which I intend at present; and that is, to make some Application. 1. Let
me endeavor to prevail with every one of you; so to carry your selves in your
several places and capacities, that whatever you do, you may please God.

It was a blessed testimony that was given of Enoch, Heb. 11.6. Before his
Translation he had this Testimony; that he pleased God; Oh! how happy will they
be at the great day of Judgment, which shall be singled out by Christ, before
Angels and Men; and Christ shall say of them, This was the man, or this was the
woman that pleased God! There is a great deal of pleasing in the world, but
there are but very sew that make this their business, to please God; therefore
I would have you shun that which is sinful, and press after that which is
matter of Duty.

1. There are some that mind nothing but to please themselves, to promote their
own interest, to love their own ease, to indulge themselves in their own carnal
delights, but they never mind the good of others, or the pleasing of God; the
Apostle speaks of, and against these, Romans 15.1, 2, 3.

2. There are others that look no farther then the pleasing of men; if they can
but keep fair with men, and shun the displeasure of men, that is all they aim
at: but my Brethren, what a poor thing is it to have man to be your friend, and
God to be your enemy? to have the smiles of a poor dying perishing worm, and to
lie under the frowns of the great God!

Indeed there is a good pleasing of men, to please them for their Edification,
as the Apostle speaks, Romans 15.2. and so the Apostle speaks of himself, 1 Cor.
10.32. Even as I please all men in all things, that is, in all things that are
of an indifferent nature, not simply evil, nor simply good, in all things.

This Apostle was of a yielding and complying spirit, that he might thereby the
better insinuate himself into the affections of men, and be more instrumental
to the glory of God, in the work of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.22. To the weak became
I as weak, that I might gain the weak; I am made all things to all men, that I
might by all means save some; and this I do for the Gospel sake.

But now in matter of Duty, such things as are expressly determined by God, and
so are either good or evil; in these things the Apostle would be no pleaser of
men: If I should please men, I should not be the servant of Christ. Gal. 1. It
is good to please others to their Edification, but we must not please others to
their own ruin and condemnation: It is good to please men when we can so do,
and not grieve God. Instead of pleasing men, let it be your constant care and
best endeavor in all things to please God: my Brethren, this is a duty of so
great importance, that was I now to take my leave of you, and should certainly
know that I should never speak to you more, as we are come very near to it, for
though I speak to you as a living man, yet I speak to you as a dying minister;
this I say, is a duty of that weight and importance, that I know not what to
press upon you more material then this; consult but two places of Scripture,
Col. 1. For this cause we do not cease to pray for you. What was the thing the
Apostle in this his constant Prayers, did beg of God for them? It was this,
That they might please God: and when he was taking his leave in the winding up
of his Epistle to the Hebrews, Now the God of Peace that brought again from the
dead our Lord Jesus, the great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the
everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do his will,
working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight.

I need not go beyond the Text for Motives to stir you up to these Endeavors:
For,

Motive. 1. First consider what that God is, which I would have you endeavor
to please. He is that God which made heaven and earth, that God before whom all
the world is as nothing, but as a little dust in the balance, and as a drop of
water to the bucket; that God whom Angels adore and worship; that God who by a
word from his mouth is able to bring the whole Universe into nothing: will you
not study to please this God? But further, consider what this God is to you; He
is the Fountain of your being, he is the God of all your mercies, he is your
Creator and Sovereign, he is your Maker and Lawgiver. It is he that by a
smile can make you happy, and by a frown can make you miserable; it is he that
has Heaven and Hell at his disposal, who opens and none can shut, who shuts
and none can open. He that must judge every one of you, either to eternal
blessedness, or else to eternal torments; it is he in whose hands your breath,
your life, your soul, your All is; will you not endeavor to please this God?
as the Prophet argues in point of fear. Isa. 51.12. Who art thou, that art
afraid of a man that shall dye, or of the Son of man that shall be made as
grass, and forgettest the Lord thy maker? Oh poor Creature! who art thou that
go about to please a mortal dying man, and do not go about to please the
great God, thy Creator and Sovereign!

2. Consider that relation wherein you profess your selves to stand to God: he
is your Master, you his servants: he is your Father, you his children: he is
your Lord, you his subjects: You know all that are in close relations will
study to please them that are above them; as the servant his Master, the child
his Father, the subject his Prince: All persons that are in a state of
inferiority, will study to please their superiors, especially when they do
depend upon them. Oh! how infiuitely is God above those relations. Alas, there
is but a very little distance betwixt you and your servants, and yet you expect
they should please you, will you not therefore please God? especially
considering your dependence upon him.

3. You shall not loose by pleasing God: that is enough to put us upon this: He
that pleases God profits himself: in that very act wherein we please God, we
profit our selves: men can do but little for us, yet for what they can do, we
study to please them. Let me open this in a few particulars.

1. If you will sincerely endeavor in all things to please God, God will give
you a gracious return to all your prayers. Oh what a mercy is this for a man to
have his prayers answered by God! 1 John 3.22 Whatever we ask, we receive of
him, because we keep his Commandments, and do those things that are pleasing
in his sight. Never expect that God should hear any prayers, if we do not
endeavor to do those things that please him. 2. Do you please God, then he
will please you: mercy pleases us, and duty pleases God. Now when we please
God in a way of duty, he will please us in a way of mercy: If we order our ways
so as to please God, he will order his ways so as to please us. 3. Great is the
benefit of pleasing God, even as to men: and this Solomon sets before you,
Prove. 16.7. When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his enemies to be
at peace with him; and he has such another expression, Prove. 22.11. He that
loves pureness of heart, the King shall be his Friend: the meaning of this
Scripture is this, when we keep close to God, and walk in compliance with his
Will, and make it our great design to please him, he will give us to sind
favor in the eyes of men. He that makes God his friend, God will make that
man's Enemies to be his friends. Men are possibly full of anger, revenge, and
exasperation; be it so: Do you desire to please God? God can turn their hearts
toward you; God can sweeten them in their spirits, and take away that venom
that is in them; so you know he did in the case of Esan to his Brother Jacob.
4. This is the way to Heaven and Happiness; God will be pleased before the
sinner shall be saved, Heb. 11. Enoch before his translation had this
Testimony, That he pleased God: there is no way to Heaven but this, the Child
pleases the Father, and then the Father gives him the Inheritance. So it is
here. 5. Let me return to the Argument in the Text; God will never leave them
alone, that desire sincerely to please him. Methinks this should be a very
prevailing motive to you, especially now; please God, and he will never leave
you, no not in a time of distress and trouble. Here is the great difference
betwixt a faithful God, and a false man.
In time of trouble and adversity men leave us and forsake us; in time of
prosperity then they flatter us, and pretend a great deal of friendship and
kindness: but as no man looks upon a Dial when the Sun is under a cloud; so
these very men that pretend so much of kindness and friendship, if so be we do
but come under a frown, or into trouble, then their friendship and kindness is
at an end, as Paul said; No man stood by him when he came to be tried before
Nero, all men forsook him, but God did not forsake him. The wise man has an
expression. Prove. 17.17. A friend loves at all times, and a brother is born for
adversity; but where shall we find such a friend, or indeed such a brother? But
now if you will please God, he will stand by you, when all men leave you, when
you have the greatest need of God, he will then stand by you; if you be in a
Prison, he will be with you; if you be banished, he will be with you: if sin
does not part God and you, certainly no affliction shall part God and you.

Study to please God; oh! is it not a sad thing for God to leave you? that is
the saddest of all; when we lose God, then we lose all, Hos. 9.12. Woe unto
them when I depart from them. What are all the mercies if God leave you? no
more then if a man had a fair pleasant House, and should never see the Sun more.

Oh do the things that always please the Lord! and he will never leave you;
under mercies, under afflictions he will be with you, and then your mercies
shall be very sweet, and your afflictions shall not be very bitter. You know
how earnest Moses was, Number. 10.13. with his father in law Hobab the Midianite;
Leave us not I pray thee, forasmuch as thou know how we are to encamp in the
wilderness, and thou may be to us as eyes. Oh keep God to you! especially
when you are entering into the wilderness of trouble; God will be to you in
stead of eyes, he will be your Counselor, your Comforter, your Guide, your
Treasure, your Portion, your All.

I might add one thing more in the last place.

Study to please God, because he is so easy to be pleased, this is a motive to
us to endeavor to please those persons who are easy to be pleased; a child
that has a father that is easy to be pleased, a servant that has a master
that is easy to be pleased, will study to please them. Sincerity pleases God,
though in the midst of much infirmity; he is so gracious and merciful, that
whatsoever a poor sinner does but desire to please God, he will accept of those
desires: If we can but please God, it is no great matter whether we please men
or not.

I shall conclude this branch with 1 These. 4.1. We beseech you brethren, and
exhort you in the Lord Jesus, that as you have received of us, how you ought to
walk and please God, that you would abound more and more.

Use. 2. By way of direction, I should here show you how you are to please God.
I told you in general in the morning, this pleasing of God lies in two things.

1. In suitableness to his Name. 2. In subjection to his Law.
If you will please God in all your actions, look to this, That what you do may
bear some resemblance to his Nature, and hold forth obedience to his Law.

Consult the will of God, and in all things act in conformity to that will, do
not allow your selves in the Commission of any known sin, for that will
certainly displease God: as it was said of David when he took Bathsheba to
Wife: but says the Text, the thing displeased the Lord. Do not Bank any known
duty, for that will displease God.

In a word, be holy in all manner of conversation.

This being too general, I shall not insist upon it; only in a word more
particularly.

Do those things now, now make conscience of those duties which now lie upon
you, in the doing of which you will certainly please God: and they are such as
these.

Be steadfast in the ways of God, in the midst of a backsliding and
apostatizing age, stand fast to the Law of God, Phil. 4.1. Contend for the
faith which is delivered to the Saints, ver 3. of the Epistle of Jude.

Be not ashamed to own Christ before all the world; if you be ashamed of him on
earth, he will be ashamed of you in Heaven; and woe be to that sinner whom
Christ is ashamed to own.

Reckon reproaches for the name of Christ, better than the pleasure of sin that
is but for a season

When God calls you to it, assert the purity and spirituality of
Gospel Worship; do not place Religion in a sew shadows where the substance is
neglected; but chiefly mind self-denial, mortification, crucifixion to the
world, keeping up close communion with God, love the people of God whatever the
world say or think of thee; for God is highly pleased when he sees his
Children loved.

Keep up Religion in your Families, whatever scorn or contempt is cast upon
you. Oh that you would labor to be of Abraham's spirit; I know, says God, he
will command his Children and his Household after him, and they shall keep the
way of the Lord, Gen 18.19.

I do not know any one better means for the keeping up Religion in this Nation,
than for Masters of Families to be conscientious in the discharging of this
duty:

Be good in bad times; be patterns of good works to those that shall behold
you. Let no reproach or obloquy make you to abate your exact walking with God;
whatever you meet withal in the ways of holiness and a strict life, say, If
this be to be vile, I will be more vile. Make conscience of a strict
observation of the Lords day; take heed of that Sacrilege of stealing away
holy times; of prostituting that to common and civil uses, which is
impropriated and dedicated to the service of God.

Pray for, and love all those that have been instrumental for your spiritual
good in the work of the Ministry, whatever dirt is now thrown in their faces,
and though you never get more good by them.

Forget not to distribute to the necessities of Gods people, that are many of
them in a low condition; for this is a sacrifice of a sweet odor, and
well-pleasing to him. Carry your selves with all patience and Christian
meekness toward them that wrong you: pray for them that are your enemies, and
when you are reviled, revile not again, but commit your selves to that God who
judges righteously.

Do your duty to your superiors, and to those that are in Authority.

So carry your selves that it may be with you as it was with Daniel; they had
nothing against him, saving in the matter of his God.

Bank not any duty for suffering, choose the greatest of suffering, before the
least of sin.

In a word, so walk as it becomes the Gospel. And finally I speak to you as
the Apostle spoke to them, Phil. 2.16. Hold forth the word of life, that I may
rejoice in the day of Christ, that I have not run in vain, nor labored in vain.

The third use is for comfort, to all those that do conscienciously endeavor
in all things to please God: the comfort lies in this, you may suffer, but when
ever you suffer, the Father will not leave you alone. Pleasing of God does not
secure a man from suffering from men, sometimes it rather exposes a man to
suffer from men: But now though it does not prevent suffering, yet it takes
away the sting and venom of suffering; it makes it to be like Sampsons Lion,
when it was slain, he found nothing but honey in the belly of it: Oh! the
presence of God in a time of affliction is exceeding precious, it turns gall
into honey, thorns into roses. Be not troubled in your thoughts about what you
may undergo: if God be with you, all will be well: if God comes when the
Crosses comes, the weight of it will not hurt you: what is a Prison when God
is there? My brethren, though estate leave you, relations leave you, all your
comforts leave you, so long as God does not leave you, it will be be well:
therefore do not fear, be not dejected, or discouraged. Isa. 43. 1, 2. Fear
not, O Jacob, why so? when thou passest through the water, I will be with thee:
We have more reason to be afraid of prosperity with Gods absence, than of
adversity with Gods presence. A good God will make every condition to be good;
it is not a prison but a palace where God is; they that do the things that
please God, whatever condition they may be brought to, the Father will not
leave them alone. Ministers may leave you, the means of Grace and Ordinances in
a great measure may leave you, your creature-enjoyments and comforts may leave
you; but here is a God that will never leave you: Oh! bless his holy name.

Fourthly, Is this pleasing of God, a duty of so great importance and benefit?
then be tender and charitable in judging of those that do differ from you and
others, upon this account, because they dare not displease God. I may in this
caution, aim at my self and others of my brethren in the work of our Ministry:
but I am not here at present to take my last farewell; I hope I may have a
little further opportunity of speaking to you: but if not, let me require this
of you, to pass a charitable interpretation upon your laying down the exercise
of our Ministry: there is a greater Judge than you, must judge us all at the
great day; and to this Judge we can appeal before Angels and men, that it is
not this thing, or that thing, that puts us upon this dissent, but it is
conscience toward God, and fear of offending him. I censure none that differ
from me, as though they displease God: but yet, as to my self, should I do thus
and thus, I should certainly violate the peace of my own couscience, and offend
God, which I must not do, no, not to secure my Ministry, though that either is,
or ought to be, dearer to me than my very life: and how dear it is, God only
knows. Do not add affliction to affliction, be not uncharitable in judging of
us, as if through pride, faction, obstinacy, or devotedness to a party, or
which is worse than all, in opposion to Authority, we do dissent; the Judge of
all hearts knows it is not so: but it is merely from those apprehensions which
after prayer, and the use of all means do yet continue; that doing thus and
thus, we should displease God: therefore deal charitably with us, in this day
of our affliction: If we be mistaken, I pray God to convince us: if others be
mistaken, whether in a public or private capacity, I pray God in mercy
convince them: but however things go, God will make good this truth to us; in
this work he will not leave us, and our Father will not leave us alone; for it
is the unfeigned desire of our soul, in all things to please God.

Dr. Bate's Forenoon Sermon, August 17. 1662.
Heb 12.20, 21. Now the God of Peace that brought again from the dead our Lord
Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
Covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you
that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ: To whom be
glory for ever and ever.
IT would give light to these words, if you consider the scope and design of
the Apostle in this Epistle to the Hebrews: the sum of which is, he writes to
them that he might animate their spirits against apostasy from the Doctrine of
the Gospel; they were liable to this from you and others, upon this account,
because they dare not displease God, I may in this caution aim at my self and
other of my brethren, this upon a double account.

1. Partly in respect of those persecutions to which they were exposed; for the
Jews were filled with a brutish zeal, for the Ceremonies of the Levitical Law,
and expressed the greatest rancour against those, who lest Moses to follow
Christ: This is the reason why the Apostle lays down so many preservatives
against their revolting from Religion; and he spends one part of this Epistle
in a most passionate Exhortation to perseverance, and does in the tenth Chapter
insinuate himself into them: You have already tasted the first fruits of
affliction, ver. 3.4. You took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing in
your selves, that you have in Heaven a better and an enduring substance. This
is that temper that Martyrs have expressed, who have not only parted with their
goods, but with their lives for the Gospel: When they came to the Stake, they
would not so much as shed a tear, to quench those flames wherein they should
ascend to God, as in a fiery Chariot: You took joyfully the spoiling of your
goods, knowing in your selves, that you have a better and an enduring
substance. Thus he insinuates himself, by representing what they had done, to
encourage them to perseverance: and partly he fortifies them against
Backsliding, by those terrible judgments which he threatened against
Revolters, as you read Chap. 6.7.

2. As they were liable to this Apostasy upon the account of Persecution, so
upon the account of the unsettledness and instability of their own spirits.
There were several of those who had given up their names to Christ, who did
compare the Ceremonies of the Law with the purity of the Gospel: Now the
Apostle, to secure them from this mixture, his great design is to represent the
vanity and infectiveness of all the Ceremonial Law, and to express and prove
the virtue and efficacy of the Lord Jesus his death, which was the substance of
all the shadows. And this takes up one great part of his discourse with them.

Now in these two verses he sums up, by way of Recapitulation, all that which
he had discoursed of at large, and in them you may observe these two things.

1. A description of God, to whom he addresses this Prayer. 2. The substance of
the Prayer it self.
The Description of God, that he amplifies by these two things: 1. From the
Attributes and Qualities of God, (if I may so express it) Now (says he) the
God of Peace. 2. From the effects of his power and love; That brought again
from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep.
And these Titles, they are not here set down by the Apostle to adorn his
discourse, merely as an ornament, but they have all a peculiar efficacy, as to
the obtaining of the request which here he makes for them.

I shall begin with the first, the Description of God from that Attribute. (Now
the God of Peace) the Title that is used in the Old Testament frequently is
this, (The Lord of Hosts) but in the New he is called, The God of peace. There
were darker representations of the mercy and love of God than, the more full
discoveries of his grace were reserved till the coming of Christ. Their
discoveries under the Old Testament were but as the Day Star, which ushered in
the Sun of Righteousness. Now this title of the God of Peace imparts two things.

1. That he is the Author of Peace, and works it. 2. That he loves and delights
in peace.
First, That he s the Author of it: And if you consider Peace in all its
notions and kinds, it is a fruit of God: and that which descends from him. 1.
Peace in Nature is the harmony that is between all the parts of the World, the
union that is between the disagreeing Elements that is from God: for without
him, the whole Creation would presently disband, and return to its first Chaos
of confusion. 2. Civil Peace, which is among the Societies of men, that which
is so amiable and lovely, and which needs no other foil to commend it, and set
off its luster, than the miseries and cruelties of war; this peace comes from
God likewise. Every rash hand is able to make a wound, or to cast a Firebrand,
but it is only the God of Peace that is able to heal breaches, and to allay
those storms that are in a Nation. You know those showers which render the
Earth fruitful descend from Heaven, from God; so all the counsels of peace
descend from above. The fiery Exaltations ascend from the Earth, Counsels of
War and disturbance, proceeded from the devilish hearts of men. Or, 3. If you
consider that Rational Peace, which is in the spirits of men: that is, when the
understanding exercises a coertion and restraint over our licentious appetites,
when all our inferior Faculties are under the empire and conduct of Reason;
this proceeds also from God: For, since the fall, there is a great deal of
tumult, many riots and disorders in the soul of a man: Reason hates a bad
Guide, and our Appetites those are evil instruments, and so many times hurry
Reason from its regular actings. But, 4. much more if you consider Spiritual
Peace, that peace does not only import an Agreement of a man within himself,
but the Agreement of the soul with God.
This is the fruit of the Spirit, and it is only God that is able to convey
this peace to us. And upon a particular account this Title is given to him, by
way of eminency and property: as,

1. He is alone able to allow and dispense this peace unto us, for all our sins
are injuries committed against him, against the Crown and Dignity; all the
Arrests of Conscience are made in the Name of God, and therefore it is only he
that can speak peace. As in the civil state, it is an Act of Supremacy to give
a pardon: only he that can condemn is able to speak pardon; so it is our God
that is our Judge, provoked and incensed by us, he has a judicial power to
cast Body and Soul into Hell fire: is alone able to speak peace, and pass a
pardon for us in the Court of Heaven, and this is experienced by a wounded
spirit: It is just with such a person as with a Malefactor, who stands
condemned at the Bar, he cannot receive encouragement from any of his
spectators, till the Judge speak peace unto him: So if an Angel from Heaven
should come and speak to a wounded Spirit: it were impossible, unless God did
order, command, and dispense it, that the Spirit should receive any peace,
because our sins are immediately committed against him.

2. He is alone able to reveal and discover it; there is nothing harder in the
World, than to calm and quiet a disturbed Conscience? it must be the same power
that makes light to spring out of darkness that must cause a cheerful serenity
in a dark and disconsolate Soul. I know there is nothing more easy than that
false peace which is so universal in the world; for the most amongst us cheat
themselves with presumption, instead of peace with God, and security instead of
peace with Conscience, but that peace which is solid and true, can only be
revealed by God himself. We have an instance of this in David, Psalm. 51.
although Nathan had told him from God, Thy sin is pardoned; yet notwithstanding
he says, Make thou me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have
broken may rejoice. He still addresses himself to God, that he would cause him
to hear the voice of pardon and reconciliation: for his soul could not be quiet
by the voice of the Prophet. There is so much infidelity in the soul of a man,
that when he comes to take a view of his sins in all their bloody aggravations,
only the Spirit of God himself, is able to allay the terrors of the Conscience:
And this he does by an over-powering Light, when he does in an imperative and
commanding manner, silence all the doubts of the soul, and restablish it in
peace with God. Certainly, he that shall but consider the terrors, the
faintings, the paleness of a wounded Conscience, when you shall see a person
dis-relish all the things of this World upon this account, fearing lest God is
his enemy, when all discourses that are addressed to him are ineffectual, and
but like warm clothes, to a dead carcass, cannot inspire any heat into him.
This shows, only God is able to reveal peace. So Job, If he hide his face, who
is able to be at peace? There needs no other fury to complete the misery of a
man than his own accusing Conscience: Conscience is a verier Devil than the
Devil himself, and able more to torment and lash the creature. Therefore, if
that be once awakened, it is only God, to whose Tribunal Conscience is liable,
which is able to speak peace to the soul. Now you see in what respect this
Title [The God of Peace] is attributed to him as he is the Author and Worker of
it.

2. As he loves and delights in peace. This is that which is so pleasing to
him, that he adopts those into the Line of Heaven, who are Peacemakers, for
they shall be called the children of God, Mat. 5.6. This characterizes persons
to be his Children, to be allied to him. God he only delights in the reflection
of his own Image; for those things that we admire in the World, and delight in,
do not affect his heart: He delights not in the strength of the Horse, he takes
no pleasure in the legs of a man: the Lord takes pleasure in them that fear
him, in th^se that hope in his mercy. Nothing attracts his eye and heart, but
his own similitude and resemblance; and therefore where he sees peaceable
dispositions, that is that which endears the soul to him, and makes it amiable
in his eyes. You may judge of his delight in peace by this: It is that grace
which in an especial manner prepares us for communion with him: for we can
never really honor or enjoy him, unless we bring to him those dispositions
which (if I may so speak) are in himself. And therefore it is no wonder that
those have little peace of Conscience, who make so little Conscience of Peace.
You know when God appeared to Elijah, he did not appear in the storm, nor in
the fire, but in the small still voice, and when Elisha was transported with
anger, he was fain to allay that passion by Music, that so he might be
prepared for the holy motions of the Spirit, he called for an Instrument, and
then the Spirit moved in him; I bring it for this end, to show, how God
delights in Peace, and he will only maintain communion with those that are of
calm and peaceable spirits. So much way as we give to anger, so much
proportionably do we let in the Devil, and cast out the God of peace.

Now, the reason why this Title is given to God, is upon a double account,
partly with respect to the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, which made peace
between God and us; partly with respect to the Covenant it it self, which is
founded in that Blood.

1. In respect of the Blood of the everlasting Covenant. For it was the blood
of Christ that has sprinkled Gods Throne, and made peace in Heaven. You shall
read therefore when Christ came into the World, it is said, ( Luke 2.14.) that
the Heavenly host appeared and sang, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth
peace, etc. Since the fall God and man are enemies, there is a reciprocal
enmity between God and man: God hates the creature as it is unholy, and man
hates God as he is just, the avenger of sin, the Author of the Law: Now Christ
was the Umpire that composed this difference, he was God and man in one person,
and so being allied to both, he was a fit person to reconcile both. He was (as
Job speaks) a days-man between us. He has paid every farthing that was due;
for he did not compound with God, but paid the utmost that was due to him; He
it is that has reconciled us to God by the power of his spirit, in changing
and renewing our Natures, and Creating in us those dispositions which are like
to God; so that his blood is the foundation of this peace. And now, God appears
to us not as a Consuming Fire, but as a Refreshing Light, full of calmness,
serenity, and peace toward us. Christ has brought more honor to God by his
obedience, than we brought dishonor by our transgression; and therefore without
any injury to God, he might be at peace with us. You know all our sins were but
the acts of finite Creatures, and only infinite in regard of the object against
whom they were committed. But the Blood of Christ was of infinite value in
regard of the Subject; for, he was God, and the enriching union of the Deity
conveyed such worth and value to his blood, that he was able to appease God,
and not only to free us from condemnation, but to make us the favorites of God.
We are not only pardoned, but preferred upon the account of his Blood.

2. He is the God of peace, as with respect to the blood of Christ, which is
the purchase of peace; so with respect to the Covenant which is made between
God and us, [Through the blood of the everlasting Covenant,] there are three
sorts of Covenants amongst men; some are Covenants of Friendship and Amity,
some are Covenants of Trade and Commerce, and some are Covenants of Assistance
and Help. Now all these qualifications meet in this Covenant which is made
between God and Believers: it is a Covenant of Peace and Friendship, for now we
stand upon terms of amity with God. Those who were strangers and enemies are
now reconciled. And there is between God and us perfect peace; there is a
League (as the Scripture speaks) between God and the Creature. It is the
Covenant of Trade, there is now a way opened ^o Heaven, we may now ascend to
God in duties of holiness, and God descends to us by the excitations of his
grace and influences (...) And it is a Covenant of Assistance, for he promises
nor only to give us the reward of the Covenant, but to secure unto us the
condition, he promises to enable us to discharge the condition of Faith and
Repentance. Now upon this account of that Covenant which is founded in the
blood of Christ, he is the God of Peace to his people.

1. Use is by way of Conviction. This may discover to us how distant their
temper is from God, who are enemies to peace. We un-man our selves; We
unchristian our selves so far as we are opposite to this blessed temper of
peace. Certainly as disturbed Water cannot make any reflection unto us of that
face that looks into it; so when our spirits are disturbed by animosities,
exasperations, heats and divisions, it is impossible for us to see the Image of
God, as he is the God of Peace. And certainly there is no more doleful
consideration in the World than this, That man whom God made so sociable a
creature, who has all the engagements and endearments laid upon him, which may
cause him to live in Peace and gentleness toward those who are of the same
nature with him; yet that in fierceness of our hearts, should exceed those of
the most Savage creatures. Man comes into the World naked, and altogether
unarmed, as if he were designed for the picture of Peace; but could you look
into the hearts of men, you would find there such tumults, such divisions, such
seeds of enmity against their fellow creatures, that Tigers and Lions are Calm
and peaceable in comparison of them. Now how is this distant from the temper of
the God of peace? It Is very strange to consider that when promises are made to
bury all differences as rubbish under the foundation, that nevertheless the
great Work of many persons should be only to revive those former animosities,
to make those exasperations fresh and keen upon their own spirits; but is this
to imitate the God of peace? These to promote divisions and disturbances
amongst us, clothe their enemies with the Livery of shame and reproach, that so
they may be baited by their Fury, that make it their design to represent that
Party which they think is dissonant from them, with the most odious appearances
(you know this is the old Art) and those showers of Calumnies which are in the
World, they usually precede the storm of persecution. The Devil was first a
Lier, and then a Murderer; and those who are of this Seed, they follow his
Art. In the Primitive times, all the Persecutions of the Heathens arose from
the reproaches of Christians: so it is now. It is an easy thing to blast the
name of those persons, who are designed for ruin. But if the contending
Parties would consider, (if I may call one Party contending, which is only
liable to Penalties, and is resolved to bear them patiently) how unlike this is
to that God of peace, methinks it should allay the rancour that is in men's
spirits, and make an atonement between all the differences and divisions that
is amongst them.

2. If only Peace come from God, you may from hence take a trial of that peace
that is within you, (for hither to I have been only discoursing of civil peace)
whether it be an effect of this God of Peace. I know nothing more common in the
world than presumption; there is a false Peace which does not arise from the
knowledge of a man's happiness, but from the ignorance of this misery: Peace,
which is only like a Torch to shine in the night, or like Players that glitter
only by Torch-light: so is the false peace men cherish in their bosom, merely
upon this account, because they do not bring their souls to the light of the
Word, they never had it from this God of peace, because,

1. God never speaks peace to a soul, but in the way of holiness and obedience:
And therefore you shall find it is the counsel of the Scripture, Acquaint thy
self with God, and be at peace.

Our peace is found in the way of Duty; and there are none who are more blessed
with the peace of conscience, than those who with the greatest fervor,
frequency, and delight, maintain communion with God in holy duties. For, a
friendship among men is cherished and preserved by visits and conversations, so
our peace with God is preserved by those visits we make to heaven in our
prayers.

2. That peace that comes from God, always causes in us a war with sin, for
Gods Covenant with us is Offensive and Defensive; and therefore it is
impossible any person should have true and solid peace, that waking tranquillity
of soul, which is the reward of holiness and obedience, that entertains sin;
for every sin thou do wilfully commit, it is an act of hostility against God,
it is that which makes him thine enemy, and makes thee an enemy to him, As Jehu
said, What peace, so long as the whoredom of thy mother Jezabel and her
witcherafts are so many? So what peace can there be, so long as thou do
indulge thy self in sin, and make it thy business to gratify thy outward
senses, though it be to the displeasure of God? It Is the greatest mercy in the
world to rob such persons of their peace, and to discover to them their danger;
they are only capable of true peace, by the knowledge of that which is false.
Therefore bring your selves to this trial: whether or no does that peace which
now you please your selves in, cause in you an eternal hatred of sin? does it
set you at a distance from your most beloved lusts; then it is that peace that
springs from God. The greatest part of the world are in an estate of War with
God, though they do not feel the effects of that war. True indeed, God does not
always draw the sword, either of Famine, Pestilence, or War, against a Nation,
and yet they may be acting in a most hostile way against God: So for a person,
God may not blast thy estate, or send diseases upon thy person, or raise a
tumult in thy conscience, and make a conspiracy of thy thoughts and passions
against thy peace: thou may be quiet within, and yet have war with God;
because, as in the world there may be a Truce, when there is no peace, the War
may still continue, though there is a Truce between two Princes: or rather,
there is not a Truce between God and the sinner, but as a Town that is besieged
for many days, may not feel the Battery of their Enemy, because he is
undermining them to blow them up at once; so God does not many times make his
battery against sinners, but he is under mining them, and the fall at the last
will be dreadful, if there be not a composition.

Use. 2. By way of exhortation; let me press you all to follow peace, it is a
duty which the Gospel injoyns with the greatest force of words and expressions.
The Apostle when he is to seal up his affection to them, he does it with that
prayer, 2 Thessalonians. 3.16. Now the God of peace himself give you peace always, by
all means: What strange expressions! First, he gives you; hear the Title of the
God of peace, and then he says [Himself] the God of peace himself. There Is a
great deal of force in that word; peace is so excellent a blessing, and there
is such an abhorrency in our corrupt nature to it, that it is only the Lord
himself that is able to effect it: As if the Apostle had said, the Lord must
bow the heavens, he must come down himself to create peace among you; and to
express the greater vehemence of his desire, he says, Give you peace always,
by all means. So another Scripture, pursue peace, follow peace with all men; a
word that imports our pursuit after it, though it runs from us. This is the
strain and tenor of the Gospel, and this becomes you as Christians. When
Christ came to purchase our peace, he came as a Lamb, an innocent and meek
Creature; Behold the Lamb of God. When the holy Spirit descended to seal the
privilege of peace to us, he descended in the form of a Dove; a Gaul-less
creature, in whom there is no rancor nor bitterness. What a strong engagement
should this be upon all of us to pursue and promote peace? And for your
encouragement consider:

1. That in the times of the Gospel, all the promises do as it were empty
themselves into this blessing, the blessing of peace. Thus Isai. 11.6. you
shall find there a gracious promise respecting the times of the Gospel. The
Wolf also shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the
Kid, and the Calf, and the young Lion, and the fatling together, and a little
child shall lead them; and the Cow and the Bear shall seed, their young ones
shall lie down together, and the Lion shall eat straw like the Ox. That which I
observe from thence, is this, that God here promises to cause an universal
peace and unity under the Gospel, though it be as difficult as to persuade the
most disagreeing natures to a peaceable co-habition: For here the Scripture
instances in those creatures between which there is the most natural, and
therefore the most fierce animosities. The Lord will reconcile men, though
their differences be never so great. What is too hard for the God of Peace to
effect? Is not God of infinite power, of infinite love? then it should quicken
us to pursue peace. 1. By prayer to him, because he is able to effect it;
certainly that God that was able to bring Order into the World, when it was a
mere lump and mass of confusion, is able to bring peace, and to unite our
spirits.

And it is observable, the greater our differences and divisions are, the more
will the power of this God appear in reconciling them. It Is said in the Psalms,
that Gods throne is in darkness; that is, his ways of Providence are very
difficult for us to trace and find out; and therefore when our divisions are at
the highest, he is able by one word to allay the storm. This should encourage
us in Prayer. This is the course of God to glorify himself, by putting a stop
to the greatest troubles when nearest to us, and to work out one contrary by
another. To give you some instances, that so we may encourage our Faith, and
quicken our Prayer to God for this blessing, consider how still God has made
difficulties the way for enjoyment: For instance, the promise that Sarah should
be the Mother of a child; but he made way for that by her dead Womb, for all
that numerous Progeny which like the Stars of the Sky descended from her. That
he first maimed Jacob, and then gave him the blessing. He brought Joseph from
the Prison to a Princely Palace. First David was harassed with troubles, and
then his head was decked with the Imperial Crown. So if you look into the
Kingdom of Christ, who would have thought that a few Fishermen-men should have
advanced the Empire of Christ in the World? Had you lived to have seen those
despicable beginnings, when a few unlearned men were the Heralds and Preachers
of Christ, how would this have caused you to fail and sink in your spirits! and
yet the Gospel has been Preached in all parts of the World, and that by a few
Fishermen. The Providence of God are like those plated Pictures, if you look
one way upon them, there is the appearance of a Serpent; if you look on the
other side, there is the appearance of an Angel. So here, many times God is
pleased to suffer exasperations to go very high, that so his power may appear
more eminent in the composure of them. He it is that enables the faith of his
people to draw Water out of the Rock, when the Fountain is dry; that makes meat
to come out of the Eater (as in Sampson's Riddle) that is able to bring a
peaceable harmony out of devouring differences; and therefore it should quicken
our prayers to him.

2. To make us more serious in our endeavors after peace. Consider what a
dishonor it is to the Gospel, that those that profess themselves Sons of the
same God, Members of the same Christ, Temples of the same Spirit, should be at
deadly jarrs one with another; It is strange and unnatural that Lillies should
prove Thorns to one another; that those who are Saints in pretense, should be
Devils in practice to one another; that Gods Diamonds should cut one another;
this is very strange; yet thus it is. But now especially it is most sad, when
Religion which should restrain and bridle our passions, is made fuel and
incentives of them: How far distant is it from the counsel of the Apostle,
Romans 14.10. where he speaks concerning their lesser differences, one values one
day above another, another esteems every day alike? what is His counsel? he
speaks as a person that was filled with bowels and compassion: Oh, says he,
let not him that does not esteem the day, judge him that does: For we shall all
stand before the judgementseat of Christ, there we shall appear all upon a
level, stand upon equal ground, and receive our final doom from him: This
therefore should calm our Spirit. Why may there not be some differences in
judgment, without division in affection? for it is as impossible that all
judgments should be of the same extent, as all our faces to be of the same
color and figure. Therefore consider what an injury it is to our Profession,
how does it obscure the glory of God, and luster of our Religion?

3. Does not the public enemy rejoice over us, I mean the Papists? do they not
warm themselves at the sparks of our Divisions? For you know the old Maxim of
Divide and Reign: therefore it should compose our spirits, and quicken us to
labor after union. Unmortified lusts are thence, whence all Wars and Enmities
springs in the World. The Apostle Paul when he would compose their differences,
he does not lay, down Rules to decide their controversies, but to correct their
secret passions, pride, self-seeking, revenge, etc. This being the seed of all
disturbances in the Church: And although these Lusts may not be conspicuous and
visible to the eyes of men, yet they are certainly the fuel of our distempers.

The sum of all is this, those that have the Spirit of God, they cannot but
mourn and be sensible of these divisions, I know a great part among us are
unconcerned: some rejoice, those that are rather buried in the affairs of the
World, and encumbered with much business, or those that are steeped in the
pleasures of sense, are altogether unaffected with these things, stand as
Newters, disregarding all events: But the Saints of God cannot but mourn over
them, when our divisions hinder the progress of the Gospel, and are serviceable
to nothing but to the Kingdom of darkness. Therefore I beseech you, let what
has been spoken quicken you in your prayers to God, to pray for the peace of
Jecusalem, (that is the least effect of our love and desires after peace) and by
all endeavors to labor to bring back peace to us, that we may see that
prophecy fulfilled in our time, that the Lord should be one, and his Name one
amongst us.

Dr. Bates's Afternoon Sermon.
Heb. 13.20.21. Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord
Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
Covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you
that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ: to whom be
glory for ever and ever.
THe Apostle describes God by the effects of his power and love, [That brought
again from the dead our Lord Jesus] The Resurrection of Christ from the dead is
one of the most transcendent testimonies of Gods love and power toward us.

1. Of his Love, because as the Anger of God was that which crucified our
Savior, so on the contrary, it must be his Love that should raise and restore
him. Christ when he died, he looked upon God as an Enemy, as a Judge; and as
those colors which we see conveyed to us, are answerable to the Medium through
which we see them; as, if we look through a colored glass, we see the object
of that color: So the Lord Jesus, when he was upon the Cross, looked upon God
through the black-cloud of our sins, and through the red cloud of his Fathers
wrath, and so dyed as a Sacrifice to Divine Justice. But when he was raised
from the Grave, that was the testimony of Gods love to him, and of his love to
us; for he died as our Surety, he was arrested for our Debt, he was cast into
the Grave, as into a Prison: But by his Resurrection he was redeemed from
Prison and Judgment. And therefore you shall find, when Christ was: risen, he
salutes his Disciples with this, Peace be unto you, Luke 24.31. There was the
dawning of peace at the Incarnation of Christ, for then the Angels sung, Peace
upon earth; but the complete Sunshine of peace was at his Resurrection, when
he had made full and complete satisfaction to Gods Justice: for this was a
clearing of him before all the World, when God raised him from the Grave. And
in this respect it was very agreeable for the Apostle to say, The God of peace,
that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus.

2. It was the eflect of Infinite power. You know it is naturally impossible
for a dead body to quicken himself, to revive; but for the Lord Jesus, who had
the load of the sins of all the Elect upon him, who was, as it were secured in
the Grave by Gods Justice and Power, for him to rise again: This must be an
effect of Insinite Power in the Great God. Thus raising of Christ, sometimes
it is attributed to the Son, being God equal with the Father: But here it is
attributed to God: and therefore when the Scripture would speak with the
greatest magnificence of the Power of God, it expresses it thus, That power
which raised Jesus Christ from the dead. When Christ wrought deliverance for
the lost world, (all those who were committed to his charge.) This could be no
less then the work of an infinite Power. And upon this account also it is very
proportionable to the design of the Apostle, for that prayer he makes to God is
for that which only can be accomplished by Infinite Love, and Infinite Power,
i.e. to make the Christian Hebrews perfect in every good work to do his will.

I come to a further description. He that brought again from the dead [our Lord
Jesus.] the Title of the Lord Jesus was only given to our Savior after his
Resurrection, he was called Lord before, and Jesus before: but these two Titles
were ever united till after his Resurrection; hey came to see the place where
the body of the Lord Jesus lay; the reason was this, because the Resurrection
of Christ was a solemn Proclamation to the World, that Christ was the Son of
God. It Is true, this Title was given him immediately upon his conception, but
it was never completely declared to the World, till after his Resurrection; for
before, Christ was a Prince in disguise; the beams of the Divinity was abated
by the vail of his Humanity; but then he was declared by power to be the Son of
God.

It follows [That great Shepherd of the Sheep] for the opening of this;

1. We will consider this Title of Christ.

2. The Person for whom this Title relates.

First, This Title [The great Shepherd] It Is a wonderful condescension in
Christ, that he will take upon him the Title of a Shepherd, that which rather
expresses Love and Care, than Power and Dominion; yet he is pleased to assume
this Title to express his affection to us. For the opening of it, wherein he
appears to be the great Shepherd, I shall lay down these particulars.

1. He is great in the Dignity of his Person; for, he that is Lord of Angels,
is become the Shepherd of the Sheep; and the humiliation of his person in this
respect, is the exaltation of his Office: It is looked upon in the World as a
mean and low employment, to have the care and inspection of a Flock; but now
herein appears the love of Christ, he was pleased to become our Shepherd, that
so he might secure and bring us to the Fold of Heaven, and there make us to
feed upon those Pastures, and to drink of those Rivers of pleasures which flow
from the presence of God.

2. In the derivation of his Authority: That Authority which is communicated to
him, whereby he is our Shepherd: and that is originally from God himself; It is
not by any mediate deputation, but from God himself. He is our Shepherd, and
has a Title to his Flock upon a double account. 1. They are committed to him
as his charge and custody, John 6.37, etc. All the Elect of the world were
given by God the Father to Christ, not by way of Alienation, but by way of
Opigneration, as so many pledges which he was to bring to grace and glory: And
this charge he does most fully execute, for there is none missing of those
committed to him. 2. They are given to him by way of Reward and Recompense for
all his Blood and Sufferings, Isai. 53.10.
The Lord put such a value on souls, that he purchased an interest in them by
his own blood; and he thinks himself exceedingly recompensed for all his pains
on the Cross, Agonies in the Garden, Temptations in the Wilderness, etc. if
souls will submit to his care. And here observe the course of Heaven, God would
endear souls to Christ upon all Reasons, by virtue of his command, and that
charge he gives to them, and by virtue of his own purchase.

3. If you confider, the extent of his care and affection, For all the Saints
of the World, those who are dispersed in all places, in all ages, they are all
his Flock; and therefore it is the Royalty of his Administration, John 10.16.
There shall be one Fold, and one Shepherd. As Christ is the only Catholic
King, so he is the only Universal Bishop; For all other Shepherds have but
particular Portions of his Flock committed to their charge, and they should be
such portions as they have regard to, and are under their inspection, And at
the last day, all his sheep shall congregate together, and stand at his right
hand. All the Saints of God that are now scattered, as so many Stars in the
Firmament, shall be united in one constellation, when they shall appear in
glory before him.

4. In respect of his endowments and qualifications, which fit him for the
discharge of his Office. And 1. Take notice of his affection and love to us,
and that is the wonder of Heaven and Earth, Christ laid down his life for his
sheep. Joh. 10.11. This is strange, that Christ should be a sheep for the
slaughter, that he might become our Shepherd, that he should be a sacrifice
before he could take his Office upon him: Other sheep lay down their lives for
the Shepherd, but Christ laid down his life for the Sheep. So great was his
love, that it brought him from Heaven to seek and find those that were lost; he
left a Palace to come to a Wilderness; a Throne of Heaven to come to a Fold
here upon Earth. We read of David that he exchanged a Sheephook for a Scepter;
but Christ quite contrary, he exchanged a Scepter for the Rod and Staff of a
Shepherd. It was said by one, There is nothing so conspicuous in Christ, as the
prodigality of his love to us. Oh! do but consider how great love that was that
should make him to die for us, that he might bring us home to his Fold. We were
all of us like erring sheep, who had strayed from him, and fell to the Lord of
the Soil, as strange Cattle; we were gotten into the possession of the God of
this World; the Lord Christ would buy us off from thence; though we forfeited
our right in him, vet he would not lose his right in us, but he laid down his
life that he might reduce us to his Fold, that of Wolves he might make us
Lambs, and sit us for the comforts of his Presence. 2. In respect of his exact
diligence and inspection over them. When but one Sheep went astray from his
Fold, we read, he left the ninety and nine, and went and sought for that One,
Luke 15. where we have that Parable, to express the diligence and watchfulness
of Christ over his Sheep. There is no person, be he never so mean, never so
obscure, though lost in the number and account of the World, if he be one of
Christ's Sheep, he is always under his inspection and watchfulness. We read of
the High Priest, that he carried the names of the Tribes upon his Breast Plate;
the Lord Christ carries the names of all his Sheep in his heart: therefore,
Rev. 13. speaking concerning the Saints, all that dwell upon Earth, Whose names
are written in the book of Life. His diligence and care is so exact, that he
has all their names writ in his Book. He that tells the Stars, counts their
hairs, and always exercises the most watchful providence over them for good.
You know Sheep are either liable to rage, or erring, and wandering; Christ's
diligence is such that he protects them from the rage of Satan, reduces them
from all their wanderings, and brings them home to himself. 3. In making
proportional all their services and sufferings, to those degrees of strength
which he gives to them, Isai. 40.11. He shall feed his Flock like a Shepherd,
he shall gather his Lambs with his Arms, and carry them in his bosom, and
shall gently lead those that are with young. Christ always makes a proportion
between the Services, Sufferings, and strength he calls them to. He it is that
with that tenderness speaks to Peter, Peter love thou me? feed my Lambs. He
has provided for them the most ample, and most satisfying nourishment, the
Ordinances of the Gospel, the Word, the Promises, which are the breast of
Consolation; these are all provided by him for his people. And in this respect
he is the great Shepherd, for he does not only allow them means, but blesses
the me ans to them: he is able to enlighten the dark mind, he can make pliable
the stubborn Will, and he can spiritualize drouzie affection, which all other
Shepherds in the World are not able to effect. 4. He is the great Shepherd, if
you consider his power to preserve them from danger; not only those dangers
which respect Satan (for that fell under his care before) but those diseases to
which they are liable, which threaten ruin: Other Shepherds possibly may cure
diseases, but not defend them from danger. Christ it is that gives eternal life
to his sheep, he begins the life of holiness, which though at present is but a
spark in the Sea, yet he keeps it alive till it shall break forth into a
triumphant flame. That life that is encompassed with so many enemies, and
liable to so many weaknesses, the Lord Jesus will bring forth judgment to
victory, and will make them to be powerful over spiritual and eternal enemies.


The sum is this: the Lord Christ is so perfect a Shepherd, so complete, as
to all the qualifications of that office, that the Prophet David breaks forth
into exultation, Psalm. 23. The Lord is my Shepherd, etc. and then afterward
expresses all those provisions which are made for him by God as a Shepherd, He
makes me to lie down in green pastures, he leads me beside the still waters.
So that you see, Christ, whether for diligence, love, tenderness, for
preserving us from danger, for securing us to life eternal, he is only the
great Shepherd, he is the God of Shepherds as well as the God of Sheep, and all
other Shepherds are but inferior to him, and must be accountable to him for
the Souls of his Sheep, which are more valuable then all the world.

It follows, The great Shepherd [of the sheep] I shall not spend any time in
making any resemblance between the People of God and the Sheep; Only,

1. They are Sheep in respect of their Innocence. You know, of all creatures
the Sheep are unarmed: other creatures, either they are armed with strength, or
skin, or swiftness to guard themselves, and offend others; but the Sheep has
neither the strength of the Lion, the craft of the Fox, nor the swiftness of
the Deer, and of all creatures is most weak, inoffensive, and most liable to
dangers and injuries. Of all persons, Gods people are most liable to danger,
and when out of Christ's protection, the weakest persons in the world. 2. In
respect of their Meekness. A Sheep is an Emblem of Meekness, that is their
temper, and therein they imitate Christ, who has propounded himself to be
their pattern, Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly; both these qualities are
expressed by the Prophet, Isa. 11. where speaking concerning the times of the
Gospel, he says, The Lamb shall lie down with the Wolf; Now, where the Prophet
expresses their safety, there he expresses their Innocence and Meekness. This
is the reason why the Prophet says, For thy sake we are killed all the day
long, we are counted as sheep for the slaughter; because of all creatures most
liable to injuries, that which does least resent them: And wherever the grace
of Christ comes, it sweetens the most cruel nature, and polishes the most rough
disposition, and makes them to be like Christ, meek and lowly. 3. In regard of
their Profitableness; for of all creatures, they are most profitable, the food
as to their flesh, the cloth as to their fleece. And the people of God,
however they are exposed to the contempts and injuries of the world, they are
the most profitable: for were it not for them, the whole frame of Nature would
fall into pieces, the Stars would fall like leaves in Autumn, and all the
Elements would fall into confusion; we see it by one Lot, who kept showers of
fire and brimstome from falling on Sodom, till he was got out of it. And it is
the people of God, for whom this frame of Nature is continued, and when they
are brought into the fold of Christ, the Justice of God will have a solemn
triumph over all the world. 4. As they are liable to wandering; sheep are
wandering creatures, and when strayed, not able to reduce themselves. And in
this respect the people of God are sheep, they have a thousand allurements to
draw them from the ways of God: and if God should not guide them by his eye,
it is impossible they should go in the way that leads to Heaven. Therefore David
says, I have gone astray like a lost Sheep, seek thy Servant; Psalm. 119.176.
This shall suffice to make the Parallel and Resemblance of the people of God to
sheep.
The second Argument is this, That he has designed Christ to be the Shepherd
of the Church, The great Shepherd of the Sheep; this is another argument and
evidence that he is reconciled to us, and that he is the God of Peace: For when
God gave Christ to be our Sacrifice, and raised him up to be our Shepherd;
these are the most clear Testimonies of his Love: For, although Christ now sits
in Heaven, and all the Angels of God worship him, yet he does not disdain to
exercise the same care, and to express the same Love to his People, that he did
when he was upon the Earth. All the Offices of Christ express Gods love to us,
for he feeds us as a Prophet, died for us as a Priest, Governs and defends us
as he is a King; and all these meet together in this Title, feeding of us,
dying for us, desending of us; as he was God, he loved us; as he was Man he
died for us. This does express the effects of his two Natures in this Title;
and therefore an admirable evidence that God is at peace with us.

It follows, [Through the blood of the everlasting Covenant.] The blood of
Christ is that which cements God and us together: For you must remember, our
original peace with God was broken; that peace we have with him now, is called
Reconciliation; it is as a broken bone, which well set, is stronger then
before, because Nature conveys most liberal supplies to the weakest part: so
now being reconciled to God, through the blood of his Son, we stand upon surer
terms with him, than we did in Innocence; The Blood of Christ speaks better
things for us, than all our Sins speak against us; it speaks peace to our
souls, and that in Heaven purchased by his death. Christ died as a Testator,
and bequeathed to the Church a Legacy of Peace; he lives as the Executor of
that Covenant, and now in Heaven conveys to us that blessing of Peace, which he
bequeathed in his death. And as our Peace was founded in his Blood, so it is
conserved by his Intercession; he appears in the Court of Heaven as our
Ambassador, to make up all those differences which fall out between God and
us; for you know, Amity and Friendship is kept between Foreign States, by
their Residents and Agents, that are kept in their several Courts; so we have
an Agent in the Court of Heaven, the Lord Jesus Christ, that was raised from
the dead: And as a Believer falls into sin, which is a breach of Peace between
God and us, so that Peace is made up by the exercise of repentance on our part,
and by sprinkling of Christ's blood upon us, on Gods part. The renewed exercise
of Repentance, and application of Christ's blood, preseryes that peace that is
between God and Believers. And (to sum up the force of the Argument) when we
had fallen from God, and it did not consist with the Majesty of God to make
peace with us, without satisfaction, then was he pleased to pay our Ransom out
of his own Treasury, and Redeem us by the blood of his Son; So that all his
Attributes might shine forth in their Luster, and glory in our Salvation, and
that upon sure terms we might be able to challenge an Interest in his Favor
and Love.

It follows, Through the blood of the [Everlasting Covenant.] It is called an
Everlasting Covenant in two respects.

1. In opposition to the Old Covenant, which was made with Adam in Innocence;
but that Covenant which secures to us the reward of that Life Eternal, did not
secure to us the Condition, that was perfect Obedience; and in reference to
this Old Covenant, sometimes the Gospel is called a New Covenant, sometimes a
Better Covenant, because it supplies all weakness in the first Covenant; not
as if the Law of God was weak and faulty in respect of its self, for the Law is
Holy, Just, and Good, but weak in respect of us; for it is impossible that that
Covenant, by the breach of which Sin and Death came in to us, should reconcile
us to God, and appease his anger; and therefore God contrived another Covenant
for us, a Covenant in the Gospel, that was made with us in Christ, and this is
called an Everlasting Covenant, because it remains for ever, the tenor of it
shall not be changed; for, the Frst Covenant is only abrogated and made null,
while frustrated as to the intent it was first given. 2. It Is called an
Everlasting Covenant, as it brings to those that are parties in it an
everlasting Glory: so the Lord Jesus his blood is called an Everlasting
Redemption, for it ransoms the souls of men from that Eternal Death to which
they were liable, and gives them a Title to Everlasting Life; for this Covenant
which now God has made with us, it not only secures the Reward, but the
Conditions to which the Reward is made; for God says, I will plant my fear in
your hearts, that you shall not depart from me.
I have now gone over the Title, and that in order to the Prayer which follows,
[Make you perfect to do his will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in
his sight,] the general sum of it is this: That God of Peace who is reconciled
to us in his Son, as he is the Father of mercies to us, so he is the Fountain
of Holiness to us; and in this respect we can only expect from him the
treasures of Grace, as he is the God of Peace; for God, as he is our Judge,
dispences to Sinners nothing but revenge; there is nothing to be expected but
the curse of his Law, the Execution of that sentence of death from him. For,
although the World despise holiness as a base and contemptible thing, they had
rather be ungracious, than inglorious in the eyes of men, and upon this account
they are afraid to be Holy, lest they should be the public scorn and contempt
of the place wherein they live: although holiness is of so low a price in the
world, yet in Heaven, next to God, Christ, and the Spirit, Holiness is the most
rich Jewel, that God can bestow upon us; and therefore we must first look upon
him as the God of Peace, before we can beg any grace from him. And this is the
Reason why the Apostle represents God by these Titles, that he might encourage
the Hebrews to believe God would grant this request. When Christ dyed for us,
it was not his design only to quiet our consciences, but to quicken our souls,
not only to free us from Damnation, but from the Domination of sin: And
therefore you shall find these two are joined together, Tit. 2.14 Who gave
himself for us that he might Redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. The death of Christ, as there
was a value in it to purchase Gods favor, so there was a virtue in it to
restore to us Gods Image. And the account of his dying for us is it, that we
must expect the least degree of Grace and Holiness from God. And this is the
reason why the Apostle prefaces this, Now the God of Peace, etc.

I know you expect I should say something as to my nonconformity, I shall
only say thus much, It is neither fancy, faction, nor humor, that makes me
not to comply, but merely for fear of offending God. And if after the best
means used for my illumination; as prayer to God, discourse, study, I am not
able to be satisfied concerning the lawfulness of what is required; if it be my
unhappiness to be in error, surely men will have no reason to be angry with me
in this world, and I hope God will pardon me in the next.

Mr. Watson 's Forenoon Sermon. Aug. 17. 1662.
John. 13.34. A New Commandment give I unto you, that ye love one another, as I
have loved you.
WE are this day called to a Love-feast; and nothing can be more suitable than
to treat of Christian Love; Jesus Christ has given us a great evidence of his
Love to us, he bled Love at every vein; therefore we are to imitate him, and as
becomes Christians, to Love one another. It Is a general complaint, how true I
know not, That this is the great Grace that is defective among Christians.
Although they pretend much Love to Christ, yet they have little Love one to
another.

I have in former Sermons discoursed concerning Faith, how that by Faith we
must receive Christ in the Sacrament; and now I shall speak something of Love;
Love is needful at a feast, it is requisite when we sit down at our own Table.
I remember it is said of Augustine, He would not suffer any to feast at his
Table that came in a Spirit of Rancor, and sat down in passion. Sure I am,
they are not fit to be Guests at Christ's Table, that come not in a Spirit of
Meekness and Love. It is true, we are to eat the Passover with bitter herbs,
but they must be the bitter Herbs of Repentance, not the bitter Herbs of
Malice, Wrath, and Fury; we must come here with bitter Tears, not with bitter
Hearts: hear what the Text says, A New Command I give unto you, etc.

Wherein, First, you have the Command, A New Command I give unto you; It is not
left to our discretion, but, we are bound to it by virtue of a Command, A New
Command I give unto you.

Secondly, This Command is enforced by Gods own example, as I have loved you.
It is called a new Command, but Love is an old Command, this Law is written in
the Nature of Man. It is engraven in every man's heart by Nature, and it is an
old Command, because found among Gods ancient Statutes, the ancient Records of
his Law; I, but it is a new Command too, because pressed by a new Example of
Christ, As I have loved you, so do ye love one another.

Doct. Christians ought to make Conscience of this duty of loving one another.
Confident I am, We shall never see Religion thrive in the World, until we see
this Grace of Love flourish in the heart of Christians.

Nor the illustration of this proposition, I shall do these two things; First,
show you the truth of this Love: Secondly, the extent of this Love.


First, Truth of this Love; If you love one another, says Christ, see you do
it purely, not dissembling, but from the heart. 1 John 3.18. My little
Children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth;
dissembling love is like painted fire that will never warm; we must not be like
the Be, that has honey in her mouth, but withal has a sting in her tail; we
must not pretend to love, to have honey in the mouth, but withal have the sting
of malice in the heart; no, said the Apostle, Let us love in deed and in truth.

Secondly, Extent of our Love; this Fountain of Love must run in three streams.

1. We must love all men, love their persons, although we must not love their
sins, we have all the same make, the same lump and mould, and therefore must
love; there is a natural Love, that every creature bears to his own species and
kind.

2. Our love must especially stream out to the Saints of God the household of
Faith. It is with our love, as it is with our fire, you keep fire all the day
upon the Hearth, but upon special occasions you draw it out larger, so our Love
must always burn to all: I but to the Saints you must draw out the fire,
enlarge your affections, we must love as God loves, he does especially love the
Saints: love every creature with a common love, but especially the New
Creature; and indeed there is that in every true Saint, that may excite and
allure our Love. What are the Graces of the Spirit, but so many pearls to adorn
the Bride of Christ? What is holiness in the heart, (...) the imbroidery and
curious Workmanship of the Holy Ghost? here is enough to entice and draw out
our Love: and Beloved, if we love the Saints for their Graces, then we love all
the Saints.

And here I beseech you consider these six pariculars.

First, We ought to love the Saints in what condition soever they are, although
they be poor in the world, low in their condition, for commonly so it is. They
that have the lowest hearts, have the lowest condition too. I read of the King
of the Moors, that he was offended at the Christians because of their poverty:
and truly when wicked men do fleece the Saints, it is no wonder if they be
poor: methinks grace in a poor man, is like a Pearl that lies in the dust, or
like a cloth of Gold that is hid under Rags; you must love the Gold, that is,
the Grace, notwithstanding the Rags. The poorest Saint alive has the Angels
riches; the poorest Believer is a Member of Christ, and shall we not love him?
we love the picture of a friend although it be hung in a mean frame: we must
love a rich Christ in a poor man.

Secondly, We are to love the people of God although they have many weak
infirmities: show me the man that is perfect, and let him throw the first
stone, even the best. Saints like the Stars they have their twinkling, they
have their blemishes and their failings: in some there is too much pride, in
others too much censoriousness, in others too much rash anger and passion, but
we must love the Grace that is in them, notwithstanding the infirmities that
are in them: you love Gold though in the oar, and mixed with much impurity; a
Saint on earth, is like a Diamond that has its flaw, like to the Rose that is
sweet and perfumed, but yet has its pricks. The best Saints have some mixture
and infirmity, and we must love them for the good that is in them: this is our
great fault, we are apt to overlook all the good, and so take notice of the
stain and blemishes in them; as those that see a little stain in a piece of
Scarlet, despise the cloth for the stains sake; so do we. But God does not do
so by us, he is pleased to overlook many sad failings, he sees the Faith, and
winks at the failings of his people; you that cannot love a Brother because you
see an imperfection in him, would you have God do so by you, would you have him
damn you for every blemish of sin?

Thirdly, We must love the Children of God, though weak in parts; all are not
born Politicians; But though the Saints of God have not always so good
intellectuals as others, yet if they have good Vitals, and the life of Faith in
them, love them for that Grace; you do not despise your Children because they
are weak, but you love them because they are your Children. Oh! do not despise
a Saint because he is of low parts, but love him as he is a Child of your
Heavenly Fathers.

Fourthly, We are to love the Saints of God though in some lesser things they
differ from us, if they keep the foundations of Religion, and hold the Head,
Christ; yet we are to bear other things: one Christian has more light than
another, and shall we un-saint all that cannot come up to our light? Its great
wisdom to separate between the precious and the vile: O what a blessed place
will Heaven be, because there our light shall be clear, and our love shall be
perfect. And that is the fourth.

Fifthly, Love the Saints of God when reviled and persecuted; a bleeding Saint
should be the object of our love. Onisiphorus, says Paul, was not ashamed of
my chain; a sign he loved Christ's Graces in Paul. Christ Jesus loves no Saints
more than his persecuted Saints, his Martyrs have the highest Thrones reserved
in Heaven for them: we must love to see Christ's Livery upon a man, though
sprinkled with blood: he that is ashamed of a persecuted Saint, will never
suffer for a crucified Jesus.

Sixthly, We must love the Saints of God, though their Graces may eclipse and
outshine our Graces. Beloved, in the sweetest fruits worms are apt to breed,
and in the best heart, the worm of pride is apt to be breeding; if God does not
keep us, we shall not only envy another Graces, if they outshine us, but
their persons too. What though another Graces do outshine yours? yet love
him, because the eminency of his Graces brings much honor to the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

And thus my Beloved, I have shown you how you must love all the Saints, 1 Pet.
2.17. Love the Brotherhood, love the whole Fraternity of Believers. Oh! that
this sweet spice of love might send forth its perfume among Christians, that we
could turn all our heart-burnings into heart-breakings, and quench the fire of
Divisions and Contentions, and keep the fire of love burning upon the Altar of
our hearts. And my Beloved, as we must love all the Saints, so we must show
this love by the fruit of it, for God does not value that love that is
invisible; the fruits of our love to the Saints must be these four.

Four Fruits of Love to the Saints.
1. We must show love to them by prising their persons above others, Psalm.
15.4. spoken of a man that shall go to Heaven, In whose eyes a vile person is
contemned, but he honors them that fear the Lord: the wicked are so much
rubbish and lumber, but the Saints are called the Jewels, Mal. 3.1. and we must
prize these Jewels above all the Lumber in the World; as they said of King
David, thy life is worth ten thousand of ours, 2 Samuel 18.3. so is a Godly man
above a wicked man; God he will give Kingdons to ransom his Saints, Isa. 43.3.
I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Aethiopia and Sheba for thee: and thus should we
set the highest rate upon the Saints of God, for that is to love them. 2. We
must show love to all the Saints of God, by vindicating of them, when they are
traduced and slandered; its a great sin to slander a Christian, its to go to
pollute Christ's Image, the wicked their throats are open Sepulchers, to bury
the names of the Righteous in; now you that are Christians must not be ready to
receive a false and groundless report of a Saint, but rather vindicate them,
for that is to love them. 2. We show our love to the Saints, by praying for
them; you know not what good your prayers may do them: Ministers must pray for
their People, and the People must pray for their Ministers; for prayer commands
God himself, Isa. 45.11. Prayer is the golden Key that unlocks the Heavenly
treasure of Gods bowels. Oh pray one for another; we should not strive one with
another (as is too frequent) but pray one for another. 4. Show your love by
being ready according to your abilities to relieve their wants; to love one
another is to be a well-wisher to him, and to do all the friendly Offices we
can one for another; there are, my Beloved, many of the dear Servants of God in
the Ministry, that have been already reduced to misery and want, and abundance
more are like to be reduced to great necessities; Now I beseech you to show
your love to the household of Faith, for that is a sign of your true love to
God, and to the Brotherhood, that when as myrrh drops freely from the Tree, so
works of mercy drops freely from the heart. If Jesus Christ should stand in the
midst of the congregation, and say, show your Love to me by your good works; I
believe no heart here would be so hard as to deny Jesus Christ; Why, remember
whatsoever you give Ministers, and to his Members, he takes it as given to
himself.
That is the second, Our Love must extend to all Saints.

3. Our Love must reach to our enemies, we must love them that do not love us,
Luke 6.1. Love your enemies, do good to them that hate you. I confess, a
mortal enemy, I would be loath to make a bosom friend. But though policy teach
us not to trust our enemies, yet piety teaches us to love them: Christ, he did
pray for his enemies, and he shed tears of compassion for them that afterward
shed his blood. So much for the Doctrinal part. Now for a word of Application,
and I have done.

USES.

And first, this may serve to reprove those, who seem in other things to be
excellent, and profess much love toward Christ and his Gospel, but have no love
to the Saints of God: there are some that upon this very account, have for
these great many years absented themselves from the Lords Supper, because they
pretend not to be in charity. This is a double-dyed sin, a sin with a witness;
its a sin not to come, and its a sin not to be in charity. But let me say this
to them, surely such kind of Christians are a shame to their profession. What,
does not the Gospel teach you charity and love, as well as faith? Surely that
Christian has no grace in his heart, that lives out of charity with his
Brother; for as the Philosopher says, All the virtues are linked together, and
tied as with astring, and where there is one, there is all: and where one is
wanting, there is no virtue: so I say of the graces, they are linked together,
and where there is one, there is all: and where one is wanting, there is none
at all. Says Augustine, Thou braggest of thy faith in Christ, but show me thy
faith by thy love to Christ, for Faith and love cannot be separated: For as in
the Sun, there is light and heat, and these cannot be separated one from the
other, so faith and love is twisted together, and where there is one waning,
the other is wanting: as he that did so engrave his name on the Buckler of
Minerva, that who ever went about to take out his name, spoiled the Buckler: so
Faith and love are so inseparable, that if you go to take away the one, you
spoil the other. Oh! remember and mourn for it, thou that say thou art not
in charity: it is a sad symptom thou art not in a state of Grace, Titus 3. v. 5.
For me our selves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving
diverse Lusts and pleasures, living in malice, envy, hateful, and hating one
another, that is, before conversion we were swelled with poison of malice and
wrath; but when once the grace of God came, then it was otherwise; that man
that has not Love and Charity in his heart, surely he has nothing of God in
him, for God is Love; he knows nothing of the Gospel savingly, for the Gospel
is a Gospel of peace; he has none of the wisdom which comes from Heaven, for
that is meek and gentle, and easy to be entreated.

If there be any on the other side, that are not in charity, and yet will come
to the Lords Table, remember this, you get no good by the Ordinance, you do but
defile the Ordinance. The Apostle calls it, the leaven of malice; it does sower
all your Holy Duties, Sermons, Prayers, and Sacraments; it is a little gall
imbitters a great deal of honey: So where there is a little of this Gall of
malice and hatred, it imbittereth and spoileth all the honey of your Graces and
Duties. The Apostle bids us in prayer to lift up pure hands without wrath, 1 Timothy 1.2. I will therefore that men pray every where, lifting up pure hands
without wrath and doubting. What the Apostle speaks of the duty of Prayer, I
may say of the Lords Supper; when you come to see the Body and Blood of the
Lord, Lift up pure hands without malice bitterness and wrath. That is a sad
speech of Augustine, He that is full of rancor and malice, he is a manslayer:
Nay: the Apostle says it in the first Epistle of John 3.15. Whosoever hates
his Brother is a murderer, and ye know no murderer has Eternal life abiding in
him; Do not think this Ordinance will profit you, if you do not come in love to
the Saints; suppose a man drinks down poison, and afterward takes down a
Cordial, surely this Cordial will do him but little good; so thou that drinkest
down the poison of wrath and malice^ into thy soul, and come afterward to
drink down the Cordial of Christ's blood in the Sacrament, why certainly this
Cordial will do thee but little good.

EXHORTATION.

Therefore to conclude by way of Exhortation; I beseech you in the Lord, that
you would remember this Text this day, when you come to the Lords Table, read
over this Lesson, A new Commandment I give unto you, that you love one another
as I have loved you; come to the Sacrament in love to Jesus Christ, and in love
one to another, be not full of bitterness, but full of bowels; the primitive
Saints were of one heart; you all expect I know one Heaven, and will you not be
of one heart? this I believe is a great reason, why the Sacrament has no more
profited many receivers; you know if there be a stopping at the stomach, the
meat taken in will never concoct and nourish; why thou that have wrath and
anger, and malice at thy heart, there is an obstruction as it were at the
stomach, and therefore it is that the bread of life does not nourish thy Soul.
Why Christians, are not we all Soldiers under one Regiment, under Jesus
Christ, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, and Captain of our salvation? Are not
we all Branches of the same Vine? and are we not all Members of the same Body?
and shall there be a schism or rent in the Body?

I shall only say this, we should do all as the Serpent: Naturalists observe
the Serpent, that before he goes to drink at the waters, he casts up his
poison; so before you come to the Table of the Lords Supper, cast up your
poison of bitterness, wrath, and malice, and then Christ's blood will be both a
Medicine to heal you, and a Julip to refresh you.

Mr. Watson's Afternoon-Sermon, Aug. 17. 1662.
2. Cor. 7.1. Having these promises, dearly Beloved, let us cleanse our selves.
IT is the Title that I intend now by the help of God, to insist upon, that
sweet Parenthesis in the Text, Dearly Beloved, wherein you have the Apostle
breathing forth his affections unto this people: he speaks now as a Pastor, and
he speaks to them of his spiritual Children.

Dearly Beloved; where you have, First the Title, Dearly Beloved. Secondly, the
Exhortation to Holiness, Let us cleanse our selves. Thirdly, the means how we
should be cleansed and sanctified, Having these Promises.


It is the first of these that I intend, the Title that the Apostle gives to
his Children, Dearly Beloved.

From hence observe this Doctrine:

That the affections of a right Gospel-Minister toward his People, are very
ardent.

Dearly Beloved, there are two things in every Minister of Christ that are much
exercised; his Head, and his Heart; his Head with labor, and his Heart with
Love; his Head with labor in the work of the Ministry; if done aright, it is a
work fitter for Angels than for men; it is our work to open the Oracles of God,
even those sacred profound things that the Angels search into; and if God did
not help us, we might soon sink under the weight of such a burden; and as a
Ministers head is exercised with labor, so his Heart is exercised with Love,
and it is hard to say which of the two exceeds, his Labor or his Love: Thus is
it here in the Text, My Dearly Beloved.

In these words we have St. Paul laying fiege to these Corinthians, and
laboring to make a happy victory, to conquer them with Kindness; Dearly
Beloved, St. Paul's heart was the spring of Love, his lips were the Pipe, the
Corinthians were the Cistern into which this spring did run: this Holy Apostle
was a mirror and a pattern of Love toward the sinning Corinthians; Paul's
tears did drop toward the praying Corinthians, his Love did burn; Holy Paul
was a Seraphin, his Heart did burn in a flame of affection to his People: How
many passages do we find scattered in his Epistles? he tells his People, which
sometimes he did write to, and sometimes he preached to, he looked after their
souls more than their silver, 2 Cor. 12.14. We seek not yours, but you: as a
tender Nurse cherishes her child with the Breast, so St. Paul gave his People
the breast-milk of the Word, in 1 Thessalonians. 2.7. this man of God did not only
bestow a Sermon upon his People, but was willing to impart his very soul to
them if it might save theirs, 1 Thessalonians. 2.8. We were willing to have imparted to
you our own souls, because you are dear unto us: Such was St. Paul's affection
to his people, that without a complement he loved them more than his life.
Phil. 2.17. and if I be offered upon the sacri^^ce and service of your Faith, I
rejoice with you all; that is as if he had said, if it be so, that my blood be
poured forth as a sacrifice, if my death may be any way serviceable unto you,
if it may help forward the strengthening and confirming of your Faith, I am
willing to die, I rejoice to do it: so full of affection was this Apostle, that
he could not choose but love his people, though the more he did love, the less
he should be loved: In 2 Cor. 15. Oh! how did Paul sweeten all his Sermons with
Love? 2 Cor. 12. if he reproved fin, yet he was angry in love, he dipped the Pill
in Sugar, Gal. 4.9, 10, 11. How turn ye again to weak and beggarly Elements? ye
observe days, and months, and years, I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed
on you labor in vain: Brethren, I beseech you, be as I am. See how St. Paul
chides their sins, and yet at the same time courts their souls; no sooner did
he lanch the wound, but presently he poured in Wine and Oil into it; so did
Paul love his People, that he would not justly give any offense to the weak
Believer, 1 Cor. 8.13. If meat make my Brother to offend, I will never eat
flesh more while the world stands. Paul was like some tender Mother, who
forbears to eat those meats that she might, for fear of hurting the child that
she gives suck to. Thus you see he was a spiritual Father made up of love; and
surely my Brethren, this affection in some degree, is in all the true Ministers
of Jesus Christ, they are full of sympathy and bowels unto those over whom the
Holy Ghost has made them Overseers.

I shall only glance at the Reason, why it will be thus, and why it should be
thus, that such flaming affections there should be in all Christ's Ministers to
their People.

It will be thus, for these two Reasons briefly.

First, From that Principle within, that teaches love; Grace does not fire the
heart with passion, but with compassion; Grace in the heart of a Minister files
off that ruggedness that is in his spirit; making him loving and courteous.
Paul once breathed out persecution, but when Grace came, this Bramble was
turned into a spiritual Vine, twisting himself about the souls of his People
with loving embraces.

Secondly, There will be this ardent love in a Ministers heart, from the
spiritual relation that is betwixt him and his People; he is a spiritual
Father, and shall we think him to be without bowels? 1 Cor. 4.15. Though you
have ten thousand Instructers, yet have ye not many Fathers; for in Christ
Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel. Some he begets unto Christ,
others he builds up in Christ. Does not a Father provide cheerfully for his
Children? Can a Father see bread taken from his Child, and not have his heart
affected with it? Is it not a grief to a Parent to see his Child put out to a
dry Nurse?

Thirdly, There should be this ardent love and affection in all Gods Ministers,
for this reason, because this is the liveliest way to do most good; knotty and
stubborn hearts will soonest be wrought upon with kindness. The fire melts
the hardest metal: the fire of love, with Gods blessing, will melt the most
obdurate sinner. A Boanerges, a Son of consolation; who comes in the spirit of
Love, is the fittest to do a piece of Gospel-chyrurgery, to restore and put
such a one in joint again that is taken with a fault, Gal. 6.1. Restore such a
one with the spirit of Love and Meekness. Thus much in short for the Doctrinal
part.

Give me leave now to make some Application.

And first, here are several Inferences that may be drawn from this: As

First, See here the right Character of a Gospel-Minister: He is full of love,
he exhorts, he comforts, he reproves, and all in love; he is never angry with
his People, but because they will not be saved; how loath is a Minister of
Christ to see precious Souls, like so many Jewels, cast overboard into the
dead sea of Hell; a conscientious Minister would count it an unhappy gain, to
gain the world, and lose the souls of his people; he says as the King of Sodom
to Abraham, Give me the Persons, and take thee the Goods, Genesis 14.21.

The second branch of Information is this; are true Gospel Ministers so full of
Love? then how sad is it to have such Ministers put upon a people as have no
love to Souls? The work of the Ministry, it is a labor of Lope: Oh! how sad it
is to have such in the Ministry, that can neither labor nor love, that are
such as are without bowels, that look more at Tyths than at Souls, it must
needs be sad with a people in any part of the world, to have such Ministers set
over them, as either poisons them with error, or do what in them lies to damn
them by their wicked example: How can the Devil reprove sin? How can the
Minister cry out in the Pulpit against drunkenness, that will himself be
drunk? Romans 2.22. Thou that teach a man should not steal, do thou steal?
Thou that say a man ought not to commit Adultery, do thou commit Adultery?
We read that the Snuffers of the Tabernacle, were to be made of pure Gold,
Exodus 37.23. those who by their calling are to reprove and snuff off the sins
of others, they should be pure Gold, holy persons. In the Law, God did appoint
the lip of the Leper should be covered, he ought to have his lip covered, he
should not be permitted to speak the Oracles of God, who though he be by Office
an Angel, yet by life is a Leper.

Thirdly, See from hence the happiness of a Minister, who is placed among such
a people as give him abundant cause of love; how happy is he that can say to
his people from his heart, (...) my dearly beloved: And here let me speak by
way of encouragement to you of this Parish; I find St. Paul commending the good
he saw in his people, 1 Thessalonians. 1.3. We are bound to thank God always for you
Beloved, because your Faith grows exceedingly. Here Paul is commending his
People; in imitation of the Apostle, let me at this time speak a commendatory
word to you; I have exercised my Ministry now among you for almost sixteen
years, and I rejoice and bless God that I cannot say, the more I love you, the
less I am loved; I have received many signal demonstrations of love from you,
though other Parishes have exceeded you in number of houses, yet I think not
for strength of affection: I have with much comfort observed your reverent
attentions to the Word Preached; you rejoiced in this Light not for a season,
but to this day: I have observed your zeal against Error: and as much as could
be expected in a critical time, your unity and amity, this is your honor; and
if for the future there should be any interruption made in my Ministry among
you, though I should not be permitted to preach to you, yet shall I not cease
to love you, and to pray for you; but why should there be any interruption
made, where is the crime? some indeed say, that we are disloyal and seditious;
Beloved, what my actions and sufferings for his Majesty have been, is known not
to a few of you: but however we must go to Heaven through good report and
through bad report, and it is well if we can get to glory, though we pass
through the Pikes, I shall endeavor that I may still approve the sincerity of
my Love to you; I will not promise that I shall still preach among you, nor
will I say that I shall not; I desire to be guided by the silver thread of Gods
Word and of Gods Providence, my heart is toward you: there is you know an
expression in the late Act, that we shall be now shortly, as if we were
naturally dead; and if I must die, let me leave some Legacy with you before I
go from you, I cannot but give you some counsel and advice for your souls, and
I hope there is no hurt in that: There are my beloved, these twenty Directions,
that I desire you to take special notice of, which I would leave as advice and
counsel with you about your Souls.

First, I beseech you, keep your constant hours every day with God; the Godly
man is a man set apart, Psalm. 4.3. not only because God has set him apart by
election, but because he has set himself apart by devotion; give God the
Aurorae fitiam, begin the day with God, visit God in the morning before you
make any other visit; wind up your hearts toward Heaven in the morning, and
they will go the better all the day after: Oh! turn your Closets into Temples,
read the Scriptures; the two Testaments are the two lips by which God speaks to
us; these will make you wise unto salvation: the Scripture is both a glass to
show you your spots, and a laver to wash them away; besiege Heaven every day
with prayer, thus persume your houses, and keep a constant intercourse with
Heaven.

Secondly, Get good Books into your houses, when you have not the Spring near
to you, then get water into your Cisterns: So when you have nor that wholesome
Preaching that you desire, good Books are Cisterns that holds the waters of
life in them to refresh you. When David's natural heat was taken away, they
covered him with warm clothes. 1 Kings 1. So when you find a chilness upon your
souls, and that your former heat begins to abate, ply your selves with warm
clothes, get those good Books that may acquaint you with such truths as may
warm and affect your hearts.

Thirdly, Have a care of your Company, take heed of unnecessary familiarity
with sinners, we cannot catch health from another, but we may soon catch a
disease; the disease of sin is very catching: I would be as fraid of coming
among the wicked, as among those that have the plague. Psalm. 106.35. They were
mingled with the heathen, and learned their works: If we cannot make others
better, let us have a care that they make not us worse: Lot was a miracle, he
kept fresh in Sodoms salt water. My beloved, take heed of the occasions of sin,
evil company is an occasion of sin. The Nazarites in the old Law, as they might
drink no wine, so they were forbidden grapes, whereof the wine was made, as you
read in Number. 6. to teach us, that all occasions of sin must be avoided; evil
company is belluo animatrum, the Devils draw-net, by which he draws millions to
Hell: how many families, and how many souls have been ruined and undone in this
City by evil company? many there are that go from a playhouse to a
Whore-house, and from a Tavern to Tyburn.

Fourthly, Have a care whom you hear; it is our Savior Christ's counsel, Mat.
7.15. Beware of false prophets that come to you in sheeps clothing, but
inwardly are ravening wolves. Let me tell you, the Devil has his Ministers as
well as Christ, Rev. 12.15. The Serpent cast out of his mouth water, as a flood
over the woman; that is, as the Learned expound it, Satan by his Ministers, and
Emissaries, cast out the flood of Arian Doctrine to drown the Church. There are
some, who by the subtilty of their wit have learnt the Art to mix error with
truth, and to give poison in a Golden cup. Take heed who you hear, and how you
hear, be like those Noble Bereans, that searched the Scriptures whether the
things that they preached were so or not, Acts 17.11. Your ears must not be
like spunges that suck in puddle-water as well as wine, but your ears must be
like a Fan, that fans out the chaff, but retains the pure Wheat; you must be
like those in the Parable, Mat. 13.48. that gathered the good Fish into
vessels, but cast the bad away; the Saints are called Virgins for their wisdom:
they will not let every one defile their Souls with error, they have a
judicious ear, and a critical palate, that can distinguish between truth and
error, and put a difference betwixt meat of Gods sending, and the Devils
Cooking.

Fifthly, Study sincerity, Psalm. 51.6. Behold thou desire truth in the inward
part: Be what you seem to be, be not like Rowers in a Barge, that look one way
and Row another: Do not look Heavenward by your profession, and Row Hell-ward
by your Conversation; do not pretend to love God, and yet love sin: simulata
Sanctitas, duplicata Iniquitas, counterfeit Piety is double Iniquity. Let your
hearts be upright with God: the plainer the Diamond is, the richer it is; and
the more plain the heart is, the more does God value his Jewel; a little rusty
Gold is far better than a great deal of bright brass; a little true grace,
though rusted over with many infirmities, is better than all the glistering
shows of Hypocrites; a sincere heart is Gods current Coin, and he will give it
grains of allowance.

Sixthly, As you love your souls be not strangers to your selves, be much and
often in the work of self-examination; amongst all the books that you read,
turn over the book of your own heart, look into the book of Conscience, see
what is written there, Psalm. 77.6. I commune with mine own heart: set up a
judgment seat in your own souls, examine whether you have grace or not, prove
whether you are in the faith, be as much afraid of a painted holiness, as you
would be afraid of going to a painted heaven: do not think your selves good
because others think so: let the Word be the touchstone, by which you try your
hearts: let the Word be the looking-glass, by which you judge of the complexion
of your soul; for want of this self-searching, many live known to others, and
die unknown to themselves.

Seventhly, Keep your spiritual watch, Mat. 13.37. What I say unto you, I say
unto all, watch; if it were the last word I should speak, it should be this
word, Watch. Oh! what need has a Christian to be ever upon his Watch? the
heart is a subtle piece, and will be stealing out to vanity, and if we are not
careful, it will decoy us into sin: we have a special eye upon such persons as
we suspect; thy heart is a suspicious person: Oh! have an eye upon it, watch it
continually: it is a bosom Traitor, Job set a watch before his eyes, Job 31.1.
We must every day keep sentinel, sleep not upon your guard: our sleeping time
is the Devils tempting time: let not your watch-candle go out.

Eighthly, You that are the people of God, do you often associate together,
Mal. 3.16. They that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another. Christ's Doves
shall flock together: one Christian will help to heat another: a single coal of
Juniper will soon die, but many coals put together will keep life in one
another. Conference sometimes may do as much as Preaching; one Christian by
good discourse drops holy Oil upon another, that makes the lamp of his Grace to
shine the brighter. It is great wisdom to keep up the Trade in a Corporation.
Christians by meeting often together, setting good discourse on foot, keep up
the Trade of godliness, that else would decay and soon be lost; is not the
communion of Saints an Article in our Creed? do not then live so asunder, as if
this Article were blotted out. The Naturalists observe there is a sympathy in
Plants, they say some Plants bear better when they grow near other Plants, as
the Vine and the Elm; the Olive and the Myrtle thrive the best when they grow
together: it is true in Religion, the Saints are trees of Righteousness, that
thrive best in Godliness when they grow together.

Ninthly, Get your hearts screwed up above the world, set your affections upon
things above, Col. 3.5. We may see the face of the Moon in the water, but the
Moon is fixed above in the firmament: so though a Christian walk here below,
yet his heart should be fixed above in Heaven, there is our best kindred, our
purest joy, our Mansion House; Oh! let our hearts be above, it is the best and
the sweetest kind of life: the higher the bird slies, the sweeter it sings, and
the higher the heart is raised above the world, the sweeter joy it has. The
Eagle that flies in the air, is not stung by the Serpent, those whose hearts
are elevated above the lower region of this world, are not stung with the
vexations and disquietments that others are, but are full of joy and
contentment.

Tenthly, Trade much in the Promises, the Promises are great supports to Faith,
Faith lives in a Promise, as the Fish lives in the water, the promises are both
comforting and quickening, they are mitralia Evangelii, the very breast of the
Gospel; as the Child by sucking the breasts gets strength, so faith by sucking
the breast of a promise gets strength and revives; the promises of God are
bladders to keep us from sinking when we come into the waters of affliction,
the promises are sweet clusters of Grapes that grow upon Christ the true Vine:
O! trade much in the Promises, there is no condition that you can be in, but
you have a Promise, the promises are like Manna, that suit themselves to every
Christians palate.

Eleventhly, To all you that hear me, live in a Calling. Jerome gave his friend
this advice, To be ever well employed, that when the Devil came to tempt him,
he might find him working in his Vineyard. Sure I am, the same God that says,
Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy, says also, Six days shall thou
labor. The great God never sealed any warrants to idleness; an idle Professor
is the shame of his Profession: 2 Thessalonians. 3.11. I bear there are some (says the
Apostle) that work not at all, but are busybodies, such we exhort, by our
Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work. Solon made Laws to punish
idleness; and Cicero says of an idle man, Spiritum trahit, non vivit, he draws
his breath, but does not live, he is not useful; but a good Christian acts
within the sphere of his own calling.

12. Let me entreat you to join the first and the second Table together, Piety
to God, and Equity to your neighbor, the Apostle puts these two words together
in one verse, (...) Tit. 2.12. That we should live Righteously and Godlily:
Righteously, that relates to Morality; Godlily, that relates to Piety and
Sanctity, always remember this, every command has the same Divine stamp and
authority as another command has. I would try a Moral man by the Duties of the
first Table; and I would try a Professor by the Duties of the second Table:
some pretend Faith, but have no Works, others have Works but they have no
Faith; some pretend Zeal for God, but are not just in their dealings; others
are just in their dealings, but have not one spark of Zeal for God; if you
would go to Heaven, you must run both sides of the Table, the first and the
second Table, join Piety and Morality together; as we blame the Papists for
blotting out the second Commandment, let not the Papists blame us for leaving
out the second Table.

13. Join the Serpent and the Dove together, Innocence and Prudence, Mat.
10.16. Be wise as Serpents, and harmless as Doves. We must have innocence with
our wisdom, or else our wisdom is but craftiness, and we must have wisdom with
our innocence, else our innocence is but weakness: We must have the
harmlessnesse of the Dove, that we may not wrong others, and we must have the
prudence of the Serpent, that others may not abuse and circumvent us, not to
wrong the truth by silence, here is the innocence of the Dove: not to betray
our selves by rashness, here the wisdom of the Serpent: How happy it is where
these two are united, the Dove and the Serpent, the Dove without the Serpent is
Folly, and the Serpent without the Dove is Impiety.

14. Be more afraid of sin then of suffering. A man may be afflicted, and yet
have the love of God, but he cannot sin, but presently God is angry; Sin
eclipses the light of Gods countenance, in suffering, the conscience may be
quiet. When the Hail beats upon the Tiles, there may be music in the house,
and when there is suffering in the body, there may be peace and music in the
conscience; but when a man sins wilfully and presumptuously, he loses all his
peace. Spira abjured his faith, and he became a terror to himself, he could
not endure himself, he professed he thought Cain and Judas in Hell did not feel
those terrors and horrors that he felt. He that will commit sin to prevent
suffering, is like a man that lets his Head be wounded to save his shield and
helmet.

15. Take heed of Idolatry, in 1 John 5.21. Little children keep your selves
from Idols. Idolatry is an image of jealousy to provoke God, it breaks the
Marriage-knot asunder, and makes the Lord disclaim his interest in a people:
what kind of Religion is Popery? it is the Mother of many Monsters. What
soul-damning Doctrines does it hold forth, as the meriting of Salvation by good
works, the giving of pardons, the worshipping of Angels, Popish indulgences,
Purgatory, and the like; it is a soul-damning Religion, it is the breeder of
ignorance, uncleanness and murder: the Popish Religion is not defended by
strength of Argument, but by force of Arms; keep your selves from Idols, and
take heed of Superstition, that is the Gentleman Usher to Popery.

16. Think not the worse of godliness, because it is reproached and persecuted,
wicked men being stirred up by the Devil, do maliciously reproach the ways of
God: such were Julian and Lucian: though wicked men; would be godly on their
deathbeds, yet in the time of their life they revile and hate Godliness, but
think not you the worse of Religion, because it is reproached by the wicked.
Suppose a Virgin should be reproached for her chastity, yet chastity is never
the worse: if a blind man jear the Sun, the Sun is never the less bright.
Holiness is a beautiful and glorious thing, it is the Angels glory, and shall
we be ashamed of that which makes us like the Angels? there is a time coming,
when wicked men would be glad of some of that holiness that now they despise,
but they shall be as far then from obtaining it, as they are now from desiring
it.

17. Think not the better of sin because it is in fashion, think not the better
of impiety and ungodliness, because most walk in those crooked ways; Multitude
is a foolish Argument, Multitude does not argue the goodness of a thing: the
Devils name is Legion, that signifies a multitude. Hell-road is this day full
of Travelers, esteem not the better of sin, because most go this way, do we
think the better of the Plague, because it is common? the plea of a multitude,
will not hold at Gods Bar, when God shall ask you, Why did you profane my
Sabbath? why were you drunk? why did you break your oath? to say then, Lord,
because most men did so, will be a poor plea. God will say to you then, seeing
you have sinned with the multitude, you shall now go to Hell with the
multitude: I beseech you, as you tender your souls, walk Antipodes to the
corruptions of the times, if you are living Fish, swim against the stream, dead
Fish swim down the stream, Ephesians. 5.11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful
works of darkness, but rather reprove them.

18. In the business of Religion, serve God with all your might, Eccles. 9.10.
Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might, for there is no device
or work in the Grave whither thou go. This is an argument why we should do
al we can for God, serve him with all our strength because the Grave is very
near, and there is no praying, no repenting, in the Grave, our time is but
small, and therefore our zeal for God should be great. David Danced with all
his might before the Ark, and so should we act vigorously for God in the sphere
of Obedience. Romans 12.12. Fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord. Take heed of a
dull lazy temper in Gods service, you must not only say a prayer, or read a
prayer, but you must pour out your souls in prayer; not only love God, but be
sick of love to God, God in the old Law would have the Coals put to the
Incense, Levit. 16.13. and why so? to typifie that the Heart must be enflamed
in the worship of God; your prayers must go up with a flame of Devotion. I
confess Hell will be taken without storm, you may jump into Hell with ease,
but it is all up-hill to Heaven, and therefore you must put forth all your
might, Mat. 12.11. The violent take Heaven by force. Heaven is not taken but by
storm, do you not see men zealous and very active for the Devil, and for their
Lusts, and shall they take pains for Hell, and will not you take pains for
Heaven?

19. Do all the good you can while you live to others; God has made every
Creature useful for us, the Sun has not its light for it self, but for us, the
Fountains run freely, and so does the myrrh drop from the Tree: every Creature
does as it were deny its self for us, the Beast gives us its labor, the Bird
gives us its music, and the Silkworm its silk. Now has God made every thing
useful for us, and shall not we be useful one for another? O labor to be
helpful to the souls of others, and to supply the wants of others: Jesus Christ
was a public blessing in the World, He went about doing good. We are Members
of the Body politic, nay, we are Members of the Body mystical, and shall not
every Member be helpful for the good of the body? That is a dead Member that
does not communicate to the good of the body. O labor to be useful to others
while you live, that so when you dye, there may be a miss of you, many live so
unfruitfully, that truly their life is scarce worth a prayer, nor their death
scarce worth a tear.

20. Every day spend some thoughts upon Eternity. O Eternity, Eternity: all of
us here are ere long, it may be some of us within a few days or hours, to lanch
forth into the Ocean of Eternity. Eternity, Eternity is status interminabilis,
says Boethius; no Prospective-glass can see to the end of Eternity. Eternity is
a sum that can never be numbered, a Line that can never be measured: Eternity
is a condition of everlasting misery, or everlasting happiness: if you are
Godly, then shall you be for ever happy, you shall be always sunning your
selves in the light of Gods countenance: if you are wicked, you shall be always
miserable, ever lying in the scalding furnace of the wrath of the Almighty.
Eternity to the godly is a day that has no Sunsetting: Eternity to the wicked
is a night that has no Sunrising. O I beseech you my brethren, every day
spend some time upon the thoughts of Eternity. The serious thoughts of an
Eternal condition would be a great means to promote Holiness.

1. The thoughts of Eternity would make us very serious about our Souls. O my
Soul, thou art very shortly to fly into Eternity, a condition that can never be
reversed or altered, how serious would this make us about our Heaven-born
souls. Zeuxes being once asked why he was so long in drawing of a Picture,
answered, Aeternitate pigno, I am now painting for Eternity. Oh how frequently
would that man pray that thinks he is praying for Eternity. Oh how accurately
and circumspectly would that man live, that thinks upon this moment hangs
Eternity.

The thoughts of Eternity would make us slight and contemn all the things of
this World, what is the world to him that has Eternity always in his eye? Did
we think seriously and solemnly of Eternity, we should never overvalue the
comforts of the world, nor over-grieve the crosses of the world.

1. We should not overvalue the comforts of the World, worldly comforts are
very sweet, but they are very swift, they are soon gone, the pleasures of the
World are but for a season, just like Noah's Dove, that brought an Olive Branch
in her mouth, but she had wings, and so did presently fly from the Ark; so are
all outward comforts, they bring an Olive Branch, but they have wings too, with
which they fly away.

1. The thoughts of Eternity would make us not to over-grieve the crosses and
sufferings of the world. What are these sufferings to Eternity? Our sufferings,
says the Apostle, are but for a while, 1 Pet. 5.10. what are all the sufferings
we can undergo in the world to Eternity? Affliction may be lasting, but it is
not everlasting. Our sufferings here are not worthy to be compared to an
Eternal weight of Glory.

And thus my Beloved I have given you these twenty Directions for your precious
souls: I beseech you treasure them up as so many Jewels in the Cabinet of your
breast. Did you carry these Directions about you, they would be a most
excellent Antidote to keep you from sin, and an excellent means to preserve the
zeal of Piety flaming upon the Altar of your hearts.

I have many things yet to say to you, but I know not whether God will give me
another opportunity; my strength is now almost gone: I beseech you, let these
things which I have spoken, make deep impressions upon all your souls. Consider
what has been said, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

Mr. Watson's Farewell-Sermon. Aug. 19.
Isai. 3.10, 11. Say ye surely it shall be well with the just, for they shall
eat the fruit of their works.

Woe be to the wicked, it shall be evil with him: for the reward of his hands
shall be with him.


THis Text is like Isreal's Pillar or Cloud; it has a light side, and a dark
side: it has a light side unto the Godly, say unto the Righteous, it shall be
well with him; and it has a dark side unto the wicked, Woe unto the wicked, it
shall be ill with him; both you see are rewarded, Righteous and Wicked; but
here is a vast difference, the one has a reward of Mercy, the other a reward of
Justice.

I begin with the first of these, Say unto the Righteous, it shall be will with
him.

This Scripture was written in a very sad and calamitous time, as you may read
in the beginning of the Chapter. The mighty man, and the man of war shall
cease, the prudent and the ancient, both Judge and the Prophet shall be taken
away: This was a very sad time with the Church of God in Jerusalem.

If the Judge be taken away, where will be any equity? if the Prophet be
removed, where will be any Priests? the whole body Politic was running to
ruin, and almost in the Rubbish; now in this sad juncture of time, God would
have this Text to be written: and it is like a Rainbow in the Clouds; God would
have his People comforted in the midst of afflictions; Say unto the Righteous,
it shall be well with them.

The great Proposition that lies in the words, is this:

That howsoever things go in the world, it shall be well with the Righteous
man; This is an Oracle from Gods own mouth, and therefore we are not to dispute
it, its Gods own Oracle, Say unto the Righteous, it shall be well with him.

I might multiply Scriptures, but I will give you one instance, in Eccles.
8.12. Surely I know it shall be well with them that fear God.

I know it; It is a golden Maxim not to be disputed, It shall be well with
them that fear God.

For the illustration of this, consider two things.

1. What is meant by the Righteous man. 2. Why, Howsoever things go, it shall
be well with the Righteous.
1. Who is meant here by the Righteous man.

There is a threefold Righteousness, a legal Righteousness; and so Adam in this
sense was said to be Righteous, when he did wear the Robe of Innocence: Adams
heart did agree with the Law of God exactly, as a well made Dial goes with the
Sun; but this Righteousness is forfeited and lost.

2. There is a Moral Righteousness, and thus he is said to be Righteous, who is
adorned with the Moral virtues, who is prudent, and just, and temperate, who is
decked with the level of Morality: But

3. There is an Evangelical Righteousness, and this is meant here: this
Evangelical Righteousness is twofold.

1. There is a Righteousness of Imputation, and that is when Christ's
Righteousness is made over to us: and Beloved, this Righteousness is as truly
ours to justify us, as its Christ's to bestow upon us. 2. There is a
Righteousness of Implantation, which is nothing else but the infusing of the
seed and habit of Grace into the heart: a planting of holiness in a man, and
making him a partaker of the Divine Nature: this is to be Righteous in the
sight of God, a Righteousness of Imputation, and a Righteousness of
Implantation.
The second thing is to show you, why, Howsoever things go in the world, yet it
shall go well with this Righteous man; it must be thus for two Reasons.

1. Because he who is Righteous, has his greatest evils removed, his sin
pardoned, and then it must needs be well with him: Sin is the thorn in a man's
Conscience, now when the thorn is plucked out by forgiveness and remission, then
it is well with that man.

Forgiveness in Scripture is called a lifting off of sin, Job 7. Lord, why do
thou not lift off my sin? so the Hebrew word carries it; it is a Metaphor taken
from a weary man that goes under a burden, he is ready to sink under it, now
another man comes and lifts off this burden; even so does the great God, when
the burden of sin is ready to sink the Conscience. God lifts off the burden
of sin from the Conscience, and lays it on Christ's shoulder, and he carries it;
now he that has his burden thus carried, it is well with him howsoever things
go.

Forgiveness of sin and pardon, it is a crowning Blessing, it is a Jewel of a
Believers Crown, pardon of sin is a multiplying mercy, it brings a great many
mercies along with it: whom God pardons, he adopts, whom God pardons, he
invests with Grace and Glory.

So that this is a multiplying mercy; it is such a mercy that is enough to make
a sick man well, Isa. 33.24 The Inhabitants shall not say I am sick; the people
shall be forgiven their iniquity: The sense of ^^^^on takes away the sense of
pain, and then it must needs be well with the Righteous, for his greatest evil
is removed.

2. However things go, it is well with the Righteous; because that God is his
portion, Psalm. 16.5. The Lord is the portion of my inheritance; the lines are
fallen unto me in pleasant places: in God there are all good things to be
found, and all that is in God is engaged for the good of the Righteous, his
Power is to Help, and his Wisdom is to Teach, and his Spirit is to Sanctify,
and his Mercy to Save. God is the Righteous man's portion, and can God give a
greater gift to us than himself? God is a rich portion, for he is the Angels
riches; God is a safe and sure portion, for his Name is a strong Tower, he is a
portion that can never be spent, for he is Infiniteness: He is a portion can
never be lost, for he is Eternity. Thou art my portion for ever, Psalm. 72.26.
and surely it is well with the Righteous that has God for his portion. Is it
not well with that man that is happy? why, if God be our portion we are happy,
Psalm. 144.15. Happy is the people whose God is the Lord.

Thus I have cleared up the Doctrinal part. For the Use to this,

Here is abundance of comfort for every Godly man, for every person serving God
in this Congregation, God has sent me this day with a Commission to comfort
you.

Oh! that I might drop in the Oil of gladness into every broken heart and
rejoice every troubled spirit. Oh here is good news from Heaven Say unto the
Righteous, it shall be well with him.

But here is a question must be answered, You Will say to me, but how does this
appear, that it shall he well with the Righteous? for we often see it is the
worst with them in this world, he is deprived of his comfort many times, he
loses his very life in that quarrel, he is made the very reproach of the world
oftentimes; how then is it well with the Righteous?

To this I answer, yet still it is well with the Righteous, though he meet with
trouble in the world, and one follows on the neck of another, yet it is well
with the Righteous; as will appear in these three or four particulars.

1. The troubles that the Righteous man meets with, they turn to good, and so
it is well with him; that is a most famous Scripture in Jer. 24.5. Whom I have
sent out of this place unto the land of the Ghaldeans for their good. Gods own
Israel were transported into Babylon among their enemies: but it is for their
good, says the Lord. The troubles of the Righteous are a means to purge out
their sin. I have read a story of one who running at another with a sword to
kill him, by accident his sword run into an Imposthume and broke the
Imposthume; thus all the evils and troubles of the Righteous serve but to cure
them of the Imposthume of pride, to make them more humble; when that the body
of a Saint is afflicted, his soul, that revives and flourishes in Grace.

At Rome there was two Laurel-trees, and when one withered, the other did
flourish: so when the body is afflicted, yet the soul that Laurel, does revive
and flourish.

God does distill our of the bitterest drink his Glory and our Salvation, says
Jerome, that, that the world looks on as a punishment, God makes a medicine to
heal the sore; why then it shall be well with the Righteous. The rod of God
upon a Saint, is but only Gods pencil whereby he draws his Image more lively
on the soul. God never strikes the strings of his Viol but to make the Music
sweet. Then it is well with the Righteous.

2. In the midst of all the trouble that does befall the Righteous, yet still
it is well with them in regard of those inward heart-revivings that God does
give them.

We see a godly man's misery, but we do not see his comfort: we see his
prison-gates, but we do not hear the music that is within his Conscience. God
does sweeten to his People outward trouble with inward peace; it is the Title
that is given to God, 2 Cor. 7.6. God that comfort them that are cast down.
The Be can gather honey as well from the thistle and from the bitter herb, as
from the sweet flower; the Child of God can gather joy out of sorrow: out of
the very carcass sometimes the Lord gives honey; when the body is in pain, the
soul may be at ease, as when a man's head aches, yet his heart may be well; thus
it is well with the Righteous: God gives him that inward comfort that revives
and sweetens his outward pain.

3. In the time of trouble and calamity, yet still it is well with the
Righteous: because God does cover his people, in the time of trouble, he hides
them in the storm, God has a care to hide his Jewels, and will not let them be
carried away; and thus he makes good that Scripture literally, Psalm. 91.4. He
shall cover them with his feathers, and under his wings shall thou trust, no
evil shall touch thee.

God oftentimes verifies this Scripture literally, He makes his Angels to be
his peoples lifeguard; to hide them; and defend them, when a flood was coming
upon the world, God provided an Ark to hide Noah, when Israel is carried and
transported into Babylon, God hid Jeremiah, and gave him his life for a prey,
Jer. 39.11. and in this sense the Saints of God are called hidden ones, Psalm.
83.3. Why so? not only because they are hid in Gods decree, and hid in Christ's
wounds, but oftentimes God hides them in a time of danger and calamity: they
are hidden ones, he reserved to himself seven thousand that had not bowed the
knee to Baal. The Prophet knew not where there was one, but God knew there were
seven thousand. In this sense, it is well with the righteous in time of public
misery.

I but you will say, sometimes it fares yet worse then all this, sometimes the
righteous they die and perish, they are carried away in a Tempest, why? yet
still it is well with the Righteous, and that in a twofold sense.

1. Many times God does take away the Righteous by death, and that in great
mercy: he takes them away, that they shall not see the misery that comes upon a
Nation. Virgil the Heathen Poet says, They are happy that die before their
Country: his meaning was, they die before they see the ruin of their
Country: and truly God many times takes away his people in mercy, that they
may not see the ruin that is coming on a Land; you have in Scripture for this,
1 King. 14.13. He only of Jeroboam shall come to the Grave in peace, because
in him there is found some good things toward the Lord God of Israel, God puts
him in his grave betimes in mercy, because he should not see the evil coming
upon the Land: and there is a parallel to this, 2 King. 12. last. It is spoken
of Josiah, I will gather thee unto thy Fathers, thou shall be gathered unto thy
Grave in peace, and thine eyes shall not see the evil I will bring upon this
place. Josiah he dyed in Battle: how then was it said he went to the Grave in
peace? We must understand the meaning of it is this; Josiah went to his Grave
in peace, because he was a holy man, and he had made his peace with God, and so
he went to his Grave in peace; and because he should not see the evil
approaching, God gathered him to his Grave in peace.

Jerome speaking of his friend Nepotian (you must observe Jerome lived to see
some troubles before he died) says he, Oh! how happy is my friend Nepotian,
that sees not these troubles, but is got out of the storm, dies and is arrived
safe in Heaven.

Luther died in mercy before the trouble in Germany broke forth: and thus you
see the Righteous though they die, yet it is well with them, God takes them
away in mercy that they may not see approaching evils.

2. Though the Righteous die, and are taken away, yet it is well with them,
because death cannot hurt them: Death can neither hurt their body nor yet their
souls, and then it is well with them.

1. Death cannot hurt their bodies, the body of a Saint it does not perish,
though it die; the bodies of the Saints are very precious dust in Gods account:
precious dust, The Lord locks up these Jewels in the Grave, as in a Cabinet;
The bodies of the Saints lie mellowing and ripening in the Grave till the
blessed time of the Resurrection. Oh! how precious is the Dust of a Believer,
though the world mind it not, yet it is precious unto God. The Husbandman he
has some Corn in his Barn, and he has other Corn in the Ground: why? the Corn
that is in the ground, is as precious to him, as that is in the Barn: the
bodies of the Saints in the Grave, are Gods Corn in the ground, but the Lord
makes very precious account of this Corn: The bodies of the Saints shall be
more glorious and blessed then ever they were, at the Resurrection. T^rtullian
calls them Angelical bodies, in regard of that beauty and luster that shall be
upon them. As it is with your silks, when they are died of a purple or scarlet
color, they are made more bright and illustrious then they were before; thus
it is with the bodies of the Saints, they shall be dyed of a better color at
the Resurrection, they shall be made like a glorious body; Phil. 3.20. thus it
shall be well with the righteous, their bodies shall not perish.

2. It will be well with the Righteous at death, as to their souls too. Oh it
will be a blessed time! methinks it is with a Saint at the time of death, just
as it was with Saint Paul in his voyage to Rome, we read that the Ship did
break, but though there were so many broken pieces, yet he got safe to shore;
so though the Ship of the Believers body break by death, yet it is safe with
the passenger, his soul that gets safe to the Heavenly harbor: Let me tell
you, the day of a Believers death, it is the birthday of his blessedness, it
is his Ascension day to Heaven, the day of his death, it is his marriage-day
with Jesus Christ. Faith does but contract us here, in this life is but the
contract, but at death the Nuptials shall be solemnized in Glory, they shall
see God face to face, it will be Heaven enough to have a sight of God, says
Austin: when the Saints shall enter into joy, here joy enters into them, but
then they shall enter into it: they shall drink of these pure Rivers that run
from the Everlasting Fountain.

And thus you see, it will be well with the Righteous, how ever things go,
though trouble come, though death come, yet it will go well with the Righteous.
And Oh let those that are the people of God comfort themselves in these words!
Oh what an encouragement is this to all you that hear me, to begin to be
Righteous! this Text may tempt us all to be Godly, Say unto the Righteous, it
shall be well with him; when things are never so ill with him, yet it is well
with him.

We would be glad to have things go well with our Relations, and in our
Estates; why? when the Righteous things go well with us, thy person is sealed,
thou art Heir of all Gods Promises, thou art Christ's favorite, thou have Heaven
in reversion, and is it not now well with thee? If you would have Happiness,
you must espouse Holiness. Say unto the Righteous, it shall be well with them:
and thus much of the first Proposition, the Godly man's comfort in life, and
death, it is well with him.

But now if all this will not prevail with you, to make you leave your fins and
become Righteous, I must pass in a few words to the next branch of the Text,
to scare men out of their sin, to affright men out of their wickedness, Woe
unto the wicked, it shall be ill with him.

This my Beloved is the dark fide of the cloud.

It may cause in every wicked man that hears me, a trembling at the heart.

Woe unto the wicked, it shall be ill with him.

The Proposition that does resist out of these words, is this:

Doct. When things seem to be well with the wicked men, it shall be ill with
them at last, though they have more then heart can wish, yet it shall be ill
with them at last, Eccles. 8.13. It shall not be well with the wicked, nor
shall he prolong his days, which are as a shadow; because he fears not God, it
shall not be well with the wicked, the God of truth has pronounced this.

It is as true as God is true, it shall not be well with the wicked.

Now that I may a little clear this to you, I shall demonstrate this to you in
these four particulars.

1. It is ill with the wicked in this life. 2. It is ill with them at death. 3.
It is ill with them at the day of Judgment. 4. It is ill with them after
Judgment; it shall be ill with the wicked.
It is ill with the wicked in this life; a wicked man that hears me will hardly
think so, when he has the affluence and confluence of outward comforts, when
he eats the fat, and drinks the sweet, he will hardly believe the Minister that
shall tell him, it shall be ill with him, but it is so.

For is it not ill with that man that has a curse? yea, the curse of God
entailed upon him, can that man thrive that lives under the curse of God?

Floods of blood and wrath hang over the head of a wicked man, he is heir to
all the Plagues written in the Book of God.

All Gods curses are the sinners Portion, and if he die in his sin, he is sure
to have his Portion paid him.

Woe unto the wicked, every bit of bread he has, he has it with a curse, its
like poisoned bread given to a dog: every drop of Wine he drinks, he swallows
down a curse with it; woe unto the wicked, there is a curse in his Cup, and a
curse upon his Table. God says woe unto him: we read of Belshazar, Dan. 5.4, 5.
that he did take the Wine, and commanded to bring the Gold and Silver vessels
out of the Temple, and then they brought the Golden vessels that were taken out
of the Temple, out of the house of God that was at Jerusalem, and the King and
his Princes, and his Wives and Concubines drank in them.

Belshazar was very jovial, in the midst of his Cups he was merry, but woe unto
the wicked; for in the same hour came forth the finger of a man's hand, and
reached over the Candlestick, upon the plaster of the Wall of the Kings
Palace, and the Kings countenance changed, and he was troubled; there was a
hand and a woe written on the wall: let a sinner live till he come to an
hundred years of age, yet he is cursed, Isa. 65.20 his gray hairs, they have a
curse upon them.

2. It Is ill with the wicked, not only in this life, but it is ill with him at
his hour of death, and that in these two respects,

1. Death puts an end unto all his comforts. 2. Death is the beginning of all
his miseries.
1. Death puts an end to all his Comforts, no more indulging and pompering the
flesh, then no more cups of Wine, then no more Music, Revel. 18.22. The fruits
thy soul lusts after, are departed from thee. All things that are dainty and
good, are departed from thee, the voice of the Harper, Musician, and Trumpeter,
shall be heard no more in thee.

As it is spoken of the destruction of Rome, so you may say of the wicked man,
no more joy and gladness, no more mirth and music, all a sinners sweet Spices,
his scarlet Robes, his sparkling Diamonds, they all at death depart from him.

2. As death puts an end to a sinners mirth, so it lays a foundation for all
his sorrow: Alas, before death begins to close a sinners eyes, the eye of his
conscience is first opened, every sin at the hour of death, stands with its
drawn sword in its hand: those sins that did in life delight him, now they
affright and terrify him, all his joy and mirth turns into sadness: as
sometimes you have seen Sugar lying in a damp place, it does dissolve and run
to water: thus all the Sugar-joys of a wicked man at the hour of death turns
into water, into the water of tears, into the water of sorrow.

3. It shall be ill with the wicked man at the day of Judgment, when he is
seated before Gods Tribunal, then he shall leave judging of others, and shall
stand at Gods Bar, and be tried for his life.

I read concerning Felix, when he heard Paul speak of Judgment, that Felix
trembled. Josephus observes, that Felix he was a wicked man, and she that lived
with him, her name was Drusilla, whom he enticed from her Husband, and lived in
uncleanness with her: now when Felix heard Paul preaching of Judgment,
trembled. Now if he trembled to hear of Judgment, what will he do when
Judgment comes? when all his secret sins shall be made manifest, all his
Midnight wickedness shall be written on his forehead, as with a point of a
Diamond? At the day of Judgment shall be these two things.

First, There shall be a legal Trial. Secondly, The Sentence.
First, A legal Trial. God will call forth a sinner by name, and say, stand
forth, hear thy charge, see what thou can answer to this charge.

What can thou say for thy Sabbath-breaking, for thy Murders, and
Drunkenness, and Perjury? for all thy revenge and malice? for all thy
persecuting of my Members? what do thou say, Guilty, or not Guilty?

Thou wretch, thou dare not say thou art not Guilty; for have not I been an
eyewitness to all thy wickedness? do not the Books agree, the book of thy
Conscience, and the book of my Omniscience, and dare thou offer to plead not
Guilty? How will the sinner be amazed with horr^r, and run into desparation?

Secondly, After this legal process of Trial, follows the Sentence, Go ^^c^rsed
into everlasting fire; what, to go from the presence of Christ? in whose
presence is fullness of joy, to go from Christ with a curse, Why, says
Chrys^stom, that very word Depart, is worse than the torment it self. And
remember this, you that go on in your sins, when once this sentence is past, it
cannot be reversed; this is the most Supreme Court of Judicature, from which is
no appeal. Here on earth men remove their Causes from one Court to another,
from the Common Law unto the Chancery; Oh! but at the last day of judgment, no
appeals to remove the sentence, for this is the highest Court.

4. It will be ill with the wicked that die in their sins after the day of
judgment: Oh! then there is but one way, and they would be glad they might not
go that way; any way but to prison. Oh! but there is no way but to Hell, Luke
16.23. In Hell he lifted up his eyes. Hell, it is the very center of misery,
it is the very Spirits of Torments distilled out: The Scripture tells us, that
in Hell there are these three things; there is Fire, there is Darkness, there
are Chains.

1. Hell is called a place of Darkness, Jude 13. To whom is reserved blackness
of darkness: Darkness you know is the most uncomfortable thing in the world; a
man that goes in the dark, he trembles every step he goes.

Hell is a black Region, nothing but blackness of darkness; and it must needs
be a dark place where they shall be separated from the light of Gods presence.
Indeed Augustine, he thinks there shall be some little sulphurous light there:
but suppose it be so, that light shall serve only that the damned may see the
tragedy of their own misery, and see themselves tormented.

2. In Hell, as there is Darkness, so there is Fire, it is called a burning
Lake, Rev. 2.15. Who was not found written in the book of Life, was threwn into
the Lake of Fire. You know that Fire is the most torturing Element, it makes
the most dreadful impression on the flesh. Now Hell is a place of Fire.

It is disputed among the Learned what kind of fire it is, and I wish we may
never know what kind of fire it is. Augustine and others affirm that it is
Material fire, but far hotter than any fire upon your Hearths, that is but
painted fire compared with this. But I do rather think that the fire of the
Damned it is partly Material, and partly Spiritual; partly Material to work on
the Body, and partly Spiritual, which is the wrath of God to torment the soul:
that is the Lake, the burning Fire: Oh! who knows the power of Gods anger? who
can dwell with these burnings? it is intolerable to endure them, and
impossible to escape them.

3. In Hell there are chains, chains of darkness. Those sinners that would not
be bound by any Law of God, such shall have chains of darkness to bind them.

Quest, What should be the meaning of these phrases, Chains of darkness?

Answ. I suppose it may be this, to intimate unto us, that the wicked in Hell
shall not have power to walk up and down, which perhaps might be a little ease,
though very little; but they shall be chained down fast, not to stir, they
shall be fastened to that stake with chains of darkness; Oh! this will be
terrible indeed. Suppose a man should lie always on a Dounbed, and might not
stir out of the place, it would be very painful unto him: Oh; but to lie as the
Damned upon the wrack, always under the torturing scorchings of Gods wrath, and
to be tied, and not to move, how dreadful are the thoughts of this? and this is
the condition of the wicked, they are under fire, and darkness, and chains.

And to add unto the torments of Hell, there are these two things more to show
you, that it shall be ill with the wicked, let them dye when they will.

The first is the Worm. The second is the Serpent.
First, There is the Worm to torture the damned spirits, and this is no other
than the Worm Conscience; the 9 of Mark the 44 verse, Where their worm never
dies. Oh! how dreadful will it be to have this Worm?

Melancthon calls the tormenting Conscience, A hellish fury. Conscience will be
just as if a Worm full of poison were feeding upon the heart of a man. Those
Sinners that would never hear the voice of Conscience, they shall feel the worm
of Conscience. And then,

Secondly, As there is the Worm to torment, so there is the Serpent, that is
the Devil, who is called the Old Serpent, Rev. 9. As there is the biting of the
Worm, so there is the stinging of the Old Serpent.

First of all, The Damned shall be forced to behold the Devil. I remember what
Anselm says, says he, I had rather endure all the torments of this Life, than
see the Devil with bodily eyes: But now this sight the wicked shall see whether
they will or no, and not only see, but they shall feel the stinging of this Old
Serpent the Devil.

Satan is full of rage against Mankind, and will show no mercy, as he puts
forth all his subtilty in tempting of man, so he puts out all his crue'ty in
tormenting of Mankind. And this is not all,

There are two things to set out the Torments of Hell.

First, These Agonies, and Hell-convulsions, they shall be for ever: take that
Scripture for proof, Rev. 14.11* And the smoke of their Torment asc^nded for
ever and ever, and they have no rest day nor night. Thus it is in Hell, they
would dye, but they cannot; the wicked shall be always dying, but never dead;
The smoke of the Furnace ascends for ever and ever. Oh! who can endure thus to
be ever upon the wrack? this word e^^^ breaks the heart. Wicked men, now think
the Sabbaths long, When will the Sabbath be over? they think a Sermon long, and
think a Prayer long; but oh! how long will it be to lie in Hell for ever and
ever? after millions of years their Torments are as far from ended, as at the
first hour they began. Secondly, Which is another aggravation of Hell torment,
the damned in Hell have none to pity them; it is some comfort, some ease to
have our Friends to pity us in our sickness and want; I, but they have no
friends. Mercy will not pity them, Mercy is turned into Fury. Christ will not
pity them, he is no more an Advocate for them. The Angels will not pity them;
but they rejoice when they see the vengeance; they insult and glory when they
see the Justice of God executed upon his enemies. Oh how sad is this! to lie
down in the scalding furnace of Gods wrath, and none to pity them; when they
cry out, God will laugh at them. Oh! hear this all ye that go into sin, It will
be ill with the wicked; Oh! therefore turn from your sins, lest God tear you in
pieces as a Lion, and there be none to help you.
Now for Application.

Oh! what an affrighting Word is this to all wicked men that go on desperately
to sin, and add drunkenness to thirst? never such an inundation of wickedness
as now; men sin as if they would spite God, and dare him to punish them; men
sin so greedily as if they were afraid Hell gates would be shut up ere they
come thither: Oh! how manfully do many sin? they go to Hell strongly in their
wickedness? Oh! these are in a sad condition: Is it not sad at the hour of
death, and at the day of Judgment, and after Judgment with them? wicked men
live Cursed, and they die Damned; sinners are the very mark that God will shoot
at, his standing mark, and he never misses this mark: you know what the
Scripture says, There shall be weeping, and there shall be gnashing of teeth.
And says Latimer, That is sad fare, where weeping is the first course, and
gnashing of teeth is the second course.

Quest. Whence is it that there is this gnashing of teeth?

Answ. First, it does arise from the extremity of Torment the wicked suffer:
they are not able to bear it, and know not how to avoid it.

Secondly, The wicked gnash their teeth in Hell at the Godly to see them in
Heaven, them whom they persecuted, and scoffed, and jeered, to see them in
Heaven, and themselves in Hell, they are mad at it, Luke 13.18. When they shall
see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and
they themselves shut^ut; they shall gnash their teeth at this. How may this
amaze a wicked man? if all the curses in the Bible will make a man miserable,
he shall be made so,

The second Use is this.

Take heed that none of you here be found amongst the number of the wicked;
take heed of being of this black Regiment that wears the Devils colors; and
fight under his Banner, the sinner and the furnace shall never be parted: Oh!
take heed of those sins, which will bring you to Hell fire.

There are (says Bernard) fiery sins which bring men to Hell fire.

What are those fiery sins? why, the fire of malice, the fire of passion? and
the fire of lust and concupisence, and the fire of Revenge; these fiery sins,
bring men to fiery plagues, to Hell fire.

When you are tempted to any wickedness, think with your selves, O! how can I
bear the fierceness of Gods wrath for ever? how can I lie in the wine press of
Gods wrath for ever? Oh! take heed of those sins that will bring you into this
place of Torment.

I have read a story of a Virgin, who being tempted by a young man to commit
folly, says she unto him, Grant me but one request, and I will do what thou
desire; what is that, says he? Do but hold your finger one hour in this
burning Candle, no, he would not do that. Says she, Will not you for my sake
hold your finger an hour in the Candle, and will you have my soul lie burning
in Hell for ever. Thus she rebuked the Temptation.

Does Satan tempt thee to wickedness, hold out this Text as a shield to the
Devil to quench his fiery Darts; say thus, Oh Satan! do I embrace thy
Temptations, I must be under thy Tormenting to all Eternity, Oh! therefore
labor to be Righteous, It shall be well with the Righteous.

But take heed of sin, It shall be ill with the sinner.

I will conclude all with that saying of Austin, When a man has been virtuous,
his labor is gone, but the pleasure remains; when a man has been wicked, the
pleasure is gone, but the sting remains.

Mr. Lye's First Sermon. August 17* 1662.
Phil. 4.1. Therefore my Brethren, dearly Beloved, and longed for, my Joy and
Crown, so stand fast in the Lord, my dearly Beloved.
MY Beloved, I do very well remember that upon the 24th of this instant month,
in 1651. I was then under the sentence of banishment; and that very day did I
preach my Farewell Sermon to my people from whom I was banished, because I would
not swear against my King, having sworn to maintain his just Power, and Honor
and Greatness; and now behold a second Trial; then I could not forswear my
self, the God of Heaven keep me that I never may: I am apt to think I could do
any thing for this loving Congregation, only I cannot sin; but since Beloved,
there is a sentence gone out against us, that we that cannot subscribe must not
subsist; this is the last day that is prefixed to us to Preach; I shall now
speak to you (God assisting me) if my passion will give me leave, just as if I
would speak, if I were immediately to die; Therefore hearken my Brethren,
dearly Beloved, and longed for, my Joy and Crown, so stand fast in the Lord, my
dearly Beloved. Paul was now a prisoner at Rome, for the Gospel of Christ;
'twas his second imprisonment, and he was not far from being offered up a
sacrifice for the Gospel he had preached. This Gospel the Philippians had heard
him preach, and the godly Philippians having heard of his imprisonment, they
sent so far from Philippi to Rome to visit him, and to supply his wants. A
gracious temper, which I hope the Eternal God has given the Saints in London,
and for which, if for any thing, God has a blessing in store for them. Paul is
not so much concerned in his own bonds, as in the Philippians Estate:
Epaphroditus tells him that there were Heresies, and false doctrines got in
amongst them, but yet the Philippians stood fast: and herein Paul rejoices,
writes this Epistle, bids them go on, stand fast, keep their ground, and to be
sure not to give an inch, but to stand fast, knowing that at long run, their
labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.

I shall without any more ado enter upon the Text; in which you have two things
considerable.

A most melting Compellation, and a most serious Exhortation.

1. A melting Compellation, my Brethren, dearly Beloved, etc.

2. A serious Exhortation, and in it first, the Matter of the Duty, stand, and
stand it out, and stand fast. Secondly, the Manner. First, So stand, so as you
have stood, stand fast. Second, In the Lord, stand so, and stand in the Lord,
in the Lords strength, and in the Lords cause; to stand in your own strength,
would be the ready way to fall, and to stand in your own cause, for your own
fancy, would be the ready way to expose your selves to all manner of
Temptations: Therefore my brethren, dearly Beloved in the Lord, stand, and so
stand fast in the Lord, my dearly Beloved.

In the next place, by way of Observation from the words; and if there be any
wicked Catchers here, let them know, that I shall speak no more then I shall
draw from, and is the mind of my Text; I would not give occasion to be a
greater sufferer then I am like to be. But for the words.

First, For the Melting Compellation, my Brethren, my dearly Beloved. Paul was
an Apostle, and an high Officer in the Church of God, and he writ unto the
Philippians, to all the Philippians, to the poorest of them; and see how he
bespeaks himself to them, (my Brethren) from hence take this observation, That
the highest Officers in the Church of Christ, though they are indeed by Office
Rulers over them, yet by Relation, they are no more then Brethren to the
meanest Saint. Here we have no such Rabbis, to whom we must swear, because
they say we must swear it. Paul calls them Brethren, and so writes to them,
Gal. 1.2. and James a Scriptural Officer, one of the highest Apostles Christ
ever made; says, Hearken my beloved Brethren, Jam. 2.5. So Peter an Apostle of
Christ, Wherefore the rather Brethren; and John the beloved Disciple, Brethren,
I write no New Commandment, etc. 1 John 2.7. Well then,

1. If this be so, that the highest Officer in the Church, such as Christ
approves of, are but Brethren to the meanest Saint, then certainly they are but
Brethren to their fellow Officers; If no more Relation to the Toe in the Body,
then no more to the Eyes: If there be any of a light Spirit would bear Rule,
that love to have pre-eminence, I would desire them to read two Scriptures, the
first is, Luke 22.26. the second, Mat. 26.27. Does Christ say, whosoever will
be chief among you, let him be one that will Domineer over your Estates, over
your Persons, over your* Consciencs, does not Christ say so? no, but Whosoever
will be chief among you, let him be your Minister, -- let him be your servant.
Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to Minister, and to
give his life a Ransom for many: You have this also, Luke 22.25. And he said
unto them, the Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, (i. e.) over
their slaves, over their vassals, but ye shall not be so: but he that is
greatest among you, let him be as the younger, and he that is chief as he that
does serve. Sure if Paul be but a Brother to Philip, then he is no more to
Timothy.

2. If the highest Officers in the Church of Christ be but Brethren to the
meanest Saint, then it is not for those Brethren to Lord it over their fellow
Brethren, Lord it over Gods Heritage; remember it is Gods Heritage. I hope your
Consciences will bear me witness, that I have labored as much as in me lies,
to be a helper of your joy, not to Lord it over your faith, 2 Cor. 1.24. to
press or cause you to believe this or that, because I believe it, if this may
be allowed, then may I turn Papist to morrow. Says Christ to him that would
have had him speak to his Brother, to divide the inheritance with him, Man, who
made me a Judge over you? Luk 12.14. So say I, Man, who made thee a Tyrant, and
Lord over thy fellow Brethren? 1 Pet. 5.3. Neither as being Lords over Gods
Heritage, etc.

3. If the highest Officers in the Church of Christ be but Brethren and no
more, then there should be no discord between those Brethren. Behold, how good
and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity: and truly I may
comfortably speak that, and it is one of the greatest comforts I have in the
World. I hope we have lived together in love, blessed be God: Let us not fall
out, says Abraham, the elder, to Lot his younger Cousin, for we are Brethren,
Beloved, the discords between Pastor and People, have made the best music in
the ears of the Jesuits.

4. Are Pastors; nay, the highest Officers that Jesus Christ has, and does own
in the Church, but Brethren? Oh! then let those Brethren if they will appear
before the Bar of their Father in Heaven with comfort, take care of offending
the souls of Brethren: for at the hand of every Brother, God will require the
soul of his Brother, Ezekiel. 33.6. His Blood will I require at the Watchmans
hand. We that are called by some the Dogs of the Flock, what shall we prove
dumb Dogs? what a comfort will it be to my dying Brethren this day, if they can
but say, Lord, we are clear from the Blood of our Brethren? the Officers of
Christ should never behave themselves so, that they should give their people
occasion to say, we are Brethren to Dragons. But Jer. 9.4. Take ye heed every
one of his Neighbor, etc. I would commend one Scripture to all my Brethren in
the Ministry, 1 Cor. 8.13. A Scripture that I would have writ in letters of
Gold on the Lintel posts of all Ministers doors. Wherefore if meat make my
Brother to offend* I will eat no flesh while the world stands, lest I make my
Brother to offend. Rather then to endanger my soul, lle away with all these
Toys and Gew-gaws.

2. From the terms of dearest affection, dearly Beloved, longed for, etc. Take
this Observation, That it becomes the highest Ministers, much more the lowest,
to bear a most tender, vehement, ardent, melting affection, toward that flock
or people that God has committed to their charge. Thus Paul to the Philippians
in the Text: My brethren, dearly beloved, etc. You shall find Paul in all his
Epistles, in a thawing frame to his people, melting in love unto them: the
Corinthians were so in his heart, not only to live with them, but, if God
called him, to die for them, so abundantly did he love them, 2 Cor. 12 15. That
he would very gladly spend, and be spent for them, carried them in his heart,
and earnestly longed after them all. As for the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 2.8.
He, as a Nurse, tendereth and nourishes them as Children, and is so
affectionately desirous of them, that he is willing to impart to them not only
the Gospel, but his own soul, because they were dear to him. Then,

1. Is this so? ought the Pastors so to love their People? Give me leave to
bespeak you in the words of Job, (in respect of those hundreds of Ministers,
that are to be plucked from their people:) Have pity upon me, have pity upon
me, Oh ye my friends! for the hand of God has touched me, Job 19.21. What will
nothing serve but plucking out our very eyes? our very heart (being so much the
objects of the peoples love?) how sad is it for the Father to be plucked from
the Child, the Shepherd from the Flock, the Nurse from the Child? this is a
lamentation, and ought to be for a lamentation, that there must be a parting
between David and Jonathan, who loved one another as their own souls; this cuts
them to their very heart. And this I may say in respect to my self, I bless
God, I cannot say as she of her Husband, A bloody Husband have thou been unto
me: but a loving Congregation have you been unto me. I know none of you have
desired my destruction, nor to taint my name; never did I hear three in this
Congregation speak of pressing any thing against me, that was contrary to my
Conscience, nor can I say, that there are four in this Parish that did ever
deny to pay me my legal due, blessed be God for such a people; you have not
encroached upon my Conscience, as I hope I have not upon yours. Pastors must
love their people, do not blame them if their hearts be almost broken, when
they are to part with such a people. 2. Must the Pastor love his people? then
the people must love their Pastor. It Is true, it lies in the power of man to
separate Pastor and People, but not to separate their hearts; I hope there will
never be a separation of love, but that will still continue; if we do not see
one another, yet we may love one another, and pray for one another, I hope a
Husband does not cease from loving his Wife because she is absent from him. But
Oh! for my Brethren, hundreds of them think that you are undone, but you are
not undone, though you cannot see as far as other men, you may live in love and
keep your conscience quiet. 3. Must Pastors love their People? then you may see
from hence what should be the grand object of the Pastors affection, i. e. the
People, not what the people have. This is the great enquiry, what is the
Benefice worth? what is the preferment? do they pay well, etc. Whereas we
should not seek so much the Fleece as the Flock, we should not take oversight
of a Congregation for love of their pay, but of their souls; not, it is an
excellent good living, as one said I have heard of, let me have their Tithes,
and let their souls go to the Devil; but as the Apostle, I seek not yours, but
you, 2 Cor. 12.14. And I hope there be many hundreds can say, it has been the
peoples souls they have more loved and affected, than any thing that the people
had. 4. Once more: We must love them, and love them tenderly; why, and yet
leave them? Yes my Beloved, we are so to love our People, as to venture any
thing for them, but our own damnation. I come not here to throw firebrarnds, I
bless God I have a most tender affection for all my Brethren in the Ministry;
and though I am not satisfied my self, yet I condemn no man; I believe there be
many of them do as conscientiously subscribe, as deny to subscribe. I protest
in the fear of God, I cannot subscribe, perhaps it is because I have not that
light as others have; for he that doubts, says the Apostle, is Damned. My
Beloved, I hope you would not have us sin against God and our own consciences:
it is not my Living that I desire, but my Office to serve my Lord and Master;
but if we should, to keep communion with you, lose our communion with God, this
is the ready way to have all our labor and pains lost; but as David said, (and
Oh that I could speak it with as good hopes as David!) Zadock, carry back the
Ark of God, If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me
again, and show me both it and his Habitation, etc. 2 Samuel 15.25. Brethren, I
could do very much for the love I bear to you, but I dare not sin; I know they
will tell you, this is Pride and Peevishness in us, and are tender of our
Reputation, and we would fain all be Bishops, and forty things more: but the
Lord be witness between them and us in this. Beloved, I prefer my Wife and
Children before a blast of air of peoples talk; I am very sensible what it is
to be reduced to a morsel of bread: let the God of Heaven and Earth do what he
will with me, if I could have subscribed with a good conscience, I would; I
would do any thing to keep my self in the work of God, but to sin against my
God, I dare not do it.
3. My Joy and Crown; therefore my dearly Beloved and longed for, my Joy and
Crown, my present Joy and future Crown: my Joy which I value more than a Crown,
my principal Joy. Hence observe this Doctrine, That the fixed, standing,
flourishing growth of Saints in Gospel practice, and Gospel obedience, is, or
ought to be, matter of transcendent Joy to their Pastors. It was so to the
Apostle Paul; Paul heard how they stood, though there was a plague amongst
them, yet they were not infected; and though he was in the Gaol ready to be
beheaded, yet this was his Joy and Crown, that his people did stand; and I hope
my Brethren, it will be our joy and crown to hear of your standing and growth
in Gospel-knowledge and profession: And,

1. If this be so, as John said, I rejoiced greatly, that I found of thy
Children walking in the truth: It should be the prayers and endeavors of all
Pastors, really to love the souls of their People, and to pray for them: that
when they cannot look after the souls of their Children, yet that good Nurses
may be looked out for them; What a joy was it that Moses's Mother was made his
Nurse? and who can tell, it may be, though not out of any merit of ours, yet of
their own clemency, our Governors may give us to be Nurses over our own
Children: but if I cannot Nurse my Child my self, I will wish it well, and as
good a Nurse as I can: far be it that those that are to succeed, should not
prosper: Lord, it shall be the prayers of thy servant, that those that are to
succeed, may have a double and trebble portion of thy spirit, that they may be
both painful and faithful, etc. 2. If the peoples growth in grace and
knowledge, be matter of Joy to a faithful Pastor: then what do you think of
those that hinder their thriving? I shall give you two Scriptures, John 12.19.
The Pharisees therefore said among themselves (they durst not speak publicly;
but who was it against? why, it was against Christ) perceive ye how ye prevail
nothing? behold the world is gone after him. But we will order him for that, we
will lessen his Congregation; if we cannot do that, we will shut the doors
against him; see Mat. 23.13. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites,
for ye shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men: what! shut up the Kingdom of
Heaven against men! what the Pharisees, that pretended they had the Keys of
Heaven, and to be the guides! I, that it is, because there is not room enough
in Heaven for us and them too? No, faith Christ, there is no such matter, for
ye neither go in your selves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in.
I dare not tell you at this time, what it is to shut up the Kingdom of Heaven
against men, you may better imagine it than I can speak it; but thus did the
Pharisees, they would not go in themselves, nor suffer them that were entering
to go in. I remember when I was a Child, we had such a Minister, that would one
Lords day preach up Holiness, and the next Lords day preach against the
practice of Holiness.
And now my Brethren, I come in the next place to speak to the last part, Stand
fast; and because I see a Hurricane a coming, keep your ground, stand fast, and
live in the Lord here, that you may live with him hereafter.

Mr. Lye's Second Sermon, Aug. 17. 1662.
Phil. 4.1. Therefore my Brethren, dearly Beloved and longed for, my Joy and
Crown, so stand fast in the Lord, my dearly Beloved.
FRom this Scripture you have these three Doctrines, 1. That the highest
Officers of the Church of Christ, though they are Rulers of them, yet they are
but brethren to the meanest Saints. 2. That it becomes a true spiritual
Minister of Christ, to have a most vehement, ardent, strong, melting, tender
affection, to that flock or people which the providence of God has committed
to his charge. 3. That the fixed, standing, flourishing, and thriving of that
flock in the profession and practice of Gospel-knowledge and obedience, is
matter of transcendent joy and triumph to such a godly Pastor.
The fourth, which is that I would now prosecute, is this, That it is the grand
and indispensible duty of all sincere Saints, in the most black and shaking
seasons, to stand fast, fixed, and steadfast in the Lord.

This is a grand thing St. Paul had to say to the Philippians, when he was
ready to have his head cut off; for so it was, he was beheaded for the
testimony of Jesus: this is all he had to say, when in Goal, and in Bonds, and
that under Heathen Romans; you are now my Joy, you are now my Crown; Oh! do but
stand, and my Joy, which is but two notes above Gamut, will get to Ela: Oh! do
but stand, and my Crown is studded with Diamonds: we live if you stand, though
we dye when you stand. It is the great and indispensible Duty, etc. Whether
these are black and shaking seasons, I have nothing to say, but I am wholly now
upon your Duty Beloved, and for Gods sake let the words of a seemingly dying
Minister prevail with you. There is a kind of a Maxim among some, that in case
a person dye seemingly and revive again, that the last words that was heard of
that person, when in a rational temper, are the only things that that person
will remember, when brought to life again. It is most probably Beloved, what
ever others may think, but in my opinion (God may work wonders) neither you nor
I shall ever see the faces of, or have a word to speak to one another till the
day of Judgment. Therefore I beseech you hear me, as those that would, and may
live with me to Eternity: mark your Duty, I have spoken something concerning
the Pastors Duty in the morning; now for the peoples. It is the indispensible
duty of all sincere Saints, to stand fast, etc. I confess, I have a love for
the whole Auditory; I have a mess for them, but my Benjamins mess is for those
I once called my own people: you are my Benjamins, I wish I had a greater than
a fifth for you. This proposition I shall first prove, and then secondly
improve.

In the worst of times, in the most shaking seasons, and if I do not greatly
mistake, there is an hour of Temptation threatened by God, now beginning to be
inflicted: if ever you would stand, stand now; and for your comfort let me but
hint, that a Christian may stand comfortably, when he falls sadly, that is, he
may stand by God. when he falls by man: I knew that a great many years ago.

First then, It is our duty to stand. There be Scriptures more then enough to
prove this to be your Duty, Col. 1.12. Stand perfect and complete in all the
will of God. Phil. 1.27. Only let your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel
of Christ; that whether I come and see you, (alas poor Paul, thou come and see
them, thou wast beheaded before thou could come and see them, but) or else be
absent, I may hear of your affairs, that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one
mind striving together (not to pluck out one another throats, no more of that:
but striving together, not against one another, but) for the faith of the
Gospel. So 1 Cor. 15.58. Therefore my Brethren be steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as you know that your labor is
not in vain in the Lord. It Is our Duty to stand. But

2. Wherein must we stand fast? I have no new Doctrine to preach now, I shall
but mind you of what I have formerly spoken, when you would not believe. I
confess I do not begin to be of a new judgment now: and should I be continued
in the Ministry, (a mercy I can hardly hope for) I should be of the same
judgment, and preach this Doctrine, Stand fast.

God will certainly bring the people of God in England, to his own terms, or
else fare them well for ever. What is that we should be steadfast in? I would
advise to a stedfastness. 1. Of Judgment. 2. Of Resolution. 3. Of Fatih. 4. Of
Conscience.
So stand fast in the Lord in your Judgment, in your Resolution, in your
Faith, in your Conscience.

1. I would advise you to a stedfastness of Judgment. Strange Doctrines are
the greatest Fetters that do assault a sound Judgment; they are like waves, if
they do not split they will shake the Ship to purpose: therefore your way is,
to cast Anchor well, to stand firm on the Rock of Truth, I had almost said all
in a word Protestant truth, though the market may rise somewhat high, yet stand
firmly there; while strange Doctrines, like so many impetuous Waves, are
beating upon you, break themselves in pieces they may, but if you stand, can
never hurt you. I am not to begin to warn you against Popery, not that I have
the lest reflection on any thing in the World, but on the Scriptures. I am apt
to think, the wound of the beast must be healed; however, do not you spread a
plaster for the Beast, to heal his wound: Be no more children tossed to and
fro, carried about with every wind of Doctrine, with every wind of windy
Doctrine, by the slight of men, and cunning craftiness, that can cog the die;
notable Gamesters there are in the world, but you must stand steady in
judgment, you must be firm to your principles: I would have you Stars not
Meteors, for Meteors are carried about with every blast of wind. I hope better
things of you, I shall pray God would make you steadfast in judgment. First be
sure to get good principles, and secondly be sure to stand in those principles
that you have got. And though I cannot say but some Tares are sown among this
Parish, yet I bless the Lord for the generality; I hope I may say, I have an
Orthodox Ministry.

2. It Is not enough to stand in judgment, but we must be steadfast to our
Resolution, 1 Cor. 15.58. Be steadfast, unmovable; such as stand firm on some
basis and foundation that does not totter and stagger: if they find you
staggering, to be sure the next moment they look upon you as falling. Be as
they say, of one or both of the poles of the heavens, though all the world
turns, the poles are immovable. If I mistake not, you may see a great turn in
the world, and behold, at this day the greatest turn, that ever was in England;
but yet you must not move, you must not stir, be true to your Resolutions, but
just to your first Love; go on in the Lords work, let nothing take you off. If
I have preached any false Doctrine among you, witness against me at the day of
Judgment; but if the things I have preached be true, stand to the truth; if
you do not witness against my Doctrine, (mine it is not) but rather witness for
it; remember if you leave it, that very Doctrine will witness against you at
the day of judgment. Oh! the excellent Hero, Queen Hester, thus and thus will
I do, and if I perish, I perish. You cannot imagine against how many thousand
temptations a steadfast resolution will guard you.

3. There Is a Stedfastness of Faith too; when we so believe, as that we do not
waver, or do not deviate. Will you give me leave to propose to you (my dear
friends, though my Congregation I cannot call you) that question which our
Savior did unto the Jews, (whom he hated, though I love you) The Baptism of
John, whence was it, from Heaven, or of men? The Doctrines you have heard, have
they been from Heaven, or from men? Answer me, if from men, abhor them; man is
a false Creature, man would make merchandise of your faith and Souls: but if
from Heaven, why then should you not believe them? I bless the Lord, my
Conscience bears me witness, I never did so far propose a Doctrine to you, I
would have you believe without Scripture: if the Doctrines have been from God,
believe them; if not, abhor them, and any of those that shall dare to bring a
Doctrine, but dare not bring the Authority of the Scripture to warrant them.
You may not be like those in Jam. 1.6. That wavereth like a wave of the sea,
driven with the wind, and tossed. The most godly man may stumble in his way,
(i. e.) tread awry; but a wavering minded man is never settled concerning this
way. Blessed be God, I am not now (on this day, that looks as like my dying
day, as can be in the World) to begin to fix upon a Religion, fix upon my way;
I know my way, if God will but keep my steps, and guide me in that way. If God
be God ( I appeal to your Consciences) worship him; if Baal be God, worship
him, do not stand in disputing and doubting; do not say, shall I? shall I? if
the ways you have found be the ways of God, follow them; God has but one way
to Heaven, there is but one truth; if Baal be God, follow Baal, do not stand
wavering; do not consult with flesh and blood; it is an infinite mercy that God
will give any of us to leave Relations, Estates, Congregations, any thing for
Christ; it is an infinite mercy we do not split upon a Rock: Be sure to be
either for God or Baal; a godly man many times halts in his way, but never
halts between two opinions.

4. Stedfastness of Conscience: Indeed the genious of my Ministry has lain
this way, and here I could casily lanch out, but I must be short. I would speak
a word in season to those that are weak, it becomes you to be steadfast in
conscience; then have a God-decreeing, a Christ-redeeming, a Spirit-quickening,
a Gospel-promising, a Heaven-prepared, a God infinitely more ready to save him,
then he can possibly be desirous to be saved by him. Be steadfast in Conscience
against the guilt, the filth of sin, against the temptations of Satan, etc. Let
us draw near with full assurancee of Faith; you can never believe Gods love so
much, as Gods love does engage you to believe, etc. I might add,

5. You must be Steadfast in Conversation; It Is not the running well, but the
running out; it is not the fighting, but the conquering that gives you Title to
the Reward; for you to give a great deal of milk, and throw it down all at
length with your foot, may argue you to have a good dugg, but a bad foot. Never
give those Beasts of Babylon occasion to say, That a man may be a Child of God
in the morning, and a Child of the Devil at night; that we contradict that
Doctrine by our conversation, that we be steadfast,

But why must we be steadfast?

Alas, why? would you have me marshal up all the Reasons? bid me count the
Stars, or number the Sands on the Seashore: There is not an Attribute in God,
not a Precept, Promise, or Threatening in the word, not an Ordinance, not a
Providence, there is nothing in God, or in the Devil, or in Sinners, or our
selves, but all would give a contribution of Arguments to prove the Saints
should be steadfast. I must but hint at a few things. First, I would argue from
Jesus Christ. Believers, you love Christ, and therefore you love the Honor of
Christ; now the honor of Christ is highly engaged in our stedfastness. We
never cast a deeper blot on the Honor of Christ, than when we grow unstedfast;
I need not tell you so, the Jesuits, those meek Papists will tell you so,
those that delight in nothing more than in milk of the Virgin Mary, and in the
blood of Saints; they have enough if you be unsteady. 1. You dishonor Christ
in his sufferings, pray tell me, Believer, why did Christ sweat blood? why did
he dye? why did he undergo what the wrath of Devils could inflict, but for this
end, to make you stand in conquest triumphing? Thus I remember as Joshua, Jos.
13. Come put your feet upon the neck of these Kings, etc. So Christ has dyed
that you might live, that you might stand; and what dishonor to the Eternal
Savior of the world, to a dying Savior, to see a flying Christian. It was
never heard of, that Soldiers should fly before a conquered Enemy, whose legs
were cut off, whose arms were broken, whose swords were taken from them. 2.
It Is a dishonor to the Spirit of Christ, the same Spirit that was with Christ,
in all his Agonies, this very Spirit he has given to Believers, that he might
bring them through with some victory, therefore when we stand not, it is an
high dishonor to Christ's Spirit. 3. It is a dishonor to Christ's Truth: Oh!
let but a Saint fall, and what dishonor does it bring to the Truth: I have but
thought of some late experiments of poor Ministers, that I have heard of,
carried about in triumph, look here is the man, that has done this, that, and
the other thing; and now look here is his -- I cannot excuse Noah for his
Drunkenness, yet methinks it is the part of a Cham, to show his Fathers
nakedness. I remember that one has told me (it is a great truth,) that
Religion never suffers greater wounds than by the hands of her professed
Friends. Oh! what advantage have the wicked Papists taken against us by the
falls of English Professors, both in principle and practice. 4. It is a very
great dishonor to Christ's all sufficiency.
Tell me man, is thy Christ able to protect thee against all evil? and is he
able to supply thee with all good? or is he not? if he be not, then deny him,
and whatsoever thou have said concerning him; if he be, then stand close to
him; In the Mount he will be seen.

2. I would argue from Saints; the infinite advantage, that at long run (I do
not say presently) will redound to those that are steady in judgment, in
resolution, in faith, in conscience, in practice, so far as all these are
conformable to the word of God, and no further. The greatest advantage appears
upon these four grounds.

1. What ever you think, a steady Condition is the safest Condition. 2. The
fullest Condition. 3. The strongest Condition. 4. The freest Condition.
Oh! that I could beat this into my heart, as well as it is in my head: The
safest condition in the midst of dangers; the fullest condition in the midst of
wants; the strongest condition in the midst of assaults; the freest condition
in the midst of straits: I profess in the presence of God, I have felt these
things, and knew them to be truth many years ago.

1. It is the safest condition; never do the Saints take hurt, but by
declining, moving from their center; while at their center the Devil cannot
touch them; departing thence, is like the poor Bird from her nest, every one
has a fling at them. Remember this, let but a man once leave his Scriptural
station, and what Temptation is he able to stand against? it is just like a man
thrown down from the top of an house, no stopping till he come to the bottom, 1 John 5.18. He that is begotten of God keeps himself, and the wicked one
touches him not.

2. It is the fullest condition. Oh my Brethren! Saints living steadfastly on
their foundation, are continually supplied by God, as the fountain does
continually issue out it self into the streams; I know it is best living upon a
single God. How many thousands be there yet living in England, that can tell
you, they never enjoyed more of God, than when they enjoyed least of the
Creature. Some have professed to me, their Prison was to them as a Palace, that
were troubled more with these things, than ever you were, and the God of Heaven
grant you never may.

3. It is the strongest condition. A man that stands steadfast, is like a man on
a Rock, the waters come, they may dash themselves in pieces, but never shall be
able to dash him in pieces, he is fixed on a Rock, and therefore stands. A man
that stands steady to his Scriptural Principles, is like Sampson with his Locks
about him, let all the Philistines come, what cares he, he is able to conquer
them all.

4. It is the freest condition. A man that deserts his principles, is a save to
every Condition, afraid of every Humor, of every Aspine leaf in the world,
thinks all those are Informers that converse with him, is afraid of some
Promooter or other: But he that stands fast, where the Spirit of God is, there
is liberty and freedom: such a man in chains as Paul at Rome, is in a far freer
condition than others, not in that restraint. Well then, it is rational that you
stand; but it may be your lusts and interests can hardly swallow these things;
if you stand you shall not fall; nay, if you do not stand, be sure you shall
fall at last. The next thing I would do, is to apply this truth. Is it the most
important Duty of all sincere Professors in the most shaking seasons, to stand
steadfast in the Lord? Then

First, by way of Lamentation.

1. Over our own Souls. 2. Over hundreds of Congregations.
Lord, we do say hundreds, nay thousands of Congregations, that are this day,
though they do not accompany us in person, yet mingling tears with us, and
especially as I hear in the West of England.

1. Over our hearts. We must stand; that is our Duty. Oh how should it cause us
to lie low! by reason of the instability of our hearts, and their cursed
declining from the true foundation every day. Alas Beloved, this is that God
complains of, They are a Generation whose spirit is not steadfast with God; and
therefore we have very much reason to complain of it: Oh what an unsettled
people have we been! to day we have been apt to cry Hosanna', Hosanna, to the
son of David: to morrow our note is changed, crucify him, crucify him, give
us Barnabas: to day the Lord is God, to morrow Baal: any thing is God, provided
we may keep our Estates. Oh Lord! what will thou do with such a people as this?
certainly it is a lamentation, and ought to be a lamentation, Believe it
beloved, I can now count seven years, if not something more, wherein I have
most clearly expected the days I now see; no way but the severest ways to be
taken with such a false people as we have been. Judge in your own thoughts,
whether we have been true to God or man, to Saints or sinners, to the Church of
God at home or abroad; whether or no this be not matter of Lamentation? 2. With
respect to our Congregations. (It is not against the Law yet to call them our
Congregations) This I confess, I can rather weep than speak too; I cannot speak
my heart is too big for my head here. Lord, is it the duty of people, of saints
to stand, to be steadfast? how then should we mourn over their poor souls, that
because their Pillars are taken away, must needs for ought we know Fall, unless
thou do support them: what Lord, do thou complain of a flock of sheep that
are scattered? there is no wonder in it, their Shepherd is gone. Do you look
on it as a strange thing, to see a poor Ship tossed here and there in the Sea,
when her Pilot is destroyed? why mothers, is it a strange thing for your
children to fall, and knock their arms, legs, their brains out? why their
mother is taken from them: Oh poor people! good God provide for this
Congregation, I, and for this City, that (let defacing, abominable wretches say
what they will) is certainly one of the best Cities God has in the world; and
therefore they hate it so desperately, because God loves it, and because they
hate that God that loves it. I bless God, I can speak of my own people, they
are not a mad pestifferous people for the most of them. How many thousand have
their hearts at their mouths, now at this time before God in England? Alas,
alas, that we should have our Seers carried away from us; but what think you,
when poor people shall be exposed to greater temptations, to an Ulcer in the
very Kidneys, to a Plague in the very Heart, or Head; you now fear it, but when
you feel it, what then?
2. By way of Exhortation, Beloved, I remember good Jacob, when he was come
into Egypt, ready to die, calls his Children together, and before he dies,
blesses his children. I cannot say you are my children, but I can say in the
strength of God, you are dearer to me than the children of my own bowels. I
remember what poor Esau said, have thou but one blessing my Father? bless me,
even me also, Oh my Father! Oh Beloved! I have a few blessings for you, and for
Gods sake take them as if them dropped from my lips when dying; it is very
probable we shall never meet more while the day of Judgment; what ever others
think, I am utterly against all irregular ways; I have ( I bless the Lord)
never had a hand in any change of Government in all my life; I am for prayers,
tears, quietness, submission, and meekness, and let God do his work, and that
will be best done when he does it. Therefore be exhorted to stand fast in the
Lord; my own people hear me now, though you shall never hear me more, be
exhorted to stand fast in the Lord: you are not a schismatical, heretical
people; I do not know the least person among you inclining to Popery: therefore
be exhorted, as ye have been a people that have waited upon the Ordinances of
God, that have not persecuted your poor Ministers, that have made it your
design and business to live lovingly, quietly, and as it becomes Christians; (
I am confident a Minister may live as comfortably among you, as among any
People in England) So be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work
of the Lord, for as much as you know that your labor shall not be in vain in
the Lord. Here I had prepared, I confess, several arguments to have moved you
to this stedfastness.

1. I could have told you, that withdrawing of any one of you back, you will
meet with great temptations, which will very much unfit you for Heaven. If any
man or woman draw back, my soul (says God) shall have no pleasure in him: I
could have urged you with examples from the Heathens. Alexander being in Indea,
bid them tell him the greatest rarity in their Country; Sir, go tell them, say
they, when you come to Greece, there are many here that cannot be forced by the
prowess of Alexander to change their minds: I know there are some here, that
cannot be easily persuaded to change their Religion. Says Lactantius, Our very
women torment their tormenters: I would never desire a more able Disputant,
than a woman against a Monck.

I could tell you of those enjoyments God has put on you, our miseries have
been great, but our mercies have been greater; I could tell you of six troubles
and of seven; of six, wherein God has stood by, and of seven, wherein he has
not forsaken; and the truth is, he cannot forsake his people, he may forsake
them as for comfort, he will never forsake them as for support; let him lay on
a burden, he will be sure to strengthen the back.

3. I hope, it is not dangerous if I tell you, you are engaged to God; there
are vows upon you, Baptismal vows, to say no more, you have sworn to God, you
have lifted up your hands; you are those that have undertaken that you would be
true to God to your lives end: if these vows have been any way strengthened,
Oh! remember Zedekiahs case, Ezekiel. 17.18, 19. Seeing he despised the Oath by
breaking the Covenant (when lo he had given his hand) and has done all these
things, be shall not escape: therefore thus says the Lord God, as I live,
surely mine Oath that he has despised, and my covenant that he has broken,
even it will I recompense upon his own bead. Remember it, you may play fast and
loose with man, you must not think ever to carry it away, by playing fast and
loose with God.

4. If you should not stand, you lose all you have wrought, all your prayers,
tears, professions, practices, sufferings, are all gone if you give out at
last, etc,

5. While you stand by God, God has promised to stand by you; and the truth
is, I have but one God, it is no great matter for all the tiles in Worms: There
be a thousand Devils, but all those Devils are in one chain, and the end of
that chain is in the hand of one God: Oh! God will show himself strong, 2 Cor.
1.6* 9. For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro through the whole earth, to
show himself strong in the behalf of them, whose heart is perfect toward him.

Quest. But what shall I do to stand?

Answ. 1. If ever you would stand, if ever you woul'd be firm standing
Christians indeed, take heed you be not light and proud Christians; a feather
will never stand against a whirl wind; error and profaneness are most apt to
breed in proud hearts. The Proud and Blasphemers are put together; (2 Timothy 2.2.)
Be but humble Christians, that is the way to be standing ready Christians; if
ever you would be steady in your stations, you must below in your own eyes, do
not you go and judge. And now, we shall have another kind of Religion come up,
as we have had it a great while, such a man cannot be an honest man, alas, he
is a Presbyterian, he is an Independent, he is an Anabaptist, etc. Now, all
your great business will be, such a man cannot be good, an honest man, for he
does not Conform; on the other side, he cannot be an honest man, for he does
Conform. These are poor things; I bless God, I lay not the stress of my
salvation upon on these: It is true, I cannot in conscience conform, but I do
not lay the stress of Salvation on it, as I did not lay the stress of my
Salvation on my being a Presbyterian; I confess I am so, and have been, it has
been my unhappiness to be always on the sinking side, yet I lay not the stress
of my Salvation upon it. It is my Conscience, but it may be I have not so much
light as another man, and I profess in the presence of God, could I conform
without sin to my own Conscience, I would; if I should do any thing against my
conscience, I should sin and break my peace, and conscience, and all, and never
see good day: do not then spend the strength of your zeal for your Religion in
censuring others. That man that is most busy in censuring others, is always
least employed in examining himself. Remember good John Bradford, he would not
censure Bonner, nor Gardner, but says he, they called Jo. Bradford, the
hypocritical Jo. Bradford, etc. I do not speak this, as though I can or did in
Conscience approve of those things, for which I must suffer, that I cannot
approve of them, but take off people from those things, that are so far from
the foundation: look you but to the main things, look into your own hearts,
examine them, and then you need not be much persuaded to look about to others.

2. You must take heed you be not loose Christians, will you remember one thing
from me, (the God of Heaven grant you never live to see it verified.) a loose
Protestant, is one of the fittest persons in the world to make a strict Papist.
Tell me not of his Protestantism, being a drunkard, it is because his King or
Country are Protestants where they live. There is no Religion in a loose
liver: if ungodliness be in the heart, it is no difficult thing for error to
get into the heart. A loose heart can best comply with loose principles: see,
if they will not be of any Religion in the world that's uppermost; let the Turk
prevail, they would soon be of his Religion.

3. Take heed of being a worldly Christian: Oh! this is the David, that has
slain his ten thousands. A worldly heart will be bought and sold upon every
turn to serve the Devils turn. Come to a worldly heart, and but promise him
thirty pieces of silver, he will betray his Savior. The Temptations of the
world are great upon us, at this time, you that are Husbands, and Parents, know
it; the world is a great temptation; but if we be overcome by the world, and
the world not overcome by us, we shall never be able to overcome any one
Temptation that is offered to us. Therefore that is an admirable support, In the
world you shall have Tribulation, but be of good cheer, I have overcome the
world: I have overcome the world for you; and likewise I have overcome the
world in you. Oh Lord! if thou will but overcome the love and fear of the
world, if thou will but arm us against the smiles of the world, then come what
will, we shall stand steadfast.

4. Take heed you be not Hypocritical Christians, i.e. take heed you do not
receive the Truth, and only the Truth, and not receive the Truth in the love
of that Truth, These. 3.10. You have received the Truth, but have you received
the Truth in the love of that Truth which you have received? want of this, is
that damnable occasion to Popery; And with all deceiveableness of
unrighteousness in them that perish, because they received not the love of the
Truth, that they might be saved, etc. It is just with God that they should fall
into errors, whose hearts did never love real Truths; better never received the
Truth, then to receive it, and not in the love of it.

5. Take heed of being ventrous and God-tempting Christians; What is that? when
do I tempt God? I tempt God when I run into a Pesthouse, and say, God will
preserve me from the Plague. Take heed of running upon temptations to sin,
whether it be in principles or in practice. I could tell you of two Spiritual
Pest-houses in England, if I had time; for principles one, and for practice
another: I do not say that I mean Play Houses, on the one hand, or Mass-houses
on the other hand. Certainly Brethren, I read of Julian, that wicked bloody
Apostate, that he sunk into that his Apostasy first, by going to hear Libanius
preach, mistake me not, I am not against your going to hear the Ministers of
Christ, for a man may be a true Minister, though he be a bad man; all the World
can never answer the instance of Judas, who was a true Minister, though a bad
man; while I plead for the truth of his Ministry, I do not spread a skirt over
the wickedness of his life. The Scribes and Pharisees set in Moses chair, hear
them.

But that which I mainly aim at, is this, do not you go, and run, and venture
your selves upon temptations: you have heard of a superstitions or idolatrous
Worship, you have a months mind to see this, and what if so be when you are
found in Satan's way, Satan should lay his paw on you, and claim to you, what do
you there in Satan's ground? would you be found when you come to dye, in a
Playhouse, or in such a place, where the true God is Idolatrously worshipped?
It is a great truth, if you would not be found in the Devils power, do not be
found in the Devils pound. Brethren, we must know Satan is busy enough to
tempt us, we need not go to tempt him. Eve lost all that she had by hearing one
Sermon, but it was from the Devil. Therefore, if you would not have you pockets
picked, do not trade amongst Cheaters, 2 Timothy 6.3, 5. If any man teach
otherwise, etc. (than that ye have received, and we Preached) from such
withdraw thy self, that is a good, honest, laudable separation, from such
withdraw thy self.

6. Where God does not find a mouth to speak, do not you find an ear to hear,
nor an heart to believe, (pray mind it, this I am sure is of concernment) this
is one of the grand points in my Cards or Compass, on which I hope I shall
venture all. If any man come with a Doctrine, not according to the Word of God,
let him carry it whither he will, what have I to do with it? either you come
from God or no, if you do, show me his Word, and I Will believe it, if not, open
your pack where you please, etc. where God does find a mouth to speak, where
you have not a Precept, Promise, Threatening or Example in the Word of God, let
them talk their hearts out, it is nothing to me, to my Religion, to my
Salvation.

Object. But what ground have you for this?

Answ. Jesuit, I will tell you my ground: this is my great hold I have against
Popery, could they convince me of this, That I must believe with an implicit
faith, because they say it, I think it would not be long before I turned Papist.

Quest. But why must I not believe it with an implicit faith?

Answ. Look you into these three great Scriptures, Mat. 15.2. Why do thy
Disciples transgress the traditions of the Elders? The Jews come and tell
Christ, he was not a true Son of the Church of the Jews, he was disobedient to
the Church of the Jews; why? thou have Disciples that walk not as they ought;
what do they do? they commit an unpardonable sin, they transgress the
traditions of the Elders, they break one of the greatest Commandments: what is
that tradition? They wash not their hands when they eat bread: This was the
great sin, and they charge it on him, eat with unwashed hands; why bring you in
this Tradition? What have you to say to it? what is that to the purpose? prove
Jesus Christ that there is any thing in the word of God that is against
washing? but prove you out of the word of God, where they are bound to wash
before they eat? if you will give out your imposition, make out your
institution, and let me tell you, you talk of Tradition, but first you set up
an Altar God never thought of; and secondly, you pull down Gods Altar; Why do
you all transgress the Commandments of God by your Tradition? for God
Commanded, saying, Honor thy Father and thy Mother; and he that curses father
or mother let him die the death; but ye say, whosoever shall say to his father
or mother, it is a gift, by whatsoever thou might be profited by me, and
honor not your Father or Mother, he shall be free; thus have ye made the
Commandment of God of none effect by your Tradition: ye Hypocrites, you were
told of it long ago, well did Esaias prophecy of you, saying, This people
draws nigh unto me with their mo^th, and honors me with their lips, but
their heart is far from me, They draw near, wash their hands, wash their cups,
and have filthy souls, they honor me with their lips, etc. But though their
principle, their heart is bad, their worship is good, is it not so? no, In vain
do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men. So then my
Brethren, remember, all those that teach for Doctrines, the precepts of men, in
vain do they worship God. Here Is an innocent Command, not against the Word of
God; but this Command you must wash before you eat, if you do not wash, you do
transgress the tradition of the Elders: but let you starve Father and Mother,
if you give but to the Church, to a Nunnery, Friery, etc. it is all one; so
that all those that will for Doctrines teach the traditions of men, will render
the Commandments of God of none effect, in vain do they worship me. Look
therefore wherever God does not find a tongue to speak, do not you find an ear
to hear, nor an heart to believe. Christians, if you expect Christ's
benediction, always call aloud for Christ's institution, so Col. 2.18, 19. one
of the greatest steps you have against Popery, Let no man beguile you of your
reward in a voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels, intruding into those
things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind, etc. Deuteronomy.
12.13. What things soever I command you, observe to do it, thou shall not add
thereto, nor diminish from it. There are no Wens in the body of Gods Precepts,
therefore none of them to be cut off. You must not deal with Gods Ordinances,
as that Tyrant Procustes did with men, if they were too long for his Bed, he
would cut them shorter; if too short, he would pull their limbs out of joint to
make them longer. Never think your selves in conscience bound to lend an ear to
that which God does not find a mouth to speak.

7. Would you stand fast? beware of shaking Doctrines: what are those? there
are a great many of such Doctrines, that are shaking; give me leave to instance
in three or four.

1. As you love your souls, beware of Doctrines that tend to, and preach up
licentiousness, looseness, and profaneness: should any tell you, you may
lawfully violate and profane the Sabbath, do not believe it; the doctrine of
the Gospel, is a doctrine of godliness: it teaches us to deny ungodly and
worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godlily in this present
world; therefore if you find any Doctrine at any time, that should have the
least tendency to encourage you in any sin, know it is a doctrine against the
Gospel 2. Where ever you find any Doctrine that shall tend to the lifting up of
a man's free will, and debasing of Gods free grace, know, it is a wicked
doctrine, and against the genius of the Gospel; perhaps the Papists will tell
you, you are alive, Paul tells us we are dead: they say that we can do any
thing, many things that we talk to the world, we cannot do; they say, That we
can save our selves and close with Christ if we will, whereas the Apostle tells
us, 1 Cor. 1.14. The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God,
for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them because they are
spiritually discerned. It may they will tell you, a natural man may love God
with his heart really, as so, and savingly, whereas the Apostle tells you, Romans
8.7. The carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject unto the Law
of God, neither indeed can be. Remember it in all those doctrines wherein we
agree with those whom we call Pelagians, and Arminians, so far we agree with
the Jesuits, and the worst of Papists. 3. As you would avoid Hell, avoid all
those doctrines that would lift up self-righteousness, and debase the
righteousness of Christ; I fear I shall never be in that capacity that I would,
to stand you in stead in this particular. I confess I am against forty things
in Popery, but my soul is here engaged; if that doctrine be a truth, I never
expect salvation by God; either I must be saved by Christ alone, or else I must
never be saved by Christ at all: though Christ will never save me without
sanctification, yet Christ never intended my sanctification should merit his
salvation; be as holy as you can, as if there were no Gospel to save; yet when
you are as holy as you can, you must believe in Christ, as if there were no Law
at all to condemn you. Come and tell me of the merit of Saints, etc. I will
believe that truth, when I believe the Whore of Babylon to be Christ's Spouse,
see Phil. 3.9. 2 Cor. 5.21.
8. Why should you stand? you must be praying Christians: I confess when most
of my strings are broken, there is yet one holds; there is a Spirit of Prayer
(remember Atheist) among the Saints of God, I can pray yet* and I had rather
stand against the Canons of the wicked, than against the prayers of the
righteous. Oh! pray that you enter not into temptation; or, if we enter into
temptation, Lord, let not the temptation enter into us; pray, if possible, let
this cup pass from me, but if not, let it not poison me, but let me be bettered
by it, and in due time deliver me from it. I believe, it would be a great
temptation to you, if it should be said to you, you shall trade with no man any
more, etc. you have enjoyed these and these comforts, bid them adieu for ever,
you shall have no more to do with them; this would be a temptation. Temptations
and Trials are great, and certainly where they are so, prayer should be strong.
There is no relief to be expected on earth, all our relief is to be expected
from God, and that is to be obtained by prayer. Pray that God would be pleased
above all things in the world to make you sincere: would you be steadfast in
your profession, you must be sincere in your practice. To him that has shall
be given, that is a comfort; to him that has but truth of grace, to him shall
be given growth of grace. Would you be steaddy Christians, then make it your
great work to attend the Ordinances, that God has prescribed to make you
steady Christians: you were told of this many years ago, concerning attending
the Ordinances of God.

Quest. Pray what are those?

Answ. 1. There are secret Ordinances: it may be thou can not be so much in
the Pulpit as thou would; Oh! be more in thy Closet; it may be thou shall not
have so many opportunities to hear so many Lectures, be more conscientious in
thy meditations in secret: it may be thou shall not have that freedom with God
in public, be more earnest with God in private.

2. Mind your families more than ever; you have your Children and Servants call
aloud upon you. How many grave faces do I see at this time, that can tell me,
Sir, I remember some twenty or thirty years ago, you could not pass the
streets, but here was one Family repeating the Word of God, another singing the
praises of God, another praying to God, another conferring concerning the
things of God; at that time we had not so much foolish absurd excursion into
streets and ^ields as now. O! for the Lords sake begin to take them up now, let
the Amorite, Perisite, and Jebusite do what they will, but oh! for you and your
children, and your servants, do you serve the Lord; up again with those godly
Exercises; when we cannot hear a Sermon, then read a Sermon; if we cannot hear
a Sermon well Preached, our Godly Parents would engage us to read a Sermon well
Penned; if nothing new, let the word repeated and meditated call to mind what
you have heard; Oh! reduce your selves to your Christian frame; let the
debauched Atheists know, that they have something among you to be feared;
that is your prayers: let them know, that though you have not those
opportunities you have had, yet you will improve those you have. And you
Masters of this Parish, for Gods sake, keep in your Servants on this day more
than ever, you are to be accountable for their souls; and they will give you a
thousand thanks when they come to age, especially at the day of judgment; Oh!
then blessed be God I had such a Master, blessed be God I had such a Mistress,
blessed be God I had such Parents.

Quest. But then for public Ordinances, what would you have us do?

Answ. 1. Where evere Christ does find a tongue to speak, I am bound to find an
ear to hear, and an heart to believe. I would not be mistaken, I bless the Lord
I am not turned out of my Ministry for being a Scismatick I know Schism is a
sin, nor know I any of my Brethren that are so; do not mistake us therefore, do
not go and tell the Jesuits we are Schismatics, for we are none: But this I
would advise, (I speak as though I were dying) do whatsoever lies in your
yower, to hear such whom you think to be godly: beg of God, be earnest with him
that he would give Pastors after his own heart, and whom God has sent: not
such as may daub with untempered mortar, and not such as may prophecy lies in
the Name of the Lord; not such as may be clouds without water, but such as may
be guides of the blind, burning and shining Lights, faithsul Stewards. What
shall you do? what did you twenty or thirty years ago? what did the good old
Puritans do? they were not Schismatics. But as much as lies in you possible,
hear them whom in your conscience God does hear; Oh! then expect the Word of
God should come to your hearts, when you have ground to believe it comes from
your Pastors heart: I must confess, I intend to do the same, when put into the
same condition with you; I acknowledge I am bound in Conscience to hear the
Word of God, but I must take care whom I hear, hear those by whom God speaks, I
hope God will grant several such.

Take but this advice more, and I have no more to say. Whatever abuse you find
either in Paster, in People, or wherever you find it, do not go as your old
use have been, to rail, calumniate, back-bite, and speak behind their backs,
this is wicked and ungodly; but do every one according as God prescribes us
that are members of any visible Church; what is that? If I know any thing
against my Brother, do not go and make a sputter and a noise, and back-bite;
but take the rule of Christ, If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell
him of his fault between him and thee alone; if he shall hear thee, thou have
gained thy brother; but if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or
two more, and if he neglect to hear them, tell it to the Church, and leave the
blood at their door, thou have freed thine own soul. I hope by Gods grace I
shall do so. Thus I have now spoken something from this Scripture, I cannot
speak what I desire; for besides the exhausting of my Spirits, there is
something to be done after, viz. a Funeral Sermon: I shall say no more, but
only this; The God of Heaven be pleased to make you mind these plain things; I
can truly say this, I have not spoken one w^rd that I remember, which I would
not have said to you if I had been a dying, and being to go to God as soon as
gone out of the Pulpit, and the God of peace be with you; only mind that one
thing, When God does not find a tongue to speak, do not you find an ear to
hear, and an heart to believe.

Mr. Mede's Farewell Sermon.
1 Cor. 1.3. Grace be unto you, and peace from God the Father, and from our
Lord Jesus Christ.
YOu will wonder, possibly, that I should pitch on the Apostles Salutation for
my valediction, and make that the conclusion of my Preaching, which he made the
beginning of his Writing, and therefore I have made a double Plea for it. I
find that this was a Form of Blessing peculiar to this Apostle, both in the
beginning and end of this Epistle; for as there is scarcely one Epistle but
begins with it, so many end with it likewise; as in Ephesians. 6.24. The grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. So in 2 These. 3.18. The grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ be with your all. So that I find the Apostle to use it
frequently at the beginning and end of his writing; I thought as I made it the
matter of my prayer for you in the beginning, so I might make it my farewell to
you in the ending, and therefore Grace be unto you, and peace from God our
Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.

Besides this, as Jacob said to his Benjamin concerning his Venison, when his
Father asked him, how he found it so quickly? he answered, because the Lord thy
God brought it to me: The same I may say of this Scripture; for considering of
what subject I should speak in my last labors here among you, the Scripture
came to my thoughts, and opening the Book came immediately to my sight; and
therefore I may say God brought it to me; which I no sooner looked upon, but
methinks I saw the Apostle on Mount Gerizim, and his mouth filled with
blessings; for what greater blessings can a man wish, than that which
comprehends all blessings, and that is grace and peace. Being therefore now to
part, I thought to go to the top of the Mount, and leave with you grace and
peace from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ. In which words there
are two generals.

1. A double Blessing desired. 2. A double Spring discovered. 1. A double
Blessing desired; and that is grace and peace. Grace is of all Blessings the
richest, peace is of all comforts the sweetest; both these the Apostle begs for
the Corinthians; and so do I for you. Beloved, Grace be unto you, and Peace
from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ. 2. Here is a double
Fountain discovered; and that is the Father and the Son, God and Christ. The
Father is called the God of Grace: the Son is called the Prince of Peace; not
that Grace is from the Father without Peace, not Peace from the Son without
Grace, but both Grace and Peace are from God the Father, through the Lord Jesus
Christ.

The Order of the words is worth nothing, Grace be to you and Peace; First
grace, then peace, for there can be no peace without grace, nor grace, but
there will be peace: but there can be no true peace but from God, not from God,
but as he is a Father, not from God as a Father, but as our Father, and he
cannot be said to be our Father, but through our Lord Jesus Christ: and
therefore he said, Grace be unto you, and Peace from God our Father, through
our Lord Jesus Christ: both are manifested as a golden Chain linked together,
not grace without peace, nor peace without grace, but both enjoined together,
to cram the believers Souls with grace and peace. Now from the Order of the
Words, we might raise several Observations.

1. That Peace is the fruit of Grace. 2. That Grace and Peace are both from
God. 3. That Love which is the spring of Grace and Peace, is from God as a
Father. 4. That we share not in his Love, but only as he is our Father: All is
from Propriety. First, Our Father, then grace and peace from God our Father.
5. That God is our Father only through Christ.
But before we draw any thing from the Text by way of Observation, we will
speak to the terms by way of Explication. Grace be unto you: What is here meant
by Grace? This is a sweet word, it perfumes the Breath, it cherishes the
Conscience, it warms the heart, it ravishes the Soul; as the Spouse was
ravished with ^ayes of Christ's glory, so Christ revives the Soul with one of
his gracious rays discovered to the heart: Grace is the life of the Soul, thou
art dead till Grace quickens thee, thou art lost till Grace find thee, undone
till Grace saves thee; Grace is the Manna of Angels, the spiritual Bread which
those that are holy in being are nourished with, and subsist by: Angels live on
Grace, and stand by Grace; Man that shares in the Grace of God is made fellow
Commoner with Angels, eats Angels food, and shares in Angels blessings: Grace
is the substance of the Scripture, the end of the Law, the fullness of the
Gospel: Gregory calls it the Heart and Soul of God, I am sure Grace is the
Heart and Soul of the Word; it is a little Word, but it comprehends all good:
here is more than Homers Iliads in a Nut-shell, it is the Epitome of all the
good in Heaven an Earth; name any Word that signifies good in the Soul here, or
hereafter, but it is found in the Index, in this little word Grace: Grace
comprehends Gods love to us, and our love to God, and as Gods love to us is the
sum of all Mercy; so our love to God, is the sum of all Duty; Grace is the
new birth of the Soul, whereby it takes up another nature, a new nature, a
spiritual Godlike nature; as Christ was born and thereby took on him the nature
of man, and was made flesh; so man is born by grace, and thereby takes upon him
the nature of God, and is made Spirit: and here you have at once the great
mystery of Grace in the lowest debasement of a Savior, and the highest
advancement of a Sinner, for the Lord Christ could not be more debased, than to
be born; it was nothing so great an abasement for Christ to dye, as for him to
be born, for being once made man, it is no wonder for to die, but being the
great God, it is a wonder that ever he should be made man. Lo here is the
debasement of Christ; yet if he had been born to a Crown, to Honor, it had
been something, but he was born to shame, to sorrow, and death; but man by
grace is born to a Crown, to a Kingdom, he has a title to all the glory and
blessedness of heaven, from the first moment of his new birth; So it is in the
Text, Grace be unto you and Peace.

Peace, in Scripture, is a very comprehensive term, it carries in it all
happiness. It was the common greeting of the Jews, Peace be unto you. Thus
David by his Proxy salutes Nabal, peace be to thee, and thy house; and the
Apostle here alludes to this form of salutation, that he might mix new
Testament mercy to old Testament manners; he first styles Grace, before peace;
as Jacob did with his Venison, he made it a savory meat, such as Isaac loved.
Peace is the glory of Heaven, in the bosom of God, and brought into the world
in the arms of Angels; the first peace you read of in the Gospel, was peace by
the Administration of Angels, Luke 2.3* 4. And suddenly there was with the
Angels a multitude of the heavenly Host, praising and saying, glory be to God
in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men. And when our Lord
Christ first sent out his Disciples, this was the Doctrine that he bid them
preach, Mat. 10.12, 13. When you come into a house, salute it, and if it be
worthy, let grace and peace come upon it. Mark here by the way, our Lord Jesus
Christ is no enemy to good manners, he would not have Christians to be Clowns,
which is the use of some among us, who would have their Religion quarrel with
good manners; no, but In whatsoever city or town you enter, salute it, and let
grace, peace come upon it: that is, wish peace to them, saying, the peace of
God be upon this place, upon the head and hearts of all in it. So that peace is
both a Gospel-salutation when Ministers and people meet, and it is a
Gospel-valediction, when the Minister and the People parts. So did the Apostle,
and so do I now, Grace be with you and Peace.

I observe in Mat. 10.13, 14. our Lord bids his Disciples when they enter into
a house, If the house be worthy, to let their peace come upon it, but if they
be not worthy, let grace, peace return unto you. Instead of leaving peace with
them, to shake off the dust of their feet against them: that is, to show that
God will shake them off as dust, and tread them under feet as fuel. My
Brethren, your diligent attendance on the Word at this place has comfortably
prevented that part of my charge, to shake off the dust of my feet; for, how
beautiful have the feet of a poor worm been unto you, being shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of Christ? And therefore seeing our Lord Jesus Christ
said, If they be worthy of their peace, abide with them; on this account, I
wish to you, grace and peace from God our father, and from our Lord Jesus
Christ. But what is that peace? Its the beauty of Union, the harmony of the
Creation, the pleasure of Life, the feast of a good Conscience, it is that which
makes life sweet, and death easy: Peace sweetens all our possessions, and all
our afflictions, without this the fullness of the world is a burden; with this,
poverty and emptiness is a pleasant Companion: without this, our bread is
gravelled with sourness, and our water mingled with bitterness; with this green
Herbs become a feast, and our water is turned into wine; peace, it is the most
beautiful creature in the world, And therefore it is beloved of all, courted of
all, many seek her but few there be that enjoy her, they do not go the right
way to find her; for, In the ways of Righteousness is peace. Peace is the
seminary of all blessings temporal, as Grace is of all blessings spiritual, in
grace you have employed all Holiness, in peace all happiness; in grace all
inward, in peace all outward blessings, grace and peace are the Alpha and Omega
of all blessings, as God i^ of all beings; no ble^^ing comes before grace, and
no blessing lasts longer: Then see in this phrase of speech, the Apostle wishes
upon them, as I do upon you all, the blessings both of time and eternity, and
yet he wished not more to them, than God promised to give them, 1 Timothy 4, 8.
For godliness has the promise of this life, and that which is to come; grace
be unto you, and peace, etc. not one without the other: though a man may have
peace without grace, as in a time of dissertion, or temptation, and a man may
have peace without grace, as in a secure and unregenerate Condition; grace
without peace is often found in a troubled conscience; and peace without grace
is often found in a seared conscience, as grace without peace is very
uncomfortable, so peace without grace is very unprofitable; like Rachel,
beautiful, but barren: therefore the Apostles desires ye should have both Grace
and Peace: we say, the Sun and Sali are the most useful creatures in the world;
the one for shining, the other for seasoning. (My Brethren) grace and peace are
the Christians Sun and Salt; grace is the light of their souls, and peace is
the savor of their comforts; grace shines through all their faulties, and
Peace seasons all their mercies. The blessings of God are become as twins, as
Christ said of the Spouse, Cant. 4.2. She is like a flock of sheep that are
even shorn, which come up from the washing, whereof every one bear twins, and
none is barren among them; grace and peace here are knit together by the spirit
of God in a sacred knot not to be untied; as Castor and Pollux, when seen
together, portend happiness to the Mariner: so when Grace and Peace are found
in a soul together, they portend the highest security and blessing to the
Believer; they are said in Scripture to be bound together; where God gives the
one, he never denies the other: if he gives you the upper spring of Grace, he
will give you the nether spring of Peace, for they go both together. If he
gives you the Dew of Heaven, you need not question the fatness of the Earth: if
his right hand be full of mercy, his left hand shall not be empty. Therefore
grace and peace be with you from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.

Grace has a double sense, either for the grace of God to us, that justifies
us, or the grace of God in us that sanctifies us: Now there is a different
flowing from each of these, but still it is grace and peace.

First, justifying grace, has a peace attending that, Romans 5.1. Being
justified by faith, we have peace with God. So far as we have confidence in
justifying grace, there remains no conscience of condemning sin. As there can
be no bitterer War than between conscience and the ear, so there can be no
sweeter Peace, than when Mercy and Peace meet together, and when Conscience and
Peace kiss each other: The former is the taste of Heaven, the latter is the
perambulation of Heaven; both which the Believer shares in upon his
Justification by faith. If Christ had peace, who was made our sin, needs must
the Believer have peace, who is made the Righteousness of God in him.

Seconly, Sanctifying grace has a peace attending it, and this peace differs
from the former, as the Root from the Fruit. The peace of Justification is a
radical Peace, the root of Peace; but the Peace of Sanctification is the bud,
the blossom of the Tree: the former flows from the blood of Christ sprinkled on
the Conscience, the latter from the conformity that is between the Word and the
Will, between the Commands and the Conscience; As many as walk according to
this Rule, grace be unto them and peace, Gal. 6.16. So that Peace is the fruit
of sanctifying Grace. Now as the blood of the Pascal-Lamb, (which was a token
of peace) was not to be struck on the posts of the Egyptians, but upon the
posts of the Israelites; so neither is the blood of sprinkling, which brings
perfect peace, to be struck on the Posts of the carnal Sinner, but on the Posts
of the true Believer, an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile; no Grace,
no Peace, that is Gods Law. How can a sinner have peace in a state of sin, when
God and conscience, when Word and conscience, when Law and conscience, and all
the Attributes of God are against a sinner? No Peace says my God to the
wicked. Pray mark that chapter, it begins with the peace, and ends in no peace.
In ver. 2. it is said, He shall enter into peace, that is, the Righteous: in
the last verse, There is no peace to the wicked. It is the state of Grace that
is the only state of peace. And thus I pass from the double Grace desired,
Grace and Peace; to the double Fountain discovered, God our Father, and our
Lord Jesus Christ.

But here is a question to be answered, If Grace and Peace be from God the
Father, then how is it said to be from Christ? and if from Christ, how then
from God the Father?

Answ. It Is a known Rule, that the transial external works of God are
attributed to all the three Persons in the Trinity; the same works that are
attributed to the Father, are also attributed to the Son; and the same works
are attributed to the Son, the same also to the Father: so Grace and Peace are
here ascribed both to God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ; that is, they
are both from Mercy, and from Merit. From Mercy on Gods part to us, from Merit
on Christ's part for us; they are from God the Father, because he wills them to
us, from God the Son, because he works them in us: they are from God to Christ,
from Christ to us; they are from God the Father originally, and from Christ
derivatively, and to us actually: God the Father is the fountain of all Grace
and Peace, Christ as Mediator is the Conduit of all Grace and Peace; Man in
union to Christ is the cistern into which these streams of Grace and Peace
runs; God wills Grace and Peace to us, and Christ works them in us; God gives
Grace and Peace to be applied to the Creature, this is from the love of the
Father, but the Application of this peace to the soul, is from the Merit of
Christ the Redeemer: Thus you see there is a double spring of this double
blessing. Time will not serve me further: The only Observation, is;

That all the Grace and Peace which Believers share in, is derived from God the
Father through our Lord Jesus Christ: these three things opened will clear
this; 1. That Grace and Peace are the Believers privilege. 2. That the
Fountain of this grace and Peace is from God the Father. 3. That it is not
given out from God the Father but through Christ.


First, That Grace and Peace are the Saints priviled^e; if Grace is, then Peace
is. But Grace is the privilege of every Believer, and that whether you look
upon it as taken from the love and favor of God to us; this is the Believers
privilege. God can as well forget Christ at his right hand, as cease his love
and favor to the soul of a Believer; the Believers title to all their
blessings arises out of this never-failing love of God; or if you ask grace
for the fruit of Gods love to the soul, still it falls to the Believers
privilege, Vocation, Justification, Adoption, pardon of Sin, purging from Sin,
strength against sin, Holiness, Faith, Love, Obedience, Perseverance; all these
are the privileges of every Believer; nay, a man cannot be a Believer without
any one of them, they are as essential to the Being of a Christian, as reason
to the Being of a man.

Secondly, As Grace, so Peace is the Believers privilege: There is peace
external, peace supernal, peace internal, and peace eternal: There is peace
external, this peace with men; there is peace supernal, that is peace with God;
there is peace internal, that is peace with Conscience: all these three are to
be had here upon earth; and then there is peace eternal, and that is only to be
had in Heaven. The Apostle here does not exclude the former, but chiefly
intends the latter: peace with man is a good thing to be desired, but peace
with God and Conscience is much more to be desired. Peace with God is the
spring of all things both within and without, both below and above, both in
time and eternity: so says Job, if he gives peace, who then can make tro^ble?
Now this peace is the Saints privilege. it is a Legacy left to every Believer,
by the last Will and Testament of a dying Redeemer. Will you see a copy of his
Will, then look in Job. 14.27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto
you, not as the world gives, give I unto you. There is, it seems, a peace in
the worlds power to give, and there is a peace of Christ's bestowing. Now Christ
would have us here not to mistake the worlds peace for his, for the difference
is very great; for first, the worlds peace is a false peace, it is counterfeit
coin, it has not the current stamp of Heaven on it; but the peace that Christ
gives to a Believer, is true peace, and perfect peace:

Thou will keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on thee.

Secondly, The Worlds peace is an outward peace, it is but skin deep, it wets
the mouth, cannot wash the heart, Prove. 14.13. In laughter the heart is
sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is heaviness. The worlds peace is but the
shell of peace; their Conscience lowers, when their countenance laughs: but the
peace that Christ gives, is an inward and spiritual peace, Psalm. 4.7. Thou have
put gladness in my heart, more than in the time that their corn and their wine
increased. Thou have put gladness in my heart: Peace is that gladness, or peace
smooths the brow, but this fills the breast, as the finner has trouble within,
in the midst of all his peace without: In the world you shall have trouble, but
in me you shall have peace.

Thirdly, The worlds peace has only a nether spring arising out of the
Creature, out of worldly comforts, therefore it must needs be unclean; for an
unclean fountain cannot bring forth clean water. But the peace of Christians
has an upper spring, it flows from the manifestation of the love of God in
Christ: it is from the sprinkling of Christ's blood on the conscience, it flows
upon the workings of Christ's Spirit upon the Soul, which is first a Counselor,
then a Comforter. Oh how pure must this peace be in a believers soul, that
flows from so pure a spring!

Fourthly, The worlds peace is a peace given to sinners, it is a peace in sin,
and it is a peace with sin, as the Prophet Isaiah tell us, It is a Covenant
with Hell, and an Agreement with Death (God delivers us from that peace.)
Again, Christ's peace is given to none but believers, it is their privilege
only, a stranger does not intermeddle with his joy, Prove. 14.10. The heart
knows his own bitterness, but a stranger does not intermeddle with his joy.

Fifthly, The worlds peace is a fading, dying, transitory thing, it withers in
the Sand, The tryumphing of the wicked is but short, and the joy of the
hypocrite is but for a moment, Job 20.5. Solomon does elegantly liken it to
crackling of thorns under a pot, which is but a blaze and is gone, Eccl. 7.6.
so is the sinners peace, it is for a spurt and is soon gone, but the peace that
Christ gives to Believers, is a durable and abiding peace. Your joy no man
shall take from you, it appears in life, in death, and after death: first it is
our peace in life, grace brings forth present peace. It is said of the
Primitive Christians, They walked in the fear of the Lord, and in the comforts
of the Holy Ghost, Act. 9.41. It is a remarkable expression, Psalm. 19.11. In
keeping thy Commands there is great reward: He don't say for keeping them,
which respects the end of the work, but in keeping them, which looks at the
work it self: My brethren, every duty done in sincerity, reflects a peace in
conscience, as every flower carries its own sweetness. It is possible, I grant,
a Believer may not always find and feel this peace; few do, some seldom find
it, few find it always: the remains of corruption bringing forth to interrupt,
or temptations to hinder, and Gods dissertion may darken and hide it, and a
Believer may seem to be totally lost: yet in this condition, which is the worst
a child of God can be in, he has a double peace: first, a peace in the
promises, in this very condition, and what you have in Bonds and Bills you
account as good as money in your pockets. Secondly, he has it in the seed,
Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart, Psalm.
97.11. Grace is the seed of Peace, which Christ has sown in the furrows of the
soul, and therefore peace shall spring out of the furrows of the soul. Indeed
this seed springs up sooner in some than in others, yet every Saint shall have
a reaping time sooner or later, Psalm. 126.6. He that goes forth and weepeth,
bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his
sheaves with him: If he stays long for the fruit, he shall have a greater crop
at last, if he reaps not now, he shall be sure to reap hereafter, Psalm. 37.
Mark the perfect man, and behold the up^i^^t, for the end of that man is peace.
Secondly, by this peace which is the peace of a Child of God, it is a peace at
death; Grace will Minister to us then, and that Ministration shall be Peace;
the sinners peace leaves him when he comes to the grave; though in life it
fills him, yet in death it leaves him. A Believer has a twofold spring of
peace, the first is from above him, the other from within him: That spring that
runs with peace above him, is from the blood of Christ sprinkled on his
conscience: the other that is from within him, is from the sincerity of his
heart in the ways of Obedience. My Brethren, when we lie on our deathbeds, and
can reflect on our sincerity in all Gods ways, this will be peace at last, so
it was in Hezekiah, Isai. 38.3. Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I
have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that
which was good in thy sight. There Is nothing makes a deathbed so hard and so
uneasy, as a life spent in the service of sin and lust, and nothing makes a
deathbed so pleasant as a life spent in the service of Christ: Grace will
bring forth Peace, if not in this life: yet Thirdly, it will be sure after
death: if time brings not this fruit to ripeness, yet Eternity shall, Grace in
time, will be Glory in Eternity, Holiness now will be Happiness then; whatever
it is a man sows in this world, that he reaps in the next world: be not
deceived, God is not mocked, for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also
reap; he that sows to the flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption, but he
that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting, Gal. 6.7,
8. When Sin shall end in sorrow and misery, Grace shall end in peace, in joy,
in glory; well done thou good and faithful servant, enter into the joy of thy
Master. Mat. 25.21. Whoever shares in the Grace of Christ in this world, shall
be sure to share with the joy of Christ in the next world, and that joy is joy
unspeakable* and full of glory; I will wind up all in a threefold Application,
by way of Exhortation, to three sorts of persons. 1. To such as have this Grace
and Peace. 2. To such as have this Grace and no Peace. 3. To such as have
neither Grace nor Peace.


First, To such as have both Grace and Peace; I Will speak to them in two or three
things. First, Admire thankfully the Father and the Son, the Fathers Grace, and
the Sons Love, for both had a hand in this, therefore bless both the Father for
willing it to us, and the Son for working it in us; Grace and Peace are the
fruits of Gods eternal Election, for this blessing the Father gives, but the
Application of it to us is the fruits of Christ's redemption and intercession.
How can you think of Hell and Damnation, and see your self freed from it? And
how can you think of the dreadful fury and vengeance of God, your self not
under it? How can you look on your state change, your heart renewed, Grace
ratified and reconciled, and your Conscience quieted? How can you think of
these things, but must admire the love of the Father in giving this to you, and
the love of the Son in purchasing this for you? All Grace and Mercy that is
given to us, is by Christ purchased for us; Grace and Peace are fruits of the
redeeming blood of Christ purchased.

Secondly, Do not envy the conditions and possessions of the men of the world;
they have riches and honors, profits and pleasures, but they neither have
Grace nor Peace, therefore do not envy their happiness. There is a story of a
Roman that was condemned by a Court-Marshal to dye for breaking his rank to
steal a bunch of Grapes; and as he was going to his Execution, his fellow
Soldiers laughed at him, and others envied at him that he should have Grapes
and they none: Now (says he) do not envy me for my bunch of Grapes, for you
would be loath to have them at the rate I must pay for them. (My Brethren) You
that are the children of Grace and Peace, do not envy at men of the world, at
their riches and their comforts, their pleasures; for I am sure you would be
loath to have them at the price they pay for them; for the end of these things
is death.

Thirdly, do not complain of the worst condition that the providence of God
shall cast you into; in this it may be you shall suffer hard things, but
remember, so long as thy soul is secure, never complain of hard things. (My
brethren) as God your Father brought you into a state of Grace and Peace, and
thereby secured his love to your souls in Christ, can you complain of hard
things? So let the joy of the Lord be your strength, Rejoice in the Lord
always, and again I say, rejoice, Phil. 4.4.

The second Use is, to such as have neither Grace nor Peace: May not I say, I
speak to many such? I would I might not. Are there not many that are without
Grace, and therefore must needs be without peace? They may have the worlds
peace, but they have none of this peace; let me beg of you to get out of this
Graceless state. Oh that you would believe the words of a dying man, for so I
am to you, and such words use to be remembered. Oh remember this as a testimony
I leave with you, that love of Sin, and lack of Grace, will ruin and destroy
every soul at last. But you will say, How shall I get a share in this Grace and
Peace?

I answer, First, Break off all your false peace: we can never have true peace
with God, when we content our selves with false peace; you will never seek that
peace which Christ has purchased for you, while you content your selves with
that cursed peace which the Old man has wrought in you: Oh therefore break off
all false peace, which is not the fruit of grace.

Secondly, Labor to see and be convinced of the miserable, and of the naked
condition your souls be in, for want of the righteousness of Christ for a
covering, without this, soul, thou art miserable, wretched, poor and naked: be
convinced also what a miserable thing it is to have God our enemy; God is the
sinners en^^y, It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
Oh be convinced of thy nakedness without Christ's righteousness, and thy
emptiness without his fullness.

Thirdly, Labor to go out of your selves to Christ for grace and peace: Surely
in the Lord, shall one say, I have righteousness and strength; I, there it is
to be found. Labor for a thirsty frame of soul, for the promises run far to
such, That he will fill the hungry with good things: go to Christ, soul, beg,
pray, never leave God till he has given thee an interest in Christ, for none
can come to me, except the Father draw him: there is no pardon for the least
sin out of Christ, but there is pardon for the greatest sin in Christ; one sin
can damn the soul out of Christ, but no sin can hurt the soul in Christ. Oh go
to Christ, soul, never give rest to thy eyes, nor slumber to thy lids, till
thou have made peace with God in the blood of Christ. One sting of the fiery
serpent was mortal, without looking upon the brazen Serpent; so one sin will
damn a soul out of Christ, but no sin can damn a soul in Christ.

Fourthly, To such as have grace, but no sense of peace, this is the counsel I
would leave with all such, Be much in the exercise of grace: frame much,
believe much, use grace much, for the exercise and improving of grace will
produce peace. There are ten duties which are to be the sphere of grace in
activity, and in performing of them we shall have peace:

First, Make Religion your business, the main design of your lives; be
Christians to purpose, be not only Christians by the bye, but let your
conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ, Phil. 1.27.

Secondly, Put forth renewed Acts of Faith on Christ every day, and remember it
is as much your duty to believe in Christ to day, as if you had never believed
before. O live by faith every day, and this will bring peace to you.

Thirdly, Maintain a constant communion with God daily: this communion with God
is man's chief good; the happiness of a Child is in communion with his Father,
and the happiness of a wife is in communion with her Husband, and this is the
happiness of a Believers soul, communion with God the Father, through Christ
our Head and Husband. The seed of peace, it is true, it is sown in the soul in
Union, but then it takes root downward, and brings forth fruit upward.
Spiritual peace will never be obtained if communion with God be not maintained:
that gives comfort in the midst of all sorrows, and satisfies all doubts, and
recompenses all wants. Lo this is the fruit of communion with God.

Fourthly, Be good at all times, but of all, best in bad times; many Christians
lose their peace, by remitting of their grace, and let loose the reins of
Religion, to avoid the censures of a crooked generation. A Christians zeal
should be like winter fire, that burns the hottest when the air is coolest: or
like the Lilly, that looks beautiful though among thorns; so should a child
of God though among sinners.

Fifthly, In all conditions choose suffering rather than sinning: If ever you
would have peace, choose suffering rather than sinning; he that values peace
with God, or peace with conscience, he must make this his choice. Daniel rather
chose to be cast to Lions than to lose the peace of his conscience: the three
Children chose rather to burn in the Furnace, than to bow to the Image. One
said, He would rather go to Hell free from sin, than to live in Heaven with
guilt on his Conscience. (My brethren) let me a little enlarge, because
sufferings may overtake us; for Persecution is the genius of the Gospel,
therefore let me leave for short Rules with you concerning sufferings.

See that your Cause be good, your Call be clear, your Spirit meek, and your
End right. Sufferings cannot bring our peace without either of them, but with
them all our sufferings shall be peace.

First, Let your Cause be good: Its not the Blood, but the Cause that makes a
Martyr: it is not for every cause a Christian should engage to suffer: every
cause will no more bear suffering, than every little stream will bear a ship:
nor will Christ let go sweetness to every suffering, 1 Pet. 4.15. Let none of
you suffer as a Murderer, or as a Thief, or as an Evildoer, or as a Busie-body
in other men's matters. To suffer thus, is neither Christian-like nor
comfortable; some suffer rather as Malefactors than as Christ's Martyrs.

Secondly, Let your Call be clear: It Is not amiss to have a good cause without
a Call: some may suffer for the cause of God, and yet sin in suffering for want
of a Call. Christ calls not all to suffer; to some it is given, to others it is
not: if thy Call be clear, thy Peace will be sweet, though thy sufferings be
never so great. But you will say, how shall I know when I am called to suffer?

Answ. 1. When Truth suffers by our silence, then are we called to suffer.?

2. When our lives will be the denial of Christ, then are we called to deny our
lives for Christ.

3. When sin and suffering surrounds us that we cannot get out, but we must
either run through sin or suffering, then I may safely conclude, That Christ
calls me to suffer, and in this cause we may expect the peace and sweetness
of his presence.

Thirdly, The third direction for suffering is this, Our spirit must be meek;
so was Christ, he went as a Lamb to the slaughter.

It is possible a man may be right in his cause, and yet sinful in his
carriage: and if so, no wonder if Christ be not sweet to us. To be fierce, and
raging, and reviling in suffering, it is not becoming humanity, and therefore
much less like Christianity. A Christian should be like Christ, Act. 5.41. And
they departed from the presence of the Council, rejoicing that they were
counted worthy to suffer shame for his Name.. It becomes those that are found
in the spirit, to give blessing for cursing: the more of Christ's spirit is in
our sufferings, the more comfort and joy we shall receive from our sufferings.

Fourthly, See that your End in suffering be right: If it be self or
singularity, or schism, then Christ cannot be sweet to thee. Some have died
that their Ends may live. Socrates died in the defense of the Truth, and to
prove that there is but one God, but whether he died for Honor, Applause, or
for Gods sake, I think it is not hard to determine. But let thy Cause be good,
thy Call clear, thy Spirit meek, and thy End right, and then you shall have
peace in all your sufferings: that is the fifth thing. Choose sufferings rather
than sinning.

Sixthly, If you would have peace, be much in studying the Scriptures: for as
God is the God of Peace, and Christ the Prince of Peace, so the Gospel is the
Gospel of Peace, which God has given to thee to lead thee in the ways of
peace, Great peace have they that love thy Laws.

Seventhly, Take heed of Apostasy, either in Doctrine or Principles: Though a
Believer is freed from Apostasy in the state of grace, yet he is not freed from
Apostasy in the degrees of grace. He may fall sinfully, though he cannot fall
finally. Demas fell by one, St. Peter by the other. Pray with David. Psalm.
17.5. Hold up my goings in thy paths, that, etc.

Eighthly, Make the Word of God your rule in all things: be sure you have a
Scripture warrant for all your practices; but especially keep close to
Scripture in matters of Gods worship.

There are endless discourses about the Mode of Gods worship; I have no
disputing time. It is good in difficult cases, always to take the surest side:
(for instance) if I follow the traditions of man for the worship of God, I may;
but if I keep close to the directions of God in the Scripture, I am sure I
cannot sin; for this is the sure word of Prophecy, to which you do well to take
heed, therefore in such a doubltful case, Gods will is, that we take the surest
side: go to the Law and to the Testimony: labor to be fruitful and grounded
Christians.

Ninthly, Keep up the power of Godliness, do not let Religion down into a
lifeless formality: The righteous shall flourish like a Palm Tree: He shall
grow like a Cedar in Lebanon, those that be planted in the house of the Lord,
shall flourish in the Courts of our God, Psalm. 92.12, 13. My Brethren, it is as
much a duty in them that have grace, to improve it, as for them that have no
grace to get it. If you sit under the daily means, the daily waterings of God,
and do not grow, do you think this will be peace in the latter end? surely no,
(my Brethren) your fruitfulness under the Gospel is of very great concernment.
It Is unfruitfulness that makes God lay his Vineyard waste. It Is fruitfulness
that procures the forwarding of your account in the day of grace.

Tenthly, Observe that excellent rule of the Apostle, Phil. 4.8. Finally,
brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever
things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely,
whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if there any
praise, think on these things. And now, my Brethren, I commend you to God, and
to the Word of God, that is infinitely able to make you wise to salvation, with
this Benediction which I shall make my Valediction, Grace be unto you, and
peace from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.

Mr. Calamy's Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Ash.
Isaiah 57.1. The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart, and
merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous are taken away
from the evil to come.
WE are here met this Evening to perform the last office of Love for an eminent
and ancient servant of Jesus Christ, and excellent Minister of the Gospel, Mr.
Simeon Ash, one who has formerly performed this office for many other
Ministers, and now we are met to perform this office for him; and it is not
long before others will meet to perform the same office for us, so frail, so
brittle, and so uncertain is the life of man.

Now the Text that I have chosen, is suitable for this occasion; for this
Reverend Minister was first a righteous man, he was righteous in an Eva gelical
sense, he was one that was justified and sanctified. Secondly, he was a
merciful man both in active and passive sense; he was one that showed mercy to
the distressed Members of Jesus Christ, and he was one to whom God showed
mercy; this righteous and merciful man is now perished, as to his outward
condition, not as to his everlasting condition: but as to his outward bodily
condition, he is perished, and he is taken away: the word in the Hebrew is very
emphatical; merciful men, Colliguntur, are gathered; it is the same word that
is used concerning Josiah 2 Kin. 22.10. Thou shall be gathered to thy Fathers,
and go to thy grave in peace, and shall not see the evil that I will bring upon
this Nation. This godly and righteous man is now gathered, as ripe Corn into
the Barn of Heaven; he is taken away from the evil that is to come, from
beholding that evil that is to come upon this sinful world, he is taken away in
mercy, that he may not be troubled with the troubles that are coming upon
many; he is taken away from the evil to come.

And thus you see how suitable the Text is to the occasion; there is only one
particular that I desire may prove unsuitable; for the righteous and merciful
man, says the Text, perishes, and no man considers, nor lays it to heart:
These words are verba commentantis, and objurgantis, the words of the Prophet
bemoaning the spiritual security of the people of Israel, chiding and reproving
them for their spiritual Lethargy: Now I desire that this part may not prove
suitable, but that all of you may lay to heart the death of this ancient,
merciful and righteous man.

The Observations from the words, are these six.

First, That the righteous man must perish as well as the unrighteous.
Secondly, That the perishing of a righteous man, is nothing but his gathering
to God, Christ, and the blessed company of Saints and Angels. Thirdly, A
righteous man as long as he lives, is the preservative of a Nation, and the
supporter of a Kingdom, the Chariots and Horsemen of a Nation. Fourthly, The
death of a righteous man is a warning-piece from Heaven, a Beacon set on sire
to give notice of evil approaching. Fifthly, That God does on purpose take away
righteous men, that they might not see the evil that is coming on a Nation.
Sixthly, That it is a great and common sin, not to consider and lay to heart
the death of a righteous man.
1. It is a common fin, and therefore it is set down in the greatest latitude,
the righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart; that is, very few: And
merciful men are taken away, no man considering; that is, very few.

2. It is a great sin, and therefore the Prophet Jeremy in the former Chapter
calls to all the beasts of the field to devour, that is, all the Enemies of the
Church to destroy the Children of Israel, because they drank strong drink,
filling themselves with merriment, and promised themselves happy days, but did
not consider that the righteous were taken away from the evil to come.

He begin with the first, that the righteous perish as well as the unrighteous.

How is it that the righteous perish? not in their soul, they cannot perish so:
nay, the truth is, they cannot perish properly in their bodies; for the bodies
of the Saints never totally and finally perish; for the very dust of the Saints
in the grave, is precious in Gods sight, and they are asleep in Jesus, and by
the power of Jesus Christ, they shall be raised glorious bodies: Nothing
perishes of a righteous man by death totally and finally, but sin: and
therefore the meaning of the word is as Musculus and Justin Martyr observe,
perit, perishes; that is not according to the truth of the thing, but
according to the opinion of the world, and the proper language of his
expression is this, the righteous perishes; that is, the righteous must dye,
and go down to the house of rottenness as well as others, and that up upon a
fore-fold account.

First, Because the righteous are included within the statute of death as well
as the unrighteous; statutum est: Heb. 9.27. It is appointed for all men ance
to dye, the righteous as well as the unrighteous; it is true, Jesus Christ has
taken away the hurt of death, but not death it self: Jesus Christ has disarmed
death, made death like the Viper that fastened upon Paul's hand, but did not
hurt him; he has made it like the brazen Serpent that has no sting, but a
healing power in it: Christ has sanctified death, conquered and sweetened
death: at the present we are all under the statute of death, but at last this
enemy shall be destroyed, 2 Cor. 15. ult.

2. The righteous consist of perishing principles as well as the unrighteous:
the righteous are earthly vessels made of dust, I, their foundation is in the
dust; their lives are a vapor as well as the lives of the unrighteous:

3. The righteous must dye as well as others, because they have a body of sin
which they carry about them; for there is no man so wise, that lives and sins
not, Eccles. 7.10. wherefore there is that which deserves death in a righteous
man.

Lastly, and especially, The righteous perish upon a peculiar account: For if
we have hope only in this life (says the Apostle) we are of all men most
miserable, and therefore they must perish to keep them from perishing: they
must say as Themistocles, Perissem nisi periissem, they must dye that they may
rest from their labor: for here is not our rest, Mich. 2.10. there remains a
rest for the people of God: there is no rest in this world: the word quies
wants the plural number.

2. The righteous must die that they may have their reward, their crown of
glory, that God has laid up for them, they must first fight the good fight,
and finish their course, and then they shall receive a crown of glory.

3. They must dye, that they may be free from sin; for they shall never put off
the body of sin, till they put off the body of the flesh.

4. They must dye, that mortality may be swallowed up of life, that corruption
may put on incorruption.

5. They must dye, that they may be perfect in grace.

Lastly, They must dye, that they may see God face to face, and be for ever
with the Lord, which they cannot do till they dye: therefore blessed by God
that the righteous must perish. If a man should always live on earth, always be
young, rich, and healthful, it would be unwelcome news, for while we are in the
body, we are absent from the Lord, and subject to sin; and therefore when Peter
asked Christ what should be done with John, Christ tells him, If I will that he
tarry till I come, what is that to thee? from henceforth there went a report
abroad that John should not dye; Now the Apostle himself was much displeased
with this report, and looked upon it as a great affliction that he should not
dye, and therefore he himself confutes it; But yet Jesus (said he) said not
that he should not dye; as if he had said, God forbid that I should not dye.

Before I come to Application of this point, give me leave to speak something to
the second point, and so I shall apply them both together.

The second Doctrine is this, That the perishing of a righteous man, is nothing
but a gathering him to God, Christ, and the blessed society of Saints and
Angels in Heaven.

This is contained in the second expression, merciful men are taken away; the
word in the Hebrew is Colliguntur, they are gathered; it is evegetical of the
former, they did not perish, but they are gathered to God and Christ: there is
a great deal of excellency, and a Magazine of sweetness in this expression,
They are gathered. It implies two things.

First, That the righteous are in a scattered condition while they are in this
world, and that three ways.

1. They are scattered among the wicked and ungodly of the world, as sheep
among wolves, as lambs among Lions, rent and torn in pieces, forced to wander
up and down in Sheep skins and Goats skins. 2. The righteous are scattered in
the world one from another, and that two ways. 1. They are scattered by their
different habirations, for the godly are forced one from another, as Lot from
Abraham. 2. They are scattered one from another by the cruel persecution of
wicked men; and therefore you read Acts 8. that at that time when there was a
persecution against the Church at Jerusalem, that they were all scattered
abroad.
3. The godly are scattered in this life from the glorious presence of God in
Heaven, indeed they are never scattered from the gracious presence of God, but
sometimes they are scattered from the comfortable presence of God; as long as
we live in the world, we shall be scattered from the glorious presence of God:
for while we are in the body, we are absent from the Lord.
Secondly, This implies a bringing of Gods people out of this scattered
condition; it is a gathering of the Righteous out of this world into another,
from a sinful persecuted world, into a sinless glorious world; from diversity
of dwellings on earth, to dwell altogether in one Heaven; it is a gathering out
of the reach of Men and Devils, and a gathering them not only to the gracious,
but to the glorious presence of God and Christ, and to the souls of just men
made perfect, and to the general assembly of the first born, and to the City of
the living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, where they shall live together, never
to be scattered again. To understand this the better, let me offer three things
to you, showing you that the Godly are gathered to God three ways: in this
life, at death, and at the day of Judgment.

First, The Righteous are gathered to God in this life, and that is at their
first conversion, for by nature we are Aliens and strangers to God, scattered
from any union or communion with God, not only scattered from the glorious, but
from the gracious presence of God. God made men, at first to enjoy communion
with himself, but Adam lost this by sin, and now we are all Cains and
vagabonds, scattered from the love of God, and from union and communion with
God; but when God converts any of the Elect, he gathers them home to himself;
for conversion is nothing but Gods gathering them to himself in the second
Adam, that were scattered from him in the first Adam: the first Adam was a Root
of scattering, a Root of separation from God; but the second Adam was a Root of
union and conjunction. Christ is the head, and the Elect are all gathered
together in him, that he might gather together in one all things in Christ, so
that conversion is nothing but a gathering of the Elect of God, to Christ by
faith, and a gathering to one another by love and charity.

Secondly, Gods people are gathered at death: here they are gathered to Christ
by Grace, but at death they are gathered to Christ in glory; here they are
gathered to God by hope, but at death by fruition: here Christ is gathered to
us, he comes down and dwells with us; but at death, we shall be gathered to
him, we shall go up and be joined with him. There Is a great deal of difference
between esse cum Christo, and esse in Christo: esse cum Christo, to be one with
Christ is a Christians great security, but esse in Christo, to be one in
Christ, it is a Christians great felicity; in this life we are gathered to God
by Faith, but at death by vision.

Lastly, We shall be gathered to God at the day of judgment, it is called the
day of the gathering of the Saints together: a day when all the Saints that
are, have been, or shall be, shall be gathered together, 2 These. 2.1. I beseech
you brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering
together unto him at the great day: At the day of Judgment we shall all be
gathered together, and shall all be taken up to Heaven? I mean all the
righteous, and be ever with the Lord: and so much for the opening of the
Doctrine.

But here it may be objected; Are not the unrighteous gathered by death as well
as the righteous?

I answer, it is true, the unrighteous are scattered in this life, and gathered
by death, as well as the righteous, but with a great deal of difference.

First, the wicked are scattered in this life, but they are scattered from God;
but the Godly are scattered for God, and for a good conscience many times, as
they at Jerusalem were scattered: The godly are scattered from the glorious
presence of God in Heaven; but the wicked are scattered from the gracious
presence of God on earth. Again, the scattering of the wicked is a curse to
them, and it is threatened as a curse, Lev. 26.32. I will scatter you among the
Heathen, and draw out my sword after you: and wherever the wicked come, in
what part soever of the world the wicked are scattered, they bring the curse of
God with them: and they bring the judgments of God on Towns and Cities where
they are, as plague, famine, and sword, and all miseries. But the Godly, when
they are scattered, they are scattered as a blessing, into what country or town
soever they come, they come as a blessing, they come like a Ship laden with
Corn, to a Town ready to perish with famine: they come as a blessing four ways.

First, they pray down a blessing on the place where they come. Secondly, they
come as a blessing by their holy life and conversation, that is a Lodestone to
draw others to holiness. Thirdly, they come as a blessing, by their holy advice
and counsel that they give to the place where they come.
Nay fourthly, their very presence is a blessing; as long as Lot was in Sodom,
Sodom could not be destroyed; so long as Paul was in the ship, the 300 could
not be drowned. So that the godly come as a blessing wherever they are
scattered, but the wicked are as chaff scattered by the wind, and they are
scattered as the dust of the earth: You know when the dust is scattered, it
gets into men's eyes and blinds them; and falls upon their clothes, and sullies
them; so the wicked, wherever they are scattered, they defile the place where
they are scattered. The godly are as Planets, that wander and move from one
part of Heaven to another, carrying light to the world.

Secondly, as the wicked are scattered while they live, so when they die, they
are gathered; it is true, but how? not to God, and Christ, and his Angels; but
they are gathered to the Devil and his Angels, and to damned spirits: not as
bundles of Wheat in the Barn of Heaven, but as bundles of Tares to be burned
for ever in everlasting fire.

Now, if the righteous perish as well as others, and if their perishing be
nothing but a gathering to God and Christ, then,

First, learn hence the preciousness of every righteous man, the great God will
not gather things of no value; great men do not use to gather chaff and straw;
and therefore, when Christ said of Josiah, I will gather thee to thy Fathers,
it was a sign he was a precious Pearl worth the gathering, and of a high value
and account in the sight of God, and so is every true Child of God, right dear
and precious are they in the sight of God, both living, and dying; they are
bought with a great price, not with Gold and Silver, and other corruptible
things, but they are bought with the precious blood of the Son of God: they are
as precious to God as thee Apple of his eye: so precious that he has given
Christ for them, and to them; so precious that he called them his Jewels, his
peculiar treasure, his Jedidiahs, and therefore God will not suffer them to
perish, but gather them to himself before the evil day come, as the Husbandman
gathers in the Corn, before the Beast go out into the field.

Secondly, Learn hear what reason we have to be comforted in the death of a
righteous man or woman, because their death is not a perishing, but a gathering
to God and Christ, and the society of Saints and Angels. The death of a
righteous man is no more than if a Merchant that has abundance of Jewels in a
far Country, he should send for the^ home. Why death to a righteous man is
nothing but God sending for his Jewels home. Such a phrase there is in Mal.
3.17. In the day that I make up my Jewels, they shall be mine. In this life
they are imperfect Jewels; they are like Gold in the Oar mingled with a great
deal of dross; and death is nothing but a perfection of the Jewels; death is
nothing more; and God does nothing by death, but as a Gold-siner gathers up all
his ends of Gold and Silver; it is nothing but just as if a Father should send
for his Son home, that had been a long time absent from him, to his own house:
it is a carrying us to our Fathers house. And therefore let us be comforted
when our Righteous Friends dye, though their death be matter of sorrow to us,
in regard of the loss, that we sustain by their death, and because their death
is a warning-piece of evil to come: yet in regard of them we have no cause to
mourn. I speak this of those that are related to the righteous, when they dye;
did you ever here of a Husbandman that mourned for the carrying in of his Corn
into the Barn? or a Jeweller mourn for making up of his Jewels? Let us mourn
rather that we are lest scattered among the wicked of the earth, and from the
glorious presence of God and Christ: and let us morn for those that are
scattered from Christ, and from grace: and for those that whilst they live are
scattered, and when they dye are gathered to the Devil and his Angels. Let us
not mourn for those that dye in Christ, but let us mourn for those that live
out of Christ; let us not mourn over the body the soul has left, but let us
mourn over the soul God has left.

The third use is of Consolation to all the people of God, in reference to evil
times that are coming upon us, or to the evil of times. Whatever befalls a
Child of God in this life, though he be scattered by wicked men, from England
into foreign Countries, though he wanders up and down in Deserts and
Wildernesses, though he be scattered from house to prison, yet there shall be a
gathering time shortly: there will a time come when all the Saints shall be
gathered to Christ, and to one another, never to part any more. The death of
Gods people is not a perishing, but a gathering: comfort your selves therefore
with these words against the fear of death: look upon death as a gathering, as
a gathering to Christ: you are here as Daniel in the Lions Den, as Jeremiah in
the dungeon; yet there will come a gathering, and if you dye in a good cause,
you shall not perish, but be gathered to Christ, to his Saints and Angels.

But you will say, If I were sure when I dye, that I should be gathered to
Christ, to live for ever with him, this would be matter of great consolation to
me: but you told me, the wicked are gathered by death, as well as the Godly:
how shall I know whether (when I come to dye) I shall be gathered to the Devil
and his Angels, or to Christ and his Angels? How shall I know whether I shall
be gathered at death, as a bundle of tears to be burned in Hell, or a bundle of
Wheat to be carried up into the Barn of Heaven?

I answer, You may know it by four things.

1. If you are righteous, then you shall be gathered to Christ at death; For
the Righteous shall go into everlasting life: Heaven is entailed upon righteous
men; by Righteousness I mean the imputed Righteousness, and imparted
Righteousness of Jesus Christ: I wave the explication of them, because time
will not give leave. Know you not (says the Apostle) that no unrighteous man
shall inherit the Kingdom of God? Damnation is entailed upon unrighteous men.
2. If you are merciful, you shall be gathered to Christ: if you are one that is
full of bowels of compassion to the distressed members of Christ Jesus, for
Christ has said it, Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy, now
if you are hard-hearted, covetous, worldly minded, remember that Text, He shall
have judgment without mercy, that shows no mercy. 3. He that is gathered to
the second Adam by faith in this world, shall certainly be gathered unto Christ
by vision in the other world; Christ Jesus will save all his members, and you
must know that faith is a transplanting grace, it is not only a
heart-purifying, but a world-overcoming grace: It takes a man out of the old
Adam, and puts him into a new Adam; it takes a man out of the root of
scattering, and puts him into the root of union and conjunction: Wherefore you
that are now joined to Christ by faith here, shall be joined to Christ in glory
hereafter. But now, you that are vagabonds, Cains, and aliens from the life of
God, and from the life of grace: You that are wooden members, wooden legs in
Christ's body, that have no real conjunction with Christ, you shall not be
gathered to him in glory.
Lastly, If you are gathered here to the Saints by love, then you shall be
gathered to the Saints in Heaven, and to the everlasting enjoyment of God with
them to all eternity. Confider this, every man shall be gathered (when he dies)
to those whom he delights, and chooses to keep pany with while he lives in
this world. If you are gathered to the wicked in love and affection here, you
shall be gathered to them at death in hell and destruction, for it is pity
companions should be parted, wheat must to wheat, and tares to tares, for wheat
and tares shall not be bound together at the last day.

The last use is of exhortation: If the righteous must perish, and if their
death be nothing but a gathering, then take this threefold Exhortation.

First, Let us labor to make the best use we can of our godly friends and
Ministers before they be gathered; let us do as Elisha did, he was told that
his Master Elijah was to be taken up to Heaven, and therefore he would never
leave him till he had got the spirit of Elijah doubled upon him: If Elisha had
not thought that Elijah would have been taken up that day, he would never have
followed him so punctually and inseparably as he did. O beloved! did you
believe that Text, Zach. 1.5. of which we have often had experience, Your
fathers, where are they? and the prophets, do they live for ever? Indeed if
they did live for ever, we might get good from them when we please, because we
are sure never to lose them; but they live not for ever, but must perish, and
be taken up to heaven: And therefore whilst we have them, let us make what use
we can of them, before they be taken away from us. It is a great fault among
the people of God, that they make no more use of their Godly friends and
Ministers. I have known many that have godly relations that have died, that it
has been the greatest burden on their consciences, that they got no more good
by those Godly Relations while they lived. Many of us deal with our Ministers,
as we do with a strange sight that is to be seen near our doors; we are not so
much solicitous when we see it, but a stranger that comes from a far Country,
is curious, and very careful presently to see it. So do we in this City
especially; I have had experience of it by being here many years; strangers
that come out of the Country, many times get that good by a Minister, that his
own people do not, because they think their Minister is continually with them:
but a stranger knows he is there but for a day, and he hears so, that he
carries Christ home with him, and a great deal of consolation also. Beloved,
this is a great fault; I beseech you remember, the Righteous must be gathered:
let us therefore do with them as we do with Books that are borrowed: if a man
borrows a Book, he knows he must keep it but for a day or two, and therefore he
will be sure to read it over, whereas if the Book be a man's own, he lays it
aside, because he knows he can read it at any time. Remember, your Ministers
are but lent you, they are not your own, and you know not but that God may take
away your El^jahs from you this night: Therefore make what use you can of them,
while you have them.

Secondly, Must the Righteous be taken away? Then let the Righteous make
conscience of doing what good they can before they are taken away. Beloved, if
it were possible for the Godly to grieve in Heaven, this would be their
greatest sorrow, that they have done God no more service here upon earth. Be
wise for God, O ye Righteous! do as old men that have rich places and offices,
they labor to buy the reversion of their places for their Children: So must
you to whom God has given great gifts and graces, labor to propagate your
gifts and graces, that there may be no loss by your death. Observe the cares of
St. Paul the aged in his exhortation to Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.4, 5, Watch thou all
things, endure afflictions, do the work of an Evangelist, make full proof of
thy Ministry, why so? for I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my
departure is at hand, and therefore work thou, see that thou endure affliction,
preach the Gospel as becomes a Minister of the Gospel, that there may be no
loss by my departure. So in 2 Timothy 2.2. The things that thou have heard of me
among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men that shall be able
to teach others also. Has God committed any thing to you, a treasure of
Learning or Grace? commit it to young Ministers that they may commit it to
others, that so there may be a succession of Gifts and Graces: Do as Physicians
do, that labor to communicate their skill to their Children, and to others; so
should we, that there may be a succession of Godly ones, that Godliness may be
entailed upon us, and our Relations.

Thirdly and lastly, let us all labor to be such, that when we dye, when we
come to be gathered, we may be gathered to Christ and his Angels; not to the
Devil and his angels; And for that purpose let us labor to be merciful and
righteous, and let us be gathered to Christ by Faith, and to one another by
love and dear affection: and then we shall be gathered at the great day to
Christ, and the blessed company of the Saints and Angels.

There are 4 observations yet behind, but I must wave them at this time.

I have now another Sermon to preach, and I cannot without injury to you that
are alive, and without wrong to the memory of my dearly beloved Brother, but
speak something of him, at whose Funeral we are met this Evening, not so much
for his commendation, he needs not, but for our imitation; it is pity, great
pity something should not be said, that this Reverend Minister, though dead,
may yet preach this night; and I have so much to say of him, that I know not
where to begin, and when I have begun, I hardly know how to make an end: I must
confess, the little time alloted me for the providing this solemn work, and the
necessary avocations in this little time, have hindered me from enforming my
self about his Breeding and manner of Education at Emanuel College, under Mr.
Steaker, and his excellent carriage and converse with Mr. Hildersham, Mr. Dod,
Mr. Ball, Mr. Langly, and other Ministers famous in their generations; and the
many pressures and hardships that he suffered in those parts and times, for the
keeping of his conscience pure from that which he counted sin, and therefore I
must draw a vail over that part of his life, and confine my discourse only to
the time since his coming to live with us in London, which is about the space
of twenty two, or twenty three years, all which time I have had the happiness
to be intimately acquainted with him, insomuch as that I can freely and clearly
profess, and that with a sad heart, that I, and many others, have lost a real,
wise, and Godly friend, brother, and fellow laborer in the Lord; the Church
has lost an eminent Member, and choice pillar; and this City has lost an
ancient faithful, and painful Minister; who by his Prayers and Holy life, did
seek to keep off the judgments of God from falling on us; and the less
sensible the City is of this loss, the greater is the loss. I fear we may too
truly repeat the words in the Text, The righteouus perishes, and no man lays
it to heart: and mereiful men are taken away, none considering that the
righteous are taken away from the evil to come. I have read of Philo the Jew,
and by chance met with the same in the life of St. Ambrose, that when they came
to any City or Town, and heard of the death of any Godly man, though never so
poor, they would both of them mourn exceedingly, because of the great loss that
place had by the death of that Godly man, and because it was a warning-piece
from God of evil approaching. But we have had many Godly men, and Godly
Ministers taken away of late, and yet I fear me, but few lay it to heart; and
therefore as I said, the loss is the greater to this City, because it is so
little sensible of it. It is a great loss also to his relations; his Wife has
lost a dear and loving Husband, his Sister a brother, his Parish and
Congregation a faithful Pastor.

The Ministerial excellencies of many Ministers were collected and concentred
in one Simeon Ash, he was a Bazalcel in Gods Tabernacle, a Master Builder, an
old Disciple, a Polycarp, a Christian of long standing in the School of Christ,
a burning and a shining light, one whom many Ministers and other good
Christians called Father, insomuch that it was a common proverb in this City,
Father Ash; and I believe many experimentally weep over him, as the King did
over the Prophet Elisha, My Father, my Father, the chariots of Israel, and the
horsemen thereof! for he lived desired, and died lamented; not only in the
City, but I believe in many places in the Country where he was known. But more
particulary, there were twelve excellencies I observed in this reverend
Minister, and my dear Brother, that were as 12 Jewels or precious Pearls in
that Crown with which God had crowned him: I shall name them for your imitation
and benefit; He needs them not, for he is above our Eulogy.

The first and chief Jewel that did beautify and adorn this our Brother, was
his sincerity and uprightness in heart; which indeed is not a single Grace, but
the soul of all Grace, and the interlineary that must run through all Grace;
what is faith if it be not unfeigned? what will love to God profit you if it be
not without dissimulation? what is repentance worth if it be not in truth? as
the body without the soul is a rotten carcass, so is all grace without
sincerity; this is the soul of all grace, this is the girdle of truth.
Sincerity is that which girts all our spiritual armor together, and makes them
useful: what advantage is it to have the breastplate of Righteousness, the
shield of Faith, the helmet of Hope, if they be but painted things? it is the
girdle of sincerity that makes all the other parts of our armor useful. Now
this excellent grace of sincerity was eminent in our dear Brother; he was a
true Nathaniel in whom there was no guile; I mean no allowed hypocrisy, this
was that which carried him through the pangs of death with a great deal of
comfort; for he was able to say with Hezekiah, Remember, O Lord, how I have
walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart. He could say with Paul,
this is my rejoicing, the testimony of my conscience, that in simplicity and
godly sincerity, I have had my conversation in this world.

2. Another grace was his humilicy, this is a grace that he was clothed
withal, and it is a rare grace: for God dwells with the humble he resists the
proud; but he gives grace to the humble. This Reverend Minister was low in his
own eyes, and therefore very high in Gods eyes; he had a mean esteem of
himself, and therefore he was high in esteem with God. He was as Jacob said of
himself, less than the least of Gods mercies, and therefore he was made
partaker of the best of Gods mercies. He was like an ear of Corn full of fruit,
bowing down in thankfulness to God.

3. Another Jewel was the fruitfulness of his discourse; for it may be said of
him as it was of Christ, he went about doing good: where ever he went, he
scattered his goodness, this all that knew him, knew to be true. He was full of
good discourse where ever he came; when I was with him in his sickness, he took
occasion to complain much, and not without just cause; (God grant his complaint
may make impression upon our hearts) he complained that it was a great fault of
Ministers, that when they met together, they discoursed no more of Christ, of
Heaven, and of the concernments of the other world, and professed that if GOD
should restore him, he would be more careful in his discourse, and more
fruitful than ever yet he had been.

3. Another Jewel that beautified this Righteous man, was his mercifulness; he
was a merciful man, which he manifested not only in his charity to the members
of Jesus Christ, but in his frequent visiting of sick persons, and persons that
needed Spiritual physic. I know not any Minister in this City more careful in
visiting the sick than he was.

5. Another Jewel was his Prudence and Spiritual wisdom; he was not only a
Pious and Godly, but a Wise and Prudent Minister: that had zeal for God, but
knew how to mingle his zeal with discretion; discretion is nothing but frantic
fury; discretion without zeal will quickly eat out the heart of Religion, and
eat Religion out of the heart. Zeal without discretion is not a coal from the
Altar, but a coal kindled by the wildfire of passion, that is able to set a
Nation on fire; but this Reverend Minister had zeal sweetly tempered with
discretion.

9. Another Jewel was his Patience; God was pleased to exercise him with long
and great afflictions, by reason of the Gout, that did often, especially of
late years, affix him to his bed, and afflict him with great pain; but God was
pleased to put his everlasting Arms underneath him, supporting him under all
his pains, and giving him a great measure of patience, insomuch, that in
patience he did possess his soul, and patience had its perfect work in him.

The 7 Jewel was his high valuation of Jesus Christ; a written copy for us to
follow, and for you his people also. Being with him in his last sickness, he
exhorted me, and other Ministers with him, to preach much of Jesus Christ; and
to speak to him of Jesus Christ; and he said, When I consider my best duties, I
sink, I dye, I despair; but when I think of Christ, I have enough, he is all,
and in all. I think these were his very words. I desire (said he) to know
nothing but Jesus Christ, and him Crucified: I account all things dung and
dross, that I may be found in Christ: To this effect he spoke in the morning
before the evening in which he dyed, speaking much of Jesus Christ.

1. Another Jewel was, his diligence in preaching the Gospel in season, and out
of season; in the time of his health he was a painful, laborious Preacher; one
that did not preach to tickle the ear, but to wound the heart; not to please,
but to profit; not seeking the applause of the People, but the salvation of
their souls: This you all know to be true.

2. Another Jewel that did beautify and adorn this Reverend Minister, was his
excellent gift in Prayer; and herein he was very eminent, and did exceed many,
nay I may say, most of his Brethren: As Apolies was mighty in the Scriptures,
so was he (as you all know) mighty in Prayer; he was a Jacob, very skilful in
wrestling with God; like Moses he often stood in the Gap, and at most Fasts,
all the time of his health, he was a Minister that was chosen to conclude with
Prayer: and this heightens the loss that we sustein by the death of this Godly
Minister; because we have lost the benefit of his Prayers, which is an
invaluable loss; for though I doubt not but he prays in Heaven for the Church
in general, yet I believe he prays not for any in particular; as not knowing
what our condition is, For Abraham knows us not, for the Saints in Heaven know
not what is done upon earth. The loss therefore is the greater, because we
have lost not only a preaching, but a praying Minister: And give me leave to
add, that this excellency in this Minister is sufficient to prove, 1. That
there is a gift of Prayer, which some against all reason do deny. 2. That
conceived prayers, when uttered by one that has the gift of prayer, are not
vain tautologies, or empty repetitions, and a rate of nonsense, as some
unjustly charge men with, but they are the bleatings of Gods Spirit, that
pierce not only into the ears and hearts of the hearers, but into the ears and
heart of God himself.


10. The next Jewel was, he had great acquaintance and communion with God; for
he was of a long standing in the School of Christ, and a good Proficient in
that School. Much acquaintance he had with God, he was often in the Mount with
God, and came down with his face shining, though he in his modesty did not see
it; and when he came to dye, he was able to say as Dr. Preston did when he lay
a dying, I shall change my place, but not my company.

11. Another Jewel was, his comfortable passage out of this world, dying with a
great deal of calmness and serenity upon his Conscience: The morning before he
dyed, I heard him say these words. It is one thing to speak of Christ, and of
Heaven, and another thing to feel the consolation of Christ, and of Heaven, as
I do, clapping his hand on his breast. Another time I heard him say, The
comforts of a holy Life are real, soul-supporting; and that he felt the reality
of those comforts, and that by him we might know it was not in vain to serve
God. And I cannot forget this speech the morning before he dyed, I am a little
straitened, but I care no more for my life than I do for this phillip. That
which was said of old Simeon, Luke 2. may be said of this reverend Mr. Simeon
Ash, who was a Simeon, a just and devout man, an old servant of Jesus Christ,
one that waited for the consolation of Israel; one that dyed, though not with
Christ in his bodily Arm, yet with Christ in the Arms of his faith; and when he
dyed, could say, as it is there, Now Lord, let thou thy servant depart in
peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation.

Lastly, Another Jewel was his constancy and perseverance; he was not a Reed
shaken with every wind, but as firm as a Rock, an immovable pillar in Gods
house, he was unchangeable in changeable times: in Religion he was a house
built upon a Rock, not on the Sand; and as he lived, so he dyed holily, even as
the ancient Patriarchs that dyed in the faith, and endured faithfully unto the
death.

Now this excellent Minister of Christ thus beautified with these Jewels, is
now perished as to his outward man, gathered to God, to Christ, and the blessed
company of Saints and Angels. The Application that I shall make of this
discourse, is this:

1. To us Ministers. 2. To you of this Parish and Congregation.
First, to us Ministers. God has of late years taken to himself many famous
men: seven of the Lecturers of Cornhil are dead, Mr. Buroughs, Dr. Bolton, Mr.
Sedgwick. Mr, Whitakers, Mr. Cranford, Mr. Vines, and now Mr. Ash. I might name
many other excellent Ministers that are dead, as Dr. Gouge, Mr. Walker, Mr.
Gataker, Mr. Marshal, Mr. Robinson, and lately Mr. Cook, with many more: Now
all these are warning-pieces from Heaven of Judgments approaching; For the
righteous perish, and no man lays it to heart; and merciful men are taken away,
none considering that the righteous are taken away from the evil to come. Thus
Methuselah dyed a year before the Flood: Now Methuselah in Hebrew signifies a
messenger of death. Thus Austin dyed a little before Hippo was taken; and
Pareus a little before Hiddleburg was taken, and ^uther a little before the
wars in Germany began. The death of the Godly is like the separating the
Israelites from the Tents of Corah and his company, like the taking of Lot out
of Sodom. When the Israelites departed from Corah and his company, the earth
swallowed them up; and when Lot departed out of Sodom, God rained down fire and
brimstone upon them. Let the thoughts of these things cause us to provide our
Arks, to get our Zoars. Let it teach young Samuels to rise up in the room of
old Elies; young Elisha's in the room of old Elijahs; and young Timothies in
the room of Paul the aged; that there may be a succession of Gospel Ministers
to hold forth the Word of life to the Nation. And let us labor to be
Inheritors of the Twelve Excellencies, that beautified this our Reverend
Brother.

Secondly, Let me speak a few words to you of this Parish, the Auditors of this
worthy Minister. There is scarce one man of an hundred, that understands the
tie and obligation that is betwixt a Minister and his People. Oh the Love and
Affection that ought to be betwixt them! Paul tells the Galatians, that they
could have plucked out their eyes for him if need were. Chrysostom tells us,
that when Miletus was taken away by death from his People, their hearts sunk
with sorrow; and such love had they to him, that they called all their Children
by his name, and got his picture engraven on their Rings. And I have read of
Chrysostom, that when he was banished from his People there was not a corner in
the City, but was full of People weeping and lamenting. The loss of a Godly
Minister is a public loss, and therefore there ought to be a public mourning:
it is a soul loss, and therefore methinks every one of you should weep and
mourn; you have lost your common Father: you of this Congregation have lost
your spiritual Father, your spiritual Shepherd: you have lost your eyes, your
guide: and indeed it is you that are his Flock, that must commend your Minister
by practicing that which he preached; says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3.1. Do we
again begin to commend our selves, or need we, as some others, Epistles of
Commendations to you, or Letters of commendation from you? Ye are our Epistle
written in our bearts, known and read all men. As if the Apostle should say, do
we need Letters of commendation? is it necessary that we should spend time in
commending our Ministry? you are our Letters of commendation: your holiness and
piety commends a Minister above all other things. As when a man comes into an
Orchard, or Vineyard, (says Chrysostom) and sees every thing skilfully
handled, and neatly trimmed, he need not spend time in commending the
Vine-dresser, or Carpenter, the work its self commends them. So ought it to be
among you. When we preach the Funeral Sermons of Ministers, we must look into
the Parish or Congregation and see what Letters of commendation there are:
whether the proficiency of the Auditors commend their Ministers, I grant, it is
not always true: God does not always give suceess to a godly Minister, but the
worst is yours, I had almost said, the curse is yours: but I will speak
modestly, the worst is yours. Tell me, how many of you are able to say, I bless
God that ever such a Minister was sent among us: blessed be God that ever we
heard him preach? what seal of his ministry is there here among you? he was in
another, and another place of this City, it may be here are people from all
places that have been his Auditors, what seal of his Ministry is there now to
be found among you? how many Souls has he plucked out of the snares of the
Devil? how many of you have gone weeping from a Sermon, knocking your breasts,
and pricked at the heart of sin, crying out, Men and Brethren what shall we do
to be saved? your tears and mourning for sin, these are the Auditors that
commend your Ministers. Go home now and think with your selves, what can I
remember of all the Sermons that I have heard from Mr. Ash? and give me leave
to tell you, woe be to you, if as your Minister be dead, so all the Sermons he
made die with him: for as Abel being dead, yet speaks, so shall the Sermons
of this worthy Minister, at the great day, speak for you, or against you: for
they are spiritual Talents that God has be-trusted you with, and you must be
accountable: both he and you shall appear before the Tribunal of God; your
Minister shall be examined, how he can free himself from the guilt of
Soul-blood? and you shall be examined, what fruit you brought forth answerable
to the means you have enjoyed? and if it appear you have been unprofitable and
unfruitful hearers, Christ will say, Cast the unprofitable servants into utter
darkness. But I hope better things of you, and things that accompany salvation.
What ever was good in this reverend Minister, let i^ live in you: and though he
be dead, yet let not his Sermons that he preached die with you, but let them be
in you: that at the great day, when he and you appear before God, he may be
able to say, here am I, and the Children that thou have given me.

Dr. Seaman's Farewel-Sermon.
Heb. 13.20, 21. Now the God of Peace, that brought again from the dead our
Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the
Everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good work, to do his will,
working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ;
to whom be Glory for ever and ever, Amen.
THe Apostle, being now upon the conclusion of this Epistle, after a very large
discovery of Jesus Christ, in all those things that belong to his Person,
concerning his Nature, as God, as Man, and concerning his Offices, especially
concerning his Priestly; and concerning the blessings and benefits, especially
in matters of Sacrifice, does in this last Chapter insist on matters Hortatory;
and in the words, draws near to a conclusion, which contains a Prayer, wish, or
desire, which he puts up unto God, in the behalf of them, in order to their
good and benefit. Now the God of peace, etc.

In which words, there are two things considerable.

1. The matter, of the Apostles Prayer. 2. The grounds, which he does insinuate
for Audience.
In the things he desires, the Matter of the Prayer is laid down in v. 21 and
is summarily and generally propounded in several expressions; yet nevertheless,
so as they have their Specialities belonging to them. In the beginning he shows
what he aims at, make you perfect, etc. In general it refers to their
Sanctification, and that they be thoroughly sanctified, as to their inward man,
and outward conversation, as to those things that belong to them, in the habits
of their minds, and Eternal carriage.

The Grounds which the Apostle uses, by way of insinuation for Audience, are
contained in the words of the 20. verse, wherein we have a very large
description of the Person prayed unto; The God of peace, that brought again
from the dead our Lord Jesus, etc. He describes him under such notes and marks,
as serve much for enlargment, and enforcement, in the matter of prayer.

But here a Question may arise; Seeing Grace is the thing the Apostle
principally desires, and it is usual with holy men, both under the Old and New
Testament, to choose out such Attributes, as sure most with their particular
occasions, and are most agreeable to those requests they have, why he does not
apply himself to God, as the God of all grace, but rather, the God of Peace?

Therein first, the Apostle seems to make use of that same liberty which
belongs to holy men. As there is in the General, a Liberty left to Gods People
from God himself: Paul in this place makes use of that liberty he had, as to
the manner of prayer, using such a description of God, as seemed good to him at
present. But secondly, if he be the God of Peace, it follows, he is the God of
Grace. If God has glorified himself so far among the Hebrews, as to reconcile
them to himself, by the blood of Christ, then there is no question, God will
proceed further; and having provided for those things which appertain to their
Justification, no question but he will for those things that are necessary to
their Sanctification. Therefore, the Apostle argues plainly from Justification,
to Sanctification; He that justifies his people through the Blood of Christ,
Sanctify you by the spirit of Christ, make you perfect to do his will, working
in you that which is wel-pleasing in his sight, etc. So desires we should be
Sanctified, on the consideration of our Justification; having provided for
Justification, by the blood of Christ, follows Sanctification by the spirit of
Christ, 1 These. 5.23. And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly, etc. that
God who is allied to you, the God of peace, and has provided for you Peace, I
desire he would further provide Sanctification; for Sanctification is nothing
else, but the effect of that grace, which is procured for Believers through the
blood of Christ. There is no access to God, for Sanctification of our Natures,
until we prevail with him for the Justification of our persons, and he first
shows himself to be a God of peace, by way of Justification, before a God of
Grace and Sanctification: But to proceed.

First, for the description of the person; wherein take notice of him.

1. By one of his Attributes. 2. By one of his special works, whereby he has
manifested that Attribute.
1. The Attribute of God, is employed, under those words, that he is called the
God of peace. The Gracious God that provides for reconciliation between himself
and sinners; that finds out ways and means to win those who are by nature
Children of wrath, to be the Children of God. There is no peace, but God is
Author of, whether natural peace, or civil peace, or political peace, he is
pleased to provide for them: but there is a transcendent kind of peace, which
does with a peculiarity belong to Gods people, i.e. Spiritual peace between God
and sinners, and that inward peace that we enjoy, if our conscience has been
troubled with terror of sin, Wrath, etc. Peace belongs so to God; as none of
the Creatures can have any Glory of it, Psalm. 4.7. The peace, is Gods peace:
none can effect it, or devise it, but God; and with respect to this, he is more
especially called the God of peace; because he has found out a way to make
reconciliation between God and his sinful perishing Creatures, 2 Cor. 5.19.
Ephesians. 2.14. etc. Col. 1.13.

2. There is a special Work of God attributed to him, that the Apostle takes
into consideration, i.e. That he brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus,
that Great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
Covenant; wherein we have many words, and every word its weight; and we shall
scarce be able to weigh every one so, as to take the full sense and emphasis of
them. In the words there is,

1. Something employed. 2. Something expressed.
1. Something employed; namely, That the Lord Jesus Christ was sometimes in the
state of death; and that being in the state of death, it was not any ordinary
power, way, or means, could ransom him. He was in the state and condition of
the dead: he was, for a while, under the power and dominion of Death: his body,
for the space of three days, lay in the Grave, and in that sense, he was under
the dominion of death, as all dead men are. The Great Shepherd of the sheep
could not have his own life, in some sense: no interest he had in God, by
virtue of Sonship or any of his Offices, could save him from death, though the
Son of God, and Head of the Church; and Christ looked upon it so far from being
below him, as he thought it necessary for him, and it was his glory, J^. 10.11,
12. I am the good Shepherd; the good Shepherd gives his life for the sheep: but
he that is an Hireling, and not the Shepherd: whose own the sheep are not,
sees the Wolf coming, and leaves the sheep and flees, etc. Hirelings they
have no spirit or principle in them, that they should lay down their lives for
the sheep: but he so much respected his Fathers glory, and good of his flock,
finding there was no way to bring them to salvation, as he denied himself in
all other respects, for their good: so in this respect lays down his life for
them. And herein the Church of God seems to have a deadly kind of wound, to be
at a deadly loss, Zach. 13.7. I will smite the Shepherd, and the sheep shall be
scattered. But herein lies the wonderful goodness and wisdom of God, he is
pleased to improve, as the life, so the death of Christ, for the good of his
Church, Luke 24.16. Ought not Christ to have suffered these things? it was very
expedient that seeing the sheep could not otherwise be saved but by the
Shepherds dying, that the Shepherd should lay down his life for the sheep: and
seeing no other way to make reconciliation to God, it was very expedient Christ
should die. Therefore it is to be taken notice of, that it does not mis-become
the Head, therefore not the members of the body. They must be content to lay
down their lives for the Flock, for so did the great Shepherd.

2. Something expressed. Where, take notice, First of the person spoken of.
Secondly, of that which is given us to be taken notice of in particular.


1. The Person to be taken notice of, is, our Lord Jesus Christ. That which we
have considerable, is,

First, The Title that belongs to him in his Church: in this regard, called,
The Great Shepherd of his sheep; The Shepherd of the sheep, yea, the great
Shepherd of the sheep. Whatsoever glory was to be communicated to any Member of
the Church, it was first put into the head, before they were to be made
partakers of it. Some were to be made inferior ranks, Ephe. 4.11. but it was
not fit any should have such glory, to be called Shepherds, before he had that
honor of him. Therefore it is the Great Shepherd, he that is Shepherd not of a
particular Congregation, but of the whole Church of God, he is the Savior of
all his body, he has the full number of all the Elect, both among the Jews and
Gentiles, committed to his charge to save.

2. What betides this great Shepherd, through Gods grace toward him, that is,
that he is brought again from the dead, i. e. that he does attain to a state of
Resurrection, and here take notice of this by the way, for consolation; The
great Shepherd of the Sheep does dye, but the great Shepherd of the Sheep rises
again. Herein argues Gods love, that though he would suffer him to dye, yet not
to see corruption, Psalm. 16.10. because he is the great Shepherd, therefore he
must dye; but because he is the great Shepherd, therefore he cannot continue in
the state of the Dead; Death must not triumph over the great Shepherd of the
sheep, no, not by any means. As it was necessary that he should dye, much more
that he should rise again. We read Rev. 11. concerning two Prophets: when they
had finished their course they dye, and their dead bodies are cast into the
streets, etc. but we read also of their resurrection. There is a twofold state
incident to those persons, one state of dying, another state of rising; and so
it is not peculiar to Christ only, but to others with him. The great Shepherd
of the Sheep dies; no wonder if the little Shepherds dye too. But the great
Shepherd is raised, so shall the little ones in their order, and in their time,
1 Pet. 5.6. When the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of
glory that fades not away. Resurrection is that which Christ exemplifies first
in his own Person, in order to assure all his members, they shall attain to the
same state with him; and God is as easily able to provide, when he sees
expedient, to raise them from the dead, as to suffer them to dye. Christ he
brought again by a high hand, and in a tryumphant manner; he did not with so
much sorrow and trouble to himself, and his Disciples, go to, but as
triumphantly come from the grave: So can God, with a word, in a moment bring
them to life again.

2. By what means the great Shepherd comes to have this honor conferred upon
him, that he should be raised from the dead? There was worth enough in his
person, but it is not altogether ascribed to this; but (through the blood of the
everlasting Covenant) i.e. by, and in, the virtue and efficacy of it: he had
died as a Priest, and his blood was a blood of sacrifice, and it was shed for
the remission of sins, and salvation of souls; because Christ did die for so
noble an end as this, and in such a manner as that his death became a
sacrifice, and did seal the everlasting Covenant, wherefore Christ is the
Mediator; therefore with consideration of this blood of Christ and of the ends,
uses, and benefits of it: hereupon it is that Christ is raised from the dead.
In Zac. 9. the resurrection of Christ was prophesied of, but by virtue of his
bloodshed, so that Christ was more fit to be raised, who dyed for such noble
and honorable ends, as the glory of God, and salvation of his people, in the
virtue of that Covenant God has made, and in the virtue of the blood of
Christ, shed for the sealing of that Covenant.

Now, what this Covenant is, is worthy to be considered, because of its
Epithets, called here Everlasting Covenant: There was a Temporal Covenant God
made with the people of Israel, and that was sealed and confirmed by the blood
of Bullocks, etc. Christ took not on him this Covenant, he did not bind men to
stand by those terms contained in the Covenant; for indeed, Christ came to make
void. There is an Eternal Covenant, and that is nothing else but those terms of
grace and favor, which are proposed to us in the Doctrine of the Gospel, which
amounts to this, who ever repents shall be saved: he that repents and forsakes
his sin shall find mercy; and that he will be merciful to all on these
conditions in all parts of the world; for these terms God will not repent of.
If men repent they shall have the benefit of it, and whoever believes shall be
saved. It Is called [Everlasting] because God will abide by it, both here and
hereafter: the states of all shall be determined according to the terms of this
Covenant. Now Christ shed his blood to procure those terms contained in that
Covenant: for the case of poor sinners was so miserable, that they could never
come to have all their sins pardoned, and their Souls certainly saved, unless
Christ had died and shed his blood, and so to satisfy Gods justice, that it
might be free for him to be merciful, where he would be merciful. The Covenant
is founded in the blood of Jesus Christ, that blood being the blood of the
Everlasting Covenant; therefore the Apostle so magnifies it, of all the great
and Gospel-blessings that belong to the New Testament, to the condition of a
child of God, there is not any like unto this, the blood of the Everlasting
Covenant; they that come to this, and have the benefit of this, they shall be
surely justified, and eternally saved in the virtue of this blood. In the
business of being saved by Faith, it contributes nothing more, but as it is an
Instrument to bring us to be made partakers of the benefit of this blood: we
are saved not by virtue of our believing, but by the virtue of his blood; so
that, it is not so much the Act, as the object of Faith that saves, Christ rose
in the virtue of his blood; and all our comforts and hopes are founded in his
blood. The blood of Christ was of so much value with God, as that he will raise
him from the dead, and it is of so much virtue to us, that through it we shall
have Justification, and Sanctification, and Salvation, God being so good and
gracious a God to Jesus Christ and his Church; hereupon the Apostle emboldens
himself to desire his further manifestation of his love, that where he has so
bountifully provided for the justification of sinners through the blood of
Christ, that he would provide for their sanctifying by his Spirit. Hence
observe,

1. God is with some fingularity, the God of Peace. 2. To the end that God
might show himself to be the God of Peace, he has provided an all-sufficient
Savior for his people, here called the Great Shepherd of the flock; and God
being of a gracious disposition toward them, provides to that end Christ shall
take care of them, and to all those things that pertain to their eternal
welfare. 3. It was expedient this person should dye, though the Great
Shepherd; Nay it was necessary, that it might be so much more verified and
manifested that he was the great Shepherd of the sheep, that he should lay
down his life for his flock. 4. It was as necessary that Christ should be
raised from the dead, as that he should dye. Therefore his continuance was but
a temporary, nay a momentary time to him. Now Christ is risen, yea, all power
in Heaven and Earth is committed to him; and if he was able to do any thing for
his people before, much more now. 5. The Resurrection of Christ does arise
partly from the tenor of the Covenant God made with man, and partly from the
virtue and benefit that was in the blood of Christ. God put himself into a
Covenant, Christ was Mediator of it, and in virtue of that Covenant sinners
must be saved; but the Savior must first save himself, raise himself from the
dead, and then has all power committed to his hand, etc. There are two things
that I would have you further observe and carry away.
1. That Christ is indeed the only Great Shepherd of the sheep. Whatsoever
others there are, they make to his own interest, whosoever there be that may
possibly entitle themselves under the name and notion, yet this is undeniable,
that Christ is the only Great Shepherd of the Sheep: therefore in the
concernments of the Church, there is none Christians should honor as Christ;
and whose voice they ought to hear before his, or by whom they should be ruled
and governed, but by him. If Christ be the great Shepherd, then the Church
must hear his voice, for my Sheep hear my voice, etc. And if he be the great
Shepherd, then the Church must be ruled by him, for the Shepherd must have the
ordering of the Flock, and the Flock must be at the disposal of the Shepherd.
And then thirdly: The Flock of Christ must be careful to please him, (for fear
he set his Dog upon him) that we provoke him not to exercise his correcting
power. He has his correcting power. He has his Rod of Discipline, (as well as
his Staff and Crook) which is to performed by others as seems good to him, for
he has many ways to let loose the Devil on his own Children. Satan had a
desire to afflict Job, and God gave way to it, etc. The Church of God, is Gods
Spouse, and there is a great deal of love between the Husband and the Wife,
between Christ and the Church: Yet Psalm. 4.5. this she is solemnly charged
withal. God has made Christ a head to his Church, therefore his Church must be
ruled by Christ; and it is not for the Church to say, the inferior Shepherds
would order me thus and thus, we must in the mean while say, but what does
Christ say in such cases? It is not for the Church to go aside by the Flocks of
his companions, Cant. 1.7. The companions of Christ pretended to be Shepherds
of the sheep as well as he, but have not that power Christ had: They have their
societies, and would have the ordering of them; but the Church desires to know
where she may hold Communion with Christ, that she may not turn aside by the
Flocks of her companions. There are many Disputations among inferior
Shepherds; but this is out of all dispute, that Christ is the great Shepherd of
the Sheep. That great man at Rome never pretended higher, then to be the Vicar
of Christ, and Successor of Peter: now we know that the Principal is much more
to be regarded then the Vicar; therefore if Christ be the Great Shepherd,
surely the Sheep of Christ must hear his voice before all other Shepherds,
especially since Christ has spoken so signally in the case, My sheep hear my
voice, and they follow me, a stranger will they not follow, for they know not
the voice of strangers. And God having so solemnly commanded, Mat. 17.5. This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him. The Great Shepherd
must be heard before all little Shepherds. The little Shepherds have their
divisions, Acts 20.29. After my departure shall grievous wolves enter in among
you, not sparing the Flock, also of your own selves shall men arise speaking
perverse things, to draw away Disciples after them. True Shepherds are always
careful to make Disciples for Christ, and to bring all Disciples to Christ, All
John's work was to make Disciples, to put them over to Christ, not to make
Disciples to him, but to make over all his Disciples unto Christ. If any man
will gather, he must gather for Christ, not himself, others would draw men to
any matter or manner of Doctrine, Government etc. But our eye must be upon
Christ, and our ear open to his voice, and our hearts awed with his will and
mind in Scripture, made known to his Church; and they love not Christ as they
ought, that desire not to hear his voice before any others in the world, for he
is the great Shepherd of the sheep.

2. Though he be the great Shepherd of the sheep, ye he died; and though he
die, yet because he is the great Shepherd of the sheep, he is raised again. The
great Shepherd dies, the little Shepherds must not think much of it, if they be
called to die: We must be contented, if it be exemplified in us, if occasion
serve; for if God spared not the great Shepherd, what have the little Shepherds
to plead for themselves that they should be spared? If the case fall out, while
Harbor to serve the Church as I can, I come to suffer for the Church in the
end, I do rejoice, and I will rejoice. And truly we had need to pray for such a
spirit as this; for, if this was in the great Shepherd of the sheep, it will
very well become the little Shepherds. But against the fear of death here is the
comfort. The great Shepherd of the sheep dies, yet is raised from the dead; so
shall the little ones; not one Member of the flock, death can always triumph
over him. In this respect Christ will have all his Members to be raised, in
that he got the victory over death; for Christ arose as the First Fruits, and
ascended into Heaven as a forerunner. Though we may have denial as to the
advancing of Christ's service, etc. yet the resurrection of the dead is that we
must take into our thoughts, and it is our solid comfort, God will one day bring
all the sheep together into one Fold, and David shall be their King, and have
the ruling and ordering of them to all eternity. There is a Resurrection to
little Shepherds: when we come to lay down our natural lives, we-can look for
no other recompense for it but our Resurrection, and the thoughts of it must be
our comfort. And oh! how does this encourage us to come unto God, though sin be
heavy upon us? Remember, there is a God of Peace, that takes to himself his
Name, for this very end, that sinners may know for their encouragement, that
Reconciliation is wrought out between God and them, through Jesus Christ; and
if they will but come and take hold of the blood of the everlasting Covenant,
Christ has said, they shall have all the blessings and benefits promised in
the Covenant of Grace, and that the blood of Christ can procure for them; they
shall have forgiveness of sins, and salvation of Soul. Therefore, when we
consider Christ has dyed to have a Flock, and for saving of the Flock, and to
make himself the God of Peace through his blood, this should com^^^. (...)

It remains, we come to confider of the matter of the prayer: this is very
full, make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that
which is well-pleasing in his sight, etc. Here we are to observe two things:
First, The matter of the Apostles desire. Secondly, The measure of it. The
matter of his desire, is, That the Hebrews may be made perfect in every good
work to do the will of God, i. e. That they may be fully and thoroughly
regenerate, sanctified throughout, both in soul and body, and that they may be
furnished with all graces, and enabled for every duty. Take notice of every one
of the Expressions: First, make you perfect: it is the duty of Christians to
perfect every good work, to cleanse themselves from all the impurity of flesh
and spirit, and to perfect holiness in the fear of the Lord, 2 Cor. 7.1.
Secondly, in every good work, in matters of Piety, Righteousness, Charity,
Sobriety; for within these heads, most of these things may be comprehended that
belong to Christians, they will go a very great way to make a perfect
Christian, but that Christian cannot be perfect, that is not sanctified in
every one of these. Thirdly, to do his will; that you may be ready, cheerfully
willing to do his will on all occasions.

But how is it possible flesh and blood should attain to this? that they should
be perfect in every good work? Why, says the Apostle, working in you that
which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ. Working in you: You
see thereby all our works depend on God, and it is in vain for us to build on
any Foundation but this; for it is God that works in you, both to will and to
do of his good pleasure, etc. Col. 2.12. through the faith of the operation of
God; working in you, or doing in you, or causing in you, or making in you, that
which is well-pleasing in his sight. Our work is to depend on Gods work; our
outward working, depends on Gods inward working.

Again, that which is acceptable in Gods sight, but it is only through Jesus
Christ; good works themselves, though never so good, agreeable to the Law and
Gospel; yet if God look not on our persons and works through Christ, they will
not serve the turn, ye cannot be accepted; working in you that which is
well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ. Will God be pleased with
nothing, but only for Christ Jesus his sake? and if it do not please Christ, it
will not please God. It Is truly, plainly, verily so. That which God cannot
accept of through Christ, he does not accept at all; but now things are so
ordered, that God has put all things into Christ's hands; Christ Jesus has the
ordering of the Worship and Government of the Church; he has the making of all
the Articles of the Christians Creed; a Christian is bound to believe nothing,
but what Christ teaches, as necessary to Salvation; so that in Christ we are
complete, if we believe as he teaches us to believe; and if we worship God as
he teaches us to worship God, and have such order and government concerning his
house, and walk so as we desire in all things to please our Lord and Master,
and have him before our eyes; then are we returned unto Christ, the Shepherd
and Bishop of our souls. But if we present God with any kind of Creed, Model of
Worship, or Government, that has not Christ's Image and stamp upon it, God will
say, as Christ concerning the money, Whose Image or Superscription does it
bear? If we can say Christ's; the way of worship we have learned from Christ,
that Order and Government in the Church we have learned from Christ, then the
Father and Son will own it: If it have Man's superscription upon it, not Gods or
Christ, I cannot tell how we should presume it can be acceptable to God,
through Christ; for God has so confined himself, he will not be pleased, but
through Christ; and that all Matters of Religion in the New Testament should be
ordered according to Christ's mind, as the Old according to Moses. It Is
necessary we enquire after Christ's mind in what we do: If we can do any thing,
and in doing it, are sure it will be acceptable to God through Christ, well and
good; otherwise not. This is the Apostles prayer, That God would make them
perfect in every good wark to do his will, working in them that which is
well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ.

The Doxology. Whether we refer it to God or Christ, it is all all one; we have
no body to honor and glorify in the Church but God through Christ: We cannot
tell how to divide those that are so nearly united. Therefore when we glorify
God, we glorify Christ. And this me must observe: God has ordered all men's
concomments so, that we have nothing to plead for our Souls salvation, but Gods
grace: the Rule in his Word, his Gospel that he has made known to us: and
therefore let the Word of God dwell in you richly, in all wisdom. There is a
great deal of Do in Gods Church, about This and That: he that must determine
the business is Christ; and there are but two ways: the determining things for
the present, and for the time to come; hereafter by questioning the matter of
fact; for the present, by making of our Rule. When the question comes
concerning the matter of fact, there he receives our Rule: What has Christ
said? how has Christ provided in things of this nature? It Is plainly so and
so: but in dubious matter and customs, and the like, I know not how to answer
them, when we shall come to auswer Christ, when he shall put the question; Did
you not know whom you was bound to fear? Did I speak nothing at all in the
case, neither generally nor particularly? Could you not by any means come to
understand my mind? I doubt we shall not be able to answer this. But we must
say we found a certain state in the Word; but having laws and customs among our
selves, therein were at a stand. Why (says Christ) was your Laws and Customs
above, or below my Word? Must your Law be ruled by my Word, or my Word by your
Doctrine? Did not all Christians hold out this, that the Word of Christ was
above all authority, in the matters of Christ? Shall the Members of the Body
become greater than the Head? Therefore you could not be ignorant in this case:
your own professing me to be so great, in all my Natures and Offices; but when
you come to practice, then you will deny me. Shall we be able to answer this?
We must consider of this, that if we would please God it must be through
Christ; and then we must carry our s^lves, as directed by Christ Jesus in his
Word; and nothing can take us off that principle, no pretense whatsoever; for
Christian Religion is such a thing in the nature and substance of it as Jesus
Christ is the Author of. Therefore if Christ be the Author, all that belongs to
Christian Religion, as to its substance, we should account nothing of moment in
Religion, but only that which we can ascribe to Christ, as the Author of it.
The care of the Church is in the hand of Christ, whatsoever providence are let
in on the Church, to exercise or try the Church, all must be born patiently;
but every Member must worship him: God has made Jesus Christ a Shepherd, etc.
In what he finds fault, we must not justify: what he commands, we must
approve; what he calls to be done, we must practice; what is not his, we must
not own as his. Much may be drawn from this, both for instruction and
consolation, that Christ is the great Shepherd: though he die in his Members,
he shall rise in his Members: I may say, though he die in his Ministers, he
shall rise in his Ministers, Isa. 59.21. As for me, this is my Covenant with
them, says the Lord, my spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have
put into thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor cut of the mouth of
thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord, from
henceforth, and for ever. This is a part of the Covenant, that the Word and
Spirit of Christ shall be continued among the Members throughout all Ages: God
will provide, his children shall not live without a Spirit, neither without his
Word; God has engaged himself for both, for the one as well as the other, that
there shall be a super-addition, and perpetuating of them: and herein we must
depend upon the faithfulness of the great Shepherd of the sheep.

Mr. Venning's Farewel-Sermon.
Heb. 10. Verse 23. Let us hold fast the Profession of our Faith without
wavering, (for he is faithful that promised.)
THat Christians are greatly concerned, not only to believe, and to make
Profession of their belief, but to hold fast their faith, and the Profession of
it, is that which I have already proved unto you; the several Obligations that
lie upon Christians hereunto, have been in one or two Sermons handling among
you: the great Obligation here annexed is, (for he is faithful that has
promised.) From whence, and from other places of Scripture, I have deduced
several Arguments, and propounded them unto you: the last of which was this;
None can promise us better than God can; none can threaten us worse than God
can, and therefore it concerns us to hold fast; If any man can do more for you,
or against you than God can, leave God, and cleave to that person; but seeing
that is impossible, let it be as impossible for you to leave God: Can any body
promise you better than Heaven? and that God has promised to them that do
believe. Can any threaten you with worse than Hell? and that God has threatened
to them that do not believe. I shall now proceed to touch the remaining
Arguments that are behind, and give you a few helps, with which I shall
conclude this discourse at this time; I pray God I may not say Preaching too:
There are several Arguments to be drawn,

First, From the Subject concerned, Us. Secondly, From the Object, the
Profession of our Faith. And, Thirdly, From the Act, with the Qualifications,
Hold fast without wavering.
First, From the subject concerned, Us; Let [us] hold fast, whatever others do;
if they let go Faith, and God, and Heaven, and Souls, and All, yet let us hold
fast. Whatever the Apostle speaks of, or to Believers, there is a very great
Emphasis in the word we, or us, as in the first of Tim. 6.8. says he, Having
Food and Raiment, let us be content. Indeed he might have said, let every man
be content; but the Emphasis lies in the us: if no body else will be content,
yet let us: for a Christian lies under more Obligations to all manner of
virtue, than any other man does. If Nature will not be content with little, yet
let Grace; Let [us] be content. So here, let us hold fast our Profession: It
may be others will let it go; I, but let us hold it fast: let us among whom,
let us upon whom, let us in whom such mighty things have been done by God, let
us hold fast, or else it will be an intolerable upbraid, and condemnation to
us. That it will be both, see but two Texts of Scripture: the first is in Mat.
11.20, 21. Then began he (that is Christ) to upbraid the Cities wherein most of
his mighty works were done, because they repented not. Woe unto thee Chorazin,
woe unto thee Bethsaida, for if the mighty works that were done in you, had been
done in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in Sackcloath and
Ashes: but I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon, at
the day of Judgment, than for you. And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto
Heaven, shall be brought down unto Hell; for if the mighty works which have
been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this
day. But I say unto thee, that it shall be more tolerable for the land of
Sodom, at the day of judgment, than for thee. Pray, do but mark, what an
upbraid their is, and what ground, because mightier works had been done among
these, than among others. Now it seems to be a little excusable, that they,
where these mighty works had not been done, did not repent; and therefore,
their punishment shall be more tolerable: but it will be more inexcusable for
them, among whom less mighty works have been done. If they do not comply with
the design of God, their condition will be far more intolerable: They that
have been lifted up to Heaven, as it were, that have as it were seen Christ
crucified before there eyes, for them to Apostatize and turn away from Christ,
of how much sorer punishment shall they be thought worthy? Certainly, th^se
very persons, that have great and mighty works done among them, and upon them
too, great Convictions and strong Resolutions, and yet they shall Apostatize:
Oh! how will God upbraid these persons? Now see that other Text, that speaks as
dreadful as this, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. For it is impossible for those who are once
enlightened, and have tasted of the Heavenly gift, and were made partakers of
the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good Wo^d of God, and the power of the
world to come, if they shall fall away, to renew them to repentance: Seeing
they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open
shame. It is the greatest disgrace and affront that man can put upon Christ, to
Apostatize from him, (it is not half so much not to own him) for by that they
crucify him again, and put him to an open shame: it is as if they told all the
world, that this Christ is not worth a believing in, and it were but to throw
away their time and happiness to believe in him. Well then, let us that pretend
to such enlightnings, and say, we have tasted of the Heavenly gift, and of the
good Word of God, and of the first Fruits of Heavin, let us hold fast, lest we
come under this upbraid and condemnation.

But more particularly, let us hold fast, as we are concerned to do, if we
consider.

1. What we were before Faith. 2. What we were by Faith. 3. What we shall be at
the end of Faith.
1. What we were before Faith: What were we before Christ wa^ preached, and
before we believed? What were we? Why, much worse than if we had not been:
considered in our case and state, it is better not to be at all, than to be a
sinner: it were better not to be a people, than not to be the people of God.
Now, What were we before Faith? Why, truly, we were not a people: so the
Scripture tells you, They that were not a people, are now the people of God; so
that, if we were not the people of God, we are, as if we were not a people.

We were; What were we before Faith? Dark. We were the darkness it self, as the
Apostles expression is, in Ephesians. 5.8. says he, Ye were sometimes darkness.
The very light that was in us, was Darkness, corrupting our Understandings and
Imaginations; the Understanding dark. We are dead, yea, under the worst of
deaths: dead in sin: You, says he, that were dead in sins and trespasses, has
he quickened. How were they dead in sins? Did they not live in sin? Yes, says
he, wherein you walked. Why? what is their Death? To live in sin, is to be dead
in sin; all the while the Prodigal lived in his sin, the Father said of him, he
was dead: My Son that was dead is alive.

We were; What were we before Faith? Why, we were children of wrath, as well as
others.

Now, Beloved, consider how many abide thus to this day in darkness: Dead in
sin, and Children of wrath. When you are, or pretend to be, translated out of
this Darkness, into the mavelous light; will not you hold fast? You that were
dead, as well as others, and now live, is this your requital of God, that you
will not let it go? Oh! I beseech you have a care of that.

2. Let us consider, What we are by Faith: and that will be another obligation
upon us. We were not so bad before Faith, but we are better by Faith. We were
not in so miserable a case before believing, but we are in as happy a case when
we do believe. Why? what are we? we are alive, and Children of Light, and
Children of God.

We are alive: You has he quickened, says he, or made alive; and, My Son that
was dead is alive. Now, what is the work of the Living? It is to praise God,
The Living, and the Living, they shall praise thee, as I do this day. Now if
this be the work of the Living, then consider, if we hold not fast our Faith;
if we Apostatize, we are so far from doing the work of the Living, that is of
praising God, that we do all the dishonor we can to God; we do the work of
dead men: Yea, we are twice dead.

We are Children of the Light: Ye were in darkness, but now are light in the
Lord. Now it is very observable, what the Apostle speaks concerning the
children of darkness, and the children of the light, 2 These. 5.5. You
Believers, says he, are all the children of the light, and the children of the
day; we are not of the night, nor of darkness; but what follows? therefore let
us not sleep as do others: but let us watch, and be sober: why? for they that
sleep, sleep in the night; and they that be drunk be drunk in the night: if any
stagger, that is the work of the night, this is not the work of the day: Now
every Apostate that wavers, he is like a man that is drunk, so that he acts
clean contrary to the children of the day. Says he, They that are drunk, are
drunk in the night; but says he, Let us watch and be sober, and let us who are
of the day, put on the Breast Plate of Faith, and for a Helmet the hope of
Salvation.

We are by believing, the Children of God, Gal. 3.26. For we are all the
children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus: now, Beloved, are we weary of so
honorable a Title, as being the children of God? why, we are the children of
God by Faith in Christ Jesus. Will any body part with so great a Title as this?
why, if we are weary of being God's Children, whose can we be? none but the
Devils: and had we rather be the Devils Children than Gods? there are but these
two, either you must be Children of God, or the Devils children; now you are
the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus: oh therefore let us hold fast the
profession of our Faith, seeing by Faith we are the Children of God.

3. Let us consider what we shall be at the end of Faith: why, we shall be
saved, 1 Pet. 1.4, 5. and 9. verses compared, He has begotten us to an
Inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in
Heaven for you, who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation,
ready to be revealed in the last times; and in the ninth verse, says he,
receiving the end of your Faith, even the salvation of your souls; so that, it
seems, to be weary of believing, it is to be weary of being saved; not to hold
fast Faith, is not to hold fast Salvation; for, says he, you are saved by
Faith, and the end of your Faith is the Salvation of your souls. Can you be
contented to be damned? can you have patience to think of going to Hell? Now,
put all these together, and will you not hold fast? you that before Faith were
but darkness, were but dead, were but children of wrath, who by Faith are made
children of light, are made alive, and the children of God; and who at the end
of Faith, shall receive the salvation of our Souls: And shall not we hold fast?
shall we leave this Faith? but then secondly,

A second Argument in the Text shall be drawn from the Object, and that is
twofold; there is faith, and the profession of this faith, that is to be held
fast; and there are Arguments from both; First Faith, hold fast faith: why are
we so greatly concerned, and so highly obliged to hold fast Faith? I will give
you this one reason for it, it is the most holy Faith; There are many things
may be called Faith, that may not be called most holy Faith: there are many
faiths that are at least called holy: Turkish faith, is by them called holy
faith: the Romish faith, is by them called holy faith: I, but this is the most
holy faith; there is an expression that Jude has, to commend faith to us, in
the 20 verse of his Epistle, But ye beloved, building up your selves on your
most holy faith, etc. Let other pretenders be as holy as they can, they can
never rise to the holiness of this, this is the most holy faith, it is so holy
in so high a degree as to be beyond compare. I, but now, what is it that may
denominate this faith to be the most holy faith? why, it has for its Author
the most holy God; it is the gift of God, and the work of God, if we take it
for the Act of faith: and the doctrine of God, if we take it for the doctrine
of faith. There are, as the Apostle says, gods many, but we know but one most
holy God: there are that will be called your Holiness in the world; but this is
the most holy God, a God that is glorious in holiness; yea whose glory is to be
holy. There is nothing stamps glory on any subject like holiness: what is the
difference between the Angels in Heaven, and the Angels in Hell, but Holiness?
that is their glory, the the holy Angels; and that is their shame, the sinful
Angels: and what was it that made Canaan a better land than another? was it not
the holiness? it was the holy Land: what was it that made the Temple? a better
place than another? was it not because it was the holy Temple? Yea, it is the
glory of all the Attributes of God, that they are holy. His Justice would look
like severity, but that it is holy: His Power would look like Tyranny, were it
not holy: His Love would look like fondness, were it not holy: His Patience
would look like a toleration of sin, were it not holy: therefore it is said,
the Lord God glorious in holiness. Now this most holy God is the Author of this
Faith, and so it is a most holy faith, it being the Word of the most holy God;
and will you leave, and not hold fast this most holy Faith?

But then besides, It may be said to be the most holy faith in this sense too,
that it is its nature where ever it comes to make the subject in whom it is,
most holy: says the Apostle, you has God chosen, to wit, by Faith, to be a
peculiar people, a holy Nation, Acts 15.2. it is said, He has purified their
hearts by faith, and he will give them an ^nheritance among them that are
sanctified by faith. It may be called the most Holy Faith, in these two
respects.

First, Considering the operation and effects it has upon the hearts and lives
of them in whom it is: it makes them a holy People, beyond all the people in
the world: And then upon this account too, as to the uhimate effects of it,
that it admits us into the most holy places. You know the Holy of Holies in the
Temple, was a Type of Heaven, and Jesus Christ is said to enter into the Holy
of Holies, that is into Heaven. Now this does admit us into the most holy
place, where the most holy God is, says the Apostle, Having therefore boldness
to enter into the holiest, by the blood of Jesus. Alas, in the time of old they
could go but into the outward court: but now, says he, We have all this
boldness to enter into the most holy place by the blood of Jesus. Shall we
leave such a Faith as this? shall we not hold fast the most holy Faith, that is
from the most holy God, that makes the most holy people, and that admits us
into the most holy place? Where do we find such another Faith as this is? if
you leave this Faith that is so good in it self, a Faith that does so much good
to us; and, which is better, that makes us so good: for it is much better to be
made good, than to have good done unto us; and beloved, what will it avail us,
if God should do us good all our days, if we be not made good? if we should
have the good of health and wealth, and long life, and yet not be made good all
this while, it avails us not: now this is the nature of Faith, it is good in it
self, it does good to us, and it makes us good: therefore beloved, let us not
lay it aside, until we can find a better, and that we shall never do, unless we
can find any thing more holy than God.

But secondly, The second Branch of the Object is, the Profession of our Faith.
It seems, Beloved, it is not enough to hold fast our Faith only, but the
Profession of it: why so? truly there is this in it: the profession of faith,
is as necessary as the faith it self; mark that. See this from the mouth of
that great Apostle, I may say from the mouth of God himself, Romans 10.9, 10.
That if thou shall with thy mouth confess thy Lord Jesus, and shall believe in
thy heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved; for with
the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is
made unto salvation: An unprofessed Faith has no salvation annexed to it; you
see the Scripture makes it as necessary to our salvation, to profess our
believing, as to believe. Now beloved, if it be necessary to believe, and
necessary to profess, its then necessary to hold fast Faith; and consequently
as necessary to hold fast the profession thereof; without Faith there is no
salvation, faith the Scripture; and says this Scripture, without the
profession of this Faith, there is no Salvation: now to say, I will keep faith,
I will only part with a little profession, it is all one in Scripture, as to
part with Faith it self; for why, the Scripture faith, If thou believe with thy
heart, and confess with thy mouth, thou shall be saved: so that as long as
faith continues, profession is to continue, or there is no salvation; faith
without profession, will do no more for you, than profession without faith:
therefore observe what the Apostle speaks, Heb. 3.13. says he, We are made
partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our confidence steadfast unto
the end: not else.

Thirdly, A third Argument is drawn from the act with the qualifications, let us
hold fast without wavering; Now there are two things, to name no more, that are
hugely obliging in this very act, with its qualification; first, it is a manly
act to hold fast that which is good: and it is a childish act to let it go. I
say it is a manly act; it argues something of a great soul, and of a great
understanding, and of a manly resolution, to hold fast that which is good, but
it is childish to let it go, and therefore see how the Apostle puts these
together, Ephesians. 4.13, 14. says he, speaking there, That God has given some
Prophets, some Apostles, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers,
for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for edifying of
the work of the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of faith, and of
the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ. Now he comes in the 14 verse to add, That we
henceforth be no more children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
wind of Doctrine by the slight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereas they lay
in wait to deceive: it is not for a man to be tossed to and fro with every wind
of Doctrine; for a child to be bought out of a Pearl with a bauble, is no great
matter: but for a man, what a shame is it? why, we should be men, not children,
tossed to and fro with every wind of Doctrine: now beloved: you know the
Scripture calls upon us in such Language as this, Be courageous, and quit your
selves like men; be not children, that will dance after every pipe, tossed to
and fro, and always unstable.

Secondly, It is not only a manly act to hold fast that which is good, and
childish to let it go: but it is a Christian act, a proper Christian act, a
right Christian act, it is that which does distinguish a true Christian from a
hypocrite and a counterfeit; you know it is a character of a Godly man, he is a
praying man: there went up two men into the Temple to pray, the one was a
hypocrite, the other a Publican; now, what is there then in prayer, that does
distinguish these two men? why faith Job, will the hypocrite pray always? no
not he. I will warrant you, that is well, he held out in the profession of God
and of his Worship and Service; the Sains are always said to pray: but as for
the hypocrite, will be pray always? no not he; for here the true children of
God, they will hold fast; but Hypocrites and Formalists, they will let go. Now
mark here, the Apostle makes this distinction, Heb. 10. ver. last; But we are
not of them who draw back to perdition, but of them that believe to the saving
of their souls; that is, of them that believe to the end: for the end of our
Faith is the salvation of our Souls: now pray you mark by the way, what you
draw back to; when you draw back, you draw back to perdition; they that go
backward, go to Hell. How, says he, We are not of them that draw back to
perdition, but of them that believe to the saving of their souls: that is, of
those that believe to the end; and this is the difference he makes between them
that are the People of God, and them that are not, that to the end holds fast,
the other lets go. Thus I have given you an account of the Arguments that are
couched in these words, drawn from the Subject, the Object, and the Act, with
its qualifications. I think I promised you a few helps, with which I shall
conclude, take them in these three or four particulars.

First, Would you hold fast? (I cannot but believe it to be all your desires)
well then, if you would hold fast, let me beseech this of you, take heed of
all, and every sort of men, that make Religion a Trade to get money, by which
perhaps you will say, are there any such in the world? Oh, I would there were
not. See that 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, 5. where the Apostle acquaints you with such men,
says he, If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even
the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the Doctrine which is according to
godliness, the wholesome Doctrine, the healing Word: what then? in the 4. verse,
says he, he is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions, and
strifes of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings,
perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the Truth;
supposing that gain is Godliness, or as most read it, that godliness is a gain,
a mere trade to get money by; from which withdraw thy self: If you be not
baptized, they will tell you, you are not a Christian; and baptized you shall
not be, unless you pay for it: they will tell you, cat flesh you must not at
such and such times; but if you will pay for it, you may: they will tell you,
you must not sin by no means; but if you will pay for it, you may, and have a
pardon for it when your have done, such a one as they can give. Oh I beseech
you, when ever any make use of Religion to get money by, take heed of them,
faith the Apostle, from those that make godliness a Trade to get money by,
withdraw thy self, and know, that godliness with contentment, is great gain.
Doubtless, godliness is the best Trade in the world, if closely followed; but
the worst, if worldlily followed; but to take up a Profession of the Christian
Religion, merely for pomp and state, and to get gain; Oh rueful! Is Christian
Religion made use of for such ends as this? Oh! take heed therefore as ever you
would stand fast in the Faith, and hold fast the profession thereof, take heed
of all, and every sort of men, that makes use of Religion to get money by.

Secondly, Take heed of the error of the wicked, lest you fall from your own
stedfastness: this advice you have from the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 3.17. Ye
therefore Beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware, lest you also
being led away by the error of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness; the
error of the wicked, is like to make one as wicked as they: pray, what was this
error of the wicked? It was this; there were a generation of wicked men, that
said, It was in vain to serve God, for, say they, Where is the promise of his
coming? Only, Beloved, it was as much as to say, there was no reward for
godliness, nor no wages for ungodliness. Oh! take heed of this error of the
wicked* it is a wicked error, and none but wicked ones hold it, to wit, That it
is in vain to serve God: therefore keep this still in your hearts, that, Verily
in keeping his Commandments there is great reward; if there were no more but
the very work, it is great honor to us, that we may be servants to such a God;
but, Beloved, Be steadfast and unmovable, knowing that your labor shall not be
in vain in the Lord. Mal. 3.13. there is the like instance: Your words have
been stout against me, says the Lord, yet ye say, what have we spoken so much
against thee? this God is always quarrelling with us, and laying things to our
charge; what have we said? in the 14 verse, Ye said it is in vain to serve God,
and what prosit is it that we have kept his Ordinances? we have walked
mournfully before the Lord of hosts, and now we call the proud happy, yea, they
that work wickedness are set up, yea, they that tempt God are even delivered:
well now, what follows? They they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to
another: as if they had said, let not these things take any thing off the edge
of our affections, or quench any flame of our love: did God take any notice of
this now, that he had any such friends in the world? yes, says he, God
hearkened, and heard, and a book of remembrance was written before him, for them
that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his Name, and they shall be mine,
says the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my Jewels, and I will spare
them, as a man spares his own son that serves him: there is a time coming the
day will declare, whether it be serving God or the Devil: well then beloved, as
ever you would hold fast the profession of your Faith, take heed of the error
of the wicked, never think it vain to serve God, though you may lose b^ it;
for, if ye lose for him, ye shall never lose by him.

Thirdly, Would you hold fast the Profession of your Faith? then lay up the
word of Faith in a good and honest heart, Luke 8.15. It is said there of the
good ground; they are they which have heard the Word, kept it, or hold it fast:
where do they lay it up now? in a good and honest heart: so that you must pull
out his heart, before that you can pull out the Word, and will any man suffer
his heart to be torn from him? you never hold it fast till you lay it up in a
good and honest heart; if it be only in the hands, as a Bible in your hands, or
in the head, it will be gone; but if it be in your hearts, you will never let
it go: therefore observe, says he, Having heard it, they keep it, and hold it
fast in an honest and good heart, and bring forth fruit with patience: they had
a great deal of sufferings to bring with patience; for, if they were not under
suffering, what need were there of patience?? Well, beloved, consider a little
further, as to this, the Connection between the verse preceding the Text, and
the Text, says he; Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of
faith, having our hearts sprinkled with a pure conscience, and our bodies
washed with pure water. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith: the
purity of the heart is the best preservative of the Faith. 1 Timothy 3.9. Holding
the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience; a good and honest heart will
never part with the mysteries of faith,

Lastly, Would you hold fast the profession of your Faith? then look much to,
and often consider Jesus Christ, the Author and finisher of your Faith. David
had got the faculty of walking with God, and how was it? says he, I will keep
thy loving kindness before mine eyes, that I may walk with thee. Oh! if we do
but keep the loving kindness of God in Jesus Christ before our eyes, we shall
certainly keep the faith. Says the Apostle, having a high Priest over the
House of God, let us draw near, and let us hold fast; a high Priest, that is
Jesus Christ, our great high Priest, Heb. 3.1. Wherefore, holy Brethren, he
partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the Apostle, and high Priest of our
Profession, Christ Jesus. Heb. 4.14. Seeing then that ye have a great high
Priest, that is passed into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast
our Profession, Heb. 12.2. Looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our
Faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, despised the
Shame, and is set down at the right hand of the Throne of God!. Oh! let us be
thinking of, and looking to this Jesus. You will say, what shall we think of
him? Oh! think of this condescension in the world, of that vouchsafement,
which, as was never the like of his; how he humbled himself, and suffered being
God for man: Think how he became poor that was rich, that we that were poor
might become rich; think how he became a curse, think how he became sin for us,
think what a good Confession he made before Pontius Pilate, even to death, and
was obedient to the death: Think how he conquered death by dying, and how he
rose again by his Almighty power, and ascended into Heaven, and ever lives to
make intercession for those that come to the Father through him: Think how he
lived here on earth in a sad condition, and joyed in it, so that it might be
for our good, and shall we leave such a Christ as this? Oh! can you look upon
Christ, and leave the Profession of your Faith? It cannot be: keep Christ
before your eyes, make him your pattern, and you will not, you cannot do amiss.
He that says he abides in him, ought to walk as he walked: he walked in
obedience all his days, and was obedient to the death: So must we, we must walk
in all obedience all our days, though we dye for being obedient. You see now,
how many Arguments there are for our holding fast the Profession of our Faith.
There are many now that might be added, but the time is past; therefore I shall
shut up all in the words of Jude, from the 20 ver. of this Epistle to the end,
But you, Beloved, building up your selves on your most holy Faith, praying in
the Holy Ghost, keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of
our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life, and of some have compassion, making a
difference; and others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire, hating
even the garment spotted by the flesh. Now unto him that is able to keep you
from falling, and present you faultless before the presence of his glory with
exceeding joy, to the only wise God and Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion
and Power, now and for ever. Amen.

Mr. Matthew Newcomen His Farewel-Sermon. Preached at Dedham in Essex, Aug.
20.1662.
Rev. 3. Verse 3. Remember therefore how thou have received and heard, and held
fast, and repent.
I Began this Scripture the last Lords day in this Congregation. I told you
then, there were three Doctrines obvious in the Text; the first was,

Doct. 1. That it is the Duty of Christians, to remember those Truths that:
they have heard and received.

Doct. 2. That it is the Duty of Christians, to hold fast the Truth that they
have heard and received.

Doct. 3. That continued repentance, is the Duty of Christians, as well as
initial Repentance. Remember therefore how thou have received, and heard, and
hold fast, and repent.

The first of these Doctrines, I applied my self to, and applied to the people
last Lord's Day, and shall not now say any thing of it; but proceed to the next
Doctrine, that it is the Duty of Christians, To hold fast the Truths that they
have heard and received. That which the Apostle enjoins on Timothy, in
proportion, the duty of all Christians, 2 Timothy 1.13. Hold fast the form of
sound words, which thou have heard of me in Faith, and Love, which is in Christ
Jesus. The whole entire body of Divine Truth. Hold it fast against all
opposition whatsoever. Now if they that are themselves Teachers of the Truth to
others, must hold fast the Truth, according to the Platform that has been
delivered to them; then much more is it the duty of private Christians, who are
supposed, not to have that latitude of Parts and Gifts that Teachers have: And
therefore you shall find, that Christ requires this not only of the Pastors,
but of the Members of his Church: Rev. 2.24. speaking not only to the Angels,
but to the Body of the Church: But to you, I say, and to the rest in Thyatira,
as many as have not this Doctrine, and which have not known the depths of Satan
as they speak, I will put upon you none other burden, but that which you have
already; bold fast till I come. As if he should say, This is all I require of
you my people, keep your selves, and hold fast that which you have till I come.
And so in Rev. 3.11. Behold I come quickly, hold that fast which thou have,
that no man take away thy Crown. As if he should say, That Divine Truth, that
thou have heard and received, it is thy Crown, thy excellency, therefore hold
it fast. This duty of holding fast the Truth, it is thy Crown, thy excellency,
therefore hold it fast. This Duty of holding fast the Truth, is urged in many
other places of Scripture, under other expressions; as that of continuing in
the Word of God. Christ says, If ye continue in my Word, then are ye my
Disciples indeed. And continuing in the Faith, Acts 14.22. Paul and Barnabas
visiting the Churches, exhorted them to continue in the Faith: And so those
terms of being rooted in the Truth, of standing, and standing fast, and many
others, they all enforce this Duty. Now for the better handling of this point,
I shall do these four things.

First, I will show you, what Christians are to hold fast. Secondly, How they
are to hold fast. Thirdly, Why they are to hold fast what they heard and
received. Fourthly, I will apply it.
First, What Christians are to hold fast: the Doctrine says, they are to hold
fast the Truths they have received. Now Truths are of two sorts.

1. Some are Natural and Moral. 2. Some are Supernatural and Divine Truths:
called Truths of God; because they come from God, and conform the Mind and Soul
that receives them, to the Image of God.
2. Now, though it is true, it is good for a man to be right in Moral things,
and to know, and cleave to that which is Truth in Morality; yet the Truths that
we are here called upon to hold fast, they are Divine Truths, Supernatural
Truths, Truths in Religion, Truths in the things of God.

Secondly, Again, Religious and Divine Truths, Truths of God, they are either
such as are so in name, and in the estimation of some men; or else they are
such Truths as are Truths of God, in the truth and reality of the thing. Now,
when I say that Christians are to hold fast the Truths they have received, the
meaning is not, that whatever any man, or company of men offer as Truths,
should be received, and held fast; for then we must hold fast many errors: But
whatever men call Truth, or offer as Truth, we must examine it by the un-erring
rule of Truth, that is, the Word of God. In these things it is a clear Canon
which we have, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good.
Prove them by the Word of God, and if they hold Truth by that, then receive
them, and hold them fast. Divine Scripture-Truths we are to hold fast.

Thirdly, Scripture-Truths, Truths that are grounded, and warranted in the Word
of God, they are either such as are immediately and expressly laid down in the
Scripture, or such as are mediately contained in Scripture, and by deduction
drawn thence. Now those Truths are immediately and expressly laid down in
Scripture, we are without dispute to receive and hold: But those Truths that
are drawn thence, we may make use of our Reason to examine them by the Word;
and so far as we see them to be drawn from Scripture, we are to receive them,
and hold them fast.

Fourthly, Divine Truths from Scripture are of two sorts: Either the great and
weighty things of the Truth of God, and of Religion, which we call Fundamental
Truths; or else they are those things that are of less weight than Religion,
and yet Truths of God. Now we are not only to hold fast those Truths of God,
that are the Fundamental-Truths; as that there is a God, and but one God; and
that there is a Trinity of Persons in Unity of Essence, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost; and that there is but one Mediator between God and Man, the Man
Christ Jesus, and that he is both God and Man in one Person, and that he has
given full satisfaction to Divine Justice, for all that by faith close with
him, and the like.

These are the great points in Religion; these we must be fure to hold fast.
And not only these, but even the lesser; those truths of Religion that,
comparatively, are far less than these, we must hold them fast. You know what
our Savior says of the Commands: there are some that are the first and great
Commandments, and there are others that are the lesser: But, whosoever shall
break one of the least of Gods Commandments, and shall teach men so, the same
shall be least in the Kingdom of God. So, whosoever shall renounce the least
Truth, God will be even with him for it. For those Truths of God which are
little and small, comparatively, they may be of great weight and consequence in
their Sphere. Luther said, Let Heaven run together as a scrowl, rather than one
filing of Truth should be parted with. Surely those servants of God, the
Martyrs, were not so prodigal of their lives, but they knew what they did when
they suffered for such Truths, as men now call Trifles, and not worth standing
for; the least Truths of God must be held fast.

Thus you see what we must hold fast, Divine Truths, Scripture Truths, whether
greater or lesser: we must hold fast what we have received. I should, but that
I foresee the time will prevent me, answer an Objection: Is there nothing to
hold fast but Truth? Does not the Apostle bid the Thessalonians, in the second
of the Thessalonians, the second Chapter, and the fifteenth Verse, Hold the
Traditions which ye have been taught, whether by word or our Epistle. The
Papists make much of this place for their unwritten Traditions. In a word: know
this, though there were some Doctrines of Faith, and matters of Practice,
which, when Paul writ this Epistle, were not expressly to be found in Writing,
that had been Preached by the Apostles; yet this will not in the least infer,
that now, when the Canon of the Scripture is completed, there should be such
unwritten Traditions, to which we are to give up our Faith.

I go on to the second thing, and that is, to show, How we must hold fast the
Truths of God, which we have heard and received.

First, In your Judgments, being fully resolved and settled in your Judgments
concerning them, not wavering about them, nor suffering our selves by any means
and ways, to be removed from our stedfastness in them. Says the Apostle, 2 Pet.
3.17. Seeing you know these things, beware, lest you also being led away with
the error of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness. Take heed you be not
removed in your Judgments; hold fast what you have received, and suffer not
every Wind to blow you off from them.

Secondly, We must hold fast the Truths we have heard and received in our Wills
and Affections, in our love to the Truth; we must receive the Truth in the love
of it, or else we should never keep the Truth. Love is the strongest hold-fast
in the Word, no man will part with that which he loves: What makes the covetous
man so unwilling to part with his Money, but because he loves it? What makes
the lustful sinner so unwilling to part with his Lust, he will part with
Heaven, rather than his Lust? Why, It is because he does so love it. If men did
love the Truth, they would hold it fast.

Thirdly, you must hold the Truth in the profession of it, Heb. 10.23. Let us
hold fast the profession of the Truth, or of the Faith, without wavering. We
must not only believe with the Heart, but confess with the Mouth, if we would
be saved: When Peter denied his Master with his Mouth, and said, I know him
not, I am persuaded, he denied him not in his heart. It is a dangerous thing in
word, or outward profession, to renounce the truth or any part of it. Hold fast
the profession of the Truth.

Fourthly, We must hold the Truths of God fast in our life and conversation:
this the Apostle calls, Walking in Christ; and holding forth the Word of Life,
in a blameless and harmless Conversation. We must hold fast the Truths of God
in our lives.

Fifthly, We must do all this constantly, hold fast the Truth in our Judgment
and Affection, Profession and Conversation, constantly and at all times; as
David, I have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes always, even unto the
end; We must not only in times of calmness and serenity, when we may have all
the peace and applause of the world, hold fast the Truth and Profession of it;
but it stormy times when Truth may burn a man's fingers if he hold it, yet even
then we must hold it fast.

Sixthly, We must hold fast the Truths we have received resolutely, against all
oppositions whatsoever, whether of friends or foes. Paul would not bate an
inch, no not to Peter his Brother, his elder Brother in Christ, and in the work
of the Gospel; he resisted him to the face, and gave no place to him, no, not
for an hour.

Thus should we hold fast the Truth that we have heard and received in our
Judgment, in our Wills and Affections, in our Profession, and in our Lives and
Conversations. And thus hold them fast constantly, and resolutely against all
opposition, on the right hand, and on the left, both of Friends and Foes; and
that for these Reasons, which is the first thing I have to do; which is to show
you, Why we should hold fast the Truth of God.

First, For the excellency of Divine Truth; it is more precious than Gold,
better than Rubies, and all that you can desire cannot be compared with Truth.
And it must needs be so, because it is the immediate issue of God himself, who
is the Fountain of Truth, and the Fountain of all Perfection and Glory. Natural
men have said, Truth is the daughter of Time. Divines say, Truth is the
daughter of God. Divine Truth is the child of God, the Issue and Birth of God.
And whosoever therefore God has pleased to deliver this Truth unto, they must
be tenderly careful that it be not deflowred and violated.

Secondly, It is our duty to hold fast the Truth that we have received, because
we have received it under the notion of those things that have a kind of
constancy in them. I say, we have received the Truth under the Nature of those
things that have a kind of constancy and perpetuity in them. The Scripture
speaks of the Truths of God, as an heritage, Thy Testimonies have I spoken for
mine heritage, says David in the 119 Psalm. Though a man's personal estate may
be alienated, yet that which is his heritage, this is unalienable in Law; it is
a wrong done to his Posterity if he parts with that: Truth is the inheritance
of the Saints, therefore they are to hold it fast. Again, in Scripture the
Truth of God is called a Thing committed to man's trust, 2 Timothy 1.14. That good
thing which was committed unto thee, keep by the Holy Ghost which dwells in
us. That good thing! What was that! Why, the form of sound words, which in the
verse before he had bidden him hold fast; this is but a Reduplication of the
same thing on him: the Body of Gospel Truths that was committed to thee, hold
it fast; that good thing, a good thing: the Author of it is good, and it makes
us good; all that is contained in it is good matter, and it tends to a good
end, the saving of our souls. This, says he, has been committed to thee,
therefore keep it, that it may be re-delivered, and redelivered entire and
whole; and re-delivered to the same person that did commit it to us, else we
cannot be faithful to our trust. The Truth of God is committed to our trust; we
must so keep it, that we may redeliver it, and re-deliver it entire and whole;
and re-deliver it thus entire and whole to him that committed it to us, even to
God. This is the duty of all Christians thus to keep the word. There is a
committing of the Truth to all the Church and Saints of God; as Jude tells us
in his Epistle, verse the third, That ye should contend earnestly for the
Faith, which was once delivered to the Saints; the Faith, that is the doctrine
of Faith, the Truth of the Gospel, which was delivered to the Saints. We have
but one Gospel, and it was delivered but once; God means no more to deliver his
Gospel, and the Truth of it, therefore you had need strive hard to keep them,
and hold them.

Thirdly, We should hold fast the Truth that we have received; because if we do
not hold it fast, we do wrong God, and if we wrong our selves, and we wrong the
Truth, and we wrong our posterity.

1. It is our duty, To hold fast the Truths we have received; because if we do
not, we wrong God; for Truths are more Gods, then ours: They are ours as to the
use of them; but they are his, as he is the Original and Author of them. Truths
are Gods Jewels; there is never a Truth of Religion, but God owns it as his;
and for us to barter away any of these Truths of God it is Sacrilege, it is a
robbing of God, it is a wrong to God. This is that God complains of, by the
prophet, in the second of Jeremiah, the eleventh and twelfth verses. Has a
Nation changed their gods, which are yet no gods? but my people have changed
their Glory, for that which does not profit. Be astonished, O ye Heavens, at
this, and be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate, says the Lord. The Prophet,
indoed speaks of a total forsaking of God, and all his Truths; but there is, in
the forsaking of every Truth, a proportion of wrong to God.

2. It is a wrong done to the Truths of God, when men having received the
Truth, and embracing it, hold it not fast, but cast it off, this is a wrong to
the Truths of God. We say, it is less reproach to a man when he comes to my
house, to shut the door against him, and not receive him in at all, than when
he has been in a while with me, I turn him out; all the world now think I find
cause to be weary of him. They who have shut their hearts against the Truth,
and never gave any entertainment to it, they are less injurious to it, than
they that have received it, and professed it and yet turn from it. These tell
the world, that the Truths of God are not so sweet, and worthy of their
entertainment, as they supposed them to be.

3. This is an injury and wrong to our selves; this is a wrong to our Credit
and reputation. Now, though we may make Credit our end in Religion; yet we may
make use of our Credit or Reproach, as an argument to hold fast the Truth; and
this i^ injurious to our own Souls, John 8.31. Then Jesus said to those Jews
which believed on him; If ye continue in my word, then are ye my Disciples.
Indeed, here Christ does seem to distinguish his disciples; he has some that
are so in name, that are not so in Deed, and he has some that are so in Deed
and in Truth; and of these he gives a character here, If ye continue in my
Word. You now profess to believe my Word; but if you hold fast, and continue in
my Word, then you are my Disciples indeed: But if you continue not in my Word,
you have the name of Disciples only, and that will not save you. You can never
be saved, unless you be indeed the Disciples of Christ; and you can never
approve your selves to be the Disciples of Christ indeed, if ye continue not in
the Truth, 1 John 2.24. Let that therefore abide in you, which you have
received and heard from the beginning. If that which ye have heard from the
beginning, shall remain in you, ye shall continue in the Son, and in the
Father. Hold fast the truth of God which you have received, then shall you
continue in the Son: If the Truth of God, which you have received and believed,
remain in you, and be held fast by you, ye shall continue in the love of the
Father and Son, but not else; according to what he expresses again; Whosoever
transgresses, and abides not in the Doctrine of Christ, has not God,
therefore he cannot be saved; he that abides in the doctrine, has the Father
and the Son. Therefore as you would be saved, hold fast the Truths you have
received.

Now here (but I have not time to speak to it) is a Case of Conscience; Whether
every error does cut a man off from God? I Answer, No, God forbid: But this we
cannot speak to now.

Fourthly, They that hold not fast the Truth of God, are injurious to their
posterity. Our forefathers holding fast the truth of God in the day of their
trial; and sealing it with their blood, was the means of transmitting the
purity of the Gospel to us their Posterity; and if we, in our Generation hold
not fast the truth of God, but carry it loose in our Consciences and
Judgments, and we let it fall out of our hands and hearts, we forfeit the
Truths of God, not only from our selves, but also from our Posterity. Thus you
see, we shall wrong the God of Truth, and the Truth of God; we shall wrong our
selves and our Posterity, if we hold not fast the Truth we have received. Thus
we have the reasons of the Doctrine.

Application.

For Application: here first, I might bewail the general want of the care of
the performance of this Duty, which has appeared many years in this Land.

We have had little care of holding fast the Truths we have received. For
holding fast the truth of our Judgment, How many are there, whose Judgments
have been perverted with many Errors?

This is that which the Apostle calls A turning aside to another Gospel, in the
first of the Galathians, and the sixth verse. And so for holding fast the truth
in the love of it, How many are there that have failed in that, which Christ
calls, The forsaking of the first Love, Revelations the second, and the fourth
verse?

And we should hold fast the truth in the profession of it; and how many are
there that have failed in that? this the Apostle calls, in the tenth of the
Hebrews, A drawing back unto Perdition.

And for holding fast the truth in the practice of it, How many have failed in
that? that have been Professors, and now are grown loose and debauched. This
the Apostle Peter calls, A turning aside from the holy Commandments. All these
things call for our lamentation.

Exhortation.

But the whole work that I will apply my self to, is, to exhort every one of
you, to the care of this duty, To hold fast the Truths that you have heard and
received. Hold them fast in your Judgment, hold them fast in your Will and
Affections, hold them fast in your Lives and Conversations, hold the Truths you
have received constantly; and hold them against all opposition on the right
hand, and on the left, from friends and foes.

To press this upon you, I think I shall need to use no other Motive, than what
I have laid down before you in the Doctrinal part; only this one thing more,
and that is, take notice how urgent the Spirit of God is in pressing this in
Scripture.

Now, says Mr. Hildersham, If in those days, when the Apostles were yet
living, who taught the people of God with more Power and Demonstration of the
Spirit, than any of us do, or can. Yes, if then they had need of such
Exhortation to continue in the Doctrine, and to abide in it, to stand fast, and
hold fast the Word and Truth of God; how much more needful are these
Exhortations in our days?

If any say, no, there is not more cause; for then the Magistrate was a mortal
enemy to the Gospel, and the Professors of it; but we are (thanks be to God)
under a Christian Magistrate, who does not oppose, but Countenance the Gospel,
and the Professors of it. If any makes this Objection, I will give you Mr.
Hildersham's Answer to it, which I find in a Sermon of his, Printed in the
Year, One Thousand Six Hundred Thirty and One; which is now One and Thirty
years agone; says he, Though, through the great mercy of GOD, we in this Land
enjoy the Gospel in great peace, and have it countenanced by Authority; and
though through the Religious Disposition of the KING, we may have great hopes
of the continuance of the true Religion, and seem to be freed from all fear of
the altering of it; Yet (says he) there is need of this Exhortation in these
days, and that for these Reasons.

Reas. 1. First, Because of the great danger we are in of being overrun, or
overspread with Popery, and the Fiery trail before we are aware: For, says he,
The great increase of Papists that we dail^ hear of, and the great declining of
many, who are ready to receive an Error that shall be offered to them: These
things give us a just cause to fear the danger of Popery over-spreading us.

And Brethren, if it were so in his time, so many years ago, what is it now?

Reas. 2. Secondly, says he, If so be there were no danger of Popery, yet,
says he, there are so many Errors newly sprung up, that do show how needful
this Exhortation is.

Reas. 3. Thirdly, says he, There is such a general decay of the love of
Religion in all places, and amongst all sorts of people, and so much
irreligiousness every where, that it is the general disease of the Nation.

Therefore he concludes, that in these times of ours, though Religion has the
Magistrate to countenance it, yet there is as much need of pressing this
Exhortation, as ever there was; namely, To hold fast the Truths that we have
heard and received.

Now, if you ask what you shall do, that you may be able to hold fast the
truths that you have received? I will give you some directions.

First, If you would hold fast the Truth that you have heard and received, get
into Christ, be rooted and established in him. Brethren, it is not all the
Learning in the world, and Abilities that a man can have, that will enable him
to hold out, and hold fast the Truths that he has received, if a time of trial
come, unless Christ be his Bottom and Foundation, unless Christ be his
strength. If a man stands upon his own legs, his own Parts and Abilities, to
argue and dispute, and repel objections; alas! these things will fail in a day
of trial. Prison, Death, and a Stake, are such Arguments, Brethren, that all
the Learning and parts of the world cannot answer, but only Christ and his
Spirit, and grace in the heart. Therefore, if you would hold fast the Truth
which you have received and heard, and not be beaten off from them in the day
of trial, get into Christ, be rooted and established in him, then shall thou
stand, nor else.

2. If you would hold fast the Truths that you have heard and received, then
take nothing upon trust in matters of Religion: whatever Preachers you hear, or
whatever Books you read, take not things upon trust, but examine them, and
prove them by the Scriptures, and judge what foundation and warrant they have
from the Scripture, and accordingly receive them, or receive them not. It is
observable in 1 These. 5. When the Apostle says, Despise not Prophesyings, in
the next word he says, Prove all things, and hold fast that which is good; as
if he should say, though I would not have you despise Prophesying and
Preachers, yet I would not have you to take things upon trust, in matters of
Religion, but prove all things, and hold fast that which is good.

3. If you would be able to hold fast the truths that you have heard and
received, get a clear, distinct, and certain knowledge of what is truth; that
which you would hold fast, get a clear, assured knowledge that it is the truth
of God, 2 Timothy 3.14. Continue thou, in the things which thou have learned, and
have been assured of. If a man would continue in the things that he has
learned, he must be assured of them, that they are the truths of God. But how
shall a man be assured that such and such things are the truths of God? He may
know this; first, by the consonancy of them to the word of God: Secondly, by
the power of them on his heart, to convince, or humble, and quicken it.

4. If you would be enabled to hold fast the truths you have heard, and
received, then get a valuation and esteem of the truths of God. Such as David
had, Psalm. 119.72. The Law of thy mouth is better unto me than thousands of
Gold and Silver. Better in it self; all the Gold and Silver in the world, all
the riches in the world, will never do a man so much good as that; and better
in my estimation, I value it more, I had rather part with all, than with the
Word. A man that is of this mind, he will hold fast the truth: Oh! that there
were such a heart in every one of you, as to say, The words of Gods mouth, they
are better than estate, and better than liberty, and better than Wife and
Children; if there were such a heart in us, this would enable us to hold fast
the truth of God, and part with all rather than them.

5. If you would hold fast the truth that you have received and heard, then
make conscience to practice according to what you know; make conscience to obey
the truths of God: obedience is the sinew of constancy. Christ says, Luke
6.48. Whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them, he is like a man
which built his house, and dug deep, and laid the foundation upon a Rock;
and when the flood arose, and the streams beat vehemently upon that house, it
could not shake it. Mark ye it could not be shaken: the conscionable practical
hearer, and receiver of the truth of God, he is the man that is like to hold
out, and to hold fast the Word; he that has been a careless Hearer, and never
made conscience to hear for obedience and practice, he is blown over presently;
it is a sad passage I have met with in that Reverend man, M. Hildersham, and to
me it seems to have much weight in it; What hopes, says he, can we have of many
of our Hearers in England, who are willing to give the Word a hearing, and
outwardly profess it? but what hope can we have, but that if a time of trial
come, they will turn Papists, or profane, or any thing; for they never loved
the Word when they heard it; and they never obeyed the Word, but lived in known
sins; they take up a form of godliness, and hate the power of it; what hope,
but that if a time of trial come, these will fall from the truth?

6. If you would be able to hold fast the truth that you have heard and
received, then take heed of rec^^^^^^ the least truth of God; take heed, I say,
of knowing, and willing forsaking the least truth; and knowing, and willing
giving way to the least error; as the committing of the least sin, may render
a man abominable unto God, as you find in Levit. 11.43. You shall not make your
selves abominable with any creeping thing; that is, with the eating any
creeping thing. Now this was one of the least Commandments that God gave out,
for the not eating of such and such things: yet by transgressing this, the
people might make themselves abominable: the committing of the least sin may
make a man abominable to God; so the embracing of the least error, and the
forsaking of the least truth, may make a man abominable to God: the least truth
forsaken knowingly, and the least error embraced knowingly, becomes a great
sin: and a little errrour makes way for a greater: if once a man gives way to
one error: a thousand will follow after. If we would hold fast the whole body
of truth, we must take heed we forsake not the least truth; if we forsake God
and his truths, whether in lesser matters or greater, and if we turn back again
to Popery, and conform to the Papists in lesser matters (says Mr. Hildersham)
know, of a certainty, that Popery shall return again.

7. If you would hold fast the truths you have heard and received, then shun
all such persons as would go about to draw you off from the truth of God; shun
all Seducers, confer not with them; have nothing to do with them and their
ways, Prove. 19.27. Cease, my Son, to hear the instruction that causes to err
from the words of knowledge; thou have been instructed in the words of
knowledge, and, if any would instruct thee otherwise, and seek to draw thee off
from the words of truth and knowledge, have nothing to do with them: Cease, my
Son, to hear the instruction that causes to err from the words of knowledge.
Now my Brethren, this advice I judge to be more seasonable, because it is in my
apprehension, that this present providence of God, in taking off at one stroke
so many of his Servants (that have endeavored in uprightness of heart to
instruct you, and the people of God) from this work, it is on my heart to think
and fear, this will give a great advantage to Seducers, to seek to corrupt you,
and draw you off from the truth to their party. When the Shepherds are smitten,
there is a great opportunity given to the Foxes etc Wolves to make a prey of
the flock: when God makes it dark, and night, then all the Beasts of the Forest
creep out: as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 104.20. When there is a night and cloud
on the Ordinances of God, then all the Beasts of the Forest will go forth; many
will undertake to be your Instructers, and say here is Christ, and there is
Christ; but believe them not: memember the things you have heard and received,
and hold them fast: cease from the instructions of those that would turn you
aside.

8. And lastly, If you would be able to hold fast the truths of God, then
commend your selves and the truths you would hold, to God in Prayer, and beg of
God to hold you, that you may keep his truth: Put up those requests to God,
that David does Psalm. 15. Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps
slip not; and in the 119. Psalm, Be surety for thy Servant for good, hold thou
me up, and I shall be safe, and I will have respect unto thy statutes
continually. And thus my Brethren, I have done with this Doctrine, and this
Sermon, and as far as I know, with my Preaching in this place. The day is at
hand, wherein I, and many others of my Brethren shall be (through not naturally
dead, yet) civilly dead, dead in Law, dead as to the work of the Ministry. And,
as I told them of this particular Congregation the last Lords day, so I tell
you; know what I would be willing to speak to you, if I lay on my deathbed,
and had the exercise of Reason and Memory that I have now: look, I say, what I
would say to you, if I now lay on my deathbed, the same I shall speak to you
now, through Gods assistance; and first, I would, and in some measure do give
thanks to God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, that has called me, a poor
unworthy Creature, not only to the knowledge, but to the Preaching of the
Gospel (...) his Son Jesus Christ, and that in this place, and in this part of
the (...) and has pleased in mercy to continue life and liberty to (...) work
here, almost Twenty six years. Secondly, I would be, (...) I am in some
measure, thankful to God, and to his people, both of this Town, and of the
Neighborhood, for a great deal of love (...) respect, and encouragement, that
they have given to my Person and Ministry here; and particularly I do
acknowledge my self to be greatly obliged to my Reverend Brethren, the
Neighbour-Ministers, for the much love I have received from them, their
readiness to help me, in supplying my place in the time of my sickness or
absence, and sweet society I have had with them: I believe you think it is no
easy thing for me to speak, or think of parting with such an Auditory and
society, the like to which I never look to have on earth again. But seeing for
my sins, and your sins, God will have it so, we must submit, and lie at his
feet: that which he has made crooked, who can make straight? But before we
part, give me leave to speak a few words to you; something by way of Request,
and something by way of Advice: by way of Request, I would speak this.

First, That if any of you have found any benefit by my poor Ministry, that if
any of you have been enlightened, or awakened, or strengthened, and built up in
the truth, and encouraged in the ways of holiness, by any thing that God has
put into my mouth to speak to you, let God have the praise, and let me have
some room in your hearts, and prayers, however God shall deal with me.

My second Request is, That wherein soever you have seen any failings in me, or
any failings in my Ministerial duty, that you would please to pass it by, and
to help me in prayer to God, for the forgiveness of them. These are my Requests
of you, and that which I have to say to you, by way of Advice is much the same,
with what I said to this particular Congregation the last Lords day. Take it in
these particulars.

1. I would advise you and entreat you, that we may all of us lay to heart this
present dispensation of God toward us, and the Nation, in this respect, that
we may be sensible of it. I remember, when I was young, and my famous
Predecessor, Mr. Rogers, was taken off from his Ministry in this kind, though
but for a few weeks, these parts were wonderfully sensible of that providence,
and laid it to heart, and were much in Humiliation and in Prayer; and I think I
may say, they received an answer again within some weeks. Now Brethren, though
he was worth some hundreds of us; yet now it is not the laying by of one man,
but of multitudes, fifty in one place, and threescore in another, and fourscore
in another, and this not by a single Bishop, but by an Act of Parliament, which
makes the wound the wider, and the more incapable of cure; and shall not we be
sensible of this? shall so many precious vessels be laid by, as vessels of no
pleasure, and none take it to heart? Shall so many burning lights be quenched
together, so may Wells of the Water of Life be stopped up together, and this not
be laid to heart? I beseech you consider and be sensible.

2. In the deepest and saddest sense you have of this providence of God, watch
over your own spirits, that you lay the blame of it no where so much as upon
your selves. Some blame the times, and charge it on their iniquities; others
are apt to blame us Ministers, and charge it on our niceness and singularity.
Might my advice take place with this people, I would desire, that every one of
us might lay the blame no where so much, as on our selves, for certainly, we
have procured these things to our selves. I find our Predecessors the Martyrs,
when by a Law Religion was changed in the Nation, and Idolatry set up, they lay
the blame not on the Lawmakers, but on themselves, and their own hearts. One of
them says, All this is come upon us, because we did not love the Gospel; we
were Gospellers in lip, but not in life: Much more does it become us, whose
sufferings are far less, to blame our selves more than we blame any others.

3. My third Advice is this, and I beseech you take it in love, for it is out
of love that it is given you; if you should perceive at this time a difference
in opinion and practice among us, that are the Ministers of the Gospel in this
Nation; standing, and sticking at things that others can digest, and do; and
others doing things, that some of their Brethren cannot come up unto: Be not
offended, thus it has always been from the beginning; it is no new thing. Thus
it was in King Edwards days. If there be any of God's servants that are
Learned and Holy, and Faithful, that do now for the enjoyment of their
Ministry, yield a conformity to all that is enjoined, I doubt not but many of
them are grieved, that they cannot have the exercise of their Ministry without
this: and we who cannot come up to this, are grieved that we cannot come up to
it: the one, and the other have grief enough; add not your censures to this
grief, that is already upon them. It has been all along a merciful providence
of God, that when some of his servants could not satisfy their consciences,
and come up to the things that have been imposed upon them, without injuring
their Consciences; yet others have had a greater freedom given them, that they
could yield; and if not so, What would have become of the people of God?
Therefore in those things, acknowledge there may be some providence of God, for
good to you in it.

4. My fourth advice, I shall deliver to you wholly, in the words of that holy
man and Martyr of God, Master Bradford, in his Letter to the City of London,
says he, Let us heartily bewail our sins, and repent of our evils, let us
amend the evil of our lives, let us every one be diligent in prayer, and attend
with reverence on the reading, and hearing of Gods Holy word; let us reprove
the works of darkness, let us fly from Idolatry, and which is the particular I
would indeed commend unto you, Obey the Magistrate, and them that are set over
us in the Lord, in all things that are not against the Word; and when they
command any thing contrary to the Word, let us answer, It is meet to obey God,
rather than man. However (says he) resist not the Magistrate, nor seek to
avenge your selves, but commit your case to God; be patient, and submit to all
that are in Authority over you: but resist not, rise not against Authority; but
wait on God, till he pleases to cause the Light to rise, and shine again upon
you. This is my fourth advice.

5. Now it pleases God, that Hearing opportunities, at least, some of them are
taken from some of us, from many of us, for a time: My Advice and Counsel is,
that the less now you hear, the more you will read; read the Word of God much
the more, and take all helps for the right understanding of what you read. The
Book of Annotations is a great help to enlighten you to understand the
Scripture; and next to the reading of the Scriptures, what spare hours you
have, I would advise you to bestow your time in reading of the Book of Martyrs;
a Book that has formerly been more prized, than of late in England.
Especially, read that part of it which contains the History of Queen Mary's
days; they will inform you of the great controversies that are between us and
the Papists; and they will inform you what you shall answer; the reading how
cheerfully they went to Prison, and to the Stake, will imbolden you against the
fears of sufferings, and death; and the reading of their Letters, will be a
great means to edify, and build you up. This reading of the Scriptures, and
other good Books, is my fifth advice to you.

6. My fixth Advice to you is, That seeing God has taken away your Week-dayes
opportunities of hearing the Word here, and in other places, you would be
careful that the world may not devour Gods Portion; I mean that portion of
time, which some of you have bestowed in hearing these Lectures. It was a good
speech of a gracious Woman, now with God, when Mr. Rogers was silenced: Well,
said she, by the grace of God, the World shall never have those hours that I
was wont to spend in hearing heretofore: her meaning was, she would spend them
in her Closet in holy duties. It was an excellent resolution, and worthy of our
imitation; and if I might after twenty six years labor here in the Ministry,
now at my parting obtain thus much of you, that you having been pleased to be
constant hearers here, would lay a Law on your selves, that so much time as you
formerly spent in coming hither, sitting here, and returning home, that you
will spend that time at home, either in praying, and reading, and meditating in
your Closets; or else in praying in, and with your Families, and instructing of
them: If I might but obtain this of you, at my parting, I shall believe that
the Devil and his Kingdom would be losers by this our parting; if you would
spend this time weekly in holy Exercises, reading and praying for your selves,
and for the Nation, and for your Families, which you were wont to spend in
coming to these Lectures, and in attending here, and returning home; and that
is my sixth Advice to you, and therefore let me entreat this of you.

7. And my seventh Advice and Counsel is this, that seeing it pleases God to
take away from you so many of your public Instructers, that you would every
one of you that are head^ of Families, be so much the more instructing and
teaching your Families: Be so much the more in this, by how much the less is
done in public. Read the Word in your Families, and catechize your Families,
and see that they may understand them: You have many helps for this, as Mr.
Perkins, Mr. Ball, and the Assemblies Catechize.

8. And the last advice I have to give you, is this, that you would still
continue your reverence of, and love to, and care for the observing of the
Lords Holy Sabbath. It is that, my Brethren, wherein God has been honored in
this Town, and in these Parts, I think as much as in most places in the World;
and I pray do so still: And when you have not public Ordinances, and public
helps for the sanctifying of the Lords day at home in your own Congregations,
if you have the Word and Ordinances in any comfortable manner abroad, Travel
for it, I say, travel for it; and when you have them not at home nor abroad, be
so much the more earnest, and fervent, and abundant in your family and secret
Duties, in the sanctification of the Lords day. I have some fears, lest if time
should come to pass, that the Magistrates should connive at the profaning of
the Lords day, giving way to Sports and Recreations on it, and Preachers should
cry down the strict observation of the Lords day, and the like; I am afraid we
have many youth, that in these parts, notwithstanding all the instructions that
have been given them, would be ready to dance after these Pipes, and run into
the profaning of the Lords day: Therefore you that are Governors of Families,
remember the charge that God has given you more expressly concerning this, than
in any other thing that I know of: Thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, nor thy
Manservant, nor thy Maidservant, nor thy Cattle, nor thy stranger that is
within thy gates, shall thou suffer to violate the day of the Lord: Therefore,
know your Authority, and do your duty; and put on the Holy Resolution of
J^shua, Whatsoever others do, I and my house will serve the Lord; so say you,
Whatsoever others do, I and mine will sanctify the Lords day, and keep it
holy. So do, and the blessing of God shall be on you all the week long. And
now, Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the Word of his Grace, which is
able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them that are
sanctified.

Mr. Brooks His Farewel-Sermon.
ALL that I shall do, shall be to answer two or three Queries, and then I shall
leave a few Legacies with you, that may speak when I am not advantaged to speak
to you.

The first Query is this; What should be the reason that men make such
opposition against the Gospel, against the plain, powerful, conscientious
preaching of it? This is not the principal thing that I intend, and therefore I
shall only touch upon the reason of it.

1. Men's hatred and opposition arises against the Gospel, because it does
discover their hidden works of darkness, Joh. 3. They hate the Light, lest
their deeds should be removed: the Gospel brings their deeds of darkness to
light: and this stirs up a spirit of hatred and opposition against the Gospel.
2. Ground is this; Because sinners under the Gospel cannot sin at so cheap a
rate, as otherwise they might do. The Drunkard cannot be drunk at so cheap a
rate; nor can the opposer and persecutor oppose and persecute at so cheap a
rate as they might do, where the Gospel does not shine in power and glory. 3.
Because the Gospel puts persons upon very hard service, upon very difficult
work; pulling out a right eye, cutting off a right hand, offering up an Isaac,
throwing over board a Jonas, parting with Bosom Lusts, and darling sins. Herod
heard John Baptist gladly, till he came to touch his Herodias, and then off
goes his head. As they say, John 6. This is a hard saying, and who can abide
it? and from that time they walked no more with him; this is a hard Gospel
indeed, and at this their blood rises. 4. Because of the differing and
distinguishing work that the Gospel makes among the Sons of men, it softens
one, and hardens another that sits next to him; enlightens one, and strikes the
other blind; it wins on one, and enrageth another. The same Sun has different
effects on the Objects on which it shines. The Gospel puts a difference between
the precious and the vile, and this the vile cannot bear. It was never good
days (say they) since such and such must be Saints, and none else; we have as
good hearts as any, and this enrageth them. Lastly, It is from Satan; Satan
knows that the very tendency of the Gospel is, to shake his Kingdom about his
ears; Satan and Antichrist know that their Kingdom must down by the power and
light of the Gospel; and therefore Satan and men of an Antichristian spirit, do
all they can to oppose, and show their hatred against the everlasting Gospel;
and this makes them to be in such a rage against the Gospel.
Quer. 2. When the Gospel goes from a People, what goes? I shall give but a
touch here.

1. When the Gospel goes, Peace, Plenty, and Trading goes. 2 Chronicles. 15.3, 5.
and 6. compared. Now for a long season Israel had been without the true God,
and without a teaching-Priest. Why? They had Priests, but they were Jeroboam's
Priests, as you may see, chap. 13. verse 9. Have you not cast out the Priests
of the Lord, the sons of Aaron, and the Levites, and have made you Priests
after the manner of the Nations of other Lands? so that whosoever comes to
consecrate himself with a young Bullock, and seven Rams, the same may be a
Priest of them that are no gods. A little business will buy a Priesthood, and
so they are said to be without the true God, without a teaching-Priest, and
without Law. Mark what follows, And in those times, there was no peace to him
that went out, nor to him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the
Inhabitants of the Country; and Nation was destroyed of Nation, and City of
City, for God did vex them with all adversity.

3. Safety and security goes, when the Gospel goes; so in the Text but now
cited. The Ark was taken away, their strength and safety was gone. When the
Jews rejected the Gospel, the Romans came and took away both their place and
Nation, John 11.48, If we let him thus alone* the Romans will come, and take
away both our place and Nation. About for^y years after, Titus and Vespasian
took away their City; they cried, If we let this man alone, the Romans will
take away our Nation; and this was the ready way to bring the Romans upon them.

4. When the Gospel goes, Civil liberty goes; when the Jews slighted the
Gospel; and turned their backs upon it, they quickly became Bondslaves to the
Romans.

5. When the Gospel goes, the honor and glory, splendor and beauty of a
Nation goes. It is the Gospel that is the honor and beauty of a Nation; and
when that goes, all the glory goes: As old Eli said, when the Ark was taken
away, the glory was departed from Israel, 1 Samuel 4.22. Jer. 2.11, 12, 13. Has
a Nation changed their gods, which are yet no gods? but my people have changed
their glory for that which does not profit; that is, the Worship of God into
the Traditions of men. What is it that lifts up one Nation above another, but
the Gospel? Above all Nations of the Earth, England has been lifted up to
Heaven.

6. When the Gospel goes, all soul-happiness and blessedness goes. The Gospel,
you know, is the means appointed by God to bring Souls to an acquaintance with
Christ, to an acceptance of Christ, to an interest in Christ, to an assurance
that he is theirs, and they are his. Now when this goes, all soul-happiness and
blessedness goes.

7. When the Gospel goes, the spiritual presence of God goes, for that still
goes with the Gospel. There is a general presence of God, as the Psalmist
speaks, Psalm. 139. Where shall I go from thy Spirit? Whither shall I fly from
thy presence? This presence of God reaches from Heaven to Hell; in that sense
God is included in no place, nor excluded out of any place. But alas! What is
this general presence? When the Gospel goes, the special presence of God goes.
This leads me by the hand to the third Query.

Query 3. And that is this; Whether God will remove the Gospel from England, or
no?

It is the fear of many, but I humbly suppose, No: whatsoever darkness may be
upon it, yet that God will not remove it; if you please, I will offer a few
things that signify something as to my own satisfaction, and it may be so to
you.

1. The rooting that it has got in the hearts of sinners and Saints, in the
Judgment, Affections, and Consciences both of sinners and Saints. Certainly, it
has got so deep a root in the hearts of many thousands of Saints and sinners,
that it shall not be in the power of Hell to raze it out.

2. The glorious anointings that are to be found upon many thousands of Gods
servants in this Nation, to preach the everlasting Gospel, and who would be
glad to preach upon the hardest terms, keeping God and a good conscience, to
preach it freely, as the Apostles of old did. And certainly, God has not laid
in the Treasure, that it should be turned into a heap of confusion, but that it
should serve to the end for which he laid it in.

3. The ineffectualness of all former attempts and designs to destroy the
Gospel. You know what endeavors of old there has been to darken this Sun, to
put out the light of Heaven, in the Marian days, and in other days since
them; and yet it has not been in Prisons, Backs, Flames, Pillories, nor any
thing else to extinguish the glory of it. And then,

4. All Designs and Attempts to extinguish the everlasting Gospel, have turned
to the advancement, flourishing, and spreading of the Gospel.

5. God never takes away the Gospel from a people, till the body of that people
have thrust the everlasting Gospel from them. When, indeed, they have been so
bold, as to thrust away the everlasting Gospel, God has been severe unto them:
But till the body of a people have thrust away the everlasting Gospel, God has
not taken it away from them, 2 Chronicles, the 36. Chapter, from the 15th verse
to the end, God sent his Messengers early and late; they abused, slighted and
scorned them, till there was no remedy. So in the 35. of Jeremiah, from the
first to the twelfth; it is a famous Text for this. So in the thirteenth
Chapter of the Acts, and the 45, 46, and 47. verses; Because you have thought
your selves unworthy of Salvation, Lo, we turn to the Gentiles; till the Jews
came to thrust away the everlasting Gospel, the Lord continued it to them.

6. The spreading of the everlasting Gospel, is the special means appointed by
God, for the destruction of Antichrist: First he is to be consumed by the
spirit of his Mouth, then destroyed by the brightness of his coming; the spirit
of Faith and prayer in them that would be willing to lay down any thing rather
than part with the Gospel, God will not put his blessed Church to the blush, he
will not make them ashamed of their confidence.

7. Are there not multitudes of the Children of Believers that fall under many
promises? And will not God make good his engagements to them? I will circumcise
your hearts, and the hearts of your seed; and the seed of the Upright shall be
blessed, etc.

8. The strange and wonderful affections and tenderness, that God has wrought
in his children to the Gospel: What meltings and mournings, and what a spirit
of prayer has God put upon his people?

9. There are many young tender plants and buds of Grace; such in whom the
spirit of God has stirred a hungering and thirsting, and longing after the
great concernments of Eternity. I would, upon these grounds, and others of the
like import, hope and believe, that the Lord will not remove his everlasting
Gospel, however he may correct his people for their trifling with, and
slighting the glorious Gospel. I have several times thought, what a day of
darkness was upon the World, in respect of sin and superstition: When Christ
brought the everlasting Gospel, what a day of darkness and superstition was on
the whole Earth? But you know what the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 1.21. For after
that, in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God; it pleased God,
by the foolishness of Preaching, to save them that believe.

When it is nearest day, then it is darkest. There may be an hour of darkness,
that may be upon the Gospel, as to its liberty, purity and glory; and yet there
may be a Sun-shining day, ready to tread on the heels of it. And so much for
the resolution of these Queries.

I shall proceed, as I said, and leave some Legacies with you; which may, by
the finger of the Spirit, be made advantageous to you, when we are not
advantaged to speak unto you.

Leg. 1. The first Legacy I would leave with you shall be this, Secure your
interest in Christ; make it your great business, your work; your heaven, to
secure your interest in Christ. This is not an Age, an Hour, for a man to be
between fears and hopes, between doubting and believing.

Take not up in a name to live, when you are dead Godward, and Christ-ward.
Take not up in an outward form, and outward privileges. They cried, The Temple
of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, that had no interest in, or love to the
Lord of the Temple. Follow God, leave no means un-attempted, whereby your
blessed interest may be cleared up.

Leg. 2. Make Christ and Scripture the only foundation for your souls and faith
to build on: as the Apostle said, 1 Cor. 3.11. Other foundations can no man lay
than that which is laid, even Jesus Christ. Isa 28.16. Behold, I lay in Sion
for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a corner stone, a precious stone, a
sure foundation, Ephesians. 2.10. Since it is a very dangerous thing, as much as your
soul and eternity is worth for you to build on this authority, and that; on
this saying, and that; take heed.

Leg. 3. In all places and company, be sure to carry your soul-preservatives
with you: go into no place nor company, except you carry your
soul-preservatives with you; that is, holy care and wisdom. You know in
infectious times men will carry outward preservatives with them; you have need
to carry your preservatives about you; else you would be in danger of being
infected with the ill customs and vanities of the time wherein you live; and
that is a third.

Leg. 4. I would leave with you, is this; Look that all within you rise higher
and higher, by oppositions, threatenings, and sufferings; that is, that your
faith, your love, your courage, your zeal, your resolutions, and magnanimity
rise higher by opposition, and the spirit of Prayer: thus it did, Acts 4.18,
19, 20; 21, 29, 30, and 31. compared. All their sufferings did but raise up a
more noble spirit in them; they did but raise up their faith and courage: So
Acts 5.40, 41, and 42. they looked on it as a grace, to be disgraced for
Christ; and as an honor, to be dishonored for him. They say, as David, If this
be to be vile, I will be more vile. If to be found in the way of my God, to act
for my God, be vile, I will be more vile.

Leg. 5. Take more pains, and make more conscience of keeping your selves from
sin than suffering; from the pollutions and defilements of the day, than from
the sufferings of the day: this Legacy I would beg that you would consider,
take more pains, and make more conscience of keeping your selves from the evil
of sin, than the evil of punishment, from the pollutions and corruptions of the
times, Acts 2.40. Save your selves from this outward generation. Phil. 2.15.
The children of God must be harmless, and blameless, without rebuke in the
midst of a crooked and perverse generation. Heb. 11. speaks full to the point
in hand. Rev. 3.4. Thou have a few names even in Sardis, that have not defiled
their garments, and they shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy.
White was the habit of the Nobles, which imports the honor that God will put
on those, that keep their garments pure in a defiling day, Rev. 8.4. And I
heard another voice from Heaven, saying, Come out of her my people, that ye be
not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. If you will
be tasting and sipping at Babylons cup, you must resolve to receive more or
less of Babylons plagues.

Leg. 6. I would leave with you, is this, Be always doing, or receiving good:
Our Lord and Master went up and down in this world doing good, be was still
doing good to body and soul, he was acted by an untired power; he still doing
or receiving good; this will make your lives comfortable, your deaths happy;
and your account glorious in the great day of the Lord. Oh how useless are many
men in their generation! Oh that our lips might be as so many Honey-combs, what
we might scatter knowledge!

Leg. 7. I would leave with you, is this; Set the highest examples and patterns
before your face of grace and godliness for your imitation: in the business of
Faith, set an Abraham before your eyes: in the business of Courage, set a
Joshua: in the business of Uprightness, set a Job; of Meekness, a Moses, etc.
There is a disadvantage that redounds to Christians, by looking more backwards
than forwards. Men look on whom they excel, not on those they fall short of. Of
all examples set them before you that are most eminent for grace and holiness,
for communion with God, and acting for God: next to Christ, set the pattern of
the choicest Saints before you.

Leg. 8. Hold fast your integrity, and rather let all go, than let that go: A
man had better let liberty, estate, relations, and life go, than let his
integrity go; yea, let all Ordinances themselves go, when they cannot be held
with the hand of integrity, Job 27.5, 6. God forbid that I should justify you
till I die; I will not remove my integrity from me, my righteousness I will
hold fast, and I will not let it go: my heart shall not reproach me so long as
I live: look as the drowning man holds fast that which is cast forth for to
save him; as the Soldier holds fast his Sword and Buckler, on which his life
depends: So (says Job) I will hold fast my integrity, my heart shall not
reproach me; I had rather all the world should reproach me, and my heart
justify me; than that my heart should reproach me, and all the world justify
me: That man will make but a sad exchange, that shall exchange his integrity
for any worldly concernment: Integrity maintained in the soul, will be a feast
of fat things in the worst of days; but let a man lose his integrity, and it is
not in the power of all the world to make a feast of sat things in that soul.

Leg. 9. That I would leave with you, is this, Let not a day pass over your
head, without calling the whole man to an exact account. Well, where have you
been acting to day, Hands? what have you done for God to day, Tongue? what have
you spoke for God to day? This will be an advantage many ways unto you: but I
can only touch on these Legacies.

Leg. 10. Labor mightily for a healing spirit. This Legacy I would leave with
you as matter of great concernment. Labor mightily for a healing spirit: away
with all discriminating names whatever, that may hinder the applying of Balm
to heal our wounds: labor for a healing spirit; discord and division becomes
no Christian. For Wolves to worry the Lambs, is no wonder: but for one Lamb to
worry another, this is unnatural and monstrous. God has made his wrath to
smoke against us for the divisions and heart-burnings that have been amongst
us. Labor for an oneness in love and affection with every one that is one with
Christ, let their forms be what they will: that which wins most upon Christ's
heart, should win most upon ours; and that is his own grace and holiness. The
question should be, What of the Father? What of the Son? What of the Spirit
shines in this or that person? and accordingly let your love and your affection
run out: this is the tenth Legacy.

Leg. 11. Be most in the spiritual exercises of Religion. Improve this Legacy;
for much of the life, and comfort, joy, and peace of your souls is wrapped in it.
I say, be most in the spiritual exercises of Religion: There are external
exercises, as hearing, preaching, praying, and conference; and there are the
more spiritual exercises of Religion, exercises of Grace, Meditation,
Self-judging, Self-tryal, and Examination. Bodily exercise will profit nothing,
if abstracted from those more spiritual. The glory that God has, and the
comfort and advantage that will redound to your souls, is mostly from the
spiritual exercises of Religion. How rare is it to find men in the work of
Meditation, of Trial and Examination, and bringing home of truths to their own
Soul?

Leg. 12. Take no truths upon trust, but all upon trial, ^ These. 5.21. So 1 John 4.1. Acts 17.11. It was the glory of that Church, that they would not
trust Paul himself. Paul that had the advantage above all for external
qualifications; no not Paul himself. Take no truth upon trust, bring them to
the balance of the Sanctuary; if they will not hold water there, reject them.

Leg. 13. The lesser and fewer opportunities and advantages you have in
public, to better, and enrich your Souls, the more abundantly address your
selves to God in private. Mal. 3.16, 17. Then they that feared the Lord, spoke
often one to another, etc.

Leg. 14. Walk in those ways that are directly cross and contrary to the vain,
sinful, and superstitious ways, that men of a formal, carnal, lukewarm spirit,
walk in; this is the great concernment of Christians. But more of that by and
by.

Leg. 15. Look upon all the things of this World, as you will upon them when
you come to die. At what a poor rate do men look on the things of this world
when they come to die? What a low value do men set upon the pomp and glory of
it? Men may now put a mark upon them, but then they will appear in their own
colors. Men would not venture the loss of such great things for them, did they
but look on them now, as they will do at the last day.

Leg. 16. Never put off your Consciences with any plea, or with any argument,
that you dare not stand by in the great day of your account. It Is dreadful to
consider, how many in these days put off their conscience. We did this and
that for our families, they would have else perished: I have complied thus, and
wronged my conscience thus, for this and that concernment. Will a man stand by
this argument, when he comes before Jesus Christ at the last day? Because of
the Souls of men, many plead this or that. Christ does not stand in need of
indirect ways to save Souls, he has ways enough to bring in Souls to himself.

Leg. 17. Eye more, mind more, and lay to heart more, the Spiritual and
Internal workings of God in your Souls, than the External Providence of God in
the World. Beloved, GOD looks that we should consider the operations of his
hand; and the despising the works of his hands is so provoking to him, that he
threatens them to lead them into Captivity, for not considering of them. But
above all, look to the work that God is carrying on in your Souls: not a Soul,
but he is carrying on some work or other in it, either blinding or enlightening,
bettering or wors^ing; and therefore look to what God is doing in thy Soul. All
the motions of God within you are steps to eternity, and every soul shall be
blessed or curss'd, saved or lost, to all eternity; not according to outward
dispensation, but according to the inward operations of God in your Souls.
Observe, what humbling work, reforming work, sanctifying work, he is about in
thy spirit, what he is doing in that little world within. If God should carry
on never so glorious a work in the world, as a Conquest of Nations to Christ;
what would it advantage thee, if Sin, Satan, and the World should triumph in
thy Soul, and carry the day there?

Leg. 18. Look as well on the bright side, as on the dark side of the Cloud; on
the bright side of Providence, as well as on the dark side of Providence.
Beloved, there is a great weakness amongst Christians, they do so pore on the
black side of Providence, as that they have no heart to consider of the bright
side. If you look on this black side of the Providence of God to Joseph, How
terrible and amazing was it? But if you look on the bright side, his fourscore
years reign; How glorious was it? If you look on the dark side of the
Providence of God to David, in his first years banishment, much will arise to
startle you; but if you turn to the bright side, his forty years reign in
glory, How amiable was it? Look on the dark side of the Providence of God to
Job; Oh! how terrible was it, in the first of Job? but compare this with the
last of Job, where you have the bright side of the cloud, and there God doubles
all his mercies to him. Consider the patience of Job, and the end that the Lord
made with him: do not remember the beginning only, for that was the dark side;
but turn to the end of him, and there was his bright side. Many sins, many
temptations, and much affliction would be prevented by Christians, looking on
the bright side of Providence, as well as on the dark.

Leg. 19. Keep up precious thoughts of God under the sowrest, sharpest, and
severest Dispensations of God to you, Psalm. 22.1, 2. and 3. My God, my God, Why
have thou forsaken me? Why art thou so far from helping me, and from the words
of my roaring? O my God, I cry in the day time, but thou hear not, and in
the night season, and am not silent; There was the Psalmist under smart
dispensations: but, what precious thoughts has he of God under all? But thou
art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praise of Israel: though I am thus and
thus afflicted, yet thou art holy. Psalm. 65.5. By terrible things in
Righteousness will thou answer us, O God of our salvation.

Leg. 20. Hold on, and hold out in the ways of well-doing, in the want of all
outward encouragements, and in the face of all outward discouragements. It Is
nothing to hold out, when we meet with nothing but encouragements; but to hold
out in the face of all discouragements is a Christian duty, Psalm. 44. Though
thou have sore broken us in the place of Dragons, and covered us with the
shadow of death; yet have we not dealt falsely in thy Covenant; our heart is not
turned back, neither have we declined from thy ways; it is perseverence that
crowns all. Be thou faithful to the death, and I will give thee a Crown of
life, Rev. 2.10. And he that endures to the end shall be saved, Mat. 24. It Is
perseverence in well-doing that crowns all our actions. If you have begun in
the Spirit, do not end in the flesh: do not go away from the Captain of your
salvation; follow the Lamb, though others follow the Beast and the false
Prophet.

Leg. 21. In all your natural, civil, and religious Actions, let divine glory
still rest in your souls, Romans 7.8. 1 Cor. 10, 11. In all your hearing, in all
your prayings, let the glory of Christ carry it: in all your Closet-duties, let
the glory of Christ lie nearest your hearts.

Leg. 22. Record all special favors, mercies, providence, and experiences.
It Is true, a man should do nothing else, should he record all the favors and
experiences of God toward him; and therefore my Legacy is, Record all special
favors, peculiar experiences. Little do you know the advantage, that will
redound to your souls upon this account, by recording all the experiences of
the shinings of his face, of the leadings of his Spirit; many a Christian
loses much by neglecting this duty.

Leg. 23. Never enter upon the trial of your estate, but when your hearts are
at the best, and in the fittest temper. It Is a great desire of Satan, when the
Soul is deserted and strangely afflicted, to put the Soul on trying work: Come
see what thou art worth for another world, what thou have to show for a better
state, for an interest in Christ, a title for Heaven: this is not a time to be
about this work: thy work is to get off from this temptation, and therefore to
pray and believe, and wait upon God, and be found in all those ways, whereby
thou may get off the temptation.

Leg. 24. Always make the Scripture, (and not your selves, nor your carnal
reason, nor your bare opinion) the Judges of your spiritual state and
condition. I cannot see my condition to be good. I cannot perceive it. What?
must your sense, and your carnal reason be the Judge of your spiritual state?
Isa. 8.20. To the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to his
rule, it is because there is no light, no morning in them. John 12.24. The word
that I have spoken, the same shall judge you at the last day: The Scripture is
that which must determine the case in the great Day: whether you have grace or
no, or whether it be true or no.

Leg. 25. Make much conscience of making good the terms on which you closed
with Christ: You know the terms, How that you would deny your selves, take up
his Cross, and follow the Lamb wheresoever he should go: Now you are put to
take up the Cross, to deny your selves, to follow the La^^ over Hedge and
Ditch, through thick and thin, do not turn your backs on Christ: the worst of
Christ is better than the best of the world: make conscience of making good
your terms, to deny your self, your natural self, your sinful self, your
religious self; and to follow him: and if you do so, oh! what an honor will it
be to Christ, and advantage to your selves, and a joy to the upright!

Leg. 26. Walk by no rule but such as you dare die by, and stand by in the
great day of Jesus Christ. You may have many ways prescribed to worship by: but
walk by none but such as you dare die by, and stand by, before Christ Jesus:
walk not by a multitude, for who dare stand by that rule, when he comes to die?

Make not the example of great men a rule to go by: for who dare die by, and
stand by this, in the great day of account? Do not make any authority, that
stands in opposition to the authority of Christ, a rule to walk by: for who
dare stand by this, before Jesus Christ? Ah! Sirs, walk by no rule, but what
you dare die by, and stand by, at the great Day.

Leg. 27. And lastly, sit down, and rejoice with fear, Psalm 1. Let the
righteous rejoice, but let them rejoice with fear: Rejoice, that God has done
your souls good by the everlasting Gospel: that he did not leave you till he
brought you to an acceptance of, to a closing with, and a resignation of your
souls to Christ, and the clearing up of your interest in him. Rejoice, that you
have had the everlasting Gospel in so much light, purity, power, and glory, as
you have had for many years together. Rejoice in the riches of grace, that has
carried it in such a way toward you. And weep that you have provoked God to
take away the Gospel, that you have no more improved it, that you have so
neglected the seasons and opportunities of enriching your souls. When you
should have come to Church Fellowship, any thing would turn you out of the way.
Oh! sit down and tremble under your barrenness, under all your leanness:
notwithstanding all the cost and charge that God has been at, that you have
grown no more into communion with God, and conformity to God, and into the
lively hope of the everlasting fruition of God. Here are your Legacies, and the
Lord make them to work in your Souls, and then they will be of singular use to
you, to preserve you so, that you may give up your account before the great and
glorious God with joy. Labor to make conscience of putting these Legacies into
practice, of sucking at these breasts, which will be of use to us, till we
shall be gathered up into the fruition of God, where we shall need no more
Ordinances, no more preachining, or praying.

Mr. Collins his Farewel-Sermon.
Jude v. 3. Contend earnestly for the Faith, etc.
THese words contain two parts:

1. A Duty exhorted to. 2. The manner of the management of Duty.
The duty exhorted to, is, to retain the faith delivered to the Saints:

The manner of its management is, that we should earnestly contend to keep it.

I opened the terms, What Is meant by Faith.

It is not so much the grace of faith, but the Doctrine of faith; not special
faith, whereby we apprehend special mercy upon a promise made to the Elect, but
the Fides quae creditur, the whole substance of the Doctrine of Christ, as to
things that are to be believed, and duties that are to be practiced.

But why is it said, The faith that was once delivered? (that is) invariably,
irrevocably, once for all. To the Saints, respects the privilege the Saints of
God had in the faith that God had left: it is the faith of the Gospel, committed
as a Treasure: And the Church is called a Candlestick, not only to hold out the
light, but to hold the light: whence the Church is called the Pillar, or the
ground of truth: not that they are to make Doctrines, but to hold forth the
Doctrines of Christ, even as Tables and Pillars, upon which Proclamations are
hung and held forth to be made public: so is the Church of Christ, it is that
in which the Truths of the Lord Jesus are kept, and will be kept from one age
to another.

But what is the import of the word [Earnestly contend?] It Is a word used only
once in the New Testament in the Composition: The word in the root is
frequently used, and imports a struggling with might and main, as those that
use to run at games. It is used for Jesus Christ in his sufferings, He was in
an Agony; the same word from whence this word is compounded. The Apostle would
imply such a contention, such a struggling to keep the faith of the Gospel, as
one word in the English is not able to express it, and Interpreters very much
differ what is the import: The best do center in this, that we should contend
for the Faith, as men that would contend to keep their very lives.

The Proposition is this, That it is the duty of the Saints of God to maintain
an earnest contention, to struggle for, and to keep the Faith that was
betrusted with them: Wherein does this contention consist?

1. It is not a carnal contention; the weapons of our warfare are not carnal,
but spiritual, the Saints are not called to contend for the Faith with carnal
weapons, with carnal power and force: (not by might and power, but by the
Spirit of God) force and power, and a fleshly Arm, Prison, Pillors, and Chains,
and taking away of men's comforts and Estates upon the account of the Faith of
the Gospel, has been the usual way of Error's detending it self: Prayers and
Tears are the Churches Weapons.

2. It Is not a contention of uncharitableness. This Contention allows no
murdering, either of the bodies or souls of men: Christians are so to contend
against Error and sinful Practices, as to love their persons, and pity those
they contend with. There are some opinions, that there is no way to show a holy
way of zeal against, nor to be able to destroy them, but by a holy separating
from the persons: there were such to whom it was not lawlul to say God speed,
or receive them into their houses: but yet this in order to the saving their
souls: Saving some, plucking them as brands out of the fire.

But positively, this holy contention it consists in these four things.

1. In managing the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, against Errors and
sinful Practices, to be able to confute them mightily, as Apollos did, out of
the Scriptures, showing the Jews that Jesus is the Christ. 2. By Prayer: for to
pray down sinful opinions and practices. That we mean when we pray, Thy Kingdom
come, that the Gospel may run on and be glorified: that these nights of
darkness may be dispelled: that Truth may shine to the perfect day. 3. By holy
practicing against them: by holding forth the Word o^ Life in your
Conversations: by striving together by a mutual provocation for the Faith of
the Gospel, in respect of holy walking. 4. By being able to suffer for them.
The reasons of the Point I gave you.

I shall now sum up all in a word of Exhortation, to press every one that bears
the name of a Saint, to take up this Exhortation of the Apostle, Earnestly to
contend for the faith that was once delivered to the Saints. The sum of all is,
to beg that you would be valiant for the Truth of Christ; that whatever has
been delivered to you consonant to the truth, agreeable to the faith delivered
to us, that you would struggle might and main, by all Christian courage, by
argument, practice, prayer, by suffering, rather than let go those truths that
God has taught you by his faithful Ministers: that Christ has been preached
to you: those Scriptures you have in your hands; those Doctrines you have
learned by experience, by prayer, by searching the Word: those ways of Worship
God has taught you; those patterns of his house, and outgoings and returnings
there, that he has taught you; be exhorted to hold them fast, and not let them
go: ( Contend earnestly for the faith, etc.)

It is to be lamented, that there is so sad a spirit of indifferency among
Christians, as we find at this day. Many do so carry it, as if there were
nothing in the Gospel of Christ that were worthy the owning by practicing, or
worthy owning by suffering. This lukewarm indifferent temper has done the
Church of God a great deal of mischief formerly; and if admitted now, will do
you as much mischief again. It has been one of the sins which the Lord at this
day is judging and punishing his poor people for, that our zeal has been so
hot against one another for mere circumstances, and so cold when we are like to
lose the substance: that our contentions rise so high in matters hardly of any
moment, and our spirits work so low when they are to gain the great things for
which Christ suffered, and which he delivered to us. It is my work therefore to
beg you, that you would put on a holy resolution, that there may be no
contention among us (for we are Brethren) but only that contention, who may
most retain, and evidently witness the Faith that is delivered to us: It is the
trust God has committed, and he does expect and look how we will manage it
with courage and confidence, to keep the Faith of the Gospel. There are very
great oppositions against you, and there ought to be great resolutions of
Christians to maintain themselves against such oppositions. It is a very sad
thing that Christians should see the Faith and the ways of the Gospel of God,
as it were taken from them at any time (...) and they have not one word to
speak, nor any thing at all for to venture in suffering for the ways and
truths of Jesus Christ: Moses had such a holy zeal, that when Aaron was an
example to the people to lead them to Idolatry, he contended with him earnestly
to his face. The zeal of Gods servants is so small now, that though Balaam be
about the work, we have not a word to speak; Though the small Prophets of
Antichrist be about the business, yet no Christian has courage to speak. The
holy Apostle Paul, when Peter walked with an uneven foot, and began to Judaise,
he tells us, he did resist him to his face. Shall Paul resist Simon Peter, and
shall not the Saints of God resist Simon-Magus? shall they resist Hymenaeus and
Philetus, and shall not we contend with Alexander the Copper-smith? it is but
suitable to what God expects; and the Exhortation here given us, That we should
maintain with might and main, as that which is our treasure, which we will not
let go, the Faith once delivered to the Saints.

To put you upon this, I might encourage you with several things. All the
Reasons mentioned are as so many Motives to this holy spiritual contention:
Shall I tell you of three words further?

1. The mercy of God delivering the truth to you, should engage you to this
holy contention: it is such a mercy as is a Non-such mercy, Psalm. 147. the two
last verses, He has given his Judgments to Jacob, and his Statutes to Israel;
He has not dealt so with any Nation. How many of the greatest part of those
that we call Christians in the world, are put like Sampson to grind among the
Philistinis? Superstition, Popery, Idolatry, Will Worship, such things as Jesus
Christ never delivered to his Saints, having both their eyes out, the Scripture
light that should have showed them the truth, taken from them; and their
Consciences that should teach them, carried in the pocket of some base Priest,
that dare not think any other than what he will tell them. How many are there,
even of the very reformed of the world, who only get upon some broken plank of
Ship-wrack'd truth, whereby they swim to the Lord Jesus? But God does not deal
thus with us: you have had the whole Counsel of God revealed to you, a glorious
light set up in the Nation for a hundred of years past, which has been like
the light of seven days: For these twenty years past the running to and fro of
men, has increased knowledge: you have learned the truth from Gods faithful
Ministers: you have received it with much affliction, with many temptations: it
has cost Jesus Christ dear to send it, it has cost you dear to receive it,
and will you let it go? Your sin above all others will be most provoking to the
Lord Jesus.

2. I might tell you that it is a time, wherein many let go the faith, and
methinks the Lord Jesus does by his poor and unworthy messenger speak to this
great Congregation, as sometimes he did to his Apostles, Will ye also go away?
There are many that have been forward and eminent Professors of the Faith
delivered to the Saints, that have made Shipwreck of Faith and a good
Conscience; will you split upon the same rock? God has kept the truth for you,
and kept you in the truth hitherto, and is coming to see whether you will
cleave to it, and keep it or no. We have been sucking at the breasts of the
Ordinances, and dandled upon the knees of Providence, and gone on in a smooth
way of Profession: but what will you do now, when you must come possibly to
suffer persecution for it? to keep the faith, you may lose your Liberty, Life,
Estate. And there is a great deal of hazard upon this account, because it has
pleased God so to dispose it, as that those that should be your guides into
truth, the Lord is removing them into corners. Possibly while they have been
with you, you have kept the faith; but what will you do when they are gone?
While Moses was with the people they cleaved to the Lord; when once he was gone
into the Mount, they fell into their Idolatry, and worshipped a Calf. While
Paul was at Ephesus the flock kept pure, but (says he) I know after my
departure grievous Wolves shall break in, not sparing the flock, etc. So while
you have heard of God, who sends voices and warnings to scare away the Wolves
and Foxes from you, possibly you may keep the Faith; but what will you do when
God removes them?

3. God has ever had in all ages of his Church, a word of his Patience to be
kept, to try his Saints; and therefore it does concern you for to be valiant
for the truth. In all the series of Gods dispensations with his Church, there
has been something or other of the faith of Christ, that has cost them
resisting to blood, to sacrifice their lives, to lay down all that they have
for it by suffering. Now even as they, so we; if not in the same thing, yet in
the same faith: we have still some word or other of Gods patience to keep,
therefore we need to have on the Armor of Light; you must wrestle with the
fiery Trial, for there is some Jewel that Jesus Christ puts upon you to wear,
that Persecutors and Persecutions, Heresies and Heretics will scratch at,
which you must hold out with loss of life to keep; and this must be till the
latter part of the rage and reign of Antichrist is out; and even as you keep
that, so will God keep you, Rev. 3.10. As you honor the word of Gods patience,
so God will honor you: As you are faithful to him, so will he give you the
Crown, and no otherwise: Hence therefore it concerns us all to be armed with a
holy confidence and resolution, as to this spiritual Warfare, in contending for
the faith delivered to us.

But the great thing I shall speak to, is; Wherein may Christians be helped in
this holy struggling and contention?

I shall only mention five or six things, some to fit you for it, others to
help you in the mannagement of it: I shall name them mixtly, and not distinct.

Rule 1. First, Bring all Doctrines that are offered you to believe, and all
practices that are put upon you to practice, to the Scriptures, the Word of
God; try them there, whether they be to be retained, or to be rejected. You
will have this double advantage by it; 1. To discover what is right, and what
is wrong. 2. To have on the best part of your armor, whereby to contend against
it.


1. To discover what is right, and what is wrong; for the Scripture alone is
the Touchstone of Doctrines, and the Trial of Spirits: The Scripture does
discover it self, and does discover all things that are contrary to it: when
you are bidden to try all things, it is not by practicing all things, as some
poor giddy-headed Christians of late days have done; who have made the
practicing every opinion, to be their trying of it, till they have run
themselves into all Opinions: but it is the Scripture you are first to try, and
then to practice; who are like the noble Bereans, that were more noble than
those of Thessalonipa, because they searched the Scripture. To bring the Truths
that have or shall be taught you, or the Doctrines that shall be imposed upon
you, to the Word of God; to see whether they be according to the Truth, or no:
for false Doctrines and false Worship, of all things they hate the Scripture
most: they are alike false coin, or false Jewels, which go best in the night:
false coin will not endure the Touchstone, nor false Jewels the day: no more
will false Doctrines the Scripture; therefore it will be a great way to
discover them.

2. It will be a great way to vanquish them, Ephesians. 6. Above all, take the sword
of the Spirit: the Word of God is the sword of the Spirit, by which we slay
Heretical Doctrines; and by which we are to slay sinful practices. All those
stones that the David's of God have flung at the Goliahs of Error, they have
been taken out of the Brook of the Scriptures: therefore reduce all Doctrines
offered you to believe, all Worships that are taught you to practice, to the
Word of God.

1. All Doctrines that are taught you to believe, reduce them thither; there is
no profession of Faith to be built, but the stones must be fetched from that
Mountain: If you believe Divine Truths, but not because the Scripture propounds
them, your faith is but humane: If you believe any thing the Scripture does not
speak, your faith is Diabolical: the Word of God, and your faith, must run
parallel: All that is written, you must believe, and you must believe nothing
but what is written: This was the Rule of the Old Testament, Isa. 8.20. To the
Law and to the Testimony; to the Law, that is, to Moses; and to the Testimony,
that is, to the Prophets: if they speak not according to these, there is no
light in them. When any thing was offered to Christ by way of enquiry, his
common answer was, How read thou? Luke 10.26. How is it written? When the
Apostle Paul would redress the abuse of the Lords Supper, he does not carry the
Corinthians to these and these Fathers, to this and that use and custom, but
brings that, How it was delivered from the Lord: he reduces them to the
Institution; What I have received from the Lord, that I have delivered unto
you. The Word of God is perfect, in respect of Doctrine, and in respect of
Worship. So that whatsoever is offered you to believe, you must try it by
perfect rules; for it is given by Divine inspiration, to make the man of God
perfect and wise unto Salvation: it is such a Canon about Doctrines to be
received, as nothing must be added nor taken from it, Rev. 22. Therefore it is
called a Testament: Now no man dares add to another man's last Will and
Testament: Who shall dare to add a faith to the Faith of Gods Elect, to that
which Christ has delivered? I will give you this as a certain Observation,
that there never was any thing of false Doctrine brought into the Church, or
any thing of false Worship imposed upon the Church, but either it was by
neglecting the Scripture, or by introducing someehing above the Scripture.

2. Bring hither all practices of Worship, as well as Doctrine, to be believed:
try the ways and forms of Christ's house, by the Word of Christ: he shows us
the patterns thereof, the our-goings, and returnings thereof: he was faithful
in all his house, even as Moses was, who did not leave a pin of the Tabernacle,
but did appoint it. There is nothing decent and comely in the Church, which is
so much pleaded for, but what comes in by Christ's institution. Whatever you
worship without a warrant from the Word of God, or by whatever means you
worship without a warrant from the Word of God, you worship you know not what,
John 4.20. It Is Will Worship; and by the same Rule you receive one
Will Worship, you may receive twenty; It Is vain worship, it will never reach
the end of your Communion with God: (for he is a Spirit, and seeks such
Worshippers:) it will never bring you to the enjoyment of God: therefore in
point of Worship, bring it to the Word of God; and as to Faith and Worship,
say, Hitherto, my Faith, and my Worship, shall thou go and no further. This
rule rightly improved, will dis-intangle you from the hooks, and take you off
from the baits of those cunning Fowlers (for to such the Apostle does compare
them in the New Testament) who seek to betray souls from the simplicity of
Gospel-faith. Never any did invent false Doctrine, but to put up them, they put
down the Scripture, and they put out the eyes of Christians to make them bend
to it. Before they use other means to compel them, their great work is to
darken the light, or the truth; and in the room of the Scripture to be your
rule, they set up other Rules: which, because there are three mavelous
Popular, I desire to mention them in opposition to this Rule I have given you.

There Is a threefold rule men would set up to deceive poor souls: The Name of
a Church: Ancient Customs: The Generality of those where they live.

1. The specious Name of a Church, to make that a Rule to Doctrine and to
Worship. It was the plea of the Popish Party in the Marian days; What! will
you not believe the Church? has not the Church power to make Institutions and
Canons about this, and that, and the other? will you not believe the Church?
will will you go out from the true Church? Thus do men that go about to
deceive; nothing like it, as to the catching and deluding many poor souls, by
making the Church their Rule. It was the way of the Popish Party of old, and if
Antichrist ever has power again over the Church of Christ, in that measure and
degree it has had, you must expect it again; therefore let me caution you
against it. Can we enquire who this Church was? It was only the decree of the
proud Church, Antichrist of old, and the Antichristian Clergy, who, (as you may
read in their Stories) would lord it over the faith of Gods heritage. I must
tell you, the Name, and Custom, and way of the Churches of Christ, is a
reverend holy thing, even of that that is a true Church: It Is a weighty
Argument, when the Apostle says, We have no such Custom, nor the Churches of
Christ: And therefore I do fully close with him that said, No sober man will go
against reason: No Christian against the Scripture: and no peaceable minded man
against the Church: But then the Church must shine by a Scripture Light: If
that be a Rule, it must be ruled by the Scripture; the Churches power is not
Authoritative, as to give Laws against the Laws of Christ; it is only
ministerial, we do believe the Scripture for it self, and not because of the
Church: we receive the Scripture by the Church: Hence therefore when we set up
the name of a Church, let us see whether that Church walk in the way of Christ,
whether she be his Spouse or no, whether she does act according to his
Institutions, whether they bring his light, yea or no; then submit: for it is
not what a Church practices, but what they are warranted to practice: not what
they hold for a truth, but what they are warranted to hold as the Word of
Truth: The Word was written after the Church, but as it is the Word of God,
it is before it. This therefore will break the snare, if you be set upon by the
specious name of the Church; look that the Church has warrant from
Scripture-Institution, and then submit to Church-Institution.

A second Rule I observe men would set up to betray poor souls from the faith
once delivered to them, is Ancient Custom: (our Fathers worshipped in this
Mountain.) When they would hold forth that which the Scripture is short in,
they will send us to such and such customs, of so many hundred years standing.
It is to be bewailed that the date, the standing of false Doctrines, and false
Worships, is so ancient; for though at first they were but Innovations, yet to
succeeding Generations they become old: And it is a very great truth, That what
is the most ancient, is the most true; and therefore there lies a great snare
in this. Therefore when Antiquity is pretended, if you find not their hoary
heads in the way of Righteousness, there is little reason for you to reverence
them, or comply with them, no more than there was reason so suddenly to be
taken with the Gibeonites moldy bread and clouted shoes: When matters of
Antiquity are pretended, say as Ignatius, Jesus Christus est mea Antiquitas,
Jesus Christ is my Antiquity; so say, Truth is my Antiquity: for though an
opinion has been practiced a thousand years, yet men may have the Word of
Truth in their hearts that is ancienter than all.

A third Rule that men would set up, is, The general course of the World, or
Place, the generality of those where they live: This was that the Popish Party
did often mention to the witnesses of Jesus Christ; What! will you be wiser
than others? Cannot you do as others do? must you be singular? And this is a
taking Rule for to make you conformable to those things possibly the Word of
God will not warrant, if you bring not this custom to the Word of God: It Is not
what the most do, but what we may do: it is not what the practice of all in
general is, but what ought to be the singular care, and strict holiness of
Christians in particular, that the Word of God will allow: Christians are not
to be conformable to the present World, Romans 12.1. The Word will tell you, It
is no more safe to follow a multitude to do evil, than it will be sweet to be
in Hell with a great company: The Word will let you know, the secrets of the
Lord are with a very few, and those, them that fear him: as for the whole
world, it lies in wickedness: The Word will tell you, The ways of Jesus
Christ, and the profession of Jesus Christ, is commonly called a Sect; it is
every where spoken against, and men hate it every where: Therefore set up a
Rule in your hearts, in your houses, in your meditations, in your practice.

Rule 2.

Be very well rooted and established in the faith that has been delivered to
you. I observe one of the great reasons why Christians so easily let go the
profession they have made, is, because they were never well built upon it, nor
established in it. There are many Christians, that, through their own itching
ears, heaping up Teachers to themselves, have never been rooted or established
in the truth; the Lord pity them and keep them this day: Many Christians that
have attended to establishing means, yet never seriously considered nor laid
things to their heart, but are like those the Apostle speaks of, Heb. 5.12.
that had need to learn the first Oracles of God. How many among us profess with
the highest, but have little ground for their faith? only (with the Jews) the
Traditions of the Elders, the custom of the place, Education, and because such
a party of men say so, because no body denies it, because Ministers commonly
preached it; but to have any solid and serious ground, they are yet to seek.
It Is not with the things of God, as with other Arts, as Logic, Rhetoric,
Astronomy; in these Arts the principal is presupposed to be proved; no man goes
about to prove there is Reason, that there is Number, that there are Heavenly
Bodies, because sense and experience shows it. But it is quite otherwise in the
things of God: for you are not only to run away with the notion, that there is
a God, that this God is one, and that these are his Words and his Works; but
you are to know this by experience, because the knowledge of these things comes
by infusion, by faith, by a belief that God is: For by faith we believe the
Worlds were made by the Word of God, Hebr. 11.3. It is that therefore I would
press you to, that you would labor for an established Spirit: Do not only
hear the things of God, but see them; the first will but blind you, or at best
leave you at great uncertainties; the last will settle you. What was the reason
of the holy Apostles zeal, when they were under the greatest threatenings of the
High Priests, and were forbid to speak in the name of Christ, and to speak of
Justification by faith, and the Resurrection of Christ from the dead, and
forgiveness of sins by him? (things that are further remote from sense and
reason) the Apostle will tell you, Acts 4.20. We cannot but speak the things we
have seen and heard. Hence it is that poor silly women, that in respect of
their Imbecility and Infirmity of Sex, the terrors of the fire and faggot,
might have been such to have brought them to Apostasy, yet they confounded the
great Doctors and Rabbis when they were brought before them; they were able to
burn, though they could not dispute; they beheld things that were invisible.
It Is an excellent thing not to take up the Word upon notion, upon opinion, but
to have an established heart through Grace. I shall direct you in two words.

1. Get the Lord by Prayer to teach you every truth; what Jesus Christ teaches
once, is everlastingly taught; no word is abiding, but what the Lord Jesus
teaches himself. Look as it is with Satan, when he comes to seduce men from the
truth, he will present such a fine notion without, and commonly he darts in
some dazzling light within, so that you never knew a Heretic take up a false
opinion, but it was with a mavelous deal of sweetness and comfort: so when
the Lord Christ teaches by his Spirit, he comes with that light, that
sweetness, savor, and relish of truth, as will be impossible for you to let it
go: Hence when Christ would confute the Pharisees, who had the witness of his
Father in his work, he says, Joh. 5.37. Ye have neither heard his ^oice at any
time, nor seen his shape: It Is an excellent thing to see the shape and hear the
voice of God. 2. Be well rooted upon Christ, or else you will never be
established in any truth of Christ: If you miss the Lord Jesus by the Grace of
Faith: you will never h^ld fast the Doctrine of Faith: you are built upon the
Doctrine of the Apostles, (not their Persons) upon which the Lord Jesus is the
Cornerstone: he that does not know Jesus Christ himself, will certainly lose
his Faith: What Is the reason the stony ground in time of Persecution fell away?
why, they had not root, they were not planted upon the Lord Jesus.
Rule 3. Thirdly, those truths that God has taught you, and those ways of
Worship God has committed to you, love them as your lives, love them above
your lives; for no man will ever contend to hold them, if he do not love them.
Things of low price and esteem, are presently let go; he that loves the Word
above his life, will let life go rather than the Word: If you receive not the
Word out of love, every Imposter and false Prophet, every fear and terror of
men will rob you of it: Hide the Word in thy heart, says Solomon, Love the
truth dearly. It was a great speech of Calvin, Never did any one Apostatize
from the truth of Jesus Christ, but it was because he did not love the truth:
And I add this, That never did any Apostatize from the ways and truth of Jesus
Christ, but it was because they did not receive them in love, or else they have
lost their love; for there is a decay of affection, as well as having no
affection: if you love them, what will you not suffer for them? (but more of
that by and by.)

Rule 4. Fourthly, Guard all the truths of God, and those ways of God that
have been taught you; guard them strongly, especially truths that are most
material and fundamental: for leading truths are like Captains of Armies, if
they be routed, the whole rout follows them. There is great opposition that
will be made against your faith. The whole power of darkness, of Antichrist, of
his seducing spirits, likely and probably enou^h, will overspread the whole
face of Christianity once more: for she must sit as a Lady, before she be
desolate and forsaken for ever. The Apostle bids you beware of Dogs, beware of
the Concision, beware of Evil workers, guard your selves against them, guard
the truths you have learned, by Argument, by Scripture, by Reason, that you may
have wherewithal to confute them by the word of truth mightily, out of the
Scripture, as the Apostle did.

Three things you are to guard against.

1. Your own deceitfulness, especially in a rash and sudden forsaking of those
ways that have been taught, and the profession you have taken up; for
Christians would never be so mad to Apostatize, were they but seriously
deliberate, about the weight of them, Gal. 3.1. O foolish Galathians, who has
bewitched you, that you would not obey the truth, etc. and 1.6. I warvelled
what ailed you, that you soon turned away to another Gospel. One would have
thought they might have spoken with Paul first, and sent to him, and reasoned
the case with him: There Is a mavelous bewitching in false Doctrines, to take
men presently, who are not watchful over themselves. It is in disputations and
practicing truth, as it is in contentions: if you make a Judgment before you
hear both parties speak, you judge unrighteously: if you forsake the ways and
truth of Jesus Christ, before you can hear what can be said for them, you do
unrighteously. 2. Guard them against the lusts of your own hearts. The great
work of a Chris^ian, is contention; it is not so much against Antichrist, those
that are without him, as that which is within him. If all Heretical Do^trines
and ways were rooted out of the World, not only the being, but the memory,
the heart is bad enough in one day to set them all o^ foot again; therefore
guard the truth: Men of corrupt minds will presently grow ^eprobate, as to the
Faith, 1 Timothy 3 6. Such Doctrines and Worships as shall suit with our lusts, as
shall suit with exalting Self, and laving Christ low, as shall suit with an
easy way to Heaven, when the Scripture says, Straight is the Gate; as shall
suit with self-preservation: So I might secure my Estate, my Liberty. I would
suspect such Doctrines as these, before I take them up for the ways of Christ.
Guard the truth against false Teachers, such as shall come among you in Sheeps
clothing, yet are Wolves in heart; men that creep in at unawares among you, to
subvert souls: I will not here describe them, you know them well enough by
their fruits: only this let me tell you in opposition to those; though you
cannot come at the public Ministr^, or those God has set over you, yet make
Conscience for to take fences, to take defenses from them, as you may by their
Counsel, Prayer, Help, and Assistance, for to guard you against false Teachers.
When the Church of Christ is in the Wilderness, you will find this is that the
Holy Ghost advises them to, Cant. 1.8. You are to guard your selves by
communion one with another; as to go forth by the footsteps of the Flock, so
also you are to go and feed your Kids by the Shepherds tents; for though it is
not the work that God calls for, to pin your faith upon their sleeves, yet it is
your duty to enquire of the Lord by them; for he is the Messenger of the Lord
to you.

Rule 5. Arm your selves with Resolutions to suffer for the faith of the
Gospel, and for the ways of Jesus Christ; As you should love the truth above
your lives, so labor to be made willing to part with Life, Estate, Liberty,
any thing for to keep the ways of Jesus Christ. It is not the honor of the
Gospel of Christ to hear Christians to break out into murmurings, passions,
discontents, contentions that are carnal and sinful; your work is, humbly,
meekly, and patiently to lie under the hand of God, and under the hand of man
too; that becomes Christians. Suffering is that that will restore the glory of
Religion, that will keep the truth delivered to you, that will honor the Cause
of Christ best of all: follow the example of blessed Paul: his his expression
is worthy of consideration, 2 Timothy 2.9. he gives a charge of keeping and
propagating one of the most glorious truths, (that Jesus Christ was risen from
the dead) yet a thing that is farthest off from sense and reason, (wherein I
suffer trouble:) Mark, Paul does not say, wherein I make trouble; no, but
wherein I suffer trouble, as an evil doer, unto bonds, but the Word of God is
not bound. If this blessed and glorious Apostle would have had the faith of God
bound, and have contented himself with sinful silence, and not propagated the
Gospel, Paul might have been free; but Paul would not have the Word of God
bound, therefore Paul would suffer for it. Shall we go higher a great deal than
this? You have the glorious commendation of the Lord Jesus Christ upon this
account, that he gave a free and full account of the Doctrine of his Father,
and of his glorious person, before Pontius Pilate, a bloody Persecutor. It was
not by saying to his Disciples Fight; nor by saying, My Kingdom is not of this
World: but he gave a glorious confession before the face of Pilate, of the
righteousness of his Truth, Doctrine, Gospel, and of his Person. Fear to
ensnare the freedom of the Truth, with your own Liberty; do not ensnare it to
your own lusts, nor to the will of any man. Oh! that we could study, and
improve these Scriptures more! it would make us fear God more, and man less.
This is that that would make us to say, as holy David did, Psalm. 119.161.
Princes have persecuted me without a cause, but my heart stands in awe of thy
word: for he that has the most fear on you, and upon you, you will be more
afraid to fall into his hands. It is a childish thing for a Christian to tread
down the belief of any Doctrine, or practice any Worship for fear of man, who
has no more power to hurt us, than we give him our selves by our fear; Fear
not him that can kill the body, etc. It was the way of Gods people formerly,
that they came to divide between duty commanded by God, and commanded by Man.
You may read in all the days of Antichrists persecution, from the beginning
they came to divide in matter of obedience to God and his truth; and worship
and obedience to Man. Christians! nothing but a suffering spirit will help you
to this, for there is no other way of Obedience in this case to Authority, but
to suffer under it meekly, patiently, as Lambs: This made the three children to
divide between the command of the King, and the command of God: What says
Nebuchadnezzar? Every knee that bows not, shall be cast into the Furnace: Very
well; As for that matter, say they, O King, we are not careful to answer thee;
for we will not bow down, etc. What, will they not obey him? Yes, they will
obey him; by suffering, as becomes Christians, and is the example of Christ: as
if they should say, Truly we are terrified with the burning Furnace, but we
are terrified with Hell too: We are terrified by the threats of the great King,
but we are likewise terrified with the threats of the great God: He is able to
deliver us our of your torments, you are not able to deliver us from his
torments: so in the case of Daniel. Arm your selves with this Resolution of
suffering, and lying down patiently and meekly under those things that you
cannot do, so that God may be honored by your holy resolution upon this
account: for truly, you never do contend successfully for the faith of the
Gospel, till you contend by suffering; for it is said, They overcome by the
blood of the Lamb: You never make Religion your business, till the world see
you can let such great things go, as Life, Estate, Liberty, to keep it: then
wisdom is justified of her Children. You never glorify the truths of God so
much by practice, or writing, as by suffering for them. Those glorious truths
against Popish justification, mixing of works with faith, Transubstantiation,
Purgatory, Idol-worship, against all those things that were superadded contrary
to God's Institution, there is such a glory upon the truths, that is hard for
the Popish power ever to darken them again, because we see them written in the
honorable and blessed scars of the witnesses, and burnings of those glorious
Martyrs. If you would take one another by the hand, when God takes away our
faithful Guides, and say, Brethren, Sisters, Friends, come let us hold
together; there is no way in the world to hold on together like suffering; for
the Gospel really would get more advantage by the holy, humble, sufferings of
one gracious Saint, merely for the Word of Righteousness, than by ten thousand
Ar^uments used against Heretics, and false Worship. Compare Phil. 1 12, 13,
14. with the 27, 28, and 29. verses. How are Paul's bonds a furtherance of the
Gospel? Paul no doubt was called an evil doer, that sowed Heresy, and was
hated every where; (says he) Many of the Brethren of the Lord waxed confident
by my bounds, and were much more bold to speak the Word without fear. Here Is
the great encouragement: and that is in the 27. verse, and he speaks it as one
that was leaving of them, Only let your Conversation he as becomes the Gospel
of Christ, that you may stand fast in one spirit, with one mind, striving
together for the faith of the Gospel, and in nothing terrified by your
Adversaries, for unto you it is given, not only to believe, but also to suffer,
etc. It is given to you as a duty, given to you as a privilege. O that you
would confirm one another, and in slippery times hold up one another by the
hand; do it in going after Gods call, and in this way, suffering for those
truths you cannot otherwise hold and maintain.

Truly Christians, you had need be armed with Resolution; for the world is
always counting the things Gods people have suffered, for very little, and they
count it prudence not to meddle therein. Those men that have easy, soft terms
to comply, that they have a latitude to do any thing, I believe some Christians
are of that opinion, that they would even think the Saints of God were
ill-advised to venture their All upon those truths they see others dyed and
suffered for.

It is a sad thing, many Christians study; to draw out the lines of obedience
as far as the honesty of the times will give them leave, but no farther: that
they would go on with the Lord Jesus to the High Priest's Hall, and there deny
him: or that would be willing to do any thing for Christ, but are willing to
suffer nothing for Christ: you do very little honor Jesus Christ in this, and
you will very little honor your selves at the last. It is upon this account
that Christians if they see even against plain conviction of Conscience, and
the Word, that there are super-instituted things broken in, as in conscience
they cannot submit to, yet they cannot comply, why? they may be used lawfuly,
though not superstitiously: But says the Apostle Paul, Do I yet strive to
please men? Gal. 1.10. Am I then the Servant of Christ? You cannot be the
Servants of Christ, if you strive to please men. Woe be to you that please men,
and displease God: He that would be my Disciple, let him deny himself, and take
up his Cross, etc. (What Is that?) deny Wife, Children, Relations, Comforts, he
must be willing to go out of all: Those duties the Lord Jesus Christ is most
glorified in, they are either those our floathful hearts are most unwilling to
do, or that our fearful hearts are most unwilling to suffer for: Therefore arm
your selves with resolutions to suffer.

I intended to have taken up four Appearances and Coverings that Saints usually
take up for to hide themselves, as under a covert, to beat down the
Gospel-warrants and commands, to suffer for the Faith delivered.

1. The motion that a Christian has of indifferency of things, that they are
but toys and trifles, that they may be done, or not done. It is not my work to
tell you what is indifferent, or name any thing in particular. As I remember in
the Book of Martyrs, the usual Argument was, Why cannot you worship the Idol?
why cannot you bow down as well as others? it is a small matter: cannot you
show your outward reverence, and keep your heart to your self? Indeed if there
were any thing that is indifferent, a Christian has a mavelous latitude in
point of Doctrine, in point of Worship: I would caution you therefore. The term
of indifferent, I suppose it is devised as a Pillar to rest the Conscience on,
which otherwise would startle, and look with a broad face upon them. Things
that come under this notion, had need well to be weighed and considered: If
they tell you plainly they came out of Rome, and had the Plague of Popery upon
them: they came from Hell, were hatched there, and the curse of God is upon
them; no body will entertain them. They must pretend they came from the Church,
from the Apostles, descending from the Scriptures; and hence they are
entertained with the freedom and willingness, as that most Christians take no
notice, but fall down under them; and so the very power and life of Religion
and holy practice is eaten out. The Devil has three ways whereby he makes men
seek after him. First, Commonly he does cover holiness with other names.
Secondly, He persuades that sins are but little. Thirdly, That they may repent
hereafter. The first is suitable to my purpose, That virtue or grace is covered
with other names: therefore if a man be holy, he is called precise; if zealous,
he is said to be rash; and if it be really a sin, it shall come under the name
of indifferency, a toy, a trifle, and things of that nature: therefore you had
need be cautious; for it is not so much what name the sin has, what title it
goes under, as what it is really. As to things of Doctrine and Worship I know
there is no medium; every man must give an account to the Lord what he does;
therefore I do not tell you what is indifferent, and what not; but search the
Scripture, take heed what you receive for indifferent.

The second thing Christians will say is, I hope without danger I may comply
with them, considering I bear them as my burdens. This is very like the young
man in the Gospel; he came to Christ, and would have him come up to his terms;
and when Christ told him, Yet he lacked one thning, Go^^ell all, etc. he went
away sorrowful: So, many Christians they would follow Christ, but they cannot,
because there is not such security in it, but they will go away sorrowful: Thou
Hyvocrite! Art thou willing to forsake all for Christ, yet can not leave
life, liberty, and some of these small things? Will you wound the name of
Christ, and pretend to be sorrowful for it? I conclude, ^hy pretense shall not
excuse thee; for so was Pilate loath to crucify Christ; and, as a means and
expedient, he calls for water and washes his hands, saying, I am innocent from
the blood of this just man: But do you think God excused Pilate? no more, will
he you: Whatever is brought to you, is either forbidden or commanded by God: If
forbidden by God, why do you meddle with it? If commanded of the Lord, why are
you burdened with it? why do you it heartily? for the Lord loves one that is
cheerful in his service: Neither man nor God is pleased with such.

A third thing, which satisfies many, is, That they may follow in some things
the opinions of wise men, holy men, and good men; That they may do as they do.
I shall say but these two words: First, Many men are reputed good, wise, and
honest, that are not so: A man may be accounted an honest man, that yet may be
covetous: he may be accounted a very good man, yet be really corrupt in heart,
and in his lusts; therefore it is good to try men: I dare not trust mine own
heart, (unless God give strength of grace, and assistance every moment) lest I
should betray the truth of Christ upon some advantage: when the Devil would set
abroach an evil opinion or practice, it is his common way to tunn it up in some
clean Vessel. Men of civil honesty and goodness: You read the old Prophet drew
the young one in, though expressly forbidden by God himself: When you do not
fear a young Christian, it may be the example of an old Minister shall draw
you; therefore it is good to mind who you follow. Secondly, Grant they are all
good and real, they are men fearing God, (as there are some;) yet God will not
let his people know all his mind. There are some that would, but cannot know
all his mind and will; the Lord is free and voluntary, he reveals things
necessary to salvation; but for other things he withholds. But what is your
rule? Call no man Master: you are to follow no man further than he follows
Christ: And indeed for a man to follow the examples of others, wherein they sin
and do not know it; it is just like the case of holy Noah, (who was a gracious
man) and knew not the strength of the Grape, he was drunk with his own
Vineyard: But what is the fruit of it? his Son Cham saw his nakedness, and
discovered it: If good and holy men taste of the intoxicated Wine that is too
strong for them, and know it not, will you sip after them? unless you will
discover your nakedness, and proclain it from Generation to Generation, and
make your selves Chams, not sons of the Prophet: Therefore I know not what
warrant you have to follow such examples.

The fourth things is this; Christians usually do no good by standing out.
Answ. Whether we get good, or do good or no, we are to do our duty. The Lord
will honor you for suffering for the Truth, 2 These. 1.2, 3, 4, 5. And by
suffering you shall confirm the Saints, and bear testimony; you shall witness
against all false Doctrines, and false Worship, before the whole world. By your
humility and Patience, when you suffer not as evildoers, but as those that
suffer for the Word of Righteousness, the Word of Truth, for holding fast the
Lord Jesus and his Faith, that is more precious than Heaven and Earth, than any
created thing: this will make your name as a sweet savor to all Generations;
when those that Apostatize, Persecute, and oppose Jesus Christ, their memories
shall be left as a curse to the people of God.

Rich Treasure in Earthen Vessels. A Sermon Preached Jan. 1. 1662. at the
Funeral of that Reverend and faithful Servant of Jesus Christ, Mr. James
Nalton, late Minister of Gods Word at St. Leonards Foster-lane, by T. Horton,
D.D.
2 Cor. 4.7. But we have this Treasure in Earthen Vessels, that the excellency
of the Power may be of God, and not of us.
THere is nothing so excellent or complete in this World, but has its
diminishment and qualifications; and something that does rage it, and abates it
of the excellency thereof; not the things of this World only, but spiritual
things in some sort, as to enjoy them, and partake of them in this life, have
their inconveniences and disparagements annexed, and are mingled with something
that abates of their worth; an instance of which we have here in this present
Scripture which the Apostle Paul signifies to us concerning the enjoyment of
the Ministry of the Gospel of Christ. He had in the Verse before the Text, told
us the great privilege that both Ministers and others had in having the
glorious Gospel, viz. The light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ, shining into our hearts; the consideration of which, is
of great encouragement to us: yet adds this as a qualification of it; viz. But
we have this Treasure in Earthen Vessels, etc. That which does qualify it, is,
That this excellent Treasure has its conveyances through weak and mean
persons, men of frailty and mortality. In the words there are two main parts:
I. The Dispensation of it. II. The Account of it.


I. The Dispensation it self, This Treasure we have in Earthen Vessels, etc.

II. The Account of it, That the Excellency of the power may be of God, and not
of us.

I shall begin with the first, the Dispensation it self, which has two
branches.

1. The Depositum, the thing laid up. 2. The Repository in which this Treasure
is laid up.
First, The Depositum, or thing laid up, which is a Treasure; and what is this
Treasure, but the Gospel of Jesus Christ? The Gospel is a Treasure according to
a twofold consideration.

In respect of the 1. Matter of it. In respect of the 2. Ministry of it.
Both make up a Treasure. The Matter of it, the things of the Gospel are rich
things; and the conveyances of it, the Ministerial gifts and ability, by which
the Gospel is administered, do make up the Treasure: It Is a treasure in both
respects.

1. In respect of the Matter of it; therefore it is, we read of the Riches of
Christ, of the Riches of the Gospel. The Scripture makes mention of three
things, wherein the Gospel is agreeable to a treasure.

2. A Treasure is a thing of dignity and worth; it is not a company of Pebbles
(though many) that will make up a Treasure; Treasure consists of things of
worth and dignity: and thus is the Gospel: in it are contained excellent and
admirable truths, the Mysteries of salvation by Christ; the Doctrine of the
Gospel b^ings glad tidings of peace and reconciliation with God in Christ:
there we have the gifts and graces of God, there we have glory and immortality,
etc. and those things in the Gospel are administered to us: there is no Science
in the world brings such Treasure as this.

2. The Gospel is a treasure for variety, and abundance, and plurality. It Is
not one thing of worth, but many that make up a treasure: if few, yet much
worth must be comprehended in them; so in the Gospel we have the manifold
wisdom of God, the rich Treasures of wisdom and knowledge. The Gospel, though
it be but one for substance, yet it is many for improvements; it is a chain of
many links, one faith, but diverse articles of it; so it is a treasure in that
respect.

3. It Is a Treasure for its closeness; We do not open a Treasure to every one,
but it is kept close. The Gospel is a secret mystery, hidden, not revealed to
every one: it is not discovered to carnal worldly men; though it may be
revealed to them in the outward proposition, yet not in the spirituality of it.
But where shall wisdom be found? and where is the place of understanding? says
Job, chapter 28: v. 12. The peace of the Gospel is a treasure hid in the field, not
found by every one.

2. The Gospel is a treasure in respect of the Ministry of it, so the Apostle
hints, it is not only, but a shining light, which shined into our hearts, to
give the light of the knowledge of the Glory of God, etc. It Is a treasure in
this respect, viz. In the discovery and shining of it, the conveyances, the
several gifts and graces of the mystery, by which the Gospel is conveved to us,
makes us a treasure; and as the Ministry is a treasure, so the opportunities
and advantages thereof are. Thus the Gospel and the Ministry thereof is
precious, and ought to be esteemed and made use of by us. We should highly
account of the Gospel, and put a high value on it, for it is a treasure; yea,
it is a treasure in the want of other treasures, they are rich that are made
partakers of it: Silver and Gold have I none, (says St. Peter to the Cripple)
but such as I have, I give it thee: this is the privilege of Ministers; though
it may be, poor in respect of themselves, yet are rich to others. These
excellent riches are committed to us, and accordingly we must not only make use
of them our selves, but make them known to others; the Gospel is a treasure not
for us to keep, but to discover, reveal and manifest to others: to give the
light of the glory of God, etc. This is the work of the Ministry, we have
indeed this treasure, but not for our selves only, but for others: We are to
keep it, to preserve and maintain; it but so, as to be diligent to impart what
is committed to us for the edification of others: Every Scribe instructed to
the Kingdom of Heaven is as a good householder, brings forth things new and
old.

The Gospel is a treasure, therefore we ought to carry our selves answerable to
it: As

1. We must labor for it, be diligent in the search of it, dig for it as for
hidden treasures. Lift up thy voice for understanding, etc. Pro. 2.2, 3, 4. Dig
for it: you know there is a great deal of pains-taking, and labor used to get
Worldly treasure. What will not men venture for it? they will go over Sea and
Land, go through fire and water, expose themselves to all dangers for earthly
treasure, make unto themselves Friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, pass
away a great deal of time, and take a great deal of care for it. 2. Esteem this
treasure, this heavenly wisdom, this Evangelical knowledge, even the Gospel of
Christ: labor to understand it, and have the efficacy wrought upon your hearts.
3. Rejoice in it; how do men rejoice in earthly treasure? so should we, as the
Merchant in the Gospel, when he had found the Pearl of price, rejoiced
exceedingly; so we ought, as being made partakers thereof. I greatly rejoiced
at thy word, even as one that had found great stoils, (says David) so should
we rejoice always in this treasure. It Is said of those that sat under John
Baptists ministry, that they rejoiced but for a while, and that is the
condition and misery of many. The City of Samaria, when they had received the
Gospel, it is said, they had great joy, Acts 8.9. 4. Be careful to keep and
preserve it, for it is a treasure, and therefore we must treasure it up in our
hearts: and the rather, because it will keep us. It keeps (as Chrysostom
says) the house where it is; other treasures cannot secure us: Discretion
shall preserve thee, and understanding shall keep thee, Prove. 21.11. Thus you
see the excellency of this spiritual wisdom. So much for the first thing
considerable in the first branch, viz. the Depositum, the Treasure.
The second thing considerable is, the Repository, i. e. Earthen Vessels, or
Vessels of Earth, Earthen Pitchers: these are the Repository, but have this
treasure in Earthen Vessels, etc. Earth is a word of diminution, and
disparagement, and that in three regards;

1. In regard of its meanness and baseness. 2. In regard of its foulness and
pollution. 3. In regard of its frailty and transitoriness.
It Is passing away in all respects; these Earthen Vessels in the Text, is to be
understood, the Apostles and Ministers of Jesus Christ, in regard of their
outward man, are so called, and are so according to this threefold notion.

I. In regard of their meanness: their outside is mean, either for person, or
sometimes for estate, body, and outward deportment. This was the condition (you
know) of the first Ministers of Christ, mean and ordinary persons outwardly God
made use of. Nay, our Master, our blessed Lord and Savior, was mean, in regard
of his humane birth, and so reckoned of by most men according to his birth and
parentage. So it is with the servants of Christ, they are in their persons
generally base, mean, low, and accordingly rendered despicable to the eyes of
the World. II. In regard of foulness and pollution; Ministers are called
Earthen Vessels, they have many weaknesses, they are men subject to the like
passions as others. It Is true, the Ministers of Christ have greater advantages
than others, in regard of their education, knowledge, gifts, and employments,
being more free from those defilements and snares that others are entangled in:
yet through the remainders of the flesh in them, they have many infirmities: so
Satan watches them more than others, lays more snares for them in regard of
their parts and employments; so that they are more subject to his temptations
than others. Satan has a desire to sift them (as the Apostle Peter) as wheat)
because he knows they will draw many after them: so that they must needs be
subject to many weaknesses and infirmities. Sometimes God makes use of the
worst sort of men, even the most vicious and malicious; first he changes them,
and then makes use of them as instruments of glory. The Apostle Paul was a
Vessel of Election to carry the name of Christ unto the Gentiles: yet in times
past a great persecutor. So it pleases God to make use of such, that the
excellency of the power may be of God, etc. III. Ministers are called Earthen
Vessels in the regard of the frailty and mortality of their persons, and
Earthen Vessels are soon cracked and broken. Ministers are subject to many
infirmities of body: This Heavenly light of the Gospel, shines often through
Lanthorns of glass, with some broken. Ministers have weak and frail bodies;
Timothy had his bodily infirmities, and Trophimus was left sick at Miletum, 1 Timothy 4.20. and Epaphroditus was sick nigh unto death, Phil. 2.27. and Paul had
need of Luke the Physician, probably in regard of his sickness. Thus the
servants of God are subject to many infirmities. Besides the reasons in the
Text, there are other reasons, why God will have it so. 1. That they may be
more compassionate, and more sensible of the weaknesses of others: for likeness
of condition breeds sympathy in affection. Men are apt to pity those in the
like condition with themselves; so our Lord took our nature upon him, that he
mighty pity us; he took flesh and blood upon him, he was tempted in all things
like unto us, but without sin, that so he might succor those that are tempted:
So his servants, many of them are much tempted, which may breed in them a
sympathy of affection to others, that are in such a condition. 2. God will have
it so, that Ministers may have the more experience of the Truths they preach to
others concerning an afflicted condition; those that have had no sickness, or
other affliction, cannot preach from experience of such truths that concern
such a condition; they cannot preach so feelingly and savory as others; when
they have been under affliction, they will know what affliction is, both in the
nature of it, and the comforts of it, and Gods gracious assistance therein, and
so they may speak comfortably, and be enabled to comfort others, as the Apostle
Paul speaks. 3. God is pleased so to order it sometimes for their humiliation,
to keep them low, that so they may not be lifted up by reason of extraordinary
manifestations and impartments; thus St. Paul had given him a thorn in the
flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet him, lest he should be exalted above
measure, 2 Cor. 12.7. A thorn was given him, etc. ('it is twice repeated both in
the beginning and end of the verse) that so this thorn in the flesh, might keep
out pride in the heart, that so they may have a more low, meek, and humble
frame of spirit, and thereby fitted and prepared for greater services. And 4.
That they may be also more conformable to those they have to deal with. Israel
desires Moses to speak to them, (and not God) why? because he was like unto
them, and would therefore compassionate them; from whom they therefore desired
to receive the commands of God. Thus it pleases God to deal with his servants,
that as they may pity those they have to deal with, so likewise to draw the
affections of their people unto them, to make them more loving, and the more to
attend on their Ministry, seeing they are so fleeting, and going away; it
pleases God that Epaphroditus should be sick even to death, to endear the
Philippians more to him, chap. 2.25, 28. that their love and tenderness may be
drawn forth the more by discovery of his frailty. Let us improve this. Use 1.
First, as to Ministers, see how the condition is with us in our Calling; We are
Earthen Vessels, taken out of dust; We should often consider our frailty, to
make us more humble, more meek, and more compassionate to others, more diligent
in doing good, that we may make amends for our frailty and natural weaknesses
that are upon us: We must not think much of it, it being no more than in former
times: it was the condition of the Apostles themselves, they were Earthen
Vessels, they had such weaknesses, men subject to the like passions as we. Use
2. Secondly, As for the people, this may improve in all the notions and
considerations of an Earthen Vessel.


First, In regard of the meanness; you must not esteem the Gospel according to
the Vessel, according to the disparagement of the Vessel; a Vessel of
dishonor, in respect of its matter, may be a Vessel of honor, in regard of
the Gold that is in it; those members of the body that are weak, and in
themselves less honorable, we afford a great deal of honor upon them, in
deeking and clothing them: So the Ministers work and employment, and the
Doctrines they bring, are excellent, and of great use; when all is done, we
have that we serve for: according to the employment we are put to, we are
honorable, though outwardly mean. Wicked and base men are called Filii Terrae,
they are Sons of the Earth, Job 30.8. Children of Fools, yea, Children of base
men; they are viler than the Earth, i.e. Men of no account (as one says) the
Earth groans under such ungracious persons; but gracious persons are Vessels of
honor; as it was said of the Giants of old, so it may be said of these, They
are men of Renown, and so we shall esteem of them. Worldly men look at the
outside, and so esteem of them; so was Christ dealt with, Is not this the
Carpenters son? So those Teachers in Corinth endeavored to render Saint Paul
his presence weak, and his speech contemptible, 2 Cor. 10.11. that so they
might make his Ministry contemptible also. But this glorious Treasure is in
Earthen Vessels; You know (says Paul) Gal. 4.13. that through infirmity of the
flesh, I preached the Gospel unto you at first: This was their commendation, v.
14. But my temptation which was in my flesh, you despised not, nor rejected,
but received me as an Angel of God, even as Jesus Christ: All his weaknesses,
and whatever was matter of discouragement, they did not despise, but honorably
entertained him, even as Christ himself. So it was the commendation of the
Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13 That they received not the word as the word of
man, but (as it is in truth) the Word of God, looking to the mighty God to make
it effectual; so should all others do upon this consideration.

2. Seeing Ministers are Earthen Vessels, in regard of moral infirmities which
adhere to them, in respect of their corruptions and weaknesses judge of them as
men, but esteem of what is righteous in them; though they have great advantages
against sin, yet notwithstanding, they are not totally exempted and free from
sin; as they are Ministers, so they are men.

3. In regard that Ministers are Earthen Vessels in respect of their frailty.
Seeing then they are so frail and transitory, therefore accordingly you should
make use of them, deal kindly and affectionately with them, in that they are
quickly broken. What is sooner broken than a Glass, or an Earthen Vessel?
Ministers are quickly taken away, and therefore you should be tender of them
while you have them. Where are all the Fathers? Do the Prophets live for ever?
The Word of the Lord indeed indureth for ever, but the Preacher of it does not;
the Gospel is eternal, but the Dispenser is mortal; the Calling is lasting, but
the Minister is transitory; and therefore you should carry your selves with all
tenderness and respect to them: take heed of grieving their spirits, seeing
they are so soon broken. Endeavor also to improve by them, and to get as much
good as you can by them. It is a great argument, to work while it is day,
because the night comes, when no man can work: whilst God affords means and
opportunities, make use of them: we are but Passengers; therefore this is a
great ground for you to get all the good you can by Ministers, seeing they are
frail.

Lastly, By way of Improvement: Take notice of the ways of God, as different
from man's; God puts excellent Treasure into Earthen Vessels: we keep treasure
in Strong Holds, in the strongest Repositories. Gods ways are not as our
ways, he goes another way than we do; he makes use of the poorest, meanest,
and most frail Creatures sometimes; he lays aside many times men of greater
abilities, parts, and quality, and makes use of weaker to do this great work.
Chrysostom makes an Expostulation, If it be excellent Treasure, why in Earthen
Vessels? therefore it is a Vessel of Earth, because an excellent Treasure. Thus
Gods ways are unsearchable; this is the Improvement.

Now besides this interpretation given of it, there is another that will not be
impertinent. Some understand by Earthen Vessels, the Expressions, Words, and
Phrases of the Ministry, through which the Doctrines and Truths of the Gospel
are conveyed; this is agreeable to what went before: Some false Teachers in
Corinth pleased themselves with eloquent and enticing words of worldly Wisdom,
and so endeavored to render Paul's preaching despicable, in regard of the
plainness of it: Therefore (says the Apostle) we have this Treasure in Earthen
Vessels, i. e. familiar conveyances, that so we may easily understand it.

Thus I have explained this Earthen Vessel, and so have done with the first
considerable part, viz. the Dispensation it self, This Treasure we have in
Earthen Vessels: I come now to the second, viz.

II. The account of this Dispensation, That the excellency of the power may be
of God, and not of us. Which words may be considered two ways.

First, Either Absolutely, as lying in themselves. Or, Secondly, Connexively,
to the words before going.
1. Take them absolutely as they lie in themselves, and two things are
exhibited.

1. The excellency of the Gospel and Ministry it self, called Power. 2. The
Author and Original of it, laid down two ways, positively of God, and
negatively, not of us.
1. The excellency of the Gospel and Ministry thereof, called Power: There is a
great deal of power and efficacy in the Gospel, it is in its nature, powerful
and efficacious; so the Ministry of it, Romans 1.16. I am not ash^med of the
Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that
believes. See 1 Cor. 2.4. Paul's preaching was in the dimonstration o^ the
Spirit and of ^ower, etc. It Is called the Arm of Gods Power, the Sword of the
Spirit, Ephesians. 6.17. It Is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged
Sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of the Soul and Spirit, etc. Heb.
4.12. and many other places. We may conceive it to be so, according to the
various effects and consequences of it, viz. as to

1. Conviction. 2. Conversion. 3. Consolation.
1. It Is powerful in regard of Conviction, it is a word of Conviction; and one
part of the work of the Ministry is (by the Spirits cooperation) to convince
the World of sin, to open men's eyes, to show them the vileness of their ways;
to discover such courses to be sinful; the Conscience is awakened by the Spirit
in the Ministry of the Word; herein it is powerful and efficacious: There are
diverse instances in Seripture, how powerful the Word has been in point of
Conviction; in Felix, the Apostle Paul preached to him of righteousness and
judgment to come, etc. he trembles: The Judge at the Bench trembles at the
Word delivered by the Prisoner at the Bar: So powerful is the Ministry of the
Word, as to discover our sinfulness. So the Disciples going to Emaus, their
hearts burnt within them, when our Savior opened to them the Prophets, etc. So
it was with St. Peter's Auditors, Acts 2. they were pricked in the heart when
they heard this; he did preach to them in the power and demonstration of the
Spirit, and plainly discovered that sin that they were more especially guilty
of, and when they heard that, they were pricked in the heart, etc.

2. It was a Word of Conversion also; Conviction is one thing, and Conversion
in another: Sometimes men may be convinced, and yet have no change wrought in
them; therefore Conversion is another work; it is a turning men from darkness
to light, from the power of Satan to God, etc. To receive an inheritance among
them that are sanctified. Herein is the Word powerful, viz. in Regeneration: I
have begotten you (by the Word) to a lively hope, etc. Of his own will has he
begotten you, etc.

4. It is a word of comfort and consolation, it is a powerful word, and able to
comfort the heart: and the Ministry is very effectual herein (when set on by
the Spirit) to quiet, satisfy, and pacify the Consciences of men, which
declares the remission of sin, and whosoever's sins are forgiven, must needs
be comforted. Indeed it is not in the power of men to forgive sins, yet they
can speak a word of comfort in season by the administration of the promises
(the Spirit of God going along with them) and then they are not only
declarative, but operative. Where (I say) it pleases God to bless and
sanctify the Word, it is effectual for quieting of the mind, for pacifying of
the conscience, and settling of the troubled soul. Thus you see how powerful the
Ministry is; and seeing it is so, this should teach us how to behave our selves
under it; it is powerful in it self, and powerful in its dispensation, and has
none of that weakness (mentioned before) of the dispenser of it; 'Twas with you
(says St. Paul) in much weakness, and in fear, and in trembling, 1 Cor. 2, 3,
4. And my speech -- was in the demonstration of the Spirit, and of power. These
may seem to be contradictory; but it is answered, the Word is powerful in the
demonstration of the Spirit, though delivered by one of humane weakness, as
before is declared. This spiritual power we should look at, and labor after;
which power does not consist in matter of elocution, the enticing words of man's
wisdom; nor in matter of voice, which indeed is a good thing, and suitable to
the nature of the matter: A quick and powerful delivery is of great efficacy
and power, for the setting home of truths. Yet this does not make a powerful
Ministry; for a whisper in the ear may cause a thunderbolt in the conscience;
the power lies first in the nature of the matter; the matter consists in the
nature and condition of Mankind, the certainty of the Judgment the necessity
of Christ, the Covenant of Grace^, and the graces and privileges thereof, etc.
These carry a great deal of power and effiacy with them, when they are
carefully and frequently dispensed, and Gods Spirit going along with them, so
they become powerful: for the Ministry consists not in empty notions and
speculations, that will only fickle the fancy, but never reach the conscience.
Moral discourses, though they be of great use, yet if we rest in them, they
leave us as they found us. Evangelical truths (which are manifold) are to be
delivered in the Ministry. Now as the matter of the Ministry must be powerful,
so the expression must be powerful; there should be suitableness of expression
to the matter, i. e. with gravity, sobriety, and affection, etc. Strong lines
make but weak preaching, and take away the efficacy: but delivering truths in
the demonstration of the spirit, and in power, that is most effectual: when we
speak feelingly, and from our hearts, it comes then (through the blessing of
the Lord with it) with power. This is then to learn us of the Ministry, viz. 1.
Use.

Let us be careful, that the matter of our Ministry be powerful, so that the
handling and dispensing thereof be powerful, that so it may come home to the
conscience; thus we should deal with all: The words of the wise are as goads,
and as nails, fastened by the Ministers of the Assemblies, etc. So our words
should have a force and power in them. This, as the Apostle says, is mighty and
powerful, to the beating down of strong holds, etc.

Use 2. Secondly, In reference to hearers; seeing the Ministry is powerful, you
must then submit your selves to the power of it. Many people are Sermon-proof,
and think to stand out against the power of the Word; but if it comes in power
to the conscience, they will not be able to resist it; as it is said of them in
the Gospel, They were not able to resist the Spirit by which he spoke (viz.
Stephen.) And for those that desire the conversion of others, what course
should be taken by them for that end? but by good counsel, instruction, prayer,
and good example, to endeavor them; and more especially to bring them to the
Word, and administration thereof, which God has sanctified for this end.

So much for the excellency of the Gospel, viz. The excellency of the power,
etc. I come to the second.

2. The Author of it. 1. Positively, it is of God. And 2. Negatively, it is not
of us.

First, Positively, it is of God, and that in all the considerations of it, in
the full extent of it, it is of God. So the Ministerial gifts, the performances
of it, and the success of it, are all from God.

First, Ministerial gifts are from God, it is he that makes us able Ministers
of the New Testament; There are (says the Apostle Paul) diversity of gifts; to
one is given the word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge, by the same
spirit, etc. 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. It is God that bestows every good gift.

Secondly, The performance also is from God; his grace concurrs and assists
therein; the habit and the act are both from him; God gives gifts to men, and
he enables them to dispense them. Ministerial employments are not only for
general, but particular applications; and so need not only general, but
particular assistances; That I might be enabled (says Saint Paul) to fulfill
the work, etc. the Lord stood by me, and strengthened me, that my preaching
might be fully accomplished.

It is God that makes the work powerful, efficacious, and successful: Alas!
when we have used our best endeavors, all the success is from him, he must
make it effectual; it is said, our Savior went about doing good, for God was
with him, enclining him to the work, and assisting him therein: So he is with
all his servants; their griefs, employments, and success thereof, are all of
God, not of us.

Object. But it may be objected: Is all from God, and nothing from us? Are we
not said to concur with him? and is not then the power partly ours?

Answ. I answer, No: It Is of God, and not of us; we are indeed subjects of the
Ministry, the Recipients thereof; persons employed in the work, and therefore
are said to be workers together with God, 2 Cor. 6.1. But the power and
efficacy thereof is from God alone: Paul and Apollo were but Ministers, it is
God that gives the blessing. It is not of us in two respects. 1. It is not
merited by us, it is not of our deserving, nor of our procuring. 1. It is not
of our deserving; the best, and most accomplished, do not merit: I received a
mercy (says Paul) to be faithful: He accounted it a mercy to be employed, and
to be faithful therein. 2. It is not of our own procuring, we do not obtain it
by our own power; as Peter said in the recovery of the lame man, It is not by
any power and holiness of ours, that this man ^s restored, etc. And so it is
not our gifts and industry only, that will make our Ministry powerful; and
therefore in this work let us be looking up to God, and desire him to assist
us, as Moses said, If thou go not, O Lord, up with us, wherefore should we
go hence? So say I, if the presence of God be not with us, what can we do?

And further, When we do partake of any measure of ability, see where we must
determine it: Not unto us, Lord; not unto us, but unto thy Name be all the
glory. We must not sacrifice to our own Net, nor give the honor to our own
industry, but wholly give praise to God, because the excellency is of God.

2. But in the second place, if you look upon the words reflexively, or as
having their connection to the words going before, and so agree and hold
together, and thus you may read them: Therefore is this Treasure in Earthen
Vessels, that the excellency of the power may be acknowledged to be of God, and
not of us: If it were in Angels, or had we never so strong bodies, yet the
excellency of the power of God would not be so clearly seen, as it is now,
being laid up in poor frail Vessels: Here is the power of God, here is the
luster and glory of God most manifested; for so much the more apparently it
will be seen to be from God, by how much the weaker the instrument is that is
employed by God. Therefore if any thing does act beyond its own power, it must
have some foreign powers for the producing such and such acts: therefore when
we see any great matter done by poor frail and contemptible persons of Earthen
Vessels, this does plainly show the excellency of the power to be of God, and
not of Man; therefore look from Man to God, it is God that does these things;
We should overlook Earthen Vessels; we should (I say) overlook men that are
these Earthen Vessels, and look to God that makes the Ministry powerful in such
conveyances as these are.

Furthermore, It may satisfy us of the Ministry, in that we are Vessels, viz.
men of frailty, etc. We are apt to be discouraged; and to think hardly that we
are followed with so many weaknesses, that we have a hard matter, that when we
have taken such pains in the work of the Ministry, we should be thus rewarded:
but this should satisfy us, the more weakness in us, the greater honor will
come to Christ: This Treasure we have in Earthen Vessels, that the excellency
of the power may be of God, and not of us. The weaker the Vessel, the more
honor will redound to Christ.

Furthermore, This may take off the servants of Christ from unwillingness unto
those works and performances which God calls them unto, by reason of their
weakness: Thus it is when God call^ to any work or employment, the servants of
God are apt to plead their own inability: Moses says, he is not eloquent;
Jeremiah says, he is a child; Jonah says, he is a man of unclean lips. Thus we
have their delays, their excuses, whereby they endeavored to discharge
themselves from that work that God called them unto, by their own weakness,
etc. But God refuses such excuses; for who makes the blind to see, and the dumb
to speak, but God? It is he that touched Isaiahs lips; it is he that said to
Jeremiah, Do not say, thou art a child, for I have sent thee, etc. This I say
then is a consideration may encourage Ministers in their work, that the weaker
they are, the more honor and glory will redound to Christ; for he said unto me
(says the Apostle) my grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made
perfect in weakness. Not that it is an encouragement, or argument, for any to
take upon them the great work of the Ministry, without sufficient
qualifications and abilities: But where there is not that degree of ability as
is desired, where there is a true sensibleness of their weakness, this may be
an encouragement to them, that God delights to show his power in them, that
by so much the more they are weak, so much the more honor he will gain. For a
conclusion, it comes to this, viz.

That we lay no stress upon any outward things.

There is no stress or happiness in these outward things; those that seem to be
of some concernment, as strength of body, and other outward qualifications,
that are of remark; yet consider, they are fading and transitory; this should
teach us, in the enjoyment of outward things, a great deal of humility: though
we are Vessels of Gold, in regard of the treasure and improvement; yet in
regard of our selves, we are Vessels of Earth, and so should be in respect of
humility. Let us look upon all these things, as given to us of God, even for
this very end, that we may be more serviceable to him, and his people.

So I have done with the two general parts of the words, and so with the whole
Verse, viz. We have this treasure in Earthen Vessels, that the excellency of
the power may be of God, and not of us.

Do we begin again to commend our selves? (says the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 3.1.)
Or need we Epistles of commendations to us? Ye are our Epistle in our hearts,
etc. But this is applicable to the present sad occasion now before us.

This Reverend and blessed man of God, Mr. James Nalton, was a Person of great
note and eminency among us, and well known in this City, and in this place,
where he spent his labor and pains many years. I could give large accounts and
testimonies of him (if need were) from my own knowledge of him, having been
acquainted with him many years. He was not only a Minister, but the Son of a
Minister, his birth and education suiting together. He looked upon it not only
as an honor, but an engagement, to be careful to walk in those steps set
before him, and to continue the work of the Ministry begun by his religious
Father. Certainly the Children of godly and holy Parents, cannot come off so
cheap in their carriages, as others; they have greater accounts to make, as
having greater examples set before them, greater advantages of Prayer,
Exhortation, etc. and so greater engagements; this was thought on, and observed
by him. And as he was the Son of a Minister, so when he came to years, and was
sitted, he took upon him the Ministry: as he was one of great abilities, so
accordingly he discharged them faithfully and conscienciously. He was a
spiritual, powerful, conscientious Preacher; he preached by his life: for as (
Erasmus says) we should not only love to speak truths, but we should digest
truths on our own hearts, before we commend them to others, and so they will be
the more effectual. He was a man of a very meek, sweet, and humble spirit; a
man of a great humility, and of great meekness in the midst of great abilities,
which was a great Ornament in him; a man full of tenderness and condescension
to others; a man of a very yielding and melting frame of Spirit, soon dissolved
into tears. It was the saying of one, that a good man is full of tears: so this
good man was full of tears, not affected, but very real, and hearty, drawn from
the fullness of his Spirit; as the Apostle Paul says, he served the Lord in
much humility, and many tears. This was remarkable, that in these times our
Reverend Brother was full of tears in delivering his Doctrine, which was
suitable to the age we live in, being full of sin and calamity; there is much
need of a bewailing spirit to bewail the iniquities and miseries of the times;
they that cannot bewail themselves, need the tears of others. He was a man of
great integrity, and single-heartedness; in his exhortations he had much of the
simplicity of Christ, as the Apostle Paul speaks. In reference to the Ministry,
he had no worldly and base affection, he had no carnal designs therein; but his
chief design was to bring Souls home to Christ, that was his chief business.
What the Apostle says of himself, may also be said of him, that in simplicity,
and godly sincerity, he had his conversation in the world, not walking in
craftiness, nor handling the Word of God deceitfully, but by the manifestation
of the truth, commending himself to every man's conscience in the sight of God,
2 Cor. 4.2. He was a man had ability to speak a word in season; he was very
compassionate to wounded spirits, he himself having been much afflicted. He was
a man much in communication with God, and had much acquaintance with God, and
was careful in improvement therein: He was a Jacob in wrestling with God, a
Moses, that stood in the Gap, an Elijab that prayed earnestly; the whole Land
was the better for such a person, being much with God; the made many addresses
to him, and had much holy familiarity with him. And as in his public
performances he was very faithful and beneficial, so in his Family and
privately, he was very fruitful and serious. In a word (not to multiply much in
this kind; you need it less in this Auditory, but only by way grateful
memorial) there was much of God and Christ in him, and he was a great example
to his fellow servants; there was much of this Treasure (spoken of in the Text)
in this Earthen Vessel; as, in the matter of it, he was one of a Gospel Spirit;
and in the conveyances of it, he had great abilities for the work of the
Ministry, and discharged it with a great deal of success. As he had this
treasure in an Earthen Vessel, so his Vessel, his frail body, was no
disparagement to him, but the advancement of the treasure, in setting forth the
power to be of God; his outward man was much weak and worn away, but his inward
man was upheld by the grace of God. His first work in the Ministry was in that
place where my self have relation to; he was an assistant to my Predecessor
(being then past labor) Mr. Richard Couder, and performed the work so well,
that he was exceedingly beloved of Mr. Couder, and well beloved of the Parish,
and other places. He left a good impression behind, and I found good effects by
the foundation there laid. The Apostle Paul indeed desired not to work there
where another had laid the foundation, but I thought it a great advantage that
the foundation was laid by such a Master Builder. He was called into the
Country to Rughy in Warwickshire; there he continued very fruitful, and did
much good. For some occasion he removed, and returned into the City, and came
into this place, where he continued about 18 or 19 years, discharged the work
of the Lord carefully: I need not say much of his carriage in this place, I
appeal to your own consciences. I may say of this servant of Christ, as the
Apostle Paul said of himself, 1 These. 2, 10, 11, 12. Ye are his witnesses, and
God also, how holily, and justly, and unblameable he behaved himself among you:
as you know, how he exhorted, and comforted, and charged every one of you (as a
Father does his Children) that ye would walk worthy of God, who has called you
unto his Kingdom and Glory. Therefore there lies an engagement upon you to walk
answerable to the truths he delivered, and to follow his steps, considering the
end of his Conversation: I shut up all in the words of the Apostle Paul to the
Philippians, chap. 4. v. 9. Those things which ye have both learned, and
received, and heard, and seen in him, Do: and the God of Peace shall be with
you.

Mr. Beerman's Farewell Sermon.
BEloved, I know you are not ignorant, that I am called by Authority to depart
from you, which for Conscience sake we must obey; and were it not for the
breach of Conscience, I think I could be content to undo my self to stay with
you. I shall now in love and tenderness take my leave of you all, with that
large portion of Scripture, in the 20th. of the Acts, from the 17th. Verse to
the end; they were Paul's parting words to the Ephesians.

Verse 17. And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called the Elders of the
Church, and when they were come unto him, he said unto them, Ye know that from
the first day that I came into Asia, after what manner I have been with you,
serving the Lord with all humility of mind, with many tears, and temptations,
which befell me, through the lying in wait of the Jews, and how I kept back
nothing that was profitable unto you, but having showed you, and taught you
publicly, and from house to house, testifying to the Jews, and also to the
Greeks, repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ; and
now, behold, I go bound in the Spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the things
that shall befall me there, save that the Holy Ghost witnesses in every City,
saying, that bonds and afflictions abide me, but none of these things move me;
neither count I my life dear unto my self, so that I might finish my course
with joy, and the Ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify
the Gospel of the grace of God; and now, behold, I know that ye all, among whom
I have gone preaching the Kingdom of Heaven, shall see my face no more.
Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all
men, for I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God. Take
heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock over which the Holy Ghost
has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God which he has purchased with
his own blood; for know this, that after my departure, grievous Wolves shall
enter, not sparing the flock: also of your own selves shall men arise speaking
perverse things, to draw away Disciples after them; therefore watch, and
remember, that by the space of three years, I ceased not to warn every one
night and day with tears. And now Brethren I commend you to God, and to the
Word of his Grace, which is able to build you, and to give you an inheritance
among all those that are sanctified. I have coveted no man's silver, or gold, or
apparel. Yea, your selves know, these hands have ministered to my necessities,
and to those that were with me. I have showed you all things, how that so
laboring, ye ought to support the weak, remembering the word of our Lord Jesus,
how he said, It is more blessed to give than to receive. And when be had thus
spoken, he kneeled down, and prayed with them all, and they all wept sore, and
fell upon Paul's neek* and kissed him, sorrowing most of all for the words which
he spoke, that t^^^ should see his face no more; and they accompanied him unto
the Ship.

BEloved, I have read unto you the words of a departing Minister to his
Hearers. The case being my own, I thought I could not pitch upon a more fit
place to take my Farewell withal. I shall not stand to open all these words,
only speak a word or two at parting, as Paul did to the Ephesians; and I shall
only hold forth something to you by way of Analysis of it, and thereby you may
judge of the Analogy of it. In this parting speech of Paul's you have two parts.

1. Paul's carriage to them. 2. Their carriage to him.
First, Paul's behavior toward them, that was very pious, as you may read from
verse 17. to verse 37.

Secondly, The peoples behavior toward their departing Minister, which you
have in the two last Verses. Wherein is observable,

1. Their Love. 2. Their Sorrow.
First their Love, expressed by kissing him, and accompanying him unto the Ship.

Secondly, Their Sorrow, expressed by their weeping, they could not part with
such a Minister with dry eyes; but says the Text, They all wept sorely,
sorrowing most of all for the words which he spoke, that they should see his
face no more. They wept, and they all wept, and they wept sorely; a sore
weeping when this Minister and this People parted. From whence note this, That
there is occasion and matter of great sorrow when people lose a godly Minister.
Paul was not the first Minister that ever parted (...) People, nor the
Ephesians the first People that ever lamented at the (...) of a faithful
Minister. See how the people lamented Samuel, 1 Samuel 25.1. And Samuel died, and
all Israel were gathered together, and lamented Samuel; O that brave, that
powerful preaching Samuel is gone! How did Elisha lament Elias, catching hold
of his garments, and cried out, My Father, my Father, the Chariots of Israel,
and the Horsemen thereof. Christ himself, when he saw the children of Israel
scattered abroad upon the Mountains, as Sheep without a Shepherd, how did his
bowels yern toward them? But to name no more, take St. Stephen ( Acts 8.2.)
when Stephen was departed, dead and gone, devout men carried Stephen to his
grave, and made great lamentations over him; they could but lament to think
that that noble, courageous, and heart-daunting Minister should never preach
more before them. When Christ was put to death, how did his followers lament
him! Is it not a lamentable sight to behold a poor weather-beaten rotten Ship,
without mast or tackling, in a tempest? Good Lord, what will become of the Ship
and Mariners? Is it not a sad sight to see a flock of Sheep environed with a
band of Wolves, and no Shepherd to protect them? Thus it is with the people
when their Minister is gone. Ministers themselves have wept and lamented, when
they have thought of departing from their own people, and that for these two
causes.

First, Because they knew they would corrupt themselves. Secondly, Because they
knew they would suffer others to corrupt them.
First, Because they knew they would corrupt themselves. Moses he knew this (
Deuteronomy. 13.29.) he is there leaving the world, and the people thereof. Call unto
me the Elders of your Tribes, that I may speak a word in their audience, and
call Heaven and Earth to record against them, for I am sure that upon my
departure you will utterly be corrupted, and turned from the way that I have
commanded you, for behold I being yet alive with you this day, you are
rebellious against God, how much more then after my death? I assure you it is
cause of lamentation to think on this. Thus it was with Joash while Jehojardah
that good Minister lived with him, and instructed him in the way that he should
walk, he kept to the worship of God; but after Jehojadah died, he turned
Idolater, and persecuted the sons of Jehojadah, (2 Chronicles. 24.21.)

Secondly, They knew that after their departure they would suffer others to
corrupt them. This was that that made Paul use these words to the Ephesians,
(v. 29.) For I know that after my departure g^^^^^s Wolves shall enter, not
sparing the flock. And therefore well may you ^^^urn when a faithful Minister
is taken from you. I shall say no more, only a word or two to Paul's speech,
wherein you have.

First, Paul speaking to God for them. Secondly, Paul Speaking from God to
them.
First, He spoke to them from God, and then prayed to God for them. I shall
divide his speech to them from God, into these two parts.

First, He spoke something by way of Vindication of himself. Secondly, He spoke
something by way of Exhortation to them.
First, You may observe in Paul's Farewel-speech, something by way of
vindication of himself; and it is not amiss for a Minister, when he is to
depart from a people, to say something in vindication of himself: there are
enough that will, when his back is turned, lay falsehoods and scandals to his
charge, which they never durst do to his face; Samuel knew this, and therefore
provided for it, (in 1 Samuel 12.1.) And Samuel said unto them all, Behold, I
have hearkened to your voice, and have made you a King; now behold the King
walks in and out before you; I am old, and of gray-hairs, and must now leave
you. I have walked before you from a child to this day, and now witness against
me before the Lord, whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I kept? whom have
I done wrong to? or whom have I hurt? and of whose hand have I received a
bribe, to blind mine eyes therewith? He stood here upon the justification of
his life and carriage toward them, that he had not been a self-seeking, or
oppressing man unto them: And thus did Paul vindicate himself to the Ephesians;
give me leave to divide Paul's vindication into four or five parts.

First, He tells them that he had constantly preached amongst them,
notwithstanding all the afflictions which encountered him ( v. 19.) Serving the
Lord with all humility of mind, with many tears, and temptations which befell
me through the lying in wait of the Jews. Secondly, He vindicates himself by
telling them the matter of his preaching, ( v. 20.) I have taught you
publicly, and from house to house: you know, I may fitly apply this to my
self, for I have not only taught you publicly, but in many of your houses
also. But, Thirdly, He vindicates himself, by telling them the matter of his
preaching; and I bless God it has been my method ever since I preached among
you, ( v. 21.) Testifying to the Jews, and also to the Greeks, repentance
toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ; and this is my rejoicing
(now I may preach no more) that I have spent my time in declaring unto you the
Fundamentals, and grounds of salvation, and not in frivolous Ceremonies.
Fourthly, He vindicates himself by declaring the impartiality of his preaching,
(v. 27.) I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God. Oh, my
Brethren, though I cannot say, I have declared all the counsel of God; yet
this, through grace, I can say, that I have not shunned to declare any of it.
Fifthly, Paul does clear his Doctrine, and withal himself, by telling them he
had preached freely, (v. 32. and 33.) I have coveted no man's silver, or gold,
or apparel. Yea, ye your selves know, that these hands have ministered to my
necessities, and to those that were with me. I bless the Lord I can with a good
conscience safely say, I have coveted neither your silver nor gold, neither am
I a penny the richer for what I have received of you; it was not a desire of
any thing of yours, that made me first accept of this place; yet this shall I
say for your honor, that you have richly and liberally bestowed your favors
upon me. But as there is something in his own vindication; So
Secondly, There is something by way of Exhortation to them (v. 18.) Take heed
therefore unto your selves, etc. Paul, before he leaves them, has something
from God to say to them; from whence I note this, That the Ministers of God,
before they quite leave, have something to say to them for God. It was thus
with the holy men of old; Jacob, when he was dying, called all his Sons before
him, and to every one he gave counsel and blessing. David, when he was upon
leaving the World, and he knew he should not live long, he called all Israel
unto him, and says thus unto them, ( Chron. 28.8, 9.) Now therefore in the
sight of all Israel, the Congregation of the Lord, and in the andience of our
God, keep, and seek for all the Commandments of the Lord your God, that you
may possess this good Land, and leave it for an inheritable to your Children
after you for ever. And thou Solomon, my Son, know the God of thy Fathers, and
serve him with a perfect heart; and with a willing mind, for the Lord searches
all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts: If thou
seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake him, he will east thee
off for ever. Thus you see it has been the custom of holy men of old, when
they were leaving the World, to say something to their people; so now here, I
am come unto you this day as a^dving man; (for you know when this day is gone,
I must no more preach among you) and I know you are here come, to see what I
shall leave you for your Legacy; which that I may do, take these twenty things,
as counsel and advice from a dying man; and O that they may remain with you
when I am dead. First, I shall give you ten by way of Caution; and secondly ten
by way of Counsel. My Cautions are:

First, Beloved, I beseech you, as you tender the welfare of your souls, take
heed of breaking the Sabbath day, of profaning the Lords day. It has been
observable, that where ever Religion has flourished among any people, there
they have ever been careful, and conscientious of the Sabbath day: And, on the
contrary side, where Religion is gone to decay, and people grown to
profaneness, there they are always loose on the Sabbath day. Pray remember, I
hope you will remember, for God calls upon you, and commands you so to do, (
Exodus 20. ver. 8.) Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy. Do not you take
so much liberty as some will give you. Whosoever you are that refuse thus to
do, I will leave this assertion upon you, "Thou wretched man, has "God given
thee six days, and reserved but one for himself, and "will thou rob him of
that too? What if he had given thee but one, and kept six for himself, would
you be so vile, as not to keep them? How much more then, when God has given
thee so much pre-eminence in time. This is the first, be conscious in keeping
the Sabbath day.

Secondly, Take heed, and beware of Idolatry; this was John's Caution to his
beloved Children (1 Epist. 5. v. 21.) Little Children keep your selves from
Idols. There is no sin to which, nor no sin by which we are more in danger,
than Idolatry.

1. There is no sin to which we are in more danger, than Idolatry; Moses back
was no sooner turned, but the people made them a brazen Calf, and bowed down to
it, and worshipped it as their brazen God, (Exodus 32. v. 4.) Jehojada was no
sooner dead, but Joash returned to Idolatry. If we were not prone this to sin,
what is the reason all the World turns Antichristians so universally? 2. As
there is no sin to which we are in more danger, so there is no sin by which we
are in more danger, than Idolatry. I do confess if you will keep your garments
clean, and undefiled with the mark of the Beast, it may be you may come under
shrewd temptations; yet I entreat you as a dying man, as you love your souls,
and for Gods sake, flee from Idolatry, notwithstanding your temptations that
happen to you, he will supp^rt you, if you flee, and withstand the thing you
are tempted to, (1 Cor. 10. verse 13.) There has no temptation taken you, but
such as is common to man; but God is faithful, and will not suffer you to be
tempted above that you are able to bear, but will with the temptation also make
a way to escape, that you may be able to bear it: Now see what use the Apostle
makes of this promise; in the next Verse he follows with these words,
Wherefore, my dearly beloved, flee from Idolatry, Seeing God will uphold us;
let us withstand any temptations, to this end, that God may uphold us. This is
the second Caution.
Thirdly, Take heed of Apostasy, of a degenerating backsliding spirit, that
you do not fall off from the truth and ground of the ways of God, which ye
have known and professed. It is is true, it may be for standing to your
Principles, you may lose the love of man; I acknowledge it may be so; but hear
what God says, If any man fall back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him: If
thou go on, man's soul may have no pleasure in thee; but if thou fallest
back, Gods soul will have no pleasure in thee: Thou do by Apostasy declare
to all the World, that thou have made trial of the ways of God, and thou do
not find them to be as thou thoughtest they were, nay, not so good as others.
Oh, take heed of scandalizing the ways of God, hear how God complains of those
that so do, ( Jeremiah 2. and 10.) Go unto the Isles of Chittim, and behold,
and send unto Kedar, and take diligent heed, and see whether there be such a
thing: Has a Nation changed their Gods, which are yet no Gods? But my people
has changed their glory for that which will not profit. Hear, O Heavens, and
be astonished at this: for my people have committed two evils, they have
forsaken me, the fountain of living waters, and hewed to themselves broken
cisterns, that will hold no water. Whatever it is that would lead thee to
Apostasy, beware, and fly from it, especially evil company (of which I shall
speak more anon) let your love to Christ be augmented, and love of your selves
abased; for unless you love Christ very much, and your selves very little, I
cannot hope that you will stand to your Principles.

Fourthly, Beware of Covetousness; it is Christ's Caution ( Luke 2. and 15.
verse) Take heed and beware of Covetousness: Here is a Caution, with a double
Action, Take heed, and Beware. Believe me, Brethren, it stands us upon so to
do, for it steals upon us before we be aware of it; There is no person will
deal more injuriously with a Christian, than a Covetous man will; He will
betray his Life (if it were in his hands) into Enemies hands for Money, as
Judas did. A Covetous man will injure Christ in his Ordinances, he will not
come at them, for the love he bears to the World will not suffer him; truly
(quoth he) I have lost this, or that, while I was hearing a Sermon, I Will go no
more, I must stay at home, and look after my business; I could give you many
instances of this, but time will not give me leave; I shall only touch this
one: What was it but the love of this World that kept those who were bid to the
Marriage Feast of the Great King of Heaven from coming? One had bought a piece
of Ground, and he must needs go see it; another had bought Oxen, and he must go
to prove them; a Third had married a Wife, and therefore he could not come. Of
all persons in the World, a Covetous man cannot, nor will not endure to bear
the Cross of Christ. ( Philippians 3. verse 18.) For many walk, of whom I have
told you often, and now tell you weeping, that they are the enemies of the
Cross of Christ, whose end is destruction; Who are these? what manner of
persons are they? why, they are such who make their belly their God, whose
glory is their shame, and who mind earthly things. A covetous man he will lie,
with Ananias and Saphira; he will steal, with Acha^; he will murder, with
Aban; he will betray, with Judas: what will he not do, to attain his covetous
desire? This is the fourth, Beware of Covetousness.

Fifthly, You that have not taken warning yet, I beseech you take warning now:
Have a care and avoid evil company ( Ephesians 5.11.) Have no fellowship with
the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them, and be ye separated
from them. Never go into a wicked man's company, if, before you go, you have not
a probability of doing good, or getting good. Confider with thy self, is there
any likelyhhood that thou by thy wholesome reproofs may do him any good; if
there be, then go on; if not draw back, avoid them, fly from them, for their
steps tend to perdition. By wicked company, these two things have been effected,

Good men made Bad.
Bad men made Worse.
Good men have been made bad by wicked company. Jehosaphat that good King, is
an example of this, who by the company of wicked Ahab, was drawn to fight
against those whom God favored, and to help Ahab in his wicked enterprise.

Bad men have been made worse by evil company: Ahab was made worse by the
Instigation of his wicked Wife Jezabel. Oh, can you bear when you are in their
company to hear them blaspheme the holy Name of God, and not reprove them?
Truly, if you can, it is a sign you are not so good as you should be.

Sixthly, My sixth Caution is this: Oh, have a care of having the least finger
on your hand against a Saint; it is dangerous to have a thought, word, or act
against the people of God; it is dangerous to have a thought amiss of them, (
Psalm. 62.3.) They imagine mischief against a man, (that is, against a Saint)
therefore they shall all be slain, for their bare imagination they shall all be
cut off. It is dangerous to speak against them, How durst thou (says God to
Miriam) to speak against my servant Moses? and immediately he smote her with a
leprosy as white as snow: it is dangerous to act against them; and it is
forbidden by God, ( Psalm. 105.5.) Touch not mine Anointed, nor do my Prophets
no harm. Perhaps you would say, you would not do them any harm, if you thought
they were Gods people; Oh, but take heed lest they prove Gods people, and then
it were better for you, if a Millstone were hung about your neck, and you cast
into the Sea, than to offend the least of them.

Seventhly, Let me beseech you all to take heed of complying with this sinful
World; whoever does, do not you; but take up that good resolution of Joshuah's,
As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord. Though all else forsake God,
yet will not I, yet let not us: I beseech you (says he) that you would not
conform your selves to the fashions and manners of this wicked world. Oh take
heed of conforming your selves to the conversation of this world, but walk
harmless, and shine as lights in the midst of a crooked and perverse
generation; if we will comply with the world, I mean, to be as most of the
world are, that is, temporizers, time-servers, preferring the pleasing of Man
before the pleasing of God, then we must lie in wickedness, as all the World
does, (1 John 2.16.) For all that is in the World is either the lust of the
flesh, the lust of the eye, or the pride of life; and these are not of the
Father, but abides in the wicked one, the Prince of the power of the Air,
after whom the men of the world walk. This is the seventh. Take heed of
conforming your selves to this World.

Eighthly, Take heed of a hasty spirit when you are under sad dispensations;
when you are under sufferings you are apt to seek, and close with relief, come
it which way it will, and on what terms it will. Let me beseech you Christians,
to have a care of such a hasty and impatient spirit, ( Esa. 26. verse 18.) He
that believes makes not haste; that is, he makes not haste to get out of his
afflictions. The people of Israel were of hasty spirits, and murmured, because
they were kept so long in the Wilderness, for which God slew an innumerable
company of them. Saul was of a hasty spirit, and by it lost his Life and
Kingdom. Jacob's Mother no sooner told him his Fathers intent, but he was
resolved to have the first blessing, though he cheated his Brother, and lied
for it, and so told his Father that he was his eldest Son; but he himself was
afterward deceived by a lie, with having the eldest Daughter given him instead
of the younger. Take David for your example, he waited Gods time, the Kingdom
was promised to him after Readiness death, and when Saul pursued him, you know
David had him twice in his power, and with ease might have destroyed him, but
he would not, Far be it from me (says he) that I should touch the Lords
Anointed; let God smite him by the hands of his Enemies, I will not. It is far
better to be Gods Bondslave, than the Devils Freeman. Do not use any the least
action whatever, in any indirect way, to deliver thy self, but patiently sit
down, and wait Gods good time, which, when once come, thy deliverance will
assuredly come with it. Take heed then of a hasty and sullen spirit under
afflictions; some men, when God takes away any comfort from them, are of so
sullen a spirit, there is no pacifying of them: God will now this day take
something from you, which I believe you would willingly keep; will you
therefore be of so sullen a spirit, that, because you cannot enjoy all, you will
not enjoy any, but will rob your selves of all? What though you cannot enjoy
your Minister any longer, will you not make use of the Ordinances of God? I
beseech you refrain this spirit, and let the deprivation of one mercy, be a
means to make you make better use of those that are left.

Ninthly, My ninth Caution is this, Take heed of an ungodly Minister; I speak
not to any man's person in particular, neither can I because I know not as yet
who will succeed me; but whosoever he be, if he be wicked, beware of him; for
if he be ungodly, the people will follow him; for, like Priest, like People:
And I pray God deliver you from such Ministers, as for Doctrine, do teach the
traditions of men; and cry Peace, Peace, when sudden destruction hangs over
their heads; Such Ministers may please you, but believe me they will never
profit you; but at last you will find, that through the Vale of Security, you
are led to the Pit of Perdition. They will tell you, you need not be so strict
and diligent in your conversations; nor Heaven is not so hard and difficult to
gain, as some would make you believe: believe them not, but remember, that
without holiness none shall see God; and that neither Fornicaters, Adulterers,
Idolaters, Thieves, Murderers, Covetous persons, Drunkards, Revilers, nor
Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven.

Tenthly and lastly, Take heed you be not found professors of the Gospel only.
Christ, when he was preaching to a throng of people (as I am here this day)
said unto them, Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is
Hypocrisy. Oh, that I had no cause to say, the leaven of the Pharisees is
among you! I mean that there are many here that are but bare Professors! let me
ask you that are only Professors this one question; Is Religion good, or bad?
If it be not good, what is the reason thou art not ashamed to profess it? if it
be good, what is the reason thou do but profess it? By thy bare professing,
thou losest the love of Man; by no more than professing, thou can never gain
the love of God; so that on all sides thou art like to be miserable: The World
will hate thee for being so good, and God will hate thee for being no better.
What a sad thing is it, that thou losest thy comforts in this life, by
professing so much; and thy comforts in the life to come, by no more than
professing? Thus you have heard what I have to say by way of Caution: I shall
now speak to you by way of Counsel. The former ten were Negative, these shall
be Positive.

First, I entreat you all, that above all things, you would mind the one thing
necessary: that you would not trouble your selves so much with many things of
little concernment, but mind the great thing for which you came into the World.
Oh my friends, will you spend your time for that which will not profit you, and
your money for that which is not Bread? Look after Grace, labor to get an
interest in Christ, of which you being unprovided, you will be undone for ever,
and it will be better for you, you had never been born: Oh! gain Christ, and
then you will be fitted for all times, all troubles, and all conditions that
can happen unto you; you will be endued with all wisdom, and with all riches;
if you gain not Christ, all that God does to you, and for you, will nothing at
all avail you.

Secondly, My second Advice and Counsel unto you is this; That you would live,
as you would die; live to day, as if you must dye to morrow. Let me a^k you,
would you be content to dye in the state you are in? If my Soul does not desire
to be in a better state when I come to dye, than now I am in, I may very well
sit down satisfied; if not, then surely it greatly concerns me to look after a
better. Would any man be content to dye a Drunkard? I ask you that are
Drunkards, I do believe you will answer no; why then do you live in
Drunkenness? How know you that God will spare you when you are drunk, until you
are sober again? We may read of many that have dyed in their drunken fits. God
does not always send his Herald to warn thee, before he sends his Sergeant to
arrest thee. How know thou but Death may strike thee on a sudden? What will
then become of thy Soul? Oh Beloved, I beseech you live not in that you are
unwilling to dye in. Balaam was not such a Wretch, but he could cry our, Good
Lord, let me dye the death of the righteous.

Thirdly, Lay up for suffering times; there are few of you I believe are so bad
husbands, but will lay up for a rainy day; I mean against a time of sickness
comes, wherein you will be unable to work; are you thus careful to maintain
your bodies? and will you be careless of your souls? O be careful to provide
for stormy weather; you have winter garments for your bodies to preserve them
from cold, oh let patience be your winter garment, to preserve and keep your
selves warm in afflictions; I know that he that will live godlily in Christ
Jesus shall suffer persecution, and that through tribulations and sufferings we
must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; shall I not then provide for them? But
you may say, What, does persecution attend all the godly? A man may escape
them, as well as suffer them? Put case afflictions should not come, thou will
be never the worse for being provided for them; for he that is fit to dye, is
fit to live; and that man that is fit to suffer afflictions, is fit to live
without them. It was Paul's Exhortation to the Ephesians 6.10. Finaly, my
Brethren, put on the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand the
wiles of the Devil. And it is wisdom in a man, to provide for a misery before
it comes. There is mention made of a Nation (the Spartans, I think) that uses
to choose their King, as we do our Lord Mayor, every year, and whilst they are
in their annual Government, they lived in all abundance of state, have all the
fullness their hearts can wish; but when their year is over, all their pomp and
glory is over too, and they banished into some obscure remote place for ever,
where they spent the remainder of their lives in great want and misery. One
King (knowing this) being called to rule over this Nation, made such use of his
time wherein he reigned as King, that by his provident living, he heaped up so
much treasure, and sent it before him to the place where he knew he should be
sent, as maintained him all his life time. Thus it is, God has appointed to
every one a time to live in, and that bur a short time too; and in that time he
has appointed afflictions to attend us, if we will live godlily in Christ
Jesus; it is not wisdom in us then to provide for them? Take heed then, to
avoid sufferings, you do not commit sin; to commit sin, to avoid suffering, is
as if a man should run our of the mouth of a barking Dog, into the mouth of a
devouring Lion; What is the wrath of man to the wrath of God? Man can but
destroy the body, and no more; but God can destroy both body and soul into Hell
fire to all eternity.

Fourthly, My fourth word of Counsel and Direction is this, Be serious in
serious things; when you come to perform serious things, do them seriously. I
do not know that ever I saw a man fall asleep while he was telling of Money,
for if he should, how could he tell whether it were right or no? Yet alas! too
too many sleep when they should be taking Truth, not only by natural sleep, but
also by spiritual sleep; they are so careless in receiving the Word they hear,
and so lazy withal, that rather then they will try the Word they hear, they
will take all for truth the Minister tells them. Beloved, I believe you will
scarce put so much confidence in a man, as to receive a sum of Money without
te^ling it, because he says it is right; and yet will you receive all that
your Minister tells you is truth, for truth, without trying it? You must not be
sluggish in your working for God, but put forth your selves to the uttermost:
You must make the Kingdom of Heaven suffer violence, and take it by force. But
then.

Fifthly, The fifth Direction which I shall give you is about hearing the Word,
how you must behave your selves when you hear. I take it for granted you will
hear, I hope you will; for brown bread is better than none, and a little is
better than none at all; yet I entreat you take these two words of Direction.

First, Try the Word you hear by the Truth. Secondly, Try your selves by the
Word.
First, Try the Word you hear by the Truth; if it be not consonate to that,
believe it not, let who will preach it. Paul exhorts the Galathians so to do,
( Chap. 1.8, 9) But though we, (...) an Angel from Heaven, preach any other
Doctrine unto you, than that which we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed. How Paul, accursed? sure you speak too high; what if an Angel, must
he be accursed? sure you will call in your words again: Nay, instead thereof,
he repeats them over again, As we said before, ^o I say again; If any one
preach any other Gospel, than that which you have received, let him be
accursed. If any man pretend a Revelation from Heaven, and cannot bring
Scripture for what he says, do not believe one syllable. Take the noble
Beraeans for your Example; they would not believe Paul's Doctrine, until they
had searched to see whether it were so or no.

But then, as you are to try the Word you hear, by the Truth; so try your
selves by the Word: You hear as a Truth, that there is no condemnation to them
that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.
Now try your selves by this Truth, and see whether or no you walk after the
Flesh, or after the Spirit: I have likewise two Directions about the preaching
of the Word.

First, Do not you receive the Word for the persons sake that brings it. I am
apt to think that many of you will receive a Truth of one man's bringing, which
you would not receive of another: and thus ye receive the Word of God with
respect of persons, which you ought not: But first, receive the Word for its
own sake; and secondly, receive the Person for the Words sake, (1 Thessalonians. 5.12,
13.) We beseech you, Brethren, to know them which a^e over you, to admonish
you, and labor among you in the Lord, and to esteem of them very highly in
love, for their works sake.

Sixthly, My Direction in the sixth place, shall be concerning the Times we
live in; and I shall tell you how you ought to behave your selves, in two
particulars.

First, Blame thy self most, that the Times are so bad; there is a general
complaint about the sadness of the Times, but no particular; every one puts the
cause away from him, and instead of accusing themselves, are always accusing
others: Ahab he said to Elisha, thou art he that troubled Israel; Elisha said
unto Ahab, Thou art be that troubled Israel; Adam said to God, The woman which
thou gave me, did give to me, and I did eat: the Woman she said, the Se^pent
beguiled he^: Thus do we put it off from our selves to others. No man says
with Jonas, E^^ my fake is this come upon you, I am the cause of all this; no
man says, what have I done? Would you have the Times mend? Oh, then every soul
of you condemn your selves, and amend your ways; the Times would not be so
bad, if we were not so bad: would you have the effect cease, then seek to
remove the cause. But then Secondly, Pray not so much for better Times, as for
better Hearts; for had you never-so-good Times, and not good Hearts, your
blessings would be cursings; good Times without good Hearts, will but fatten
you the sooner to the slaughter.
Seventhly, If you cannot do the good you would, then do the good you can; many
people are so sullen, that because they cannot do all they would do, they will
do none at all. I beseech you be not of this temper; what though you cannot
serve God in public, will you not therefore serve in private; why may you not
do as S. Austin was bid to do; (^olle loge) take up and read? This will be a
reading and praying time with you; and now you cannot hear as formerly you have
done, Oh, pray more, and read more; and the less you have in public, the more
you may have in private; you may read and pray, we are not forbidden that yet;
let us then make use of them.

Eighthly, My entreaty is unto you all, That you would be careful and
circumspect in your conversation, ( Ephesians. 5.15, 16.) See then that ye walk
circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time, because the days
are evil. Walk as becomes the Professors of the Gospel, and labor to be
blameless toward God and Man. Oh, what notice will there be taken, when any
Professor does but slip aside, and do any thing amiss; it is the joy of wicked
men's hearts to see it, and how diligently do they watch for it, and often wish
it? We have a Proverb, That one man may better steal a Horse, than another look
on: I am sure a wicked man may better commit seven sins, than a Professor one:
For it is the failings, the bad lives of Professors, that makes Religion ill
spoken of, and hinders many a weak soul from closing with it: Sure think they,
their Religion cannot be good, their Conversations are so bad: Let us therefore
be wary and careful in all our actions.

Ninthly, Mourn, and lament for the sin you cannot hinder. It was said of Let,
(2 Peti 2.8.) That his righteous soul was vexed with the wicked Conversations
of the Sodomites. Oh, that we were but so good as we should be, then sure it
would grieve us more than it does, to see the wicked and abominable lives of
those among whom we live: Though thou do not blaspheme God thy self, ^et it
is thy God that is blasphemed, and shall not that trouble thee? How can thou
but reprove them whoever they be? When a sick man sees his Wife, Children,
Friends, and Physician, lamenting his condition, sure it will make him think
his condition is worse than he thought it, or very bad at least, or else why do
they take on so, if there was no cause of fear? Thus, it may be, thy reproof
may work upon a wicked man; If when thou hear him blaspheme God, thou
lamentest his condition, and puts him in mind of his sad estate, it may make
him lay that to heart then, which he never did before.

Tenthly, The last thing that I have to beseech of you, is, That you would love
one another: I have not at all sought to proselyte you to my way, but whatever
you see in whoever it be, that is of God; Oh, love it, be he of what profession
he will, he is a godly man: O then love him; you cannot love God, if you do not
love his people; Let brotherly love continue, (1 John 1.20.) If any man says
he loves God, and hates his Brother, he is a liar, and the truth is not in
him: For if he loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God
whom he has not seen? We believe, says John in the next Chapter, That Jesus
Christ is the Son of God, and he that loves the begetter, must also love him
that is begotten. You would be loath to do otherwise in civil business: Will
you refuse commerce with a man, because he is contrary to you in opinion,
because he is not a Freeman of our City? Be not then so far from loving one
another, as to bear hatred one to another.

Thus you have heard what I had to say unto you by way of Caution and Counsel:
O that they may make such impressions on your hearts, that they may be your
continual practice in your lives and conversations. I shall now close with the
words of St. Paul, (2 Cor. 13.11.) Finally, Brethren, farewell; be perfect, be
of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of love and peace
shall be with you. And the Lord grant, that both ye and I, when we come to the
Judgment Seat of God, render up our account with joy, and receive an immortal
Crown with Christ in Heaven; until which Day, I beseech Almighty God to keep
you, and preserve you in his fear. Amen.

Mr. Lie 's Sermon, Preached at the Conclusion of the Morning. Exercise in
Lombard Street.
Joh. 13.17. If ye know these things, happy are ye if you do them.
IN these words two things observable, First, A Supposition, which is double.
1. If you know these things. 2. If ^e do these things.
There be many that do, but do not know, do not understand; there be many that
know, but do not do, do not practice. But our Saviors saying to his Disciples,
is, If you know first, and then, If you do. Knowing without doing is
unprofitable; Doing without knowing is impossible. Secondly, a Position; If you
so know it to do, then (...) blessed, happy are ye.


First, For the Supposition, which is double. First, If you know: This word
Knowledge in Scripture, contains two things:

1. It intimates an act of the mind or understanding, if you know. 2. It
imports an act of the memory, or retentive faculty of the soul, if you so know
as to remember. From both these significations, you have these two
observations: 1. Our first great care should be this, With all seriousness to
apply our selves to the knowledge of the things of the Gospel. We must with the
Angels (...), stoop down to look into, to have a clear, through, perfect sight
of those things that are discovered in the Crystal Glass of the Gospel. We must
look into the perfect Law of Liberty, James 2.25. 2. As the Word imports an act
of memory, or remembrance, it affords us this Observation, viz. Next to our
knowing of it, should be our care to retain and remember the glorious Truths of
the Gospol. It is all one, not to remember, as not to know. We must not only
attend to Wisdoms words, but must keep them in the center of our hearts, Prove.
4.21.

2. If you do, hence observe, It Is not enough to know and remember, but we
o^ght to do according to what we know, and practice according to what we
remember. It Is some slight kind of happiness to know; but so to know, as to do,
that is the happiness; If you know, if you do. We must not only be Hearers of
the Word, but Doers of the Word; Knowledge without Practice, it is Rachel-like,
fair indeed, but barren; Practice without Knowledge (were it possible)
Leah-like, fruitful, but blear-eyed: both together, Rachel's fairness, with
Leah's fruitfulness, a fit Spouse for a Solomon.

2. For the Position Happy are you if you do them; hence observe, There is a
blessedness annexed to so knowing the truth of God, as to remember, and so to
remember as to do the work of that Word. If you do know, if you do, not other
wise, blessed are ye.

Thus I have cut the words in pieces. The second Observation is, that I would
first commend from the Supposition, If you know, that carries in it an act of
memory, namely; That as it is our first care to know, so it should be our next
care to remember what we have known. To this end let us help our memories by
way of a Summary rehearsal of our Morning-Exercises. The first Sermon that was
preached to you was built upon

Isa. 55.3. Hear, and your Soul shall live. FRom that Text, this Doctrine, That
that Soul shall surely live spiritually, blessedly, eternally, that so hears,
as to come to Christ himself. The grand question upon that point was this. What
is to be done that we may so see? 'Twas answered, something was to be done
before, something at, something after hearing.

First, Before hearing; That holy duty of Hearing calls aloud for holy
preparations so much at least as settles the bent of the heart Heavenward: so
much at least as makes us humble, and hunger after spiritual Manna: so much at
least as raises the heart into a posture of expedition of some divine and
spiritual good from God.

Secondly, A right demeanor in, or at hearing; which consists,

First, The Hearer ought to propound to himself spiritual and right ends, and
that

1. Negatively, This must not be the Hearer's end; to come and judge either the
Word, or the Minister of it: nor, 2. To come and hear things that will tickle
his fancy; if he desire that, let them go to those sinks of all Wickedness,
Play Houses: nor, 3. Must we propose this our end, merely to better our parts:
nor, 4. Merely to know, much less merely to be known, that it should be said of
us, that we have been at the Morning-Exercise every day this month; But our end
should be to profit by what we hear, Psalm. 119.33. We should hear that our
souls may live.
Secondly, We must labor to approve our selves true Gospel-hearers: And to
that end,

1. We must be wakeful-Hearers: it is dangerous sleeping by a Candle set up by
God. 2. We must be reverent-Hearts: in the fear of God we must worship, though
not toward, yet in his holy Temple. 3. Attentive-Hearers: our Ears and Hearers
should be like Lydia's, open to attend to those things spoken by Paul, Act. 16
14. 4. Receptive-Hearers: We must take in what we hear, Acts 2.41. And this
must be done with Faith, with Love, with Joy, with Delight, with Meekness, with
particular Application: and this too, not as the word of such a man, or such a
Minister: I abhor that wicked notion among you, the head of such a Party, and I
know not what: But, as it is indeed and in truth the Word of God. That man
never hears as a Saint, that, when he hears, does not look mostly at the Word,
as it is the Word of the God of Saints. And if thus we apply our selves to the
Ordinances truly, we are in immediate capacity to have the Glory, Spirit, and
Power of Christ to rest upon us in hearing: And this leads me to
The Second Sermon.
2 Cor. 12.9. Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that
the power of Christ may rest upon me.
FRom this Text, you had this Truth, That a Christians chiefest glory under his
infirmities, is in the power of Christ resting upon him. In the prosecution of
this Point, there was these four particulars propounded to be opened and
prosecuted.

First, What kind of power of Christ it is, which Christians may hope to have
experience of, notwithstanding all their infirmities? To this question it was
thus answered: a power that Christ has with his Father, with whom he is
extraordinarily prevalent more than the fondling is with his dearest
affectionate Mother: A power of Christ's which enables us to do what God
requires, and to suffer what God commands: a powerful Application of Jesus
Christ himself unto his people, and that, not only of light to them, but of
living, of spiritual growth, of spiritual strength, of strength unto conquest,
yea, to be more than Conquerors.

Secondly, What is it for the power of Christ to rest on the Soul? (...) i. e.
for the power of Christ to come, and take its residence in the Soul: to make
the Soul to be that which a Tent or Tabernacle is to him, who takes up his
repose therein; to come and lodge in the Soul of a Believer, as in his Tent or
Tabernacle.

Thirdly, What is it for a Believer to glory in the power of Christ resting on
him? That is,

1. To have the heart so full of Christ, that it cannot contain it self, but it
must be bursting out, as it were, and running over in holy Exultations and
Triumphs. 2. To be so much in the admiration of Christ, as that, to a carnal
eye, it makes a man seem to be ridiculous: what a goodly person was David in
Michols eye, when he danced before the Ark. 3. To rest on Christ so, as to look
out for nothing else, etc. To terminate and confine all the desires of the
Soul, in and upon, and toward Christ Jesus. 4. To oppose Christ to any, to
every thing, that does any way in the world, either enjure, or endanger him.
Fourthly, Why should a Christian rather glory in this power of Christ resting
upon him, than in any inherent grace that is given unto him? Upon these
Accounts.

1. Because all that a Christian by inherent grace is able to do himself, is
through Christ: I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me. 2.
Because if there be any acceptance of what a Believer does with the Father,
this also is through Christ: the gift is accepted, not for the gifts sake, but
for the sake of the Merit of Christ. 3. If so be a Believer should glory in his
graces, there is a possibility of falling, but being clad with, and resting in
the power of Christ, there is an impossibility of miscarrying. Thus the Saints
of God have their infirmities, frailties, their multitude of frailties and
infirmities; yet have they reason to glory in that power of Christ which rests
on them on Earth, but much more reason, if they will look up, and see the
tongue of Christ engaged for them, i. e. interceding for them, in Heaven: And
that lets me into
The Third Sermon.
John 17.15. I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but
that thou should keep them from the evil.
I Pray not that thou should not take them out of the world; Let them stay
there, and glory even in their very infirmities: But I pray that thou should
keep them from the evil. In this Scripture you have our Saviors Intercession
for his Disciples Preservation; and in this his Intercession two things
observeable.

1. In the Negative part, for what Christ does not pray, Not that thou
should take them out of the world. 2. In the Affirmative part, That thou
should keep them from the evil of the world. For the Negative part, wherein
you have, 1. Something employed, Not that thou should take them out of the
world: This implies, That God has the disposal of our continuance in the
world; else Christ would never address himself to his Father, that he would not
take them out of the world; If so, then 1. Live constantly, Believer, above the
flavish fear of Death. Times are not in thine Enemies hands, no, not in the
Devils hands, but in Gods hands. 2. Be patient under the loss of thy dearest
Relations: God has taken them, who has the disposal of our continuance. 3.
Seek to God for a blessing on all those means, which at any time are prescribed
or used for your preservation.
2. There Is something mainly intended, I pray not that thou should take them
out of the world, and tha't this, That God will have his people oftentimes
continue in the world, though they should meet with much trouble in the world.
And if so, this should teach you, for ever, how to carry your selves in the
midst of a sinful, wicked, rude, God-hating, Saint-persecuting World: that is,
1. Patiently to wait Gods leisure, you must stay his time. 2. Carry your selves
Innocently, be sure you, in a salt Sea, like good fish, retain your freshness.
3 Carry your selves Wisely; you walk among Devils, Snares, etc. walk Wisely:
And 4. Walk Serviceably, continue you must, but it is Gods time, how short you
know not, therefore walk serviceably. For the Affirmative part; But I pray that
thou should keep them from the evil of the World. Wherein something
Absolutely, and something Relatively: Take the words Absolutely: thence these
four Notions, That thou should keep them from the evil. 1. Sin is an eminent
evil, the evil of evils. 2. That we are utterly unable to keep our selves. But,
3. God can keep his people, in, and from the evil of a sinful World. 4. That
it is the Godly only that are kept from the evil that is in the World; but
Relatively, especially, I pray, etc. No great matter of their sufferings, but
their sins; that is the thing, let them be preserved from that: Thence observe,
Preservation from sin, is a far greater mercy, than exemption from suffering:
And so, then 1. See the folly and madness of those; that embrace sin, to avoid
suffering; take a stab in their hearts, that they may avoid a scratch upon
their finger. 2. See the folly of those, that desire the removal of their
sufferings, rather than of their sins; take away the Frogs, not my hard heart.
3. This shows what should be our greatest complaint in the midst of a
troublesome world; not my sorrows, plunderings, imprisonments, Lord, but the
scarcities of my soul, etc. 4. This shows the grand mistake of the nature of
true safety. Men think safety to be merely to sleep in a sound skin; but it is
not safety to be preserved from danger, but from sin. True, the men of the
world, yea, the best of Saints are too too apt to mistake in this case; there is
a heart within them, that is very apt to think sometimes sinning to be chosen
rather than suffering, not in wicked men only, but in the best of men; for, As
in water, face answers to face, so the heart of man to man. Which lets me into




The Fourth Sermon.
Prove. 27.19. As in water, face answers to face, so does the heart of man to
man.
IN this Proverb two things.

1. The Proposition, and that by a Similitude; As in water, face answers to
face. 2. The Reddition, So does the heart of the man to man. Or in the words
these two Generals to be observed. 1. A Glass. 2. An Object to be seen in this
Glass.

1. A Glass, a notable one: that is twofold, a dead Glass, Water; a living
Glass, the Heart of a Man.

2. The Object to be seen in these Glasses: in the dead Glass, the face of man
is to be seen; in the living Glass, the heart of man; there is all the Species
and Complexions of the Sons, nay, of the Souls of the Sons of Men, to be seen.
That as by looking into the Water, you may discern your own, and other men's
countenances, and that plainly and clearly; So, by looking into your own
hearts, if you could have a Casement into the hearts of other men, there may
you see of what Spiritual Complexion, Constitution, and Make you are, as
clearly as a man may see his face in water. As in water, etc. From these words,
this great Truth, that the Heart of every man in the world is a Looking-glass.
It Is such a Looking-glass, wherein he may see himself, his Condition,
Constitution, special Complexion, whether it be Morally, Spiritually,
Scripturally, Good or Evil. For the right improvement of this Looking-glass,
three things necessary, which are optic Principles, but clear to those that
have either Physical, or Natural Light.

1. There must be an Object that must be seen. And oh! what visible Objects are
there in the hearts of men? Man is called a little World, a Compendium of the
whole World: The heart of man, is the Man. The heart of man, is like the Ark of
Noah, which contains all sorts, all kinds of clean and unclean Beasts: It Is an
Epitomy of Heaven and Hell What is there in the heart of man? Who but God can
fathom the depth of it? There are more Objects in the hearts of men, than Stars
in Heaven, or drops in the Ocean.

2. There must be light to actuate this Object, if it were dark, we could never
see it. There must be light both to actuate the eye and object. Now this light
that actuates the eye and object, it is either the natural light, the light of
Nature, the light of Conscience, the light of common Illumination, the light of
the Word, or the light of the Spirit of God: By all these Lights we come to
look into the Looking-glass, our Hearts.

3. There must be an Irradiation from the Object, i. e. a beaming forth from
that Object, some Species or Idea's that carries the object to the eye, and
clearly makes out to the sense what that Object is, this beaming is by action
from the heart; mark it (for it may be as necessary truth as was preached among
you) that look what the Stream is to the Fountain, what the Beam to the Sun,
that the action is to the heart, whether the act be manent, or transient;
whether Internal in thought, purpose, election, assection, in joy, in love, in
fear: Or External, in the life, in the practice, and in the conversation. So
that look as a puddle Stream always declares a corrupt Fountain, so all your
humble, holy, faithful thoughts speak a clear spiritual heart within; a holy
conversation speaks a holy Affection; and a holy Affection, declares a heavenly
Constitution, a new Nature. Now for the Use of this, is the heart of a man a
Looking-glass?

1. See from hence, of what concernment the Actions of men are, whether
internal or external: The actions of men are like the streams, you may
certainly find the Fountain by them; they speak the heart, as the Root bears
the fruit. It Is of infinite concernment, it is the Fountain of what principles
within, and conversation without: descend but into thy own heart, etc.

2. This shows the sad condition of all natural poor souls, your Hearts are
Looking-glasses; but they are Looking-glasses in a dungeon of Darkness; there
be Toads, Vipers, and Devils there, but thou can not see them that have no
spiritual Light.

3. Here is consolation to Gods people; Is the Heart of a man a Looking-glass?
What reason have they to rejoice in their hearts, that are the best
Looking-glasses in the world, not like our Gallants Looking-glasses that must
not bewray their wrinkles, spots, etc. But theirs will represent their Heart,
Complexion, Condition, and Nature to them; Nay, in that Glass may be seen the
face of a God: Nay further, because thy Heart does answer to another Heart, and
his to his, whatever Grace is in any Believers, it is there in thy Heart, in
semine; there is the seed.

4. By way of exhortation; Is the Heart a Looking-glass? Then keep the
Looking-glass very chary, make much of it; above all keepings keep thy heart,
and that with all diligence, in all places, at all times, and in all things? If
any thing under Heaven will keep thee holy, it is the keeping of thy Heart:
There thou may see all thy spots, defects, desperate Hypocrisies, Infernal
Atheism, all the deliques of thy soul: How prone to commit as vile ^ins as ever
was committed by the vilest of the sons of men. Once more, keep it clean, and
keep it close: Look into the heart, and thou shall find it to be a Copy of the
Role of Eternity, where thou shall see thy very name written in Letters of Gold
or Blood: for we looking into our Hearts, may, and do know, that we are passed
from death to life, and that upon this ground, because we love the brethren.
And thus I advance to

The Fifth Sermon.
1 John 3.14. We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love
the brethren.
IN these words five things.

1. A supposed Estate, in which we are all by nature, and that is an Estate of
spiritual death. 2. A peaceable Recovery, or mention of another state, and
estate of life. 3. A real Transition from this state of death to life, We are
passed, etc. 4. An inseparable property of all the Regenerate Souls in the
World; they do not hate, but love the brethren. 5. A comfortable Conclusion,
that a Christian may make, from that property; he may know, he may be assured
by this, that he is passed from death to life, because he loves the brethren:
The Observation this, A Christian may know his real Conversion and Transition
to Eternal life, by this Character among the rest, because he loves the
brethren. This Proposition wa^ slit into these two particulars. 1. That every
Believer may have an assurance of his Transition from death to life. 2. The
love of the brethren is one of the great eminent Symptoms of man's Regeneration.

1. A Christian may know his real Conversion, and Translation to eternal life.
Such a great and real change is there wrought in every Believer at his
Conversion; and this wrought by such a great Efficient and Infinite cause, the
Spirit of God; and this cause, working by such real and powerful means, and
instruments, the great Word of God; and this done, notwithstanding the great
opposition that is made by a poor sinner against the Word: and when wrought, it
has such a real and grand effect upon a Believer, that it is impossible but a
Believer must needs know this his Transition from death to life.

Secondly, Love to the brethren is the great Symptom of men's Regeneration. Love
to the brethren, not taken solely, singly, as if this was the only Character,
but concomitantly taken with others, but beyond, and above all others, this is
the Privy Soul of God on the Soul, if he have inflamed it with love, he may
know he is passed from death to life. The Use is of Confutation of the Papists,
those grand enemies to Gospel Truths, and Believers peace. They abhor this
Doctrine of Assurance: by it, their Purgatory would fall down, their Popes
Kitchen would grow cold. They tell us, Believers cannot have assurance in this
World: No?

1. Why has God commanded us to make our Calling and Election sure? and will
God command Impossibilities, such as cannot be wrought by our, or his own power?

2. Other Saints have attained this Assurance, this New Name, and White Stone
within them.

Object. That Is by extraordinary Revelation?

Ans. This is not upon proof: Was not the assurance of Gods people in Scripture
grounded upon general promises? Had they (many of them) either extrinsecal
signs, or marks to assure them of it? did it not spring from Principles, common
to all Believers?

Object. But suppose they have assurance to day, they may lose it to morrow?
Man is a mutable Creature, he may be a child of God in the morning, and a brat
of Hell in the evening.

Answ. It Is true, man is a mutable Creature, yet is he preserved by an
immutable God: Man is a weak Creature, but yet is preserved by the power of God
unto salvation: Man, as a Creature, is no less mutable in Heaven than upon
Earth; there preserved by God, therefore why not here?

Object. This is a Doctrine that tends to looseness?

Answ. Not so: It did not work looseness in Paul, Job, etc. I labored more than
they all. Nothing under heaven so sovereign to stave off, and preserve from
lust, as the assurance of Gods love to the Soul. Such assurance comes from the
highest act of Faith; and one of the great things of Faith, is, to purify the
heart and life. Such an assurance must needs constrain the Soul; The love of
Christ constrains us. Nay, so far is it from inclining to looseness, that it
casts the soul upon its knee, lifts up the Souls hand, sends him to Heaven
continually, constantly arms it with petitions, resolutions, never to let the
Lord of Heaven and Earth alone, gives him no rest, begging of him, as for other
things, so especially for this: Lord, as thou art pleased to give me the
privilege of enjoying promise, so, give me the power to perform duty. Thus
says he, Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. And so I am come as
far as

The Sixth Sermon.
Matthew. 6.10. Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven.
THere is a twofold Will of God.

1. Preceptive; to be done by us. 2. Providential; to be done upon us. [The
Minister carried the words in the last sense, the will of God be done upon us:]
Hence 'twas observed, Gods children must not only do, but submit to their
Heavenly Father's providential will: They must not only do his will, the will
of his precepts, but they must submit to his will, the will of his providence.
Let God do what he will, they must lay down their head upon the block, and with
patience and resignation, say, Thy will be done. There are but two grand
instances, wherein Saints ought to show this submission. First, When God
deprives them of spiritual privileges and enjoyments, they must submit now,
they must not murmur then, and that upon these considerations. 1. Suppose a
deprivation of public Ordinances, yet the holy Scriptures are left. 2. The
holy Spirit too, that shall bring home the Scriptures to the Conscience. 3.
There are old experiences of former love to live upon. 4. Yet none can detain
or debar us from making secret addresses unto God. 5. It Is a most noble thing,
it becomes a Christian exceedingly, to live upon pulse, yet thrive. 6. By the
want of such public Ordinances, God thinks fit to convince his people of their
folly, in sinning away the Gospel.
Secondly, When the Lord makes a breach upon our temporal comforts and estates,
now for submission, and that upon these accounts. 1. Come what will come, yet
no strange thing does, or can happen to us; no temptation but what is common to
man. 2. With what comely submission have those old Believers behaved themselves
to the will of God, Elijah, Job, Samuel, Daniel, and the Captain of our
Salvation, our blessed Savior, Not my will, but thy will be done. 3. There Is a
glorious day coming, when God will un-riddle all his dark providence, and show
you, that there is love in the bowels of them. 4. God has made a breach upon
some of thy comforts, how many Comforts has he yet left thee? 5. Thou art now
deprived of thy comfort; thou have enjoyed it twenty years, thou have reason to
be thankful it was continued so long, and not to murmur that it is taken away
now. 6. Thou have some goods, the best of goods; there is no plundering a man of
his grace, no putting him out of Gods favor. 7. God does thee a kindness in
this; were it good for thee, it should be continued to thee: He withholds no
good thing, he takes away nothing but what is evil, or would be so. This life
is a transitory vapor, and had thou enjoyed it, thou could not long do so.
8. Compare thy self with thy self and others: The other day thou were a
pitiful poor brat, and what shall thou be? Compare thy self with others: We
are low, how many thousands are beneath us? 9. All outward things are not
properly, formerly, good or evil: As we fancy them to be good or evil, so they
are; they are but fancies.


Use. Labor after this submissive frame of spirit. Get but this, and this will
evidence, that though he frowns, yet he favors thee; this will make thy faith
appear to be a glorious faith; it will show, that the Kingdom of God is not
only come to thee, but in thee, and rules in thy heart to that end. But, What
shall I do to submit?

1. Let not a day of adversity take thee unawares. 2. Do not overvalue thy
self, do not think too great of thy self, that the wind must not blow on thee.
3. Retract the superlative of thy desires, do not look at so much as what is
necessary. 4. Design nothing as thy main end and business, but the honor and
glory of God; mind but his honor, and let him alone to take care of thy
external comforts: Believer, who art so much in his heart, in his book, in his
soul, that he numbers the very hairs of thy head. And thus we fall upon
The Seventh Sermon.
Matthew. 10.30. But the very hairs of your head are all numbered.
FRom this Text you had this great Conclusion, The special and distinct
Providence of God, extendeng to the smallest things and creatures, and in a
special manner, to the smallest concernments of Believers, is a great Argument
to remove their fears, and inordinate cares, and to quiet, and confirm their
souls in confidence upon God. The very hairs of, etc. Is it so? Then

1. We have no reason to repine at wicked men, when they prosper; let them
ruffle, puff, throw, and sweat, what then? They will cut off the head; no they
cannot touch a hair.

2. Be not overmuch troubled with any particular changes or passages in the
world; they are all managed by a particular and distinct Providence.

3. Fear not man slavishly, this use our Savior makes of it.

4. This rebukes our inordinate and distracting cares, thou art mighty
inquisitive, what shall I eat? what shall I drink? wherewith shall I be
clothed? Friend, thy hairs are numbered, content thy self, God will take care,
etc.

5. In all the passages of the World, observe and acknowledge, not only a
general, but be sure to observe a particular providence; and then conclude, 1.
That nothing shall befall thee for want of faithfulness, sufficiency, knowledge,
love of God. 2. Nothing shall come unto thee, that shall in the least damnifie
or injure thee. 3. That all the plots, designs, contrivances, attempts of the
Devil, and all his Party, against Gods Church, are all under a Providence, they
are all numbered. All the hours of thy sufferings, all thy tears, fears, griefs,
pains, wants, every one numbered. Thou tellest the Clock at midnight under thy
pains, and God tells thy pains more than thou the Clock: Nay more, the hairs of
thy head are numbered; therefore not the meanest Believer in the greatest crowd
is over-looked by God. And then all thy worldly concernments, thy relations,
diseases, etc. are all numbered. Nay more, remember this Believer, all thy
distrusts, disquiets, murmurings, despondencies, the meanest lust unseen, and
the most secret sin, are all numbered.


6. Are our hairs numbered? This is sad news for Unbelievers: Are your hairs
numbered? then certainly your Oaths, Curses, contempts of Gods people, all your
sinful thoughts, words, actions, wilful omissions of commanded duties,
commissions of forbidden sins, all your disputings against God, his people, his
word, ways, will, are all upon the file, they are all numbered.

7. What an encouragement is there here for poor sinners to come in to God? Do
but come into God, and thou shall come into such a condition of safety, that
the very hairs shall be all numbered: And if thou will not come in, certainly
thou art wanting to thy self: For, look as well as thou can to thy self, thou
have not a promise to keep one hair of thy head till to morrow morning: Not a
promise of a sup of water, bit of bread; nor a promise of one minutes safety,
till to morrow morning. And if so be thou have not a God, no interest in him,
if God should turn his back on thee, a thousand to one but afflictions come:
And if afflictions come, thy heart is gone, thou having no spiritual strength
in heart, no eternal Rock of ages to fly to, no wonder if thou faint under
them, and so thou will certainly do: If a Believer that has but little
strength is apt to faint, thou that have no strength wilt utterly fall when
afflictions find thee. And this leads to

The Eighth Sermon.
Prove. 24.10. If thou faint in the day of Adversity, thy strength is small.
THe Observation from hence, was, To faint in the day of trouble, argues a man's
inward strength to be but small, his judgment weak, his reason low, his graces
feeble, his inward comfort, peace, and joy, not much, but very little. This,

1. Shows whence our mis-givings of heart, whence our want of liveliness of
spirit in and under troubles proceeded, even from hence, that our strength is
but small.

2. Teaches us how to judge what our spiritual strength is; namely, this way,
How do thou bear afflictions? How is it with thee in a day of distress? Do
thou faint and fail? It argues thy strength is but small.

By way of Dehortation: Do not thou faint in the day of affliction, in the day
of adversity. Take heed of fainting in three things.

1. Under work or duty, be it never so great, grievous, troublesome, or
dangerous. 2. Under the with-holdings of mercy, be they never so long detained.
3. Under afflictions, be they, or may they be never so grievous: whether 1.
Public afflictions, the afflictions of the Church of God: Suppose Sion is now
clad in Sackcloth, there is a time coming when she shall be arrayed in Scarlet.
When the Whores Scarlet shall be turned into Rags, the Churches Rags shall be
turned into Gold. Or, 2. Personal afflictions, faint not under them, be it this
or that, or the other, be they never so great, never so long, or never so many.
But, what shall I do to bear up my spirit, and to preserve me from fainting? 1.
Live in the holy dependence, and filial fear of the great God: He that fears
God most, to be sure will faint least. 2. Strengthen Grace: There are two
graces to be strengthened, viz. Strengthen Faith; I had fainted unless I had
believed, etc. Strengthen Patience; dejection of soul usually comes from
impatience. 3. Be much in Prayer: Is any man afflicted? let him (not go and
sinfully murmur and complain, but let him) pray. 4. Make use of
heart-strengthening considerations; and that is, 1. Turn over the promises:
They are left on purpose, as Gods bottle, his Vial of Cordials to keep the soul
from fainting. 2. What ever befalls, remember it proceeds from Gods love. 3.
All that God aims at, is to do thee good. 4. Be the affection never so great,
it is as necessary as prosperity, as health: This thy Physic is as necessary as
thy food. 5. The issue of all, a Crown of glory: these light afflictions which
are but for a moment, works out for us a far more excellent and eternal
weight of glory. And therefore if so be there be such principles from which
afflictions flow, and such ends to which they are managed: It is no wonder
Christ will not pray that we may be taken out of the world from affliction, but
keep in this world from the evil: So we fall on



The Ninth Sermon.
Joh. 17.15. I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but
that thou should keep them from the evil.
GOd has spoken once, yea twice have I heard this, That power belongs to
God. When God is pleased to strike twice upon the same string, it seems he has
something more than ordinary mind, that you should observe the turn. The
Doctrine was, That it is the will of Jesus Christ, that his servants should
continue in the world, though they meet with nothing but trouble in the world.
I pray not that thou should take them out of the world: let them stay Lord,
be thou but their Pilot, and then keep them at Sea as long as thou will. God
knows his Saints are very serviceable in their generation: They are as it were,
a Pillar of fire unto the rest of the world for guide and light: By their
Doctrine and Conversation, they instruct the godly, and convince the wicked:
God will have his people stay in the World, that his power, providence, mercy
and goodness in their preservation may more clearly be discovered; that their
afflictions here may work out for them an eternal weight of glory. These are
the reasons why God will have them stay in the World, etc. Then,

1. Saints, carry your selves as becomes such in midst of such a World, with
that wisdom, faithfulness, carefulness, humility that may bring honor both to
your selves, and to your Profession: Walk as Lights in the midst of a crooked
and perverse generation: Walk closely, warily, innocently, patiently,
submissively, etc. All these are necessary while you are to converse here in
this wicked world.

1. From that truth, But that thou should keep them from the evil: Observe,
preservation from sin is a greater mercy than exemption from suffering. Which
1. Informs us of a truth, that carnal men will never believe till they come to
Hell; that that is the height of folly, which the men of the world count to be
the top of wisdom, they think it wisdom to choose sin rather than suffering. 2
This will evidence, that the people of God are not such Fools as the men of the
World think they are, but the wisest, that will choose the greatest suffering
rather than the least sin. 3. This reproves those that will take more care to
have their afflictions removed than sanctified. 4. Be more afraid of sinning,
and less afraid of suffering; what, afraid of a lash, my child! no, be more
afraid of disinheritance: look on sufferings with Scripture-spectacles: Labor
for integrity and uprightness of heart, that preserves, when falling: Be
watchful over thy thoughts and ways: Be a resolved Christian: if thou be not,
thou will turn an Apostatizing Christian.
You must set your faces as thorns; resolution is absolutely necessary, not
only under, but before a day of suffering. Be resolved for God, and be resolved
against sin, and that for fear, lest in a day of suffering thou should halt
and founder, and so lose the things which thou have wrought: which brings me to

The Tenth Sermon.
2 John 8. Look to your selves, that we lose not those things which we have
wrought; but that we receive a full Reward.
IN these words you have a Warning-piece discharged to an Elect Lady, a serious
Item to an Elect Lady and her Religious Family, to look well to themselves that
they lost not the things they had wrought. And this is grounded on a double
reason.

1. From the damage of such as begin well, and hold not out, They lose the
things they have wrought. That were sad, that so much should be done, and all
should be lost at last.

2. From the advantage and benefit if we do go on, then we shall receive a full
reward. The Observation was, It much cancerns all those that have begun well,
that are looked upon by Ministers, and those that are Godly, as if they were
truly godly, that have entertained the Truth, and the profession of the Truth,
to look well to it how they stand, to continue, to go on, to hold out in their
holy Profession and Conversation. Look to your self, you Elect Lady, you her
Religious Family, look to your selves, that you lose not the things you have
wrought. There Is all the reason in the world it should be so; the Election of
Believers engages us it should be so, we are chosen that we should be so. If we
do not look well to our selves, we may chance to lose all we have wrought. It
too too often falls out, that after a hot fit of Profession, there comes a cold
fit of Apostasy; this cold fit of Apostasy, caused by a sharp wind of
Persecution; or by a melting, thawing Sun of Prosperity, either by our natural
inconstancy and mutability within, (we love new changes, we love to be
changeable) or else the subtilty of Seducers from without. Again, there has
been, are, and will come trying seasons, were you never so sincere: Think not
all the work overdone, as soon as converted. As soon as come out of Egypt,
there is a Wilderness and Red Sea to pass through, Midianitish women, Giants,
etc. to contest with: Therefore no wonder he writes, Look to your self. Then,

1. Here see Election shuts not out the use of means: You are an Elect Lady,
yet look to your self. 2. You scandalous Papists, the Doctrine of Perseverance
we preach, is no Mother of Sloth and Security: Though you shall be saved, yet
look to your selves, you shall not perish, yet keep in the Ship. 3.
Orthodoxness of Faith, and soundness of Profession is not enough to make a good
Christian. Elect Lady, you make profession you are sanctified, but you must
look to your self. 4. It is not enough to have a well-ordered Family; Oh Lady!
Look to your self as well as to your Family.
6. The business of Religion is not the work of one day; As long as you have
life, look to your self.

2. For Exhortation; Look to your selves, take heed of Apostasy; Take heed of
that which occasions cold fits, after a cold fit comes a dead fit, as after a
hot fit usual; comes a cold fit. Apostasy is the Quartan Ague of the Soul; if
it be not death, it is ex^reme dangerous.

3. By way of Direction: Would you look to your selves? Look up to God, beg to
be strengthened with all might in the inner man; that he who has begun a good
work, would be pleased to finish it. To that end, Lord give strength while in
begging, and begging hearts for continuance of that strengthening Ordinance
amongst us, that it may be never said as it was said of those precious
Israelites, the Word of the Lord was precious in those days, there was no open
Vision. Which leads me to

The Eleventh Sermon.
1 Samuel 3.1. The word of the Lord was precious in those days, there was no
open vision.
THe Word of the Lord was precious in those days: Was it not always precious?
Yes, but there is a twofold preciousness.

1. Of worth and excellency. 2. Of want and scarcity. The Word of the Lord has
not been so precious to the Israelites; in regard of its worth and excellency;
therefore God made it precious to them, in regard of its want and scarcity;
There was no open vision. Hence observe:
1. There has been, there may be such a day overtake a Church and People of
God, wherein the Word of God may be precious, that is, may be scarce, rare, and
hard to come by.

2. It Is most just with God, to teach them how to prize the word, by the want
of it; that know not how to prize the word of God by the worth of it; the Use
was for Direction, what to be done to prevent this judgment of a scarcity and
famine of the Word of God. 1. Learn to prize the word by the worth of it. 2.
Improve the word as to the fruit of it. 3. Adorn the word in your lives and
conversations. 4. Be earnest with God, in public and private, for the blessed
continuance of that word. Learn to prize the word by the worth of it. We do
prize the word, etc.
Do you prize the word in the truth? Then*

1. What has meant that horrible, wicked, general contempt of the word of God,
and Ministers of that word, through the Land? though (blessed be God) they have
not taken the vilest of the People and made them Priests, yet the best of
Ministers have been esteemed as the worst and ^ilest of People. 2. What means
the want of the word read, repeated, looked into? 3. What means the general
disobedience to the word? 4. Why are you so ready to sell the truth, far more
ready than to buy it? 5. What means that easy forsaking of the blessed truths
of the Gospel, that a Popish Jesuit cannot come and vent one of his wicked
Opinions, but presently let it be vomited, it must be sucked up by one or
other? 6. What means the^ having of the faith of Christ in so much respect of
persons, as has been here amongst us? Judge your selves then for what is past,
and for the future learn to prize the word according to its worth; consider
what an admirable excellent thing this word of God is, and that is, and that
may be known.
1. By the Metaphors unto which it is resembled in Scripture, which speak
either its profit, pleasure, usefulness, or necessity: Thy word is a light to
my feet; what more precious than light, without which the world were but one
great Dungeon? etc. It Is compared to Bread, Manna, Food, Water, Precious
Stones, Rain, etc. Nay, it is more necessary. As they formerly, we can better be
without the Sun, than without Chrysostom: Love for God makes us sensibly to
say, we can as well be without fire or water, as without the word of God. As it
is the more excellent because compared to those things: what they are
naturally, it is spiritually so, it is spiritual Bread, spiritual Water,
spiritual Pearl, etc.

2. By its precious Properties and Operations. There is a Scripture to me
tastes like honey in my mouth, Ps. 19.7, 8, 9. Where the word is discovered by
its properties and operations. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the
Soul; The testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple; The Statutes
of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart; The Commandments of the Lord are
pure, enlightening the eyes; The fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for ever;
The Judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether. What are these the
Metaphors to which the Word is compared? Are these the Properties and
Operations of the Word? No wonder then Job sets such a high valuation upon them
as he does in our

Twelfth Sermon.
Job 23.12. I have esteemed the Word of his mouth more than my necessary food.
IN these words you have the matter, and the measure of Job's valuation. 1. The
matter of Job's valuation, i.e. the words, all the words of his mouth, precepts
as well as promises, threatenings and directions, as well as promises and
privileges. 2. The measure of his valuation, as his food, as his necessary
food; nay, more than his necessary food. Hence this truth was raised, The
Ordinances of God are exceeding precious to all truly Religious Persons. All
the Ordinances of God, and amongst them, his word, which is not the least part
of his worship: This appears, 1. From their desires after the Ordinances; My
Soul pants, longs after, etc. 2. From their hearty content and satisfaction
in them. 3. From their bitter Lamentation under the want of them. 4. From their
diligent endeavors to enjoy them.


Religious Persons really understand their worth, and want of them: They know
the Ordinances of God to be the food, the spiritual fodder of the Soul: the
walks of God, where God is pleased to take his turn; the Instruments of Divine
Glory; the Legacy of Christians, their Christian Armor and Accoutrements, to
contest with Sin, Satan, the World, and, as Stars that lead to Bethlehem; no
wonder the Ordinances are so precious in the esteem of all truly Religious.
Then, 1. Know your privilege, yet you enjoy Ordinances. 2. Lament the sad
condition of those poor titular Christians on the one hand, that have
Ordinances but enjoy them not, they know not the worth of them: And true
Christians on the other hand, from whom the Ordinances are gone, and whether
ever they will return, they know not. 3. This reproves those to whom they are
not precious.
But, how shall I know the Ordinances are precious to me? Answer, If thou
carriest thy self toward them, as toward what thou look on as precious:
tell me, 1. Art thou greedy of all opportunities of enjoying? 2. Heartily
troubled, when hindered of enjoying them? 3. Have thou a dear respect to those
that help thee to the enjoyment of them? 2. By way of Conviction to those mad
men that tell us of being above, i.e. without Ordinances: What, was it ever
heard of any of Gods Saints in Scripture, that ever they said they were above
Ordinances? 3. For Instruction to Christians: It will be seasonable to consider
what you ought to do, if God should deprive you of your Ordinances: He did not
say, it is probable, but such a thing is possible; Therefore make provision,
lay in provision beforehand; Provision of Knowledge, of Grace, of Comfort, of
Light, against a day of darkness.
And if it should come, here is Counsel given to us, and Consolations laid
before us.


1. Counsel given us, if ever it should be. 1. Lament, bewail, mourn over the
Lords absence, weep till you can weep no longer. 2. Seek after, pursue them:
Let them go where they will, be sure thou follow the Ordinances. 3. Be more
frequent and serious in the use of private Ordinances. 4. Frequently reflect
back on thy former enjoyments; Oh the House, the Tabernacle of God, etc.
And reflect, 1. To excite your thankfulness to God, that ever you did enjoy
them. 2. To suck strength from the Ordinances: To chew the cud, and get
strength of them. 3. For Humiliation; for finning away, and provoking God to
take them away.


2. For Consolation, that the People of God may not utterly fail, then 1. Know
in such a condition, That though your condition be exceeding bad, yet better
than many thousands; they never had Ordinances. 2. God is able in such a case
to support without Ordinances: When he calls into the Wilderness, he can carry
along without Circumcision. 3. Remember those that have had them, but not now;
What is become of Sion? Of the Church of, etc. 4. Your Salvation may be carried
on without Ordinances. 5. There is a time coming when you shall have no need of
Ordinances.
In the mean time, if you cannot get up to the Ark of God; Take heed of bowing
to the Calves, at, Dan and Bethel: If you cannot serve the God of Israel; Take
heed you serve not the gods of the Amorites. What you will do I know not, to be
sure Joshua would not. Choose you (says he) this day whom you will serve,
whether the Gods which your Fathers served, that were on the other side of the
flood, or the gods of the Amorites, in whose Land ye dwell: But as for me, and
my House, we will serve the Lord. Which brings me to.

The Thirteenth Sermon.
Josh. 24.15. As for me, and my House, we will serve the Lord.
IN the words two things: 1. An indefatigable Exhortation; Take your own
choice, follow your own discretion: If you will go and bow down to a dumb Idol,
to a captive God, etc. 2. An admirable Dehortation; We are at a pitch, we are
resolved, and if there be any attractive in me, or my Family, you have it in
this, I, and my Household, we will serve the Lord.
The Observations were,

1. Pious Governors of Families are very zealous, that their Families, as well
as themselves, shall serve the Lord. Never hope of thriving in godliness, till
you bring your Families right for God, to be of the same Religion with your
selves.

2. A true sincere Christian is resolved to choose and follow God, what ever
else the World choose and follow. 1. Sincere Christians have much more
satisfaction in the judgment and practice of God, his Word, Saints, than in the
judgment and practice of the World? He knows their judgment to be depraved,
their choice and practice corrupt, their end and conclusion worst of all;
Therefore no wonder he makes a better choice. 2. They have the best testimony
in the World for their choice, the Spirit and Son of God, that this is their
choice; Therefore no wonder, etc. But how do they choose God? Answer. They choose
God as the object of their souls love, as the chiefest of ten thousand, as the
lot of their inheritance; as the companion of their souls, to converse with
him, as the Commander of their ways, to bt guided by him, as a shelter of their
hearts, as a refuge to fly unto in the time of danger.

The first Use was by way of Examination: Is God chosen as the chief object of
our souls love? Can we truly say, There is none in Heaven but thee, none upon
Earth I can desire besides, or in comparison of thee? Can we say in having God,
The lines are fallen unto me in a pleasant place, yea I have a goodly heritage?
Is communion with God our Heaven upon Earth? Is God the Commander of our ways,
as well as we hope to be the Savior of our souls? Is God our shield, or
buckler, our retreat in danger?

The second Use was by way of Consolation: Believers, have you made choice of
God? Happy are the people that are in such a case; thou have the best assurance
in the world, to come to the best, possession in this world, peace and joy,
Peace within, if not Peace without: And Joy, the best Joy in the world, Joy
unspeakable, and full of glory. And truly, if so be that this be thy portion,
in having chosen God, it is no wonder thou do not Apostate from him. It is no
wonder that whatever comes upon a Believer, yet for that his heart is not
turned back, neither his steps declined from Gods way. And this leads to

The Fourteenth Sermon.
Psalm. 44.18. Our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined
from thy way.
FRom these words two Observations:

1. In times of sufferings and afflictions, true Christians are to make a
narrow inspection into their hearts, to see how they stand affected. Thus did
the Church here.

2. To keep steadfast and close with God, notwithstanding all afflictions and
sufferings we undergo, either from, or for God, is the duty and commendation of
Saints. 'Twas our duty, and it is our honor, Lord, etc. In prosecution of this
point, these seven preliminary Theses were laid down.

1. When man was first created, his heart stood rightly bent toward God, as
his great center and mark. 2. When man fell, his heart immediately drew off,
and turned back from God. 3. Though this be the case of fallen man; yet poor
creature he sees it not. 4. The very Formalis Ratio of sin, that wherein the
Formality of sin consists, is in this, not so much in finning against God by
outward Acts, as in the hearts departing from God. 5. All true Conversion to
God, begins at the Heart. 6. It is an Argument of infinite love in God, to
bring back our hearts to him. 7. When once the heart of a Believer is brought
back to God, no suffering or affliction is able to turn that heart from him.
Quest. When may a man's heart be said not to be turned back, notwithstanding
all sufferings and afflictions?

Answ. 1. When a man still retains the same esteem and estimate of God that
ever he had. When Job looks upon God as a God, fit to be lessed, though God be
plundering of him.

2. When a man still retains the same affections, the same love to him, delight
in him, fear of him, as much as ever.

3. When we hope and trust in God as much as ever: Though he kill me, yet will
I trust in him.

4. When we have the same resolutions to cleave to God as ever. If a God in
Israel, as long as a God in Israel; It Is all one, makes not to the God of the
Philistims; this is for a man's heart not to be turned back from God. By way of
Use,

1. Learn, The heart of man is very apt to turn from God in days of
affliction: our heart is not, though theirs were. 2. It concerns us in time of
affliction and suffering, to see if our hearts be not turned back from God.
But, what means shall I use that I may not turn a base Apostate?
Answ. 1. Be watchful over your hearts: they are exceeding slippery and
deceitful. The veriest Thieves in the world.

2. Be still bending of your hearts from the world and the flesh, unto God, as
you bend a crooked stick to make it straight.

3. Do not only bend, but bind your hearts, tie them, shackle them as you would
one that has broken Prison, by holy, serious, Scriptural, necessary vows.

4. Converse much with God: That man that converses much with God, it is not
the frowns of men shall bring his heart off from God. To spur you on to this
duty with these motives.

1. If you turn from God, the soul of God will turn from you, If any man draw
back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him. 2. Keep close to God in such a
time, and God will keep close to you. Here Is a people, that not all their
sufferings could make them fall from me. God glories in such a people. 3. This
will be one of the greatest comforts by way of argument of your sincerity, that
your heart is upright with God. This will make an Hezekiah look up to God in
the time of sickness, with a Lord remember now how I have walked before thee in
truth, and with a perfect heart. 4. If you will not turn from God by way of
Apostasy, you may run to God, and find in him a Sanctuary. And so you have it
in
The Fifteenth Sermon.
Isa. 8.14. He shall be for a Sanctuary.
THe words are an allusion to a City of refuge, and from hence this
Observation, Jesus Christ will be for a sure refuge to all those that make him
their fear and dread. And the truth is, there is the greatest reason in the
world Christ should be so; Saints stand in greatest need of this Sanctuary;
They are a poor weak helpless generation of Creatures, but they have a Rock of
refuge; The Conies are but a feeble folk, yet make their Houses in the Rocks.
Christ bears dearest love to them; they are most precious to him; they are his
Jewels: what will a man preserve, if he will not preserve his Jewels? Will
Christ be a Sanctuary? Then 1. See the true reason why the Saints of God are of
such an heroic Spirit even when troubles look them in their faces, and ring in
their ears, they have a God to fly to, a Christ to rest on. 2. See the reason
of that consternation of spirit that seizes on wicked men in times of troubles.
Hide me from the wrath of the Lamb; why? they have no refuge to go to, and
however it is with them now, you shall hear nothing but howling and lamenting,
when God shall come to avenge the blood of his Saints. 3. Be exhorted to make
Christ your Sanctuary, get into this City of Refuge, and for Motives consider,
1. Your absolute need of a Sanctuary. You are in the power of the world, in the
paw of the Devil, in the mouth of Danger, in the mouth of Hell. 2. All other
things in the world are not sufficient to become a Sanctuary. You may run to
the Rocks, but they cannot hide you; you may make an arm of flesh your
strength, but it will prove an Egyptian Reed, and run into your hands; you may
make Riches your refuge, The rich man's wealth is his strong Tower, but rather
it is a Castle in the Air; you may make Honors your refuge, etc. All things
unable to be your Sanctuary. 3. Consider what a large, free, present,
well-furnished, unchangeable Refuge and Sanctuary Christ is: There are many,
nay, all things in Christ, in which a poor soul may take Sanctuary; Do thou
want Righteousness? He is the Righteous one. Do thou want Sanctification,
Wisdom, Redemption? He is all, in him, Refuge and Sanctuary may thou take,
in his Providence for thy Protection, in his Offices for thy Salvation, in his
Promises for thy Consolation; and amongst the rest, that which is like the
Diamond in the Ring; see that great Promise in



The Sixteenth Sermon.
Rev. 2.17. To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the hidden Manna.
TO him that overcomes, i.e. Not that has by one, two, or more acts
conquered; but to him that Overcomes, that has, and does, and is overcoming
still, that goes on conquering and to conquer.

2. To him that overcomes thus, and this way, and this Enemy, this greatest
Enemy that God has, Truth has in the World: Antipas especially, that keeps my
Truth inviolable, that in a Scriptural way opposes that greatest Enemy I have,
and opposes him to a conquest. To him that overcomes, that goes on to overcome,
that thus overcomes. Hence this Observation; Believers are all a generation of
Conquerours, all Conquerours; they are all like the Sons of Kings, but some
Believers are more Conquerours than others; some that lay Antichrist upon his
back, such as out-shoot the Devil in his own Bow, that stand out against Satan's
greatest Batteries, that turn his Cannon on himself, and cuts off the head of
that Goliath with his own sword: These are something more than Conquerours. But
how come Believers to be thus Conquerours? They are actuated with a six-fold
power.

1. With ability to discern all necessary, heavenly mysteries, and this enables
them to overcome Antichrist, as he is an erroneous, fawning, Heretical Prophet.
2. With a power to believe all things, even such things, as though they do not
contradict, yet exceed the reach of Reason. 3. With a power to do all duties, I
can do all things through Christ that strengthens me. These Conquerours cannot
do any thing against, but any thing for the Truth. 4. With a power to suffer
all things. These Conquerours are ready, not only to be bound, but to suffer,
to die, for the Name of Jesus, and to conquer by dying. 5. With a power to
forsake all things. To look upon all things, as dung and dross, that they may
win Christ. 6. They have not only a power of might, but of right too, as Kings
conquer, etc. But what means are to be used to overcome in the sense of the
Text.
Answ. 1. Study well that little Book of the Revelations; indeed the Book of
Books, the Book of Sacred Scripture, in which we have at once the sum of the
Saints duty and privilege, and of Gods care and providence over his Church in
the latter days of the Church, etc.

2. Concoct this Book by a practical belief of what is revealed in it, do not
think your own Notions to be Divine Revelations.

3. Familiarize the Cross of Christ, dye daily in expectation of it, and
provision for it; do not say, (as Rev. 8.17.) I sit as a Queen, and shall see
no sorrow.

4. Labor, by a prospect of Faith, to antedate those great joys God has
prepared for those that so suffer, as to conquer.

5. Buckle on the whole Armor of God, and above all, leave not out the Shield
of Faith.

6. Let your Love abound higher by opposition. That becomes a Martyrs spirit
indeed. The more the wind blows it in thy face, let that blow up more of thy
blood into thy face; Let it warm thee more, etc.

7. Live not by Example, but by Rule; Those that follow the most, whither go
they? Wide is the gate, broad is the way, that leads to Damnation, and many
there be that enter therein. The flock of Christ is a little Flock.

8. Esteem duty above safety. As one, It is necessary Rome should be ruined: it
is not necessary I should be preserved. It Is necessary Religion should be
advanced, the power of godliness preserved; it is not necessary I should be in
this or that condition.

9. Indulge not the least sin else, thou will never be Conqueror. That-man
that will not lay down his Lust for Christ, will never lay down his Life for
Christ. A man can never be resolved for Christ's ways without, if not resolved
against all impurity within.

10. Harden, and anoint your selves with practical improvement of Christ's
sufferings, in Christ's death. There was an estimable price to purchase our
Conquest, an infinite merit to strengthen, to encourage our Conquest; an
all-sufficient virtue to cause our Conquest, a pledge of our eternal Conquest;
we are Conquerours already, we do but gather the Spoil. Make use of Christ's
death as the merit, pattern; and motive of your Conquest.

11. Labor for Sincerity.

12. Get well acquainted with Divine Attributes, and Divine Promises: And such
especially as may be most suitable for your condition.

13. Abhor the relics of superstition: The very Nest; and the very Cage of the
Bird is unclean: Not a crum of that old Leaven, it will sour the whole lump:
Antichrist is hugely like the Devil, let him get in but one ^aw, let him but
get in his head, he will quickly get in the whole body: if you would avoid the
paw of Antichrist, avoid as much as you can, the very parings of his nails.

14. Get an experimental knowledge of Gospel Truths; they are your
Head-Professors, that turn Apostates.

15. Let this be your first and chiefest care, your first and last, to seek and
serve God: Which if you do, as all other things, so this privilege of Conquest
shall be added unto you as your Crown: Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and
the righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be added unto you; Which
opens the door to

The Seventeenth Sermon.
Matthew. 6.33. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all
these things shall be added unto you.
FRom this Scripture you had a remedy against solicitous thoughts and fears,
given in this Proposition, that a serious inquiry, and earnest pursuit of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and the righteousness thereof, is an excellent remedy
against distracting cares and fears about provision and safety. Seek, First,
and trouble your selves no more. Seek first the Kingdom of God, etc. Two
questions were propounded, and answered.

1. What is it earnestly to enquire after, and seriously to pursue the Kingdom
of God, and his righteousness? In this question three things included; the
Object, the Act, the Order.

1. The Object; The Kingdom of God; the Kingdom of Heaven, and its
Righteousness. The Kingdom of Heaven, that is, the Kingdom of Grace, and the
Kingdom of Glory; the Kingdom of Grace, as the means to the Kingdom of Glory.
The righteousness of this Kingdom, that is, Sanctification, sincere holiness in
heart and life, which is the beginning, or the way to, and a sign or pledge of
our interest in the Kingdom of Glory. 2. The Act; Seek. i.e. Bestir your utmost
thoughts about, your utmost time, care, diligence, upon these things. 3. Seek.
i.e. Set your choicest affections upon these things. 3. Seek. i.e. Strive and
labor, go forth in utmost endeavors for obtaining of these things.
3. The Order, Seek first: Seek it first, in respect of time, begin with God,
Remember thy Creature in the days of thy Youth. Seek it first, with the
greatest care, accuratest diligence, industry, with the greatest seriousness.
The Kingdom of God is the most necessary thing indeed, that one thing
necessary: It is the most excellent thing, eternal, all other things are
temporal; get this, and you get all; you get above the terrors of the World:
The best way to have the things of the World sanctified, is this, Seek first
the Kingdom of God, etc.
2. How is this a remedy against distracting cares and fears?

Answ. 1. It is a remedy by diversion. 2. Present things seem little, compared
with eternal things.


Use 1. This reproves those that observe not our Saviors direction.

1. Those that are drowned in earthly things, give them Onions and Garlic,
take the Kingdom of Heaven and Righteousness thereof who will: Let me have my
part in Paris, what care I for Paradise.

2. Others that are for the Kingdom of God, but not for the Righteousness of
that Kingdom: they are for the end, but they do not care for the way; they
would have fruit, but they will not climb the Tree.

3. Others that could wish they had a portion in it, but in a slight and
perfunctory way; If Heaven could be obtained with a few prayers, this they would
do, but further they will not go.

2. Is this such an excellent way to cure our carnal fears and cares? What
advantage has a Child of God above all other men in the world, both in this
life, and that to come? In this life, under a watchful providence, not a hair
of his head shall perish: but chiefly the privileges of an everlasting
Kingdom; he has a Bird in the bush, and in hand too; choice enjoyments in the
hand, and in hope much more, but much more above; and this hope of his shall
not make him ashamed. The vision of his appointed comforts is for an appointed
time, and it will come; will come, said I? Faith looks our, and sees it coming
already; let but Faith look to Heaven, and he sees his Judge coming. Which
brings me to

The Eighteenth Sermon.
Rev. 22.12. Behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me.
THe Observation from the words was this, The Lord Jesus will certainly and
speedily come to Judgment, when he shall give reward equal to every man. These
two questions were answered.

In what sense Christ comes quickly?

Answ. In Gods account, with whom a thousand years are but as one day. In our
account Faith sees him coming, though Sense cannot. Faith makes future things
present; it is the Prespective of the Soul. Believers receive part of their
reward at death, and that is quickly.

2. Why does Christ defer his coming at all?

Answ. 1. To stop the mouths of the wicked; they will not have one word to
reply, they had time and space to repent.

2. Out of his dear love he bears to his Elect: There is many of his Elect not
yet born, and though born, not newborn: Now these must be born, and newborn,
and brought all in; and when that time is come, then He will come.

Use 1. Will Christ come quickly, and with a reward? then certainly remember
this, Athiest, It Is no vain thing to serve our Lord Jesus: What profit is it,
if we serve him, etc. What profit? Infinite profit, there is a reward coming.

2. By way of Exhortation, Will Christ come? Oh then

1. Prepare for his coming: Labor to be prepared by his spiritual coming in
thy heart, that is the way to be prepared for his last coming; get thy
understanding enlightened in the saying knowledge of Christ, thy will subdued,
and brought into subjection unto Christ, thy affections renewed, spiritualized,
thy conversation such as becomes the Gospel of Christ.

2. You that have made all things ready for his coming, look out after his
coming: The Table is spread, the Trencher laid, the Dinner ready, the Guest not
come; Oh! when will He come? I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ;
come Lord Jesus, come quickly, every Saint will echo to, Come quickly: to
every Believer it shall be a most welcome coming, he shall come with a reward
of absolution and pardon of all sin, of vindication and clearing up of all
names: Believer's bodies shall not only have a Resurrection, but their good
names; It shall be a reward of Coronation, all their Crowns of Thorns, shall be
turned into Crowns of Glory.

3. Is Christ coming? Will he come? This should bear up Believer's hearts, in,
and under the sufferings they fear, or feel. Christ comes quickly, therefore
fear none of those things which thou shall suffer. This gives us advance into

The Nineteenth Sermon.
Rev. 2.10. Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer: behold the Devil
shall cast some of you into prison, that you may be tried, and you shall have
tribulation ten days: Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a
Crown of life.
WHence observe; 1. The people of God must suffer. Through tribulation, through
many tribulations, they must enter into the Kingdom of God; from a Cross, into
Heaven: Think it not strange, no, not of the fiery trial, thou shall suffer. 2.
Whatever sufferings the people of God, either are, or may be in, they have no
just cause, ground, or reason of fear, i.e. of disponding, distrusting,
distracting fear. The Arguments of this point are in the Text.


1. The Consideration of who it is that brings the people of God into
suffering, it is God? God is the Disposer, but who is the great Executioner?
the Devil, whom God hates more than thou can; The Devil shall cast, etc.

2. It is the Devil in a chain: the Devil has two sorts of chains; 1. A chain
of darkness, in which he is kept to the day of Judgment. 2. A chain of
providence; he is restrained in that, etc.

3. The Quality of the suffering should keep them from fearing: He shall cast
some of you into Prison, not into Hell.

4. The Design, to destroy you? No, but to try you: It is well you are Gold,
else you would be presently destroyed and burnt.

5. The Duration: Could the Devil have his design, it should be for ever: it is
but for ten days.

6. God overrules all that befalls us, Christ always stands by the Believer
to take notice of every stripe, as well as of every hair of thy head, to own
thee in all thy sufferings, to sympathize with thee, to have a fellow-feeling
and compassion unto thee, to compose, and to sanctify all unto us, to order
the issue of all, that it shall be sure, speedy, and good; and by all these to
make us like God, God-Man, as possible.

Use. Then do not fear: Here we are fore-armed and forewarned.

1. Forewarned; Our suffering is like to be great, nay, it may be greater than
we may suppose: This to be sure, if our sufferings do but keep pace with our
sinnings, I believe never such sufferings in England: If God lay Righteousness
to the Line, and Judgment to the Plummet, never such matter for his Justice in
England.

2. We should not fear, because that is the spring of many other sins,
Fainting, Running, Lying, Perjury, and to any thing in the world, etc.

3. The best of men in such bad Times, it will be as much as ever they can do
to keep themselves steady.

We are Fore-armed.

1. In reference to the Church of God: Do not fear, the Church of God is dear
to thee, but it is dearer to God. The interest of God, is more concerned in the
life, peace, and truth of the Church, than in mine, etc. If the great God will
not look to his own interest, can the Church be safe? But doubtless he will.

2. In reference to our selves. Suppose many sufferings, yet the ways of God
are in the dark, as well as in the deep; there is no tracing of him, let him
alone, where thou can not trace him, admire him; God can, and has done; and
I bless God, I can set my seal to that word, that tells me, God will do great
things: Babylon must sink, his people must be called, the Kings of the Earth
must hate that Whore; when God brings his People low, it is but making way for
the baring and magnifying his own mercy; when the praise can be given to none,
now is a time for God to work. Now will I arise and show my self strong.
Therefore Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer. Fear not! Oh ye
Saints of the most High: It is true, if you were carnal, natural, unconverted,
sinful, idolatrous wretches, well might you fear the wrath of the Lamb, and him
that sits on the Throne: Were thou a filthy, drunken, unrighteous,
intemperate Felix, thou might well fear thou had no God to run to; but
being a Paul thou need not fear: No, Paul can speak and act with so much
confidence, even when he stands before a great Tribunal, ready to leave a
sentence of death passed on him, that he makes his very Judge to tremble. And
so you have it in

The Twentieth Sermon.
Acts 24.25. And as he reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to
come, Felix trembled.
IN these words you have the Manner, Matter, and Effect of Paul's preaching. The
Manner, why Paul was reasoning; the Matter, it is of righteousness, temperance,
and judgment to come; the Effect, Felix trembled. First, For the manner of
Paul's preaching, as he reasoned, i. e. as he argued the matter, he did propound
it in a rational way, and pursued it before Felix; and this he does in a double
capacity, as he is a Convert, and as he is an Apostle; as a Christian, and as a
Preacher.

1. As a Convert and Christian, and so he had reason to do, and make use of
that reason he had to show; though he became righteous, yet Paul had not lost
his reason. Hence learn, true Religion will consist with right Reason. Blessed
be God for his truth. We are apt to look upon men as mad men, if they will be
righteous. It is true, before Paul was converted, he had reason, but he used it
madly; but after conversion, he begins to be sober, and make the best use of
his Reason.

2. Look upon Paul as a Preacher, so he makes use of his reason. And true
reason may, and must be used in preaching the Gospel, yet with these two
Cautions.

1. Do not overvalue Reason, do not lift up the Servant above the Master;
Prize Grace more than Reason: Piety is better than Parts; though Parts are the
Ring of Gold, Piety is the Diamond in that Ring. As if a man in a Pulpit should
come to show what a brave Scholar he is, this is to overvalue Reason. 2. Do
not under-value Reason. We have had a strange fancy, that if a man that could
not read English, would but come and talk, and preach to us, he was far more
desirable than a Black-coat that has been at the University, and learned his
root there (as they say,) you will be glad of such as these. This Learning has
spoiled all the World; do you not know how many Scholars are Atheists, and
their Learning made them the worse, etc. This is not the fault of their Reason,
had they more Reason they would improve it the better. It is want of Reason
that makes them not crucify their Lusts. Because corrupt men many times abuse
that which is good, will you therefore cast it off?
2. For the Matter of Paul's preaching: And here observe,

1. It is suitable to his Hearers. Felix was a Judge, though a corrupt one, and
so he reasons of Righteousness. He and his Whore lived in Adultery, and so he
preaches of Temperance, of Judgment to come: know God will call thee to
judgment. Hence observe, The Gospel is then preached aright when suited to
Hearers hearts, cond^tions, and constitutions. A man in the Pulpit ought not to
shoot at random. Paul speaks ad rem to his hearers, suitably tells them of
righteousness, temperance, judgment to come.

2. Consider it with relation to his Scope, which was to bring them unto
Christ; and what does he do? He preaches Grace, Mercy; and Peace; no, not a
word of that, but Righteousness, Temperance, Judgment to come. Paul was a
convincing Preacher, he knows his way to bring home Felix and Drusilia to
Christ, was first to convince them of their sin, and the wrath of God due to
sin. The whole sum of Paul's preaching was by way of conviction. Sin and misery
must be preached for this end, that it may bring men unto Christ. We must not
make them half dead, and there leave them, but bring them to the Surgeon;
all our conviction is only for this end, that you might be brought to Christ,
by grace to glory.

3. For the Effects of Paul's preaching; Paul preached, and Felix trembled; does
not Drusilla tremble? It Is more than probable she brought Paul to preach there,
that Drusilla had a months mind to hear what he had to say; but Felix trembled.
Hence observe, These that are first in enjoying, may be last in receiving the
Gospel. Drusilla was a -- yet turns a wicked Apostate, yet when come to hear a
Sermon, her heathenish Husband Felix, that served the Devil in stead of God,
trembled, but not she. Backsliding professors from the truth, are infinitely
farther from melting under the Gospel, than profane Sinners, that never heard
of it. A man had far better go to preach to Heathens, than Apostates. Then for
the words, Felix trembled. Why? there was Righteousness prosecuted and
convinced, Judgment to come threatened against him. Now his knees began to smite
together, now the writing on the Wall, now Felix trembles. Oh poor soul!
would thou not tremble at the preaching of Judgment to come? submit to the
Judge before he come; would thou not have thy Judge to condemn thee then? let
him be now thy King to rule, thy Prophet to instruct, thy Priest to reconcile;
would you avoid the terror of a Judgment to come? accept of this offer of a
Christ coming; coming did I say? nay, he is come already: Do but lay your ear
close to the third of the Revelations, and the twentieth, you shall hear your
Judge knocking. Which brings me to

The One and Twentieth Sermon.
Rev. 3.20. Behold, I stand at the door, and knock; if any man hear my voice,
and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with
me.
THese are the words of our blessed Savior, words coined, as it were, for the
close of the Morning Exercise. A continued Metaphor, wherein you have, 1. An
important thing of weight, intimated in that Particle, Behold. 2. The state of
men in the visible Church implied; though they profess a Christ, high thoughts
of him, and obedience to him, yet many, most of them keep their hearts shut
against him; Behold, I stand without at the door. 3. Christ's dealing or
transaction with the poor Creatures, for opening their hearts to him, and that
in four things. 1. His standing, waiting, or dancing attendance on the Soul,
and the place where; I stand at the door. 2. His earnest desire and importunity
of entrance; and knock. 3. His Call and invitation; for where a hearing is
enjoined, there must needs be a calling implied. 4. The Argument or Motive he
uses to persuade poor Creatures to set him in.



1. Ab honesto, If he will but open, I will come in, and take my abode; An
admirable thing to have such a Tenant.

2. Ajucundo, I will sup with him, I will vouchsafe him fellowship and
communion.

3. He shall sup with me; There shall be mutual fellowship between him and me;
What I have shall be his, and what he has shall be mine: we will walk, love,
and lodge together; I will lodge with him, and he shall lodge with me.

4. To whom this invitation is made; to every one, all, If any man or woman,
that have slighted my Ministers voice, months or years, if yet he will open, I
will come in.

5. The sinners duty and interest.

1. The opening the heart when Christ knocks, that is his duty, because Christ's
invitation is his command.

2. His interest; because then Christ will come in, etc. The Doctrine was, When
Christ knocks and calls at the doors of our hearts, it is our duty and
interest, to open, admit, and let him in. These two questions were proposed and
prosecuted.

1. When, or how, is Christ said to knock and call at the hearts of sinners? 2.
How are sinners said to hear and open, Christ said to knock and call at the
hearts of sinners?
1. If you regard the means whereby he knocks, i.e. by natural light of
Conscience within, or by the Ministry and Gospel without.

2. If you regard the manner of Christ's knocking or calling, it is either
externally, by the Word, Ordinances, Providence, (his Rod has a voice as well
as his Word;) or internally, by the spirit of God that accompanies that Word,
by the means of Grace, by the motion of his Spirit.

2. How are sinners said to bear his voice, and open?

1. For hearing; it must not be an external, but an internal hearing, a hearing
of the heart, through the heart: it must be a particular, distinguishing
hearing, it must know the voice of Christ, it must be a sensible, and humble,
satisfying Hearing. 2. For Opening, it is either, 1. Special Opening, at first,
when the door is shut, those everlasting doors are at first open to entertain
the King of Glory, in our first Conversion. 2. Progressive, i. e. When the Soul
opens more and more: for there is no door, but its shut as close on him after
entrance, that it is as much as ever Christ can do to creep in. This Opening
appears, 1. In parting with, and putting away, whatever keeps possession of the
heart against Christ: The strong man must be turned out. 2. The Soul freely
consents to Christ, by an entire resignation to his Will and Spirit, to take
him upon those terms. And when Christ does thus knock and call at the door of
our hearts, it is our duty and interest thus to open admittance (...) him.


The Use was for Exhortation, to plead with poor sinners, that yet, Oh yet,
they would open to Christ Jesus knocking and calling. Arguments here these were
used: if they did not melt it, it was not because they were not powerful, but
our souls marble.

1. It is a matter of greatest importance more than your earthly Jointures; it
concerns your everlasting Souls, Souls that are more worth than ten thousand
worlds: Whether you will now believe it or no, you will hereafter.

2. Consider the Person that comes to call, who is it? It is a King that stands
a^ your door; it is the King of kings, God of gods that stands there.

3. It is he that deserves admittance, a God of abundance, superabundant love,
by his undertaking he has deserved admittance: Will you keep out your Father,
your Mother? Thou Wretch, that was rescued the other day, will thou keep out
thy Redeemer?

4. It is he that has a great love and affection for you, however you have
dealt with him; thou that brought him to Hell, yet can he never be at quiet
till he has brought thee to heaven.

5. Consider the posture, I stand; must you s^t, and I stand?

6. I have stood a long time, I have been staying and waiting for you many
years; I can reckon every day and night, I have stood and waited for you; you
would have abhorred to have waited on the greatest man in the world, as I have
waited on you, a worm; nay, I stay still waiting for you.

And this one thing sticks yet with me, I stand ready to depart; I have knocked
a great while, but now knock no more; what if this would be the last knock you
should hear? How many did knock and the last knocked, yet stand? I knock this
once more, it is very questionable, whether Christ will ever knock again, at
least, in such a wa^, and by such means, never did Christ knock louder.

7. I stand at the door, a poor cold place: I stand despised and contemned: but
besides, many in the mean time are let in, and I kept out, and that out of my
own house.

8. I stand at the door, ready to have my Patience turned into Fury: therefore
let me come in quickly.

9. I stand, I that am blessed in my self, I that can make thee infinitely
eternally blessed: I that am, etc. do stand, therefore prithee, prithee open.
What Is that? It Is, hear, and know, remember, believe and do. And this would
give me a fair retreat into my Text, If ye know these things, happy are ye if
you do them. I beseech you to consider, you have known these things, cursed,
wretched for ever are ye if ye do not do them; happy for ever if you do them.

Thus I have given you a short account of these things lately delivered to you:
you must not impute any of my weaknesses to my Reverend Brethrens labors that
went before: the God of Heaven bless you, and reward them a thousand fold. And
oh! whatever God does, keep up this exercise in the midst of us. You have
abundantly reaped Gods Spirit: I hope there is something done in this
Congregation, that Eternity it self shall never be able to blot out. I confess
this is no Fasting-day, but yet however, we may make it such a day; as, since
God is pleased to give us an Ocean, to return him some drops. Beloved, it is
very probable, that it will be the last motion that ever I shall make to you
while I live in this way; if I were now to go from my Pulpit to my Grave, this
should be the double motion I would make to you.

1. For Gods sake prize the Word of God. 2. Labor to prize the Word of God, by
the worth of it, that you may never come to prize the want of God by the want
of it. And if you would express your prizing of the Word; Never any man
repented he had given so much to a good use; doubtless my children wants it
now, or my Wife wants now, etc. And I can assure you, I think there was never
so many Thanksgivings made to God for this City of London, as for their
abundant Charity in this respect.
Mr. Craddacott's Farewell Sermon.
Phil. 4. latter part of Verse 9. -- And heard, and seen in me, do: and the God
of Peace shall be with you.
FRom this Verse we may observe three Doctrines:

That the Peoples eyes must be taught by the Ministers holiness of life, as
well as their ears by the Ministers soundness of Doctrine.

Paul did not preach one thing, and practice another; he practiced as he
preached, and he both practiced and preached the forementioned Duties in the
verse before the Text. And to this end the Lord appointed a Ministry to be
perpetuated through all Ages of the World: And it is the Lords appointment,
that the peoples ears should be taught with sour'd Doctrine, to the matter and
manner of it: and it is the Lord appointment, that the Peoples eyes should be
taught by the Minister, holiness of life, as well as their ears, by their
soundness in Doctrine; and this is necessary for the Minister himself, and
necessary for the people: No marvel then that a faithful Ministry is the Butt
of the Devils malice, of his craft and cruelty; and that the Devil has in all
Ages attempted and endeavored utterly to overthrow the Ministry, or to poison
and fly-blow it shamefully; and this is the method whereby Satan has
endeavored to fly-blow the Ministry. Why, then see the folly and madness of
those people, who affect, or cry up those Ministers, who do not teach their
people with sound Doctrine, or a holy life; and whether there be no such
Ministers, which do not teach their peoples ears with soundness of Doctrine,
or their eyes with a holy life? and whether there be not such a people as do
cry up such Ministers? and whether or no such people are not guilty of
spiritual folly and madness? judge ye.

Doct. A Ministers soundness in Doctrine, and holiness of Life and
Conversation, does lay a very great obligation on a people, to a due
conscientious practice of every commanded duty. The Apostle, we see, makes his
Preaching and Practice an argument to excite the Phillippians to the
forementioned commanded duty, as in the Text, and the verse before the Text.

As first of all, the Appellations and Titles given in Scripture, to such
Ministers whose Doctrine is sound, and whose lives and conversations are
exemplary holy.

They are called, 1. The Salt of the Earth, as Math. 5.13. read that, says
Christ to those great Teachers of the Gospel, and Dispensers of his Oracles,
and in them to their Successors. Salt has two things in it; namely, Sharpness,
and Savouriness; and thus Ministers, First, must rebuke sharply, that people
may be sound in the Faith, as Paul enjoins Titus, as in the 1. of Titus, and
13. verse. And secondly, Ministers must speak savoury things to every person,
and to every palate, that their people may be savoury both in heart and life;
but to be as unsavory as stinking Carrion in the Nostrils of the Almighty God,
under such a savoury and seasoning Ministry, this is woeful. It is the nature of
Salt, to cause barrenness where it seasoneth not; Therefore we read of
Abimelech in Judges 9. ver. 45. That be sowed the City with Salt: So that
people who live under a sharp and savoury Ministry, and are not seasoned
therewith, and preserved from putrefaction in their sin and corruption thereby,
their case is very dangerous.

They are called again, The Light of the world, in Mat. 5.14. read that. As for
their Doctrine, The Salt of the Earth; so for their lives, The Light of the
world; and they must therefore lead convincing lives, as Job. 5.35. read that:
It is there said of John the Baptist, our blessed Lord and Savior gives him
this commendatory Character, or Testimonial, That he was a burning, and a
shining light; burning in himself, and shining to others. Or, as it was said of
Basil, Thundering in his Doctrine, and Lightning in his Life and Conversation.
Now if good Ministers be the Light of the World, then hence we may infer,

1. Inference. First, That without a godly, and faithful Ministry, the World
lies in darkness, ignorance, error, sin, and misery. It is said of Galilee, in
Mat. 4.16. That the people that sat in darkness, saw great light; read that.
Why, had they not Priests and Levites? I answer, They had indeed sorry Priests,
but they had not a faithful Ministry; and therefore the Evangelist tells them,
They sat in darkness, yea, in the region and shadow of death, notwithstanding
the sorry sottish Priests they had: But when they had a faithful Ministry, they
are said to see a great light. Again, if good Ministers be the Light of the
World, then we may draw this Corollary, That to be offended at the Light of a
faithful, a powerful Ministry, argues and speaks a very sinful and wretched
frame of heart. Nothing is so excellent, but some will be displeased at it, and
with it, as Eccles. 11.7. Even the Light it self, we know is offensive to sore
eyes. And thus the burning and shining Light of a godly and faithful Ministry
is offensive and terrible to some; but who are they? Sore diseased souls, the
Lord knows. The Ark of God, which was the monument of his presence, whom did it
smite with Emrods, but the Philistims? What then, is the Alehouse more easy
to thee, than thy Pew is to thee, in this place? than a Conscience,
Soul-searching Sermon? What art thou offended at a powerful faithful Ministry?
Oh fearful Plague-tokens!

2. To do all that men can do to put out the Light, this is worse. It is the
most horrid hellish Plot that can be designed or named; and of this I am sure
the Church of Rome cannot plead Not Guilty, which, like the Scribes and
Pharisees take away from the people the Key of Knowledge, and shut up the
Kingdom of Heaven against men. How terribly does our blessed Lord
thunder-strike those stupid Pharisees for this, Mat. 23.13? And as did the
Pharisees, so did the Papists: For, 1. Heretofore they made it a moral sin to
read Gods Word. 2. Afterward, they clogged the liberty they granted with such
cautions and restrictions, as that very few escaped of those that were within
the reach of the Inquisition. 3. Those cloggs contented not, but now it is
thought fit utterly to deny liberty, and can there be a more horrible hellish
Plot assigned than this? to take from people their knowledge of salvation?
And thus the Church of Rome, whether they have Church-snuffers or not, to be
sure they have Church-extinguishers, and various means to put out the Light; Oh
fearful is this! as in Joh. 3.19, 20. That is the reason men hate the light,
because their deeds are evil.

Again, If good Ministers be the light of the world, then hence may we draw
this Conclusion, That it concerns people very nearly to believe in the light,
and to walk in the light, and to work while the light lasts; as our blessed
Savior exhorts in Joh. 12.35, 36. read that. God sets up his Ministers as
Lights, as Candles, on the Candlesticks of his Church, to awaken men, and to
light men unto eternal life: And ought not people to pray hard, and to work
hard while the light lasts? God removes many times the Candle and
Candlestick, and makes the Sun to go down at Noonday, as Amos 8.9. so darkens
the Earth at clear day. Good Ministers they are called the light of the world,
and they are called.

3. Stars, as in Rev. 3.1. And who are meant by the seven Stars, Rev. 1. ult?
they are the Angels, that is, the Ministers of the seven Churches. Now the
Stars are said to affect those inferior bodies: 1. By their influence. And
thus godly and faithful Ministers, by the influence of their lips, they feed
many with the bread of life. 2. By their regular motives of their lives, they
confirm many. 3. By the light of both they confirm many.
One while their employment is to instruct poor souls, and so they are like
stars shining in a dark winter-night; Another while they are to converse in
their courses, Judge. 5.20. Now to enjoy and live under the Ministry of such
Stars, and yet to walk in darkness, and to have fellowship with the works of
darkness, to remain unconvineed, unconverted, unhumbled, unmortified,
unfruitful, this is woeful, this is a very lamentable state.

4. They are called the Lords Messengers and Ambassadors, Mal. 2.7. and the
Ministers of the Gospel; for indeed the Ministers of the New Testament they are
no where called Priests, they are called Ambassadors for Christ, 2 Cor. 5.20.
Godly, faithful Ministers are the Lords Messengers and Ambassadors in matters
concerning the soul, the precious, immortal, never-dying soul of man, not in
the matters of this life, but for the soul. Now this is no mean employment to
treat with God for the Soul.

5. They are called the Lords Husbandmen. Gods Church is his Husbandry, 1 Cor.
3.9. and Ministers are Gods Husbandmen; naturally we are like a barren
Wilderness; Now the Lord sends his Husbandmen to those barren Wildernesses, to
make a fruitful Paradise: Now for Gods Husbandmen to plow, sow, and harrow, and
yet no fruit, no crop, Isa 5.6, When Gods Vineyard brought forth no fruit, I
will take away all their rainy clouds, says God, you shall have clouds, but
you shall have clouds without rain; you shall have Ministers still, but such as
shall never do your souls any good.

Well, you see the Titles given to them in Scripture; they are called the Salt
of the Earth, and the Light of the World, and Scars, and the Lords Messengers
and Ambassadors, and Husbandmen; all which does import a very great obligation
lying on a people, who live under such a Ministry, and who live under, and
practice every commanded duty.

2. Inference. Secondly, Dangerous and fearful is the state of those, who have
enjoyed, and lived under, and have not been wrought upon by such a Ministry.
And this will appear, if we consider,

1. How fearful a sentence the Lord Jesus Christ has given to those that live
under, but despise, and profit not by the Ministry of his faithful Servants,
Mat. 10.14, 15. And do not think that Christ said this touching the Ministry of
the Apostles only, certainly the Lord Christ would have it to be understood of
the Ministry of all his faithful Servants, whom he sends to teach his people,
Joh. 13.20. whomsoever he sends; and so, He that despises whom ever I send,
despises me. Then is the Message of the Lords faithful Messengers received
aright, when people do not only hear it, but receive it, and bring forth fruit,
as our blessed Lord speaks of good hearers, Mark 4.20. Those are they that hear
and receive the fruits sown in good ground. And thus our blessed Lord expounds
himself, Mat. 11.24. he tells us there, that they of Capernaum shall be in a
worse case than they of Sodom and Gomorrah; and why? because they repented not
at Christ's Sermons and Miracles; they were not to be seen in their lives,
notwithstanding Christ's Ministry, notwithstanding Christ's preaching, and his
mira^^^s among them, they did not amend their hearts and ways: O how fea^^^l a
sentence has our Lord Jesus Christ denounced against such!

2. If a People be not wrought upon by such a Ministry, what hope can such a
People have, that any thing should do their souls any good? For is not the
Ministry of Gods faithful Servants, the power of God to salvation, and the
ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8? That is, that Ministry whereby the
spirit of grace and holiness is infused into the hearts of the Fathers chosen
ones in Christ Jesus. The Poe^s speak of excellent Musicians, who, by the power
of their Music, made stones to leap into a wall. A godly faithful Ministry
has done more, it has taken the stone out of man's heart, and has given them
new hearts; it has made all the Commandments of God easy to ma^p a poor
soul, because it loves its Father, its Redeemer, and Comfo^ter. There is a kind
of obedience in a godly faithful Minister; and if this will not do, nothing
will, as in Luke 16.31.

3. Is not the cause of the non-proficiency of such a people, under such a
Ministry, in themselves? Oh men do hinder the fruit of the Word in their own
souls, the powerful operation and working of the Word on their own souls! The
Lord prophesies that sentence on the Jews, Mat. 13.14. ^e lays all the blame on
themselves, and assigns their own sins as the reason and cause of it, as in
Verse 13. And thus our blessed Savior expounds the Parable of the Sower,
showing how many that hear the Word, are never the better for it; and he lays
the blame on themselves, as in Luke 8.14. What then, have thou not profited
under the Ministry of the Lords faithful Servant? Oh lay the blame on thy self.

4. Consider, Has not the Lord himself a hand in the proficiency, or
non-proficiency under such a M^nistry? Surely the Lord has a chief hand in
making the Ministry of his Servants fruitful, or not fruitful, to them that
enjoy it. Now to enjoy, and not to enjoy, is it not a fearful sign, that you
are not of God? as John 8.47. Is it not a sign, that thou are not of Gods
elect, at least of Regeneration? But you will say, Did not the Jews hear Gods
Word? Yes, they did, with their bodily ears; but they heard it not with says,
submission, and fruitfulness; and therefore our blessed Savior tells them, they
were not of God, that is, they were at least in an unregenerate, if not in a
reprobate condition. And so Joh. 10.26. Ye are those Goats (says Christ) that
must stand at my left hand in that great day; and then Unbelievers shall
reflect on themselves, not on Christ's Ministry, by the mouths of his Servants.

But if any should say, What then, will you say that all of us are Reprobates,
that are not wrought on by your Ministry? I say not so; for that seed which
has been sown on you, may ^o your souls good hereafter, though it has done
them little or no goo^ as yet. But secondly, that I may boldly say, That if any
of you dye in your present state, unconverted, unregenerate, you will carry
with you to your grave, as fearful marks of reprobation, as we can find any in
the whole Book of God. John Baptist compares the Ministry o^ the Gospel to a
Fan, in Mat. 3.12. When the Lord Jesus makes use of the Ministry of his
faithful Servants among the people, when he makes use of those Fans, it will
appear who among them are Wheat, and shall be gathered into the Lords Garner;
and who among them are Chaff, and shall be cast into fire. And now, whether the
present state that you have lived under, and are not yet wrought upon by a
faithful Ministry, be not very dangerous, judge ye? And so much may suffice for
the Doctrinal part.

If so be then, That a Ministers soundness in Doctrine, and holiness of sife
and conversation, does lay a great Obligation on a people, conscienciously and
duly to practice every commanded duty. Then first of all, the first Use we
shall make of this Doctrine, shall be by way of Trial and Examination, and that
in two particulars.

First, Whether you in this Parish, in this place, you here before the Lord, 1.
Branch of the Use of Trial.
do make conscience of the due practice of every commanded duty. Secondly,
Whether the Ministry you have enjoyed, and lived under, does not lay a great
Obligation on you so to do?
For the first of these, Whether you here before the Lord, do make conscience
of the due practice of every commanded duty, in obedience to Almighty God? you
may try your selves by these three excellent Ingredients.

First, Universality; Can thou in the witness of thy conscience say, that
through grace thou do every, as well as any part of the Lords revealed Will,
so far as thou know it?

2. Uniformity; Do thou do all without prejudice or partiality?

3. Vbiquity; Art thou the same at home as abroad? in thy Closet, as well as in
the Congregation? and do thou mind inward and secret, as well as open and
outward holiness? What says Conscience to this?

As first, Have commanded Duties a Throne in your own Souls and Conscience?
Secondly, Have they a Throne in thy Family?

First, Have commanded Duties a Throne in your own souls and consciences? Are
your hearts fully possessed with the power of those divine and heavenly Truths,
which you have often heard, which has been again and again inculcated upon
you, as it was upon the Thessalonians, 1 These. 1.5? their carnal principles
were confuted, their passions moderated, their Iusts mortified, their self ends
confounded; are yours so? Have commanded Duties a Throne in your souls and
consciences? Oh that all your consciences could give a satisfying answer to
this Query.

Secondly, Have commanded Duties a Throne in your Families? Do you make
conscience of Family Duties? Are your houses Bethels, that is, houses of God,
house^ (...) Prayer? Are your habitations of holiness and righteousness? Do you
make conscience of relative, as well as of personal duties? Oh that all your
consciences could give a satisfying answer to this Query!

2. Branch of the Use of Trial.
But now the second Branch of this Use of Trial and Examination is this, Whether
the Ministry you have enjoyed, and lived under, does not lay a very great
Obligation on you, to put in execution every commanded Duty, as Romans 10.6, 7,
8. that is, the Word of Faith we preach; read that place. And may not we take
up that with some variation, and say, You have heard of the disease, the misery
and remedy. When the great God shall arraign thee at the great and fearful Day,
and shall say thus, Thou rebellious Wretch, why did thou not forsake thy evil
ways, thy drunkenness, thy tippling, thy covetousness, thy snuffling at Purity;
thy inveterate heart and spirit against my holy ways and Ministers? why did
thou not forsake thy evil ways? will thou be able to say, Lord, I lived under,
1. A soul-betraying, non-resident Minister, one that made it his business to
fleece indeed, not to feed the flock: Or 2. under a soul-poysoning Innovator:
Or 3. under a soul-pining dry Nurse: Or 4. under a soulguiding Guide: Or 5.
under a soul-unsetling Temporizer: Or 6. under a soul-destroying
Discountenancer.


1. Can thou say that thou live under a soul-betraying, non-resident
Minister, one that made it his business to fleece, and not to feed the flock?
one that looked after the wool and fat of the flock: the fleece, but never
minded the flock: but non-residency has been hitherto decryed, as that as
breeds a Minister idle and erroneous, or licentious? but will thou be able to
say, Lord, I lived under such a Minister, that was a soul-betraying Minister,
one that was greedy of Livings, and had perhaps two, or three, or four, but so
bad a man, that the worst was too good for him? or will thou be able to plead?
or can thou say,

2. Lord, I lived under a soul-poysoning Innovator, one that was for formality
more than reality of true Worship; one that preached such Doctrine as did not
season, but poison and destroy the souls of his Hearers: such are Romish
Teachers, Jesuits, Priests and Seminaries, who so affect the outward pomp, as
they neglect the inward power of it? Will thou be able to say, Lord, I have
lived under the Ministry of such an one, who was more zealous for the formality
of thy worship, than the reality: more zealous for those things that will not
endure the trial of the Lords day of appearance, than for the substance of
Religion? Or,

3. Can thou plead that thou have lived under a soul-pining dry Nurse, one
that did not, nor could not feed us with the sincere milk of the Word: one from
whom thou never heardest a soul-solid, a soul-working Sermon all thy life? I
appeal to your Consciences, have you not heard often of your miseries, and Gods
mercy, and Christ's merits? Have you not heard often of the necessity of a holy
life? Oh the convictions, informations, exhortations, persuasions, directions,
you have enjoyed and lived under! Has not thy state by nature been ripped up,
and the Anatomy, (not of the Council of Trent) but of Gods Book, been showed to
thee? What shall I say, Has not Hell and Damnation to all rebellious, and
Heaven and Salvation to all true penitent Souls been preached unto you?

4. Or can thou say that thou livedst under a Soul-misguiding Guide, as 1. A
blind Seer, a blind Watchman, a blind Leader of the blind, one who knew not
Heavens way? Can thou say thou livedst under such a Creature that is not to
be found in Christ's Catalogue, an Idol-preacher, as in Psalm. 135.16, 17.
verses, read that. Or 2. If not ignorant, yet one so Vicious, that he pulled
down more with his foul hands, than he built up with his fair tongue? Can
thou say thou livedst under one, who by his Conversation gave his Doctrine the
lie? Will thou be able to plead thus at the great day? or will thou be able to
say,

5. That thou have lived under a Soul-unsetling Temporizer. What would he not
do, rather than he would lose his Living? which made me think Religion to be
but a fantasy. Will thou be able to say at the great day, Lord, it was my sad
lot and portion to live under the Ministry of such a one, who turned his
Fiddle to the times of every one? I, Or

Lastly, will thou be able to say thou livedst under a Soul-destroying
discountenancer of all purity and holiness; one (perhaps) though no Dunce, or
Drunkard, yet a profane scoffer; one that preached holiness, out of his
Pulpit, and Parish, and House, and the like.

But first of all, we can through grace, appeal in this case both to the Lord,
and to your selves, that it has not been so with you.

2. Consider how inexcusable you will be, if you live and die in your
ignorance, impenitency, and unbelief.

1. Consider, we can in this case appeal both to the Lord, and to your selves.
1. To the Lord; we are able with an humble boldness to appeal to him, and say,
Lord, thou know we have given this people warning, Ezekiel. 3.18. Now blessed
be the Lord, we can humbly appeal to his Majesty, O Lord, thou know we have
warned the wicked to turn from his wicked way, and the profane from his
profaneness, and the superstitious from his superstition, and the schismatical
from his schism, and the formal from his formality, and the civil honest man
from resting in his mortality. O blessed be thy name, we have endeavored to
take off this people from all their Sandy, quagmiry Foundations? Lord, thou
know our Prayers for them. And so,

2. To appeal to you: And this was a very great comfort to St. Paul, that he
could appeal to the people themselves, as Acts 20.26, 27. This was a great
comfort to him: and blessed be the God of Grace, it is a great comfort to us,
that we can take you to record, that we are pure from your blood, we have not
ceased to declare all that the Father has shown to us; we have not been
afrighted by any man, or men's frowns, nor debauched to conceal any part thereof
by any man's smile.

2 Consider how inexcusable you will be, if you live and dye in your ignorance,
impenitency, and unbelief, Ezekiel. 3.10. Observe it, if you miscarry for
eternity, the blood of your souls will not be charged on us; Nay, it will be on
your own heads; And therefore the Apostle Paul, when he preached Christ to the
Jews, and they opposed and blasphemed, their blood was upon their own heads, as
Acts 18.5, 6. Oh consider it! if your Ministers have been faithful, they are
clear, and free, and guiltless; the Lord will never charge the blood of souls
on them. Consider it therefore, how speechless will you be at the great day, if
you live and die in your sins? may not the Lord say of this place, as he did of
Capernaum, Mat. 11.23. For thou have enjoyed the Ministry of many of my
Servants. Dare any of you meet us in the day of Judgment, under whose Ministry
you have lived in an unregenerate estate, and say that you have lived under a
soul-betraying, non-resident one; or under a soul-poysoning Innovator; or a
soul-pining dry-Nurse; or a soul-misguiding guide, or a soul-unsetled
Temporizer; or a soul-destroying discountenancer, in an unregenerate estare?
the Lord will then make you to know what it was to have a faithful Labourer
among you, as Ezekiel. 33.33. Then, when you shall be convinced in your own
Consciences, you shall then say, You heard all those things, and we cannot say
we were unwarned, either in sin or danger; we had preceptaton precept, but we
slighted all warning, and exhortion, and direction; therefore now are lost and
undone everlastingly. So much may serve for the first Use.

The second Use is a Use of Direction, which will fall into many very suitable
and practical particulars, whereto I do beseech you to hearken unto, as the
words of a dying man do commonly take the deepest impression on the surviving
hearts. Now this may be, for all that I know, my last words to you in this
place, therefore I beseech you to hear me: An interruption, a suspension of my
weak worthless pains and labor among you there will be, for any thing I know,
from this day; but observe, it is no resignation from me, or my Reverend
Brother; and therefore what other dissolution of the property and relation
between your Pastor and you, there may be, as of that mutual intercourse, I
shall not account, o^ call it forfeiture of his place, whatever others may call
it, let them call it what they will. Then hearken to my words, as the words of
a dying man, yet not dead, but alive, and perhaps shall not die, but live, and
declare the Word of the Lord, and hold forth the Word of the Lord to you many a
time in this place, whenever it pleases God to set open a door for me.

If it be so, That the Ministers foundness in Doctrine, and holiness of life
and conversation, do lay great obligation on a people, duly and conscienciously
to practice every commanded duty; Then from this Doctrine I would suggest and
leave with you several words and hints of counsel: And on that the Lord God of
Heaven, would effectually engage and set them home on every one of our hearts.

My first Counsel is this, That when the Lord takes away such Ministers whose
Doctrine is sound, and their lives exemplary holy, you would then be duly
apprehensive, and deeply sensible, both of the inflicting cause, and also of
the meritorious deserving cause thereof.

1. For the inflicting cause: and that is the Lord himself, Isa. 3.1, 2, Who is
it that takes away from the people the natural staff, and the civil staff, the
spiritual staff, says the Prophet? The Lord, the Lord of Hosts. Whoever it be
that is the Instrument, it is certain, it is the Lord himself that is the
principal efficient cause of this judgment on a people; and this will appear,
if we consider.

1. The Lord has threatened this judgment on a rebellious people, Amos 8.11,
12. I (says the Lord) will bring this judgment on them. A most dreadful
spiritual judgment! Gods Word is the spiritual food of our spiritual lives; and
therefore, as the granting of it is a blessing indeed, so the withholding of
it is a judgment. This ireful, dreadful judgment of the Lord, we see,
threatens; yea, that is not all, the Lord has not oly threatened it, but

2. Inflicted it; as the Lord takes away his faithful Messengers and
Ambassadors.

1. Sometimes by death, out of the world, out of the Land of the living. And
thus the Lord took away the Prophet Enoch, Genesis 5.24. And, 2. Sometimes by
removal. Thus the Lord took away the Prophet Jonas from Israel, and sent him to
Niniveb, as Jona 1.2. And thus Paul and Barnabas went away from the Jews, and
turned to the Gentiles, as Acts 13.4. 3. Sometimes by deprivation. A time there
was, when the good Priests and Levites were forced to flee their own places and
possessions, 2 Chronicles. 11.13, 14. 4. Sometimes by suspension. Thus a time there
was, when it was said to the Seors, see not, and to the Prophets, prophecy
not, Isa. 30.9, 10. Thus a time there was, when people would have Pastors, but
would not endure faithful Jeremiah; and a time there was, that there was a Law
made, Look ye speak no more in the name of Jesus, Act 4.11. And a time there
was when Paul and Timotheus, and Silvanus, were forbid to preach to the
Gentiles, 1 Thessalonians. 2.15.16. Thus we see the Lord himself has inflicted this
dreadful Judgment on a people: and the Lord has diverse ways, and methods, and
means to inflict it.
3. Consider, The Church and people of the Lord has been very sensible of the
Lords hand in this judgment, as we may see in Psalm. 74.1. and 9. verses
compared. Why, what is the matter? as if they have said, God was wont
heretofore to give us signs and tokens, he would even work miracles for us; the
Lord would send us some Prophets to converse with, and instruct us; we had
those that could tell us how long our troubles should last; but now we see no
sign, the Lord leaves us as it were to the wide world, and how sensible was
the Lords Church in this judgment? as ver. 1. of that Psalm. This is the first
endeavor, We are to be duly sensible, and deeply apprehensive of the
afflicting cause of such a judgment; and that is the Lord himself.

2. Of the meritorious Cause, and that is sin. Say not we, it is long of such
and such, but it is long of our selves, we may thank our selves for this, and
we appeal to your selves, whether this judgment may not be charged?

1. From the general inflexibleness and untractableness of people under the
Ministry of the Word: For this very cause the Lord plagued and poured his
vengeance upon the ten Tribes, as in 2 Kings 17. from v. 13. to 19. The Lord
testified against Isreal by all the Prophets, and by all the Sters, saying,
Turn you from your evil ways, notwithstanding they will not hear. And for this
very cause did the Lord afterward plague all Judah, as Jer. 20.17, 18, 19. And
for this very reason did the Lord Jesus Christ remove Paul from Jerusalem,
because the people were a stiff-necked people, and they would not receive Paul's
testimony concerning Jesus, as Acts 22*18. Paul had a great desire to stay at
Jerusalem, as appeared by his reasoning with the Lord, as ver. 9, 20. But what
says the Lord Christ, ver. 21. Now can England, can London, plead not guilty
of this heinous provocation, a general inflexibleness, untractableness under a
Conscience-ransacking, a Conscience-searching Ministry. What shall the Lord do
with such a people, under such a Minister? Is it not just with God to let them
alone that are profane and superstitious? Let there be like People, like
Priests? Let the blind lead the blind, and let the wicked rebellious Minister
lead a wicked, loose people, that both may perish together everlastingly.

2. The unfruitfulness, formality, l^ke-warmness, declining of Gods own people;
and for this the Lord threatens the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2.4, 5. I have
(says Christ) somewhat against thee, thou have left thy first love; though not
absolutely for nature, yet eminent for measure: And can England, can London
plead not guilty of this sad provocation? Now indeed we cannot but observe, and
approve of your flocking to the Lords Ordinances, as Doves to the holes of a
Window; but did you do so some Months agone? Oh your voluntary and fearful
distractions, avocations, diversions from the Worship and Service of God! And
is it not just with the Lord to take away that abundance, and choice of
Spiritual helps a people had, when they approved not of them; yea, when they
undervalued, and despised, and abused them? Oh the Lord God help us all to
affect our souls, and lay our selves low before his All-seeing Majesty, for our
provoking him to do this! and endeavor to be duly apprehensive, and deeply
sensible of the inflicting cause, and meritorious cause thereof.

2. Take heed of a profane delight in loose, lewd, wicked, dissolute
Ministers. And here we will premise two or three things. 1. Too many people are
too ready to cavil at many Ministers without a cause.

The life of our blessed Lord and Savior, was it not traduced? Did not some
say he was a friend to Publicans and Sinners? We see Christ was cavilled at,
and quarrelled with by some: And thus the holy Apostles, their lives were
traduced, they went through evil report, as well as good report, 2 Cor. 10.2.
And thus Athanasius, who was traduced for an Adulterer by the Arians; and so
Luther and Calvin are represented and reported by the Papists, as if they had
been the vilest Creatures in the World. The wicked man cavils at, and finds
spots (at least does what he can to find spots) in the Sun; and some, who are
not so wicked: do look for an Evangelical perfection in Ministers, and all
theirs, their Wives, and their Children, and their Servants, and their Company:
How ready are people grossly and uncharitably to censure a Minister for any,
yea, the least they discern in him, or his; and is this their Virtue? nay, is
it not their Vice and Corruption?

2. It is no breach of the Churches peace, no argument of a contentious and
unquiet spirit in a Minister, to speak vilely of vile Ministers, and enemies of
the Churches peace. Why, who are they? John Baptist tells us, he calls them
Vipers, a generation of Vipers: why, were they not Preachers? Mat. 3.7. And
will you say that John Baptist was a man of a contentious Spirit, of an unquiet
Spirit? And who were they whom our blessed Savior calls a Generation of
Vipers? Mat. 12.34, 38, 39. And who were they whom our Savior calls a
Generation of Vipers, and an evil and Adulterous Generation? were they not
Preachers? and it is very observable, both John Baptist, and our Savior did
call those Preachers thus, even in the hearing of them who were their ordinary
hearers; and do but observe what strange terms of disgrace St. Peter gives
them, 2 Peter 2.12. to certain Preachers in his time, verse 14. what strange
terms does the Apostle give to those Teachers, whose pernicious ways many
would follow, as in verse 2. of that Chapter. But did not the Scribes and
Pharisees sit in Moses's Chair? and did they not preach some good Doctrine?
insomuch that Jesus Christ bids the people hear them, and observe what they
said, though not what they did, as Mat. 23.1, 2, 3. Therefore may some say: It
seems strange that Christ should thus disgrace the Scribes and Pharisees; was
not this the way to make their Ministry contemptible?

First, It is very clear and undeniable, that there was a Generation of pitiful
sorry Teachers, as in Mat. 9.36. Why, did not the people enjoy the Teaching of
the Scribes and Pharisees; yes, they did; but the Scribes and Pharisees were
Idol-Shepherds, they knew how to feed their Flock, and therefore Christ looked
on the people as Sheep scattered abroad, for all the Scribes and Pharisees.
They did not understand that there was heart-murder, or heart-adultery, until
our blessed Savior instructed them: The Scribes and Pharisees, they did but
strike at the bough only, but our Savior Preached with authority, and not as
the Scribes did. And withal, I answer,

2. That beyond all peradventure, our blessed Savior saw, that although the
Scribes and Pharisees did teach some truths, yet by their Life and Doctrine
they did more mischief than good; and therefore the more credit they had among
the people, the more mischief they were like to do: And therefore from hence
our blessed Lord and Savior calls them a Generation of Vipers. But I hope you
will not count it an argument of the breach of the Churches peace, to speak
vilely of a vile Ministry; It was no more than John Baptist did, and than our
Savior did.

Thirdly, No man's sin deserves so sharply to be reproved, as the sins of
Ministers; because his sins of all others, are the chief sins committed in a
Land; at the Sanctuary of profaneness too too often begins.

Therefore when Gods people met in their public Fasts, they made solemn
Confession of those sins of the first Magnitude, by which they had most
provoked the Lord; they do make Confession chiefly of the sins of their
Magistrates and Ministers, Neh. 9.33, 34. The Jews there bewailed the sins of
their Magistrates and Ministers, as the particular cause of their plagues. Oh
the sins of Teachers are the Teachers of sin, and therefore no man's sin
deserves to be so sharply reproved, as the scandalous sins of Min isters. Now
if you love your souls, take heed and beware of a profane, delight in lewd,
loose, dissolute Ministers. We sind the Lord complaining of the wickedness of
the Prophets, and of the Priests and People, as Jer. 5 ult. the people, did
take a profane delight in false Prophets, and in polluted Priests; and so
likewise in the Prophet Micah, chap. 2. v. 11. the people, although they did
oppose the Prophet Micah, and other true Prophets, yet they did approve of and
delight in false Prophets, such as were of their own leaven, their own way and
mould, such as would flatter them, and promise them wine and strong drink: and
are there not many such people in the world, that had rather hear such a
Minister, than such as preach close-walking with God, and of getting to Heaven
under pain of damnation? Will you cry up, and will you profanely delight in a
Ministry that shall preach peace, peace to all profane rebellious people; in
short, such a one that will poison you in Doctrine, or in his example.

Fourthly, Take heed and beware of a sinful Idolizing of godly, faithful
Ministers; the Apostle decries this with much zeal, ardency, and servency of
Spirit; what is Paul's planting, and what is Apollo's watering? 1 Cor. 3.5, 6.
As excellent gifts, parts, and graces as these men had, yet they look higher:
so it is your duty to look above men's parts, and above men's gifts and graces;
Paul and Apollo cannot give increase; Paul indeed may plant, but there is no
rooting indeed in these plants, but by christ. And read v. 7. It is God and he
only that can give increase: As Elisha's Servant could carry his Masters staff
and lay it on the dead child, but the child could not be raised to life, until
Elisha came himself; thus godly faithful Ministers can but lay Gods Message
before you, but unless the Lord set it to the heart, never a dead Soul can be
raised from the death of sin, to the life of grace and holiness. Remember godly
and faithful Ministers, although they have the Lords Sword, yet they have not
the Lord Christ's arm; and alas, what can the Lord Christ's Sword do without his
Arm.

Fifthly, Take heed of being leavened with prejudice against the Ministry of
the Word, because of the misdemeanors or miscarriage of the Minister. Surely
the efficacy of the Word and Sacrament does not depend on the quality of the
Minister. It is the Word of the Lord that converts, not the person of the
Dispenser or Speaker. A seed that is fown in a good soil, may, yea will grow
and thrive, although perhaps the Sower had a very dirty hand, 2 Cor. 3.2, 3.
The Apostle tells the Corinthians, that they are, says he, The Epittle of
Christ's Ministry by us; the hand is Christ's, Ministers are but the Pen. Hence
it was, that the Ministry of the Scribes and Pharisees was not to be rejected,
but to be esteemed; so long as they sailed not in the substance thereof, and
hence the Apostle rejoices that Christ was preached of the false Apostles,
Phil. 1.15, 16, 17, 18. though out of envy; take heed therefore and beware of a
total separation from disserting of, and forsaking Church Assemblies; and yet I
conceive it is a very rare thing for unconverted Ministers to convert some. For
what says the Lord by the Prophet Zephaniah, Zeph. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. Ob says the
Lord to Jerusalem, that has such Prophets and such Priests, woe to such a
City, to such a Country, to such a Parish. And what says Christ himself in
Mat. 15.14. Let them alone; oft-times it falls out so, that it made Archbishop
Abbot speak in a Lecture of his, and profess, that his heart did even bleed
within him, to think of the precious Souls of many people, who had such
Ministers, that if they had not been in the Ministry, they would not have been
fit Hogherds for Swine. And yet we must remember not to tie the efficacy of the
Word and Sacraments, to the goodness or badness of a Ministers person.

Sixthly, Take heed and beware of being leavened with prejudice against all
Ministers, because of the Vileness, and monster-like unbeseeming Carriage of
some Ministers. It has been granted over and over that some Ministers evil,
licentious Carriage and Conversations, are notorious; the Lord knows, too many
Ministers have Esau's hands with Jacob's voice; what then, must this redound to
the general disgrace of all Ministers? because some Professors of the Law live
lawless, must therefore all be censured and cuodemned for the lawless Livers?
because Judas was a Devil, and a Son of Perdition, will you therefore say that
all the Disciples of Christ were naught? Perhaps you do know some Sir John's,
some blind Seers, some blind Watchmen, who know nor Heavens way, some blind
Droans; or secondly, some that carry themselves insolently, as Jer. 20.1, 2.
Pasher did: or thirdly, some that are too too like that evil servant in the
Gospel, as Luke 12.45. or perhaps you know: Fourthly, Some apostarizing
Demas's, who embrace this present world and revolt from their principles and
profession, as 2 Timothy 4.10. Or perhaps you know, filthy, some aspiring and
climbing Diotrephes, as 3 John 9. perhaps you know some such as these I have
instanced, what then? is there any Profession as it were, but it ha^h a certain
seum? wh^ then in the face of some, who through grace are free from these
miscarriages, take heed and beware of being leavened with prejudice against all
Ministers, because of the vileness and miscarriage of some.

Seventhly, Be earnest with the Lord for a godly, faithful Ministry, whose
labor and pains among the people the Lord uses to bless; The Lord Jesus
Christ is the greatest Patron of all Livings, as a reverend man now in Heaven,
once said; He can present whom he will to a parish, and he can restore whom he
will to their people, as Acts 12.5, 6, 7. as he did Peter out of Prison by the
peoples prayers; and thus when Paul was in prison at Rome, observe how he
writes to Philemon, in v. 22. of his Epistle, and thus when the Author of the
Hebrews was restrained from preaching, observe what an Exhortation he uses,
Heb. 13.12.18. Oh pray therefore! pray for godly faithful Ministers; their
pains, their labors, the Lord uses to bless among a people, as Mal. 26. we
read that the Lord blessed the labors of Levi, so that he was an instrument in
the Lords hands to turn wicked men from their iniquities; and v. 5. so it was
said of Barnabas, that by his Ministry, much people were added to the Lord,
Acts 11.24. And if we would have godly faithful Ministers; as we must pray for
them, so we must first repent us of our sins, Jer. 3.14, 15. repent we must for
our sins, and particularly our contempt of the Ordinances and worship of God.
Secondly, We must prize the Gospel more than we have done; the Gospel loves to
come and stay where it is welcome. Of all the 7 Churches of Asia, the Church of
Philadelphia was the best, that Church used the word best, and that Church
enjoyed the word longest. Be earnest with the Lord for godly faithful
Ministers, whose pains and labors among the people the Lord uses to bless and
prosper.

7. Be earnest with the Lord, that the refining work of a National-Reformation,
a City, a Country, a Family-Reformation, a Personal-Reformation, may begin at
the refining and purging of Ministers. None will deny, but that there is a
great need of a Reformation; there is none of you but will confess, that the
Seed of Leaven had need sometimes to be winnowed out from amongst us, as 2 Chronicles. 29.48. Hezekiah began at the Priests and Levites, Hezekiah began his
reformation at them; and thus at our first reformation, the Protestants, did
then affirm, that there could never be any good reformation, unless they begun
at the Court of Rome: and it is very observable, that when the Prophet speaks
of the Lord Christ's coming as a refining fire, and as Fullars soap; this also
is prophesied of refining the Sons of Levi, Mal. 2.2. when he shall purify the
Sons of Levi, when he shall purge them as Gold and Silver; as it was in Judah,
in the reign of that good King Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 29.34. The Priests were too
few there; and as it was in Judah then, whether it be not so in England now I
affirm not, but leave you to judge. But a Ministers soundness in Dectrine, and
holiness of Life and Conversation, should lay a great obligation on a people,
duly and conscienciously to practice every command to duty. And this may
suffice for the second Doctrine. Come we now to the third Doctrine, deducable
to be handled from this Text, and that is, That in the due practice of
commanded duties, Gods People may may warrantably and confidently expect much
of the gracious presence of the God of peace, even in the worst of times. These
things think on, says the Apostle, v. 8. These things do, says the Apostle in
the Text, and what then? The God of Peace shall be with you. In the due
practice of commanded duries, Gods people may confidently expect much of the
gracious presence of the God of peace in the worst of times; then take counsel
from this Doctrine, that you may have the gracious presence of the God of peace
with you; and if this Pulpit were my deathbed, I should give such counsel as
this following to you.

First, Crown the Prince of Peace, the Lord Jesus Christ in your hearts and
lives; I say, Crown the Prince of Peace, the Lord Jesus Christ, in your hearts
and lives; receive him as your Lord and King, set a Crown on his head here in
your hearts and lives, and he will crown you with peace in this life, and set a
crown of Glory, a crown of Immortality on your heads in the life to come. If
you have Christ, you have all things, all heavenly graces, and spiritual
comforts, all temporal blessings; if you have Christ, God will and can give you
all things that are good for you; without Christ you are not, and you can do
nothing that is acceptable to God. Therefore this is my first counsel to you,
Crown the Prince of Peace, the Lord Jesus Christ in your hearrs and lives.

Secondly, Then maintain a constant, and a conscientious intimate communion
with the God of peace. It was good counsel which Eliphas gave to Job, Job
22.21. Would you have much of the preseuce of the God of peace? Oh! then
frequently fall down and lie at the footstool of the Lords Throne, for grace
and for peace; and when you do so, be not unmindful of us, who have been often
your mouths to God, and Gods mouth to you. And to engage and encourage you
herein, consider.

First, The Lord Jesus Christ has promised to be with his poor Ministers
always, even to the end of the world. Mat. 28. ult. If always, not in the
Pulpit only; no, the Lord has promised to be with his faithful Servant, out of
the Pulpit, as well as in the Pulpit; in the prison sealing the truth, as well
in the Pulpit preaching the truth? Oh then will you put this in suit by prayer,
that the Lord Christ will be with his poor Ministers to the end of the world.

Secondly, We shall not fail to pray for you, 1. Sam. 12.23. Our sequestring
from our preaching-work from you, will give us advantage to lay our more time
to fetch sighs from our hearts in praying-work for you; and I trust the Lord
will give us hearts, so to improve our time for you, as Samuel said, so God
forbid we should sin against the Lord in c^^sing to pray for you, as Peter did
to the people with a promise, as 1 Pet. 5.10. And not only for you. But

Secondly, Even for such as have treated us somewhat uncivilly and unkindly, to
say no more of them, although their number be very inconsiderable; but such I
trust we shall not forget in our prayers: As Moses fell down on his face for
the children of Israel, when they treated him very unkindly, and spit in his
face; I trust we shall not forget Moses's prayer for the people: and so when
they daueed before their Idol, Jeremiab wept for those in his time, as Jer.
13.17. And that we shall not for get Jeremiah weeping for you: And I trust
likewise, that we shall remember Stephen being on his knees for his
Persecutors, pouring out his life and prayer together, Acts 7.60. I doubt not
but my reverend Brother, and my self shall remember Paul's willingness to spend,
and to be spent both in prayer and preaching for you all. Though the more
abundantly he loved, the less he was beloved, 2 Cor. 12.15.

Thirdly, Maintain and nourish all tenderness in your Conscience all your
days: Oh! go not without, much less against the dictates of Conscience, rebel
not against the light of it; beware of stifling and suppressing a warning
Conscience, lest a warning Conscience prove a gnawing Conscience, and prove a
tormenting Conscience. And consider. First, Remorse of Conscience, has an eye
against all sin past. Secondly, Tenderness of Conscience, which has an eye to
all fin to come. Take heed then of all calmness of heart.

Fourthly, Take heed of Apostatizing. Chrysostom has a notable saying,
namely, That Ministers have a greater trouble, because they never find their
work as they leave it, as other workmen do. Oh! in how short a time does a poor
Minister find all his work put out of frame and order? Did not Moses find it
so? Exodus 32.8. Moses had no sooner turned his back as as it were, but the
People were turned out of Gods way, of worship: And did not Paul find it so?
Gal. 1.6. The Galathians were quickly removed, Paul was but lately gone from
them, and they were quickly apostatized. Now this comes to pass;

First, It is by reason of a crafty, subtle, deceitful Devil, as in the Gospel
we read, While men slept, the enemy came and sowed tares, Mat. 13.25. And who
this Enemy is, we may see in Christ's expounding the Parable, ver. 39.

And secondly, Partly by reason of men's own deceitful hearts, as Heb. 3 12.
observe it. There is an evil heart of unbelief in the best, it dwells in the
best, but it raigns in the wicked; And what is that? one of these evil hearts
of unbelief, in apostatizing, in departing from the living God.

Thirdly, It is partly by reason of deceitful Workers, as the Apostle calls
false Apostles. It is partly by reason of such: Then take heed of Apostatizing,
either from truth of Doctrine, purity of Worship, or practice of Conversation.

First, From truth of Doctrine. Be not weary of old Truths; take heed, and
beware of itching after novel Doctrines; take heed and beware of admiring this
or that Opinion, which, as new Lights, drop down from Heaven, but indeed is but
as the smoke of the bottomless pit.

Secondly, From purity of Worship also. Let not your zeal be cold, but kindled
against every bracelet of the Sca^let-whore. How often does the Apostle call
the People Adulterers, and Adulteresses, because they Apostatize from the Word
and Worship of God.

Thirdly, In Practice and Conversation. Pri^e the Gospel, love it, and live
accordingly to it: With constancy look on every motion of thy soul, and every
action of thy life is a step of life, or a step to death; as a step toward
Heaven, or a step to Hell, Heb. 10 31. To close this Counsel, the Author of the
Hebrews brings in the Lord protesting against Apostatizing. If any man draw
back from Gospel-principles, and Gospel Worship, or from a Gospel-conversation,
says the Lord, If any man draw back thus, my soul shall have no pleasure in
him. Tremble then at this, thou Apostatizer, whoever thou art, where ever thou
fittest or stand, My soul shall have no pleasure in thee. I loath and
abominate that person, says the Lord.

5. All of you then study peace, and particularly you who do unfeignedly set
your hearts and faces toward Heaven, study peace and follow after it; though
it run from you, pursue after it. You profess your selves to be them that are
truly searing God, and truly honoring the King, and truly loving one another;
Oh then seek peace.

You who do unfeignedly set your hearts and faces toward. Heaven, study peace
always, and decline all dividing principles and practices among you; and that
you may not either breed or feed circumstantial differences, or substantial
divisions, consider, God is the God of peace, our Savior is the Prince of
peace, our Comforter is the Comforter of peace, our Calling is the Calling of
peace, our Way is the Way of Peace. Oh that we may so live in Peace, that the
God of Love and Peace may dwell with us; and that the God of Peace may live
with us here, that we may live with the God of Peace hereafter!

Mr. Bull of Newington-Green, his Farewell Sermon in the Forenoon.
Joh. 14.16. And I will send the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever.
THe Observation that I commended to you out of these words, was this.

It is the great work for which the Spirit of Christ is given by God, to
comfort the hearts of his people.

You may remember, that I have formerly opened the truth to you, and have
showed you what this spiritual comfort is, that the Spirit of Christ works in
the hearts of his Disciples. I gave it you in this Description.

It is that inward, spiritual satisfaction that the heart of a gracious person
finds in, and through Jesus Christ, in all the various dispensation^ of God
toward him, whereby he is enabled to go on in cheerfulness in the way that God
would have him, whether it be by a way of doing, or of suffering. And herein I
showed,

1. The nature of the spiritual satisfaction. 2. The Author of it; It is God by
his Spirit. 3. The Object of it; God through Jesus Christ. 4. The proper
subject of this inward spiritual comfort; the people of God. 5. And lastly, The
effects of the spiritual comfort; it is to strengthen the heart both to do, and
to suffer.
I came the last time to show you how the Spirit of God does this.

1. He does it as an enlightening Spirit, By showing where comfort is to be had,
by opening the eyes of the understanding, as he did Hagars bodily eyes to see
the Well of Water.

2. He does it as a quickening Spirit, bringing the Soul into that capacity to
take in the comfort; for what comfort can a dead man receiver? a Cordial and
Puddle is all one to a dead man.

3. He works this inward spiritual satisfaction, by discovering the truth of
his vital Principle in the Soul: for a man may have a principle of grace and
spiritual life in him, and not know it; that though he has the spiritual
comfort, yet it is all one as if he had it not.

Now this is the great Question that is debated in the heart of a child of
God, Whether he be regenerated and born again? Whether he has grace in his
soul, that grace that will qualify him for glory? and if he was satisfied as
to this, he would not be a moment without comfort: But he is afraid that he is
dead in sin, that he is a stranger to the life of grace: hence arises all the
Spiritual troubles: Now the Spirit of God comes in, and resolves the case,
comes into the soul by his bright reflections, and fills our souls with
comfort: Now we have received not the spirit of the World, but the Spirit which
is of God.

4. The Spirit of God is a comforting Spirit, as he opens the vein of godly
sorrow in the soul: Truly this is the next way to spiritual comfort, when a man
can once spiritually mourn for sin, Mat. 5.4. Blessed are they that mourn, for
they shall be comforted. Godly sorrow opens the vein, and lets out the matter
that hinders comfort, and causes inward trouble in the soul: A gracious man
takes a great delight in godly sorrow: Oh! it is matter of mavelous comfort to
a Child of God, when he can kindly mourn for his sins.

5. The Spirit of God comforts the soul as he is a mortyfying Spirit. Thus he
takes away that that is the ground and matter of Believers trouble, mortifying
that sin that is the cause of his sorrows, pride, unbelief, inordinate love to
the World.

6. The Spirit of God works comfort in the hearts of his people by setting
their own spirit to seek for comfort in Gods own ways.

The last thing that I did for the explication of the Doctrine, was to add some
Propositions, and they are such as these:

1. Many a gracious heart that has fellowship with the spirit of God in his
sanctifying work, may feel and find none in his comforting work. The Sun may
operate where it does not shine: A man may be in a state of Salvation, when it
does not feel the joys of Salvation, Isa. 51.3. You shall find those that fear
the Lord, and had the comforts of the Holy Ghost, yet walked in darkness.

2. Even those gracious souls that have the fellowship of the comforting spirit
to day, may want it to morrow: This is not daily bread, while the Saints are on
this side Heaven. The Solstice of a Christians comfort does not last all the
day long, they are not feasted with this every day; they have the night as well
as the day, there is a night as well as a day in the heart of a gracious soul:
as it is natural in the common course of nature, the Sun may shine to day, but
it may be clouded to morrow. Thus it was with that holy man, Psalm. 30.7. Lord,
by thy favor thou have made my mountain to stand strong; thou did hide thy
face and I was troubled. And God does this in infinite wisdom, to put a
difference between Earth and Heaven; this valley of tears, and that state of
Glory; that so the hearts of Gods people may be kept in frame of longing after
the state of Heaven; God will have his people be groaning here, that his people
may groan after that condition when all sorrowing and sighing shall flee away.
God reserves perfect comfort to be the reward of perfect holiness; while our
graces are imperfect, we must make account that our comfort will be so too;
Tears will be never wiped from our eyes, till sin be quite taken out of our
hearts.

3. Those that have had this spiritual comfort in their Souls, they may lose
not only the impression of the Spirits comfort, but they may feel the
impression of Gods anger. Haman complains, That the wrath of God did bang upon
him, and that the terrors of God had out him off. A gracious heart has real
grounds of Consolation, though he has not present sensible comforts.

A child of God has always that, that if he did see, he could not be without
comfort; the Promises are his support, he has the first fruits of the Spirit,
and right to eternal life: A Child of God shall always have so much to keep up
his hopes and affiance upon God; A Child of God, in the darkest condition,
though he does not see enough to make him rejoice in God, yet he sees enough to
make him trust in God: though he walk in darkness, and see no light, yet he
trusts in God. Job says, Though the Lord slay him, yet be would trust in him.
David was in great trouble, while he was in that disquiet expostulation, Why
art thou cast down, O my Soul! and why art thou disquieted within me! trust in
God.

5. Those that have inward comforts from the Spirit, may at the same time have
little comfort from Gods outward dispensations. It may be dark without, when it
is light within; while Stephen sees nothing but blood here below, he saw Heaven
above: And Christ rells his Disciples, In the world they shall have
tribulation, but in him they shall have peace.

6. And lastly, Though this be one great work of the Spirit of God, to comfort
the hearts of Christ's Disciples, yet there are some special seasons wherein the
Spirit of God gives out this comfort. There are seasons of sadness, there is a
season of heaviness, and there is need of it: There is a time to weep, and a
time to laugh, a time to mourn, and a time to dance. I showed you some of the
Seasons.

1. One special season of the Spirits comforting the renewing Soul, is
presently upon the Souls first salvation. After the spirit is become a Spirit
of Adoption, presently it becomes a Spirit of Consolation; after the Spirit
has come into the soul in the Law, it then nextly appears a Spirit in the
Gospel.

2. Another season when the Spirit gives out this comfort, is just before the
Lord lays upon his people any great affliction. When was it that Christ was
transfigured, and his face did shine as the Sun? it was immediately before his
bloody passion. Christ was first taken into the Mount, before he was lifted up
upon the Cross. When was the voice heard, This is my Beloved Son in whom I am
well pleased? but just before he was led into the Wilderness, to be tempted
When was Paul lifted up into Heaven? it was immediately before Satan was sent
to buffet him. Thus God gives his people something beforehand to support their
Spirits, that they may not faint; the Disciples were full of comfort, Acts 5
41. And when was this? immediately just before they were carried before the
Council, and whipped up and down like Vagabonds and Rogues, for preaching the
Gospel.

3. Another Season when the Spirit gives out this Comfort, is in the time of
suffering. God comes in the nick of time, especially if a man suffer for
righteousness sake, if this suffering be upon the account of Christ, he seldom
sails to send the Comforter for the relieving of his Spirit, 1 Pet. 4.13. But
rejoice in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his
glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy.

Bodily confinement, and in ward straits are the time of the souls greatest
enlargement. John had his vision in the Isle of Patmos. When a Child of God is
brought to a piece of bread, then is the season for God to feed him with
heavenly Manna; Jacob had glorious Visions, while he was flying from the wrath
of his Brother, when he had nothing but a heap of Stones for his Pillow. It was
in the Wilderness that God speaks to his Church thus. I told you of Mr. Glover,
a Prisoner, who found no comfort in the time of his imprisonment; but when he
was going to the stake he cried out, He is come, be is come, meaning the
Spirit, the Comforter.

4. Another season of Comfort is, after some special exercise of grace, godly
sorrow-for sin, free actions in the pardon of sin, and new Engageme ^^s, and
Resolutions, and Promises of more close walking with God, after declining from
him.

5. Another season of Comfort is, After some great Trials and Afflictions.
Light is then most pleasant, when we newly are come out of a dark place; after
Thunder comes Lightning; after a Storm comes a Calm: God led his people first
into the Wilderness, and then into the Land of Canaan: It is often so in Gods
Dispensations toward his people, their greatest Afflictions go before their
greatest Deliverances: And therefore let not the Saints of God despair when
they are at the lowest, when they walk in darkness, and see no light, yet let
them trust in the Lord.

6. Another Season of comfort was, when men were conscienciously diligent in
their particular Callings, then they walk with God. To this I gave you an
instance in the Shepherds, they were faithful and diligent in their Callings,
they were watching over their flocks by night, and then the Angel comes and
tells them, To you is born this day in the City of David a Savior, which is
Christ the Lord, Luke 2.11. A company of poor Shepherds, keeping of their
Sheep, God appears unto them, and manifests his comforting Presence, when the
Scribes and Pha^isees, notwithstanding all their long prayers, and their strict
Rites and Ceremonies, hear not a word of him.

7. Another Season of comfort is, when we are either preparing for, or in the
spiritual act of some duty. When grace is exercised to prepare the heart to
pray, and in attendance upon such an Ordinance, then oftentimes the Spirit of
God is with them, to let poor souls in their endeavors find acceptance with
God. Hannah had been praying to God; But what melody did she find in her
heart! When Mary sat ^at: Christ's feet, how does Christ fill her heart with
comfort, sealing up her salvation to her! I now come to close with some
Application.

Use of Information.

Use. If it be the work of the Spirit of God to comfort the hearts of Christ's
Disciples, then by way of Information I gather this, That a poor soul is very
hardly settled and satisfied in point of Comfort. Sure it is a hard matter to
comfort a poor soul, when one of the Persons of the blessed Trinity must be
employed on purpose to do it. This is an office belonging to the Holy Ghost,
when he is to be the Paraclec, the comfort of the Holy Ghost. This sure is a
hard matter to comfort the wounded spirit, when the soul is full of the spirit
of bondage. Oh! the hesitates, the jealousies, the doubts and fears, the
objections that a poor soul makes against his spiritual peace and comfort! now
it begins to take comfort, then it doubts again; now he believes, and takes
courage, but anon he is afraid; there is a great deal ado to fasten comfort
upon a poor soul, 2 Cor. 1.22, 23. What a heap of Words are there together, and
it is all little enough to comfort a poor soul! Now he that establishes us
with you in Christ, and has anointed us, is God, and has also sealed us, and
given the earnest of the spirit in our hearts. It is not without much tugging
and drawing that the soul is first brought to believe, and then, when it does
believe, it is a hard thing to persuade it that it does believe: There is a
strange kind of squemishness upon the heart, he thinks that there is no comfort
to be taken that does belong to him. Luther says, It is a harder thing to
comfort a troubled Conscience, than to raise the dead. Surely it must be as
hard, when nothing but the same power must do it.

The soul is hardly convinced; but all the glad tidings of the Gospel, are
golden streams, and all the Promises are but pleasant Fancies, without any
Reality; but that these things should belong to him, this he cannot believe,
for want of faith: So that the Spirit of God is fain to come in, and end the
controversy, before the soul will be satisfied.

2. If it be the work of the Spirit of God to comfort the hearts of his people:
Then all the comfort of Christless and graceless souls is nothing worth, there
is no true peace, for they are not the Disciples of Christ, which are the
proper subjects of this comfort; they will not hearken to Christ; nor learn of
Christ, but they cast his words behind their backs, and break his bands asunder.

Those that do not learn Christ's Precepts, and follow Christ's Canons, and obey
Christ's Commands, they are none of Christ's Disciples; and to be sure, they have
not the Spirit of Christ, which is the Efficient in this comfort; and without
the root, there cannot be the fruit; for this inward peace is the fruit of the
Spirit. And therefore what comfort they have, it is either a sinful comfort,
which to be sure will end in sorrow, or else at best, it is but a carnal
comfort, which will soon vanish like the crackling of thorns under a Pot; There
is no peace, says God, to the wicked; there is no peace with God, as long as
you are at peace wi^h sin.

3. Here they are stumbled with the Riddle, That the people of God should be
sorrowing, yet always rejoicing; As sorrowing, yet always rejoicing: The carnal
world think this to be a contradiction; though they be troubled without, yet
they have peace within; though they have ma^ter of sorrow in respect of outward
affliction, yet they have fellowship with the Holy Ghost the comforter, which
gives peace in affliction, joy in sorrow, light in darkness, which fills thee
with joy unspeakable, and full of glory.

Secondly, If the Holy Ghost be the only Comforter of the hearts of Gods
people; then let me exhort every one of you to labor for an interest in this
Comforter. Friends, I beseech you be restless till you have got some evidence
of the Comforter in your souls, by the inhabitation of the Spirit in your
hearts; without you have an interest in Christ, there is no comfort, no true
comfort to be expected, no comfort in prosperity, no comfort in adversity, no
comfort in life, nor in death, no peace with your consciences: Men may make a
shift to keep themselves at quiet for the present, by lulling conscience; they
may have a kind of peace from a false principle; Ah, but what will you do when
storms arise? what will you do when death and affliction comes? Jonas lay
quietly asleep till the storm came: O my friends, we must shortly lie a dying,
the Lord knows how soon; O what will you do for comfort in a dying hour? all
other comforts may forsake you, and before that time you may meet with sorrow
and heavy afflictions, so that all your friends in the world will not do you
good; your friends may fail, your hearts may fail, and then no comfort but the
comfort of the Holy Ghost will do you good; the time may come, that all your
friends may prove miserable comforters, when God comes to deal with the soul,
to set sin home upon the conscience, to lay sin before us, then what will you
do? We are all guilty of sins of omission, and sins of commission; when these
come to be charged upon the soul, what will you then do? then no plaster of
comfort will stick, but those of the Spirits laying on, unless the Spirit seal
up the pardon of sin, the love of God to the soul, nothing will quiet and
comfort the soul; however men may be merry for a time, yet there is a time of
sorrow that will come, when they shall reflect upon their ways, when they shall
see nothing but sin behind them, and terrors before them: Oh! what amazement
will seize upon their souls! they have no interest in God, in Christ, they have
no interest in the Promises; there is nothing that will comfort you, unless you
have an interest in the Spirit.

But then, what shall I do, that I may get this comforting Spirit into my soul?

First, Thirst earnestly after it. The Promise is made to those that thirst
after it, Isa. 44.3. Thirst after him in his convincings, in his humblings, in
his sanctifying mercy: Oh let the desire and longing of thy soul run out this
way! no matter for an Estate, no matter for Friends and outward comforts, if
thou have the Spirit of God, thou have that that is paramount to all outward
comforts.

Secondly, Pray earnestly for the Spirit. You are not so willing to gi^^ your
children that they want, as God is to give his Spirit to them that ask it. Cry
mightily, Lord, give me thy Spirit; and cry to the Spirit, and say, as Laban to
Abicam, Come in; so pray the Spirit to come in to thy Soul.

Thirdly, If you would have this Comforter to come and abide with you, You must
resolve to become Christ's Disciple. It is only for such that Christ's prays that
God would send the Comforter: You must hearken and obey him, and follow him
wheresoever he goes. You know the terms upon which you must be Christ's
Disciple, Mat. 16.24. He must deny himself, and take up his Cross, and daily
follow Christ. He must deny himself. There is two selfs in a man, nay, three
selfs, and they must de denied, but however the first two must be denied, if
you intend to be Christ's Disciple.

1. A man's righteous self. If any thing that we are, that we have, or can do,
from our works or duties, any thing of our own, all must be denied in point of
Justification. 2. Sinful self. A man's corruptions must be denied, pride,
passion, and love to the world. 3. Natural self. Friends, estates, relations,
credit, and honor, and outward comforts, these may be denied; you may be
called to part with them, but if they come in competition with Christ, they
must be denied.
2. You must take up the Cross of Christ, rather than forsake his honor, or
disobey his commands. You must resolve to follow Christ wheresoever he shall
lead you, either in a way of active or passive obedience; you must take up
Christ's load, you must undergo his burden.

Now Christians, are you resolved upon this? now sit down and consider what it
will cost you to be Christians; and if you would have the best, you must be
contented with the worst; and if you are resolved upon this, then you are the
true Disciples of Christ, and you are under the promise of his comfort, and
Christ is praying the Father to send you another Comforter, who shall abide
with you for ever.

2. Use of Exhortation.

2. Use Is of Exhortation, wherein I shall apply my self to the true Disciples
of Christ, those that have had communion with Christ in his sanctifying
Presence; labor after communion with him in his comforting Presence, To all
others that are without the Spirit of God, I may say, as Jehu to Jehoram, What
have thou to do with these things.

Labor to be convinced of the need and want of Christ; but such as have been
partakers of the Spirit of Christ as a sanctifying Spirit, labor after
communion with him as a comforting Spirit; and to this end I shall stir you up
to this,

1. By way of Motive. 2. By way of Comfort.
First by way of Motive. Though you have some comfort, it is but little in
comparison of what you may have, and in comparison of what you may stand in
need of, though a Saint would not change the saddest hour of his life for the
sweetest hour in his former condition. If the Saints of God did enjoy the
comforts that they might, oh what blessed lives might they live! but they are
so full of trouble, as if there were no Holy Ghost the Comforter. The people of
God are oftentimes troubled without a cause, as that holy man, Why art thou
cast down, oh my soul? He could not render a true account of his trouble, he
was sad, but he could not tell why or wherefore.

2. When there is cause, they are apt to be troubled without measure. In those
cases, where it is a sin not to be troubled at all, the people of God are apt
to be troubled overmuch, as the Israelites in their bondage in Egypt. It were
a sin for them not to be troubled, but they were so full of troubles, that they
could not hearken to Moses and Aaron. And so the Disciples in the Text, it were
a sin for them not to be troubled for the absence of Christ's body; but so to be
troubled, as if God could not comfort them without him, this was their
weakness: And to come to our Cases, it were a sin to slight this Dispensation
of God that is coming upon us, if we should not be troubled for the loss of the
Ministers of Jesus Christ: but to mourn before God under the sense of this
Dispensation, to mourn so much, as to think that when these are gone, all are
gone, to be so much troubled, as not to hearken to the words of the Text, That
we have a Comforter. I remember an admirable expression of a Child to his
Mother, when his Father was dead, to show, That out of the mouths of Babes and
Sucklings God can manifest his praise. Why Mother (says the Child) though my
Father be dead, yet God is alive: May not I say so to you: Though your
Ministers be as it were naturally dead, yet is not God alive? Is not the Spirit
of God alive? Though you have some comfort, yet you have little in comparison
of what you may have, if you seek for it.

2. Study the excellent nature of the comfort, how little soever a man has of
this spiritual comfort, it will sweeten his condition, be it what it will be.
When a Man has communion with the spirit God, he has comfort in all
conditions: then, though a man's condition be never so bad, yet it is very good,
H^b. 3.17. Though the Fig Tree shall not blossom, though the fruit be not in
the Vines, the labor of the Olive shall cease, and the Fields shall yield no
meat: the Flocks shall be cut off from the Fold, and there shall be no Herd in
the Stalls, yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
Salvation. He can fetch Hope, and ground his Faith upon the Promises, though
the Providence and Dispensations of God be never so mysterious, the comfort of
the Spirit does make up the want of all other comforts: The comforts of
Ordinances are sweet comforts, Sermon-comforts are sweet comforts,
Sacrament-comforts are sweet comforts: Ah, but the comfort of the Spirit can
supply the want of all these! All outward crosses cannot hinder these inward
comforts: a man that has these inward comforts, may have a Feast with bread
and water, a little of this comfort is able to sweeten a whole Ocean of sorrow:
In the multitude of my th^ughts with^n me, thy comfort delight my Soul, Psalm.
94.10. So that when the hearts of God's people are filled with sad thoughts,
what will become of themselves, what will become of their Families, what will
become of the Church of God, what will become of the Ministry of the Gospel,
and of the Ordinances of Christ? they are full of sad fears, and distracting
thoughts, when they have a multitude of thougts, in the midst of all, these
spiritual comforts can comfort and refresh the Soul: Oh labor after a greater
share of this comfort.

God has cast us upon sad times, wherein we shall have need of more than
ordinary comfort: We are like to have troubles without, if we have not peace
within, it will be very sad: we are like to lose much of Christ's bodily
presence, I mean in his Ordinances: how many of those Messengers that present
the person of Christ, and stand in his stead? If we should not enjoy the other
comforter, our estates would be doleful: If we have darkness without, and
darkness within, how sad will that darkness be.

3. Labor to get more communion from the Spirit of God. This will raise and
sublimate your natural comforts, and turn them into Spiritual comforts. A man
can never relish these outward comforts, till he come to taste the ravishment
and sweetness of the holy Ghost, till he taste the love of God: these give them
a higher luster than the men of the world; though they enjoy much comfort, yet
they do not enjoy half that a child of God does; the little that the righteous
has, is better than the great revenues of the wicked; to a Child of God a
dinner of green herbs is more savoury and pleasant to him, than the stalled
Ox, because a Child of God has better sauce with it.

Worldly men they smell to their flowers, it is the only godly man that sucks
out the honey; that all things are given to him in love, out of this he sucks
comfort: A gracious heart sees all these outward comforts, that they are
purchased with the blood of Christ, and therefore these should do him good, and
he may take comfort that he hopes for what he has not, as well as for what he
may have; and he may take comfort in his condition, be it what it will, he sees
all is for his good; such a one believes what he reads not: So he believes
Gods ways are ways of Truth, though some more sweet, and some more bitter.

4. Labor after communion with the Spirit in his comforing work, is another.
This is the best preservative against all intanglements of sin whatsoever: It
is a great hour of temptation, and if our comforts do do not lie above the
world, we shall be greatly ensnared by the world; If a man eat sweetmeats, he
cannot relish ordinary food: so while these sweet comforts lie upon the soul,
he cannot relish these ordinary things in the world: What, do you tempt me with
those things, says a child of God? What are these to the comforts of the Holy
God? The heart of man will seek comfort one way or another; and if he has it
not from the Spirit of God, he will seek it some other way; if he has not
comfort from the Spirit of God, he will seek some sparks of his own kindling;
rather than they will sit in darkness without comfort, they will light their
candle at the Devil's fire: And as he delivers from temptation on the right,
so he delivers from temptation on the left hand: he that is filled with the
comforts of the Holy Ghost, what are sufferings to such a man? he has that
within will carry him through all danger, here is that comfort, and that life
by Christ, which may ease us in our greatest crosses; this will make a child of
God speak of the sufferings of this world as a light matter. Our light
affliction, which is but for a moment, shall work out for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory: They took joyfully the spoiling of their
goods, because in Heaven they had a better and more enduring substance, Heb.
11.35. Some were tortured, receiving no deliverance, because in Heaven they had
a better substance. Oh, if you would be kept from the snares of the World, let
your comforts be above the power and danger of temptation from any thing here
below.

3. By way of Direction. How shall we have communion and a^t faith upon the
Holy Ghost as your Comforter? the Holy Ghost is designed and appointed by God
the Father to this Office: now you know none love to be slighted in their
Office; and if we do not act faith upon the Holy Ghost, we slight his Office;
therefore we should have recourse to him in a way of believing: as we should
act faith upon Christ for the pardon of sin, so we should act faith upon the
holy Ghost, for a sense of that pardon

2. Go often to Jesus Christ, and beg him, and beseech him to entreat the
Father for you. Go to God the Father in the name of Christ, and beg it upon the
account of Christ's Prayer and Intercession, that he would send the Comforter:
and you have a good argument to enforce the Petition, the very same as the
Disciples, That Christ would, when he went away, Pray the Father, and he should
send you another Comforter. Christ tells them, that some there were that would
kill them, and in so doing, think they did God good service; therefore Christ,
in compassion to them, in the state that he left them in, prays the Father that
he would send the Comforter. So now we must go to God; those Ministers that
were wont to comfort us, are now to be taken from us; our Barnabas's sons of
consolation, their mouths are to be stopped, though Ordinances are now to be
damned up, the Houses of God made places of defilement, our Teachers are
removed into corners, our Troubles increase, and we have none to tell us how
long; the light of our eyes, the comfort of our hearts, in respect of outward
means, are going from us: whither shall we go? we want Bread for our Souls, we
want cordials for our Hearts, Blessed Savior pity us! and since thou will not
come to us in thy own presence, as thy Ambassadors to come to us by thy Spirit,
do now in Heaven as thou did on earth, Pray the Father for us; do not leave
us so many Orphans, without Father or Mother, but send thy Spirit to refresh
our Souls: See how we are hated and reviled, and we must suffer these things
now, Let us have thy Spirit.

3. If you would have communion with the Spirit of Christ in his comforting
work, Take heed you do not lay up your comforts in the Creature, this is to
seek for the living among the dead: those that rejoice in the Creature, rejoice
in a thing of naught: and you that have an interest in God, God will not take
it at your hands, if you seek it any where else, no, not in Ordinances; though
God would have you to seek comfort in Ordinances, yet he would not have you to
seek comfort from Ordinances.

4. Set down, and be much in duty, Psalm. 63.5, 6. My soul shall be satisfied as
with marrow and fatness, my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips, when I
remember thee upon my head, and meditate on thee in the night-watches. If you
look at the beginning of the Psalm, you shall find that this Psalm was penned
when David was deprived of the Ordinances of God. Many a man complains that he
lives uncomfortably, no wonder, when he little thinks on Christ.

5. Be much in the exercise of grace. Then they that walked in the fear of the
Lord, when they walked in the comfort of the Holy Ghost.

6. Take heed of quenching and grieving the Spirit, your Comforter, by
neglecting his motions, or by acting any thing against the mind of the Spirit:
Do not sin against him as your enlightening Spirit, that will hinder him as your
Comforter.

I close with a word of comfort to the people of God. If it be one of the great
works of the Spirit of God, here is matter of great comfort to those that stick
close to Jesus Christ.

Sure your comforts will be satisfying comforts, and sufficient, because they
are comforts of the Spirits working. The Lord Jesus has promised to make up
the want of his bodily presence, by sending his Spirit: He was now going from
them, and tells them, That he could not stay: and this was sad news to the
Disciples, who were ready to break their hearts, and the best comfort that he
could afford them, was to tell them, That he would send the Comforter. If
Christ can comfort his people in the absence of himself, surely he can comfort
them in the want of all other comfort that relate either to soul or body; and
so in the want of mercies, in the want of outward Ordinances, he can comfort
the soul. It is the Spirit of God that can comfort in the use of these; and, if
he will, he can do it in the want of them: he can comfort us in the wilderness,
where no water is; when he does deny the means, he can comfort us without,
where he denies us the stream, he can make us drink at the Fountain.

7. And lastly, The people of God find hereby, that their comforts are abiding.
Your liberty, your friends, ah, Ordinances of, and Ministers may be taken from
you, your Ministers may be banished, your Ministers may be imprisoned: but here
is a Comforter that abides for ever. And though they may keep your Ministers
out of the Pulpit, yet they shall not take the Comforter out of your hearts: So
that when I shall not preach any more to you, I shall pray the Father, that he
would send you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever.

Mr. Bull of Newington-Green, his Farewell Sermon in the Afternoon.
Acts 20.32. And now, Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the Word of his
Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among them
that are sanctified.
THe words are part of St. Paul's Farewel-Sermon, or Discourse to the Elders of
the Church of Ephesus, one of those famous seven Churches of Asia, that we read
of in the Book of the Revelations. It is not to be doubted, as Calvin does
comment upon the place, but though the Apostle speak immediately to the Elders,
yet he does comprehend the whole Church in the Speech.

Our holy Apostle had been a long time with the Church, preaching among them,
taking pains with them, both in public and private, as you may see in the 20
verse, and declares to them the whole counsel of God, verse 27. and now being
called away, taken off by Divine Provividence, by the will of his Master, the
last and best office that he thought he could do for them, was, to commit them
to the care of God, and to leave them in his arms, and to recommend them to his
Grace.

It would be more then the time would permit, to look over the whole Apostles
Sermons, which is partly Narrative, and partly consolatory: Narrative, to put
them in mind in what manner he had preached to them, from ver. 17. to ver. 27.
and it is partly consolatory: from the 27. to the Text, wherein the Apostle
could hold no longer, but his love constrains him, and makes him break forth
into the pathetical wish, or rather prayer, And now, Brethren, I commend you to
his Grace. As if he had said, I am just now going from you, not knowing that I
shall see your face any more: now I am a dying man, as to my conversing with
you, any more: Now I am departing, this is the best Legacy I can bequeath unto
you, To commend you to God and to his Grace. And if he speaks to persons as
standing in the same relation with God and Christ, and having the same Faith,
and the same elder Brother: As if he should have said, You are as dear to me as
my own flesh, a^^if you were my Brethren by Consanguinity, and it is my sorrow
that I must leave you; but as it is my greatest grief to part with you, and
must leave you, yet this is the comfort, that I shall leave you in safe hands,
I do not leave you to the wide world, I do not leave you as Orphans without a
Father, as Sheep without a Shepherd, but I commend you to God and his Grace.

O happy words! Though I must leave you, yet, I trust, God who is able, will
keep you. As God is present every where by his Essence, so by his gracious
presence more especially, God is present with his people. I commit yon, I
commend you to God, I commit you to his care, to his keeping, so the word
signifies; so Pavenelus interprets the words, I trust you with God, I leave you
as a Depositum in Gods hands, as a dying man leaves his Children in a Friends
hands to look after them: as Christ did his Mother in John's hands: So the
Apostle leaves the Ephesians in the hands of God and the Word of his Grace;
that is, the Gospel that he had declared to them. The Word of God in Scripture
is often called his Grace, 2 Cor. 6. Ephesians. 3.5* because it is a declaration of
the free Grace of God to poor souls, and because it is the Spirits instrument
to work grace in the hearts of sinners.

This is remarkable, That after the Apostle had recommended them to God, he
adds this word, of his grace: He does not think it enough to mention
Recommending them to God, but to the Word of his grace. The expression is not
for Euphoniae gratia, it is no tautology, it is not for more than needs, but to
show how needful and necessary the word of Gods grace is, as well to the
building up, as for the converting poor sinners: and though God can build up a
Saint immediately, yet ordinarily he does it not but by the Word of his Grace,
which is able to build you. Beza and Calvin refer this clause to God, answering
to that of the Apostle 2 Cor. 9.18. God is able to cause all grace to abound in
you. But Erasmus refers this word to the Word of Gods Grace which is able to
build you up. And this Construction is favored by those two places of
Scripture, and may very well be meant both in 2 Timothy 3.15. Jam. 1.21. both
which places attribute to the Word of God, as this does: And in the second
place, Receive with meckness the ingrafted Word, which is able to save your
souls. So that both these words may be referred to this cause; The word of God,
and the Word of his Grace; to God, as the Principle; and to the Word of his
Grace, as the Instrumental cause to build them up: As much as if he had said, I
commend you to the Grace of God, which is able to build you up. The Apostle
tells them, that he left them to such a God, as through the Gospel was
sufficient to build them up, till he brought them to the full fruition of the
Saints in light. The Apostle commends this to his Church, that were ready to
weep, and fay at his departure, O Paul! God has made thee a happy Instrument
of laying a good Foundation among us, of doing a great deal of good to our
souls, and we may bless God that ever we saw thy face; but now, alas! thou art
going from us, we are afraid all thy pains will come to nothing; we should
hope, that if God had pleased to continue thee among us, then we should have
been built up; and surely, if God had intended good to us, and brought us to
Heaven at last, he would not have taken thee from us. No, says the Apostle, be
not discouraged; though I leave you, yet I commit you to God, and to the word
of his Grace. If I be here, it is God alone that must build you up; I am but a
poor, weak Instrument in the hand of God: And when I am gone, God can build you
up by some means or other, and earry you over, or through all oppositions,
temptations and discouragements, till he bath fitted you for himself, and given
you an inheritance amongst them that are sanctified.

Thus have you the words explained in this familiar Paraphrase; and being thus
opened, you may take notice that

The words hold forth the special care of this blessed Apostle of Jesus Christ;
Though he must leave them, yet he takes care to leave them in safe hands, that
was able to give a good account of them; You have the Apostle making a deed of
trust for the securement of the Saints at Ephesus after his departure; or, if
you will, you have the Apostles last Will and Testament.

1. You have the Person making over this Trust, St. Paul. 2. You have the Trust
it self, and those were the Saints at Ephesus. 3. You have the Trustees, those
to whom the Trust is committed; and they are twofold. 1. To God. 2. To the
Word of his Grace. 3. Here is the time of making this Trust, Now I am leaving
of you. 4. Here is the commendation of the Trustee, from the power and ability
of him to manage this Trust, and this is expressed in two particulars. 1. He is
able to build up: And then, 2. To give you an inheritance: As if he should have
said, I will leave you with such who are able to build you up. I might raise a
multitude of Observations from the words: As first of all,


Doct. 1. That it should he the care of a faithful Minister, when be is by the
providence of God taken from a people, to recommend them to God; and to the
Word of his Grace.

2. As it is the duty of a faithful Minister to do it, so it is his comfort,
that be may do it; that he may leave his people in the hand of God, who is able
to build them up in grace.

3. It may be the comfort of any Church of Christ, that when they are deprived
of faithful Ministers, that yet they are lest in the hands of God.

4. Though God can by his infinite power perfect grace, and bring men to Heaven
without the use of means, yet we have no ground nor warrant to expect one or
other, but through the Word of Gods grace.

5. And lastly, Though there be a glorious inheritance purchased and prepared
by Jesus Christ, yet it is to be expected by none but those that are built up,
and sanctified. Or thus.

None ^ust look for an inheritance hereafter, but such as are born of the
Spirit, and built up in grace.

I might speak to many more; but I shall gather all that I have said into this
one general Proposition, which is this.

Doct. That the best Farewell that a Gospel-Minister can give to his people that
he loves and labors amongst, when he by the providence of God is taken from
them, i^, to commend them to God, and to the word of his grace.

Thus does our holy Apostle: When he was taken from his people, and left to
preach to them no more, he recommends them to the hands of God. And thus does a
greater than St. Paul, even Jesus Christ himself, The great Shepherd of the
Sheep, as St. Peter calls him; when he was leaving the world, and could no
longer preach to them, he commends them to God, John 17.11. And now, says
Christ to his Father, I am no more in the world, but these are in the world,
and I come to thee. Holy Father, keep through thy own name those whom thou have
given me, that they may be one as we are. And in the fourteenth, I have given
them thy word: He commends them to God, and to the word of his grace.

In the prosecution of this Truth, I shall explain these particulars.

1. Show you what it is in a Minister to recommend his people to God. 2. What
it is that he should recommend them to God for. 3. Why he should be so careful
to recommend them to God. 4. How he should recommend them to God.
Lastly, Ap^^ly it.

First, It is to leave them in the hand of God, to give them up unto Gods care
and keeping, as I showed you in the opening of the words: To recommend them to
God, is, to do that for them effectually which he would fain do Ministerially,
if he had been suffered to continue among them. As when a dying Father or
Husband commends his wife and children to some surviving intimate friend, it is
a leaving, a committing them to that friend, to deal, and to do for them, which
he would have done, if he had lived.

Now let us consider what it is that a faithful Ministers design and endeavors
are to do for that Congregation that is committed to his charge. These four
things especially every faithful Minister endeavors to do while he is amongst
his people.

1. Their Conversion and Sanctification. 2. Their Building and Edification. 3.
Their Protection and Preservation. 4. Their Comfort and Consolation.
First, Their Conversion and turning to God. This is that a faithful Ministers
heart is set upon, that he may convert poor souls that are in a sinful state;
that he may turn poor souls to God; that by often preaching, and praying, and
counsel, he may bring them into a state of salvation, Romans 10.1. The Apostle
there speaks of the Romans, that they were the people of God in profession: ah,
but this was not enough, fain he would that they should be the people of God-in
truth; that is the hearty desire of every faithful Minister, not only to bring
his people to the outward profession of godliness, but to the work and power of
it in their hearts; not only to have the name of Christian, but Christianity it
self; and this is the end of all his studying, to get them to God by little and
little, till Christ be formed in them, Gal. 4.11. My little Children, says the
Apostle, etc. S. Paul travels in birth with the Galathians from a state of
nature, to a state of grace, he would get grace wrought in their hearts, he
would get them ingraffed into Christ; and this is the end of his commending
them to God, which he would fain have done, if he might have been suffered to
preach to them. This is the language of a Ministers heart; Lord, Lord, thou
know that it was the desire of my soul, that every one of this people should
be made holy by thy Word; I would fain have begotten them by the Ministry to
Jesus Christ; but now by the providence of God I am taken off before my work is
done, and thou see yet there is a great many in the gaul of bitterness, and
the bond of iniquity, in a state of death, and I am now likely not to do any
thing more: Now it is my care, that those that belong to thy Election of grace,
may be gathered home to thee.

2. To build them up in knowledge and faith. He endeavors that those that are
already sanctified, may be further built up in their most holy faith; Where
there are the most eminent Saints, yet there is a great deal lacking. The
Apostle gives great commendation of the Thessalonans, 1 Thessalonians. 3.10. They were
a famous Church, and there were a great many eminent Christians, yet there was
something lacking in their faith, and in their knowledge. Christ speaks to one
of the most eminent Apostles, Oh thou of little faith! Though the
Foundation-stone be laid, yet there is a superstructure behind, and this is the
work of Christ, the building them up, Ephesians. 4.12. This is the end of every
faithful Minister, to make his people fit for Heaven; he would be feeding of
them, that they may grow to the full measure of the stature of Christ: And
therefore every godly Minister desires that he may be the Finisher, as well as
the Author (under God) of their Faith, that they may be built up to Christ's
heavenly Kingdom.

3. A Minister's aims are, that his people may be kept from danger. The people
of God, after they are effectually called, they are continually in danger, they
are as a Lilly amongst Thorns, as Sheep among Wolves, as a besieged City in the
midst of her enemies.

They have enemies without, and enemies within: enemies without, the Devil is
their adversary.

1. They are in danger, in respect of the Devil, who is a very potent enemy, a
roaring Lion, and a malicious enemy, malicious against God: and industrious
enemy, He goes about seeking whom he may devour; he compasses the earth, to do
what he can to keep souls from Christ; he is a subtle enemy, that has his
stratagems to catch and enshare poor souls. Now it is the endeavor of every
true Minister of Jesus Christ, to secure his people by his counsel, and his
prayers; for we are ignorant of his devices, 2 Cor. 2.11. As if he should say,
I have most experience of the Devils subtilty, Satan sets to oppose them most;
and this is one thing, to rob Ministers of their meditations, of their prayers;
and therefore it is the design of Ministers to strengthen their people, in
regard of Satan's temptations.

2. They are in danger in respect of seducers, that lie in wait to deceive.

3. They are in danger by the World, lest they should be frighted by its
opposition.

4. They are in danger by their corrupt lusts, that war against their souls:
Therefore every faithful Minister warns his people of those, that their souls
may be secured; this being that that a faithful Minister would do among his
people while he is with them; when he is taken from them, he commits them to
God to be socured from all danger, as Christ in that place before, Father, keep
them in thine own hands.

Lastly, Every faithful Minister seeks the comfort and consolation of his
people. It is their desire to comfort the feeble hands; they are not Masters of
your grace, but helpers of your joy, 2 Cor. 4.12. Where the Gospel appears in
power, many will stand in need of comfort, under doubts, fears, and
afflictions; and this is the desire of every faithful Minister of Jesus Christ,
at their departure from their people, to support the weak, to resolve the
doubted, to succor the tempted; and when he is taken from them, and can
contribute little to this work, he recommends them to God. A departing Minister
may say to his people, If God has made me an instrument of comfort to your
souls, you have cause to bless God for it. Now I can do no more, I must
recommend you to God, who (I hope) will be the God of your comfort, when I am
gone.

2. This is the best office that a Minister can do for his people when he is
taken from them, and that whether we look upon Minister or People, certainly it
is the best office that a Minister can do for his people, To commend them to
God.

1. God is omnipotently, infinite able. 2 God is gracious and faithful,
therefore willing to do it.
First, God is infinitely able to manage this trust, he is God all-sufficient,
Genesis 17.1. sufficient to make himself happy, much more to make his people happy.

1. God is all in all in the enjoyment of mercy. 2. God is all in all in the
want of mercy.
First, He is all in all in the enjoyment of mercy. When a people has a
faithful Minister placed over them by the providence of God, he can do nothing
of himself, 2 Cor. 3.6. Our preaching i^ from the assistance of God; and when
we have done all, we cannot make this effectual, we cannot give the success;
Paul may plant, Apollos may water, but it is God that must give the increase, 1
Cor. 3.6. Why do you keep such a stir? One would have this Minister, another
that; One would have Paul, another would have Apollo, another Cephas; Are they
not the Ministers of God, by whom you have believed? Our profit depends not
upon the parts and gifts of a creature, but upon the blessing of God; it is God
that puts this heavenly Treasure into the heart, and it is God that must
disperse it for the use and benefit of his people. The most eloquent Apollos
cannot persuade obstinate sinners to lay hold upon the Gospel; they may speak
to the ear, but it is God that must carry the Word to the heart, either for
conviction, or conversion.

Secondly, God is all in all in the want of means. Let the instrument be never
so weak, if it be in the hand of God, it shall prove effectual: God can make a
poor Fisherman instrumental to catch three thousand souls at one time; and God
chooses to do his work by weak Instruments, that the praise may be of God: It is
not the Minister's parts or gifts, but only the power of God that strengthens
the soul, and sanctifies, and builds them up, and comfort them. God is able to
convert all unconverted sinners in a Congregation; God can say, Ephata, Be
opened.

2. God is able to build up those that are converted, God is able to make all
grace abound, 2 Cor. 9.8. Those that have little grace, God is able to make it
increase; God is the God of all grace, God can make every Saint perfect,
entire, lacking nothing; he can sill all the void places of the heart.

3. God can keep us in all trials and troubles; God can keep up his people in
the midst of Apostasy, Matthew. 16.13. The gates of Hell shall not prevail
against them. God can keep them, that all the power of Hell shall not hurt them.

4. God is able to comfort the most disconsolate soul. Ministers may speak
comfortable words, but they cannot speak them further than to the ear; but God
can speak them to the heart: I will allure her into the Wilderness, and speak
to the heart. God can comfort the poor soul, let the case be never so sad, 2
Cor. 1.4.

2. As God is infinitely able, so he is infinitely gracious, and faithful. See
his Name in Exodus 34. Full of power and tender mercy. Is not God willing for
the Conversation of poor sinners, as willing as Ministers? yea a thousand, and
ten thousand times more. Hear how patiently God speaks, Turn ye, why will you
dye? Hear and live. He calls upon men every where to repent.

Secondly, God does not only desire it, but purpose it, and resolve it. God
that has begun a good work, he will finish it; and so for their preservation,
he has said, That the gates of Hell shall never prevail against them. Of all
thou have given me, I have lost none, John 17.11. Though God may suffer his
people to be led away for a time, yet they shall be brought back again, and
shall be kept through the power of God unto salvation: Heaven and Earth shall
pass away, but not one jot or tittle which God has spoken.

How willing is God to comfort all his comfortless ones? What Mother can be
more pitiful to her sick child, than God is to them that are under affliction:
Though a Mother forget her sucking child, yet God cannot forget his people. And
then he is the Father of all comfort, and there are many gracious promises God
has made to this purpose, that they may be as so many Aquavitae pledges of
Consolation to his people: So that this will appear, That it is the best Office
of a Minister, both to Minister and People, to commend them to God.

1. To Ministers, it is the highest expression of their love: What greater
testimony of their love can they show to their people, to do all that for them,
that he would willingly have done, and ten thousand times more? Is it not an
expression of love from a dying Father to his children, Dear Children, I am now
dying, I can provide for you no more, I shall leave you such a Friend that
shall provide for you in a more abundant measure than if I had been with you:
It is the best demonstration of their Faith.

1. That he will not leave them to the wide world: and then

2. He will not take any one, he will trust his people with none but God, who
is able and willing to give account of them.

3. It is the greatest satisfaction to his heart. A Minister leaving his
People, can never be satisfied in his own breast, that he should leave them,
and commit them, and not to know to whom; but when he knows with whom he has
committed them, when he has delivered them over to God, that first committed
them to him, this is a great quietment and satisfaction to a Minister's spirit:
God lays the people as a depositum, and will require an account of them at the
last day. Now when a Minister is taken from his people, he cannot be satisfied,
till he has delivered back his trust to God: Lord, here they are, and while I
was with them, I did what I could; but now I am taken from them, here I
surrender them back into thy hand; when I was in the world, I kept them in thy
Name: And so it is best for the people to be left to such a one who will keep
them in all their Dangers, and comfort them in all their Afflictions.

3. How should a people be commended to God?

1. By Exhortation. 2. By Prayer.
First, By Exhortation. Thus the Apostle before and after my Text. And then by
Prayer, for so does Saint Paul. Calvin looks upon those Words, as a Prayer
brought in, Always making mention of you in my Prayers, Romans 1.19. Phil. 1.4.
Col. 1.3.

And I trust that I shall not only now, at this solemn departure, but as long
as I live, still recommend you into the hands of God; though I shall not preach
to you, yet I shall still make mention of you in my Prayers, that God would
stablish, and comfort, and preserve you to his heavenly Kingdom.

4. Why does the Apostle commend them to the Word of his Grace? For these two
Reasons:

First, Because all the good that any people can look for, is from God; it is
declared and laid up in the Promises, and in the Gospel; there is the Treasure
of God, it is in the Gospel; The grace of God which has appeared to all men,
brings salvation, Tit. 2.11. We could never have known of the glorious
mysteries of Salvation, had it not been for the grace of God; we could never
have expected good, but from the Gospel: that is the great Magna Charta,
wherein God has made over whatsoever concerns the eternal good of his people.
We have nothing to show for grace, and comfort, and heaven, and glory, but his
Gospel. That is the great deed of gift that God has given to his People: poor
sinners might look a Savior, if the Word of God had not revealed it; those
people have no ground to expect Salvation, if God had not declared it in his
Gospel to bestow it upon them.

2. The Gospel is the only instrument by which God brings, and conveys all that
good to the Soul that it stands in need of, all spiritual and temporal good
that accompanies salvation.

God works nothing immediately to the Soul, but by the Gospel.

First, If any soul be converted to God, it is by the grace of God: And as
Conversion, so Sanctification, that is effected by the word of God; so likewise
is Edification, Salvation, and Preservation.

Use. I come now to the Application. It may be I have been too long already:
but Gods knows that it may be the last time that I may trespass in this kind:
and I have the Apostles example, who preached at Troas till midnight, but I
promise to have done in a great deal less time.

Use. In the Application I shall in the Apostles example, Commend you to the
grace of God.

My Brethren, and dearly Beloved, and longed for, now God by his providence is
taking me away from you, in the exercise of my public Ministry, I commend you
to God, and to the word of his Grace.

This I shall do, First, By exhorting and counsel; and then by Prayer.

First, By way of Exhortation.

1. In reference to God: and then 2. In reference to the Word of his Grace.
First of all, my Exhortation in reference to God, is, That you would commit
your selves to God; If it should be so much a Ministers care to commend his
people to God, it is good reason they should commend themselves.

1. A Ministers commending you to God, will be to no purpose, if you do not
commit your selves. I shall always make mention of you in my prayers, as long
as God shall continue me in this valley of tears: I shall pray that God would
build you up, and sanctify you: I shall pray for you; but God will not hear my
Prayers, if you do not hearken to my counsel, To commit your selves to God.

2. Consider, if you can so commit your selves to God, as to get God to take
charge of you, you are made for ever.

1. God will be an All-sufficient God, in stead of all the friends in the
world: you shall not need any that shall provide for you to protect you; God
will be All in All, in stead of Father, in stead of Mother, Houses, Lands,
Relations; God will be better to you than ten Husbands, than ten Ministers; Ah,
better than ten thousand Worlds.

God can sweeten all your enjoyments, God can provide for you, and make you
happy in the midst of the wants of Creature Comforts; God is a Sun, and a
Shield, He will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withold from
them that fear him.

God contains all in himself, Eminenter; get God, and you get all: Let the
World frown or smile, let it turn upside down. Though the Mountain be thrown
into the midst of the Sea, though the World be set on fire, yet a Soul that is
in Gods keeping is happy: God is a present help in time of trouble.

2. As God is an All-sufficient Friend, so he is a firm and fast Friend to
them, My Father and Mother forsook me, but the Lord took me up, Psalm. 27.10. My
flesh and my heart fails, but God fails me not; though my Minister and my
Friend leave me, yet God will not leave me; he is engaged by his own promise,
truth; and faithfulness, I will never, (never, never) leave thee nor forsake
thee.

If you do not forsake God, God will never forsake you: if once you have so
committed your selves to God, as God accepts the charge, he has undertaken
that you shall never depart from him: It is part of the Covenant, and he is
engaged to all the Relations wherein he stands to his people, as a Husband, as
a Father, as a Master.

But you will say, How shall we commit our selves to God, that God may have a
charge of us? I will give you one Direction for all.

1. Take God to be your God, and give up your selves to be his people; ^f you
will, before you and I part, heartily and unreservedly give up your selves to
God, to be his people, it will be the comfortablest day that ever I saw, though
in other respects it may be the saddest; As certainly God is your God, so
certainly he will keep you; if you will avouch your selves to be Gods, I will
avouch God to be yours.

1. You must take God to be the portion of your souls inheritance, lay up all
your happiness in God; for if you choose any thing else for your happiness but
God, God will have nothing to do with you, God will be All or Nothing: Your
hearts must say as David's, Lord thou art my portion whom have I in Heaven but
thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. He accounted all
nothing for God: God was his happiness. God was his Portion, God was his All in
All.

2. You must make God the center of all your love and delight: God will have
all from you, or nothing; you must not divide your affection between God and
the World, you must love nothing in comparison of him, love nothing but in
subordination to him; as you would have God to be wholly yours, so you must be
wholly his.

3. You must rake God to be the strength and shield of hearts; As you would
have God to take care of you, you must cast your care upon God: If you place
your hope any where else, there will be no sure hold, the Anchor of your hope
must be cast no where else; if you lay your burden any where else, God will not
lend a finger to help you; but if you place your hope in God, God will help
you; your extremity shall be his opportunity.

4. You must take God to be the guide of your hearts; if you would have the
privilege of God's guard, you must keep in Gods way; keep in Gods way, and you
will be sure of Gods protection; do you keep Gods precepts* and God will keep
your person; do what God commands, and avoid what God forbids, and then you
need not fear what will become of you. Let the World frown, and Friends forsake
you, resolve that you will follow God wheresoever he leads you, then he will be
your God all your days, and he will guide you here by his counsel, till at
last he bring you to his glory: And this leads me to the second Exhortation, in
respect of the Gospel.

Secondly, Brethren, I commend you to the Word of Gods Grace. I commend you to
the Precepts of God, to be obeyed by you; I commend you to the Promises of God,
to be believed by you.

1. Keep them, and hold them fast carefully it is your treasure, and life; keep
it, and it will keep you; it is all that you can show for Heaven: I leave it as
a Depasitum; if you part with it, take heed how you will answer it at the last
day: it is the Talent which God has committed to you, for which you will be
commended for keeping at the great day. Hold fast the Word of God's grace;
there is old tugging by the Devil and his instruments, either to pull you from
the Word, or the Word from you. Let go any thing rather than the Gospel; let go
your Friends, your Estates, your Lives, rather than let go the Gospel.

Study Gods Word, do not keep it by you for no purpose: Search the Scriptures,
for in them you hope for eternal life. There Is the Pearl of great price, there
is Directions, there is Comfort; this Book of God will make you wise unto
Salvation.

If you never hear Sermon more, you have enough by the use of the Bible to
carry you to Heaven: There Is Divinity, there is holiness and Heaven almost in
every syllable, when you cannot have it preached to you. Be much in the study
of it.

Then practice it conscionably; Be not only Hearers but Doers of it; let your
conversation be such as becomes the Gospel. I^ was the Apostles advice to the
Philippians, and its mine to you, Let your Conversation be such as becomes the
Gospel. Let your Conversation become the Precepts, the Privileges, the
Promises of the Gospel. Having then thus commended you to God, give me leave
before we part to commend God and his Gospel to you.

1. Make it your daily business to walk with God; make him the Companion of
your lives; Converse with God every day in the inward of your hearts: He that
is a stranger with God, God will soon be a stranger to him; and if you neglect
God, one day you may be to seek him when you most need him.

2. Live in the daily exercise of Grace and Godliness.

1. Live in the continual exercise of Faith, live by it; you have need of the
exercise of that Grace every day: You can as well live without food, as live
without Faith; it is that Grace which feeds upon Christ. 2. Be much in the
exercise of the Fear of the Lord all the day long; be afraid to sin against
God; in the secret of your souls mind his presence, in all places, in all
company, in all businesses. 3. Be much in the exercise of Humility; live
humbly, and think better of others than your selves. Humility will exceedingly
adorn your profession. 4. Be much in the exercise of Repentance: Be frequent
and constant in Prayer, Pray continually; do it spiritually, and do it exactly,
as to the season of it. 5. Be fervent in spirit, serving the Lord. Whatsoever
you do for God, do it with all your might; do not put off God with the skin,
but give him the marrow. 6. Be careful, not only to keep up secret, but
Family Worship: the less preaching there is in public, the more catechizing
and instructing there should be in private. I know no more likely means than
the setting up the worship of God in private Families. 7. Prize the Sabbath: be
strict and exact in the observation of the Lord's Day. I have showed you many
times wherein the spiritual observation of it does confist: it is your
Seed-time, your market day: it is a sign you shall one day celebrate an
everlasting Sabbath with God in the highest Heavens. 8. Be steadfast in the ways
of God in a backsliding Age: Keep your ground; while others fall away, stand
fast in the Faith: Be not ashamed to own Christ before all the world: reckon
upon the reproaches of Christ, and count them greater riches than the Treasures
in Egypt. Do not place Religion in a few shadows, when the substance is
neglected: do not think that God will be put off with the skin without the
substance: and by your holy Conversation, labor to put to silence the
foolishness and ignorance of wicked men, that men may have nothing to accuse
you but in the matters of Jesus Christ, that you may cut off occasion from them
that seek occasion. Let no reproach make you lay aside holiness: and say, If
this be to be vile, I will be viler still. And love all those that have been
instrumental for your spiritual comfort.
Forget not to contribute to the necessity of the poor Saints; think that God
has given you your Estates for such a time as this, for this is acceptable to
God. Bless them that curse you, pray for them that despitefully use you, so
shall you heap coals of sire upon their heads; when you are reviled, revile not
again. Do your duty to your Superiors, to those that God has set over you, and
so carry your selves as it was in the case of Daniel, that they may find
nothing against you save in the matter of your God. In all things let your
Conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Jesus Christ, That I may rejoice in
the day of the Lord Jesus, that we have not run in vain, and labored in vain.

And labor to keep up that Christian love which in this place has been more
eminent than any where I know. I would preach St. John's Doctrine, Little
children, love one another: And that my expression may be pathetical, I shall
speak it in the words of the Apostle, in Phil. 2.1, 2. If there be therefore
any Consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the
Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye like-minded,
having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind.

I now have but a word more, speaking of yours and mine own comfort under this
sad Dispensation.

1. It is a Minister's comfort, that when he is taken from his People, he can
yet Commend them to God, and to the Word of his grace, which is able to build
them up, and to give them an inheritance among them that are sanctified.

And truly, my dearly beloved in the Lord, this is my great work now, when I am
a dying to you as to my public Preaching: My beloved, I am very sensible that
it is a very sad and solemn thing for a Minister to be rent from a People that
he loves as his own Soul, that he has labored among; for to bid adieu to
those solemn meetings, wherein I have preached to you, wherein we have mingled
our sighs and our tears before the Lord, wherein we have rejoiced and sat down
before the Lord at his Table: Now to think that I must Minister with you and
for you no more in these Ordinances, methinks it is a heartbreaking
consideration, to think that I am now dving in this congregation, to think that
I now dying whilst I am preaching; but this is my comfort under these sad
thoughts, that I can Commend you to God, and to the Word of his Grace; to one
that is able to keep you, and to build you up, and to give you an inheritance
among them that are senctified. Like a dying Father, I can commend you to the
care of such a Friend, infinitely able to supply all that I could not do for
you.

It is the comfort of a dying Father, when he sees his children weeping round
about him, that he can commend them to a Faithful Friend, willing to do that
for them that he desired to do, and a thousand ^imes more.

I would hope that I have some children that I have begotten to Christ by my
Ministry, toward whom my bowels yearn; but hi^ is m^ comfort, that I can put
them into the Arms of their and my heavenl^ Father, of their and my blessed
Redeemer, to be ke^th^ the power of God.

There are many poor souls that are yet in the gall of bitterness, and in the
bond of iniquity; and if the Lord had seen good. I would sain have seen of the
travel of my soul in their salvation; but I can commend them to God, who knows
them who belong to his Ele^ion; he can either restore, or can do it by another
hand; and you that are in any measure grown in Grace, I will be willing to be
helpful to your joy, and instrumental to your comfort: But I commend you to
God, who is all to give all grace to you, and to keep you sied fast.

It will be some alleviation of sorrow, though I must leave you, and dye to you
as to my public Ministry, that I hope I may a while go up and down, and
converse with you, to be among you. The Lord grant this favor, that I may
behold your stedfastness.

2. This may be your comfort as well as mine; this may be the comfort of all
those poor Congregations that are like to be made Widows by the Metaphorical
death of their Guides and Pastors; but I leave you into the hands of all Grace
and of all Comfort.

This is a black day upon Israel, when so many faithful Ministers are slain at
one blow; this is a day of gloominess and darkness in many Congregations, for
so many Ministers to be beheaded in one day!

What has England committed? Is it not some high Treason? If we look to the
cause of it, why so many Ministers, are as dead in one day, as so many Children
without a Father.

And if we look upon this cause what has caused God thus to deal with us, we
must complain, Oh! our unfruitfulness! Our fearful unthankfulness under the
mercies of God: This will be the Emphasis and sting of our grief; and this
should be the matter of our grief.

And then, if we consider the sad Prognostic, what it does seem to foretell: It
is a sign, that when God lays aside so many faithful Ministers, of some scourge
or calamity that is coming upon us.

But you that can lament this Judgment, you that can lament the sad
deprivations of these powerful Ordinances; Remember, that though your Minister
be dead, God can raise you up others in their stead; and where the way of
instruments are wanting, He can do it without them; and those that are begot in
Christ, shall be preserved; and those yet unbrought in, who belong to the
Election of Grace, shall in Gods due time have the effectual work of the Spirit
wrought upon their Souls. For he is able to build you up, and to give you an
Inheritance among them that are sanctified.

And though I take this solemn leave of you, as to this public Exercise, yet
if the Lord shall open the door, and take of those bands of Death that the Law
has laid upon my Ministry in regard of Conscience, who cannot Conform (for
which our public Ministry is suspended) I shall cheerfully and willingly
return to you in this place.

But now, though your dying Minister, in respect of the Exercise to his public
Ministry, is leaving of you, yet I commit you into a safe hand, I commend you
to God, and to his Grace. Amen.

Mr. Pledger's Farewell Sermon.
Revel. 2.9, 10. I know thy works, and tribulation, and poverty (but thou art
rich;) and I know the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews, and are not,
but are the Synagogue of Satan.

Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer; behold, the Devil shall
cast some of you into Prison, that ye may be tried, and ye shall have
tribulation ten days: be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a
Crown of life.


IN the former Verse you have the Superscription and Description of this
Epistle: the Superscription by the mouth and hand of John, to the Angel of the
Church of Smyrna (that is) the Ministry of the Gospel, or the College of
Presbyters: As the whole Tribe of Levi in Malachy is called the Angel of the
Lord: so here, the whole Tribe and Office of the Ministry is called the Angel:
Angel is not a term that signifies a single Person, but a name of Office. Then
for the Description (These things says the first and the Last, which was dead
and is alive.) He is described by his. Eternity, by his suffering, and by his
reviving. I shall not speak of this, nor of the Verses following the Text. I
shall speak of the Inscription or Narration of the Epistle in these two Verses,
wherein you have, 1. A Commendation. 2. An Admonition, a piece of Heavenly
Counsel.


1. You have a Commendation: I know thy works, etc. I like well the pains that
thou take in my service for my Servants sake; I know how thou have suffered:
I take all well, I consider all the reproaches that are vomited our against
thee.

2. Then you have the Counsel. 2. Fear none of these things. 2. The Arguments
to set it on.

1. It Is the Devil that shall trouble you: he is the prime Agent, he that never
took a good Cause: Thou have certainly God for thee, if thou have the Devil
against thee. 2. This Devil shall be checked and restrained.
1. As to the number of them he shall deal withal: [The Devil shall cast some
of you into Prison] He aims at all, but he shall come short of many.

2. In respect of the kind of the Affliction [Cast some into Prison] He aims at
our Souls, to disturb the peace of them, to cast us into Hell;] but it shall be
but into Prison.

3. For the design of this Affliction [Not for destruction, but to try us] It
shall not be as Wood in the fire, to be consumed; but as Gold in the sire, to
be tried.

4. For the term of duration; it shall not be for ever: [But for ten dayes] for
a time, a set time, for a short time; perhaps thou shall lose thy life, but Be
thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a crown of life.

Before I finish, I shall endeavor to show the whole light of this Text, in
these six or seven Propositions.

Pro. 1. First, Jesus Christ takes notice of all the works, and trouble, and
losses that we endure for him. There cannot be a godly word spoken, but the
Lord hears it, takes notice of it; not a day of humiliation, not a tear, not a
prayer, not a sigh, not a cup of cold water, but the Lord sets it down: Item,
At such a time thou did lose such a thing, hazard such a concernment. Now
this knowledge lies in two things: 1. It implies an Approbation. 2. A
Recompense: I know what thou do, what thou suffer; so as to approve it,
and so as to recompense it.
Now then if God takes notice of what we do and suffer for his Name, then
either we must say, He has not good enough, or not time enough to bestow that
good upon us, or not faithfulness enough to perform his promise, before we can
be moved from his service.

Pro. 2. Secondly, I observe, Believers in their poor condition, when they have
lost all, they are rich: I know thy poverty, but thou art rich. The only wise
man is the only rich man, (so says the Philosopher) but the Believer is the
rich man, (so says the wisdom of God in the Text.) And the riches of a
Believer lies in five things.

1. In his interest, he has a God for his portion: Faith does unite and
implant into the Lord Jesus Christ; so that we are become spiritually rich to
the utmost degree of happiness: says David, The lines are fallen to me in a
pleasant place, I have a goodly heritage. All that rich love of God, which is
stronger than death it self: a rich Covenant of Grace shines in the Promises as
so many Pearls; he will not with hold any thing that is good, nor suffer any
thing that is evil to fall upon us, that shall not turn to good. How rich are
they that are rich in God!

2. Believers must needs be rich in their relations: Our Communion is with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ: They are married to Christ, and have an
Interest in him, they must certainly contract very honorable Allies, the
Brother of Jesus Christ, a Member of Christ: she that marries a Prince or King,
is a Queen: What title of Honor shall we give to her that is espoused to Jesus
Christ?

3. The Believer is honorable in his possessions: To name but two, possession
of Grace, possession of Peace: Grace and Peace, there is your riches; so the
Lord salutes you in his Word: the least dram of Grace is more than all the
World. And this is the character of one that hungers and thirsts after Christ.
And then for comforts which are grounded upon grace and the work of grace: for
the spring of grace is a spring of joy: In the world you shall have trouble,
but in me peace: And, in the midst of my troubled thoughts (says David) thy
comforts delight my Soul.

4. A Believer is rich in regard of his expectation, that Reversion, that
blessed hope that is reserved for him. A Believer his character is, to long and
look for the appearance of Christ: The Believer is rich in the everlasting
Kingdom of glory.

5. A Believer is rich in the things of this life: he can live above these
things, he can be content without them; contentations is your riches: you shall
want nothing that is good: Why then, have we not enough? And if we have enough,
Why do we nor see our riches? Because God does not shake down the Acorns from
the Tree of common providence, which he does to the herds of the World, but
feeds us with Childrens bread, shall we therefore repine? Let us see our riches
even in the things of this life. He that believes on Christ, is in such a
condition as can know no want: He that is not in Christ, cannot be rich: He
that is in Christ, cannot be poor. Judge not of his condition by what he
appears to be outwardly. A Believer is worth as much as the Promises come to,
which are his Charter; as much as the Kingdom of Heaven comes to, which is his
Reversion.

Prop. 3. Christ takes notice of all the reproaches and blasphemies of his
Adversaries: I know the blasphemy of them that say they are Jews and are not,
but are of the Synagogue of Satan. Christ counts himself reproached when his
Servants and ways are reproached: The reproaches of them that reproached thee
are fallen upon me. A Christian does quarter Arms with Christ: Therefore, all
the reproaches of the black mouths they are especially taken notice of by Jesus
Christ. There is not a word they can speak, but is presently recorded among the
memorandums of Jesus Christ. Repent, if it be possible, that the word in thy
tongue, the thought in thy mind may be forgiven; I say, if it be possible,
though a malicious Scoffer does seldom return.

Prop. 4. What ever the Children of God suffer at any time before the Grave,
they may suffer still [ I know thy works and tribulation (nay, yet the wind is
not yet over) in the next verse thou shall suffer.] After great expenses of
blood and treasure, still more heavy calamities: the water of Tribulation does
rise higher and higher, till the Believer resists unto blood, striving against
sin: you must expect it, you must go with your lives in your hands, resolving
upon the greatest trouble, to wade through a deep flood of calamities, not one
piece of the Cross excepted.

Prop. 5. Christ usually gives notice to his people in their sufferings; he
tells us before hand. So Joh. 16.7. Mat. 24.9. Acts 9.16. There never did besal
any great trial, but the Church of God had notice of it: Abraham had notice of
the ruin of Egypt: So the Antichristian trouble must come upon the Church,
rise higher and higher, specially in the last days: they are set down exactly
in the Book of the Revelations: And the reasons are,

1. That Gods people may not be offended when troubles come, Joh. 16.1. I told
you, that you might not be offended. Look for them that you may not be
terrified by reason of the unexpectedness of them. 2. That he might convince us
that there is nothing befalls us without his privity: he that foresees them,
must needs see them; he that forecasts them, must needs have the ordering of
them; not a hair of your head falls to the ground without his Council, without
his hand. 3. That we might provide for them: know you not the coming of the Son
of man? When Christ comes with notable mercies, usually he sends his
Harbingers; we must therefore be as Noah: being warned of God, believing his
word, he was moved with fear, and built an Ark.
Prop. 6. Whatever troubles come upon the people of God, they have no cause to
fear: Fear none of these things thou shall suffer: be careful for nothing: (it
is very comprehensive) there is a fear that we cannot be without, and there is
a fear we may not admit: A fear there is of dependence, this furthers our
preparation, prayer, renouncing our selves, flying to the Lord Jesus under his
wings: that is a blessed fear of trouble, that makes us to come nearer to God:
But then there is a fear of despondencie, Apostasy, a fear of Distraction, so
as to be dismayed, discouraged. There is no ground of salvish fear as to God;
no ground of a fear of man, of any thing that man can do to us: And the Reason
is,

1. All our sufferings are ordered by a Father: it is the potion that thy Father
gives thee to drink: what ever bitter ingredient there is in it, still its of
thy Fathers procuring: why, will thou suspect it to be poison, and be afraid of
it? no, be encouraged. 2. Fear not, Christ stands by thee in all thy
sufferings: The Angel stood by Christ in his Agony to comfort him: but Christ
stands by us in our Agony, in our contending for the Faith: Fear not (says
God) O worm Jacob, I will be with thee: He is always with us, though sometimes
as to sense it is otherwise: nay, if Christ be nearer to us at any time, it is
when trouble is most near us. ( O Lord be not far off, for trouble is near,
says the Psalmist.) That trouble is blessed that engages God to be nearer to
us, that engages us to come nearer to God. 3. Fear not: Whatever it is that we
suffer, there shall be sufficient strength given to bear it, to go through it:
God will never lay more upon thee than he will enable thee to bear: and if thy
strength be increased proportionably, it is all one to lift a pound weight, and
to lift an hundred pound weight. 4. Fear not any of these sufferings, because
none of them shall hurt thee; God has said, he will stave all evil from thee
(no evil shall come nigh thy dwelling) and he that fears the Lord shall not be
visited of any evil, Prove. 19.23. No hurt shall come, nothing shall come to
thee amiss (that is, as to thy Soul, and the Soul is the man; there shall be no
impairing to thy Soul, to thy best interest; thou shall lose nothing but that
thou can not keep, nothing that enters into the other world to make up thy
happiness; thou shall lose nothing to do thee good; no loss of communion with
God, no loss of Grace, Peace, and Comfort; thy interest shall not be shaken,
thy Communion shall not be diminished.
But why do I speak of no hurt? there shall come a great deal of good by these
troubles. When God calls thee to suffer, and thou will put him off with doing,
make it up that way, God loses by it, and thou do lose that thou do; but if
you will buckle your self to that service God calls for; active when it is
active, passive when it is passive; this is that piece of godliness that is
great gain. Thou will either live or die, and shall gain both ways; if thou
live, thy Graces shall be better, the Spirit of God shall be upon thee; if
thou die, thy Glory, which is weighty, shall be double; the weightier the
Cross, the weightier the Crown: be content to go as Christ did, from the Cross
to the Crown. Let us strive against our carnal Lusts, those sew things that are
ready to choke our faith, disparage God, and cut the sinews of our endeavors
to any service God calls us to.

1. Consider our troubles are like to be great: here is the Symptom of Gods
displeasure upon us, here is the pouring out of such a providence among us, as
is usually attended with destructive Judgments. Sodoms calamity was coming;
when one Lot was discharged: Germany's calamities was coming, when one Luther
was taken away; Lord then what woe is this, to sweep away so many faithful,
painful Laborers at once! but it is our duty to suffer patiently, and not
complain.

2. As our troubles must be great, so many will fear, and in fearing faint; we
see it come to pass, and you will find it more and more: There are those that
run with the Footmen, that will not keep pace with the Horsemen, that may be
left behind, and be trod under foot: our troubles are likely to rise according
to all we can learn from Scripture and Providence, and very many there be that
will shrink.

3. Consider it is a very difficult thing to stand steadfast in a day of evil;
you cannot name any of God's Children, but when they have indeed come to it,
their carnal sears have been working so, as their feet have almost slipped, they
have been almost gone, but that for the promise of God, that he would ^^y no
more upon them than he would enable them to bear.

O but you will say, What will become of the public interest, of the name and
Church of God? and what shall become of my private interest?

I answer, you have no ground of fear (according to Scripture) in either of
these respects.

First, as to the public Name of God, the interest of his Church, of his
truth, of righteousness, or of a real Reformation, the interest of our prayers
and hopes, be not afraid.

1. God bears a dear respect unto his People: they are represented in Scripture
by all names that may import dearness and nearness imto him: the interest of
his glory is bound up in his people: he calls Israel his Glory: We know the
interest of men is that which moves the world: but the interest of God, of his
Glory, no doubt will be the ground of safety and security unto us, even till
God takes us to Heaven. For the interest of Gods Justice God made Hell; and for
the interest of his mercy and grace, be gave Jesus Christ to die, to take
effect here among the children of men; Do you think God will forget his
interest?

2. Remember, Gods ways are in the deep: you cannot tell what God is doing;
when you think thoughts of destruction and confusion, my thoughts toward you,
says God, are thoughts of peace: And truly God he does not save a Soul, nor
does not promote the salvation of his Church in any eminent degree but it is in
a way that is cross and contrary to the sense and expectation of flesh and
blood: insomuch you know the darkness of our condition has been the entrance
upon deliverance; as just before the day dawns, it is the darkest of the night;
when God looked and there was none to help them, says he, My arm brought
salvation.

Thus it was with you that are effectually called: you have received the
sentence of death; the entrance upon your deliverance, is the darkest time of
your condition.

3. God can do great things, Joel. 2. Fear not, thy God, O Sion, can do great
things. It Is a disparagement that we offer to God, we ascribe more to the
Creature than we do to God, when we give way to carnal fear; fear not what man
can do, because of the power of God which is his shield and buckler; Is any
thing too hard, too heavy for God? And when God does great things, he usually
goes on to do greater; though he may seem to suffer his work to be thrown back
to confusion, and his people may be ready to say, we thought he had redeemed
Israel, that degree of Reformation shall not be lost. You know in Luthers time,
take any special degree of Reformation in the Church, and it seemed to be
opposed by the gates of Hell: when it was brought upon the stage to any hopeful
degree, when it was taken as it were utterly out of sight for a while: but it
was never lost: thus God is but making way for his own glory to appear in these
great works.

O, but you will say, What shall become of my particular? It is enough God has
promised that we shall not want any thing that is truly good, and that nothing
that is evil shall fall upon us, and lie upon us: though we do not see
deliverance, it shall be: whatsoever our sad thoughts and tremblings of heart
may be, yet give God the glory of his Word: Take these few directions:

1. Strive to strengthen thy Faith. Faith is that which lays hold on Christ,
and Christ is your strength: therefore Faith is said to do that which Christ
does: let every day drive thee to a renewed Act of Faith: Take heed, be not
shaken in the Faith of the Cause, be not shaken in the Faith of Christ (fides
causae, fides Christi) Be not shaken upon the Cause, which upon utmost
examination we find to be according to the Word, hold that: Heaven and Earth
shall pass away, but not one jot and tittle of this Cause. And then do not
shake in the faith of Christ, that is, in your laying hold in your applying
your selves to him, in your resting and settling upon him; beg of God to
strengthen your Faith. 2. Get more Self-denial: we must forsake all, we must
not accept any thing. A man would part with his life, as easily as with a pin
off his sleeve, if he had but some considerable growth in Self-denial. 3. Get a
great deal of love toward that Christ that loved us with love stronger than
death: get love of that Christ that may be stronger than life. Let nothing in
the world be of any consideration with you, so as Christ be magnified in your
bodies: love will breed courage, and cast out fear: slavish fear before God,
carnal fear before me. 4. Get a true insight in, an account of suffering and
troubles whence they are: they issue from the same love with redemption of your
souls from Hell, and your glorification: God does every thing in pursuance of
the purpose of his love: he does every thing according to the platform and
pattern of his thoughts toward us from eternity. Confider what troubles are,
and to what end, not to destroy, but to try: to wean from the world, to fit for
heaven. 5. Get an insight into the vanity of the Creature: you reckon the
Creature some great matter, and that is the reason of your love, and of your
fear. 6. Get the fear of God, that may overruled other fears: Fear not him that
can but kill the body, but fear him that is able to cast Body and Soul into
Hellfire. 7. Keep a clear conscience void of offense toward God, and toward
men: by a heart-abasing confession of what is past, and the application of the
blood of Christ; and by mortification and watchfulness therein, keep your
selves from evil for the time to come. 8. Get a better assurance of eternal
life; a glimpse and sight of this would make a man run through the very flames
of hell. How comfortable was Stephen, when a shower of stones was about his
ears, to see Jesus standing at the right hand of God! I wonder how they dare to
venture their life, that have no ground of a better life: but for those that
have a well grounded hope of the mercy of God, they say, We reckon these light
afflictions, which are but for a moment, to work for us a far more exceeding
and eternal weight of glory. Fear not any of these things which you shall
suffer.
Prop. 7. Christ does limit Satan, he has him in a string, him and all his
instruments: ( The Devil shall cast some of you into prison, etc.) Every word
has its weight: who shall do it? the Devil: What shall he do? cast you into
prison. How far! some of you: How long? ten days: For what use? that you may
be tried. Christ as he has Satan in a chain of providence, so he has a chain
of Restraint; it is Christ that sets a circle about him, he cannot cause a hair
of thy head to fall: he is in the hand of Christ; they are as truly under him
and his hand, as they are against him: If God let alone his Enemies, what shall
they not do? If God let alone his People, what shall they do?

2. God has a special Providence about the things of his Church by way of
Eminency, by way of Premission, and ordination.

3. You will not deny but there is power enough in God to destroy all that are
against him, and to limit; and all shall make to the praise of God, and to his
peoples good.

4. The Lord is exceeding merciful; he cannot hold when the Enemy comes to
insult, to blaspheme, and revile: Now will I arise, says God, and set him at
liberty from him that puffs at him: there is not only a judging of their
Enemies hereafter, but a judging of them here: the world shall say, Verily
there is a God that rewards righteousness, verily there is a God that judges
the earth.

5. God has a special design in hand: therefore just so far as he will carry
on the design God has toward his people (which is always a design of
Faithfulness) just so far shall the enemy go, Isa. 10. The Enemy means not so,
he means to cut off people, not a few; but Gods end was otherwise, and he will
overruled them: this is the comfort, there is a set time, there is an end.

There is a difference between the afflicting of God's people, and judging
their Enemies: in the intention, and extension: one is for ruin, the other in
proportion: one is a light affliction, the other a load. And then for
extension, one is for ever, the other, is for a time, for ten days. Then our
affliction shall have an end, I and a comfortable end, the end of our sins, and
the end of our sorrows? God will restore comforts to his mourners; let us be
mourners during the time of mourning: God will quickly cloth us with garments
of praise: there shall be an end of sufferings, never an end of our joy and
glory.

Prop. 8. To conclude in a word, Be faithful to the death: Be faithful in your
Promises, in your vows and purposes, your covenants of obedience and
reformation; persist in the doctrine of the Gospel, and the worship of the
Gospel, and the Ministry of the Gospel, and Offices Christ has fixed in his
Church: be faithful by your most earnest, zealous desires before the Lord: Be
faithful to the death: he will never let you see death till all your fears are
conquered: he can presently take them away; he will certainly be present with
you in all your troubles. And remember, God in tender mercy and faithfulness,
for the present accepts thy unfeigned purpose to be constant and faithful to
him to the death.

Mr. Philip Lamb's Farewell Sermon, Preached at Beer-Regis in the County of
Dorset, Aug. 17. 1662.
Joh. 14.23. Jesus answered and said unto him, If a man love me, he will keep
my words; and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our
abode with him.
THe departure of Jesus Christ unto his Father, from whose bosom he came into
the World, was very sadly resented by his Disciciples, whose mixed passions
produce a very great disturbance and trouble upon their Spirits.

The inward Anxiety, and unconcealed grief of the Disciples, move the Bowels of
their more affectionate Lord to pity their case, and provide for their relief,
and give them instructions how to express their love unto him in his absence,
not so much in carrying blubbered eyes and heavy hearts, as by remembering and
observing the Counsels and Instructions that he has given to them, while he
was present with them. So that this whole Chapter is filled up with Counsels
and Comforts, Directions and Consolations.

First, Directions and Counsels, especially in the 1.13.15. verses.

First, To the exercise of Faith, verse 1. Ye believe in God, believe also in
me. And this is the life, even a life of Faith, which we must live, till we
come to the enjoyment of Christ, by which we fetch comforts in all troubles,
and strength against all tentations, from Jesus Christ.

Secondly, To the duty of Prayer, ver. 13. which is the proper duty of an
afflicted State, as Jam. 5.13. Is any afflicted? let him pray. By Prayer the
Soul empties his Complaints in Gods bosom, and finds ease by telling him of
all the trouble and grief that attends his state; Prayer has that divine
excellency, that, like a heavenly Charm, it speaks away trouble, and speaks in
comfort; as it is said of Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.18. She prayed, and went away, and
did eat, and her countenance was no more sad; And thus our Prayers always
speed, when they be made by the help of the Spirit, and offered up to God in
the name of Christ, 13, 14. verses Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my name,
that you shall receive.

Thirdly, To obedience in the 15. verse, to do the work committed to them: If
ye love me keep my commandments. You cannot better express your love to me,
than in keeping my words. Nor is there a more certain way for men to find
comfort, than this, by keeping his commands: for then, though they cannot enjoy
his Person, yet they shall not miss his Promise.

Secondly, The Consolation which he gives them in the 2. ver. etc. the 16. ver.
etc. and the 23. ver. etc.

First, In the 2, 3, 4, ver. etc. From the place whether he was going, to his
Father and their Father, his Home and their Home; whence he did intend to come
again to them. So that his going from them, was but a Recess, or withdrawing
for a time, until he came: For in ver. 3. I will come again, and receive you to
my self; as rendered in the Greek, I come again, in the Present Tense, to
intimate the certainty of his coming to them again, as if he were already come;
which in ver. 28. of this Chapter, Christ tells them, should be matter of great
joy to them. If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the
Father.

Secondly, From ver. 16. The promise of the Spirit, which shall supply his
absence: such a Spirit as shall reach them, comfort them, and be in stead of
All to them, give them such Joy, Courage, and Peace, as the World can neither
give, nor take away, ver. 27. Peace I leave with you, my Peace I give unto you,
etc.

Thirdly, In the 23. ver. in the Text, We will come and make our abode with
him, while you keep my words, which is the great promise here.

If a man love me, he will keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we
will come unto him, and make our abode with him.

The words of the Text are an Answer to the Question of Judas, (not Iscariot)
Lord how is it, that thou will manifest thy self unto us, and not unto the
world? Jesus Christ gives the Answer, If a man love me he will keep my words,
etc. To him the Promise is made, That the Father will love him: They love him
that keep his words; and to these he has said, He will manifest his love to
them, and make his abode with them. In which word there are three parts
considerable.

First, A Supposition, If a man love me, etc. Secondly, A position, which is
the effect of that love: He will keep my words. Thirdly, A promise, which is
twofold. First, Of the Father's love, My Father will love him. Secondly, The
Co-habitation of the Father and Son with such a Person, We will come unto him,
and make ^ur abode with him.

The Observations that I intend to insist upon, are two:

First, That it is the duty and special property of them that love Jesus Christ
in sincerity, to keep the words of Christ. Secondly, That God and Christ will
make their abode with them that keep his words.
First, Of the first of these; That it is the duty and special property of them
that love Jesus Christ in sincerity, to keep the words of Christ.

If any love me, he will keep my words, he will do my will, walk in my ways,
treasure up my truths and counsels.

This Doctrine requires three things to be spoken to in their order.

1. That Jesus Christ must be truly loved. 2. What it is to keep his Words. 3.
Why it is both the duty and property of them that love him to keep his words.
First. That Jesus Christ must be truly loved; there is such an indispensible
necessity for this, that the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 16.22. If any man love not
the Lord Jesus, let him be Anathema Maranatha, let him be accursed.

But because every one pretends highly to love Jesus Christ, and but few that
love him indeed, I shall show two things more briefly.

1. Who is he that truly loves him. 2. Why we should all truly love him.
First, Who is he that truly loves Christ.

First, He truly loves Jesus Christ, who, upon the discovery and tender of
Jesus Christ in the Gospel, as King, Priest, and Prophet can willingly deny all
for him, as the Merchant, Mat. 13.45, 46. sold all that he had for the goodly
Pearl. And so Paul, Phil. 3.8. accounts all dung, his parts, his righteousness
by the Law, his greatest excellencies; he loves Christ in deed, and not in show
only, who can leave the world, his dearest lusts, his best righteousness for
Christ.

This is a true conjugal love, Psalm. 45.10. Hearken O daughter, and confider,
and incline thine ear, forget also thine own people, etc. When Christ sees that
we have such love to him, that we will part with all for him, then he sees a
beauty in us that delights him.

Secondly, He truly loves Jesus Christ, who having received him will rather
lose all, than part with him again; who accounts Jesus Christ better than his
best things, as he says, in Mat. 10.37. He that loves Father or Mother more
than me, is not worthy of me, etc. therefore says the Spouse, Cant. 8.6. Set
me as a seal upon thine heart, as a seal upon thine arm, let me be so united to
thee, that I may never be severed from thee. It is a very hard lesson, and an
irksome duty for the best of men, to part with friends, liberty, peace, life,
all these, or either of these sweet mercies; but to part with Christ, nothing
can persuade, or enforce the soul that truly loves him; that is a thought more
cruel than the Grave, witness the holy Martyrs, a whole cloud of witnesses;
that notable and eminent Galeacius, Marquess of Vico, etc.

Thirdly, He that truly loves Jesus Christ, takes abundance of delight in
communion with him. No pleasure like the kisses of his mouth, No sweetness like
that of his bosom; all his ways are peace, and his paths pleasantness; Christ
makes every condition comfortable, there is no comfort of life, but in that
little enjoyment of Christ that the soul has in his life: it is communion with
Christ, converse with him, that is all my comfort and pleasure in the world. O
how does the Spouse take care that he be not disturbed, in Cant. 2.^. I charge
you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes and the Hinds of the field, that
ye stir not up, nor awake my Love, till he please. The words are an allusion to
one that would not have her Friend disturbed, and speaks to her companions, and
charges them by all that is dear and pleasant to them, not to break the rest of
her best Beloved, and shows the wonderful delight the soul takes in communion
with Jesus Christ, and the special care that it always has, that no tentation
break in, nor corruption break out, to interrupt that sweet communion, or
occasion Christ's departure, who will not for any profit commit any sin, or
cause Jesus to depart from him.

Fourthly, He that truly loves Jesus Christ, having lost the sight of him, is
never satisfied, till he come to the re-enjoyment of him, is always at a loss,
and is never quiet till he enter into acquaintance and communion with him, as
in that of Joseph and Mary, they having lost their Son, went seeking till they
found him; So Cant. 3.1, 2, 3, etc. By night on my bed, I sought him whom my
soul loves, I sought him, but I found him not: I will rise now and go about
the City, in the streets, and in the broad ways, etc. I said to the Watchmen,
Saw ye him whom my soul loves? etc. By all which is expressed the sedulous
care and industry of a living soul seeking after Christ.

First, By night in her bed. Jesus Christ has her best thoughts; in her closet
and private duties of Prayer, serious Meditations, spiritual Ejaculations, and
secret self-Examinations: in all these the soul enquires: As one that loves the
world, by night his meditation is of the world; so the man of pleasures and
honors is pursuing his lusts in the night season; the wicked man is contriving
mischief upon his bed: so the soul that loves Christ, his are still at work
after Christ.

Secondly, I will rise now and go about the City, etc. (i.e.) I will betake my
self to all public Ordinances, and show more zeal and life in my duties, and
in these I will make enquiry.

Thirdly, I asked the Watchmen, the Ministers of the Gospel, which are, or
should be as faithful watchmen, that watch for our Souls, and be able to speak
a word in season, etc. So nothing will satisfy the Soul that truly loves
Christ, without him; and no means shall be negected till she enjoy him.

Secondly, Why must he be thus beloved?

First, Because he is lovely, altogether lovely.

First, Lovely in his Life, observing all the will of God, there was a
wonderful beauty upon him, if we behold and can understand, that hidden glory
of an untainted Holiness, and exact conformity to the will of God. Secondly,
Lovely in his Death, never more lovely and amiable to the believing sinner,
than when he was most despicable in the eyes of rebellious sinners. O then he
appears most beautiful and desirable, when he hangs on the Cross, there making
our Peace, procuring our pardon, obtaning life and glory for us, by that
shameful death. Thirdly, Lovely in all his Graces, each Grace a matchless
Jewel; Rocks of Diamonds, Mountains of Pearl, not worthy to be mentioned with
the least of his excellencies. If he put a little of this Grace upon any Soul,
though he be never so vile, clothed with corruption; as in Ezekiel. 16. from the
9 to the 16 Verse. Yet he may be made beautiful by his comeliness. Fourthly,
Lovely in all his Ordinances, in which the more immediate sight the Soul has
of him, the more he is taken with his Beauty; No wonder he is called in Hag.
2.7. The desire of all Nations.
Secondly, Because of his deserving love; We love him, because he first loved
us.

Consider in his love, these four particulars.

First, He laid down his life for us, such a love will deserve love, and life
too; John 15.13. Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his
life for his friends. Secondly, He lives now in Heaven for us, Heb. 7.25. He
ever lives to make intercession for us. He is there minding our necessities,
agitating our affairs; by his sitting there, we have Liberty of coming thither;
his sitting there in glory, we have our standing here in grace. Thirdly, he
accounts that as done to himself, that is done to them that are his, Zach. 2.8.
He that touches you, touches the Apple of his eye, and Mat. 10.40, 41, 42.
etc. He that receives you, receives me: and so he said to Saul, Acts 9.4. Why
persecutest thou me? when he was with commission from the High Priest, dragging
the poor Professors of Jesus Christ to the prison. Fourthly, He longs to have
us with him, John 17.24. Father I will that where I am, there they may be also,
to behold my glory. He is not satisfied with out their Company: and is always
imparting his most secret counsels to them, John 15.16. Henceforth I call you
not Servants, for the servant knows not what his Lord does; but I have called
you friends, for all things that I have heard of my Father, I have made known
unto you.
Thirdly, Because otherwise we shall not regard his words which is intimated in
the Text, If we love him, we shall keep his words; but if we love him not, we
will not keep his words; It is want of Love to Christ, that is the cause of the
abounding of every sin; for if we did love him, we should keep his commands,
which is the second particular.

Secondly, What it is to keep the words of Christ?

First, There is a Natural and Mental keeping of the words of Christ: and so we
must keep them, that is, Remember his Words, his Promises, Counsels and
Appointments.

The Memory is man's storehouse, or cabinet, that should be kept Sacred for the
truths of Christ; so the Disciples kept the word of Christ, when they remembered
his sayings; and David, Ps. 119.93. I will never forget thy precepts, for by
them thou have quickened me, (i.e.) I will keep thy precepts; for what we
forget we lose, and what we remember, we keep. And thus, as Friends take
pleasure to look sometimes on the love tokens of their absent friends; So may
we have singular comfort and refreshment, to see the heart of Christ in the
counsels, promises, and appointments left with us.

Secondly, There is an Evangilical and Practical keeping of the words of
Christ. When we do believe promises, and obey commands; Promises not believed,
and precepts not obeyed, are as water spilt on the earth besides the Vessel
that should receive it, Heb. 4.2. but when they are believed, they be as liquor
put into the Vessel for its proper use. Hence says Christ, Luke 11.28. Blessed
are they that hear the word of God, and keep it. Then we keep the words of
Christ, when we believe his promises, observe his precepts in all our
conversation, and walk by his appointments and institutions in all our duties.

Thirdly, Why? it is their Property and Duty that love Jesus Christ, to keep
his words.

First, Because true love is comprehensive: He that loves Christ truly, loves
also all that is his; He that loves him that begat, loves him also that is
begotten: The nearer any thing is to Christ, the better it is beloved, and then
we love the Word, when we keep it as a special pledge of his love; To have his
Word, and a heart to keep it, is a double blessing: and indeed, such a gift is
the Word of Christ, as wordly to be loved for it self, and kept for the Givers
sake.

Secondly, Because true love is Operative, It is the principle of
Gospel-obedience, 2 Cor. 5.14. The love of Christ constrains us. Where there
is the disposition of a Son, there will be obedience to the Fathers commands*
so where there is spiritual love to Christ, it will set the Soul on work, and
quicken it to keep the words of Christ. As is said of Faith, Show me thy Faith
by thy Works: So, show thy love to Christ by thy works; as Faith without works
is dead, so is love without obedience.

Thirdly, Because keeping the words of Christ gives the clearest and surest
testimony of the truth of our love to Jesus Christ. Probatio dilectionis est
exhibitio operis, Obedience is the most lively testification of love, as Christ
said to Peter, Love thou me, etc. show it in this, in doing thy duty, Feed my
sheep. So Christ tells us in the Text, Where the fire of love is in the breast,
there the flames of duty and service is in the hand, Joh. 15.14. Ye are my
friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. In the 1 John 5.3. In this is the
love of God, that we keep his Commandments.

Use 1. For Exhortation.

First, To a mental keeping of the words of Christ, according to that word,
Heb. 2.1. We ought therefore to give the more diligent heed to the things which
we have received, lest at any time we let them slip. And that we may not
forget, but keep in our memories the words of Christ;

First, consider, That all the promises and counsels which Jesus Christ has
made known to us, are not only for the present, but for the future use, Isa.
22.23. Hearken and hear for the time to come. We should hear as if we were to
hear no more. The Cordial which has sometime revived us, must not be lain
aside, lest for want of it another time, we faint quite away. The reason why
they were ready to faint under afflictions, Heb. 12.5. was, because they had
forgotten the Exhortation, which speaks to them as to Sons. For this cause
Jesus Christ often bids his Disciples remember the word he had spoken to them,
and knowing their frailty, promises his Spirit, Joh. 14.26. and that (says he)
(...), shall bring to his remembrance.

Secondly, consider, Not to remember the words of Christ, is a sad sign of our
dis-esteem of Jesus Christ. We usually remember Precepts, Counsels, and
Sayings, according to the authority which the person has with us, from whence
they come. It is a very great dishonor to Jesus Christ, when he shall cast his
words behind our backs. Did we honor Jesus Christ as our King, Lord, and
Lawgiver, we should be more careful to remember what he has spoken to us. We
often blame our Heads, as if the fault lay only there, that we do not remember
the words of Christ, when indeed the fault lies most in the Hearts, that we
have not more and esteem of Christ there.

Thirdly, The time will come, when we shall dearly repent every Truth
forgotten, that we did not endeavor to seal instruction upon our Hearts.

First, When God shall withold instruction from us, because we have refused
it, the time may come, when, as Am^s 8.12. Men shall run to and fro, and seek
the Word of the Lord and shall not find it; and then we shall see the worth of
the Word, that now we prize not.

Secondly, When God shall call us to account for all Sermons, and Instructions
we have received, as he will certainly do; though we forget, yet he will
remember, and he will ask how we have kept, and improved the Word he has
spoken to us.

To help us in keeping, or remembering the words of Christ,

First, Let our hearts be affected with the worth and excellency of the Word,
that it is more precious than Gold or Silver: and then we shall keep it as
choice Treasure. That which a man prizeth, he will keep in safe custody, and
have often in his eyes, as David says of the Word, Psalm. 119.97. O how I love
thy Law, it is my meditation all the day long. If a man account the Word as his
Treasure, he will not forget it, as Jerem. 2.32. Can a Maid forget her
Ornaments, or a Bride her Attires? This they forget not. Yet because we account
the Word as excellent and necessary as these, therefore it follows, Yet my
people have forgotten me days without number.

Secondly, Apply every word of Christ to your own Soul: though men will not
keep what is another, yet usually they keep what is their own; while men carve
away the Word to others, as if it concerned not them, it is no marvel if they
keep it not: but if we accounted every word as spoken to us, and our portion,
we should hear and keep it. Men remember the news which concerns themselves. We
should hear Christ speaking, as Job 5.27. Hear thou this, know it for thy good.

Thirdly, Meditate often upon what you have received, as Mary pondered the
sayings which she heard, in her heart. The way to keep any thing safe, is to
have a constant eye upon it. Meditation is the Souls serious retiring into it
self, to take a view of all that of God that is laid up within it self.

Fourthly, Hasten to do all that you have heard and learned, Psalm. 119.16. It
is said by David, I made haste, and prolonged not the time to keep his
Commandments. A man will not easily forget his Trade; for if we daily obey
commands, and believe promises, we cannot easily forget the commands and
promises given to us: which last direction leads me to the second Exhortation.

Secondly, It may exhort us to keep the words of Christ with an Evangelical and
Practical keeping. Keep the Word as a man keeps his Rule; or the Soldier keeps
his Weapon; let not the Word depart from thee, and do not thou depart from it,
by forsaking the appointments and commands of Christ.

First, Consider, That if we do not keep the words of Christ, by obeying, and a
suitable walking, we do but in vain pretend love to Jesus Christ, as they that
had no more of Christ, but to call him Lord, ( Mat. 7.21.) Not every one that
says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, etc. So, not
every one that says he loves me, but he that does my Word, he is my friend.

Secondly, Consider, What a sin it is to pretend love to Christ, and not so
truly to love Him, as to keep his Words; it is Hypocrisy, they be Christ's false
friends: an open enemy is less dangerous than they, Ezekiel. 33.31. They hear my
words, but they will not do them, their heart goes after convetousness: They be
false to themselves, and delude their own souls with a bare profession and
hearing, Jam. 1.22. Be ye doers of the Word, and not hearers only, deceiving
your own souls.

Thirdly, Consider, What judgment they incurr, and who can tell how great it
is? It Is called a beating with many stripes, when the least stripe from that
hand can break the loins, Luke 12.47. He that knows his Masters will and does
it not, shall be beaten with many st^ipes.

Fourthly, Consider, This is the clearest evidence of our interest in Christ,
of his love to us, That we keep his Commandments. By this we know that we love
him as our Christ, when we do not only love him as a Jesus, a Savior, but obey
him as a Lord, and follow his Law. When God shall write his Law in our hearts,
is not this an evidence that Christ is ours?

Fifthly, Great and many are the encouragements which he has promised to them
that keep his words. There be many blessings in the Word, but they only have
the blessings for theirs, who keep his Word, James 1.15. Whosoever looks into the
perfect Law of Liberty, and continues therein, he being not a forgetful
hearer, but a doer of the Word, this man shall be blessed in his deed; he shall
ask what ye will and have it, Job. 15.7. If you abide in me, and my words abide
in you, ask what you will, and it shall be done unto you.

That we may do the words of Christ,

First, Let it be the aim and intention of our Souls, when we come to hear, to
turn hearing into doing. Say as Paul did, Acts 9.6. Lord what will thou have me
to do? and Cornelius, Acts 10.33. Now therefore are we all here present before
God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God.

Secondly, Beg of God to give you such a heart, that you may not only say, as
the people in a good humor once to Moses, All that thou shall speak unto us,
that will we observe and do; but find your hearts such as in Deuteronomy. 5.29. O that
there were such an heart in them that they would fear me, and keep my
Commandments always, etc. it is he by whom the Word is made (as James has it)
(...), A fruit-bearing word. Begin all your hearing with prayers, and conclude
them with prayers, ^^^ause it is of the greatest concernment.

^^^^tly, A Use of Comfort.

First, If we keep this Word, this Word will keep us. It will keep us in the
worst of times, yea at all times, Prove. 6.22. When thou go, it shall lead
thee, when thou sleep it shall keep thee, and when thou awakest it shall
talk with thee. If thou keep his Commands, his Commands will keep you; if you
keep his Promises, his Promises will bring you to Glory.

Secondly, If we keep his Word, we shall not want present comforts. The present
gratuities which we have from Christ, should be enough to encourage us, if
there were no future reward, Psalm. 19. Inkeeping them there is great reward.

Thirdly, Jesus Christ promised a blessedness to such persons; they shall be a
blessed people, Rev. 1.3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the
words of this Prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein; and so
in Luke 11.28. Blessed are they, etc. and with the best of blessings does he
crown them in the Text, My Father will love him, and we will come to him, and
will make our abode with him; which is the second Observation.

God and Christ will make their abode with them that keep his Word.

In which Observation, we shall take notice of these three particulars:

First, How God and Christ do make their abode with them that keep his Words.
Secondly, Why God and Christ will make their abode with such. Thirdly, What an
excellent blessing it is to have God and Christ abiding with us.
First, How God and Christ do make their abode with them that keep his Words,
in which these three particulars must be shown.

1. How God abides with his People. 2. How Jesus Christ abides with them. 3.
How both God and Christ will make their abode with them that keep his Word.
First, How God, the first Person in the Trinity, is said to make his abode
with them that keep his Word.

And this will be two ways seen.

First, It is not here to be understood of his common or general presence, as
he is the infinite God, and being Omni-present, fills Heaven and Earth: for so
he abides with all the works of his hands; yea, so he is with them that fear
him not.

Secondly, It is here properly understood of Gods abode by way of special
presence, as he is a gracious Father: therefore Jesus Christ does first express
the Fathers love, and then his abode, as the product and fruit of his love, My
Father will love him, and we will come unto him, etc. He will come and abide
with his, as a God in Covenant with them, therefore has he put it into a
promise, in 2 Cor. 6.16. I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will be
their God, and they shall be my People.

Secondly, How Jesus Christ will make his abode with them that keep his Word
(which will be shown also, First Negatively, Secondly Affirmatively.

1. Negatively: It is not to be understood of a carnal or corporal presence of
Christ, (as Papists imagine) as if the flesh of Christ could be in all places,
whom the Heavens must contain till the time of the restitution of all things:
for so says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.16. acknowledging, If he had known Christ
after the flesh, yet so he knows him no more.

2. Affirmatively: He makes abode with his people after a spiritual manner; God
the Father makes his abode with his Servants, as a Father to them; Jesus Christ
abides with them, as the Head of his Church, as it is in Ephesians. 5.25. He is the
Head of the Church, and the Savior of his Body. God abides with us in Christ,
Jesus Christ abides with us by his Spirit.

A learned Author shows four ways of Christ's abode with Believers.

1. Politice, ut Rex in Regno, As a King in his Kingdom; and so he gives Laws,
as the only Head and King of his Church; protects them, and orders all their
affairs. 2. Occonomice, ut pater in Domo, As a Father in his House, and so he
takes care, and makes provision for his people, as a Father for his Family. 3.
Ethice, ut Ratio in Howine, As Reason in a Man, which is the light that directs
man in all his actions: Jesus Christ directs and leads his people. 4. Physice,
ut Anima in Corpore, As the Soul in the Body, which animates and acts the whole
man, without which the Body is a dead and liveless Trunk; so Jesus Christ does
quicken our Souls, by whom we have spiritual life.
And, that he is the Head of the Church, and thus abides with them,

First, Consider he has all grace, and life in him: John 5.26. As the Father
has life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have life in himself;
Therefore the Psalmist says, Psalm. 36.9. With the is thee Well of life, and in
thy light shall we see light.

Secondly, From him is all grace and life conveyed out unto us, Joh. 1.16. Of
his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace. Yea, whatsoever we
receive from the Spirit of God, we have from him originally, as in Joh. 16.15.
For he shall take of mine and show it unto you.

Thirdly, How God and Christ are both said to make their abode with them that
keep his Word. And this I shall show to be, three ways.

First, By their special providence and inspection with them, and so we may see
them in several Scriptures abiding with them, as in Zach. 1.8, 9, 10. verses.
There Is Jesus Christ among the Myrtle trees, which represent the Church. And in
Rev. 1.13. He is there in the midst of his golden Candle-sticks. And David
tells us of his experience of Gods presence with him, Psalm. 73.23. I am
continually with thee, thou upholdest me with thy right hand. And the Apostle
Paul, 2 Timothy 4.7. The Lord stood by me. Indeed the eyes of the Lord are upon
the Righteous, and he has said, he will not leave them.

Secondly, They make their abode with them in the Gospel, and Gospel
Ordinances: where these be continued in their power and purity, there the
Tabernacle of God is among men; and when these are taken away, Ichabod, the
Glory is departed: We may say, God has forsaken us. As the Ark was a type and
token of Gods special presence with the Jews, so the Gospel and
Gospel Ordinances, are a signal token of Gods abode with us; for in these we
may see him, in these we may enjoy him, by these we may be made like to him, as
in 2 Cor. 31.18. But we all with open fa^e behold, as in a Glass, the glory of
God, and are changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, even as h^ the
Spirit of the Lord.

Thirdly, They make their abode with them in the Spirit, which proceeds from
the Father and the Son; So they may both be said truly to abide with us, while
we have the Spirit, the Comforter which proceeds from the Father and the Son as
a pledge of their love, Joh. 15.20. When the Comforter is come, whom I will
send unto you from the Father: I will send him, says Christ, even the spirit of
truth, which (...), which proceeds from the Father: There is an (...), a
Procession of the Holy Ghost, from the Father and the Son to the People that
keep his Word; and thus Believers are said to hold fellowship with the Father
and the Son, in the first Epist. of John 23. It is by the Spirit we are drawn;
being drawn we come; being come, we are enabled to walk with God in Christ: It
is the Spirit that does for all us. As in the Echo, the Air being moved by
the voice, returns the same sound by its own motion: So in all our Communion
with God and Christ; the Soul being moved by the Spirit, returns answer by
virtue of the Spirits motion in us: Come, says the Spirit; I come says the
Soul, being taught by the same Spirit.

All the works wrought on the Souls of men in order to Salvation, are wrought
of God and Christ in us, but by the Spirit; As in these three special
particulars.

First, By the Spirit they instruct and teach; The Spirit is an enlightening
Spirit, a Spirit of Judgment and of Burning. The Spirit reveals the counsels of
God, the great Mysteries of the Kingdom; leads into all Truth, makes men wise
to Salvation.

Secondly, By this Spirit they quicken and comfort the Souls of men, Romans 5.5.
It is by the Spirit that the love of God i^ shed abroad in our hourts. Our cold
and frozen spirits are warmed and made fit for action, and by this Spirit we
are awakened: Hence the Church prays for the breathings of this Spirit, Cant.
4.16. Awake O North Wind, and come thou South, blow upon my Garden, that the
Spices ^^^of (...) flow out.

Thirdly, By his Spirit they do strengthen, and establish the hearts of men in
the ways of Holiness, thus they are made strong in the Lord, and in the power
of his might: strong to resist temptations; strong to suppress corruptions;
strong to perform duties: by this Spirit they are carried through all
difficulties; by this Spirit their infirmities are healed; they are made to
persevere, and kept steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in the work of
the Lord, and sealed up to the day of Redemption.

Thus God and Christ do make their abode with them that keep the Words of
Christ, till they come to make an everlasting abode with them in Heaven.

And according to the workings of this Spirit more or less in the hearts of
men, God is said to be present, or absent from his people.

Secondly, The Reasons why God and Christ will make their abode with them that
keep his words.

First, Because of their special love to, and care of them that keep his words.
Indeed all the care of God is concerning his people that he has in the world:
therefore in the second Commandment, he is said to show mercy to thousands of
them that fear him, and keep his Commandments, that do not cast his words
behind their backs, and forsaking his Appointments, follow their own
Inventions: So that if we faithfully keep his Word, he will abide with us in
our work: And this is the great Reason in the Text, My Father will love him;
not but that he loves his Elect from Eternity, but he will manifest his Love to
them, and therefore he will make his abode with them, as the people of his
Love; for in Deuteronomy. 32.9. The Lords Portion is his People, and Jacob is the Lot
of his Inheritance. And in Mal. 3.17. they are called his Jewels, and men will
abide with their Treasure.

Secondly, Because of the near Relation that is between God and Christ, and
them that keep his Word. That is a very full place of Scripture for this
purpose, Mat. 12.50. Whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in
Heaven, the same is my Brother, and Sister, and Mother. What nearer Relation
can there be than these? So near are they to Jesus Christ, that keep his Word,
observe his Will, and be true and faithful to his Appointments; and sure, such
near Relations will desire Cohabitations on both sides.

First, God and Christ are said to stand Related in a Paternal Relation.

Secondly, They are said to stand Related in a Conjugal Relation.

First, God and Christ stand in a Paternal Relation to his People.

First, God is their Father, and they are his Sons and Daughters; And this the
Church does acknowledge in Isa. 63.16. Doubtless thou art our Father, though
Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not, thou O Lord art our
Father, etc. And with this the Lord comforted mourning Zion, Isai. 49.14, 15.
But Zion said, The Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me: But
God says, Can a Woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have
compassion on the Sons of her womb? Yea, they may forget, yet I will not forget
thee: Behold, I have graven thee on the palms of my hands, etc. My abode is
with thee.

Secondly, Jesus Christ is their Father, Isai. 9.6. The everlasting Father.
Therefore he promises his Disciples in this 14 John 18. I will not leave you
(...), Orphans, or Fatherless children. He is the most affectionate
tenderhearted Father, Tam pater ne^^, tam pius nemo: None so good, none such a
Father as he (says Ter^ul.)

Secondly, God and Christ stand related to them that keep his Word in a
Conjugal relation; and God has laid a special command of co-habitation upon
persons in this relation, The man must dwell with his own Wife.

First, God is related as a Husband, And will not God dwell with his People,
when he has espoused to himself? I will betrothed thee unto me for ever (Hosea
2.19.) Yea, I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness and judgment, and in
loving kindness, and in mercies; I have even betreth thee unto me in
faithfulness. And in Isai. 54.5, 6. For thy Maker is thy Husband, etc. For the
Lord has called thee, as a Woman forsaken, etc.

Secondly, Jesus Christ is the Husband of his People, as we see in the whole
Book of Canticles. And so in Ephesians. 5. from the 29. Verse to the end of the
Chapter. Now where shall God and Christ make their abode, but with their
espoused Ones? Does Jesus Christ delight to lodge any where more than with the
Wife of the bosom?

Thirdly, Because of Gods faithful Covenant, he will make his abode with them
that keep his Word. If we keep the word of his Patience, he will keep the word
of his Promise; Revel. 3.10. Because thou have kept the word of my Patience, I
also will keep thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come on all the
world, to try them that dwell upon the earth. It is called a word of patience,
because it teaches Patience, and especially because it requires it in all
them that will observe it. And this is Gods Covenant. Now, what is the
Covenant? Jer. 32.40. And I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I
will not turn away from them to do them good; but I will put my fear in their
hearts, that they shall no^ depart from me; and such a sure and infallible
promise of abode can never be violated by a God, keeping Covenant; God may hide
himself for a moment, turn away in a little wrath from his people (Isa, 54.8.
etc.) but with great mercy will he gather them, and show them everlasting
kindness; Yea, his promise shall be as the^ waters of Noah: that, as the waters
of the great Deluge shall never cover the World any more; so, he will never
forsake his people utterly. It shall be more possible for the mountains to
depart, and the hills to be removed, than that he should finally depart from
His. The frame of the World may be disordered, but the frame of Gods heart
toward his people, can never be changed. When the men of the World think God
has forsaken them, he is near to them, and cannot cast off his people; He may
sometimes give them up for their sins into the Enemies hands, but cannot give
them away: this gave the Church that confidence in Mich. 7.8. Rejoice not
against me, O my Enemy, when I fall, I shall arise; when I sit in darkness, the
Lord shall be a light unto me. And this did bear the head of the New
Testament-Saints above water, 2 Cor. 4.8, 9. We are troubled on every side, yet
not distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted; but not
forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed. And whence is it, that Distress does
not follow our Troubles? Despair our Perplexities? Desention our Persecutions?
Destruction our sad Dejections? Sure it is, because God is faithful, always
with us, and will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able to bear,
etc.

Thirdly, What a special blessing it is, to a person or people, to have God and
Christ to make their abode with them.

The excellency and desireableness of this abode of God and Christ with
Believers, may be seen in these three partioulars.

First, It is better than all outward mercies, and earthly blessings. Secondly,
This will more than supply the want or absence of all other comforts. Thirdly,
All our happiness does lie in this, Gods presence with us.
First, The abode of God and Christ with a soul, is better than all outward
mercies, or earthly blessings whatsoever. God was wont to tell his people
heretofore, as in Deuteronomy. 28. That if they would keep his commandments, they
shall be blessed in their basket, and in their store; that he would give them
peace, the fat heritage of Jacob, and to ride upon the high places; all goodly
mercies: But now he does encourage them by a blessing of far greater worth, I
will love you, I will make my abode with you. It is so high and transcendent a
favor, that Moses preferred it before the goodly Land of Promise, Canaan, the
Land flowing with milk and honey, as appears by that passage in Exodus 33.15. If
thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence. Though Canaan be never so
desirable a good Land, yet rather let me abide in this vast howling Wilderness
with God, than go without thy presence thither. A wilderness condition with God
in the Tent, is better than all pleasures and honors without God in the
Palace. Hence David in the midst of all his royal pomp and greatness, desired
this, as the complement and perfection of all, Psalm. 101.1, 2. O when will thou
come unto me?

Consider these two Particulars:

First, That there is no beauty nor desireableness in the fairest outward
prosperity, if God and Christ do not make their abode with us. If we have all
the World, and cannot see the abode of God and Christ on our Tabernacle, in
their special Providence, in Soul-refreshing Ordinances, or by the comforting
Spirit; We may look on all, and say as Hiram did of the Cities Solomon gave
him, they be Cabul, Dirty things. If we cannot find God and Christ thus with
us, in the midst of our glory, The glory is departed. Secondly, Consider, There
is no misery, nor unhappiness in the worst afflictions, if God and Christ be
there; in the Furnace there is no Death, in Captivity no Darkness, in Prison no
Sadness, in Death no Hell. Jesus Christ tells us, he will not leave us
comfortless; He never told us, we should not meet with tribulations, but says,
In the world we shall have tribulation; and as surely, That in him we shall
have consolation. His people may be in the World friendless, harbourless,
pennyless, but he assures them, they shall never be comfortless.
Again: This abode of God and Christ with his people, will more than supply the
want or absence of all other things. Jesus Christ, when he would thoroughly
encourage his Disciples against all the hardships, and discouraging fears they
might meet withal after his departure, gives them this one precious Cordial or
Catholicon, in Mat. 28.20. Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the
World: When you are cast out of the Synagogues, had before Magistrates and
Rulers for my Names sake, scourged, hated, imprisoned: for all these things
shall they do unto you; let this comfort you; Lu, I am with you always, to the
end of the world,

Indeed: This abode of God and Christ with his people, is every thing to the
Soul; which we may see in these three particulars:

First, Their Presence is a Sanctuary, and sure Hiding Place. Secondly, It is a
sure Light and Guide to them. Thirdly, It is a Storehouse and Treasure of all
Provisions.
First, The abode or presence of God and Christ, is in stead of a Sanctuary, or
sure Hiding place; as Psalm. 84.11. For the Lord God is a Sun and Shield, etc.
and in Isa. 8.13. says the Prophet, Sanctify the Lord God of Hests, and let
him be your fear, and let him be your dread, and he shall be for a Sanctuary:
Do you set God before you, and he will set himself by you; and where the great
God goes, there goes a Guard of Angels. Psalm. 34.7. His wings be a Covert, and
his hand a Canopy, with which he hides from the Storm, and from Rain.

And that he is a mighty Savior;

First, Consider his Omnipotency; He can do whatever pleases him; He can make
the worm Jacob to thresh Mountains, and the Mountains to become a plain before
Zerubbabel, Zach. 4.7. All the Nations of the Earth are but as the drop of the
Bucket, or dust of the Balance, compared with him; and all hearts are in his
hands. Therefore, says the Prophet, in Isa. 26.4. Trust in the Lord for ever,
for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength, or, the Rock of ages. He is no
broken Reed, but that strength in which we may confide: As David says, Psalm.
46.1, 2, 3. Si fractus illabatur Orbis, If the world be dissolved, God is our
refuge and strength, etc. therefore we will not fear, though the earth be
removed, and though the mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea, etc.

Secondly, Consider his Immutability; We have standing comfort in the
unchangeableness of this God, Mal. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not, therefore
ye sons of Jacob are not consumed. And for this we have the experience of
David, Psalm. 9.10. They that know thy Name, will put their trust in thee, for
thou (Lord) have not forsaken them that seek thee: and the Churches experience,
Isa. 63.9. He bears them, and he carried them all the days of old. This great
unchangeable Savior saves his people these four ways.

First, He will save and preserve them from evils, and will be a Chamber of
safety, when the indignation is abroad, to hide from the storm; Ezekiel. 11.6. Yet
will I be to them as a little Sanctuary in the countries where they shall come.
I will be with thee, is God's great Promise, and his People's Security; it was
Joshua's Guard, and Jeremab's Brazen-Wall.

Secondly, He will save his people in afflictions, as he did the three Children
in the burning Furnace. Thus he delivers in six troubles, and also in seven, as
it is promised in Isa. 43.2, 3. When thou passest through the waters, I will be
with thee; and through the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee. When thou
walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame
kindle upon thee; for I am the Lord thy God, the holy One of Israel, thy
Savior. Job's experience is an everlasting proof of this, that when the Lead
is consumed, the Gold is preserved in the Furnace.

Thirdly, He will save or deliver out of afflictions, 1 Cor. 10.13. In the
midst of all temptations, he will make away for us to escape them. Many are the
troubles of the Righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of all. He is
Emmanuel, God with us; Our Redeemer from Hell, and from trouble.

Fourthly, He will save by afflictions, and by the evils they meet withal.
Prove. 29.15. The Rod and Reproof give wisdom; and, as David says, It was good
for me that I was afflicted. All things shall work for good. 2 Cor. 4.7. These
afflictions work for us a for more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. The
Vessel is usually covered with dirt, by the cleanser's hand, that it may shine
with the more brightness; So, by afflictions, God makes us partakers of his
Holiness.

Afflictions and outward evils come alike to all, but with much different
effect; All men fall into afflictions, Good and Bad: but as the Israelites and
the Egyptians went both into the Red Sea, and the one was drowned, and the
other passed through to Canaan; so the Righteous and the Wicked fall under
Calamity, the one finks through unbelief, and the other passes through safely,
And by Faith and patience comes to inherit the Promise.

Secondly, The Abode or Presence of God and Christ with Believers, i^ instead
of a sure Guide and Light unto them; They can never want a Guide, who have God
with them. As the Pillar of a Cloud by day, and of Fire by night, was unto
Israel in all their March, the same and more is God to his People in all their
Pilgrimage.

Consider three things.

First, Consider, That Man cannot be without this Guide; The best of man have
very great need of the presence of God to lead them, that they be not mes-led,
and that they don't saint in the way; What can the Sheep do without a Shepherd?
Such is God to his, Psalm. 23.1. Without God 's abode with us, it is as Children
without a Father, and none to direct them, and so left to run themselves into
mischief. What is the World without a Sun? Jer. 10.23. The way of man is not in
himself, it is not in man that walks to direct his steps. Secondly, Consider,
That it is our great wisdom to commit our way to the guidance of this God and
Christ; Every wise man will commit his way to God; and not move a step without
him; as Moses in the Conduct of Israel, would not move a foot without God. That
was a good Petition, or rather Resolution of David, in Psalm. 73.24. That shall
guide me with thy Counsel, and afterward receive me into Glory; I am resolved
be guided by Gods Counsels: and an excellent and imitable practice of Isaac in
Genesis 26.24, 25. that where he had met God at Beer-sheba, and where God had
blessed him, there he pitched his Tent; so we should move as God leads.
Thirdly, Consider, That if God undertakes to guide us we shall not miscarry, he
will certainly bring us safe to Heaven. Our feet may be almost gone, but shall
not be altogether gone. Psalm. 73.2. My feet were almost gone, my steps had
well-nigh slipped. So it may be with the choicest of Gods Servants; but in the
23. verse, Nevertheless, I am continually with thee; thou have holden me by my
right hand.
The more dark and dangerous the times be, the more we should desire Gods abode
with us; the nearer a night of trouble or of death is to us, the more earnestly
beg his stay, as the two Disciples, Luke 24.29. They constrained Christ,
saying, Abide with us, for it is toward evening, and the day is far spent.

Thirdly, The abode or presence of God and Christ with his people, is in stead
of a Treasury and Storehouse of all Provisions. Where Jesus Christ is, and
where God makes his abode, there is a Springhead of comforts that cannot be
drawn dry, Isa. 33.16. Bread shall be given them, and their waters shall be
sure, who have God with them. So was God to Israel, Deuteronomy. 29.5, 6. He fed
Israel in the wilderness forty years, their clothes did not wax old. You have
not eaten bread, neither have you drunk wine, or strong drink, that ye might
know that I am the Lord your God.

Consider three Particulars here.

First, Consider, God is such a store, that he is always full; He has an
Autarchy in himself, and says to his creatures, as in Psalm. 81.10. Open thy
mouth wide, and I will fill it; Ask what you will, and there it is to be had.
There be full treasures of temporal and spiritual good things with them, with
whom God and Christ do make their abode. As the Ark of God brought all kind of
blessings to the house of Obed-Edom, so when God comes, he brings all things;
Deus meus and omnid; My God, and all things. When Jesus Christ came to Zacheus,
he tells him, This day is salvation come to thine House; that is, both temporal
and spiritual preservations and deliverances; Salvation does consist in the
total absence of all evil, and in the presence and possession of all good.
Secondly, God and Christ have left with us the promises of the Covenant to live
upon, till we come to the inheritance of the purchased Possession: These be
like the Widows Cruse, that never fails; this, like the Manna, will not be
withheld while we be in the Wilderness, till we come into Canaan, to feed on
the fruits of that Land, Heb. 13.5. That is a sure Promise, in which we may by
faith see present supplies, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee; and in
Phil. 4.19. (We may possess in that Promise whatever we want) My God shall
supply all your need, according to his riches in glory, by Jesus Christ.
Thirdly, God has given us his Son, and Jesus Christ has given us himself, as
an ensuring pledge of all mercies contained in the promises, Romans 8.32. He that
spared not his own Son, but gave him for us, how shall be not with him freely
give us all things? He that has not spared his Son, will not withhold any
mercies; He that has given us the best of blessings, will not withold
smaller mercies; He does always tell his people, as in 2 Cor. 12.9. My grace is
sufficient for you.
Thirdly, The abode of God and Christ with Believers, is their Heaven upon
Earth. All our happiness is in the abode of God and Christ with us.

First, Consider it is a wonderful mercy of the great God, that by his common
Providence, he is with the works of his hands, which is man's safety; and David
admires at this, Psalm. 8.4. Lord, what is man, that thou art mindful of him?
and the son of man, that thou visitest him?

Secondly, Consider it is a mercy, of the greatest worth, and to be for ever
admired, that God and Christ do not only visit us by common Providence and
Inspection, as his creatures, but make their abode with us, as with children
and friends. O this is our glory; God does not come with a short life, for a
day, for a few days, but makes an everlasting abode. The Church complained
when she thought God was departed, because he had been with them, and made so
short a stay, Jer. 14.8. Way should thou be as a stranger in the Land, and
as a wayfaring man that turns aside to tarry for a night? etc. But when she
remembered the Covenant of eternal abode, she comforts, her self 8 in 9 Verse,
Yet thou, O Lord, art in the midst of us. To be ever with the Lord, is all we
can hope for, and it is man's contemplative happiness, to converse in his
thoughts with that glory.

First, Consider Jesus Christ has promised this as our great glory, and full
reward; I will take you to my self, they shall behold my glory, 1 John 3.3. We
shall be like him, we shall see him, as he is.

Secondly, This abode, with God and Christ is the highest Option and aim of all
the people of God. This was Paul pressing in Phil (...) That he might attain to
the Resurrection of the dead, (i.e.) the state of them that are risen, and with
God and Christ; Therefore resolves after a long debate, with himself, Phil.
1.2.1: To be with Christ is best of all. And David in Psalm. 73 at the latter
and, professes, He had none in Heaven but God, and there was none upon Earth
that he desired in comparison of him.

Use, First, of Lamentation, and laments three sorts of persons.

First, Let us lament such as be without God and Christ in the world, all
ignorant and ungodly persons; yea, this is the sad case of all the Sons of
Adam, ever since he sinned and lost communion with his God; They be brought
forth in the world with their backs upon God, and with God's face against them.
What was Cain's grief? How was his heart hurried into a world of inconceiveable
distempers, and distracting thoughts, when he must be turned out of Gods
presence, from the enjoyment of God in his Ordinances? Genesis 4.14. Behold, thou
have driven me out this day, (says poor Cain) from the face of the earth, (but
this is as nothing) and from thy face shall I be hid, (and now where is my
comfort and safety?) It shall come to pass, that every one that finds me,
shall slay me. Such persons be as Lambs in a large place, Hos. 4.16. without a
keeper in their most plentiful state; What hope have such to escape Hell and
Destruction?

Consider these particulars.

First, Consider, it is a very sad case, when God and Christ withdraw, or
depart but for a moment, it is a sad and intolerable moment, as we see in the
complaint of Christ, when God withdrew himself from him; My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? and in the example of David, Asaph, and Heman, in Psalm.
77. and 88. and the whole Church laments in Jer. 14.8.

Secondly, Consider, if God and Christ do never come to make their abode with
us here, we are never like to make our abode with them hereafter; and then it
were better we had never been born. Psalm. 73.27. They that are far from the
shall perish. And this is Hell, to be separated from God and Christ, 2 These.
1.8, 9. They ( i. e. the wicked) shall he punished with everlasting destruction
from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. It is Heaven
wherever God is in his special abode, and that is Hell where he is not present
in his mercy and grace.

Second Use of Lamentation.

Let us lament over a worse sort of men and they be such as in Job 21.14. That
say to God, Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways; that
refuse the Word of Christ, and be weary of God and his Ordinances, and so
reject God, as if one house could not hold them both; as in Isa. 30.10, 11. Who
say to the Seers, see not; and to the Prophets, prophecy not, etc. Cause the
Holy one to cease from before us. They that stop the mouths of them that speak
the Word of Christ, or turn away their ears from hearkening to that which is
spoken, say in effect, Let God be gone, let Christ depart from us.

First, Consider what an ill frame of spirit it is, for men to refuse the
presence of God. Was there ever wickedness like this? that the great God should
be as an unbidden guest with his own creatures, and have no better
entertainment than Christ with the Gaderens, who besought him to depart out of
their Coast; yea, which is far worse, rejected, as Christ was by the possessed
in the Gospel, Matthew. 8.29. What have we to do with thee? Art thou come to
torment us before the time?

Secondly, Consider it will be a very terrible day when God and Christ depart
from such persons: God threatens it as a sore judgment upon Jerusalem, Jerem.
6.8. Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from thee: When God
departs, in comes all judgments; for it follows in the Text, Lest I make thee
desolate: Desolation comes as soon as God is gone; yea, says the Lord, Hos.
9.12. Woe to them when I depart from them: And though he depart from such, by
removing his Counsels, Gospel, and Ordinances, He will still be with them in
judgment; when he is far from their affections, he will be nigh to their
Consciences; then he will show his terror and his wrath; and then they shall
find that as there is not a sweeter promise th^^ this, I will never leave thee
nor forsake thee; so not a more terrible judgment than this, I will not love
thee, nor abide with thee.

Thirdly, A Use of Lamentation.

Let us lament our selves, who have had God and Christ making their abode with
us for many years in their special Providence, Gospel Ordinances, etc. Yet
have we not improved so glorious a Presence, so rich a mercy; especially we
have cause to lament this fourfold neglect.

First, That we have so little acquainted our selves with God and Christ, so
little prized and observed their presence with us, that we have learnt no more
of God and Christ, but are yet strangers to them; so that Jesus Christ may say
to us, as in John 14.9. Have I been so long time with you, and yet have thou
not known me Philip? so he may say to us, Have I been so long time with you in
my Providence, Ordinances, and by my Spirit, and yet have you not known my
Goodness, my Faithfulness, my Name, my ^aws and Ordinances? Sure it is with
most of us, as with Jacob, Genesis 28.15, 16. The Lord was with him, when he was
in his Dream; and when he awaked, he said, Surely the Lord is in this place,
and I knew it not. So God has been with us, but we have been in a dream, or in
a sleep all this while; but when God shall awaken us, we shall say with him,
God was in this place, and we knew it not. Secondly, We may lament our selves
that we have so little conformed to God and Christ. God has been with us, but
we have refused his company, as Ephesians. 2.12. And had our conversation as
without God, and without Christ in the world: Oh, when God and Christ shall
depart from us, it will be a heart breaking to us, and we shall dearly repent
the least miscarriages. Thirdly, We may lament, that we have not lived more
upon God and Christ, to trust in them, and depend upon them for Life and
Salvation, and made him our Counselor, Guide and Strength, and lived upon his
All Sufficiency; we have not made them our Sanctuary, our Treasury, our
Happiness, though they have been with us, in whom are all things. Yet have we
lived at so poor a rate, (as to our spiritual comforts) as if we had been under
the Hypocrites Curse, Job 20.22. In the fullness of his sufficiency he is in
straits: Or guilty of that vanity mentioned in Eccles. 6.2. To have Riches and
Honors, etc. and not a heart to use them. To have faith to use them for our
comfort, we have even starved our selves at the fullest Table, and Spring head
of plenty. Fourthly, We may lament our selves, that we have not taken more
pleasure in the enjoyment of God and Christ in the Gospel and
Gospel Ordinances; accounting all Company and delights, solitariness, in
comparison of the joy and comfort that is in the abode of God and Christ:
especially, when God expects we should rejoice in him, and has promised to
abide with such, Isa. 64.5. Thou meetest him that rejoices, and works
Righteousness, and remembers thee in thy ways.
Two Uses of Exhortation.

1. To get the presence of God and Christ with us. 2. To endeavor to keep God
and Christ abiding with us.
The first Use of Exhortation.

Let us be exhorted above all desires, to desire Gods presence; And above all
getting, get God and Christ to make their above with you. Oh, with what ardency
and heat of desire does David express himself, Ps. 27.4. One thing have I
desired of the Lord, that I will seek after, that I may dwell in the house of
the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to
enquire in his Temple: and so in Psalm 42.1, 2. As the Heart pants after the
waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God; My soul thirsts for God;
when shall I come and appear before God? O when will thou come unto me? And in
a multitude of such like Pathetick breathings after God.

And that we may the more earnestly desire this mercy, the abode of God and
Christ with us: consider three particulars.

First, Consider, the presence of God and Christ is the special favor and
honor that God bestows only upon his own people. By this was Israel
distinguished from all the world, Exodus 33.16. My presence shall go with thee;
and in the last verse of the last chapt. of Ezekiel, it is the Church only that
is called Jehiah-Shammah, the Lord is there; her Founder, Preserver, and
Governor. Secondly, Consider, that they that have God and Christ with them,
dwell continually at the Fountainhead of consolations, as David says, Psalm.
23. I shall want nothing, the Lord is my shepherd, my cup runs over: Surely
goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life. This Fountain keeps
our cisterns full, our channels run shall low sometimes, but never are they
dried up, Hos. 14.5. I will be as the dew unto Israel, he shall grow as the
Lilly, and cast forth his roots as Lebanon: they shall grow up as the Lilly,
beautiful and fair, and as the Cedar, well rooted and established: He that has
the Sun has Light; he that has the Well, must needs have Water; Ille possidet
omnia, qui possidet possidentem omnia: He has all things, who has him from
whom all things come. Thirdly, Consider, that when all comforts leave us, God
will not: when friends forsake, and riches profit not in the evil day, God is a
present help in time of trouble, and loves to show himself in dubiis and
arduis, in the greatest difficulties, and on the mount of straits. Jesus Christ
says truly to us, what Peter said rashly to him, Though all forsake thee, yet
will not I.
Object. I have found God and Christ gone from me, says the soul, when I have
had need of him.

Answ. First, That God and Christ may, and do sometimes hide their faces from
their dearest friends.

Secondly, Though God and Christ do sometimes withdraw from us, yet every
interruption of communion is not a separation: The Sun does not cease to be,
when it cease to shine. Grace may suspend its acting, but does not lose its
being. God will not finally forsake his people.

Thirdly, God has very many gracious ends, why he sometimes withdraws, and
they are always in mercy to his people, Sad providence producing sweet effects.

Directions and helps how to get the presence of God and Christ with us.

First, Repent and humble your selves because of all your sins, that you have
at any time rejected the counsels of God, and resused grace and mercy, and
neglected opportunities of doing your souls good, and drawing near to God;
Repentance and resolution against sin, come like John Baptist, to prepare a way
and a place for God and Christ to come to, and make their abode in: Of the
Hearts and Houses of impenitent sinners, we may well say, God is not there. The
way to have God to turn unto us, is to turn away from sin, as Ephraim, Jer.
31.18, 19, 20. He bemoaned himself and repented, and God came to him as to his
dear Son, and to his pleasant Child.

Secondly, Believe in Jesus Christ, and by Faith get an interest in him: It is
by Faith only that we get an entertainment to Jesus Christ: It is by Jesus
Christ alone, that God and man come together. No man has seen the Father at
any time, but the Son, and he to whom he does reveal him; and he that has the
Son, has the Father, Romans 5.1. Being justified by Faith, we have peace with
God.

Thirdly, Own Jesus Christ in all his offices, as your King, Priest, and
Prophet.

First, As your King, let him have the Sovereignty of your souls, that he may
rule over you. If Christ be your King, God will be your Father; God loves to
come where Christ has his Throne.

Secondly, As your Priest, that his Righteousness may give you the advantage of
communion with God, without which we cannot come near to him, and he will not
come near to us.

Thirdly, As your Prophet, that he may show you the way; if his Spirit be your
Guide, and his Word your Rule, you may be sure his Promses shall be your
portion, even this Promise in the Text, They will come to you and make their
abode with you, even God and Christ.

Four^hly, Seek earnestly after God and Christ, in the use of all appointed
means, till you come to see and enjoy their presence with you.

Here shall be fhewn these two particulars.

1. Where we may seek God and Christ. 2. How, or after what manner we must seek
them.
First, Where we must seek after God and Christ.

First, We may find them in the works of Creation; these will represent God
and Christ unto us; the power and wisdom of God and Christ, by whom the World
was made; In omni re aspeciabili quaedam extant vestigia Dei: In all the
visible Creatures, there be some prints of the invisible God; so that he which
lives altogether without God, must needs be (...) without excuse, having God so
near him.

Secondly, We may find them in the Word, 2 Cor. 4.6. The glory of God shines
there in the face of Jesus Christ, and to them that are conversant in the Word,
God has promised to reveal himself: Isa. 66.2. To this man will I look, even
to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my word. And
the Apostle gives this direction, Romans 10.6, 7. Say net in thine heart, Who
shall ascend into Heaven, that is to bring Christ down from above: or, who
shall descend into the deep, that is to bring up Christ again from the dead.
But what says it? The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart,
that is, the word of faith, which we preach.

Thirdly, We may find them in Prayer, Jam. 4.8. Draw nigh to God, and he will
draw nigh to you: If you will be strangers to the duty of Prayer, to the Throne
of Grace, God will be a stranger to you; he has promised to draw nigh to them
that draw nigh to him: and so in Exodus 20.24. In all places where I record my
name, I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee.

Fourthly, We may find them in the communion with the people of God: Where two
or three are niet together in my name, there will I be (says Christ) in the
midst of them. Therefore Jesus Christ directs us to go up by the soot-steps of
the flock, and they enquire wisely, Came. 6.1. that say to the Church of Christ,
Whither is thy beloved gone, that we may seek him with thee? And when the two
Disciples went to Emmaus, communing of Christ, he came and joined himself with
them.

Secondly, How, or after what manner we must seek God and Christ?

Take these four following Directions:

First, Affect your selves with the worth and excellency of this presence of
God and Christ, carry a high esteem of them in your hearts: think with your
selves how safely they are immured, as the Prophet said unto his servant, There
is more for them, than can be against them: Isa. 33.16. Their place of defense
is the munition of r^cks, etc. O what sweetness and satisfaction have they
within, with whom: God and Christ abides! as the Spouse does express it, Cant.
1.3. Because of the savor of thy Ointments, thy Name is as Ointments p^ured
forth, therefore do the Virgins love thee. Thy Name of Mercy, Wisdom, and
Faithfulness, how does it refresh their hearts, that have the presence of God
and Christ? O sweetness and satisfaction beyond expression! and then conclude,
Si tanius quaerentibus, O quantus p^ssidentibus! If he be so good to them that
seek him, how good is he to them that enjoy him! Secondly, Labor to affect
your souls with the great want and need that you have of the presence of God
and Christ, while men do think in their hearts they can be well enough without
God and Christ, they will never seek after them, but say, as in Jer. 2.31. We
are Lords, we will come no more unto thee; that is, we have strength enough of
our own, we need no more of thy support: and thus David brings in the wicked,
priding themselves, in Psa. 10.4. The wicked through the pride of his
countenance, (as in the Original, through the pride of his nose) will not seek
after God. God is not in all his thoughts: when these proud Laodicean spirits
will not seek, the poor, hungry, desolate soul, that sees a need of God and
Christ, find them. Thirdly, Quicken your selves to much diligence in seeking.
The Prophet complains, No man stirs up himself to seek the Lord. It is a
business of the greatest concernment, and must not be attended with a cold
indifferency, but as one set on by a true love, and where that is, Non quiescit
amor, sed quaerit amatum; Love will be restless in the pursuit of the thing, or
person beloved. See with what heat men seek the world, with much more heat seek
God and Christ. We must do as the woman that had lost her groat, she lights a
candle, sweeps the house, seeks diligently; so we must set up the light of the
Word, and to work with the besom of a serious repentance, and
thorow-reformation, and diligently enquire. Thus David with a very vigilant
eye, seeks him whom his soul loved, Psalm. 132.4, 5. I will not give rest to
mine eyes, nor slumber to my eyelids, till I have found out a place for God,
etc. Lastly, Resolve with your selves never to give over, till you come to the
perfect and full enjoyment of them, as Job said, I will wait all the days of my
appointed time: so do you seek all the days of your appointed time; if we would
find God and Christ, we must all seek the days of our lives. They that will
find what they seek, must seek till they find. As God in the Creation did not
rest till he had man, so man should not rest till he has found God; and as in
the Redemption Jesus Christ did never cease seeking, till he found all the lost
sheep of the house of Israel; so we should never give over, till we have made
God and Christ our own.
This should be the work of our lives, and upon this work I must leave you.

For now I must tell you, that (perhaps) you may not see my face, or hear my
voice any more in this place; yet not out of any peevish humor, or disaffection
to the present Authority of the Kingdom (I call God and Man to witness this
day) it being my own practice and Counsel to you all, to fear GOD and Honor
the KING; but rather a real dissatisfaction in some particulars imposed, to
which (notwithstanding all endeavors to that purpose) my conscience cannot yet
be espoused; Wherefore, I hope in this, and in all my abode with you, I may say
(without ostentation) with the Apostle in 2 Cor. 1.12. Our rejoicing is this,
The testimony of a good Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, we
have had our conversation in the World, especially to youwards. And as he says
in Acts 20.26, 27. So, I take you to record this day, that I have endeavored
to be pure from the blood of all men; for I have not shunned to declare unto
you the whole counsel of God, both by my life and Doctrine; because I knew this
very well, that (as one says) Suadet loquentis vita, non oration; that the
Preachers life, is the most lively Preaching.

I shall only add this (my Friends) that though my Lips be sealed up that I
may not speak from God to you, yet I shall not cease to speak to God for you,
as ever I have done: And though I cannot have you in my eye, yet I shall lodge
you in my heart; and asking nothing of you, but your Prayers, shall hope to
meet you daily at the Throne of Grace, and that at last we may enjoy one
another in Heaven.

And because they say, the words of a dying man makes the deepest impression,
before I am altogether civilly dead, I shall give you one Exhortation more.

Secondly, Let it be your endeavor to keep God and Christ with you, that they
may make their abode with you in their hearts and houses, that whatsoever you
loose, you may not be undone.

In the General.

First, Take heed you do not slight, or abuse his Providence. Secondly, Do not
despise or neglect his Ordinances. Thirdly, Be sure you do not grieve his
spirit.
Secondly, Observe more particularly these ten Directions, which I would leave
with you.

That God and Christ may make their constant abode with you;

First, Endeavor to please God and Christ, and to walk as the Gospel commands,
in all well-pleasing. And for this purpose, Observe these three Rules.

First, Entertain God and Christ like themselves. Now they are come to you as
Solomon did his Temple, which he had prepared for God; The Heaven of Heavens
cannot contain thee, much less this poor Tent; so with the most humble frame of
spirit, admire his greatness, and infinite condescension, for he is the King of
Glory, as in Psalm. 24. And so give him suitable entertainment, for he will
dwell with the humble and contrite spirit, If Elizabeth wondered at the visit
which Mary gave her, with a Whence is it that the Mother of my Lord is come
unto me? then admire that the Lord himself should come, not only to visit your
hearts, but to make such a gracious abode with you. And, as the Centurion said
unto Christ in the Gospel, I am not worthy thou should come under my roof.
So acknowledge your unworthiness of so rich and unparalled a grace, that God
and Christ should come in unto you, to abide with you.

Secondly, Wait upon God and Christ with all readiness of mind, to observe
every intimation of the will of God to you. Stand always ready as Servants wait
upon the hand of their Masters, saying in your hearts, Lord, what will thou
have me to do? or, what will thou have me to suffer? It is the frame and
posture which Christ commends unto his Disciples, Luke 12.35. Let your loins be
girded about, and your lights burning, to do his will, as it is done in Heaven.

Thirdly, Take pleasure and delight in the company and society of God and
Christ above all the pleasures in the world. Do nothing without first calling
God and Christ into the action. Remember this in these four cases especially.

First, Pray God and Christ along with you into all your spiritual duties, that
you may be sure to perform them all according to the mind of God. None knows
better what will please God than himself; do not enquire so much what others
say, but what God appoints; it is not what this or that man says, how we must
serve God, but what God says himself; as Augustine said to the Manichee in
another case, Nec egote, nec tu me, sed ambo audiamus Apostolum: So, hear what
God and Christ says to us, as to the performance of all our duties: If we will
entertain God and Christ, and have their company, we must set before them such
savory meat as they like, lest we be like them ( Mat. 15.9.) of whom Christ
says, In vain do they worship me, etc. and our service be like theirs, of which
the Lord said, Who has required these things at your hands? O what was that
great evil the people were guilty of, for which there comes that heavy
judgment, Psalm. 78.60. He forsook the Tabernacle of Shiloh, the Tent which he
placed among them. Sure it was some great guilt; in the former ver. we find it
to be their Hypocrisy, Apostasy, and Idolatry; any taint of this kind, will
make the jealous God forsake our solemn meetings.

Secondly, Pray God and Christ into all your Civil affairs. The Greeks (...)
with God in their entrance upon every work, was a commendable practice. It is
reported of Publius Scipio the Roman, that he would always go first to the
Capitol, and then to the Senate; so we should begin our Civil employments with
spiritual duties: And do as Abraham's servant, when he was to take a Wife for
his Master's Son, he took God along with him; and thus to abide with God, is to
have God to abide with us. Therefore says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.20. Let every
man abide in the same calling wherein he is called, and in the 24. Verse,
Brethren, let every man wherein he is called therein abide with God, and God
will abide with him.

Thirdly, Pray God and Christ to your Tables at your eating and drinking, for
man does not live by Bread only. If these be guests at your Tables, you must
needs have cheer enough; there is more sweetness in a morsel with them, than in
all dainties without them, and then you may be sure also your Tables shall not
be a snare unto you. Theophrastus reports of the Heathens, that they did first
(...), and then (...), they did first Sacrifice, and then Kill, lay on their
meat, entertain and eat. And it is the Apostles rule, seeing all things come of
God through Christ, That God and Christ should not be unbidden guests: but, as
in 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the
Glory of God.

Fourthly, Pray God and Christ along with you in the morning when you rise, and
at evening when you lie down: visit him morning by morning, and evening by
evening; this is the way to have a prosperous day, and a safe night: David took
this course, Psalm. 4.8. I will both lay me down, and take my rest, for thou
Lord only make me dwell in safety; and this gave Jacob such a pleasant
dream, Genesis 28. that having God with him, he was all night within view of
Heaven.

Secondly, Love God and Christ above all, and then God and Christ will not
depart from you; for, He shows mercy to thousands of them that love him, and
has made over himself, and heaven, and all, to them that love him. It is
reported of Ignatius, that his love was such to God and Christ, that he had the
name of Christ, Cordi ejus insculptum, graven upon his Heart. It is such a
Heart love that he requires; for he is a jealous God, and will have all our
love.

If we love any thing better;

First, It will steal away our hearts from God: And

Secondly, It will take off the heart of God from us, so that God and Christ
will set themselves against us.

Thirdly, If we would have God and Christ to make their constant abode with us,
delight we in the society and fellowship of the People of God, with whom they
dwell; never be ashamed to converse with them, whom God and Christ do own for
theirs. The Apostle's Argument why we should entertain strangers, in Hebr.
13.2. (Because thereby some have entertained Angels unawares) is but mean and
inconsiderable to this reason, why we should entertain and own the Saints of
God: for thereby we are sure, to entertain Christ, as in Mat. 25.40. For this
cause the Gibeonites made a League with Israel, For we have heard that God is
with you. And there is a promise in Zech. 8.23. That ten men out of all
Languages shall take hold of the skirt of a Jew, saying, We will go with you,
for we have heard that God is with you. Malachy 3.16. They that feared the Lord
spoke often one to another, and the Lord hearkened and heard it, etc. He was
with them, and indeed, God dwells in the Tabernacles of the righteous.

Fourthly, If we would have the constant abode of God and Christ with us, let
us keep our selves clean from sin, our hearts pure, our consciences undefiled,
and, as the Apostle says, void of offense toward God and toward men; very
careful not to sin against God, and very circumspect not to sin against man;
that this may be our comfort, that the world must needs say of us, as they did
of Daniel, That they could find nothing against him, save in the Law of his
God, as in Daniel 6.5. Whatever others do, beware of sin. Say as Joshua, I and
my House will serve the Lord. Watch against sin, choose any suffering, rather
than the least finne.

Consider in that choice two particulars.

First, Consider in all your sufferings, God will be with you, but in any of
your sins, he will not abide with you; as in the example of Israel, Exodus
32.23. When the Calf was got into the Ca^^p, God forsakes the Host of Israel,
When Saul forsook the Lord, the Spirit of the Lord forsook him. That was an
excellent saying of Azariah the Son of Obed, in 2 Chronicles. 15.2. And oh that
all England could hear i^* Hear thou me Asa, and all Judah, The Lord is with
you, while you be with him; If you seek him, he will be found of you; but if ye
forsake him, he will forsake you. Secondly, Consider, it is an act of high
presumption, reflecting much upon the purity and holiness of God, for men to
imagine that God will own and prosper them with his presence while they go on
to do wickedly, in their Whoredoms, Drunkenness, Blasphemy, and all manner of
Profaneness, which God can no more own, than disown himself. So they foolishly
promise themselves Peace, Deuteronomy. 29.19. Though they walk in the imagination of
their hearts, and add drunkenness to thirst: But the Lord will not spare, but
his anger and jealousy shall smoke against them, till he has brought them
down from their high mount of a sinful and carnal confidence. Therefore the
Prophet reproves that wicked People, Micah 3.11. where the Judges, the Priests,
and the Prophets were corrupted. Yet they say, Is not the Lord among us, none
evil can come upon us, Therefore shall Zion be plowed as a Field, etc. as Abner
said to Joab, This will prove an evil thing and a bitter in the latter end: as
Galen says of Meats, Quae dulcia sunt, facile in bilem and amaritudinem
convertuntur; Sweet Meats generate choler and corrupt matter; so sin, that is
a sweet morsel now, will be shame, death, and hell at last.
Fifthly, With an humble acknowledgment of former barrenness, under Gods
gracious presence with you, resolve and endeavor to be more fruitful. God
never left his Vineyard, and pulled up the Hedge, and commanded the rain not to
fall upon it, in Isa. 5. till it became barren, or did bear corrupt fruit. The
exiled Confessors in Queen Mary's days, confessed that (as Vrsin says in the
Preface to his Catechism) the cause of their present suffering, was their
former barrenness, and unprofitableness under the Gospel. And a sad example of
this is Jerusalem, over whom Christ laments: O Jerusalem Jerusalem, thou, etc.
if thou had known in this thy day, etc. but now they are hid from thine eyes:
and when once a People grow up to this height, to reject the Gospel, then
expect some fearful Judgment. Read the last Chapter of Chronicles, the second
Book, and at the 16. Verse, and them you will see, when the wrath of God is
like to break our upon a people without remedy.

Sixthly, If you would have the continual abode of God and Christ with you, Let
God have all your thoughts, let him be your meditation; this is the way to have
the best company when you be alone: David would meditate of him day and night,
and professed the meditation of him should be sweet to him.

Here consider two particulars:

First, Consider that no place, state or condition, can hinder the soul of this
way of secret communion with God and Christ; this privilege could not be
denied to a benighted Jacob, to an imprisoned Jeremy, to an exiled John in
Patmos; by this (says Jerome) Solitudo fit Paradisus, a man may turn a
Wilderness into a Paradise; and therefore we read in Cant. 11.12. how the
Spouse invites Christ to go with her, as Isaac did into the Fields to meditate,
Come let us go into the Fields, and lodge in the Villages. Secondly, Consider in
these secret silent visits of the Soul, God and Christ do take abundance of
delight; our Night-thoughts, our Field-thoughts, our Closet-thoughts, are very
welcome to them; yea, when we can do no more but think of God, our very
thoughts shall be an accepted service, Cant. 2.13. He loves the Fig Tree that
puts forth her green Figs. The ripe fruit is in the bud: so, holy
endeavors in pure breathings and desires, God accepts, when our Infirmity, or
the Iniquity of the Times may be such, that we can do no more.
Seventhly, If we will have God and Christ to make their constant abode with
us, then let us walk humbly with God. He that beholds the proud afar off, will
be nigh to them that humble their Souls under his mighty hand, Isa. 57.15. Thus
says the high and lofty One, that inhabits eternity, whose Name is Holy: I
dwell in the high and holy place; with him also, that is of an humble and
contrite spirit.

God has two Heavens in which he dwells.

First, His Glory dwells in the high and holy place in Heaven above. Secondly,
His Grace dwells in the humble and lowly spirit. Here will I dwell, says God.
Eighthly, If you would have the constant abode of God and Christ with you, be
sure to look to your Hearts, that you walk in your uprightness: be true to the
Word of God, be true to your profession. There is not in the world a more
lively representation and image of God, than the heart of the upright:
therefore God loves so much, when he has drawn his likeness upon them, to walk
with them, therefore David resolves, Psalm. 101.2. I will walk in the midst of
my house with a perfect heart: O when will thou come unto me? This was the
comfort of the Apostle, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, he had his
conversation in the world; God will be with such, and such shall be with God,
Psalm. 37.37. Mark the perfect man, behold the upright, the end of that man is
peace: And thus God appointed Abraham to walk, that he might be with him a God
in Covenant, Genesis 17. Walk before me, be thou perfect, and gives him this
encouragement, I am God all-sufficient: God's all sufficiency being sufficient
to keep the soul upright, being rightly improved.

There be two things which usually biass the soul away from God, and makes it
warp from its holy principles. First, the Frowns; Secondly, the Flatteries of
the world.

Against both which, there is a sufficient remedy in the All-sufficient God.

First, That which often perverts the soul from the truth, is the fear of
troubles and wants; If I keep my integrity (says the soul) I shall be undone, I
shall lose my estate, embroyl my self in many troubles; perhaps a Prison,
Exile, or Death comes next. But what force is there in this tentation? if we
hear on the other hand God saying, If thou will be upright, fear no troubles,
no wants, I am a God All-sufficient, as in Job 22.25. to the end of the
Chapter, The Almighty shall be thy defense, (then fear not force) Thou shall
have plenty of silver, thou shall gather gold as dust, and the gold of Ophir as
the stones of the Brooks. Then fear no wants.

Secondly, There is another thing in the world that has a very great influence
upon the spirit of a man, to pervert him, and turn him from his integrity; and
that is the hopes of preferment, and greatness of the world: But this is but a
poor bait, if we look upon the All Sufficiency of God: Does the world promise
thee Riches? God will out-bid the world, and give Eternal riches. Will the
world give Pleasures? God will give better; with him is fullness of joy, and
pleasures for evermore. Will the world give Gold? God will give Diamonds. Will
the world give all its glory? God will give thee the glory of a better world,
rather than that shall be a snare unto thee.

Ninthly, Pray much, pray continually; God will be in the hearts and houses of
his praying people, when he has a curse in store for Prayerless Families, in
Jer. 10.15.

And especially pray for these two things.

First, That God will abide with you and the Kingdom in his Gospel, and pure
Ordinances: that you may dwell in Bethel, and not in Bethaven, a house of
vanity and grief. Pray that God would not remove his Candlestick from you, not
utterly extinguish the light of the Kingdom. Secondly, Pray, and I shall pray
with you, that God will give you a faithful Pastor after his own heart, not
according to your hearts, that he may teach you by his Doctrine and his Life
too; a faithful Teacher, to go in and out before you, to show you the Word of
the Lord; one that may be among you, as it was said of Athanasius, that he was
Magnes and Adamas. 1. Magnes, As a Lodestone, to draw your souls with a gentle
hand and melting heart from your sins Heavenward. 2. Adamas, as an Adamant, of
an invincible courage and zeal against all sin and profaneness; one that will
not spare sin that he may save your souls.

Pray that God would give you a Star, a Star out of his right hand, not a
churlish Orion, that brings a cold, barren, and cloudy Winter, but a benevolent
and friendly Pleiades, that there may be many Sons brought in to God, and your
souls may find a continual spring, and that you may be as Trees of his own
planting, And may flourish in the Courts of the House of our God, And may bring
forth fruit in old age.

Tenthly, and lastly, If you would have the constant abode of God and Christ
with you, conform; conform universally and fully to the Gospel of Christ,
consent and assent unfeignedly to all the Truths and Doctrines thereof, that
you may walk worthy of God, and all that grace which has been revealed to you;
for Christ has said, If a man keep his Word, the Father will love him, and
both Father and Son will come, and make their abode with him. Wherefore I shall
conclude this Exhortation with that of the Apostle, Phil. 1.2, 7. Only let your
conversation be such as becomes the Gospel of Christ, that whether I come and
see you, or else be absent from you, I may hear of your affairs, that ye stand
fast in one spirit, with one mind, striving together for the faith of the
Gospel.

And to shut up all with that in Acts 20.32.

And now Brethren, I commend you to God and to the Word of his Grace, which is
able to build you up, and give you an inheritance among all them which are
sanctified.

Mr. Sclater's Farewell-Sermon.
1 John 5. v. 1, and 21. Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born
of God; and every one that loves him that begat, loves him also that is
begotten of him. Little Children, keep your selves from Idols.
THis general Doctrine I have already delivered unto you from this Text, which
indeed is the marrow and substance of the whole Chapter; That Gospel-believing
is a duty, which they that really perform, are highly privileged by, to their
greatest advantage. I have spoken concerning Gospel-believing, and that is a
duty, and that they that do really perform it are highly dignified and
privileged by it, as has been made to appear from the Chapter; that which
remains to be done, and shall be, as God enables the work of this morning, is
to make improvement of this Doctrine, which is one of the most material and
momentous Doctrines that can be preached to us. Gospel-believing it has most
precious privileges entailed upon it; Whosoever believes that Jesus is the
Christ, that Jesus is the Son of God, that Jesus is come in the Flesh; is born
of God, knows God, and shall be eternally blessed of God, and with God; surely
then the world runs upon a very great mistake. I have hinted something already
to that purpose, but I have left the more full discussion and discovery of the
matter until now. Why, who is there among the generality of common Professors
that is not very pregnant to hold forth this to be their Faith? If so be that
it should be put to the Question, Friend, what is your Faith? What belief are
you of? Why? not one in a thousand, I think, but will be apt to say, Why truly,
I will give you this account; There is a Gospel Gospel which is preached among
us* and in the world, and this Gosspel does hold forth this for true Doctrine,
that Jesus the Son of Mary, that was born at Bethlehem, is the Christ, is the
Messiah which was promised by the Father, and which the world did live in
expectation of so long, This Jesus I believe is the Son of God, this Jesus I
verily believe is come in the flesh, and he is come to be the Savior of the
world: This is the Belief, and that which is the common Profession that is made
by the generality of people. Why, but will you consider now, this Text, and
other Scriptures do speak fully to the purpose; Whosoever does believe this,
that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that he is come in the flesh,
whosoever believes this, is of God, is born of God. And it does clearly appear,
and may be most convincingly made out, that many thousands that profess their
belief concerning these things, yet notwithstanding are not born of God. Why,
certainly there must needs be a great fallacy in the business: Gospel-faith and
Believing, it is not so common a thing as many take it to be, and therefore if
this be Gospel-faith, and that which does interest persons in such great and
precious privileges, truly it concerns us to look well to it, that we be not
mistaken concerning this belief. Now this I would say, there is something in it
to be considered with respect to the time wherein Christ appeared visibly to
the world, and the aftertimes wherein the Apostles did hold forth these great
Doctrines of the Gospel concerning Christ. And this we are to say, that in such
a time as that was, when this was the critical point as it were, the
discriminating thing, in such a time for any to make this Profession, and to
hold forth this to be their Faith and Belief, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son
of God, it was of high signification; and might very well, as to man, beget a
comfortable confidence and hope concerning such persons, that certainly they
were born of God, as to man, and according to rational Charity it might be very
comfortable that such persons as did thus believe, and profess this to be their
Faith and Belief, there were some blessed beam upon their Souls; for mark you,
it has been thus in the world, and among the people of it concerning matters
of God and Godliness, that there has been such and such a Truth, that has
been the Critical Truth, as I said; that has been, as I may so say, the
Shibboleth whereby people are distinguished one from another. I allude to that
passage in the Book of Judges, concerning the Gileadites; they made a
profession of themselves to be such and such, and they were put to it to
pronounce Shiboleth; they that could not speak out the word, and clearly
pronounce it, they were not judged to be persons that they professed themselves
to be; but they that could do it held their liberty; so such and such a
Doctrine is ordered out to be a distinguishing point, upon the account of the
desperate opposition that the world makes against it; and upon this account the
Priests, and the Rulers, and the rest of the world were desperately bent
against Jesus; they called him Jesus, but could not endure him to be called
Christ the Son of God; it was an Act and Decree amongst them, That whosoever
should confess Jesus to be Christ, should be put out of the Synogogue, should
be excommunicated. Now for persons at such time, wherein it was as much as
their liberty, it may be their lives we^^ worth, to own that Jesus Christ was
the Son of God, for persons now ^t such a time to own this Jesus, that was in
so mean a condition, to be the Christ, there is very much in it, infinitely
more, than for persons now to take up this profession.

Why? because this Doctrine has obtained in the world, and it is a Doctrine
among Papists as well as Protestants; there is no such danger now for persons
to be of this belief. But shall I say this, that for all that to believe this
really according to the right account, and true genuine interpretation of
Gospel-believing, the case is the same with them and with us at this day,
setting aside the consideration of times and time; the danger then, and the
encouragement now; the Case is the same, Gospel-believing of these truths
according to a genuine interpretation of Gospel-believing, it is the same now
as then, and then as now: And therefore we must consider and look further.

I would put these few things to your Consciences; You profess this to be your
Faith, you believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, that he is come in
the flesh; these things you profess to believe, and if you do so indeed you are
highly privileged people, blessed of God, and shall be to all eternity but do
you not mistake, Do you believe this, that Jesus is the Christ? How came you by
this belief? What account can you give of it? How were you brought over to this
belief? Did you not come to this Faith and belief by common report? You were
born to this Doctrine; you look upon it as that which is the benefit you have
by your being born in a Nation, and among a people that profess the Name of
Christ, and this has been instilled into you by Education, and upon this
account you take it: Did you ever buy this truth? It is a Truth, that Jesus is
the Christ, How came i^to be yours? Did you ever buy this Truth? Buy it? I say
buy it. For the very Truth is, we are never able to make a good Title to any
Scripture-Truth, until such time as we can say, we have bought it: How, why,
by serious meditation, studying the Scriptures, searching into them, seriously
pondering and weighing of them, crying mightily to God, that he would manifest
them to us, and encountering temptations from without, and from within, being at
a point, willing to engage liberty and estate, and life, and all for this
Truths sake: Can you say, we have pondered, and are so fully satisfied about
it, as that if all the World should come in a way of contradiction, and rise up
in opposition to us, and come with fire and sword to beat us out of this Truth,
yet we are resolved to stick to it? Can you give such an account of your
selves, That you have not taken it up upon a common report, but are able to
say, there has been an inward Revelation made of these things to your Souls,
that there has been a sanctified work of the Spirit upon your understanding,
that you come to see into the mystery of these Gospel-Testimonies? Is there an
habitual frame of Spirit wrought in you, whereby you are carried out to close
with every Truth of God, and to close with it upon this account, because of a
Divine Authority stamped upon it? When we give assent to common Truths, but not
with a common spirit, but in the strength of an inward conviction, we assent to
it upon the account of an Unction that we have received from the Holy One; and
we assent to this and that truth upon the account of a Divine Authority which
we see to be stamped upon it, and withal we find that there are suitable
workings of our heart in the loves, and desires, and delights of them, to these
Truths (as there will be a kindly working of the heart, where there is a right
assent suitable to the Truths assented to;) as if there be a Threatening, the
Soul assents to it, and will tremble before God: If a Promise be made, or a
Gospel-Revelation, it will be accompanied with a holy rejoicing in God, that
ever he should make such a Promise or Revelation; and then there will be a holy
resolution of Spirit, Come what will come, I will never part with this Truth; I
have bought the Truth, that was my duty; and having bought it, I will never
sell it, that is my duty too; can we give such an account as this? But then
withal, let me a little further improve that which I have already spoke from
the Chapter.

You say, this is your belief, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of GOD; but
can you give an account of those privileges that are entailed upon this
belief? For you must know that the privileges which belong to such, will serve
as evidences that they are such.

Now if you believe, it is your privilege to be born of God; and this being
born of God must be the evidence of this belief. Can you give an account of
your being born of God? If you are not born of God, you do not believe, That
Jesus is the Christ. Can you give an account of your overcoming the World? Are
you such as are enabled to stand out in opposition to the Errors, and
Heresies, and corrupt Doctrines and Practices that are in the World? Can you
bear up against the lust of the Eye, the lust of the Flesh, and the pride of
Life? If you are in slavery to the World, in bondage to the beggarly Rudiments
of the world, you are mistaken, if you believe That Jesus is the Christ: For,
he that believes, according to the true interpretation of Gospel-believing,
That Jesus is the Christ, does overcome the World, and by virtue of this
belief, he is enabled to get a conquest over the World, and over the
Corruptions that are in it through lust.

And then again, you profess to believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of
God: Oh! but are you able to give an account that you have believed into this
Jesus, and upon this Jesus? For that is it the Text holds forth: He that
believes that Jesus is the Christ, does believe on Jesus the Christ: Are you by
virtue of this believing which you profess, drawn out to a closing with Christ?
Do you roll your selves upon him? Own him for Righteousness and Salvation, and
are willing to yield your selves up in subjection to him? You believe Jesus to
be the Christ; but do you believe on that Jesus whom you profess to be the
Christ? Now this being thus laid down as a Foundation, I would infer thus, and
so go on to a farther branch of this Application; Either you do really believe
with a Gospel-believing the Truths and Doctrines concerning Christ, or you do
not: Why, they that do profess they do, but in truth they do not, there is a
clear and manifest contradiction which this profession meets withal, and that
upon the accounts I have formerly given, as alas, this profession suffers
contradiction generally; generally the Professors of this Faith, That Jesus is
Christ, do clearly make a flat contradiction; and I am very confident that
there are thousands, that if they should be put to the trial, Will you stick to
this truth? If you do, it shall cost you the loss of your Liberty, and
Estates: Nay, your Life shall go for it. Oh! I am very apt to think, that you
shall have thousands that will turn their backs upon this Profession, renounce
this Profession. Now concerning such, this I would say,

First, That the condition of such persons as are not right in
Gospel-believing, is a most mournful and miserable condition; however it may be
with them in other respects, yet it is sad to think what a condition they are
in: for consider first of all, they that do not perform this great duty of
Gospel-believing, according to the truth and reality of it, I will tell you
what they do, they do give God the lie, they do, by interpretation, tell God to
his face that he is a very Liar; and what higher blaspheming can there be, than
to give the lie to the God of Truth! every one will be apt to bless themselves,
and say, Oh far be it from me, God forbid that I should be charged with such a
horrid impiety as this! Oh, but Brethren, the very truth is, it is a very
common thing by interpretation to give the lie to God: and all that do not
believe according to that Gospel-believing that you have heard, do tell God to
his face that he is a Liar. How does that appear? Why take a little help, such
I am able to give you; To profess that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God,
that he came to be the Savior of the World, is ordered out to be our
Righteousness, is sent of God to preach Liberty to captives, to heal diseased
souls, and to deliver poor creatures from the bondage of the Devil; these
things people generally profess to believe: but mark you now, they never come
to Christ, nor never set in with him upon this account, and to this purpose, O
Lord thou art the Jesus, the Anointed of God; I come to thee for life, I am a
poor dead creature, I am in a state of unrighteousness, and thou art given to
be for righteousness; Lord I fly to thee for it, I am a poor diseased
creature; the Plague is set upon my soul, and thou art appointed to heal the
Soul of the Plague; I come to thee for healing.

There is not one of thousands that come thus to Christ. Will you now see how
the lie is given to God? I profess for my part, says one, I know no such
matter (Jesus is the Christ, and I profess to believe so, and he is appointed
of God for such and such things; he is sent to preach liberty to the captives;
I know not that there is such bondage. Christ came to save sinners; alas, I
know no need of any such salvation by him, he came to heal diseased Souls; I am
well enough, what need have I of Christ? What is this but to give the lie to
God? He that receives not Christ, makes God a liar; for he does in effect say,
Lord, thou say so and so concerning the World, I know nothing of all this,
and so the lie is given to God. And is it nothing to give the lie to the great
God, the God of Truth? And I tell you, while you profess this Jesus to be the
Christ, the Son of God, and in the mean time fly not to him, you believe him
to be the Son of God, and that all authority is given unto him, and you will
not subject to his authority, why you give the lie to God, and is this nothing?

2. Consider the sad condition of such as believe not according to a right
Gospel-believing, they are such as are liable to the dreadfulest touches from
the Devil that possibly can be: He that believes is born of God, overcomes the
World, and is enabled to keep himself, that the wicked one does not touch him
with a mortiferous touch: But I tell thee, whatever thou art, that are under
the power of unbelief, thou are in danger of a dreadful touch from the Prince
of Darkness: And if thou live and die in a state of unbelief, thou will
fall under the power of condemnation. I remember what our Savior speaks, and
consider well of it: You stand out in opposition to my Doctrine, but I tell
you, Except you believe I am he, you shall dye in your sins; a dreadful word,
you shall dye in your sins, and what then? be damned eternally: this is the
condition of all such as are in a state of unbelief: But then on the other
hand, in case we be able to give a good account of our believing that Jesus is
Christ, the Son of God, and of our believing on him concerning whom these
Testimonies are given. Oh what cause have all such to rejoice in their
condition, the condition of such persons is happy beyond all expression and
comprehension, that have owned these Truths, owned that Jesus of whom these
faithful testimonies are given.

Now all the Chapter, according to the account I have given you, comes in to
the purpose of comforting and rejoicing the hearts of such persons. Here is
your comfort now, really believing according to a right interpretation of
Gospel-believing, this is your privilege, you are the persons that are born
from above, you are the persons that shall be enabled to overcome the world, to
bear up against all opposition that Men and Devils can make against you; you
are the persons that have the witness within you, and you shall be able to bear
up against all the contradictions of sinners; you are the persons that have
Christ, and have eternal life by him: you shall have it, nay, you have it
already; He that believes on the Son of God, has eternal life; he has it in
the beginnings of it, and shall have it in the complete state of it, being
brought over to Gospel-believing, you may come with boldness to God in a way of
Prayer, with holy confidence, that whatever else you ask believing, you shall
have a good account of it; God does not neglect any believing Prayer of a
believing Soul. And all the privileges of the Gospel are entailed upon you,
and you are entitled unto them, and you shall have the benefit of them while
you live, and when you dye, unto all eternity; well may it be said of such a
person, Blessed is be and she that has believed with a Gospel-believing,
Gospel Truths, and Testimonies concerning Christ, and on Christ, on whom those
Testimonies are given, for there shall be a full and perfect accomplishment of
what ever God has spoken with his mouth concerning such.

And then lastly, if the Grace of God has brought us over to a closing with
Christ, of whom these Truths and Testimonies are given; why the last branch of
the explication is but this, That you would but justify your believing, and
labor to manifest the reality of your believing, according to the Gospel, by a
suitable walking; this is that that shall be the closing up of this application.

Oh Brethren, let us consider well, our Savior tells us in Matthew. 11. Wisdom
is justified of her Children: Why, if ever we mean to approve our selves to be
Wisdoms Children, our care must be for to give in our Justification of Wisdoms
sayings, and for to carry it in a congruousness, and suitableness unto that
Gospel-believing which we profess to be by grace brought over to. Why, but what
is that you will say? why, consider the Text, and see what remains of the
Chapter. I shall make it our, give it out to you in this way.

Why first of all, this one special duty that lies upon you, That you would
study your mercy, and know what God has been to you, and done for you, and how
highly you are dignified, and not be always in a fluctuating state, and upon
the questioning and disputing point, but to come to some well grounded
confidence, that you may be able to say, We know that this and that is our
condition, and this and that is our dignified privilege, that we are planted
under.

Do but mark how the point in hand does charge this upon us, in the thirteenth
Verse of this Chapter, These things have I writ to you that believe on the Name
of the Son of God, That you may know that you have eternal life. Here is your
duty according to what the Text it self does charge upon you; if you be such as
by grace are brought over to a Gospel-believing, the Apostle John that did
write this Epistle, and I from it, preach unto you, in the Name of the Lord,
and by authority from him, that this is your duty, to know that you are persons
that have eternal life, that you are such as Christ by his Blood has made a
purchase of eternal life for; that he has by his Blood once for all entered
into the holy place, that is not made with hands, that he may prepare for you,
and that you might have the possession of those blessed Mansions, that he has
made preparation of

Eternal life it is yours, and you may be bold to claim it, and you are bound
to hope and rejoice in the expectation of the full enjoyment of it, and not to
be always upon the question, and disputing point, but to go on with a holy
confidence toward God, according to what the Apostle expresses, 1 Cor. 2. We
know that when this earthly Tabernacle shall be dissolved, we shall have a
House not made with hands, etc.

But then, a second thing that I have to charge upon you is this, that you
would acknowledge with all thankfulness and enlargednesse of heart to God, the
riches of his mercy, and grace to you, that has been pleased to call you out
of an unbelieving world, and b^ing ^ou over to the Gospel, and to the
participations that are by Christ, ^^cording to the Gospel: Oh! this you should
set your hearts upon, ^^y admiring the riches of his grace, and say, Lord, why
should thou manifest thy self to us, and not to the World! That many
thousands should live and die in the total ignorance of Christ, and the
Gospel-mysteries, or else live and dye in an empty profession; and yet that God
should be pleased to pitch upon me! This is that the Text does hint unto us in
the nineteenth verse of this Chapter. Oh! says he in a triumphing manner, We
know that we are of God, and that the whole world lies in wickedness, Oh! our
mercies, and the riches of Grace that has appeared to us, while the whole
world that lies in wickedness, is put into the Malignant one, lies in the
Devil, for he is the Malignant evil one, while the whole world lies in the
Devil in malignity! Oh! It is a sad condition, infinitely more sad, than for a
man to lie in the most noysomest stinking Ditch, or in the loathsomest kennel,
why this is that that heightens the mercy to poor souls that are called by
grace according to the purpose of God, that while the whole world lies in
wickedness, and so are like to lie: yea, and to lie in Hell to all eternity,
that God should please to lay you in the bosom of his Son, and to take you into
the arms of his mercy; this is that, that should heighten our thankfulness. I
may make use of that expression which we find in Acts the fourth, when Paul and
Barnabas came unto a company of heathens, and they saw what great things were
done by them, and took notice of the gracious spirit that they discovered;
sure, say they, The Gods are come among us in the likeness of men. Considering
the state of times, and what a height of wickedness many at this day are grown
up unto the dreadful swearing, blaspheming of God and his ways: truly judge of
it your selves, whether we may not say the Devils are come among us in the
likeness of men. Why now, Oh! how should we heighten our love and thankfulness
to God, that should please in free grace to bring us over to close with Jesus
Christ!

But then 4 as many as are brought over to Gospel-believing, this is your duty
to study, and endeavor what you can your advantages in faith; and so the
Apostle gives it in charge here in the Chapter in v. 13. These things have I
writ to you that believe on the Name of the Son of God, that you may know that
you have eternal life, and that you may believe on the Son of God. This is that
you should set about, if God has brought you over to a closing with Christ,
and an embracing of the Testimonies concerning him, believe more and more,
labor for your advancement, and let it be your prayer, Good Lord increase our
faith: labor that you may be clear in your apprehensions of gospel-mysteries,
and that you may be more strong in your adherence to Christ, of whom those
Gospel-testimonies are given, and that you may not only come to have an
adhering faith, but to an assuring faith; that you may not be like waves tossed
and tumbled up and down, but that you may come to be rooted and established,
and grounded in your faith, that you may not come to be unsettled by Heresy,
corrupt Doctrines, or the Apostasy of others, but that you may be steadfast and
unmovable.

Yet further, fifthly, This is to be given in charge to such as do believe
according to the Gospel, that they carry it suitably to a believing state, as
in those particulars that I have insisted upon, so in a deportment congruous
and suitable to the privileges which belong to believing: You are born of God,
carry it as men and women that are so indeed: what I born of God? the sons and
daughters of God? What and not live according to God? and not study conformity
to God? I remember what he speaks there concerning Amnon, How is it, that thou
bring the Kings son, art lean from day to day? How is it, that we that profess
to be the sons and daughters of God, are lean and lank, not more improved? that
we do not show forth God and express Christ? This lies in the beginning of the
Chapter, If you be born of God, remember that you be born of him that is the
God of Love: And therefore you are to manifest this birth, and your believing,
and your being born of God, by loving God, and by loving them that are born of
God; He that believes is born of God, and be that loves him that begat,
loves him that is begotten of him. The God of love does beget a people of
love; a loving God, a loving people; and this is that you should express your
believing by, and your adoption by, by the love you bear to God, and the
children of God.

A hateful, spiteful spirit, where it does discover it self, speaks those
persons not to be born of God, but of the Devil; carry it as Believers, as
persons of God, by studying a conformity to God, and by keeping his
Commandments, subjecting your selves to his authority, not living according to
your lusts, but according to the laws and rules which God has given you, says
the Apostle here, This is the love of God, that we keep his Commandments.

It is not a love in word, and in tongue, but in reality, a love discovering it
self by a conscientious care to hold conformity to all the will of God; and if
any should object, This is a hard saying, who can bear it? says the Apostle.
No such matter, there is never a believing soul will say the Commandments of
Christ are grievous or burdensome: No, they are light to them that are brnught
over to the faith of the Gospel.

And the last thing I have to charge upon you, upon the account of your
Gospel-believing, and being brought over to a closing with Christ, it is this,
and so upon the matter I have given you an account of the substance of this
precious Chapter, having reduced it to that general Doctrine I propounded
before: I say the last thing is this, That you would walk suitable to a
believing state, by being very careful concerning your Worships that you do
perform, that they be according to God, and according to the Gospel; and this
is that which the Apostle closes the Chapter withal in the 21. verse, Little
Children, keep your selves from Idols, Amen. As I take it, in the former
Translation it was Babes, Babes, keep your selves from Idols; here it is Little
Children. I observe in this Epistle the Apostle makes a distinction of
Believers into three Ranks, as you shall find in the second Chapter, I write
unto you little Children, I write unto you young men, and I write unto you
Fathers; in the close of this Epistle he concludes with this charge to little
Children: now whether he includes all the rest under this Title of Little
Children, I forbear to dispute; but sure I am, it is a duty lies upon one and
the other, whether they be Babes, or young men, or Aged Fathers in Christ.
Whatever our rank or condition be, I am sure of this, this is a great duty that
lies upon all that will approve themselves in Godliness, and be brought over to
the Faith of the Gospel, that they look to their worship, and that they take
heed of Idols; as if he should say, He that is born of God, he keeps himself
that the wicked one does not touch him. Oh Little Children, show forth that
spiritual ability that by Grace you are furnished withal, by being able to
keep your selves from Idols.

It might be said, what is this to us? Are we in danger of Idols? True, well
might the Apostle give in such a Charge to them in those ^^mes, when the
greatest part of the World were in a state of Heathenism, and in estrangement
from Christ, and the mysteries of the Gospel: But this I say, it does really
concern Christians in Gospel Times, that have had the breakings out of the
Gospel Light, and the knowledge of the Gospel-mysteries, to be careful of this
Charge, that they keep themselves from Idols: there were the Idols of the
Heathens: grant it, and so still there are a generation of people that our
souls should mourn over to consider their state, and are wrapped up in ignorance
of God, know nothing of the true God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, and it is the
state and condition of the Jews at this day; and what a sad condition are they
in? Grant it they worship not Idols after the manner of the Heathens, yet they
worship not the true God, because they worship not God in Christ; for, says
the Apostle, Whoever sins, and abides not in the Doctrine of Christ; he has
not God; He that abides in the Doctrine of Christ, he has the Father and the
Son: And so the Jews at this day, they not abiding, not owning the Doctrine of
Christ, they have not God, because they have not the Father and the Son; this
is their condition: and thus I say, there were not only the Idols of the
Heathen: Oh! but sadly be it spoken, there are Idols among Persons pretending
to Christ, and Gospel Faith, and the Doctrine concerning Grace by Jesus Christ.

How man* Idols and Idolaters are there? I might tell the Govetous person is an
Idolater, the voluptuous person, and the self-justitiary* sets up his own
Righteousness, and Idolizeth that: But I say this there are Idols among
Christians; Papists hold forth the Name of Christ, but, yet what woeful Idolatry
is there among them? There was the Dragon* worship in the time of the Heathens,
and in the room of that, there is come up the Beast-worship, and of that
worship the generality of the world runs upon; and it concerns us to keep from
Popish Idolatry, it being the grossest Idolatry that ever was, because there is
the suitest petence of Worshipping JESUS, and yet they turn him into an Idol:
What else means their worshipping and bowing to Image, their Breaden gods, and
the like? Oh therefore it concerns us to keep our selves from Idols; and there
is a Scripture, if it were but well studied, would cause trembling of heart,
and make all that have any care of their souls, to look about them; that
Scripture I referr you to, is in Rev. 13. compared with Rev. 20. In Rev. 13.11.
whereas before there was Dragon-worship, it is said here, I beheld another
Beast coming out of the earth, and he had two Horns like a Lamb, and he shake
as a Dragon, and he exercises all the power of the first Beast before him, and
^auseth the Earth, and them that dwell therein, to worship the first Beast,
whose deadly wound was healed: now look at verse 8. says he, And all the
dwellers upon the Earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the
Book of Life of the Lamb sl^in from the foundation of the World. Oh! it is a
terrible word, and that that should make us to fear and tremble, lest in any
kind we should be drawn into the worship of the Beast; for as many as were not
written in the Book of Life of the Lamb, they were drawn into the Worship of
the Beast. This is that that should make us keep our selves from Idols, from
whatsoever has but so much as a tincture of Superstition and Idolatry, and the
rather, considering that other Scripture, Rev. 20.15. And whosoever was not
found written in the Book of Life, was cast into the lake of fire: All that are
not written in the Lambs Book of Life, are prevailed to perform the worship
with the Beast, and not being writ there, must be tumbled into the Lake for
ever.

This therefore concerns us to keep from Idolatry, from whatever has a
tendency that way, and that has any tincture of Superstition upon it; and
consider with your selves, that our Duty is in matters of Worship, and in
things concerning the Worship of God, to see to it, that we keep a humble
dependence upon God, that we walk not according to the will of Men, but
according to the will of God; You were bought with a price, be not servants of
men. We are to walk by a Line, by a Plummet, and what is not warranted by the
Word of God, or maintainable by Argument drawn from it, we should not close
with.

And for the closing up of all, do but consider how this Chapter; and the
things that I have spoken to you, and preached from it, how they do all
influence this Exhortation, Little Children, keep your selves from Idols; see
to it, that you approve your selves in holy Worship to God and the Lord Jesus.
Do but argue thus; You profess to be Believers, and is it not your duty to
answer to this profession? Your Falth is a pure Faith, and an obediential
grace; it is a grace that will tutor you to hang upon Christ, and his
appointments and Institutions; and therefore being Believers, study to keep
your selves from Idols, and whatever is not consonant to the will of God
concerning Worship.

You believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, keep your selves from
Idols in this respect; for he is come into the world, and has showed the
pattern of his House; and then you are born of God: carry it like a people that
are born of God, that are high born, and credit your holy profession, by
keeping a dependence upon that God, of whom you are born: and then being
Believers, you are born of God, and have overcome the world, and therefore show
forth your heroic spirit, by standing out in all opposition to Idols, and
whatever is contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of godliness.

You have an Unction from the Holy One, and this engages you to look to it,
that you keep your selves from Idols: And then we know (says he) that the Son
of God is come, and has given us understanding that we may know him that is
true, and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. And
thereupon he brings in this, Little Children; keep your selves from Idols: as
if he should say, This is the true God, God in Christ, Jesus Christ the Son of
the Father, this is the true God, and he has eternal life with him; other god
are false gods, and that benefit will you have by following them and performing
worship to them? Nothing but eternal death: false gods can bestow no eternal
life upon you, but this is the true God, and he can give you eternal life: And
therefore Little Children keep your selves from Idols.

And now yet one word more. I would not occasion any discomposure of spirit
that is not becoming you: But this I must say, for ought I know, you have the
words of a dying man, and we use to say, that the words of dying men are apt to
take somewhat a deep impression; I mean a dying man, not in properness of
speech according to nature; and if it should be so, I hope there would be cause
of rejoicing on my part: but I speak the words of a dying man in respect of the
Ministerial Office.

I suppose you all know there is an Act come forth by Supreme Authority, and it
is not for us to quarrel at all, but to submit to it, and hold correspondency
with it so far as we can, with a good conscience; and there being many
Injunctions, that many, besides my self cannot comply withal, therefore we are
willing to submit to the Penalty inflicted.

This I say, you have for many years had the benefit of my poor Labors; I have
fulfilled near up toward forty years, and have performed my service to God,
Christ, and his People, and I bless his Name, not without acceptance and
success. My work, so far I know, in this course, as in the weekly course, is
now at an end; my desire is, that you whose hearts have been inclinable to wait
upon God in the way of my Ministry, may be kept faithful to God, and that you
may have the blessing of the everlasting Covenant coming upon your Souls, and
that you may have the power of this Doctrine, held forth in this Sermon, put
forth upon your hearts; that as you do believe that Jesus is the Christ, that
as you profess these things, you may carry it suitably to your profession, that
you may walk in love to God, love to Christ, and love to one another; that you
may labor to manifest a noble generous Spirit in overcoming the world in
Errors, Corruptions, false Doctrines, and unwarrantable Worship; that you may
in all things labor to approve your selves: And littlte Children keep your
selves from Idols, Amen.

Mr. Calamy's Sermon, Preached. December 28. 1662.
1 Samuel 4.13. And when he came, Lo, Eli sat upon a seat by the way side,
waiting; for his heart trembled for the Ark of God.
THat you may the better understand these words, you must know, that whatsoever
God threatened against old Eli, in the second and third Chapters, because he did
not restrain his wicked Sons from their lewd courses, is here executed in this
Chapter: therefore we read there were four thousand I raelites slain by the
Philistines? And the Elders of Israel met together to consult how to repair
this great loss; they confess it was the Lord that had smitten them: For, say
they, Wherefore has the Lord smitten us to day before the Philistines: And
they conclude, the way to repair this their loss, it was, to fetch the Ark of
the Covenant of the Lord from Shiloh, and carry it into the battle; whereupon
they appointed Hophni and Phinehas to fetch it, whereby they imagined that the
presence of the Ark would save them from ruin, but herein they were miserably
mistaken; for this judgment befell them not because the Ark was not in the
Camp: but because their sin was in the Camp: The Ark of the Covenant would not
preserve those that had broken Covenant with God: And therefore there was a
great slaughter of the Israelites, and were slain thirty thousand men, and
H^phni and Phinehas were slain, and the Ark it self was taken Prisoner. But
what was old Eli doing? He was ninety and eight years old, and was not able to
go to the Battle, but sits upon a seat by the way side near the Battle; and
there he sits, thinking what shall become of the Ark: And lo, Eli sat upon a
seat by the way side watching; for his beart trembled for the Ark of God, for
fear lest the Ark should be taken: He was not troubled, what should become of
his two sons, or what should become of the people of Israel, but what should
become of the Ark of God.

In the words are three parts.

1. Old Eli's sollicitousness for the Ark. 2. Old Eli's heart trembling for
fear of the Ark. 3. Old Eli's preferring the safety of the Ark before the
safety of his two sons, wise, and children.
He sat upon a seat by the way side watching, for his heart trembled for the
Ark of God.

But what was the Ark of God? why should old Eli's heart tremble for fear of
the Ark?

I answer, this Ark was the holiest of all the things of God; it was so holy
that it made every place holy where it came, 2 Chr. 8.11. And Solomon brought
up the daughter of Pharaoh, out of the City of David, into the house that he
had built for her, for he said, my Wife shall not dwell in the house of David
King of Israel, because the places are holy whereunto the Ark of the Lord has
come. This Ark was the dwelling place of God, it was the habitation of God,
Psalm. 99.1. The Lord reigns, he sits between the Cherubins. Now these
Cherubins were placed over the Ark* it was the speaking place of God, he met
his people there, and there he gave an answer to them: Exodus 25.21, 22. And
thou shall put the Mercy-seat, above upon the Ark, and in the Ark thou shall
put the testimony that I shall give thee: And there will I meet with the, and I
will commune with thee from above the Mercy-seat, from above the two Cherubins,
which are upon the Ark of the Testimony, of all things I shall give thee in
Commandment unto the children of Israel. This Ark was Gods Footstool, and all
the pleople of God worship him before the Footstool of God. Ps. 99.5. Exalt ye
the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool, for he is holy. The Ark, it
was the glory and the strength of Israel, Psalm. 78.61. And he delivered his
strength into captivity, and his glory into his enemies bands; and it was the
terror of the enemies of God: And therefore when the Ark came into the battle,
the Philistines were afraid, and said, Woe unto us; for God is come down into
the Camp. And indeed this Ark was called Jehovah, Number. 10.35. And it ca^e to
pass, when the Ark set forward, that Moses said, Rise up Lord, and let thine
enemies be scattered; and when it rested, he said, Return O Lord, unto the many
thousands of Israel. In (...) word, the Ark was a pledge and a visible symptom
of Gods gracious presence with his people; as long as the Ark was saved, they
were saved; and when the Ark was with them, then Gods presence was with them:
but when the Ark was gone, God was gone, his comforting presence, his
protecting presence, and his preserving presence: And therefore no wonder that
this good old man face ^^^ching here sort fear of the Ark. I call him good old
man* many are of ^pihion that he was not good, because he suffered his Sons to
be wicked ^and indeed his fault was great, but surely he was a good man, and I
have two Reasons to prove it: First, in that he took the punishment of his
iniquity so patiently, It is the Lord, let him do what s^em (...) good. And
secondly, he was a good man, as appears by the Text, his solicitousness for the
Ark: He sat trembling for fear of the Ark.

Now this Ark was a Type of three things.

First, it was a Type of Jesus Christ; for God spoke from the Ark; so God
speaks to us by Christ. Secondly, it was a Type of the Church of Christ; for as
the Ark was the preserver of the two Tables of the Law, so the Church of Christ
is the preservative of the Scriptures. Thirdly, the Ark was a Type of the
Ordinances of Christ; for as God did communicate himself by the Ark, so God by
his Ordinances communicates his Counsels, Comforts, and Grace unto his people;
The Ordinances of Christ they are the ^raculuin by which he conveys himself
unto his people. Thus I have showed you what the Ark was.
I shall gather two observations from the words.

1. That when the Ark of God is in danger of being lost, the people of God have
thoughtful heads and trembling hearts. 2. That a true Child of God is more
troubled, and more solicitous what shall become of the Ark, than what shall
become of Wife and Children or Estate.
I shall begin with the first Doctrine.

That when the Aak of God is in danger of being lost, the people of God have
thoughtful heads and trembling hearts.

Or, if I may put this Doctrine in a Gospel dress, take it thus.

That when the Gospel is in danger of losing, when Gospel Ordinances are in
danger of being lost, and Gospel Ministers in danger of losing, that then the
people of God have trembling heads, and careful and solicitous hearts about it.

Mark what I say: I say not when the Ark is lost; for that was death to old
Eli, that broke his neck: and it cost the life of Eli's Daughter-in-Law, when
the Ark of God was taken, she took no comfort, in her child, though a
man-child; she regarded it not: For the glory is departed from Israel, the Ark
of God is taken.

I say not when the Ark of God is lost: but I say when it is in danger of
losing: when the Gospel is in danger, the Ministers of the Gospel in danger,
and the Ordinances in danger to be lost, then the People of God have trembling
hearts, and careful heads. When God threatened the Israelites, that he would not
go with them, they were troubled for the loss of Gods presence, and would not
put on their Ornaments, Exodus 33.3, 4. I will not go up in the midst of thee,
for thou art a stiff-necked people, lest I consume thee in the way: And when
the people heard these evil tidings, they mourned, and no man did put on his
ornaments. 1 Samuel 7.2. And it came to pass while the Ark abode in
Kiriath-jearim, that the time was long, for it was twenty years, and all the
house of Israel lamented after the Lord, that is, after the presence of God,
speaking from the Ark, 2 Samuel 11.10, 11. David would have had Vriah to have
gone down to his house and made merry: And Uriah said unto David, The Ark, and
Israel, and Judah abide in Tenis, and my Lord Joab, and the servants of my Lord
are encamped in open fields: shall I then go into mine house to eat and to
drink, and to lie with my wife? as thou live, and as thy soul lives, I will
not do this thing, 1 King. 19.10. And Elijah said, I have been very jealous for
the Lord of hosts: for the children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant,
thrown down thy Altars, and slain thy Prophets with the sword, and I, even I
only a^n left, and they seek my life to take it away. Thus you see when the Ark
is in danger, the people of God mourn and are sorrowful.

And there be four reasons, why the people of God are so much troubled when the
Ark of God is in danger.

Reason 1. Because of the great love they bear to the Ark of God; As God loves
the gates of Sion, more than all the dwellings of Jacob, Psalm. 87.2. so the
people of God love the Ordinances of God, and the faithful Ministers of Christ,
Psalm. 26.8. Lord I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where
thine honor dwells, Psalm. 27.4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that
will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of
my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple. Now
love stirs up the affections, as young Cresus, though he were dumb, yet
seeing his Father like to be killed, cried out, Do not kill my Father. Such is
the love of the Saints of God to the Ark, that they cannot be silent, they
cannot but tremble when they see the Ark in danger. and for Sions sake, the
cannot hold their peace: and they cannot be silent until the Lord make the
righteous thereof go out like brightness, and the salvation thereof as a lamp
that burns.

2. The people of God are troubled at this, because of the interest they have
in the Ark of God: Now interest stirs up affection, as when another man's
house is on fire: as you had a lamentable and sad providence this last week,
and it is not to be forgotten, how suddenly in all our feastings, may God dash
all our mirth. Now consider, how were they affected that had an interest in
those that were burned: so the people of God have an interest in the Ark. God
is the Haven of a child of God, the portion and inheritance of a child of God;
and when God begins to forsake them, they cannot but be afflicted and troubled:
The Ordinances of God are the Jewels of a Christian, and the Treasure of a
Christian; and the loss of them cannot but trouble them: And Jesus Christ is
the joy of a Christian, and therefore when Christ is departing, they cannot but
be much afflicted at it.

3. The people of God are much troubled when the Ark is in danger, because of
the mischiefs that comes upon a Nation when the Ark of God is lost: woe be to
that Nation when the Ark is gone. The Heathens had the Image of Apollo, and
they conceived, that as long as that Image was presented among them, they could
never be worsted, but be preserved; and the Romans had a Buckler, upon which
they had a Tradition, that as long as that Buckler was preserved, Rome could
not be taken. Shall I give a hint, and set it out a little in five particulars.

1. When the Ark of God is taken, then the ways of Sion mourn, and none come to
the solemn Assemblies: it was the complaint of the Church, Lam. 1.4. that is
matter of sadness. 2. When the Ark of God is taken, then the Ministers of
Christ are driven into corners: And this is matter of heart-trembling. 3. When
the Ark of God is taken, then the souls of many are in danger: when the Gospel
is gone, your souls are in hazard: There is cause of sadness. 4. Then do the
enemies of God blaspheme, and are ready to say, Where is your God? then do the
enemies of God triumph, Ps. 42.10. As with a sword in my bones mine enemies
reproach me: while they say daily unto me, Where is thy God? 5. Then is Jesus
Christ trampled under foot, and the Ordinances of God defiled and trampled on;
and then Blasphemy and Atheism comes in like an armed man.
4. The people of God must needs tremble when the Ark is in danger, because of
their accessariness to the losing of the Ark; and this was that which made old
Eli so much troubled, because he knew it was for his sin that God suffered the
Ark to be taken: He knew that his not punishing his two sons, was one cause of
that great slaughter the people of Israel met withal, and that made him
tremble: There is no person here in this Congregation, but his heart will tell
him, he has contributed something toward the loss of the Ark. None of us so
holy but our consciences must accuse us; we have done something that might
cause God to take the Ark from us: And therefore Mr. Bradford that blessed
Martyr, said in his Prayer, Lord it was, for my unthankfulness for the Gospel,
that brought in Popery in Queen Mary 's days: and my unfruitfulness under the
Gospel, that was the cause of the untimely death of King Edward the sixth: and
those that fled in Queen Mary 's days, sadly complained that they were the
cause of Gods taking away the Gospel from England. O beloved, it is for thy sin
and my sin, that the Ark of God is in danger; and therefore the Lod gave us
trembling solicitous hearts, what shall become of the Ark.

I come now to Application.

Use 1. If this be the property of a true child of God, to be solicitous when
the Ark of God is in danger, and to have such a trembling heart for fear of the
Ark, then this is a certain sign there are but few that are the children of God
in truth. O where is the man? and where is the woman that like old Eli sits
watching and trembling for fear of the Ark? And that will appear by these
reasons.

First, in reference to the many sins in this Nation; for let me tell you,
there is not one sin for which God ever took away the Ark from any people, but
it is to be found in England. Did the Church of Ephesus lose the Candlestick,
because they had lost their first love? And have not we lost our first love to
the Gospel, and to the Ordinances? And did the Church of Landicea lose the
Candlestick, because of lukewarmness? and are not we lukewarm? Did the people
of Israel, as here in the Text, lose the Ark, because they abhorred the
offerings of God? and do not you do so? are not the sins of Israel amongst us?
the sins of Germany, and the sins of all other Nations about us? and can any
man here before God this day, in this Congregation, that considers the great
unthankfulness of this Nation, and the great profaneness and wickedness of
this Nation, but they may conclude the Ark is in danger, and God may justly
take the Ark from us.

I might tell you of the Drunkenness, Adultery, Covetousness, Injustice, and
Uncharitableness, etc. that does abound among us; and I might tell you of
Sanctuary sins, profanation of Sabbath and Sacraments, our unthankfulness, and
unfruitfulness, and unworthy walking under the Gospel: and you of this place,
God may very well take the Ark even from you; and indeed it was the great
interest I had in you, the which while I live I shall ever own; and that great
affection and respect I had to you, that I would not send you home this day
without a Sermon, and let you go without a blessing. Now can any of you in this
Parish, and this Congregation; can any of you say, God may not justly take the
Gospel from you?

Secondly, shall I add, the discontents and divisions of a Nation, as Christ
says, A Nation divided against it self cannot stand; but I leave these things
to your considerations: I believe there is none here but will confess the Ark
of God is in danger to be lost. But now where are our Eli's to sit watching and
trembling for fear of the Ark? Where is Phinehas his Wife, that would not be
comforted, because the Ark of God was taken? Where are our Moses? our Elijahs,
our Vriahs? Where are they that lay to heart the dangers of the Ark? you
complain of Taxes, decay of Trading, of this civil burden, and that civil
burden; but where is the man or the woman that complains of this misery, the
loss of the Ark; Most of you are like Gallio, he cared not for these things; if
it had been a civil matter, then he would have meddled with it; but for
Religion, he cared not for that; every man is troubled about meum and tuum,
about civil concernments; but who lays to heart? who regards what shall become
of Religion? There is a strange kind of indifferency and lukewarmness upon most
peoples spirits; so they have their trading go on, and their civil burdens
removed, they care not what becomes of the Ark.

There is a Text of Scripture, I shall not spend much time in opening it, but I
would have you well consider it, Hos. 7.9. Strangers have devoured his
strength, and he knows it not: yea gray hairs are here and there upon him,
yet he knows not. Shall I say gray hairs are upon the Gospel? I come not
hither to Prophecy, I say not, the Gospel is dying, but I say it has gray
hairs: for you have had the Gospel a hundred years and above, and therefore it
is in its old age: and I dare challenge any Scholar to show me an example of
any Nation that has enjoyed the Gospel for a hundred years together. Now that
gray hairs is to a hundred years, is no wonder: well, gray hairs are here and
there, and yet no man lays it to heart.

Now shall I spend time to show you what a great sin it is not to be affected
with the danger that the Ark of God is in: consider but three particulars.

First, it is a sign you do not love the Gospel: if you had any love to it, you
would be troubled more for the danger of the Ark, than for any outward danger
whatsoever. Secondly, it is a sign you have no interest in the Gospel, for
interest will stir up your affections: it is a sign you are not concerned in
the Gospel, for if you were concerned in it, you would be affected with it, as
those that were interessed in those persons that were in that lamentable fire
the last week, it is impossible but they should be affected: and so it is a
sign you have no interest in God and Christ, if your hearts do not tremble for
fear of the loss of the Ark. But thirdly, there is a curse of God pronounced
against all those that do not lay to heart the afflictions of Joseph, Amos 6,
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Woe be to them that are at ease in Sion, and trust in the
Mountain of Samaria: ye that put far away the evil day: that lie upon beds of
Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their Couches: that eat the Lambs out of the
flock, and the Calves out of the midst of the stall: that chant to the sound of
the Viol, and invent to themselves Instruments of Music: that drink wine in
bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments: but they are nongrieved
for the afflictions of Joseph. Woe be to you that enjoy your fullness of outward
things, and make merry therewith, and never consider the afflictions of Gods
people, and the danger of the Ark.
Use 2. For exhortation, to beseech you all, that God by a providence has so
unexpectedly brought this day to hear me, and there may be a good providence in
it; possibly I may do good herein: I say let me beseech you all to declare you
are the people of God indeed and in truth, by following the example of old Eli,
to be very solicious of the Ark of God, and let me exhort you to five
particulars.

First, let me persuade you to believe, that the Gospel is not entailed upon
England; England has no Letters Pattents of the Gospel; the Gospel is
removeable: God took away the Ark and forsook Shiloh, and he did not only take
away the Ark, but the Temple also: he unchurched the Jews, he unchurched the
seven Churches of Asia, and we know not how soon he may unchurch us: I know no
warrant we have to think that we shall have the Gospel another hundred years:
God knows how to remove his Candlestick, but not to destroy it: God does often
remove the Church, but does not destroy it: God removed his Church out of the
East, as the Greek Churches were famous Churches, but God removed them, and now
the Turk overspreads that Country.

Secondly, I would persuade you that Englands Ark is in danger to be lost: were
it not only for the sins of England, those prodigious iniquities amongst us,
and that strange un-heard-of ingratitude that is in the Land: but I will say no
more of that, because I would speak nothing but what becomes a sober Minister
of the Gospel.

Thirdly, I would persuade you, and O that I could raise you up to old Eli's
practice: He sat watching, for his heart trembled for fear of the Ark: He had
a thoughtful head and an^aking heart, for the Ark of God that was in great
danger: and that I might move you to this, consider what a sad condition we are
in, if the Ark be taken: what will your Estate do you good? or what will your
concernments do you good if the Gospel be gone? wherein does England exceed
other places? there is more wealth in Turkey than in England: And the Heathen
Nations have more of the glory of the world, than any Christian King has: What
is the glory of England? what is the glory of Christianity but the Gospel? if
the Gospel be gone, our glory is gone. Pray remember Eli's Daughter-in-Law, the
wife of Phinehas she hearkened not though a man Child was born, and would
receive no comfort, but called his name Ichabod: for the glory is departed from
Israel, The Ark of God is taken: O when the glory is gone, who would desire to
live? I am loath to tell you the story of Chrysostom, he was but one man, yet
when he was banished Constantinople, the people all petitioned for him, and
said, They could as well lose the Sun out of the Firmament, as lose Chrysostom
from among them.

Fourthly, let me persuade you not to mourn immoderately, neither be
discouraged: I would willingly speak something to comfort you before I leave
you, I know not by what strange providence I came here this day, and the Lord
knows when I shall speak to you again: therefore I would not send you home
comfortless: O therefore mourn not as without hope, for I have four Arguments
to persuade me, that the Ark of God will not be lost, though it be in danger of
losing.

First, because God has done great things already for this Nation; and I argue
like Manoah's Wise, surely if God had intended to destroy us, he would not have
done that he has done for us: He that has done so much for us, will not now
forsake us. And therefore though our hearts tremble, yet let them not sink
within us.

Secondly, I argue from the abundance of praying people that are in this
Nation, there are many that night and day pray unto God, that the Ark may not
be taken; and let me assure you, God did never forsake a praying and reforming
people. When God intends to destroy a Nation, and take away the Ark, he takes
away the Spirit of Prayer; but where God gives the Spirit of Prayer, there God
will continue the Ark. You all know, that if there had been but ten good men in
those five Cities, God would have spared them: We have many hundreds that fear
God in this Nation, that do not give God rest, but night and day pray unto God
for this Land: And who knows but for their sakes God will spare the Ark.

Thirdly, another ground of comfort is this, that God has hitherto dealt with
England, not by way of Rule, but by way of Prerogative; we have had
un-churching sins all the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and of King James; and the
godly Ministers have been threatened ruin from year to year; but God has
hitherto saved England by way of Prerogative; God has spared us, because he
will spare us: according to that Text, I will be graci^us, to whom I will be
gracious. God will not be tied to his own rule; and who knows but God will
deliver us?

Fourthly, another ground of comfort is, that God is now pouring out his Viols
upon Antichrist and all this shall end in the ruin of Antichrist; God is
pouring forth his Viols upon the Throne of the Beast, and all these
transactions shall end in the ruin of Antichrist: though some drops of these
Viols may light upon the Reformed Churches, and they may smart (...) a while,
and God may severely punish them, yet it will be but for a little while, but
the Viols shall be poured out upon Antichrist: God may scourge all the Reformed
Churches before these Viols be poured out, and persecution may go through them
all; the which I call drops of these Viols, but the Viols are intended for
Antichrist, and shall end in the time of Antichrist: and whatsoever becomes of
us, yet our children, and our childrens children, shall see the issue of the
Viols poured out upon the Whore of Babylon. This I speak for your comfort.

Fifthly, I am to exhort you, that you would all of you contribute your utmost
endeavor, to keep the Ark of God from being taken: and here I shall show you,
1. What the Magistrate should do. 2. What the Minister should do. 3. What the
People should do.


First, what the Magistrate should do, I shall say but little of them, because
I am not now to speak to them; they are to use their Authority for the settling
of the Ark: for the Ark of the Covenant will be like the Ark of Noah, always
floating upon the waters, until the Magistrates settle it. Thus David, 2 Samuel
6.12. he gathered together all the chosen men of Israel, thirty thousand to
fetch home the Ark. So Solomon, he assembled the Elders of Israel, and the
heads of the Tribes, the Nobles, and the chief of the Fathers of the children
of Israel to Jerusalem, with a great deal of pomp, to bring up the Ark of the
Covenant of the Lord into its place. O that God would encourage our Nobles and
Magistrates that they might be solicitous to settle the Ark: Magistrates must
not be as the Philistine, they had the Ark, but what did they with it? they set
it up in the house of Dagon, but Dagon and the Ark could never agree: where
false Religion comes in at one door, the true Religion goes out at the other;
you must not put the Ark and Dagon together.

Secondly, what must the Ministers do to keep the Ark from losing? They must
endeavor after holiness, the Ark will never stand steady, nor prosper upon the
shouldiers of H^phni and Phinehas. A wicked, profane, drunken Ministry, will
never settle the Ark; it must be the sober, pious* godly Ministers that must do
it: How holy must they he that draw nigh to the God of holiness?

Thirdly, What must the people of God do, that the Ark may not be lost? there
be five thing? I shall comemnd unto you, and then commend you to God.

1. You must not Idolize the Ark. 2. You must not undervalue the Ark. 3. You
must not pry into the Ark. 4. You must not meddle with the Ark without a lawful
Call. 5. You must keep the Covenant of the Ark.
First; You must not Idolize the Ark, that was the sin of the people in the
Text; they thought the very presence of the Ark would excuse them, and keep
them safe, and therefore they carried the Ark into the Camp: though they
reformed not, and repented not, yet they thought the Ark would save them.

So many there be that think the Ark will save them, though never so wicked:
but nothing will secure a Nation but repentance and reformation.

Secondly, Do not undervalue the Ark: this was Michal's sin, 2 Samuel 6.14, 15
16. When David danced before the Ark, and Michal mocked him, and despised him
in her heart: but says he, it was before the Lord, and if this be vile, I will
he more vile. Some men begin to say, what need we any preaching, will not
reading prayers serve? Others say, what need so much preaching, will not once a
day serve? Now this is to undervalue the Ark; therefore let us say as David, if
to preach the word, if to fast and pray for the Nation, If this be vile, then I
will be more vile.

Thirdly, We must not pry into the Ark: this was the sin of the men of
Bethshemesh. 1 Samuel 6.19. They looked into the Ark and God smote them, and cut
off fifty thousand and threescore men. Be not too curious in searching where
God has not discovered or revealed. For example, there be great thoughts of a
heart, when God will deliver his people, and set his Churches at liberty; and
many men talk much of the Year 1666. that shall be the year wherein Antichrist
shall be destroyed: And there are strange impressions upon the hearts of many
learned men, as to this Year; some go to the Year 1669. and others pitch upon
other times; but truly if you will have my judgment, and I am glad of this
opportunity to tell you, This is to pry too much into the Ark: Remember the
Text, Acts 1.17. It is not for you to know the Times or the Seasons which the
Father has put in his own power. And thus to conclude upon any particular
time, if you find you are deceived, it is the way to make you Atheists, and
that afterward you shall believe nothing: And those Ministers do no service,
or rather ill service to the Church of God, that conclude of the Times and
Seasons.

A Popish Author says, that in the Year 1000. there was a general belief over
the Christian World, that the day of Judgment should be that Year; but when
the^ saw it happened northey fell to their old sinning again, and were worse
than before, and believed nothing. Well Gods time is the best, therefore let
not us pry too much into the Ark.

Fourthly, you must not meddle with the Ark, unless you have a lawful call to
meddle with it: this was the sin of Vzzi, 2 Samuel 6.6, 7. the Ark was in dan^er
of falling, and he good man meaning no hurt to keep up the Ark, took hold of
it; but for so doing, he destroyed himself, and made a breach and hindered the
carrying home of the Ark at that time.

We have had a great deal of disorder heretofore; and an abundance of
Well-minded people usurped upon the Ministerial Offices they were afraid the
Ark was falling, and therefore they touched the Ark, they laid hold on the Ark;
but their touching the Ark has undone the Ark, and themselves too. O take heed
of touching the Ark.

Fifthly, If ever you would preserve the Ark, then keep the Covenant of the
Ark, keep the Law which the Ark preserves: The Ark was a place wherein the Law
was kept, the two Tables; keep the Law and God will keep the Ark; but if you
break the Law, you will forfeit the Ark: The Ark was called the Ark of the
Covenant; keep Covenant with God, and God will preserve the Ark; but if you
break the Covenant of the Ark, the Covenant made in Baptism, and that Covenant
often renewed in the Sacrament; if you break Covenant, God will take away the
Ark.

The Farewell a Sermons of John Gaspine Minister of the Gospel, Preached at
Ashpriors in the County of Somerset, the two last Lords days before
Bartholomew-day, 1662.
Luke 12.32. Fear not little Flock, for it is the Fathers good pleasure to give
you the Kingdom.
IN this Chapter we have the sum of a precious Sermon which our Savior makes
to his Disciples in the presence of the multitude. In which we have,

1. Several cautions in the first twenty verses of that Chapter. 2. Some
exhortations from thence to the end of it. The Cautions are these.
First, to beware of Hypocrisy, in the three first verses, Beware of the
Leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy; and the motive wherewith he backs
this caution, is this, That all things should be opened and made known
hereafter, how closely soever they may be carried, and how secretly soever
their sins may be committed here. Men may think to varnish over the fowlest of
their actions by a fair and plausible pretenses, and so to hide their
iniquities from the eyes of God and men; but they are much mistaken; for there
is nothing covered that shall not be revealed, nor hid, that shall not be
known, ver. 2.

Secondly, He warns them to beware of timerousness and fearfulness in
publishing his Gospel, from the beginning of the 4 to the 12. Verse, I say unto
you, my friends, be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that they
have no more that they can do; but I will forewarn you whom you shall fear,
Fear him, who after he has killed, has power to cast into Hell. I say unto
you, Fear him.

Thirdly, He cautions them to beware of covetousness, and this caution of his
was occasioned by one that desired Christ to speak to his Brother to divide the
inheritance with him, verse 13. Upon this Christ takes occasion to caution them
against covetousness, verse 15. And he said unto them, take heed and beware of
covetousness. And that he might set out the folly of this sin of covetousness,
he does elegantly set it forth by a Parable of a rich man, who was coveting
after more and more of the world, and was casting, plodding, and contriving how
to pull down his barns, and to build greater, and how to increase his Estate in
the world, when God said unto him, Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be
required of thee; and whose then will these things be which thou have provided?
from ver. 15. to 20.

Having given them these cautions, he proceeds to give them several
exhortations, as to seeking after the Kingdom of God, to giving of alms, to
watchfulness against the coming of Christ to Judgment, and several other duties
which I shall not now insist upon.

The Text contains that exhortation of Christ, wherein he exhorts them to
undauntedness and resolution in the ways of God. Fear not little Flock, for it
is your Fathers good pleasure to give you a Kingdom.

The words may be divided into these two parts:

First, Here is an Exhortation. Secondly, The reason of this Exhortation.
First, An Exhortation, Fear not little Flock: In the which here is,

1. A very loving compellation, in the words (...), little Flock. 2. The
Exhortation it self, (...), fear not.
In the reason of the Exhortation, viz. For it is your Fathers good pleasure to
give you the Kingdom, we have these things considerable.

First, Here is your Donor, your Father. Secondly, Here is the Donum or gift it
self, which God will bestow upon his people, and that is the Kingdom, which is
meant the Kingdom of Heaven. Thirdly, The persons on whom God will bestow this
Kingdom, and that is You, you my little flock. Fourthly, The manner of God's
bestowing the Kingdom of Heaven upon his little Flock, and that is by gift, It
is your Father's good pleasure to give, etc. Fifthly and lastly, The motive
that prevails with God to give the Kingdom of Heaven to his people, and that is
his own good pleasure, It is your Father's good pleasure, etc.
So that you see every word has its weight: Here is very much profitable
matter contained in a few words; and many useful and profitable observations
may be observed from it; as,

Doct. First, That Christ's Flock is but a little Flock, a very little Flock;
Fear not little Flock.

Here be two diminutive words in Original: First, (...) which signifies little;
and then the word (...), which also signifies a little ^sock: Christ's Flock
is a little Flock, very little in comparison to the rest of the World; the
number of those that truly fear God, that are sincere Christians, and that are
by a true and lively faith really engrafted into Jesus Christ, is very small in
comparison of the profane, the hypocrites, the unconverted and unsanctified,
that are only Christians by an external profession, that have only a form of
godliness, but deny the power of it: The way to Heaven is narrow, and the gate
strait, and there are but few that find it, Mat. 7.13, 14. There may be many
that make fair pretenses to Religion and Holiness in a time of prosperity; but
there are but few that will stick to Christ and his holy ways in discouraging
times; there may be many that are rotten professors, but few that are sound in
the Faith.

2. Doct. That God is a believers Father; or that every sincere Christian is a
Child of God, and has God for his Father; It is (says Christ to his
Disciples) your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom. 3. Doct. That
every true Believer is interessed in the Kingdom of Heaven; the great God will
bestow the Kingdom of Heaven upon Believers. 4. D^ct. That the Kingdom of
Heaven is the free gift of God, It is the Fathers good pleasure to give you a
Kingdom. The Kingdom of Heaven comes not to a Believer by his own merits, nor
by his own deservings; but by God's free gift; the free grace of God is the
great motive, it is God's good pleasure so to do. The Saints cannot merit
heaven by their holiest actions, though they walk never so closely with God:
no, no, the Kingdom of heaven is God's free gift unto Believers. 5. Doct.
Lastly, That the consideration of a Believers interest in the Kingdom of
heaven, should make him cheerful and courageous in the practice of holiness,
and keep him from being dismayed and discouraged at all the afflictions and
tribulations that he meets withal in the world, this Doctrine is gathered from
the Exhortation in the Text, and the reason of it taken together; the
Exhortation, viz. Fear not little Flock; the reason of the Exhortation, viz.
For it is your Fathers ^ood pleasure to give you the Kingdom; intimating, that
this one consideration that God will bestow the Kingdom of Glory upon his
people hereafter, should make them with all willingness and cheerfulness to
wade through all the calamities and encumbrances of this frail life. A
Believers heavenly interest should make him rejoice in the midst of all his
trials and tribulations that he meets with from the hands of men here on earth.
I shall ^huse out the second and last of these observations to go on upon, not
having time and liberty to insist on them all; that observation then which I
shall first of all insist upon, is this, viz.

Doct. That God is a Believers Father, or that every true and sincere Christian
has God for his Father, and is a child of God: It is your Fathers good
pleasure.

Before I come to the confirmation of this Truth, I shall show how many ways a
people or person may have God to be their Father, and they may be his Children.

First, A people or person may have God for their Father by Creation; as God is
the great Creator of the World, and they are his Creatures, in this general
sense God is a Father to all the Men and Women in the World; to this refers
that Scripture, Mal. 3.10. says the Prophet there, Have we not all one Father?
Has not one God created us? but it is a more peculiar sonship that belongs to
Believers; they have God for their Father in a more special and peculiar manner
than this is. Secondly, A people or person may be the children of God, and God
may be their Father by profession: Thus God was a Father to the Jewish Nation
of old, because they among all the Nations of the World did profess to own the
Lord for their God, and to serve and worship him; and in this respect God does
profess himself to be a Father to Israel, Jer. 3 9. I am a Father to Israel,
says God, Ephraim is my firstborn: And thus God is a Father to all those that
do profess his Name. But if this be all the claim that we can lay to God as our
Father, that he is so to us, and that we are his children only by an external
profession, this will not entitle us to the Kingdom, that eternal inheritance
that God has laid up for his people in the life to come; it is therefore yet
in a more peculiar manner that Believers have God for their Father. Thirdly, A
person may have God for his Father by adoption and regeneration; and thus true
Believers, and only such are the children of God, and God is their Father, 1
John 12.13. To as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the
Sons of God, even to them that believe on his name, which were born not of
blood nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God: These
are the sons of God, the strictest and most peculiar sons that shall be made
partakers of all the privileges of the children of God, viz. those that
receive Christ into their hearts by faith, and such as are truly regenerate and
born again; these are the true and genuine children of the most High, the heirs
of God, and coheirs of Jesus Christ, as the expression is, Romans 8. these are
the children of whom it was spoken, 2 Cor. 6. last. I will be a Father unto
you, and you shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty. Having
thus shown unto you the several respects in which we may have God for our
Father, I shall come to the confirmation of it, and shall prove that Believers
have God for their Father in this special and peculiar manner; there are
abundance of Scripture-proofs for this, in which Jesus Christ speaking to his
Disciples, calls God their Father, Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine before
men, that they seeing your good works, may glorify your Father which is in
Heaven. And ver. 48. Be ye perfect as your Father which is in Heaven is
perfect, Mat. 6.8. Your Father knows what things you have need of, before you
ask them, Mat. 18.14. Even so it is not the will of your Father which is in
Heaven, these little ones should perish, Joh. 20.17. Go tell my brethren (says
Christ) that I ascend to my Father, and to your Father, to my God, and to your
God. By these and other Scriptures we may see that God is set forth to
Believers under the relation of a Father to them: And as God is called in
Scripture a Believers Father, so they are called sons, Gal. 4.6. Because ye are
sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba
Father. Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son; and if a son, then an
heir of God through Christ. Again, 1 John 3.2. Now we are the Sons of God, but
it does not yet appear what we shall be; when we shall appear, we shall be like
him; for we shall see him as he is, Gal. 3.16. The Apostle speaking to the
unbelieving Galatians, says, We are all the Children of God by Faith, which is
in Christ Jesus. I shall no longer insist on the confirmation of this Doctrine,
but shall come to the application of it.
Use. Is it so, that all true believers are the children of God, and have God
for their heavenly Father, then the first use may be of comfort and consolation
to the godly, in that they are so nearly related to the great God; believers by
virtue of their sonship, having God for their heavenly Father, have abundant
ground of comfort and consolation upon these several accounts.

First, They are under his fatherly care and providence: fathers take care for
their children, to provide them things necessary, as meat, drink, and apparel;
ab iisdem alimur ex quibus generamur, is a true Maxim; We are nourished of
those of whom we are begotten; Fathers when their children ask bread, will not
give them stones; nor when they ask fish, will they give them scorpions, Mat.
7.9. He that provides not these things for his children, is worse than an
Infidel, 1 Timothy 4.8. and has God commanded this from Parents toward their
children, and will not God much more provide for his children that are truly
regenerate and born again, and that have his Image by faith engraven on their
souls? he would do it much more abundantly, Mat. 7.11. If ye being evil know
how to give good gifts to your children, how much more shall your Father which
is in heaven give good things to those that ask him? This then is one great
privilege that believers are made partakers of by virtue of this relation,
having God for their heavenly Father; God will certainly provide good things
for them, both for their being and well-being here and hereafter; and they may
come to God as a Father, with holy boldness of faith for all things that they
shall stand in need of; God takes care for those that are strangers and enemies
to him, and makes his rain to fall upon the unjust, as well as upon the just,
Mat. 5.4, 5, He gives them rain from heaven, silling their hearts with food
and gladness, Acts 14.7. And will he not much rather feed his own children? he
gives food to all flesh, Psalm. 136.25. And will he not much rather take care
for his own children that are engrafted into him by faith, that do love and
serve him: if God's bounty be largely extended to those that are strangers and
enemies to him, even to those that go on in sin and wickedness, as many times
it is, then certainly he will kill the farted Calf for his own children, as the
Father of the prodigal did for his returning Son. Nay, in this the great God
exceeds earthly Parents, as far as Heaven is above the earth; for natural
Parents they give good things to their children when they ask them; but God the
Father of Spirits will do much more abundantly for his children, aboye what
they are able to ask or think: the Petitions of God's children may be large,
their desires and thoughts larger than heir Petitions; for we are not always
able to express outwardly, what inwardly we desire; but God will do more
abundantly for his people beyond all these. Let us look into the Word of God,
and we shall there see what noble provision he has made for his people, what
food, yea, angels food he has provided for them; what a feast of fat things (I
mean of spiritual dainties and delicates) he has dressed for them; for their
bread, they shall have the bread of life, he that eats thereof, shall never
hunger, John 6.48. they shall have their fill of that hidden Manna laid up in
the Sanctuary. We read of Benjamins Mess Gen 4.3. last, That it was five times
as much as any of his Brethren; but the children of God, their food that they
shall have from their heavenly Father, shall be a thousand times better, and
more satisfactory than that which shall be given to the men of the World; they
shall have their measures heaped up, pressed down, and running over, Psalm.
34.10. The young Lions shall lack and suffer hunger, but the children of God,
those that cry unto God their Father, shall want no good thing; but especially
spiritual good things, they shall be sure to have their fill of these, and
shall be satisfied with them, even as with marrow and fatness; and for their
drink, they shall have the heavenly Nectar, the water of Life, the blood of
Jesus Christ, the which whosoever drinks, shall thirst no more, John 4.14.
they shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of his house, he will make
them drink of the River of his pleasures; for with God is the fountain of life,
in his light they shall see light, Psalm. 38.8, 9. there is a River, the streams
whereof shall make glad the City of God, Psalm. 46.4. and his Children shall
drink of this River of Water of life, clear as crystal, proceeding out of the
throne of God, and the Lamb, Rev. 22.1. it is for these especially that God
has provided the spiritual milk of the Word, that they may grow thereby; they
shall suck sweetness out of the promises, those rich breasts of consolation;
and for their apparel, the Children of God may say as the Prophet, Isa. 61.10.
I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God; for he
has clothed me with the garments of salvation; he has, covered me with a
robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh himself with Ornaments, and as a
Bride adorneth her self with Jewels. What shall I say? they shall be clothed
with the righteousness of Jesus Christ, a garment without spot or blemish,
white as snow, even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of those.

Thus you have the first ground of consolation to Believers, upon the account
of having God for their Father, he will certainly provide for them those things
that shall be necessary, both in this life, and in the life to come.

Secondly, Is God a Father to Believers? then another ground of consolation is
this, That he will defend them from their enemies: How mightily does it provoke
natural Parents to see their Children abused? How quickly will their eye affect
their heart, and stir them up to come in and rescue them? So will the Lord do
for those that are his children by Adoption and Regeneration; he will defend
them, he will be a wall of fire round about them, so that all their enemies,
both spiritual and temporal, shall not be able to do them any real hurt: the
Devil, and all his wiles and temptations, the World and all its tempting
allurements: yea, all the policy and malice of Earth and Hell, shall not be
able to work their ruin; the Lord is on their their side, and they have more
for them, than they have against them. Upon this consideration it was that
David tells us in his Book of Psalms, Though I walk (says he) in the valley of
the shadow of death, yet will I fear none ill; for thou, O Lord, art my Rock
and my Fortress, and my salvation eke for ever.

Would we not account him unworthy the name of a Father, that would suffer his
Children to be beaten and abused, and destroyed before his face, and not act in
their defense? and will God suffer his dear Children so to be? No certainly, He
that touches them, touches the apple of his eye, Zach. 2.8. and God accounts
what is done to them, as if it were done to himself in person; In as much as ye
did it unto those little ones, ye did it unto me: Will Christ say one day as he
tells us? Mat. 25.40. and, in as much as ye did it not unto the least of these
my brethren, ye did it not unto me, ver. 45. Beloved, there is a time coming,
when the great God will reckon with ungodly men, for all the injuries and
wrongs which they have done to his people, as if they were done to himself
immediately.

Oh! consider of this you that are true Believers; are you environed round with
adversaries, either spiritual or temporal? you have God for your defense, a God
infinite in power, which is able to defend you from the hardest assaults of
your most potent and politic Enemies; his Name is a strong Tower, the
Righteous fly unto it, and are safe. Are you encountering with great
temptations? The Lord being your Father, he will protect you, and not suffer
you to be tempted above what you are able to bear, but together with
temptation, will make way for your escape, that you may be able to bear it, 1
Cor. 10.30. the Lord knows that his Children are liable to many temptations
from Satan, from the world, and from their own corruptions, and that they are
subject to many afflictions and tribulations from the hands of men, and
therefore he will be sure to be with them, and to be a very present help to
them in the time of trouble.

Thirdly, Is God a Believers Heavenly Father? then there is a comfort for them,
that God will pity them and compassionate them in all their afflictions; a
tender Father pitieth his Children when they are in any calamity; as for
instance, in sickness how will the groans of a Child go near the heart of a
loving Parent? How do the Agonies of pain in the Child, cause grief and sorrow
in the Parents heart? What means would not a Parent use to procure the health
and ease of a Child? My life is bound up in the life of the Lad, says Jacob
concerning Benjamin. Oh Absalon, my son, my son, would God I had dyed for thee,
says David concerning Absalon. What sympathyzing and sellow-feeling will a dear
and tender Parent have of the miseries of his Children? And as a Father pitieth
his Children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him, Psalm. 103.13. The Lord is
very pitiful, Jam. 5.11. The pity and compassion of the Lord toward his
Children, is excellently set forth in that Scripture, Jer. 31.20. Is Ephraim my
dear son? Is he a pleasant Child? I speak against him, I do earnestly remember
him still; therefore my bowels are troubled for him; I will surely have mercy
on him, says the Lord; The bowels of the Lord do exceedingly yearn toward his
people in all their afflictions and distresses, and he is full of pity and
compassion toward them.

Fourthly, Is God a Father to all true Believers? then here is also for their
comfort, that God does, and always will love them, and take delight in them; He
loves them with an everlasting love, they are his chosen Jewels, and he will
certainly one day polish them, though he suffer them to be among the rubbish of
the World for a while; They are his pleasant pictures, and he delights to be
looking on them, the eyes of the Lord are upon them that fear him, and upon
them that hope in his mercy, Psalm. 33.18. God takes pleasure to be viewing the
new creature which he has framed by his own Spirit in the hearts of his
people, and his own Image which he stamped upon them; and herein the love that
the Lord bears his Children, infinitely exceeds the Love that earthly Parents
bear to theirs, in that he loves them continually: Earthly Parents they love
their Children, but their love may be withdrawn from them again, and is often
times; but the love of God will never be withdrawn from his love; whom the Lord
loves, he loves to the end; and although his loving countenance may be
eclipsed for a time, and they may lose the sense of his love to them, by their
failings and sinful infirmities, yet the Lord loves them still; There is
nothing shall be able to separate Believers from the love of God, Romans 8.25.
and onward: the Apostle Paul puts the question there, (says he) Who shall
separate us from the love of God? Shall tribulation, or distress, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword, as it is written. For
thy sake are we killed all the day long, we are accounted as sheep for the
slaughter: Nay, (says he) in all these things we are more than Conquerors
through him that loved us; for I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life,
nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate
us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. It is not all the
troubles of the world, nor tribulations, nor any thing that can render
Believers less lovely in the eyes of Christ: It is not all the Devils in Hell,
that can withdraw Gods love from his children, although they do endeavor* it
by enticing them to sin by their temptations, and then by accusing them to God
for sin; yet all this will not rout them out of God's love: though the Devil do
labor to pick a quarrel between God and his people; yet it is not
principalities nor powers, it is not all the power of Hell that shall be able
to withdraw Gods love from them.

Fifthly, Is God a Father to Believers? Then they may take this for their
comfort, that he will continually be mindful of them. Parents do remember their
Children, and are mindful of them: so the Lord, he remembers his people and
will never forget them, Isa. 49.15. Can a Woman forget her sucking child, that
she should not have compassion on the Son of her womb; yea, they may, yet I
will not forget thee: Earthly Parents, though it be but rare, yet they may, and
sometimes do forget their children; but God, he is more tender and mindful of
his Children, than earthly Parents are of theirs; yea, they may, yet will not I
forget thee, etc. Though Gods people do too often forget him, yet he does never
forget them, but remember them in all their conditions, even in their low
estate, God is mindful of them, Psalm. 136.23. Who remembered us in our low
estate, for his mercy endures for ever.

Lastly, Is God a Father to Believers? Then they may take this for their
comfort, that God will provide an inheritance for them hereafter: Fathers
provide portions and inheritances for their Children for hereafter, so does
God, Romans 8. Now says the Apostle, We are the Sons of God; and if sons, then
heirs, heirs of God, and coheirs with Jesus Christ: How often is the Kingdom of
Heaven called an inheritance, the inheritance of the Saints, or them that are
sanctified, Acts 20.32. and 26.8. There is an eternal inheritance laid up for
the Children of God for hereafter; yea, the Kingdom of Heaven is their
inheritance, and it is now preparing for them, John 14.2. and they shall have
assuredly one day an abundant entrance into their Fathers Kingdom; the Children
of God while they are in the World, they are as Heirs in their minority, they
have not yet the possession of their inheritances, but it is theirs, and they
shall have it in reversion; but hereafter when they shall leave this earthly
Tabernacle, then they shall have the possession of it. Every true and sincere
Believer, he is an Heir to a Crown, even a Crown of glory that fades not away;
Their lines are fallen to them in a pleasant place, they have a goodly
Heritage; the Lord is the portion of their Inheritance, Psalm. 16.5, 6. It is
the hope of this Inheritance of theirs, that carries on the souls of the
Saints in the whole course of their lives; and makes them joyfully and
willingly to wade through all their troubles and difficulties that they meet
with in their way to Heaven. It is the consideration of this their portion and
inheritance which they are entailed to by having God for their Father, that
makes them forget the things that are behind, and press forward toward the
mark for the price of the high calling which is in Jesus Christ; it is their
acting faith upon this, and having an eye to the recompense of reward, that
makes them run with patience the race that is set before them: as knowing, that
when they have finished their course, they shall receive a Crown of Life, which
the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give them at that day.

Here the godly have the earnest of their inheritance, which is the Spirit of
God, Ephesians. 1.14. After that ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of
Promise, which is the earnest of our Inheritance, until the redemption of the
purchased possession, unto the praise of his Glory. Here Believers have the
promise of their inheritance: The Word of God is a Believers Patent for his
inheritance, in which God does as it were by promise make over Heaven, and
Happiness, and Glory to true Believers, to be enjoyed by them for ever in the
Life to come; but hereafter, then they shall have the fruition and possession
of it.

Would you know what a glorious Inheritance this is, that the children of God
by believing are entitled to? 1 Pet. 1.4. It is an Inheritance uncorruptible,
undefiled, which fades not away. They are Heirs to a Crown of Glory, the are
heirs of God, and coheirs with Jesus Christ, which is the Heir of all things:
believe it Friends, it is such a glorious inheritance that the Children of God
are entitled unto, that all the Inheritances and Poffessions in the world are
but a trifle in comparison of it; to set out the beauty and excellency of the
Saints inheritance, is a task fitter for some Angel, than for a mortal Creature
For eye has not seen, neither has ear heard, neither has entered into the
heart of man to conceive what the Lord has laid up for them that fear him,
Isa. 64.4.

Thus you see what abundant cause of comfort Believers have upon this
consideration, that God is their Father, and that they are his children in
every condition of their lives, in every trouble either outward or inward;
howsoever it be with a regenerate Christian, one that is a true child of God,
he has cause to take comfort in this.

First, Is a Believer in want here in the World? is he in distress, and driven
to streights, not knowing what course to take for the supplying of his natural
want^ (as Gods people are driven to such conditions sometimes) he can go to God
as unto a Father, and make his wants and necessities known to him; he both can
and will find out some way or other for a supply for you: He that has
promised so large a portion hereafter in Heaven, will not deny so much of this
World as is necessary for you in your way to Heaven; Your Father knows what
good things you have need of, Mat. 6.8. God which is the Believers Father,
knows what things they need, and he is ready to hear them, and knows how to
help them.

Secondly, Is a Believer in danger? is he environed about with his Enemies on
every side, and compassed about with those that seek his hurt? Oh! what comfort
is this that he can go to God as unto a Father for help, even to him that is
Almighty, and able in a moment to defend them from their most powerful and
politic adversaries? is a godly man in danger, and has he Enemies that do
wrongfully seek his life, as David had? Psalm. 31.13. yet he may have the same
confidence that David had in that condition, and say as he said in the
follownig Verse: Yet I trust in thee, Oh Lord, I said, thou art my God, my
times are in thy hand, deliver me from the hand of mine Enemies, and from them
that persecute me.

Thirdly, Does a Believer find his corruption within, to rebel against the
regenerate part? Does he find the Law in his Members which is warring against
the Law of his mind, to lead him into captivity to the Law of sin and death?
Does he find his sins to be very strong within him, and that they begin to
draw him away from God? Oh! what comfort is this to a Child of God in this
condition, that he can go and complain then to his heavenly Father, and be
consident that this Father will hear him, and h^^^ (...), and make him more
than a Conqueror over all the Enemies of his (...)

Fourthly, Art thou that art a believer, in doubt, and know not what course
to take? go to thy heavenly Father for direction: he is the infinitely wise
God, and he will be sure to direct thee for the best.

Fifthly, Art thou slandered, reviled, and reproached in the world, and made
the common scorn and derision of the Ungodly? go to thy Father, thy heavenly
Father, and complain to him; he will certainly clear up thine innocence, as the
light at noonday, and wipe off all the reproaches that are wrongfully cast
upon thee.

Sixthly, Art thou that art a Believer, wronged by men, and know not how to
right thy self? go to thy Heavenly Father, he will certainly set all things
right one day: neither is it all the power and policy of thine adversaries, nor
their riches, nor any thing that shall be able to pervert him, and hinder him
from redressing thy wrongs, and from doing thee right.

Seventhly, and lastly, Do thou find thyself to be in a state of
languishing, thou that art a Believer? for to such I am speaking all this
while: Do thou find thy natural strength to decay, and thy sickness to
increase, and thy pains to grow upon thee? putting thee in mind that thy body
must be shortly laid in the grave; telling thee that thou may expect with in
a few days or hours to lay down thy earthly Tabernacle, and to encounter with
the pangs of death? Oh happy soul then, that can make thy approaches to God,
as unto a Father; and breath out thy soul into the bosom of thy Heavenly
Father; and say as Christ did when he was on the Cross; Father, into thy hand I
commend my Spirit: Believe it Christian, thou that art truly such, it will
afford thee more comfort than that God is thy Heavenly Father, and thou his
Child by Adoption and Regeneration, then if thou were related to the greatest
Prince, and the puissant Monarch in all the world.

Thus I have done with the first Use, which is a Use of Consolation to the
godly, upon this consideration, that they are the Children of God, and that he
is their Heavenly Father.

2 Use for Caution.

Secondly, If it be so, that all true Believers are the Children of God, and
that he is their Father; then this should caution wicked men to be^are how they
meddle with Gods Children: Oh! have a care of afflicting, wronging,
persecuting, hurting of the people of God, lest you be found fighters against
God; have a care of anoying, and troubling those that are so near and dear to
God, that are so tender to him as the apple of his eye: beware of vexing and
molesting those that are so nearly related to the great King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords; you may think it may be that you may do what you will to the godly,
because they are low and mean in the world, as many of them are; But I must
tell you, as mean and as low as they are in your esteem, they are near and dear
to God: carnal men may think they may oppress, and wrong, and do what they
please to the people of God, because they are weak, and not able to help
themselves; but little do they think how nearly the great God does account
himself concerned in their affairs; little do the great ones of the world
consider, what heavy reckoning will be laid to their charge one day for
injuring, wronging, and molesting the poor servants of God; if they did, surely
we should not have them so busily employed therein as they are. Thus for the
second Use.

3. Use for Examination.

Thirdly, Is it so, that Believers have God for their Heavenly Father, then
here is matter of Trial; how shall we know, whether God be our Father or no?
and whether we be his children in this peculiar manner, by Adoption and
Regeneration? It is true, God is a Father to us by Creation, and we are his
Children by Profession; but if this be all the relation that we bear to God,
this will not entitle us to holiness and salvation, without we are regenerate
and born again, and are become his Children by Regeneration, and God be our
Father by virtue of the new Covenant: We are all by nature the children of
wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. How shall we know then, whether we are gotten into the state
of Sonship, by Adoption and Regeneration, and whether God be our heavenly
Father? there are man^ that pretend that the have God for their Father, when as
yet they are under the Dominion of their lusts, and are strangers to a work of
true conversion and regeneration, and enemies to a life of holiness, and a
groundless presumption, that men are the Children of God, when there is no such
matter, has proved the bane of many thousand souls. I shall therefore give you
these characters, whereby we may know, whether we are the children of God in
this peculiar manner or no.

First, Whose Image do you bear, do you bear the Image of God? or else do you
bear the Image of Saran? Those that are the Children of God by Adoption and
Regeneration, they are such as bear their Fathers Image; the Image of God which
is created in righteousne^s and in true holiness, is engraven upon their souls:
they are such as do bear the Image of the heavenly Adam, 1 Cor. 15.49, And they
have put ^n the New man which is created in knowl^dge, after the Image of him
that created him, Col. 3.10. And it is so with thee, do thou bear the Image
of God? have thou a new and holy nature put into thee, inclining thee to all
holy duties, and avoid all sin? art thou renewed in holiness, then thou art a
Child of God, and God is thy Heavenly Father? but if it be not thus with thee,
if thou have not this new and holy nature wrought in thee, but thy old corrupt
nature is predominant, inclining thee to sin; whatsoever groundless presumption
thou may have, yet thou art no true Child of God by Regeneration and Adoption.

Secondly, Would thou know whether thou art the true child of God or no? by
whose spirit art thou led? by the spirit of God, or by the spirit of Satan;
they that have God for their Father, are led by the spirit of God, Romans 8.14.
As many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the Sons of God: try thy self
then by this, art thou led by the spirit of God? Do thou live after the
flesh, and not after the spirit? Do thou mind the things of the spirit, and
not the things of the flesh? if so, then thou may comfortably conclude that
thou art the Child of God, and that he is a heavenly Father: we may know our
Sonship by our spirit, if we are the Sons of God by Adoption and Regeneration,
then we are led by a spirit of God, which is a spirit of Prayer, Romans 8.15. A
spirit of liberty, making us free from the dominion of our lusts, and from the
slavery of sin and Satan, 2 Cor. 3.17. John 8.32. A spirit of love to God, and
to the people of God, 1 John 5 2.

Thirdly, We may know whether God be our heavenly Father or no; by this do we
labor to set forth the honor of God? Children, they are very tender of the
honor of their Parents; this is a great duty to honor earthly Parents, Exodus
20.11 much more should we honor God, which is the Father of Spirits; If I am
your Father, where is mine honor? (says Christ) if God be our Father, where
is that honor that we should yield to him? if we are the Children of God by
Regeneration and San^^ification, then we are tender of the honor of Christ? it
will make our hearts rise to hear his Name blasphemed, or taken in vain: his
Salbaths profaned, his Worship corrupted by human^ mixtures: his Creatures
abused unto excess, his Commandments broken: these things will grieve and
trouble us more than any thing, if we are Gods Children in truth; But if we can
see God dishonored by the unholy lives of carnal men, his Commands trampled
under foot, and yet not be grieved at this: but can close in with those that
make it their business to dishonor God, then thou art no Child of God in this
particular sense: the great dishonor that is brought to God in the world, is a
sad sign that there is but few, very few, that are in truth the Children of God:
and the abounding and increasing of all sorts of sin, whereby God is
exceedingly dishonored: drunkenness, swearing, Sabbath-breaking, uncleanness,
lying, extortion, oppression, scorning and deriding at Holiness, contempt of
Gods Ordinances, Persecution of his faithful laborious Ministers and People; I
say the abounding of these and such like abominations is a very sad evidence,
that there are very few that have God for their Heavenly Father, in this
special and peculiar manner, and that are his children by Adoption and
Regeneration.

Lastly, would thou know whether God be thy Father, and thou his child by
this? whether thou art courageous in the ways of God, and in the practice of
Godliness? they that have God for their heavenly Father, they have a noble and
Heroic spirit; they are such as will not be ashamed, nor afraid to lead a holy
life; notwithstanding all the mocks and taunts, and threats of the world: they
that are of a base timorous spirit, that are afraid of owning the ways of
holiness, for fear of being reproached, reviled or opposed by the profane
world: they that are afraid to cleave to the ways and people of God in
discouraging times, they are not of the right strain; say not then that thou
art born of God; unless thou can prove thy noble extraction, by thy noble and
heroic courage and resolution; notwithstanding all the trouble, calamity, and
persecution thou may meet with in the world. Thus much for Examination.

4. Use for Exhortation.

Fourthly, Is it so, etc. Then here is a word of Exhortation.

First, Unto those that are Unregenerate, that have not God for their Father in
this peculiar manner: and that is, that they would never be in rest, till they
come to be united unto Jesus Christ, and to have him to be their Father by
Regeneration; it is a sad thing to be void of this, when we cannot go to God as
to a Father, and cannot expect any thing from him, as from a Father. Oh! how
little do thousands think of this, whether they are the Children of God, and
have God for their Father, or no; they care not for it, they make not out after
it: Or take it for granted, when they have no true and real ground so to do.
Oh! then labor to get into this state of Sonship; close with Jesus Christ by
a lively, operative, heart-purifying faith, that thou may thereby be invested
into Gods family, and become his Child; consider, that before thou art thus by
faith ingrafted into Christ, thou have woeful Parents, thou art a child of
disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. A child of wrath, Verse 3. A child of Satan, John 8.44

Secondly, Here is a word of Counsel and Exhortation to the Godly, that are the
Children of God by Adoption and Regeneration.

First, To those m^ first council is, that you would make it your greatest care
and diligence to please your Heavenly Father, and have a care of sinning
against him; consider, that the sins of Gods Children, are very grievous to
him, (...), said Caesar to his son Brutus, when he saw him among his betrayers;
What, and thou my son? so will God say to his children, when they grieve him by
sin: what, and thou my son? my child, one whom I have Adopted my Heir; what,
will you sin against me? I thought you had had more love; have I loved you so
much, and do you love me so little? has my spirit comforted you, and will you
grieve it? have my bowels yearned toward you, and will you kick against them?
have I been crucified for you, and will you crucify me again afresh by your
sins? The nearer the Relation is that the soul bears to God, the greater is
the aggravation of the sin against God. Secondly, Labor to show forth your
noble extraction, by your noble and raised affections; it is beneath the son of
a Prince to be taken up with trifles, it is beneath one that is heir to a
Kingdom, to set his affections upon low and base things, things of naught; So
it is beneath the Children of the great King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, to
let their affections run out inordinately after the world, and the enjoyments
thereof; they are born from above, and therefore should set their affections
upon things above, and not on things on earth, Colos. 3.2. What an unsuitable
thing is it for a Christian, to be taken up with the inordinate love of the
world? it is a Degradation to the heirs of Heaven to have their minds taken up
only or mostly with Earth, and earthly Vanities, they are, ad majora nati, born
to greater things: it is unbecoming such to soil their affections with Earth,
which are born to an inheritance incorruptible, which fades not away. Oh, that
the children of God, and such as do profess themselves so to be, would manifest
their holy and heavenly extraction, by their holy and heavenly affections: and
that such as are the Sons and Daughters of God by Adoption and Sanctification,
would not walk so far beneath that Relation. Thirdly, Labor to imitate your
heavenly Father: Be you followers of God as dear Children, Ephesians. 5.1. Be ye
merciful as your heavenly Father is merciful; be ye holy as he is holy, be ye
compassionate as he is in all things; labor to imitate your Heavenly Father, it
is a Christians honor to be like God, and to imitate him. Fourthly, Labor more
and more to obey your heavenly Father: our natural Parents, may require
obedience of us, and it is our duty to give it them; much more may him that is
the Father of spirits require it of us, and it is much more our duty to give it
him: Walk as obedient Children, 1 Pet. 1.14 Yea, you must obey him cheerfully
too; The obedience of Children is herein differenced from the obedience of
slaves, in that slaves are drawn to their duty out of a slavish fear, but
children come to it willingly, out of a fillial affection. Oh therefore let
your obedience to God be cheerful and voluntary: Take delight to do the will of
your heavenly Father. Lastly, Submit to your heavenly Fathers chastisements;
this is the Exhortation of the Apostle to the Hebrews, Heb. 12.5, 6, 7. My Son,
despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of
him. For whom the Lord loves, be chasteneth, and scourges every Son he
receives. If ye endure chastening, God deals with you as with Sons, for what
Son is he whom the Father chasteneth not: But if ye are without chastisement,
whereof all are partakers, then are ye Bollards and not Sons: Let us not then
murmur and faint under our afflictions and chastisements, but let us submit to
them, and labor to grow the better for them. Thus much for the first
Observation? That God is a believers heavenly Father; the other observation
that I proposed to insist upon from this Text, was the last of the five
mentioned in the beginning, and it contains the chief sum and scope of the
whole verse, and is most suitable to our Times, and to this Occasion, you may
remember was this.
Doct. That the consideration of a Believers interest into the Kingdom of
Heaven, should make him cheerful and courageous in the practice of holiness,
and keep him from being dismayed at all the trouble and calamities that he
meets withal in the world: Fear not (says Christ) little flock, for it is
your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom. In this Observation, there
is two things supposed.

First, It is supposed in this Doctrine, that believers have an interest in the
Kingdom of Heaven: This I need not now stand to prove, having spoken to it
already in the handling of the former Observation: God being their Father, he
has provided an eternal inheritance of glory for them, in his eternal Kingdom.
Secondly, It is supposed in the Doctrine, that believers are like to meet with
opposition from the world; they are diligent in the practice of godliness, are
driving a Trade for Heaven: they shall be sure to meet with abundance of
trouble and hindrance from the world, and the Prince of the world; this is a
truth exceeding manifest, both from Scripture and experience: We shall be hated
of all men for his names sake, Mat. 10.22. And because Christ has chosen his
people out of the world, therefore the world hated him. Jo. 15.19. And
experience makes this evidence in all ages of the world; those that are godly
and walk with God, they have been sure to have their portion of afflictions and
tribulations, from the hands and tongues of the malicious and ungodly world,
and my design is to show, what little cause the Servants of God that have an
interest in the Kingdom of Heaven, to be afraid or dismayed at any of these
hindrances and oppositions, that they meet withal in their way to Heaven. For
the handling of this Doctrine, and the fiting of it for our improvement by
Application; I shall speak to these three things. First, I shall show you by
some instances from the word of God, how the Saints that have had an interest
in the Kingdom of Heaven, have been encouraged in the ways of God, and have had
their spirits born up in their lowest condition, and in their greatest trials
and troubles here below. Secondly, I shall show you that believers are dehorted
from dispondency; and being dismayed under their sufferings upon the
consideration of their Heavenly interest. Thirdly, I shall give you some
Reasons, why believers, that have a Title to the Heavenly Glory, should be
courageous and undaunted, and not dismayed at all their eternal Trials and
Tribulations that they meet withal from the world: and so shall come to the
Application.

First, For the first of these, I might give you many instances from the word
of God, of the courage and magnanimity of the heirs of Heaven in their Trials;
as David, how courageous was he in the Lord, even in his lowest condition,
Psalm. 46.1, 2, 3, 4. God is our resuge and our strength, a very present help
in Trouble; therefore (says he) will we not fear, though the earth be removed,
though the Mountains be cast into the midst of the Sea, though the Waters
thereof roar and be troubled, though the Mountains shake with the swelling
thereof, Selah, Psalm. 118.6. The Lord is on my side, I will not fear what man
can do unto me: David he had put confidence in God, and therefore was not
afraid of man; where the fear of God is, and where the hope of glory is, there
the slavish fear of man will quickly vanish away: this no doubt was that which
made the three Children not to be afraid of the fiery Furnace, nor Daniel of
the Den of Lions, Dan. 3.16. and 6. We have a notable example to this purpose,
Hab. 3.17, 18. Although the Fig Tree should not blossom, nor fruit be in the
Vine; though the labor of the Olive should fail, and the fields should yield
no meat, though the flocks should be out off from the fold, and there should be
no herd in the stall: yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of
my salvation. The consideration of his heavenly interest, and that God, was the
God of his salvation, was that which not only kept the Prophet from being
dismayed, but also made him to rejoice in the absence of all creature joys and
comforts; the want of these worldly things, were not able to abate his heavenly
joy, which he had in the God of his salvation. The consideration of their
heavenly interest, and their title to the everlasting glory, was that which
made the Apostles of Christ so courageous and comfortable under all their
sufferings that they underwent for Christ: This was that which made the Martyr
Steven so fearless and undaunted, when he was on the brink of death, and when
the stones flew about his ears, when he could look up into Heaven, the place of
his Inheritance, where he was going, and take a view of that Heavenly glory,
Acts 7* 55. A believer that can look up by an eye of faith upon Christ and
Heaven and take a view of the unseen world, the place of his eternal rest and
felicity, will be able in some measure to undergo with comfort, the sharpest
and bitterest persecutions that the malice of Men or Devils can expose him to;
This was that which made Paul and Sylas sing praises at midnight, when they
were shut up in prison, and their feet in the stocks, Acts 16.25. This was that
which caused the believing Hebrews, to take joyfully the spoiling of their
goods; even the consideration of their interest in the Kingdom of Heaven, Heb.
10.34. For ye bad compassion of me in my bonds, and took joyfully the spoiling
of your goods, knowing that in Heaven, you have a better, and a more enduring
substance; Their knowledge of this their interest in the Heavenly riches, made
them willingly to part with the earthly riches for the sake of Christ.

Secondly, The next thing to be spoken unto, is this; to show that the people
of God, upon this consideration of their interest in the Kingdom of Glory; have
been dehorted from fear and dispondence, and exhorted to courage and
magnanimity in the ways of God: Upon this consideration it is, that Christ
exhorts his little flock in the Text, not to fear, because that God would give
them the Kingdom of Heaven. How often are the Servants of God in Scripture,
dehorted from fear, Isa. 41.10. Fear not, I am with thee, be not dismayed, I am
thy God. Verse. 14. Fear not thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel: I will help
thee says the Lord thy Redeemer. Isa. 50.7, 8. Fear ye not the reproach of
men, be not dismayed at their revilings, for the Moth shall eat them up like a
garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool, but my Righteousness shall be
for ever, and my Salvation from Generation to Generation: And again, Verse 12.
W^^ art thou that should be afraid of a man that shall dye, and of the Son
of man that shall be made as grass, and forgets the Lord thy Maker, that
stretched out the Heavens, and laid the foundation of the Earth? And our
Savior in the New Testament, to the supporting of Believers under their
afflictions and tribulations; tells them, that it is a blessed thing, thus to
be dealt withal by the World, Mat. 5, 10, 11, 12. Blessed are they that are
persecuted for righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed
are ye when men shall revile you and persecute you, and speak all manner of
evil against you falsely for my sake: rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great
is your reward in Heaven. And Luke 6.22. Blessed are ye when men shall hate
you, and when they shall separate from you their company, and shall reproach
you, and cast out your name as evil for the Son of man's sake, rejoice in that
day, and leap for joy, for behold your reward is great in Heaven. The
consideration of our interest in the Kingdom of Heaven, should keep us from
being dismaved, though we are hated, persecuted, reproached by the profane
world, but should make us rejoice rather, and leap for joy. Thus much for the
second thing, which is, That the people of God are dehorted from fear and
dispondency, and exhorted to courage and magnanimity in the ways of God, from
the very consideration of their interest in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Thirdly, I shall give you the Reasons why Believers, those that have an
interest in the Kingdom of Heaven, should not fear not be dismayed at any
outward trouble, opposition, or tribulation that they meet with in the world.

First, It is very unsuitable for one that has secured the heavenly interest,
and his title to eternal glory, to be dismayed at thing of naught: how
unsuitable is it for one that is an Heir of Heaven, to be excessively grieved
and disconsolate, because he meets with some rubs in his way thither? Oh how
unseemly is it for a child of light to walk in darkness and heaviness, because
somewhat of the world falls a cross to his expectation or desire: for one that
is to enjoy eternal happiness in the life to come, to be dismayed and perplexed
at every petty cross that he meets here below? how unseemly is it for a child
of God, and Heir of Heaven, for one that shall sit down with Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob in the Heavenly glory, to go up and down drooping at
inconsiderable crosses and light afflictions, which are but for a moment.

For a worldling that has all his good things here, and has no other portion
but in this life, to be grieved and perplexed at his external losses and
troubles; this is not so much for such a one to be grieved when he is thwarted
in his designs, and when the world falls a cross to him, this is but suitable
and agreeable to such a one, because he has placed his Hope, his Contentment,
his joy and delight in these things: and therefore being deprived of them, he
is deprived of his best things, his Portion, his All.

But for a Child of God, one that has an interest in eternal life and glory,
to be cast down and dismayed at such small things, as the affliction, trials
and tribulations of the world: Oh what an unseemly thing is this, as if their
Heavenly interest did not give them greater cause of joy and rejoicing, then
those external worldly afflictions, do give them cause of sadness and
disconsolation.

The Frantic mirth of the profane World, that are in the high way to
Damnation, and the groundless perplexities of the regenerate Children of God,
are both alike, unsuitable and unseemly, although not both alike dangerous.

To see a Worldling, that has nothing else to comfort and support him, but the
fading enjoyments of this present life, to be merry and jovial, as if all were
well; and on the other hand, to see a believer that is an heir of Heaven, to
live in a drooping and disconsolate state, because of these outward troubles,
is cause of pity and lamentation.

Secondly, As it is unsuitable for a child of God that has secured his eternal
state, and made sure of his heavenly interest, to be dismayed at the
afflictions of the world, so it is very unwarrantble; believers are commanded
to be much in holy rejoicing; Rejoice (says Christ to his Disciples) because
your names are written in Heaven, Luke 10.20. Be glad in the Lord, Oh ye
righteous, and shout for joy, all ye upright in heart, Psalm. 32.11. Rejoice in
the Lord, oh ye righteous, for praise is comely for the upright, Psalm. 33.1.
Rejoice evermore, 1 These. 5.16. Oh how exceeding unwarrantable is it then for
those that have an interest in the heavenly Glory, to be discouraged at their
outward afflictions, by which they do disparage Religion, and frighten away
others from the doors of grace.

Thirdly, It is irrational for one that has secured his interest in the
Heavenly Kingdom, to be afraid of his worldly afflictions and tribulations,
seeing all the losses and crosses in the World, are as nothing comparatively to
such an one: Let a Child of God but weigh and ponder such things aright, and
compare the cause of joy that he has, by virtue of his heavenly interest on
the one hand, with the cause of sorrow that he has, by reason of the crosses
of the world on the other, and he will see, that he has a thousand times more
cause of joy, than of sorrow; and therefore the thoughts of his heavenly
interest, should swallow up those of his worldly troubles and disappointments.
I reckon (says the Apostle Paul) that the sufferings of this present time are
not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us, Romans
1.18. And the same Apostle tell us elsewhere, Our light afflictions which are
but for a moment, work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory,
2 Cor. 4.17. Now, is it not unreasonable for a believer to be grieved and
disquieted with those light afflictions which shall be recompensed with an
eternal weight of glory? What can a child of God lose, as long as his God, his
portion, his interest in Heaven is safe and secured to him? What are all the
losses that he can sustain in the World, as long as he is interested in the
Eternal Kingdom of Glory?

I must tell you, Believers, ye that walk holily and closely with God, and have
a title to the Kingdom of Heaven, for you to be grieved and discontented
because all things do not concur according to your desires in the World, is
unreasonable and absurd; as if a rich man that has a great Estate, and fair
Houses and Orchards, should be disquieted because the wind blows away a few
leaves from his Trees.

Is not the Kingdom of Heaven that thou art entitled to, enough to make thee
amends for all thy troubles and calamities in the end? Art thou troubled by the
profane World, and vexed up and down by thy Enemies, and not suffered to rest
in quiet? And is it not enough for thee that the Kingdom of Heaven is the place
of thine eternal rest and happiness, where thou shall be for ever advanced
above their reach? Art thou exposed to the loss of thy place and estate in the
World, and will not an incorrupted Crown of glory, and an eternal inheritance
among them that are sanctified, make thee amends for those petty losses that
thou sustainest here? Art thou the offscouring of the World here? and is it
not enough that thou shall be glorified in the presence of Saints and Angels
hereafter? Art thou slandered and reproached by the World? And is not this
enough to support thee that thou shall be acquitted at the bar of Christ? Do
thou suffer the loss of liberty? And art thou under restraint and imprisonment,
and is not this enough to comfort thee, that thou art free from the captivity
and dominion of sin? and art rid of those chains and fetters by which so many
thousands in the World are led captive by Satan at his pleasure, and that thou
art free from the prison of Hell? Put case (which is the greatest trouble that
a godly man can undergo in the World) thou art to lose thy life for the sake
of Christ, and of a good Conscience, however a Believers interest in the
Kingdom of Heaven should keep him from being dismayed at that loss; an eternal
life of happiness and glory will be enough to recompense thee a thousand fold
for loss of this frail life. Thus you have the third Reason, it is irrational
for a Believer that has an interest in the Kingdom of Heaven, to be dismayed
at those outward crosses and losses that he sustains in the World, because they
are very little and inconsiderable while their God, their portion, their
heavenly interests is safe and secure to them.

Lastly, One that is an Heir of Heaven, and has a title to the Heavenly
Kingdom, should be courageous in the ways of God, and not be daunted at his
outward troubles, because of the short continuance of them, as the joys and
pleasures of the World are but for a little moment of time, so the sorrows and
tribulations of the World are but for a small moment of time; neither the
troubles of the godly, though they may be sharp, yet they are but short, death
will quickly put a period to them all, all the trials and tribulations of the
Saints will be at an end when they come to enter into their everlasting rest.
The Saints in Heaven are perfectly freed as from the evil of sin, so from the
evil of suffering; they will be out of the reach of their most powerful and
malicious adversaries. Now what little reason has a Believer that has an
interest in the Kingdom of Glory, to be dismayed at his worldly troubles, which
shall so soon be done away, when he has a title to everlasting happiness to
support him? Who is there that would be dismayed at the sufferings of a few
years or weeks, if he were assured of an eternal weight of glory to make him
amends for it. Thus much for the Doctrinal part.

USE 1.

Is it so, that a Believers interest in the Kingdom of Heaven should make him
cheerful and courageous in the ways of God, and keep him from being dismayed
at the sufferings and afflictions that he meets withal in the World? Is it
so, that one that has a title to Heaven, has cause of joy in the midst of his
greatest forrows and troubles? Then

First of all, Here is matter of trial and examination for us to try our selves
whether we have a title to Heaven or no: We would all rejoice to have somewhat
which might effectually support us, and bear us up under troubles and
afflictions in the World, and it is sad when we are in trouble, if we have
nothing to support us; but if we have secured our heavenly interest, and have
cleared our title to the Kingdom of Glory, we have then the greatest ground of
comfort and joy in the World, and we may upon right grounds rejoice under the
sharpest tribulations that we meet with from the hands of men. I shall
therefore give you some marks and characters how we may know, whether we have
an interest in the Kingdom of Heaven, or no. And here I might refer you back to
those characters propounded in the application of the former Doctrine; if we
can truly say that God is our Father by Adoption and Regeneration, and that we
are his Children, then we may safely conclude, that we are some of those that
have an interest in the Kingdom of Heaven; if we are the Children of God, then
we are coheirs of God, Romans 8. are entitled to Heaven; try then whether you can
conclude that you are the Children of God. But because I know not whether ever
I shall have libert^ to speak to you again from this place, I shall propose
some other characters also to help us to pass a right judgment upon our selves
in a matter of so great concernment.

First, Then whosoever thou art that would try thy title to the Heavenly
Glory, thou may try it by this: If the design of thy life be to glorify God,
and to promote their Heavenly interest, then thou art one of those that are
entitled to the Heavenly Inheritance; if thou drivest a Trade for Heaven, and
if that the obtaining of Heaven be the principal part of thy care and business,
and the great design that thou drivest at in all thy actions, then by this thou
may try thy title to Heaven. Apply now this home to thy soul, what Trade and
design art thou now driving in the world? Is it thy main business here to
promote thy temporal or thine eternal state? Art thou striving more after Earth
or Heaven? If thy design here be after Riches, Honor or Greatness in the
World? and make all thy actions subservient to thy design, then thou art none
of those that have a Title to Heaven; But if it be the business of thy life,
and the Trade that thou drivest in the World to advance Gods glory, and thine
eternal salvation, and do care for no more of this World, than may tend to
promote Gods glory, and thine eternal happiness; then thou may safely
conclude that thy name is written in Heaven, and that thou have an interest in
that Kingdom. It is the grand mistake of Thousands of souls every where, that
they pretend to seek after the Kingdom of Heaven, but they seek it only by the
by, and their main design in the World is somewhat else, as to grow Rich, or
Great, or Honorable here; They do not make it their principal business, and
their great design to secure their Title to Heaven; But the look upon Heaven
only as a reserve for them, when they can enjoy the World no longer; And
therefore they will have some glances, and some faint endeavors that way; But
if ever we will enter into Heaven, we must first of all seek Gods Kingdom and
his righteousness, Mat. 6.33. Luke 12.31.

Secondly, Would thou know whether thou have a Title to the Heavenly glory,
or no: Thou may know it by thy heavenly mindedness: They that have an
interest in the Heavenly Kingdom, they have Heavenly hearts; if their Treasure
be in Heaven, their hearts will be there also, Mat. 6.20, 21. Lay up for your
selves treasures in Heaven, where neither Moth, nor Rust can corrupt, and
Thieves break through and steal; for where your Treasure is, there will your
hearts be also. And is it so with us, are our hearts taken up with the Heavenly
glory? Are our meditations and contemplations much on Heavenly objects? Or
else, are they taken up only or mostly with earthly vanities? Are our hearts on
our Riches, Pleasures, etc. Or else are they placed upon Heaven, and Heavenly
things? If we have a title, to the Kingdom of Heaven, our hearts, minds and
affections, will be Heavenly, and taken up with Heavenly Objects, Col. 3.1, 2.
If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where
Christ sits at the right hand of God. Set your affections on things above,
and not on things on the Earth.

Thirdly, Would thou know whether thou have an interest in the Kingdom of
Heaven, or no? How do thou like the employment of Heaven? if thou likest the
employment of Heaven, then thou may comfortably conclude, that thou have an
interest in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Can thou say thou delightest to be employed in serving, and in glorifying
God, and in worshipping of him in spirit and truth, according to his word?
Can thou say in truth, that thou delightest to do the will of God here on
earth, as it is done by the Angels in heaven, and the spirits of just men made
perfect there? Do thou take delight to be employed in that employment that
the Saints of heaven are, and shall be for ever employed in? Do thou take
pleasure to adore, and praise, and magnify the ever blessed God? Do thou
take pleasure in the duties of Religion, and rejoice to be conversing with God
in prayer, and in other holy exercises, and to be enjoying communion with him?
if it be thus with thee, as I have now described: this, this will evidently
make out thy Title for Heaven. Many Thousands pretend that their designs are to
go to Heaven, and they presumptuously conclude that they have an interest in
that Kingdom, when as they like not the Heavenly employment in themselves or
others, and they care not to get acquaintance with God here on earth, and are
strangers to the duties of Religion, and to a life of holiness, and perhaps
spends and hour in a week, or it may be in a month in secret prayer, or in
other holy exercises; and it may be neglect the worship of God in their
Families too; but if we are unacquainted with the employment of Heaven, which
is to praise and magnify, worship and adore God; if thou delightest not so to
do, thou can not conclude that thou have a Title to Heaven: but if thou have
an interest in the Kingdom of Heaven, then thou do most of all delight in
that employment which has most of Heaven in it.

Fourthly, If thou have an interest in the Kingdom of Heaven, thou have a
special love to the heirs of Heaven; and thou have a near and dear affection to
the people of God though they be despised, rejected, scorned, and persecuted by
the profane world; and thou do delight in the company of those on Earth,
which are like to be thy companions in Heaven, and thou had rather have the
society of those howsoever mean and low in the world, that have the truth of
grace in them, than of all the stately and glittering gallants of the World,
that are strangers to a Life of holiness; and the more holy and heavenly they
are in their hearts, and lives, the more amiable will their company be to thee,
1 Job. 3.14. Psalm. 15.4. Put thy self to the question whether it be thus with
thee, or no, and thou shall find out thy title to heaven thereby.

Lastly, If thou have a title to Heaven, then thou art so far at a point with
all the riches, and pleasures, and enjoyments of the World, as that thou will
rather forgo them all, than forsake Christ; and rather part with them all,
rather than they shall hinder thee in thy way toward Heaven; and if thou art
brought so far at a pinch, as that thou must either forsake thy interest in
Christ and Heaven; or to forgo thy worldly accommodations; thou art very
willing to forgo them all that thou may stick close to Christ, and go
forward in thy way to thy Heavenly Inheritance; thus it was with the Apostle
Paul, Phil. 3.7, 8. But what things (says he) were gain to me, those I
accounted loss for Christ; Yea, doubtless I account all things but loss for the
exce^ency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered
the loss of all things, and do account them but dung that I may win Christ; And
is it so with us then, when riches, honor, and pleasure do stand in
competition with Christ, and hinder us in our progress in grace and holiness;
are we willing and ready to cast them away, as we would cast away Dung; if it
be thus with us in reality, then we may conclude we have a title to Heaven, and
an interest in the eternal glory. By these things, Beloved, you may try whether
you have an interest in Heaven or no. Having finished the Use of Examination, I
shall come to the next Use, which is the last that I shall speak unto, which an
Use of Exhortation.

Is it so, that the consideration of a Believers interest in the Heavenly Glory
is enough to bear up his spirit under all the trials and tribulations of this
Life, then, Oh that you which cannot upon Trial find, that you have a title to
Heaven, that you would labor after an interest in the Heavenly Glory; if thou
have no interest there, what good will all the enjoyments of the World do thee?
how quickly will all thy comforts and pleasures leave thee? and what little
cause have thou to rejoice in the abundance of outward things, if thou have no
title to the durable riches? if thou art void of the riches of grace here, and
have no title to the riches of Glory hereafter; what will thou do in a day of
Trial, and in an hour of trouble and calamity? What will thou do when Losses,
Crosses, Troubles and Vexations shall compass thee about, if thou have not an
Heavenly interest to support thee under them? What will thou do, when Pains and
Anguish, when Diseases, Sickness and Death shall seize upon thee, if thou have
not a Title to thy Heavenly inheritance? These things will certainly and
speedily come upon us, how far off soever we may put them in our thoughts; the
proud looks of the lofty will quickly be turned into an earthly paleness;
though they look as big, and carry themselves as high, as if they had a
protection from Hell and the Grave; and those bodies which we now take so much
care to please and pamper, will shortly become a feast for Worms; though they
may be adorned with all the Ornaments that the pride of man can invent, and
friends, and riches, and will but accompany us to the Grave, and there leave
us; and Oh what will then become of us, if we have no interest in Christ and
Heaven, and can no lay claim to the eve^la^ing Glory.

If you ask me, how we shall do to secure our interest in the Kingdom of
Heaven? I answer, it must be by a through closure with Christ by says, and
choosing of him for our Lord and Savior; God has ordained that those that are
united to Christ by faith here on earth, that they shall be with Christ; and
live with Christ in Heaven: Heaven and Glory is the Dowry that God gives with
his Son Jesus Christ; and they that will Marry the Heir shall have the
Inheritance; and if we are Christ's, then all will be ours, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23.
Whether of Paul, or Apo^os, or Cephas, or things present, or things to come,
all is yours, and ye are Christ's; They that have an interest in Christ, have a
Title to all. Let us therefore contract our selves to Christ: resolving to be
no longer our own, but his; and to live no longer to our selves, but to him;
let us choose him to be our Lord and Savior, and take him upon his own Terms as
he is offered to us in the Gospel, to be our King, Priest, and Prophet; and
when we are once thus united to Christ by faith, we shall be coheirs with him
of the heavenly Inheritance; all this will be ours when we are Christ's by a
self-resignation, and submission, and when Christ is ours by a believing choice
and election; when we have thus made choice of Christ upon his own terms to be
our Lord and Savior, our portion and our all: and have given up our selves to
him to be wholly his, and at his dispose: this will undoubtedly give us a s^m
and an unquestionable title to Heaven.

Secondly, The next address that I have to make, is to those that are the Heirs
of this Kingdom, and have a Title to this Heavenly Inheritance. Is it so, that
a Believers interest in the Kingdom of Heaven is enough to bear up his spirit
under all his troubles and afflictions, and to keep him from being dismayed
under his sorest Trials and Tribulations that he meets withal from the World;
then the Exhortation that I shall give to you, is the same that our Savior
gives in the Text: Fear not little Flock, for it is your Fathers good pleasure
to give you the Kingdom. You that have an interest in the Heavenly Glory; Oh be
not dismayed nor affrighted at those outward afflictions and tribulations that
you meet with here below; it is true, God does often exercise his dear Children
with Trials, Afflictions and Tribulations; this is the way by which God does
discipline his Children, while they are in their Minority here; this Believers
must count upon before hand; but there is not any of those things that should
make a believing Christian dismayed, seeing his eternal concernments are so
safe, and his Heavenly interest is secure.

And there is no Trouble nor Cross that the Saints can meet withal, but that we
are somewhere or other in the Word of God exhorted not to be afraid of it. Do
we meet with reproach from men, is that the Cross we undergo? this indeed is
heavy, insomuch that the Psalmist complains, that his heart was broken by it,
Psalm. 69.20. Yet the Servants of God, the Heirs of Heaven, are cautioned not to
fear that, ^a. 51.10. Fear not the reproach o^ men, n^r be afraid of their
revilings: or is the affli^tion that thou meetest withal, imprisonment for the
sake of Christ and of a good Conscience, this is likewise grievous and heavy to
be born; yet the Heirs of Heaven are exhorted not to fear that neither, Rev.
2.10. it is Christ's advice to the Church of Smyrna, Fear none of those things
which thou shall suffer; beh^ld the Devil shall cast some of you into Pris^n,
that ye may be tried, and (...) shall have Tribulation Ten days; be thou
faithful unto the death, and I will (...) thee a crown of ^ife. Those that h^^^
(...) interest in the crown of life; imprisonment for the sake of Christ, if
God should call them thereunto: nay, put case thou were to suffer death it self
for the sake of Christ, this is the greatest and sorest of all sufferings: yet
the servants of G^d are cautio^ed not to fear that neither, for it can be but a
bodily death, and it will make way for a better and happier life, Mat. 10.28.
Fear not them that can kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul.
Whatsoever the sufferings be, thou that art a Believer, and have an interest in
the Kingdom of Heaven, thou art exhorted not to be afraid of it.

Oh Christians! I beseech you act faith upon your Heavenly Interest; I might
tell you it can never be more seasonable so to do than now; the more you act
faith hereupon, the more you will be enabled to live above the frowns of a
troublesome and vexatious world. Oh look up by an eye of faith upon ^he
recompense of rewards, and you will be able to prefer the afflictions of the
Saints, before the vain and transitory pleasures of unregenerate sinners, which
endure but for a moment, and to choose the greatest affliction before the least
sin, as Moses did, Heb. 11.25, 26.

And let the joy that is set before you make you to endure the Crosses of this
world, and to des^ise the shame, as the Captain of your salvation has done
before you; and let the hope of the Glory of God make you rejoice,
notwithstanding all the scorn and contempt that you meet with from the world.

But because of our frailty and aptness to be afraid and dismayed at
afflictions and tribulations, I shall see before you some considerations, which
if well weighed, might (by the blessing of God) do much to the curing, and
removing of those fears and discontents that are a^t to seize upon us when we
are exposed to Trials and losses in the world.

First, Consider Christians, you that have secured your heavenly interest: are
you in sore Troubles, and do you meet with hard dealings from men? it may be
you may bring more glory to God b^ ^our afflictions, l^sses and crosses in the
world, than if you should always be in a quiet, prosperous, and serene
condition: it may be God m^^ have a greater Revenue of glory by thy troubles
and ^^^als, than by thy prosperity in the world: and shall we not be wil^^^g to
b^ in such a condition* hows^ever unpleasant to our corrupt fle^h, in which we
may be most s^rviceable f^r G^d, and bring most h^^^u^ and (...) to him? It is
a sign that we have little love to God, or indeed to (...) own souls, if we do
not prefer the Glory of God before our own ease and carnal contentment; what do
we but mock with God in our prayers, when we pray that his Name may be
glorified, if we are dismayed and discontented when God is glorified by us in
our sufferings, because they are tedious and irksome to our flesh: If we are
unwilling that God should be glorified by our sufferings: If we are unwilling
to honor him in an afflicted state, why do we then in our prayers pretend to
beg that God may be glorified? Oh, how much is God glorified many times by the
sufferings of his people, when as he is dishonored by the secure and sensual
lives of many thousands that are in prosperous, calm; and quiet condition in
the World! I might give you many instances from the Scripture, to such that the
sufferings of Gods people, have tended very much, to the setting forth of the
high praises of the Lord. Oh, how much have the sufferings of the Israelites
been all along! of Joh, of David, of Hezekiah, of the three Children, of
Daniel: and so under the New Testament; how have the sufferings of Stephen,
Paul, Silas, and the rest of the Apostles and Martyrs, resounded to the honor
and glory of God, for whom they suffered!

Indeed, Gods people do more honor and glorify God by their sufferings, than
by their doings for him. Let us not then be dismayed, though we may be in a
troublesome and suffering condition; seeing this is a condition, in the which
we are most capable of doing service for God, and of bringing most honor and
glory to him.

Secondly, Thou that have an interest in the Kingdom of Heaven, art thou in an
afflicted suffering condition in the world? to bear up thy fainting spirits,
consider, that affliction and tribulation, is that, by which God is pleased to
cleanse and purge his people from sin: Afflictions are like Black-soap, which
does seem to soil the Cloth, and make it more filthy, yet it purges and
cleanses it, and makes it more white at length: it is as the fire, into which
the Gold may be thrown, yet it is not consumed, but refined and puri^ied,
thereby it loses only its dross; so the Saints are not quite consumed by their
afflictions, but sanctified, and they lose only that filth, dross, and rust,
that does mix it self with grace in their hearts; by this shall the iniquity of
Jacob be purged, says God, speaking of afflictions: and this is all the fruit
to take away his sin, and shall we be unwilling to have our sins purged?

It is true, as for those that are Re^robates, God usually lets them alone to
go on and die, and ^erish for ever: when as yet, God is pleased to correct his
people, and to cast them into the Furnace of affliction, because he intends
mercy to them: and surely it will be known one day, that there can be no
greater Judgment befall poor Creatures, than to be let alone without
chastisements, to take their own swing in sin: and Oh how many thousands are
now in Torment, for that they were let alone in their sins, and never chastised
by Afflictions in their Life time: when as Gods people are chastened of the
Lord, that they might not be condemned with the World, 1 Cor. 11.32. And which
is easier to be born, external tribulations in this life, or eternal torments
in the life to come; one of these two will certainly befall every man and woman
of us; either we shall be chastened here, or condemned hereafter: the wicked
are oftentimes let alone here* they are not in troubles as other men. Psalm 73.
but they are condemned with the World: The Go^ly, they are often chastized of
the Lord here, but it is in mercy to them, that they may be purged from sin,
and not condemned with the world. And David tells us, that by his afflictions
he was reduced from going astray, and brought back again into the Fold of God,
Psalm. 119.67. Before I was afflicted, I went astray, but now have I kept thy
precepts. And shall we be dismayed at the means whereby we are kept close to
God, and are kept from falling away from God? A man is willing to take a bitter
medicine to purge away that disease which would otherwise kill him; Nor is he
troubled at the working of his Physic, though he have many painful gripes, so
long as it tends to the removing of those obnoxious humors and diseases which
would otherways bring him to his grave: And shall Christians be afraid of the
bitter Cup of Afflictions, which by Gods blessing purge away their sins, which
are the diseases of their Souls, and so preserve them from eternal death? Thy
trials here are to purge thee, and cleanse thee, that thou may not lie in
Eternal torments in the world to come. And shall Christians be dismayed at that
which tends to their Eternal health and Salvation, and to the keeping of their
Souls from Hell? We should rather rejoice to be in that condition whatsoever it
be; by which we may be most purged and preserved from sin. Standing po^ls do
usually contract filth and mud: So those Christians that are settled upon the
lees in a prosperous state and condition, they do ver^ frequently get fil^h and
corruption; The people of God are never made the freer from sin by their
freedom from outward affli^tions. This then is the second consideration to keep
the Saints from being dismayed at their afflictions in the World, because
thereby they are purged from sin which would otherways prove the bane of their
souls.

Thirdly, You that are the heirs of Heaven, and have an interest in the Eternal
Glory, you are in affliction and tribulation in the World, be not dismayed; For
co^^ider, that the thing do tend to the exercisin^ and increase of our ^^aces,
and t^ the making of ^ou eminent in Grace and ^^lines^: And will you be daunted
at that which tend* to the making of you more holy? Will you be grieved at that
which tends to the increasing of your faith, patience, humility,
heavenly-mindedness, and to the making of you more eminent for holiness and
godliness? Believers are usually greater gainers by their afflictions in the
World, than by their external prosperity; yea, many times they are losers by
their prosperity, when as they have been great gainers by their troubles and
adversity. Oh how many have gained in grace and holiness by their losses in the
World: the servants of God were never more eminent in grace, than when they
were least and lowest in their outward estate: true graces are the diamonds
that shine brightest in the darkest night, and these shine clearest in the
obscurest night of adversity.

The Saints in Scripture were then most eminent for holiness, and godliness,
and all other graces, when they lay under greatest troubles and tribulations
from the World, and how exemplary in holiness, and how eminent in faith and
heavenly-mindedness were the Martyrs, when they were afflicted, tormented,
imprisoned, burned and persecuted with the most grievous persecutions from the
hands of wicked men: when as the prosperity and pleasures of the wicked did
tend to the hardening of them in their sins,

Did we seriously consider how great hinderers, riches and pleasures, and
worldly prosperity are to grace and holiness, we should not be so discontented
at our mean and afflicted condition in the World, nor so over-desirous of those
accommodations which have proved the bane of so many, and the hinderers of
their salvation; peace and plenty, honor and prosperity, does very often
increase pride and covetousness, security, and earthly-mindedness; when as
affliction, tribulation, want, reproach, being sanctified by God, does tend to
the exercising and increasing of patience, humility, and a heavenly
conversation; and upon this consideration the Apostle Paul gloryed in
tribulations, because it wrought in him the grace of patience, Romans 5.3. and
not only so (says he) but we glory in tribulations also, knowing that
tribulation works patience, etc. There are many souls now in torments for
that pride, security, worldly-mindedness, and other sins which were nourished
and fostered up in their prosperity in the world: and many souls now in heaven
which were helped forward in their way thither by the exercise of those graces
which were nourished and increased by their adversity, crosses, and calamities
here below. Be not therefore dismayed and discontented Christian with that
condition, though it be grievous to thy frail flesh, which does tend to the
increasing of grace and holiness.

Lastly, thou that art a believer, and heir of heaven, art thou in affliction,
be not dismayed, because these things being sanctified by God will tend to the
fitting of thy soul for, and to the bringing of thee nearer to heaven;
afflictions and tribulations do tend to the uniting of souls closer to Christ,
and to the fitting and preparing them more and more for eternal glory; and
hence it is that God has ordained that through many tribulations we must enter
into glory, Acts 14.22. God does discipline his dear Children by sorrows and
troubles here, and so fit them for to reign with him hereafter, and shall we be
dismayed at such a condition that does tend to the fitting of us for our
Heavenly Inheritance, and to the bringing of us nearer to Christ and Salvation?
Oh let not afflictions nor tribulations dismay you that have an interest in the
Kingdom of Heaven to support you, but let the consideration of your Heavenly
interest keep you from fainting at all your afflictions and tribulations that
you meet with in your way to Heaven.

And now beloved hearers, give me leave to trespass a little more upon your
patience, seeing this is like to be the last opportunity that I shall have to
speak to you from this place, being prohibited to preach, unless upon such
terms as I confess my conscience dares not submit unto; being therefore
enforced to lay down my Ministry, I thought good to let you know that it is
neither out of singularity nor stubbornness in opinion, which many it may be
may conjecture, but because the things required are such as my conscience
cannot close withal; could I see a sufficient warrant from the Word of God for
those Ceremonies and other things that are enjoined, I should readily submit
unto them; for I can take the great God to witness with my conscience that
nothing in the world grieveth me a hundred part so much as to be hindered from
the work of the Ministry, and to be disabled from serving my great Master
Christ in that employment: but seeing I cannot find my warrant thence, I dare
not go against my conscience, and so do evil that good may come thereby. Those
strict prohibitions recorded, Deuteronomy. 42. and 12.32. Prove. 30.6. and in other
Scriptures, wherein we are prohibited to make any addition to Gods own
institutions in his worship, and the terrible threatenings pronounced against
those that shall transgress in this particular, has such impression: upon my
heart, that I dare not give my assent nor consent to any thing in Gods! Worship
which is not warranted from his word; but I think it the lesser evil of the two
to expose my self to sufferings in the world, rather than to undergo the checks
and reproaches of a wounded and grieved conscience.

Dearly beloved, While I had liberty to speak unto you, I may say with the
Apostle Paul, Act. 20.27. I have not shunned to declare unto you the whole
counsel of God; but according to that strength and ability that God has given
me, have labored to instruct you, and to press home upon you those great and
saving truths which are of necessity to be known and practiced, in order to
salvation. And as the Apolste Paul writ to the Philippians, Phil. 1.8. So may I
say to you, that God is my record, how greatly I have longed after you all in
the bowels of Jesus Christ: your conversation unto God, and eternal salvation,
is that which I have had in my eye; for this I have prayed, for this I have
preached, for this I have studied; neither is there any thing more joyous to
me, than to hear of any of my hearers that are walking in the truth, and that
have set their faces toward Heaven.

But seeing God is pleased (for ends best known to himself) to suffer my Mouth,
together with the Mouths of many others, my Dear and Reverend Brethren in the
Ministry to be stopped, I desire to leave a word or two with each of you, which
I would have you to look upon as the words of a dying Minister, or of a dead
Minister, in a civil sense; and therefore suffer them to take the deeper
impression upon your hearts; I shall therefore direct a word or two to three
sorts of persons.

First, To those that do much rejoice at this time, and that have earnestly
looked and longed for it; to such who hug themselves, and make merry because
the troublers of Israel (as wicked men account the Ministers of Christ to be)
which have told them of their sins, and reproved them of their carnal, sensual,
unholy lives, are not suffered to preach, nor to trouble them with the
unpleasing Doctrines of repentance, conversion, mortification of sin, and other
truths which they dislike; to those who look upon the faithful, laborious,
convincing preachers of the Word of God to be their enemies, because they have
told them the truth, and could not sooth them up in their sins; and rejoice as
the inbabitants of the earth did rejoice over the Witnesses, and make merry,
Rev. 11.10.

To you I say, whosoever you are, that none have more need of our labors, and
of our preaching than you; and if you were but acquainted truly with your own
state in which you are (which is a state of death and wrath, without you
repent, and turn, and become new creatures) you would be of other minds than
now you are: and turn your mirth and jollity into mourning. Consider, that is
never the better with any City when the watchmen are removed, nor for a
traveller when the light is gone which should direct him in his way; and it
cannot be but sad, when so many thousands of godly Ministers, which by their
doctrine and lives have been as Lights in the world, shall be extinguished and
silenced: believe it Sirs, there is no good groping out our way to Heaven in
the dark, when as we know not whether our next step will be in Heaven, or Hell
in eternal joy, or misery. A Sick man is never the nearer health, because his
Physician is not suffered to speak to him of the danger of his Disease; and
carnal and ungodly men are never the nearer their salvation, because their
faithful Ministers are not suffered to preach to them of the evil and danger of
their sins, which are the hinderers of it. I shall commend to your
consideration that one Scripture, which I would have you be often reading, and
thinking on, as it is recorded, 1 Pet. 4.17, 18. The time is come that judgment
must begin at the house of God; and if it begin at us, what shall the end be of
them that obey not the Gospel of Christ; and if the righteous scarcely be
saved, where shall the ungodly, and the sinner appear? If God begin with his
faithful Ministers to chastise and afflict them; Oh what then will become of
the wicked and ungodly world! if the godly drink fust of this Cup, it is
because the wicked shall drink the dregs of it.

A second sort of persons which I shall speak to, are such who are halting
between two; that are like Agrippa, almost persuaded to be Christians; that
have some convictions upon their consciences, of the excellency of the ways of
God, but yet their interest leads them another way, they are unwilling to
expose themselves to any troubles or tribulations, by going against the stream
of the world, they are afraid that if they should be diligent in the duties of
Religion, and should walk holily and closely with God, that then they should be
reproached and scorned, or persecuted by the World, and therefore they will go
on a little way, but no farther than that they may retreat back again with ease
and safety as to their carnal and worldly interests; to such whosoever you are
I must tell you, First, that you must go beyond the common sort of the World,
unless you will intend to come short of Heaven, you must not take the example
of the multitude to be a sufficient warrant for you to walk by; the broad way,
though it be to your corrupt natures the most pleasant way, yet it is not the
safest, but the most dangerous way; and the narrow way of holiness and
godliness will be found at last to be the way leading to life, though there be
but few that find it, Mat* 7.13, 15. they that are afraid of making too much
ado for Heaven, they are like to have nothing at all to do with Heaven; it is a
Christians duty, and should be his care, not to be conformed to the world, but
to be transformed by the renewing of their mind, that they may prove what is
that good, and acceptable and perfect will of God, Romans 12.2.

Secondly, you must not stick at afflictions and crosses in the World if you
intend to go to Heaven. Christ's cross is the first that must be learnt by
Christ's Disciples, Luke 14.27. you must account upon it before hand, that if
you will live godly in Christ Jesus, you must suffer persecution, 1 Timothy 3.5.
You must not be afraid of the reproaches of the ungodly, nor flinch at
oppositions and tribulations, if you intend to be everlastingly happy: the
fearful are in the forefront of them that march to Hell, Rev. 21.8. but the
fearful and unbelieving and abominable, etc. shall have their part in the Lake
which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. The fearful
you set down in the front in that black List there mentioned; But the Kingdom
of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force.

Thirdly, The end will pay for all; the Kingdom of Heaven will make you amends
for all the tribulations that you meet with in your way to Heaven.

Lastly, I shall speak a word to those that fear the Lord, and are diligent in
the practice of godliness, that are very much grieved that their faithful
Teachers would be removed into corners, my advice that I have to give you
besides what I have spoken before, is the same with Paul's to the Philippians,
Chap 4.1. My brethren dearly beloved and longed for, my joy and crown, so stand
fast in the Lord my dearly beloved. Consider your Heavenly interest, and let
that bear you up under all your worldly troubles and persecutions: let not the
terror nor threats of men nor devils make you stir a part from the Doctrine
which is according to godliness, though you may be scorned and afflicted by
men, yet the day will come when you will be publicly owned and honored by the
Lord of glory, and when Christ which is your life shall appear, then shall you
appear with him in glory? be not affrighted at the sufferings of your
Ministers, though they should be far greater than now they are; nor discouraged
at the backsliding of hypocritical professors, who having formerly made fair
pretenses to religion and reformation, yet are turned with the dog to their old
vomit again* and by their so doing do declare that it is their carnal interests
only that they look unto, and therefore they will be for religion and
reformation, so long as that may be promoted thereby, and no longer: but labor
to imitate the heroic courage of Joshua, who resolved that he and his House
would serve the Lord, though all Israel should forsake him and backslide from
him. Stand fast, I beseech you in the faith, quit your selves like men, be
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, put on the whole armor of
God, that you may be able to stand in the evil day; and having done all to
stand, let not the enmity nor opposition of the ungodly make you to forsake the
duties of Religion, and the ways of holiness; think not the better of that way,
or of those persons merely because they prosper in the world, nor the worse of
those merely because they are persecuted and afflicted. What were those that
were tortured not accepting deliverance, that had trial of cruel mockings and
scourgings, yea moreover of bonds and imprisonment; that were stoned, that were
sawen asunder, that were tempted, that were slain by the sword; they that
wandered about in sheeps-skins, and goats-skins; being destitute, afflicted,
tormented, Heb. 22.35, 36, 37. They were such of whom the world was not worthy,
verse. 38. True holiness and the fear of God are never the less lovely in Gods
account, because it is rejected, scorned, and condemned by the wicked world;
and sin and profaneness is never a whit the more pleasing unto Christ because
it is in fashion, and practiced by the greatest or most of men. Finally my
brethren, commit your selves and your way unto the Lord, and wait patiently for
him, he will command deliverance for you in his own time. Snatch not after
deliverance by any preposterous and unlawful courses, before God holds it out
to you, lest you provoke him to detain it the longer from you.

To conclude all, I shall take leave of you in the words of the Holy Ghost,
recorded, Acts 20.32. Heb. 13.20, 21. And now brethren, I shall commend you to
God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give
you an inheritance among them that are sanctified. And the God of peace which
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ the great Shepherd of the
sheep through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every
good work to do his will, working in you that which is well pleasing in his
sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever.

A Farewell Sermon, Preached at Great Ayton in the County of Yorkshire, by
George Evanke, Chaplain to the Right Worshipful, Sir George Norwood Baronet at
Cleaveland in Yorkshire.
Matthew. 26.39. Nevertheless not my will, but thy will be done.
THe Subject of this Chapter is a sad Story, and Tragical Relation of a dying
Jesus. In the beginning of this Gospel, you may see him coming into the World
in a Shower, Matthew. 2.13. And now in the end of it, you find him going out in
a Storm, Mat. 27.22.

Alas! that so good a Ghest should find so bad a welcome, and that the Lord of
Life should so soon be put to death. When the Angels, those Heavenly Choristers
first sang that Christmas Carol, of a Savior that was born into the World,
Luke. 2.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. one would have thought the World should have fallen
a dancing after such Evangelical Music, and that all hearts should have [like
the Babe in Elizabeth's womb] leapt for joy, at the news of a new born Prince:
But it was quite contrary; for instead of joining in that Heavenly Quire, in
gratulating the happy arrival of this young King into their Country; they take
the Alarm of his Birth as if an Enemy had landed in their Coasts: And hereupon
Herod presently heads an Army; goes out against him, and makes the poor Prince
to fly the Country, Mat. 2.13, 14.

But though the meanest of his Birth, Extraction, and Descent may give them
distaste at first, yet when he begins to display his Divinity among them, by
working such amazing Miracles, as none could work, and Preaching such moving
Sermons as none could ever Preach: Oh, then they will recant their Error, and
own their Savior, and the joyful shout of a King will be heard amongst them;
as it is expressed in Numb. 23.21.

Truly one would think that it would have been thus; but Oh no! the Rocky
hearts of these Marble wretches would not yield, nor melt, nor thaw, nor take
impression, but still they continue in their unbelief and hardness of heart,
disowning the Lord that bought them, and consulting his death, who was
contriving to bring them to life.

All the displeasure he would have done them, was to take their sins from them,
Mat. 11.28. And all the pleasure they meant to show him was to take his Life
from him, Mat 26.59.

All the hurt that ever Christ did them, was to pray for them, Father forgive
them, forgive them. And all the good they ever did him, was to cry, Crucify
him, Crucify him. And Crucify him they did before they could sit down.

Whose Death and Crucifixion is described and represented to your view,

1. By the Antecedents, or things before. 2. By the Consequents, or things
following after.
The Antecedents were,

1. The several Preparitories to it, Chap. 2. The judicial progress about it,
Chap. seqr;
The Prerogatives were,

1. The Jews conspiring, ver. 3, 4, 5. 2. Judas his Covenancing to affect it,
14, 15, 16. 3. Christ's own preparing and fitting himself for it, that he might
without relucting submit to it, and without the least Symptom of disponding,
encounter and go through with it. And this is the Argument of the latter part of
this Chapter at large, and of my Text in short.
Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me, yet not my will, but thy
will be done.

Which words I may call, The pious Souls sequestring it self for dying: or, Our
Saviors Preparatory to his Passion: Wherein you have two Observables.

1. Here Is an humble Petition presented, Let this Cup pass. 2. Here Is an hearty
Resignation promised, Not my will, but thine be done.
I. First, An humble Petition; Let this Cup pass from me. Our Savior was at
this time very apprehensive of Death, The sorrows of the Grave ^ha^l ^^^^^ssed
him about, and the pains of Hell had taken hold upon him: (...) ^^w in this
dark condition and Spiritual Damp that his Soul lay (...), ^e gets himself out
into the Garden alone, and there he fits weep^^^ ^^^^^^ah under the
Juniper-tree; and like dying Hezekiah, he lays (...), and sp^^ads his Condition
before the Lord, imploring him Samaritan-like, to show him some pity in this
his Extremity, Father, says he, Let this cup pass from me.

Now in that Christ betakes himself to God for help in this hour of heaviness,
you may learn hence, It Is better to entrust and interest God, for our help and
comfort, than man: For man, yea, the best of men, are but men, and when they
have done the best for us, it may be they can do no good to us.

When the man (in the Kings) had made his misery known to his Neighbors, and
cried to them, Help, Help, you know what an answer he got, How can we help,
except the Lord help?

When Job had told over the sad story of his great losses to his three friends,
expecting some redress to so unparalleld grievances, you know how long they
sat by him, without giving him one word of Counsel, or administering the least
word of Comfort, which forced him into that passionate Resolve, Miserable
Comforters are ye all.

When Judas lay under the Convulsions and Corrodings of a grumbling Conscience,
and ran to the Priests for Absolution. A look thee to that, was all the comfort
he could get from them. Ah! that man's condition is most to be pitied, who runs
to none but man for pity. When all is done, God is our surest stay; He is
usually the last, but always the best Refuge? Therefore when we have read over
the sad Lecture of our Losses, and poured out our wants and wrongs into the
bosom of our safest and firmest friends, then is this Apostrophe, this Turn,
the sweetest Turn the Soul can take, when it can Turn to God [as you see Christ
does here] and say, Father, if it be possible, let this cup, this cross, pass
from me.

II. Secondly, Here Is an hearty resignation, in these words, Nevertheless not
my will, but thine be done. And if he had said, it is true, it is Ease which this
Nature, this Humane Nature of mine would have, but if thou Lord, art otherwise
resolved to continue me in pain, I have no more to say, but only this, Thy will
be done.

It was the saying of a good Woman in her Sickness, when asked whether she was
willing to live or die, answered, I am willing to do whether God pleases. But
said one, if God should refer it to you, which would you choose? Truly said she,
if God should refer it to me, I should e'n refer it to him again. Here Is the
picture of Christ's patience (drawn here in this Text) where, as you see, he
refers to his Fathers pleasure, Not my will, but thine be done:
Paraphrastically thus; If thou will have me suffer a while, lay load on me, and
spare not; If I must be spit on thus shamefully, and buffetted thus basely, and
that by my own Creatures, whom I could send to Hell with a word speaking if I
must climb to the Ladder, and be hung up in Gibbets as a Spectacle of sadness
to my Friends, and Object of laughter to my enemies; If it be so that my Honor
must lie in the dust, and my Blood lie in the dust, and my Sacred Body go to
bed with Worms, if it must be thus, let it be thus, and no otherwise than just
thus: in a word, if he that never stole any thing, unless it were men's sins
from them, must now be numbered with Transgressors, and hanged with Thieves? if
the Redemption of the World be so costly, that I cannot hug a poor soul to
Heaven with me at a cheaper Rate, I am content to come up to Gods terms, and to
buy the life of the Nation though it be with my own death. Thus much is meant
in this Expression: Thy will be done.

From which Branch, we may shake this Fruit into your Lap.

Dostr. A gracious soul will endeavor the crossing his own will, when he sees
that it crosses Gods. Or thus,

A true Christian dare not [at least ought not] to gratify his own Humor when
it stands in opposition, or comes in competition with Gods Honor.

In the improvement of which, I shall

1. Premise some Presidents of it. 2 Annex some Reasons to it. 3. Infer some
Use from it.
The first President I shall pitch upon is Abraham, Genesis 22, 2. Here God calls
Abraham out to very hot service, even to lay the Sacrificing, Knife to the
throat of his dear Child. Come, says God, Take thy Son, thy only Son Isaac,
whom thou love, and offer him up for a Burnt-offering Alas! how many
considerations might have stepped up into Abraham's head, at this time to have
made him refuse obedience to a Command so grievous and ungrateful to flesh and
blood. Alas! Lord, Isaac is my Son, the only staff of my old Age: And if my
Son die, it will be enough to bring my gray Hairs with sorrow to the Grave. Nay
more, Isaac is my (only) Son, I have none else to keep up my Family, and to
preserve my Name in everlasting Remembrance, and if he die, all the hopes I
have of a Flourishing Posterity dies with him. Nay more, I^aac is the Son of
Promise; In his seed all Nations are to be blessed; Christ the M^ssiah, is to
come of his Li^e; Sions Deliverer is to spring out of his Race, and if he die,
the World for ought I know must want a Savior, and Israel his Red^^m^r.
Besides, if Isaac must be sa^^ificed, is there none to lay bloody hands upon
him, but my self? Must an indulgent Father, be his own Child's Executioner? Must
I that gave him life, be the cruel Instrument of taking it way? Thus Abraham
might have Expostulated the Case with God; But no, no instead of Replying, he
falls to Obeying, Genesis 22. ver 3. without either disputing the Justice of Gods
Precept, or distrusting the truth of his promise, for he considered, That God
was able to raise him up again from the dead, Heb. 11.19.

See here an eminent piece of Self-denial; his sin must go, his Son must go,
any thing, yea, every thing must go when God calls for it.

It was Abraham's will, and wish too, that Isaac should live; but Abraham would
not own his will, when he saw it did not own Gods; and what lost he by it?

Take this Christian, as an Axiom, and put it as an Article into thy Creed,
That there is never any loss in obeying God, let the command be never so
dangerous, costly, or difficult; the way to keep Isaac, is to give up Isaac,
and the way to enjoy thy will, is to deny thy will. The promise is clear, Mat.
19.29.

A second President you have in David, 2 Samuel 15.26. who in that great Cross,
his chasing from the Crown, thus expressed himself; Behold here I am, let the
Lord do with me as seems good in his sight: As if he had said, If the Lord
please to change the Nature of my unnatural Son Absalon, who seeks to Usurp the
Crown, and Ravish the Kingdom from me, and to settle and re-establish me on the
Throne again: If God please thus to honor me, it shall content me; but if he
use his Negative Vote, and deny me that mercy, saying, I have no pleasure in
thee, I will be content still; Let him do (says David) what seems good in
his sight; Not what seems good in my sight, but in his. His will shall be my
will, and his pleasure, my delight. See what another self-denying Saint here
is, that God and he, should have but one will betwixt them both. If God would
favor him, he would be for it; and if God would afflict him, he would not be
against it. Which disposition minds me of that passion which I have read of
Socrates, when a Tyrant threatened him with death, I am willing to dye,
Socrates; Nay then, replied the Tyrant, you shall live against your will; No,
said Socrates, what ever you do with me, it shall not be against, but with my
will.

O friends, I question whether some of you, who pretend to Grace, may not go to
School to thi^ Heathen, who had no other Pilot but Nature, to steer him; Could
not the Tyrant, by altering the man's condition, make him to alter his
Countenance? and is your condition up and down, as your comforts or discomforts
ebb or flow? did natural Qualifications make him quietly submit to Fortune, and
shall not Theological considerations make him acquiesce in a Providence? Did
the Springhead of mere Reason, rise so high as Contentation? and shall not
Religion, like the waters of the Sanctuary, rise as high? O Christians, lie
down at the foot of Gods Mercy, saying, Thy will be done.

1. Otherwise you will grieve God. 2. And you will gratify the Devil. 3. And
lastly, you will no way advantage your selves.
Reas. 1. First, I say you will grieve God, This expression is not to be taken
properly, but Theologically.
See Heb. 3.10. Wherefore I was grieved with that Generation, says God, What
Generation was that, which God was thus grieved with? Look but into Exodus 16.8.
and you will find it was a murmuring Generation, a dissatisfied, and discontented
Generation.

It Is a grief no doubt to a godly Parent, to see his Child discontented with
his allowance, and Esau like, slight his birthright. Ah! God is not pleased to
see his Children displeased; nor contented, to see them discontented; I read in
Psalm. 35.27. That God takes pleasure in the prosperity of his people: But I no
where read, that he ^akes pleasure in the discontent of his people. No no, this
passion, drove God himself into a passion against the Jews of old, because,
says he, You have not walked thankfully before me in the use of my blessings,
therefore you shall serve your enemies in hunger and nakedness. Whereas on the
other hand, it pleases God to see his people truckle under the Cross, and yet
content to be ground betwixt the Teeth, and wounded with the Tongues of
malicious Neighbors, and yet content: To see and hear the delicious Accents of
his dying Martyrs, when in their extremest tortures, they cried out nothing
but [Holy Jesus, Holy Jesus.]

To see and hear patient Job sitting on his Dunghill, and bearing his burden
bravely, mingling his Groans with Praises, and justifications of God; this,
this please God like an Anthem Sung by Angels, in the morning of the
Resurrection, and therefore he has Crowned him with the Wreath of Glory, In
all this Job sinned not.

II. Secondly, By discontent, you gratify the Devil. When Nero (that he might
the better conceive the flames of Troy) had set Rome on fire, he sat down and
sang Songs unto it. Oh, the Devil is never so merry, as when he sets us on fire
with compassion? Consuming and Smudging our ^i^es away in the smoke of
discontent: Such a fire makes the Devil a Bone-fire. And this was his aim in
afflicting! Job, not to make him a poor man, but an impatient man: But he was
basely mistaken, for when he expected that Job should have fallen down to
blaspheme God, Job on the contrary falls down and blesses God. The Lord has
[freely] given and [justly] taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord.

Ah! how black looked Satan at the fall of the Expression from Jobs lips? How
did this gaul and gravel a malicious Devil? Certainly this one word of Jobs,
did wound Satan more, than all the afflictions wounded Job.

Ah friends, get but your wills to buckle under the will of God; and in all
Overture of condition to acquiesce in a Providence, and this double advantage
will come of it, God will have his end, and Satan will miss of his.

III. Thirdly and lastly, you can no way advantage your selves by Discontent,
but may disturb your Conscience, and hugely prejudice your own peace. As the
Prisoner in Iron hurts himself more by striving to shake th^n off than the
Fetters would do by being on. So many a man, by fr^^ (...) and ^i^^^^^nt makes
the Cross bigger to himself, than ever God made (...) ^ontent being a greater
affliction to him, than the affliction it s^^^ ^reater I say, by how much it
sits nearer to the Spirit, than any outward crosses do, or can do. I remember
what Seneca writes of Caesar, who having appointed a great Feast for his Nobles
and Friends, and it falling out that the day proved exceeding foul, even so as
nothing could be done; and being extremely displeased at it, in the height of
madness took their Bows, and shot at Jupiter, in defiance of him, but it
happened that their Arrows lighting short of Jupiter, fell down upon their own
heads, and wounded them mortally. Thus is it in the point in hand, our
murmuring, and impatiency are as Arrows shot, not at Jupiter, but at Jehovah,
at God himself; hence said Moses, Exodus 16.8. to that Murmuring Generation,
Your murmurings are not against us, but against God; which Arrows may wound
your selves deeply, but they never hurt God at all; they wound your Consciences
with guilt, and your hearts with disquiet, and often times causes God to wound
you too with punishments, which [if it had not been for your murmurings] he
would never have brought upon you.

Miriam murmured, and God smote her with Leprosy. The Israelites murmured, and
God sent Serpents among them; they stung God with fierce Tongues, and God stung
them with fiery Serpents. Never then let a people murmur against their Maker
more, but quietly submit to his Providential proceedings, lest otherwise by
struggling and striving against God, they do but make their bands stronger, and
their condition worser; Like the silly Partridge, which by her fluttering
breaks her wings, but not the Net: My advice then friends, is this, when ever
God binds the Cross upon your backs, or ties or stakes you down to a sick bed,
or any other sad or unealie condition; since these Cords of his you cannot
break, lie down gently, and suffer the hand of the Lord to do what he pleases,
swallowing down this bitter Pill which he forces down your throat for the
health of your Souls.

I come now to the second thing; Viz. the USES of the Doctrine.

And upon enquiry I find two sorts of men Reproveable.

1. Those that do their own will. 2. Those that do the Devils will.
First then, It speaks Terror to those that do their own will; such were the
Israelites, 2 Samuel 8.5. they would needs have a King to rule over them, this
was their will, and their will they would have, although they know it jarr'd,
and extremely interfear'd both with the will of God; and his Prophets, yet
still the cry of the Rabble, and the vote of the multitude was this, Nay, but
we will have a King, ver. 19.

The like you see in Rachel, Genesis 30.1. Give me Children, or I dye. Albeit she
saw that her Husband could not, and that God would not humor her, yet still
she cries, Give me Children, or I dye, Willful woman! if thou can live in
pleasure, will thou needs dye in a pit? choosing rather to have thy body kill^d,
then thy will crossed?

This is the case of all Mankind, till Grace work a change, and till God of an
unwilling, make us a willing people in the day of his power: Till then, we have
a will, which is not only blemished with an indispesition, but also biased with
an opposition to Gods; for says Paul, that Doctor of the Gentiles, Romans 8. It
is not subject to the will of God, neither indeed ^an be. Mark, it is not
subject, nor can be subject; what more can be said to abase the natural pride
of man? as he has such a mind as neither understands, nor can understand the
things of God, 1 Cor. 2.14. So he has such a will as neither is subject, nor
can be subject, Romans 8. Thus lies fallen man, lost man, fo^lorn man,
degenerated man; thus lies he ^ockt up in obstinacy, darkness, and unbelief,
minding his own things, d^ing his own will, and damning his own soul, until God
spring in, as the Angel did to Peter in prison, and bring him news of his
spiritual enlargement out of that dead and damning Estate, to which he had
thrown, and enthralled himself, body and soul, for ever.

O thou heavenly Samaritan, that once poured in Wine into the half dead
Traveller, draw near, draw near, here is a Church full of souls, not half dead,
but wholly dead, their eyes closed they cannot, they cannot see thee, their
hearts grown stiff, and cold, and hard, and have no feeling of thee, unless in
mercy thou speak a Resurrection word, and make them live again to praise thee:
Oh let this be the time of life, Oh let it be a time of love, apply unto their
festered sores this saving salve of Christ's Blood, that they putrify not to
death, nor languish in despair; drop into their wounded souls the sharp Wine of
thy wrath, search them, and pour in also the supplying Oil of thy tender Mercy
to heal them, that so both them and their wills (which further than they are
driven will not go) may be brought into a Conformity to thee and thy will.

Secondly, It speaks terror to those that do the Devils will. It was an
Indictment which Christ preferred against the Jews, and may I fear, too truly be
laid to the charge of many Nomical Christians, John 8.44. Year of your Father
the Devil, and the works of the Devil you will do.

Adam, when the will of God, and the will of the Devil hung in equal balance
before him, we know how ready he was to choose the wrong Scale; God said, Touch
not the forbidden fruit; Satan said, Take and eat the forbidden fruit; and you
know the sad event of that affair. Now if Adam was at the Devils beck in the
slate of Creation, when his Nature was not depraved with sin, nor his Soul
debaucht with lust, who in the state of Corruption can say, my Heart is clean.

Object. It may be some will Object, None is so devoid of Grace sure, none gone
so far in the S^upi^ication of their Conscience, as to do the will of the Devil?

Answ. Ah poor soul! I could wish that the party here concerned be not nearer
than thou art aware of; put thy hand into thy bosom, and it may be, thou may
resolve the Objection thy self; Thou would possibly take it ill, should I
come to thee [as Nathan did to David] and clap thee on the shoulder with this
Arrest, Thou art the man. I confess this would be more than my Commission
warrants me to do, yet give me leave to whisper one word or two in thine ear.

When thou make a lie, whose will do thou? Gods, or the Devils? not Gods,
for God says, put away lying. Surely lying is the work and will of Satan, whom
the Scripture Records for a Liar from the beginning: Again, when with Jezebel
thou paintest thy self with pride, and stand sacrificing many a precious
morn to the Idol in the Looking-glass, whose will art thou doing at such a
time? sure not Gods, for in Isa. 28.1. you have him declaiming against such
practices, Woe to the crown of pride, to the crown of pride. When thou art
acting the good fellow upon t^^^ Ale-bench, and with thy drivling Oaths damning
all that are wedded to the Rules of Sobriety, and dares not break off thy
drunken Fraternity, whose will art thou doing? and in whose work art thou
employed at such a time? Certainly not Gods, he calls no such Conventicles, nor
allows no such Societies; witness that Alarm, which he sounds under the window
where such Swaggerers fit, Joel 1.5. Awake, awake ye drunkards, weep and howl
all ye drinkers of wine; for the time is at hand when your sweet draught shall
be cut off from your mouth. In a word, when thou art finning, whose will art
thou doing? not Gods; for he says, Cease to do evil, and learn to do well.
Certainly while it is thus with thee, the words of Christ are applicable to
thee, Thou art of thy Father the Devil, and the work or will of the Devil thou will do, John 8.44.

Use. 3. Thirdly, Is it so, then ever make Gods will the Standards of yours,
and think not to bring down his will to yours, but resign up your will to his.
That Epitapth would not become a Christian Tombstone, which was found Engraven
upon a Misers Monuments, Here lies one against his will; the blessed Apostle
was of another mind, when he said, I have learnt in what ever state I am,
therewith to be content. Many can be content in an Honorable Estate, or in a
wealthy Estate, or in a plentiful or prosperous Estate: but to be reproacht,
and yet content, to be belied, and yet content; to be affronted, and wronged,
and yet content, in such Estates as these to be content, is far above Nature,
and none can do it, but he that has learnt it, I have learnt, says Paul.

But alas! how few Scholars has this Great Doctor St. Paul in his Heavenly
Academy! Children can learn to be proud, can learn to be covetous, can learn to
be undutiful to their Parents, can learn to lie and swear, before they have
well learnt to speak. But he must be a Man, nay more than a Man, that can learn
to love an Enemy, to forgive an injury, and with Paul, to be content with every
Contingency.

For the Lords sake [MAN] ply this lesson well, if thine Enemy lay thy Honor
low, entreat the Lord to lay thy heart as low, and be content: If Authority
bring thy Estate down, beseech God to bring thy Spirit down, and be content;
when thy comforts runs a tilt, and thy blessings runs dregs, then let patience
have her perfect work, and be content, feast upon thy own Lentiles, quash thy
penitential tears instead of luscious Wine, and count thy sins instead of
pounds, keep thy heart at home, and suffer not thy ambition to climb up beyond
thy Makers pleasure.

Mahomet, when he could not make the Mountain come down to it, he went up to
the Mountain: So when thou can not enlarge thy Dominions to thy mind, then
confine thy mind to thy Dominions; and when thou have more, be the more
thankful, and when thou have less, be content. This is the third Use, Make Gods
will the stan dard of yours.

Now if you put Paul's Query, Lord, what will thou have me to do?

I will answer the question, and tell you; what God would have you to do.

1. God would have you obey his Command, and live piously. 2. God would have
you bear his Cross, and suffer patiently.
First, It Is Gods will you should live piously. For the proof of this you may
read, 1 These. 4.3, 4. This is the will of God, what is? even this, says Paul;
your Sanctification, that every one of you should possess your vessel in
holiness? Mark this, in holiness, and if so, what will become of all those
befooled and abused souls, who debauch their vessel with uncleanness, and
defile themselves with drunkenness? If Belshazar was so severely punished for
dissecrating and profaning the Vessels of the Temple dedicated unto God, of
how much sorer punishment shall these wretches be thought worthy, who have
adulterated and defiled the Temple of the Holy Ghost? He drank intemperately to
the honor of his Idol, only in dead Vessels of Gold and Silver; But these in
doing thus, abuse living Vessels, living bodies, and living souls; such Vessels
as by Baptism were marked out for God, and separated and sealed to his holy
service, they abuse and prostitute to a Lust, to a Whore, to the Devil. Ah! who
can but weep, and weep again to see how much of our English Blood is poisoned
with these beastly Enormities at this day; and how many of our [otherwise
hopeful] Gentlemen, who might do God and their Country much service, and be a
great help to the public good, and peculiar blessing to the place where they
live, do basely and unworthily melt away their youth, and Emasculate their
spirits in drunken Societies and Effeminate Embraces.

Alas, that so many Noble Births, so many sparkling Wits should be prostituted
to Satan's service, and employed in carrying on Satan's cause, while they know it
not; If they had found a Golden Chalice (as Augustine observes of Lucinus) they
would have given it to the Church; But God has given them a Golden Wit, a
golden Head, and golden parts, and in these golden Cups, and Challices, they
drink themselves to the Devil, both body and soul for evermore.

Ah deluded and degenerated Gentlemen! think with your selves seriously, what
answer you will make to your Judge at the general Audit-day, for taking the
Members of Christ, and making them members of an Harlot.

Never see my face more, said Joseph, unless you bring your brother Benjamin
with you. Oh friends, never think to see Gods face to your comfort in Glory, if
you carry not holy bodies, and holy souls, and holy affections with you; God
tells you his mind in Heb. -- Follow peace and holiness, without which you
shall never see the Lord, You may go to Heaven without a penny in your purse,
but you shall never come there without holiness in your heart. Heaven is a City
where Righteousness dwells, and therefore though God in his wonderful patience
to poor lost man, suffer the Earth to give the ungodly a little house-room a
while, yet sure I am, he will never cumber Heaven with such a crew.

Before Enoch was translated to Heaven, he walked holily upon Earth, else God
had never desired his Company so soon as he did. And before the Saints
departed, commenced, and took their degree of Glory, they kept their Acts, and
performed the exercises of grace, and so must you, the Scripture is plain,
Without Holiness, none shall see the Lord. It Is true, none goes to Heaven for
his Holiness, and this shows the Insufficiency of Holiness; But it is as true,
that none goes to Heaven without holiness, and this argues the necessity of
holiness; And therefore though it be no plea for Heaven, yet it will be your
best Evidence, and will you have your Evidences to seek, when you should have
them to show? Ah then! as you value a portion among the Saints in Light, and
hope to live in Heaven, when you can live no longer upon Earth: Be holy, as
your Father which is in Heaven is holy.

Caesar's money must be known by Caesar's Image and Superscription, and so must
the Christian at the Reckoning day, by the Terror of his Conversation. Not
every one that says Lord, Lord, but he that does the will of the Lord shall be
saved, says Christ; Your works must be your witnesses, and your deeds must
declare whose you are, and to whom you belong: And therefore begin to live that
life now, which you intend and hope to live for ever; and continue not one day
longer in that condition, in which you would not die, and appear at Judgment
in; Therefore go home and dress your selves, not with good Clothes, but with
good works; and while others are querying what they shall eat, and what they
shall drink, and what they shall put on; study you how to live, and how to dye,
and to put on the Lord Jesus Christ, making no provision for the flesh, to
fulfill the lust thereof; And when others are projecting how to improve a
barren piece of ground, let your contrivance be how to improve a barren mind;
and as their care is, that their fields should not lie fallow, so let it be
your study, not to let your hearts lie fallow; and the rather because you see
that this is the will of God, even your sanctification, that every one of you
should possess his Vessel in holiness, 1 These. 4.3, 4.

Now, that this is the will of God, will appear upon a twofold account.

1. First from the price, with which he has redeemed us to it: 2. And
Secondly, from the Promise which he has made to Reward us for it.
1. The price he paid down upon the nail, was his own blood, Tit. 2.14. He gave
himself for us, that he might Redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar people. Had man kept his primitive holiness, Christ might
have kept his life, and have spared his pains; It was man's lost Righteousness,
lost Holiness, that Christ came to recover. But this is a Point that needs
pressing rather than proving, which I shall undertake to effect by these
ensuing obrestations and entreaties. I beseech you, upon the account of these
three Considerations, that you would approve your selves a holy Nation, a Seed
which the Lord has blessed.

I beseech you 1. For my sake. 2. For your sakes. 3. For Christ's sake.


First, for my sake, who am to come to you as a Petitioner and Messenger from
the Lord, and the sum of my desires is this, I beseech you in Christ's stead,
that you would be reconciled to God. I am not courting you for your silver, but
for your souls; and what will you grant me, if this be denied me; O the Lord
make you a willing people in the day of his power.

God has sent me to you (as Jesse to David) with this Present in mine hands,
and these Breathings in my heart after your Salvation; O may they but prove
serviceable and successful to your souls, and I shall bless God that has put
it into mine heart thus to visit you? But if you will not hear, nor fear to do
no more so wickedly, My soul shall weep in secret for you.

Is it not sad to a tender Physician, to see his Patients to dye under his
hands; much sadder sure to a poor Minister, to see souls drop to Hell, one by
one under his Pulpit, and cannot help them, cannot save them; this must needs
be a heart-sadding sight to one that is sensible of the worth of souls. It
costeth the Mother no small pains to bring forth a living Child. But ah the
bitter Throws of that Minister that travels all the year long, nay, all his
life long, with a dead Child, a dead-hearted people: That spends his strength,
and like a Candle, Swails out his life amongst his Parish, and is forced at
last, to take up the Prophets complaint, Who has believed our report, and to
whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed?

O my dear friends, think solemnly and seriously, what answer you intend to
give me, before I leave you. Christ will not always cry; Come; the Spirit will
not always cry, Come, neither must I; the time is at hand, when you will say
one to another, We had a Preacher, we had a Teacher, we had a well-wisher, and
a lover of our souls amongst us; but we did not improve and profit under him as
we might, and therefore God has sent him away from us, as he did Jonah to
Nineveh, when Jerusalem despised him. O hear me then while you may, and pray
with me while you may; and accept of the tender of Salvation from me, while you
may; Yet a little while, and you that have seen me, shall see me no more; and
you that have heard me, (as Job says) shall say, Where is he? It Is but a
little, and those Seats shall have other Hearers, and this Pulpit have another
Preacher; It Is but a little that you have to hear, and I have to speak in this
place, and shall not my Dying words, be Living words to you? shall my
Farewel-Sermon be a forgotten Sermon? and the last request I am like to make to
you, be repulsed and slighted by you, O my dear Neighbors and Friends, of whom
I travel till Christ be formed in you; Awake, and live, seek the Lord before
the Grave and Hell shut their mouths upon you, and before the Servant of the
Lord, sent now to warn you, take his last leave of you, and see your faces no
more.

I am wounded, I am wounded, to think this Sermon should be Concluded, before
all your Souls be Converted, and to leave any of this Congregation, walking on
in Hell Road, when I am gone; Oh that I knew but what to do, to get you to do
that to day, which must be done, or you may be undone to morrow.

If it were to follow you home, and there to beg your Conversion on my bare
Knees, as a C^ild begs his Fathers blessing: If it were to go to my Closet
(...) is done, and there to wrestle with God, as Ja^^^ did (...) you, my loving
Parishioners, till I get this an^^^^ (...) ^^^ssed them, and they shall be
blessed, Nay, though I were sure to go to Prison as soon as I come forth of the
Pulpit, yet I should think all well bestowed, could I but see you begin to turn
this Sermon into practice, And to follow peace and holiness, without which you
cannot see the Lord.

Oh what a joyful hours work would I esteem this, and how heartily would I
bless your God and my God, that prospered his Word in the mouth of his servant,
making it a Salvation Word to as many as our Earwitnesses of it this day.

This is the first Argument, I beseech you for my sake. Little do you think
what a joy it is to your Minister to see his Children (as St. John speaks)
walking in the truth. And on the contrary, what an affliction, to see you walk
in Error, and Sin. Little do you think what a comfort it is to me to think of
making this account to God at the Judgment day, Here are the Children which
thou gave me, and I have lost none. And on the other hand, what an aching it
is to my heart, to think of bespeaking God at that time, on this manner, Here
are none of the Children, O Lord, none of the Souls that thou did commit to
my trust, for I have lost them all. But I hope better things of you, though I
thus speak.

II. Secondly, I beseech you for your own sakes. Who will have the worse of it,
if this advice be not followed, you or I? Alas, though it may be matter of
Grief to me, yet not of Guilt: God will reward me according to my labor, not
according to my success. We are, said the Apostle, A sweet Savor of Christ in
them that perish, mark, in them that perish, as well as in them that be saved.
Though the Patient dye, yet the Physician must be paid: So albeit the people
dye in their sins, yet Gods Ministers may comfortably conclude with the
Prophet, Isa. 49.4. Though I have labored in vain, and spent my strength for
naught, yet surely my Judgment is with the Lord, and my work (namely, the
reward of my work) with my God.

Ah my friends, it is you that will have the worst of it one day, if this Sermon
be not faithfully followed, and obeyed; Read at your leisure Ezekiel. 3.16, 17,
18, and see whether I speak truth or a lie; It Is you that must have the reward
of punishment; It Is you that must stand or fall, that must be the Subjects of
the pleasures of Heaven, or the Objects of all the pains in Hell; and should
not you then be as much concerned for your selves, as I am for you? Now you
enjoy your health, and the sad Accents of a dying sinner are not heard in your
habitations, but will it be always thus? Now each of you sit under his Vine
with delight, and there is no carrying into Captivity, nor no crying in your
streets, but will such times last always. Now you can hawk, hunt, swear and
drink, and then you think you are qualified like Gentlemen; but will this last
always? Suppose thou had a Crown on thy Head, how long would thou wear it?
Suppose thou had a Scepter in thy Hand, how long would thou hold it? They
are sick at Rome, and dye in Princes Courts, as well as at the Spittle; yea,
Kings themselves cannot keep their Crowns on their heads, nor their heads on
their shoulders, but must stoop when death strikes, and go as naked to their
Beds of Dust, as other men; and in that day all their thoughts, their projects,
and their pleasures perish with them; only their guilt of their sins, which
were the Ladders, by which they did climb up to the top of their pleasures, the
top of their honors, and preferments will dog them into another world. Hence
said Abner to Joah, 2 Samuel 2.26. Know thou not that these things will be
bitterness in the end? You will now have your sweetmeats, and your sweet
drinks, your sweet pleasures and pastimes, let the Minister say what he will,
but do not you know that this will be bitterness in the end? In Hell all the
Sugar will be melted off, wherein the Pill of your sins and temptations is
wrapped, and then the note you will fing will be that of the Emperor, O quantum ob
quantillum! O what an eternity of pain have I for an inch of pleasure, or an
Ell of sinful delight! As the Malefactor said to his Neighbor, do thou envy
me my Grapes that I have stolen? Alas, they I cost me dear, I must dye for
them? Ah envy not at the pleasures of a poor sinner, they will cost his soul dear
one day; what does Dives his Wine-cellar advantage him now in Hell, while he
cries out for a Cup of cold water, and cannot have it: O Sirs, you cannot now
conceive while you sit in health and ease, what different thoughts you will
then have of a holy, and unholy life, and with what gripes of Conscience will
your undone Souls, look back on a life of Mercy, thus basely, and blockishly
slept away, dreamed and sinned away. I beseech you then, and that for your own
sakes, that you would not for a few fleshly pleasures, which are passing away,
incur the torments of Hell, which shall never pass away.

III. Thirdly, I beseech you for Christ's sake. And me thinks when I beg of you
in Christ's name, and for Christ's sake, you should not say nay; If you love me,
says Christ, keep my Commandments, Joh. 14.15. See with what persuasive
Rhetoric he presses this Duty, If you love me, says he, do it? O Christians!
what may not the love of Christ command you? If it were to lay down your blood
for him, would you not do it? and will you not be persuaded to lay down your
Strifes and Divisions, your Animosities and Corruptions for his sake?

As Absalon said to Hushai, 2 Samuel 16.17. Is this thy kindness to thy friend?
Such a friend as Christ has been, is, and ever will be? Certainly that
Indictment will one day be preferred against you, which the Apostle pronounces
with tears in his eyes, Phil. 3.18. You are enemies to the Cross of Christ; as
if he had said, Christ came to destroy the works of the Devil, and you by your
loose walkings destroy the works of Christ, the Image of Christ, and the
Interest of Christ in the Soul? Christ laid down his blood to Purge you, and
you unworthily lay down your selves in sin to Pollute you, and so become guilty
of denying the Lord that bought you, and trampling under foot the Blood of the
Covenant. What Ear does not tingle, and what does not tremble at such a horrid
and flagicious Act? I beseech you then be tender of Christ's honor, Quod vos
divites relinquam.
and be holy for Christ's sake, whose heart you see, or may see by what follows,
is engaged and concerned to promote holiness among you.

Consider 1. His strict Command calls for it. 2. His servent Prayer implies it.
3. His holy Example teaches it.


First, I say his Command calls for it, Mat. 5.16. Let your light shine before
men, that they may see your good works; that is, lead such convincing lives,
that the world may witness and certify with you, that you are certainly a
choice Generation; a Seed which the Lord has blessed. Here Is a Command you
see, now where is your obedience? will you make Conscience of it, or will you
not? will you swear Allegiance to it, or will you not? shall it pass for an
irrefragable Rule of Life, or shall it not.

It was Pompey's boast, that with a Word, or a Nod, he could a we his Soldiers
to any thing; and shall God command, and go without? shall Gods word have less
authority then Pompey's?

I read much of the blind obedience of the Papists to their Rulers, even in
things scarce credible, but that themselves have published them.

One Masseus a Franciscan, tumbled himself in the dirt, and crawled like a
Child, because that St. Francis told him, That unless he became as a little
Child, he could not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

The Jesuits are so framed to Obedience, that whatever service they are
enjoined by their Superiors, though never so abominable, they must accomplish
it. Yea, if the blessed Virgin vouchsafe her presence to one of the brethren,
if his Superior call him, he must presently break from her, and go at his
bidding; although it be on a bloody Errand, and wondrous design, with a hundred
more Fopperies of this nature.

What do I reckon these for, but to assure you, that these who have paid such
homage to man, will rise up one day out of their Graves to condemn us, who are
less careful in our obedience to God Almighty: They shut the eyes of Reason to
obey their earthly Superiors, and we dispute, if not deny our Allegiance to
our Heavenly Lawgiver.

God bids us believe, and we distrust; God bids us obey, and we dispute; God
bids us remember our Creator in the days of our Youth, and we forget him even
in our age; God bids us learn of him, to be meek and lowly, and we learn of the
Devil to be proud and haughty; God bids us be sober and watch unto Prayer, and
we surfeit with excess, and sleep at Prayer; God bids us forbear, and forgive
one another in love, and we reproach and persecute one another with much
opposition and hatred. In a word, God bids us be content with what we have, and
we unthankfully murmur for what we want.

Ah sinners, God sees and hears you all this while, and his hand is setting
down in the Table Book of his Remembrance all your undutifulness and
disobedience, and when the Book shall be opened, how think you will these
Indictments be answered?

II. Secondly, Christ's servent Prayers calls for holiness, John 27.17.
Sanctify them with thy Truth, says he. Should you hear a Minister with
abundance of zeal press a Duty upon his people in the Pulpit, and as soon as he
gets home, you should go under his Closet Window, and hear him hard at Prayer,
begging of God a blessing upon his labors that day, you would easily believe
the Minister was in earnest: So here, our Savior has no sooner done his
Sermon, but you find him at Prayer, John 17.17. and what he most insisted on
in the Pulpit, that he enlarges most on in his Closet; Father, says he,
Sanctify them.

III. Thirdly, As Christ's Prayer, so his Pattern and Example shows his desires
to have his people a holy people; Was not he a lover of holiness in others, and
a true practiser of holiness himself; was not be the Israelite indeed, in whom
there was no guile, no sin, no spot? and why was he so? does he not tell you,
John 13.15. I have given you an Example, says he, that you should do as I have
done? He was content to have his Honor laid in the Dust; his Credit or Blood
laid in the Dust, but it was for an Example of all self-denial to you: Again,
he was content to take a Towel and a Basin in his hand to wash his Disciples
feet, John 3.14. but it was for an Example of Humility to you. In a word, He
was so Heavenly upon Earth, so mortified to all worldly interests, and lived so
convincingly before men, that his very enemies were forced to own his Divinity,
and to say, that he could not possibly do such things, unless God were with
him; now all this was for an Example of holiness to you; I have given you,
says he, an Example, that you should do as I have done.

O then set Christ in his holy Example before you, (as one would set the person
whose Picture he intends to draw) and labor to draw every line in your life,
according to your Copy. O this would be a sweet way indeed to maintain the
power of holiness: when you are tempted to any vanity, or extravagancy, then
set Christ before you in his holy walking, and ask thy soul, Am I in this
speech like Christ? do I in this action write after my Copy? Did Christ, or
would Christ, if he were to live again upon Earth, do as I do? and live as I
live? Would not he be more choice of his company? more watchful over his words
than I am? Were ever Cards and Dice seen so frequently in his hands as in mine?
Did he ever ruin his Debtors by extracting his right, or Defraud his Creditors
by detaining their rights? O friends, study Christ's life more, and you will
sooner learn to amend your own.

Well, I Will conclude this Discourse with one word of Counsel. Is it Gods will
that you should be a holy people, then let your wills be so too, and be holy in
all manner of conversation.

The last words that Mr. Bolten spoke to his Children on his deathbed, were
these; I charge you my dear ones, as you will answer it at the day of Judgment,
that you live so, as that you meet me not at that time in a state of unregency.

Beloved, I have not many words to speak to you, for the hour of my departure
hasteneth; therefore I will compose what I have to say, in this dying request.
You and I like Elijah and Elisha, are at the point of parting; I do therefore
require of you, and in the Name of God Conjure you, so to improve this Sermon,
this opport unity, this hours discourse, that we may take comfort at our next
meeting, and rejoice to see one another face at the Judgment day, which we
shall never do, if we appear there in a sinful and unsanctified estate.

Oh that the Lord would make me an happy Instrument to convey Converting Grace
into your souls this day; so that as Sampson slew more at his death, than he
did all his life before; so I may save more with this dying speech, than ever I
did with an that is gone before. I have read of a rich Florentine, who being to
die, called his sons together, and thus bespoke them; It much rejoices me, now
upon my Deathbed, to think that I shall leave you all wealthy. But oh my
friends, it would rejoice me more if now at my departure, I could leave you all
gracious, and if before I die, I could see Jesus Christ to live in you.

Awake, awake you Sons of sleep, and hear what concerns your peace, before the
time come when you shall hear no more. Let not your hearts run after Fields,
and Vineyards, Houses, and Orchards, for before thy fruit be ripe, thy flesh
may be rotten; before thy next Harvest be ready for the Sickle, thy soul may be
ripe for Judgment.

Up then and be doing, thou know not what a punctillio thy time is reduced
unto; thou have gone over some men's graves to day, and it may be, others may go
over thine to morrow; Or, if God spare thee with life and health, yet if thou
neglectest Gods call this Sabbath, God may neglect to call thee the next; It is
well known how many merciful Messages Pharaoh had brought him by Moses, and
what fair and frequent warnings he had to amend his life, but when all this
would not do, Moses took his leave, and he saw his face no more.

Beloved, I have appeared many a Sabbath amongst you, and once again am I come
as a Collector, to gather souls for God, and to try how many hearts I can hug
to Heaven with me. Oh consider now in time, what you resolve on! stand out
against the offers of Mercy this day, and God knows whether ever you may hear
him again knocking at your doors upon the like Errand; God makes short work
with some in his Judiciary proceedings; If he finds a repulse once, sometimes
he departs and leaves that dismal curse behind him, Luke 14.24. Not one of
those that were hidden, and would not come, shall ever taste of my Supper; they
were but once bidden, and for their very first denial, this curse is clapped upon
their heads, Not one of them shall taste of my Supper; It Is not said, they
shall never come where the Supper stands on the Table; but they shall never
taste it. Poor souls, you may sit under the Ordinances, and you may come to
Sacraments, and Sermons, where Christ is brought in, both as first and second
course; but through the efficacy of this Curse, never taste; as David says,
How good and gracious God is? Why, because, when I called, says God, you
refused, and when I stretched forth my bands, none regarded, therefore I will
now give you to eat of the fruit of your own doings, and fill you with your own
devices, Prove. 1.24, 31.

Therefore consider of it, and give up your names to God to day, lest to morrow
be too late; his Manna is ready if you come in time to gather it, but if you
linger, he has his Sun to melt it away, and it is gone.

Thus have you had the first Particular opened to you, and urged upon you,
namely, That it is God's will you should obey the Command, and live holy.

The next follows, which is this:

I. It Is Gods will you should bear the Cross, and suffer patiently, 1. Pet.
3.17. It Is better says Peter, if the will of God be so, that ye suffer for
well-doing, than for ill: Now, if the will of God be so sometime, that you
should suffer, albeit for well-doing; than let your wills be so too, and
quietly compose your selves to a suffering condition.

It Is said of the Israelites, that at the Commandment of the Lord they
journeyed, and at the Commandment they pitched; whence it may be inferred, That
it is God that assigns to us, and orders for us the several Vicissitudes of
Fortune, and changes of Condition; our pitching here or there, is from a
Providence, whether in a fair house, or a foul, in a great living, or a small,
in a barren soil, or a fruitful, and where ever, or what ever it be, it is
above our desert, and therefore should not fall below our thanks.

I read of one, who was never the more proud, when dignified with Honor, nor
never the less patient, when disgraced with Slander: Oh this even temper, is an
excellent temper, when a man can so eye his wants, as not to be puffed up with
his Receipts, and so Eye his Receipts, as not to be cast too much down in the
sense of his wants; And this is that frame of spirit, which I would fain have
both my self and you, to come up to; and therefore if God please hereafter to
make a Gap in thy Estate, let not that open a Gap to discontent, but remember
Jobs carriage in the like case, and join with him in that penitential
prostration of his, I will hear the indignation of the Lord, for I have sinned
against him. If God strike thee with Dumbness, strike not thou God again with
thy Discontentedness, but remember speechless Zachary, and be content; If God
open the mouths of thy Enemies, or wicked Neighbors against thee, do not thou
open thy mouth against them, but think often on David's words, I opened not my
mouth, said he, because thou did it. Yet David opened not his mouth to
recriminate them, nor vindicate himself, but took all in good part, because he
knew that God did it. I shall now propound some considerations to contentment
under the Cross; I can only propound them, it is God that must prosper them to
you.

1. Consider for your comfort, God will be with you in your troubles. 2.
Consider, you shall be with God after your troubles.
I. First, God will be with you, Isa. 43.2. When thou passest through the
water, I will be with thee; Mind, I will be with thee; fear not drowning then,
so long as God is in the Ship.

Thou carriest Caesar in thy Barque, said the Emperor to the trembling
Mariner, and therefore be not afraid; O Christian, thy God is with thee in a
suffering time, and how can thou be afriad of that condition wherein thou
have Gods company? I will be with thee in six troubles, and in seven, says the
Lord, and surely it cannot be ill with that man, with whom God is. It Is
infinitely better to be able to say, God is with thee, than to say, peace is
with thee, or health is with thee, or honor is with thee, or credit, or
friends are with thee, for in these you have but some particular good, but in
God you have all good; and this is the first, you have an excellent Scripture
for it, Heb. 13.5. Be content with such things as you have, why? For I will
never leave you, nor forsake you; though your Riches may leave you, and health
may leave you; yet will not I.

Oh what an argument is this to force contentment in every condition, to
consider that he will not leave us comfortless, but will come unto us: Cheer up
then my drooping soul, thou shall never want, so long as thy God has it; For
by the Promise thou have command of Gods purse, and may be sure of his
presence.

Let others repine, do thou rejoice, and let such as be without God in the
world, shark and shift, live by their wits, but in all straights do thou live
by Faith.

O beloved, you know not how soon God may call for your comforts one after
another, and bring you as he did his people Israel, out of a fat Land, into a
famishing Wilderness, where no water is, no comfort is; what will you do in
such a case as this? If you please, I Will tell you, when your hearts fail you,
and your friends thus fail you, let not your hearts fail you, nor your faith
fail you, for you have a faithful God which will never fail you, but will be
instead of all things to you, from himself alone.

As Joseph said to Pharaoh, Without me God, will provide an answer for Pharaoh.
So may I say in this case; without silver, without gold, without fair houses
and rich furniture, God can provide for the welfare of his people. Though your
means be gone, yet your God is not gone; and if you cannot be contented now, it
will argue that it was not God, but your means that did content you then.

Well, this is the first, Consider God will be with thee in thy troubles, and
that upon a twofold account.

1. To behold thee. 2. To uphold thee.
I. First, To behold thee, God sees the wrongs, and hears the grievances you
undergo for men; though your friends looks off you, yet your God looks on you,
Exodus 3.17. I have seen, I have seen, says God, the heavy Burdens and
Taxations that my people undergo in Egypt. As if God had said thus, I have
seen, and so seen, as that my bowels are turned within me, and I can no longer
hold my peace.

What a gracious God have we, that owns his people in such a low condition,
wherein none will own them; for, says God, I have seen, I have surely seen the
troubles of my people that be in Egypt. Fear not afflictions then, for they
cannot chase God from us, nay, they are rather advantages, wherein God does
ordinarily discover himself most comfortably to us; which brings me to the
second Particular.

II. As God will be with you in your troubles to behold you; so secondly, to
Uphold you; Cham looked on his Fathers Nakedness and laughed, but God looks on a
Christians trouble, and helps: The eyes of the Lord run to and fro, says the
Prophet; what to do? To show himself strong in the behalf of his people: Where
God has a seeing Eye, there he has a helping hand too, if man can but find a
believing heart to lay hold upon it.

David is a witness of this truth, when he says, In the dry that I cried thou
answeredst me, and gave me strength in my soul; as if David had said, It Is
true, O Lord, thou assaultest me, and that is my trouble; but it is as true, that
thou assistest me, and this is my comfort; In the day that I cried unto thee,
thou answeredst me, and gave me strength in my soul.

Object. I, says the scrupulous Christian, would God do this for me? if he
would put strength into my soul, strength of Faith, strength of patience,
strength of Grace, then I should bid a freer wellome to the Cross when it
comes; But alas! instead of this strength you speak of, I find nothing but
weakness upon weakness, a weak faith, a weak assurance, weak patience; all weak.

Answ. I answer briefly, have thou not strong Grace? and does that discourage
thee? it may be thou art not tried with strong afflictions, let this quiet
thee; have thou not as much patience as another? it may be thou have not yet as
much need of it as others; their patience is greater than thine, because their
troubles are greater than thine. In a word, thou said thou have not a
Martyrs Faith, it may be thou need it not yet, because thou have not a
Martyrs Fire; a weak Faith may serve for a light Cross; when God calls thee to
hotter services of Christianity, fear not but he will be at thy back, not only
to behold thee, but as you have heard, to Uphold thee, 2 Cor. 15. As the
sufferings of Christ abound in us, says Paul, So also our Consolations abound
in Christ: See here, as men lays on troubles, so God lays in comfort: Hence it
was that David's heart did not fail him, when all his friends forsook him, 1 Samuel 30. And David encouraged himself in his God, says the Text; It was sad
with him at this time; Zicklag was burnt, his Wives taken captive, he lost all,
and like to have lost the hearts of his Soldiers too, [for they speak of
stoning him.] In this condition that David was now in, he turned his face from
the Creature, looked up to Heaven, and encouraged himself in his God; when all
other visible helps shrunk from him, then his God clave to him, and he to his
God.

Oh Christian, live upon the Comforter himself, in the want of other comforts;
If thou can not say, that God is thy God, it is thy sin; but if thou can
say, he is thy God, and yet not content, it is thy shame; for if God, an
All-sufficient God, will not suffice thee, will not content thee, sure nothing
will.

II. Secondly, You shall be with God after your troubles, This day shall thou
be with me in Paradise, said Christ to the present Thief; as if he should have
said, I am with thee, bearing the Cross, and thou shall be anon with me wearing
the Crown, and therefore be satisfied; a parallel Scripture to this you have in
Romans 8.17. If we suffer with him, we shall reign with him, said Paul; who will
not now willingly act a sufferers part a while, when he remembers what a
blessed Exit his sufferings shall have at last: Daniel was brought out of the
Dungeon, and immediately preferred at Court; Joseph of a slave, became the
chief man of the Kingdom: Ah, what a Banquer did God provide for Paul and Silas
in Prison; and Jacob being banished from his Fathers House, what a comfortable
Vision saw he at Bethel: better provision sure, than if he had been sitting at
home at his plentiful Table.

But albeit the Lord treats not all his Children as he did these; yet are they
all sure of his comfort: Glory shall be the end of their sufferings, and Heaven
their habitation for evermore; they have Christ's Certificate under his own
hand, Romans 1. If you suffer with me, ye shall reign wi^h me.

Oh that so much of Heaven, were Revealed and Unvailed to you, as to see
something of those Eternal Joys, which they that be dead in the Lord, have
received for a few momentary sufferings in their lifetime; Hungry Lazarus
feasting, lame Mephibosheth dancing, and all the College of Martyrs and
Confessors striking up their Harps, and Chanting forth that Epiphanema of
praise, Rev. 7.10. Salvation, salvation unto our God, which sits upon the
Throne, and to the Lamb for ever.

Oh who would not rejoice in their sufferings, with such Music in their ears,
and such a sight as this in their eye!

Let this then beget contentment, it is in with such at present, but good news
will be next, Gods Rod, like Jonathans Rod, has Honey, nay, Heaven at the end:
Look up Christians and see, that the Cloud, while dropping on you, is rolling
over you, stand but in the shower a while, and fair weather will be next, even
an everlasting Sunshine of glory. When you have suffered a while, says Peter,
1 Pet. 5.10. the Lord will make you perfect, that is, your sufferings are not a
killing you, but a perfecting you.

Poets tells us that the Hill of Olimpus is so high, that on the top of it is
always a Calm; Beloved, it is hard climbing up the Rocky and Rugged Hill of the
Cross, but when you are once come up to the Top, you shall be in a Calm, and
say as Peter did on the Mount, It Is good to be here, good to get Heaven at any
rate.

And this is the second Argument to work Contentment under the Cross; God will
not only Come to you in your troubles, but you shall Go to God after your
troubles, God will make your afflictions to be Inlets into glory, and your
Cross a Ladder to climb up to Heaven; and therefore fear not afflictions, they
are not such Bugbears as the flesh fancieth them to be: Which seriously thought
on, would be enough to make thy soul ambitious of suffering, saying as one did
once, I am afflicted, till I be afflicted.

A Child that is going home will never complain of bad way. O Christian, thou
art going home to Heaven in a way of suffering, every affliction, every Cross
sets thee one step forward to thy Fathers house, and will thou complain of bad
way? one beam of Gods face in Heaven will dry up all thy tears; hence says the
holy Prophet, Rev. 21. There shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying,
neither shall there be any more pain, for all these things are passed away.

Thus have I given you two helping Considerations to melt your wills into
obedience to Gods will, and to run the Race that is set before you with
patience; therefore I shall be at the pains to help you a little further,
Consider, 1. The Cross is necessary, and must be born, 2. Your Cross is easy,
and may be born.


I. First, I say it is necessary, God has laid it on, and who can take it off;
As Balaam said, God has blessed, and I cannot reverse it. So may I say, God
has crossed, and thou can not repeal it; and therefore let it be born bravey
I. Now it is unavoidable necessary upon a double account

1. In regard of the Precept. 2. In regard of the Means.
First, You have a Precept for it, Luke 9.35. He that will be my Disciple, let
him take up his Cross and follow me.

Secondly, It Is necessary as a Means to the obtaining the End. Christ the
Captain of our Salvation was made perfect through sufferings, and so must we,
Heb. 2.10. Ought not Christ first to have suffered, and then to have entered
into his rest? says Luke 24.26. yes, he ought, and so ought Christians; For,
through many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

An hot burning Furnance was a pleasant path, in which the three Children walked
to their Caelestial Country, while Belshazars Coaches like a Sedan, conveyed
quickly into the dwellings of Furies, and habitation of Devils; A fiery Chariot
hoysed up Elijah to Heaven, where as a Feather-bed ushered Dives down to Hell:
Therefore be not afraid of suffering for God, for he can give an happy issue
when he pleases.

II. Again, as the Cross is Necessary, and must be born; So it is Easy, and
may be born; And that

1. Absolutely. 2. Comparatively.
First, Absolutely, and in it self; Hence said Christ, Take my Yoke upon you,
for my Yoke is easy, and my Burden is light; Never then call that Cross heavy,
which Christ has called easy and light.

Art thou pained with the Gout or Colleick? that is a light burden; and the
Boys of Spain bore so much, and more without complaining that their Cross was
heavy; for I read that they would at their Altars endure whipping and scourging
till their very Entrails saw the light through their torn flesh without crying.

These Children rejoiced in their sufferings like men, and this was their
glory; but you that are men, you weep in your sufferings like Children, surely
this is your shame.

Again, are you sick? this is a light burden, and so light, that the least
child in the Town can bear it: In a word, whatever thy Cross be, if it be
Christ's Cross, it is a light one, and therefore not to be complained of; Take
my Yoke upon you, says he, for my Yoke is easy, and my Burden is light: And
indeed, there is no burden can truly be called, or by Christians can be counted
heavy but sin; and this is a burden which makes the whole Creation to groan
under it; take away sin; and a man's life will be no longer a burden to him;
this is the heavy burden; as for other burdens, they are light, and that
first, Absolutely. Secondly, they are light comparatively.

1. If you compare them with the pains which Christ endured.

Or, Secondly, With the pains of Hell which you deserved.

First, If you compare them with the pains that Christ endured, look but into
Isa. 53. and you shall see that whole Chapter spent in relating that bloody
Tragedy which Christ acted for the Salvation of the World; He was despised and
rejected of men, says the Prophet; He has bore our Griefs, and carried our
Sorrows, ver. 4. He was wounded for our Transgressions, and bruised for our
Iniquities: And thus the Text runs on in Tears. O what a suffering-Race did he
run, that he might overtake us before we got to Hell.

Methinks I see what haste he makes on this suffering-Errand, and hear him cry
to his Father while yet afar off, Lo, I come to do thy will, O my God. See here
how the heart of Christ, like an Echo, rebounds to his Fathers call.

When his Father spoke to him to undertake the Redemption-Work of saving a lost
and undone World, he did not reluct nor answer with Moses, Exodus 4.13. I pray
thee send some other on this Message; but, Lo I come (says Christ) to do thy
will, O my God.

And now Christians tell me, Does not thy dear Lord deserve thus much from
thee, to endure a little for his sake, who has endured so much for thine? What
though thy afflictions cost thee Tears, Christ's afflictions cost him blood;
and though thou losest the comforts of this Life, this is nothing comparable to
Christ's loss, who lost life it self.

Ah! what loss can match this loss? and whose sufferings like his sufferings?
Do thou sigh under the sense of thy grievance, thus, My soul is sorrowful;
But Christ went further, and said, My soul is sorrowful to death. Mat. 26.38.
Do thou cry, My God, my God, why have thou afflicted me? But Christ said
more, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? consider this, and leave
complaining.

Secondly, Your Cross is easy, if you compare it with the pain; of Hell, which
you have deserved. Ah! there is never a one of you but would be in Hell before
to morrow, if God should give you your due; there are many there for those very
sins which you live in: Dives is in Hell for making an Idol of his Wealth; have
none of you done so? Haman is in Hell for pride; and are you not proud? Sodom
is in Hell for contempt of the Prophets of the Lord, and for neglecting the day
of Peace, and the day of Grace; the day of Gods patience and striving with
them; and is not this Englands sin at this very day? The old Word is burning in
Hell, for burning in lust on Earth; and was this sin ever more predominant than
in this juncture of time? Herod has been lying in Hell a thousand and six
hundred years, for taking John Baptists Head from him.

Ah England! England! Is not this thy charge? Has not this been thy practice
these late years? And art thou not plunged deep in thy own blood-guiltiness?
Herod did but cut one man's Head off, and he is gone to Hell for it: Oh what an
Hell may est thou look for, who have got so many Heads, and drunk the Blook of
thousands of the Saints, and faithful Servants of the most High? What City is
there wherein there is not some Noble Births, some of Englands Worthies
Sacrificed to the bloody itch, and Bedlam Surges of a Civil War? (I had almost
said of an Uncivil Peace:) What Town is there wherein there is not some
Families repeating over the Lamentations of Jeremiah, and saying, I am the man
that has seen affliction by the Rod of his wrath: Sion does mourn, Judah is
gone into captivity, the prophets sigh, the sheep are scattered, and woe is my
soul because of murderers!

How many of the dear Children of God are crying for bread? (for the powerful
Preaching of the Word amongst them) and there is no bread to be given them, nor
the pleasant voice of their faithful Ministers to be heared amongst them; and
they left to lament over their silenced Ministers, as King Joash wept over the
dying Prophet, 2 Kings 13.14. O my Father, my Father, the Chariot of Israel,
and the horsemen thereof; Will not God visit for these? Will he not be avenged
on such a Nation as this? Yes, yes he will; Israel's woe, may be England's
warning, Amos 4. Thus will I do unto thee; and because I will do thus unto
thee, therefore prepare thy heart to meet thy God, O England. But this is a
digression.

That which I am to speak to, is this, You are to bear the Cross contentedly,
because what ever you do Endure, it is nothing to what you deserve, or to what
the damned in Hell Endure.

In Hell there is variety of torments, and extremity of torments, and eternity
of torments; not one way, but a thousand ways to make a poor soul miserable,
everlastingly miserable? And who can bear variety? Who can bear Eternity? Who
can bear Eternity of torments? Yet all this you must bear, if ever it be your
lot to lie in Hell.

Here it may be you want one mercy, but blessed be God you have another in lieu
of it; you want health, but you want not friends; you want money, but you want
not a Christ; you want an Estate, but you want not a contented mind; though
your life be not absolutely made up of comforts, which is your misery; yet it
is not altogether composed of crosses; and is not this a Mercy?

And thus is your life checqu'rd with blacks and whites, so that you have never
such cause of Mourning, but withal you have some just ground of rejoicing; but
in Hell there is nothing to be seen, but objects of sorrow; and nothing to be
heard except inducements to grief; not one merry day, and one sad, not one hour
of pain, and another of ease; not one cross, and one comfort; but all crosses
and curses do meet there like lines in their proper center. Compare now your
sufferings with the sufferings of Hell, and let this quiet you.

That Schoolboy thinks he gets well off, when deserving a Rod, he escapes with
a Reproof: What a mercy then may you count it, that when you deserve a Curse
from Christ, you escape with the Cress of Christ; afflicted on Earth, when you
might justly be tormented in Hell.

Think of it then, are you corrected? It Is the Lords mercy that you are not
consumed. Has God taken away your health from you? it is well you escape so, he
might have taken away your life from you, and your Christ from you, and where
had you been then?

In a word, how much soever God takes from you, it is less then you owe him; and
how little soever he leaves you, it is more than he owes you; therefore in stead
of murmuring that your condition is so ill, bless God that it is no worse,
saying with Ezra, Ez. 9.13. Thou, O Lord, have punished us less than our
Iniquities have deserved.

Mr. COOPER'S FAREWELL-SERMON.
PHIL. 4.9. Those things which ye have both learned, and received, and heard,
and seen in me, do; and the God of Peace shall be with you.
THE Amannensis, or Penman of this Epistle, was Paul the Apostle, who being
Prisoner at Rome, takes occasion from the benevolence of the Philippians sent
unto him by Epaphroditus for the supply of his wants there, to confirm them (by
this Epistle) in the Faith, notwithstanding his bonds, to encourage them in
godliness, and walking worthy of the Gospel, but especially in stedfastness,
unity and lowliness of mind; to warn them against certain perverse Zealots of
the Law, who mingled Works with Faith in point of Justification; and (in a
word) to quicken them to the practice of all Christian duties.

My Text salls under the last of these heads, wherein our blessed Apostle being
about to Epilogize, and drawing toward a conclusion, endeavors to Epitomize
his whole Epistle, and to give them in a few words the sum of all his
Apostolic Advice, which was, That they should live up to their knowledge,
practicing with all saithfulness the things they had both learned, and heard,
and received from the Lord by him.

Those things (says he) which ye have both learned, and received, and heard,
and seen in me, do; and the God of peace shall be with you.

In which words you may observe these two things:

1. A Precept, holding forth the duty and employment of a Christian: Those
things which ye have both learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me, do.
2. A Promise, holding forth the privilege and encouragement of a Christian;
And the God of Peace shall be with you.
First, For the Precept; it holds forth the duty an employment of a Christian,
and that is, to live up to his knowledge, to transcribe the Law of God into his
life, and to practice with all diligence what ever he has learned, and heard,
and received from the Lord, whether by precept or example.

Secondly, For the Promise; it holds forth the privilege and encouragement of
a Christian, and that is, that doing what he knows and exercising himself in
the practice of what he has both heard, and learned, and received from the
Lord, he is sure to have God's presence with him, not only in regard of his
Essence, for so he is every where, and with every man present; neither can he
be otherwise; but also in regard of his grace and savor.

Doct. Those that walk in obedience with God, he will always be graciously
present with them.

The God of Peace will vouchsafe his gracious presence to all those who have
heard, received and learned, whether by Precept or Example, the Truth as it is
in Jesus, are careful to do accordingly.

Such as yield obedience to God's holy Will, endeavoring to practice what they
have heard, and to live up to the Truths they have learned, shall never be
forsaken, but God will always afford them his gracious presence.

If any man practice what he knows, (provided that he know the Truth as it is
in Jesus) if any man walk in obedience with God, endeavoring to express what
he has heard, and learned, and received from him, by the holiness of his life
and conversation; the Lord will be graciously present with that man, as a Pilot
to guide him as a Rock to sustain him, and as a Fountain of living water, to
minister all fullness to him.

In the prosecution of this Doctrine, having showed you how the Lord will be
present with them that walk in obedience with him; I shall give you the Reasons
evincing it, and so come to the practical improvement of the whole, by way of
Use and Application.

First, Therefore by way of Explication; The Lord will be graciously present
with those that walk in obedience with him, these eight ways.

1. By way of gracious Acceptance: Never did any man yet study to approve
himself to God, in a way of dutiful obedience, but the Lord also was present
with him in a way of gracious acceptance. A wicked man, not studying obedience
to God, finds no acceptance with him in ought that he does; the sighs of a
wicked man are unsavory, his solemn Sacrifice is as dung, and his prayers are
abominable; God will not come near him, for his breath is infectious. But for
those that live up to their knowledge, God highly favors them, and takes all
that they do in good part.

Not a good word falls from their lips, but is recorded, Mal. 3.16. Not a tear
drops from their eyes, but it is taken up and bottled, Psalm. 56.8. Their weak
prayers sound like melody, their broken sighs smell like Incense, Genesis 8.21.
and their very stammerings seem Rhetorical, Cant. 2.14.

When all the glistering shows of hypocrites, evaporate and come to nothing,
yet they that study to walk in obedience with God, are crowned with acceptance.

We oftentimes come to God with broken pravers; but if we be such as make it
our care to practice what we have heard, and learned, and received, God spell
can out our meaning and will take our weak performances as a most grateful
present, 2 Cor. 8.12.

2. By way of Direction: The Pilot by his presence in the Ship, and by his
Skill and Activity, turns the Rudder of the Ships, and guides the course
thereof, steering a right course toward the desired Haven: So God as a
spiritual Pilot, is present in the Ship of every obedient Soul, guiding it by
his Counsel, and enabling, it by the direction and guidance of his own holy
spirit, to steer a right course to the Haven of Eternal Rest. By nature we
understand not the things of the Spirit of God, neither indeed can we, because
they are spiritually discerned; but, says Christ, if any man will do his will,
he shall know of the Doctrine, whether it be of God, John 7.17. Knowledge is
the Pilot, to guide us in our obedience; if Zeal be not according to knowledge,
it is will worship; and there is no better way to become knowing, than by doing
and practicing what we have already learned.

The disobedient and ungodly are in darkness until now; neither can they
discern as they ought, what concerns their everlasting peace; but the secret of
the Lord is with them that fear him, endeavoring to do what they know; and he
will teach them the way that they should choose, Psalm. 25 12, 14.

Oh then, how great is this privilege, that God will resolve our doubts,
acquaint us what is his Will, and give his Spirit to lead us into all necessary
Truths, when we make it our care to answer our knowledge with suitable
practice! He that does not what he knows, shall not shortly know what to do;
but he whose life is correspondent to his light, God will never leave to sit in
Egyptian darkness.

3. By way of preservation; God is always present with those to keep them from
evil, who study obedience to him in that which is good. If God's people abstain
from drunkenness, swearing, Idolatry, and the like abominable impieties, which
inevitably drown the soul in perdition, let them not rob the Lord of his glory,
in ascribing it to the goodness of their natures, but let them ingeniously
acknowledge it to proceed from the goodness of God, that preserves them more
than others, and many times prevents their falling into those fins which by
nature they were prone to, as well as the rest.

Thus David was kept from murdering Nabal; Noah from partaking with the old
world in their wickedness; Lot from following after the abominations of Sodom;
Joseph from consenting to the lude inticements of his impudent Mistress; and
those three Jewish Worthies, from falling down to worship before the golden
Image which Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon had set up, Dan. 3.16, 18.

When therefore, Gods people consider. Judas ^hursting ^a^under, through black
despair* Julian dying with revenge and rage against Christ; Achitophel
dispatching himself for very madness, because his oracle was not received, one
blaspheming, another sinfully (...), plying with a wicked world, and a^third
running into all excess of riot: Oh! let them then also consider the goodness
of God, and the power of his Grace in preserving them from the like horrie
impiettie!

Every one of Gods people, did not the Lord preserve them by his Grace, and
keep off temptation, would soon be a Gain, or Achitophel; Yea, a Devil
incarnate.

Oh then! think with your selyes, if the Grace of God did not keep off such a
sin, such a lost, such a temptation, how had it swallowed us up, as the Whale
did Jonah.

4. By way of Corroboration; Those that walk in obedience with God, doing what
they know, the Lord is still present with them, essisting them by his Grace,
and strengthening them in all their weaknesses. Whence ^t i^, that a Christian
is able to do duty, to resist temptations and to scorn, as well the smiles as
the frowns of a deceitful world; whether seeking by promises, to draw into sin,
or by threatenings, to deter from duty, but through the Presence of God
strengthening him Phil. 4.13.

Paul has, as one observes, a kind of Omnipotency, and to him, with every good
Christian, all things are possible because possible to the Grace of God, who is
with them.

The strength of a Christian lies not in himself, but in God assisting him: the
Bird may as well fly without wi^gs, as he resist a temptation, perform duty
acceptably, mortify any lust, or do any thing prevailing without the Presence
of God strengthening.

As Sampson, while God kept him, and was present with him, no Rhilistine was
too strong for him: So, while God is present with us, assisting us by his
Grace, we cannot fall, and when he keeps us not, we cannot stand.

5. By way of Protection; Such as do what they have heard, and learned, and
received, with them God is present, not only as (...) Sun for Direction, but
also as a Shield for Protection, Not only to do them good, but also to defend
them from evil, Psalm. 84.11. Pharaoh King of Egypt followed Israel, but he and
his mighty men were drowned, and Israel escaped, for the Lord was with Israel.
Saul hunteth David as a Partridge upon the mountains, but Saul, perishes, and
David is made a King; For the Lord was with David. Haman hates Mordecai,
resolving to have him hanged high enough, because he would not stoop low
enough: But Haman himself is hanged, and Mordecai is advanced, for God is with
Mordecai.

And thus if we study to walk with God, he will give us protection, and be
present with us, to deliver us out of all our troubles. For the Lord, whom we
serve, is stronger than All, and if he be present with us, who can be against
us? Romans 8.31.

Nemo nos loedit, nisi qui Deum vincit. He only who can overcome God, can bring
evil upon those that walk in Ocedience with him; neither is any man delivered
from evil, but through Gods protecting him.

When therefore, we see one disgraced, another slain; One diseased, another cut
off by the stroke of Death, One lose his Estate, another his Liberty, and we
out selves delivered from the like Calamities, how can we choose but ascribe it
to Gods goodness, protecting us therefrom?

6. By way of Communication; The wicked are estranged from God, but the
Righteous have access into his Presence, and in all the methods thereof he lets
out himself, communicating of his Grace and Goodness to them. Such open to him,
and therefore He comes in to sup with them, that they may sup with him. Rev.
3.20 Such are often drawing nigh to him in Duty, he therefore draws nigh to
them in a way of Mercy, and graciou; Communication, Jam. 4.

If they meditate, they meet with God, and what a blessed Contemplation is
that? If they hear his Word, they meet with God, and what a joyful hour must
that be? If they receive the Sacrament, there also they meet with God in
Christ, and what a soul solacing Feast is that? If they how their souls in
Prayer, there they meet with God; And oh! what an heaven upon earth is this?

Oh! Little do any of you (that are yet disobedient) know what secret Debates,
what spiritual Incomes, what Heavenly Illapses, and soul ravishing
contentments, Gods people find in Communion with him! They study obedience with
him, and therefore he is graciously present with them, communicating himself to
their souls in every Ordinance: So that those who are willing and obedient,
they eat the fat of Ordinances; they have other j^yes, other pleasures, other
delights to be feeding upon, and solacing their souls withal, in the duties of
Gods Worship, than what the world is aware of.

Such are satisfied with the fatness of Gods House, they sit down under his
Shadow, with great delight, they find his Fruit sweet to their taste, and one
days communion with the Lord, it is better to their souls, than a thousand
elsewhere.

7. By way of Occultation: God is an abiding place for his people, their Refuge
and Fortress in times of trouble; Those that keep close to God, to do what be
loves, the Lord will keep close to them to hide them from what they fear. In
the time of trouble, says David, He shall hide me in his Pavillion: In the
secret of his Tabernacle shall he hide me, Psalm. 32.7.

God has secret Chambers of Providence wherein to hide his people in time of
danger and public calamities.

Isa. 26.20, 21. Come my people, says the Lord, enter thou into thy Chambers,
and shut thy Doors about thee; Hide thy self as it were for a little moment,
until the indignation be ever-past. When danger pursues Gods people, he teaches
them to run to himself, as a most inviolable Sanctuary. The Name of the Lord,
says the wise man, is a strong Tower, the Righteous runs to it, and is
safe, Prove be 18.10.

A Child of God never dwells so securely, as when God himself hides him under
the Ark, in the most secret place of his own Sanctuary. For the nearer to God,
the farther from danger.

8. And Lastly, By way of Supportation. Though God be not always so present
with his people, as to hide them from suffering, yet he will always be present,
to support them under their sufferings, how many and grievous soever. As,
without Gods leave, no Affliction can overtake us, so when it does overtake us,
God will not leave us: But if we walk in obedience with him, the Lord will also
be present with us, to support us under all our pressures, Isa 47, 10. Fear
not, for I am with thee, be not dismayed, for I am thy God: I will strengthen
thee, yea, I will help thee, yea, I will uphold thee, with the right hand of my
Righteousness. Here, you have God engaging his Almighty Power, to that if that
be sufficient, he will be sure to bear you up under all your burdens.

Though God will not always deliver his people out of trouble, yet he will
still be present with them, supporting them, that they may not despond, not
sink under the burden, Isa. 43.2 When thou passest through the waters. I will
be with thee, and through the Rivers, they shall not overthrow thee: When thou
walk through the fire thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame
kindle upon thee.

If at any time an ungrateful World cast Gods people into the waters of great
tribulation: yet the Lord will be present with them bearing them up (as it
were) by the chin, that they may not sink, nor be utterly overwhelmed therein.

Secondly, Thus I have showed you how God is present with those that live up to
their knowledge: As an Altar of Perfume, causing them to find acceptance, both
in their persons and performances with himself As the Sun which gives them
light in darkness, as a wall of fire which defends them in the assaults of all
their Enemies; as a fountain of living water; communicating streams to refresh
them, when all their Vessels, like Hagars, prove empty bottles; as an Ack to
hide them in from the deluge of all distresses; and as a living Rock,
sustaining them under all their pressures or burdens, how many or great soever.
Come we now therefore, to give you the Reasons, why God will vouchsafe to be
graciously present with them, who walk in obedience with him, according to what
they have heard, received, and learned, whether by precept or example.

1. Because those that are present with God in a way of obedience, the Lord is
engaged by promise, to be graciously present with them, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. Hearye
me, Asa, and all Judah, and Benjamin, the Lord is with you, whilst you are with
him. Those that are present with God in a way of Duty, he has here promised to
be present with them in a way of Grace and Mercy.

It Is our Duty indeed, to keep close to God, and to walk in obedience with him,
though after all he should reject us, and give us no reward: But, for but
better encouragement, God sweetens his Commands with promises, tying our Work
and our Wages, our Duty and Reward together.

So, that present with God in a way of obedience, according to the condition,
he cannot but be graciously present with us, according to the mind and true
intent of the promise: For the Lord is not a man that he should lie, nor the
Son of man, that he should repent, Numb. 23.19.

2. Because, such as walk in obedience with God, do engage him to be present
with them, by depending fiducially upon him. Trust, is a kind of engagement
when there is no promise: but what is it to trust upon God, who has made so
many promises of being present with those that keep close to him.

Common ingenuity will teach us to stand by those that put confidence in us;
And will not the goodness of God much more incline him to be graciously present
with his own people, who place their whole trust and affiance to him?

3. Because such stand related to God, and are become his people. The Lord has
set apart the Godly for himself; and that propriety he has in them, engages
Him to be graciously present with them, Psalm. 4.3.

Though there were nothing to move him to make such his people, before he did;
yet there is something that may engage him never to forsake, but to be
graciously present with them, now he has made them his people; and that is,
his propriety in them, because they are his people.

Has he chosen us, and will he again reprobate us? Has he set us apart for
himself, and will he cast us off? Has he purchased us, and will he reject his
own purchase? Has he married us to himself, and will he not cohabit with us,
but instead thereof, be divorced from us, notwithstanding he has told us, he
hates putting away? Mal. 2.16. Has he, in a word, of his own good pleasure,
made us his people, and will he repent of his choice, with drawing from us,
instead of being graciously present with us? 1 Samuel 12 27.

And lastly, Because God is concerned in point of Honor to be graciously
present with them; Such stand by God asserting his interest and Glory in the
world; And is he not then concerned, in point of Honor to st and by them?

To practice what we have heard, and received, and learned of God, is to run
the hazard of reproach, disgrace, and persecution in the world: Now all this
being done upon Gods account, and in obedience to him, How can it stand with
his Honor, to stand aloof, and not to be graciously present with us in the
midst of so many dangers? Thirdly, Having thus given you the Proof, let us now
come to the Improvement of the Doctrine by way of Use and Application.

First, By way of Information; we may hence take notice of these ensuing
Particulars.

1. How sad and deplorable their condition is, who having heard, learned, and
received the things of God, are not careful to do accordingly. You that have
heard, you that have been taught how you ought to walk, and yet practice not
what you have learned, most dreadful, and lamentable is your condition? For God
is not graciously pre^ent with thee, but departed from thee. What though thou
have R^ches with thee, and Honors with thee, and Friends with thee; If God be
not with thee, but sets himself as an Enemy against thee; Can thy Riches thy
Honors, and thy Friends profit thee in the day of his wrath? Can they keep off
the stroke of his Indignation? Can they make ^h^e happy, who through the want
of Gods gracious presence, are completely miserable?

Oh! that all you who are still disobedient, living contrary to the many
precious Truths and wholesome Instructions which you have heard, received and
learned, had but your eyes open to behold to what certain, great, and
unconceivable misery you are every moment for want of Gods gracious presence,
obnoxious!

Who, alas, can stand by you, if God be not with you? Who is there that can
give you comfort, if He frown upon you? Or, who can relieve your Souls, when
assaulted by men, tempted by Devils, and grievously tormented by the estuations
of your own Consciences, if God depart from you? the happiness of man consists
in Communion with God, and all those are completely miserable, with whom the
Lord is not present.

2. The great safety* and blessed security of all those that endeavor to walk
according to what thty have heard, and learned, and received of the Lord. Not
to do as the most do, not to run with the men of the world into the same excess
of Riot, but to walk circumspectly, endeavoring to answer our knowledge with
suitable practice, this does usually enrage the world against us; However, if
God be with us, what can all the world do against us? Romans 8.13.

Such walk with God in a way of Duty; Whatever therefore the world and ungodly
men may attempt to the contrary, yet Gods presence with them therein, will make
it a way of safety.

However, then, some timorated Spirits may think by dissembling conscience and
giving way to sinful compliances to secure themselves; Yet we may hence see,
that there is no such security as in walking with God in a way of Duty.

Communion with God in a way of Duty, is a sure Sanctuary of Refuge; As no
stranger can enter into it, so Gods people have most while they dwell in it.
Psalm. 27.5.

By dissembling Conscience, and waving Duty, we run our selves upon a thousand
dangers: But by diligence in the ways of God, and being faithful in all the
duties of his worship, we betake our selves to the Name of the Lord, in which,
as a strong Tower, we are sure to find safety Prove. 18.10.

3. The desperate folly, and fool-hardiness of all such as set themselves
against Gods people, opposing them in the practice of what they have heard, and
learned, and received of the Lord. It Is usual with the World, then to trample
upon the Righteous, when surrounded with Afflictions; they will grieve where
God wounds, they will persecute where God smites: But wherever the condition
of Gods people is, yet the Lord is still present with them; neither can the
ungodly of the World oppose them in well-doing, but they enter a quarrel with
God himself.

Why then do you pride your selves against those, like Moab, with whom God is
present? And, why do you strive to abase those whom God will exalt? Jer. 48.26,
27. Are you stronger than the mighty God of Jacob? And can you be present to
hurt those, with whom God is present to protect and save?

Oh, how great is the folly of wicked men, whom nothing can r^tl^im from
prosecuting their bloody thoughts against the righteous, nor withhold from
opposing them in the practice of what they have learned! Do they know of a
certainty that God is with the righteous, that no weapon formed against them
shall prosper, and that the Lord, by his presence, will secure them against all
their Enemies? Why then should they still be kicking against the pricks.

4. What reason all those have to sit down satisfied with their portion, who
make it their care to practice what they have heard, and learned, and received
of the Lord. Though possibly they have neither Riches nor Honors, nor Friends
in the World with them; yet they have God with them, as an inexhaustible
treasure, to supply all their wants, as a Crown of glory upon their heads, and
as an everlasting Friend, who will never fail them, Heb. 13.5,

What then though a Christian want other things, is it not enough, that God,
over all, blessed for ever, is still graciously present with him, and become
his portion? Shall he inflict himself for want of Starlight, who has the Sun
in its full strength shining upon him, or be disconsolate for the loss of some
broken Cistern, who may go at his pleasure to the Fountainhead, where waters
are sweetest?

Oh, how unsuitably were it for you that live up to your knowledge,
endeavoring to practice what you have learned, to grow despondent and repining
for want of creature comforts, when God, your Creator, is always present with
you, to comfort and solace your souls in every condition!

Had you nothing but God's gracious presence, and an interest in him for your
portion; yet this were as much as happiness comes to, and sufficient to make
you everlastingly blessed. For happy is that People, whose God is the Lord.
Psalm. 144 15.

S^condly, By way of Exhortation; Let me now prevail with you all, those things
which you have heard, and learned, and received, to do them; Oh! walk in
obedience with God, would you ever enjoy his gracious presence.

Many precious truths have been preached among you; many heavenly Doctrins have
been set before you, many wholesome lessons and faithful Admonitions have been
given you; let me now therefore (being, for ought I know, as a Star, setting
and rising no more in this Horizon, like a Lamp going out, and shining no more
in this your house of Sacred meeting, and as a dying man, whose last breath is
now expiring) persuade you for your own good, to remember what you have heard,
to hold fast what you have received, and to practice what you have learned.

Oh! let this be the main of your care, that as the Truth, as it is in Jesus,
has been delivered to you; so you may be delivered up to it, expressing the
soundness of your knowledge, by the holiness of your lives and conversations.

Oh! this, my Brethren, is the one thing necessary; you may hear much, and yet
be strangers to God; you may learn much, and yet never come nigh God; you may
receive many wholesome instructions at his hands, and yet at last be punished
with everlasting destruction from his presence; but now, if you practice what
you hear, if you live up to what you have learned, and transer be into your
lives those wholesome instructions you receive from God he will never forsake
you, but will always be graciously present with you. But that I may not leave
you half persuaded, give me leave to acquaint you with the excellency of God's
gracious Presence, in these following particulars.

1. Consider, Such is the presence of God with those that walk in obedience
with him, that it will make them in all things to thrive and prosper. The Ark
received into Obed-Edom'^ house caused all that he had to prosper: So the Lord
received by obedience into the heart, and graciously present there, makes the
whole man prosperous. He makes him prosper in the inward man, and he also makes
him prosper in the outward man. Where God is graciously present, there can
nothing be wanting, neither for soul, nor for body; but the man is successful,
and prospers in all his undertakings, Psalm. 1.

Without God's gracious presence we can profit by nothing; without this, health
is not profitable, nor riches profitable, nor Ordinances profitable; the
choicest means of Grace, without God's pres^nce, are but as breasts without
milk, as bottles without water; nay, they are not only a dead letter, but the
savor of death; without God^s presence they will damn us; many go loaded to
Hell with Ordinances. But, etc.

2. Consider, Such is the presence of God with those that walk in obedience
with him, that it transforms them into his own likeness, making them holy as he
is holy. As the Sun will change the color of those that are much in it; so a
man cannot be near to God, but this will make him in purity and holiness like
God.

And do you not desire to have such a beauty put upon you, and thus to be
adorned with the Robes of Righteousness? Why, do but strive to walk in
obedience with God, and he also will be graciously present with you, making you
of Briars and Thorns, Lillies and Roses, of Lions, Lambs; of deformed, he will
make you comely; and of filthy, he will make you clean, adorning your souls
with the Jewels of Holiness, Col. 1.13.

Without the presence of an holy God, you can never be holy; and without
holiness you can never see the Lord with comfort, Heb. 12.14. It Is only Grace
that leads to glory. For, no holiness here, no happiness hereafter.

3 Consider, Such is the presence of God with those that walk in obedience with
him, that it can quiet their souls, turning every storm that arises, into a
blessed calm.

When the heart is full of doubts and distresses, accused by the Law, pursued
by the Adversary, and condemned by it self; then does God by his gracious
presence still the raging of the sea, give quiet to conscience, and lay the
storm.

Nothing but the breast will quiet the child; so nothing but the breasts of
God's gracious presence can quiet a distressed soul, Rom 5.1.

Would you therefore be at peace, and have quiet in your own consciences? would
you have a sweet calm, and a sabbath of rest from all your spiritual agonies?
Walk then in obedience with God, endeavoring to practice what you know, that
he by his presence may work your desire.

4. Consider, Such is the presence of God with all that obey him according to
what they have heard, and learned, and received, that nothing can intercept it,
nor withhold it from them.

If they go up to Heaven in prosperity, God is there, making all their
enjoyments conduce to their everlasting advantage; if they be forced to make
their bed in hell and lie down in sorrow, God also is there, turning their
sorrow into joy; if they be glad to take the wings of the morning* and to fly
for their lives into the uttermost parts of the earth, God is also there,
bringing them back at length out of Egypt, the Land of their Captivity, into
Canaan.

Oh then, if any thing can make you obedient; let the hope of God's gracious
presence prevail with you to be so; your Honors, your Riches, your Friends, and
all your creature comforts may be easily withheld; these are but as the shining
of the Sun, which every discontented cloud may intercept: But if you walk in
obedience with God, there is nothing can intercept his presence; nor hinder you
from having communion with him. Are you banished from your own habitations, and
forced to sojourn as strangers in a strange Land? There will the Lord be with
you, as with Jacob at Padan-Aram, Genesis 28.15.

Are you shut up in close prison, and lie under restraint, that your Friend^
may not visit you? There will God also be present with you, as with Paul and
Silas, compassing you about with songs of deliverance, Act. 16.25.

Are you (in a word) as men appointed unto death, cast into an hot fiery
Furnace? There likewise will the Lord be present with you, as with Shadrach,
Meshech, and Ahedneg^, not suffering the flames to kindle upon you, Dan. 3.27.

5. Consider, Such is the presence of God with those that obey him according to
what they have heard, and learned, and received, that it makes them rejoice
with joy unspeakable, and full of glory, 1. Pet. 1.8.

Many traduce Religion as a thing that makes men melancholic; but his estate
is of all men's most joyful, who walking in obedience with God, does enjoy his
presence; for where can the soul find those comforts which do fill it with
gladness, and crown it with delight, but in God? His presence is a Christians
music and Festival, the Nectar and Ambrosia whereon he delights to feed.

You may sooner taste honey, than tell how sweet it is; so you may taste what
joy and gladness God's presence puts into the soul, but can never express it*
Would you then have your souls overflowing with gladness? Would you have them
rejoice with joy unspeakable* and full of glory? Then walk in obedience with
God, and his presence will do it.

6. Consider, Such is the presence of God with all that obey him according to
what they have heard, and learned, and received, that it sweetens every Cross,
and makes them not only rejoice, but to rejoice in tribulation, Romans 5.3.
Amaritudines mundi dulces reddit. The Wine of God's presence can sweeten the
bitter Waters of Marah. Let sickness come, let reproach come, let persecution
come, yea, let death it self come, yet the sense of God's gracious presence
takes away the sting out of all these.

Such is the power of God's gracious presence, that it takes away the
bitterness of afflictions from all that walk in obedience with him, gives them
honey out of the beily of Lions meat out of the Eater, and sweet out of sour.

If then you desire to see light in darkness, to have your Prison turned into a
Paradise, and the flames of Martyrdom into a bed of Spices; See then that you
walk in obedience with God according to what you have heard, and learned, and
received.

Prosperity without God's presence is full of trouble; but trouble with the
presence of God is full of comfort.

7. Consider, Such is the presence of God with those that obey him according to
what they have heard, and learned, and received, that it does not only rejoice
their souls, but gives them full satisfaction.

The Sun satisfies the eye with light, the Fountain satisfies the thirsty
with water; so God satisfies (by his gracious presence) all that walk in
obedience with him.

Outward comforts do sooner cloy than cheer; and sooner weary than fill; they
can no more satisfy the heart, than a Triangle can fill a Circle: But when
once God comes and vouchsafes his gracious presence, now the soul is at rest,
now it is come to its center, and with Jacob it can say, I have enough. For with
whom God is graciously present, to all them he is an all-sufficient portion.

8. Consider, The presence of God with all those that obey him in what they
have heard, and learned, and received, is such as shall endure for ever. Your
Riches, your Comforts, your Friends may be with you to day, and be gone to
morrow; but with whom God is once graciously present, to them he continues the
presence of his grace, his love and his favor for ever.

God may (indeed) withdraw the light of his countenance for a time; but
totally, and for ever, he will never desert those that walk in obedience with
him.

All things without God are full of vanity and change; only the Lord will
never utterly absent himself from us, if once he be graciously present with us:
He is a faithful Friend, loving at all times; his favor is a Sun that knows no
setting: and his presence a Well of comfort, springing up to eternal Life, John
4.14 and 13.1.

So that if you regard a Treasure that shall never be taken from you, that
favor which shall never end in frowns, make sure of God's gracious presence,
by walking in obedience with him, according to what you have heard, and
learned, and received from him.

9 Consider, Such is the presence of God with those that walk in obedience with
him, that it is every way suitable and correspondent to their souls necessities.

What ever the soul can desire, what ever it stands in need of, may be found in
God's gracious presence; this is beauty to adorn; this is gold to enrich; this
is balm to heal; this is bread to strengthen; this is wine to comfort and make
glad the soul in the time of heaviness.

Are we in danger? this is a shield: Are we disconsolate? this is a Sun: If in
a word) we be pursued by any calamity, this is like the munition of Rocks, an
hiding place against the storm, and a Tower wherein we may find safety.

If then God's gracious presence be thus proper to our wants, and so suitable
to all our necessities, how ought we to labor for it, by walking in obedience
with him, according to what we have heard, and learned and received from him.

10. And lastly, Such is the presence of God with those that obey him,
according to what they have heard, and learned, and received; that it fit them
for everlasting Communion with him in Glory.

God's people they go from Communion to Communion; from Communion with God in a
state of grace, to Communion with God in a state of glory. For with whomsoever
God is graciously present here, they shall hereafter enjoy his blissful,
soul-ravishing, and beatifical presence to all Eternity.

If then you desire to be with the Lord for ever, where you shall see his
glory, enjoy his presence, and be satisfied with pleasures at his tight hand
for evermore; then see that you walk in obedience before him. For those only
shall enjoy God's presence in a state of glory, with whom he is now present in
a state of grace. There is no commencing Saints, either Militant on Earth, or
Triumphant in Heaven per Saltum: If we draw not nigh to God in a way of
obedience here, we must hereafter be punished with everlasting destruction from
his presence, and from the glory of his Power.

Thus by Divine assistance I have showed you the excellency of Gods presence,
with all such as obey him according to what they have heard, and learned, and
received from him: Now then, do not deprive your selves of so glorious a
privilege, but see that henceforth you walk in obedience with God, giving
diligence to practice those things you have learned.

But that you may not at length be disappointed, neither finding God graciously
present with you here, nor enjoying his presence in glory hereafter; be sure
that in doing what you have heard, learned and received, you observe these
following directions.

1. Be sure that of all which you have heard, and learned and received, tither
of me or of any other, you practice that only which you find to be of God, and
according to the unerring Rule of his Word.

We have one Heavenly King, and must therefore observe one Law; we have one
God, and must Worship by one Rule; We have one Shepherd, and must be commanded
by one Voice: We have (in a word) one Head, and must follow upon that account
one direction.

All that builded Noah's Ark, builded by one pattern; so all that intend to
build themselves an Heavenly and Spiritual House to GOD, must build by one
Rule. All Israel traveled to the Land of Canaan by the light of one fiery
Pillar: So all that will travel to the Heavenly Canaan of God's gracious
presence, must make his Word a light to their feet, and a lanthorn to their
paths. All the passengers in a Ship sail by one Compass; so all that will fteer
a right course to the Haven of Eternal Rest, must keep close to the unerring
Rule of Gods Word, as their only Compass, Phil. 3.16.

For it is Gods Prerogative to prescribe, and man's duty to conform; our service
is no service, not will God be present with us in any thing that we do, farther
then we have heard, and learned, and received it from him, Mat. 15.9.

Let then every man amongst you that desires Gods presence, either in grace
here, or in glory hereafter, be like those noble Bereans, examining the ground
of their Faith, and obedience. Oh, do not offer to God a sacrifice without
eyes; your Religion must be Scripture-Religion, and all your obedience
commanded therein, would you ever be accepted of God in what you do.

2. Be sure that what ever you have heard, received and learned, you do it
cordially without dissembling.

The obedience of the life without, when integrity of heart, and the life of
grace is wanting within, finds no acceptance with God, nor will he ever be
graciously present with those who only draw nigh unto him by an external
conformity.

Obedience without the heart, and to practice what we have heard, and learned,
and received, but not in sincerity, will bring neither glory to God, nor
comfort to us.

Do not then dissemble any longer with the God of Heaven: Oh be not industrious
to plot your own death, and through your hypocrisy go to Hell in the way of
duty; but what ever you have heard, what ever you have learned, what ever you
have received, be sure that you do it heartily as unto God.

3. Be sure that what ever you have heard, and learned, and received, you do it
univerfally, without any reservation.

True obedience is universal; doing many things, and neglecting others, will
not save; one leak in the ship of thy Soul, is enough to sink it in eternal
perdition, Psalm. 119.

The hypocrite will walk in some of Gods Statutes; but with David you must have
respect to all his Commandments, if you ever desire the Lord to be present with
you as he was with David.

Every duty (therefore) commanded, be sure that you do it; and every sin
forbidden, be sure that you shun it as Hell it self.

Many wholesome Doctrines have been taught, and many soul-saving Truths have been
made known among you; well, of all that you ever heard, received and learned,
let nothing fall to the ground, but bring all into practice, would you ever
enjoy Gods gracious presence.

4. And lastly, Of all that you have heard, and learned, and received from God,
be sure that you do it constantly, without going over. The Lord is with you
(says the Prophet, speaking to Asa and all Juda) while ye are with him; if ye
seek him, he will be found of you, but if you forsake him, he will also forsake
you, 2 Chronicles. 15.2.

If we desire that God should always be present with us in a way of Mercy, we
must still strive to be present with him in a way of duty; and if we would not
have God cast us off, and forsake us in the end, we must be careful not to
forsake him, but to hold on with God in a way of obedience to the end.

He that shall endure to the end (says Christ) the same shall be saved, Matthew.
24.13. As God condemns no man before he sins, so neither will he crown any man
before he overcomes. We must Conquer, before we can Triumph; win the garland
before we can wear it, and obtain the Crown of Eternal Communion with God in
glory, by patient continuance in well-doing, Romans 2.8.

Let me then, once for all (as a lover of your souls) beseech you what ever you
have heard, what ever you have learned, whatever you have received from the
Lord, that you practice it, and that to the end. Oh remember what you have
heard, give diligence to practice what you have learned, and whatever you have
received from the Lord, whether concerning principles of Faith, or precepts of
Life, be sure that you hold it fast, that no man take your Crown, Rev. 3.3.

Knowledge without an answerable practice, will not avail you; and the practice
of what you know, without perseverance therein to the end, will but aggravate
your condemnation, and serve to sink you the deeper in the pit of eternal
perdition, 2 Pet. 2.21.

Take heed therefore that you be not carried away with the error of the wicked;
let no thought arise within you of departing from the living God, but press on
toward the Mark, hold fast your Integrity, persevere in obedience to God,
according to what you have heard, and learned, and received from the Lord, and
see that you break through all discouragements for communion with him.

In God you have a living Spring when all your bottles are empty; in him you
have a sure Sanctuary, when all your Refuges and hiding-places in the World are
laid level with the ground; in him you have a glorious Sun, when all the
blazing stars of your creature comforts are extinguished, and disappear: In him
(to be short) you shall find everlasting friendship, when all your friends
according to the flesh, are put to perpetual silence in the grave.

Oh then, be careful that you cleave to this God, that you repose your selves
wholly upon him, and that you constantly (without giving over) walk in
obedience with him, according to what you have heard, and learned, and
received; that so enjoying God's gracious presence here in a state of grace,
you may hereafter enjoy the presential, soul-satisfying, and open vision of
himself in a state of glory.

Mr. WADSWORTHS Farewel-Sermon. Late Preacher at NEWINGTON-BVTTS.
Revel. 2.5. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, do the
first works: or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy
Candlestick out of his place, except thou repent.
THese Words, with the foregoing verses, I have insisted largely upon already.
And in the Words I told you, there is,

First of all, A severe threatening in these words, I will come unto thee
quickly, and I will remove thy Candlestick out of his place.

I have told you what is meant by Candlestick. A Candlestick I told you
signifies the Church of God, or a Company, or a Society of people met together
to worship God in Spirit and in Truth. As if he should say, I will smite thy
Shepherds, and scatter thy Flocks; I will take away mighty Lights, and I will
leave thee in Egyptian darkness; I will cut off my Ordinances, which are my
golden Pipes to convey the Water of Life unto you.

But you will say, Why is the Lord so angry with Ephesus?

It is, Because of the Churches sins; It is, because thou have not loved me as
once thou did. Want of love to Christ is a sin that deserves to be
unchurched; that deserves that God should take away your Ministers: For, what
is our preaching for, but to gain your Loves to Christ, and to hate the Devil?

Secondly, In the second place, I showed you what the works of this Church of
Ephesus were; They had been very laborious in the external Principles of
Religion, in promoting the Salvation of Souls; but yet notwithstanding they had
gone so far, yet they had not done what they did out of a right Principle, that
is, out of pure Love to Christ; this makes the Lord so angry, that he
threatens to unchurch them.

Well, but is there no remedy to prevent this heavy Judgment? He that holds
forth the Rod tells you a Remedy. As if he should say, Oh you Ephesians, if you
will love me better, and if you will be more painful in the great Work of your
Salvation, if you will but repent of your sins, I will not bring those heavy
Judgments upon you, which I threatened to bring upon you.

I have told you the greatness of the sins that his Church was guilty of. I
have likewise showed you what a great Curse it is for the Lord to take away the
Gospel from a Nation; I told you that it is a big-bellied Curse; it is a curse
that has a great many other curse embowelled up in it.

I told you when the Gospel goes, God goes; and when God goes, Christ goes; and
when Christ goes, the ministering Angels of the Covenant go, the Candlestick
goes, and the Lights they go along with it.

What then follows, when God goes? Then the Devil he comes, yea, legions of
Devils come; and then there follows the Plague, Pestilence, Famine, Sword, and
all other manner of evils. God does not go alone, neither does God remove his
Candlestick alone. I do not tell you that God threatens you to pull down all
your Lights, I would not terrify you by telling you that God is a departing
from you, when he puts out some of your Lights: But yet I must needs tell you,
that when God does deprive you of so many hundreds, of as Pious, and as
Laborious, and as Learned (some of them) as any are in the Vineyard; I say,
when God deals thus by you, I cannot think that it is in mercy to you, but in
judgment.

The Church of England is a great People, and there are many poor souls in it,
that are as Firebrarnds in the fire, that have great need to be plucked out; and
as there are, blessed be God, many eminent Ministers at this day in England, to
snatch such poor souls, as fire brands out of the fire; Yet I say, that where
there is one, we have need of ten.

But though our disease is dangerous, yet it is not desperate: there is one way
for us to prevent those heavy judgments that the Lord does threaten to inflict
upon us; and that is by Repentance; by a serious Repenting of the sins past of
our lives, and to amend what has been amiss in us.

I shall now come to make some Application of what I have formerly delivered
unto you.

Use 1.

In the first place, Is this a Truth, That Repentance is the only way and means
to prevent the Judgments of God, that are threatened against a People by God
for sin. Then first of all, I would have you to observe the cursed nature of
this cursed thing, called sin: Sin must be repented of, or it will destroy us,
it will destroy our bodies, it will destroy our souls, it will destroy our
Kingdom: this is the cursed nature of this thing called sin.

My beloved, I think it is one of the hardest things that is, to understand the
exceeding sinfulness of sin, to understand that deadly Poison that is in it; it
is for want of the true knowledge of it, that causes that deadness of heart
that you so much groin under. Thus you see that sin (that thing which we so
much slight) what a terrible thing it is. Alas, what think many of us of a vain
word, or an idle thought, or swearing an Oath: what a trifling thing it is to
neglect Prayer.

But let me ask you, that think sin to be so slight a matter, What is the
reason that God is so angry that he made man? What is the reason that many a
sinful Church, has made God repent that ever he made them a Church? I say
therefore* consider the exceeding venom that there is in sin: Oh take heed of
sin, it is a Child that although it be conceived in joy, yet it shall bring
forth sorrow in the end. Cursed be the day that ever sin was born into the
world. Sin, it is so vile a thing, that it makes God for to cry out at it, and
Jesus Christ for to cry out at it, and makes them to say, they will be gone: If
you continue in your sins, I will take away my Ministers, and leave you in
darkness.

Tush, say you, what is sin? I say, it is the venom and poison of our natures,
it is that which is, as the hand to unsheath the sword, and to thrust it into
our own bowels. Sin, it is as a millstone that is tied about our necks, that
will pull us both soul and body into the bottom of that Sea of the wrath of
God, from whence there will be no recovery; sin is a Plague that will follow
our posterity after we are gone out of this world; sin, it is a worm upon the
Tree of life, that eats up the fruit of it; sin it is that, which makes the
Lord to take away the Gospel from amongst us; sin it is a devilish charm within
us, that drives away God, and Christ, and the Gospel from amongst us: This is
the evil of that cursed thing called sin. Oh, do not you make a liitle matter
of it: do not you say, when you have been drunk, what harm is there that I have
drunk a cup too much? do not say, what harm is there in my telling a lie, or
swearing an oath? Oh my beloved, what a sad thing is this sin, that it should
cause God for to throw Angels out of Heaven into Hell! Pride cast Angels into
Hell; take heed it does not so by you. Sin made God to destroy all the old
world; sin made God to repent that he had made the world; sin made God for to
burn Sodom and Gomorah; sin made God for to threaten Ephesus to remove hi^
candlestick from among them.

Therefore I say, do not think sin to be a small matter; make Conscience of the
least of sins; believe God, that it is a vile thing; consider with thy self
what a vain labor this labor of sin is; it is a vain troublesome work; when
you commit it, you must resolve for to die the death, or to undo it again. Sin,
it may well be called the Labor in vain. When thou art a doing any thing that
is evil, thou must repent of it, or else it will undo thee. Sin is a long thread
of the sinners spinning, that when he has spun it out he must sit down in
sorrow, and labor to undo his work again.

While thou art a sinning, I can compare it to nothing better, than to the
journey that Joseph and Mary made to Jerusalem, and left Jesus Christ behind
them.

My beloved, it is a sad journeying without Christ in your company: when you go
on in sin, you must return again, or else you will lose your souls. This I say
is the labor in Vain of sinners, they are doing a work that they must undo
again; they are running a race that they must run back again, or else it will
undo them You are gathering up of sticks that will help to burn you; you are
whetting a knife that must cut your own throats; you are spinning a thread that
must hang you.

Oh my beloved, little do you think that you are doing this, when you are
sinning! Do not you say therefore, that sin is a little matter, for God will
damn thee soul and body for it: he that will damn thee for lying, he that will
damn thee for neglect of praying, he does think that these sins are great
matters: Will you lay these things to heart? I shall speak but a few words
more, and I shall have done, and God knows whether ever I shall speak to you
any more.

I say, take heed of sin, and do not you go away with light thoughts of it.

Use 2.

Is Repentance the only way and means for to prevent the Judgments of God,
which are threatened by God for sin? Then from hence you may learn the
excellency and the usefulness of that Grace of Repentance.

Oh what an omnipotent grace is this? it is a grace that can do any thing with
God* Why, what can this grace do? what can it not do? This grace of Repentance
it can redeem your morgaged blessings, it can repossess you of those blessings
that you have foolishly played away Repentance can make God to stay here in our
Kingdom when he is a departing. Repentance, it is a heartbreaking for sin, and
it br^aks the heart of God likewise; when thy heart yearns for sin, his heart
yearns toward thee; as thou may see in the yearnings of God's bowels
toward Ephraim, Jer. 31.18, 19, 20. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning
himself thus, Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised, as a bullock
unaccustomed to the yoke; Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, for thou art the
Lord my God. Surely after I was turned, I repented: and after I was instructed,
I smote upon my thigh: I was ashamed yea even confounded, because I did bear
the reproach of my youth. Is Ephraim my dear so^? is he a pleasant child? for
since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him still: therefore my
bowels are troubled for him; I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord.

Ephraim, that was a Tribe, one of the Tribes of Israel you hear, has the
voice of a penitent sinner; he smites upon his thigh, which is a sign of great
anguish of spirit; here you have the penitent, here you have the weeping
shame-fac'd sinner: But in the verse following, you have God standing and
looking on; says God, Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? for
since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him still: therefore my
bowels within me are troubled for him; I will surely have mercy upon him.

If thy heart breaks, thou see that God's heart will turn toward thee. Oh
the excellency of Repentance, that does so much prevail with the God of heaven!
It is these dews and heavenly showers that must revive your almost dying
withering blessings. Repentance, it is that holy Oil that must recover our
Lamps that are going out: Oh the excellency of Repentance!

From hence you may gather, what an excellent privilege a penitent heart has
with God: It is the mourning lamenting sinner that is like to do England good;
these heard hearted sinners, they cannot recover an almost lost Gospel, they
cannot fetch God again; but a penitent heart can. My beloved, how can you live
without such a Grace? your Souls want it, your Families want it, three Kingdoms
want it; the great want in England is broken-heartedness,

Use 3.

Is Repentance the only way to prevent the Judgments of God, Then you may from
hence gather, That when God either has his Plugues upon a people, or continues
in threatening his Judgment upon a People, it is a sign that those people are
very guilty of impenitency, and that this people have not yet repented of their
sins.

If God threatens thee, O England, Scotland, and Ireland; If God threaten thee
to give thee up to hardness of heart, and blindness of mind (does God do it at
this day?) then I say, O England, Scotland, and Ireland, you are impenitent
people at this day. If you see a Kingdom groaning under the Judgments of God,
it is a sign that they have not made use of those remedies that would have
cured them.

This is my Charge against England, we have been a stiff necked People.

Oh London, London, how long shall God wait on you before you repent? how often
has God threatened to remove the Gospel from among you? how often has God
visited you with great and grievous Sicknesses? how many thousands have been
killed by the Sword? how many Widows and Fatherless Children have there been
left desolate? God has visited you this year with Mercy, and yet you repent
not. Oh my beloved, is not this sad? If God come to punish you after you have
received so many mercies from him, take heed that God does not rid his hands of
you.

Why fit you as if you had no hand in these things, you careless Masters, that
never pray in your Families, nor never teach your Families to pray? It is for
your sins that God does threaten to remove the Gospel, and to take away his
Ministers. Will you repent of your sins? If you do not, sad will be your ends:
God m^ cut you off from the face of the Earth, and raise up unto himself a
generation out of your loins, that may serve him better than ever you have yet
done; and God may cause you to die in a wilderness.

Oh the hard heartedness of the People of England! Oh the Swearing the
Wickedness, the Superstition and Profaneness that is grown up amongst us! That I
may say, as the world was once drowned by water, so it is now almost filled
with wickedness. Oh you sinful wicked Generation, is this your requital to God
for all his Mercies? Deuteronomy. 32.6 Do you thus requite the Lord, O foolish People
and unwise? Is not he thy Father that has bought thee? has he not made thee,
and established thee?

May I apply this to you? Is this the thanks you return to God, that has been
as a Father to you* that has bought you, and made you? When your sins grow so
high, do not you think but that the wrath of God will grow high too.

Objection.

I, But you say, Why do you speak to us of these sins? speak to them that
commit such sins.

Answer.

My beloved, have you repented of your sins? Are not you grown hard hearted
with the rest of this generation? Let me ask you, Have you repented of those
sins that you are guilty of? Yes, say you, we hope we have. Let me try you a
little with these few things.

First of all, Have you thought upon the wickedness of your ways? Have you set
your sins in order before you? Have you called to mind the manner of your Lives
and Conversations? Sin is never left until it be soundly laid to heart.

A repenting Man is one, that the World says, is a mopl^g Man or Woman; he is
one that will look himself in the face of the Gospel an hour to find out his
spots; and when he has found them, he falls a weeping.

Secondly, If you have repented, as you say you have; what has been your
mourning for Sin? You came crying into the world, your mother said. Since the
first tears that you shed, how many tears have you shed for your sins? When
were you alone in your Chambers? When have you done as Ephraim did? How often
have your Cheeks been wet with your Tears? how many Handkerchiefs have you wet
with your Tears for your Sin? Oh my Beloved* do you think that God will not
humble you for your sins? God will humble you, before he exalt you God will
bring you to the brink of H^^^ before he brings you to Heaven.

Thirdly, If you have repented of your Sins, as you say you have; Then, what
Reformation is there in your lives? what sin have you left? What sins are they
that you have forsaken?

Have you observed that you are more humble than you were heretofore? Do you
observe that your hearts are more in Heaven than they were before? Do you
observe that you pray more, and delight in prayer more, than you have done? It
may be you are ready to try out that you are well; Well, but have you repented?
Alas, you talk you have repented of your Sins, when it may be that you know not
one sin that you have left. Did thou once Swear by the holy Name of God? and
art thou now afraid for to take his Name into thy mouth, but with great
reverence and adoration?

Fourthly, Have you repented of your sins, as you say you have done? Then, what
Resolutions have you taken up for your future obedience? Is it your resolution
for to seek God more in prayer, than ever you have yet done? Will you watch
your hearts in prayer ^^^re than you have done? will you take more care of your
Family? Will you give them an example of a holy heavenly Life?

Fifthly, Have you repented of your Sins, as you say you have? Then, how much
are you troubled for the sins of others? Do your hearts mourn in secret for the
Wickedness and the Abominations of the places where you live?

And now, I beseech you, do not you flatter your selves in your wicked sinful
courses; If you do then I say, take heed that God does not send his Judgments
upon you: And if you repent not, doubtless God will bring some Plague upon
England, ere it be long.

Consider this, O England, and do not provoke God to depart from you; For, if
you repent of your Sins, you may expect to live quietly in the Land of your
Nativity, and go to your death beds in peace and rest: But if you will not
repent of your sins, then, I say, expect nothing but Cursings instead of
Blessings from God: If you will repent, do it to day; God knows how long it may
be before you have such another day.

But I have one word to you this afternoon, and it is, for ought that I know,
the last words I have to speak to you. I have one Question to ask you, before I
depart out of this Pulpit, with thoughts, for all that I know, never to return
into it any more.

My Question is this; Will you repent?

The welfare of your souls depends upon it, the welfare of the Church depends
upon it; the welfare of three Kingdoms depends upon it.

My beloved, it is no trifling now, Will you repent, I ask you? It may be
hereafter God will give you up to hardness of heart, and blindness of mind; and
if you go on in your wickedness, Hell will follow after it.

Well, I say, Will you repent? I ask you the Question, and I ask you no other
Question than I have asked my own self, before I came into this place. I ask
you again, Will you repent, every man and woman amongst you? For Jesus Christ
is angry with you, and he takes away many of your Lights from amongst you.

That God is angry with you, it is plain, for God would never else have taken
away his Ministers from among you.

I doubt not but God has made use of some of those that are to speak no more
in the Name of Jesus, to the snatching of you as fire brands out of the fire;
and in bringing you from the kingdom of Satan, unto the Kingdom of the Lord
Jesus Christ

Well, will you repent? If you will not, you sins lie at your own doors; do not
think its a hard Question, when I ask you, if you will repent? There are two
places where there is no Repentance; the one is in Hell: it were a vain thing
for me to go to the gates of Hell, and c^y to them, Repent, for their day of
Grace is past, and their doom is passed upon them; I do verily think that there
is more sorrowing in Hell for sin, than there is here upon Earth: but their
sorrow is not sanctified sorrow. If the damned in Hell were delivered out of
Hell, they would sin again: if they lived eternally, they would sin eternally.
But I am not speaking to men in hell, nor to women in hell, but I speak to you
that are here upon earth.

But there are a people to whom the day of Grace is set while they live to whom
the Sun of Righteousness is set, and their day is filled up with darkness: I
look upon the Heathen as such, I look upon the Jews as such I look upon the
Turks as such: I dare not say of any man or woman living, that can come within
the hearing of a Sermon, that God has given any one up to such a reprobate
mind.

Now my beloved, if it be not thus with any of you, that your day of Grace is
not past, as I am confident it is not, Then I beseech you in the Name and Fear
of God, that you would repent. The dying words of dying men and women, do
usually prevail with those that hear them: The dying words of Fathers and
Mothers, do use to prevail with their children: My beloved, if you have any
love to God, if you have any love to your souls, remember my last words: I say,
Repent of your sins. It may be God has made me instrumental, to the plucking
of some of you as Fire brands out of the fire, and in building of some of you
up in the most holy Faith: Remember what I say, I have chosen this as my last
words that ever I shall speak to some of you.

Object. But may some of you say, You bid me repent, how can I do it? I can no
more repent than the dead man can arise.

Answ. It is true, O sinner, that thou say: But though thou can not repent
when thou will, yet if thou will but endeavor to set thy self about the work,
it is probable that God may give thee a repenting heart: therefore I say, take
heed of shutting thy self out from mercy.

Object. But say you, Why do you then press us to such a work, when we cannot
do it of our selves?

Answ. Mark here, when I say unto you, will you repent? That is, will you make
use of the means that God has appointed for your Repentance? Will you reckon
up all the sins you have committed against God? will you reckon up all the
times that you have been drunk, or that you have sworn an Oath? will you reckon
up all the sins that you stand guilty of between God and your own souls? and
will you go to God and beg of him, that he would be pleased to pardon them?

But say you, What if we do not,? If you do not, then you are still in your
sins, and there is no peace to you; there is no inward peace to your souls,
there is no true peace to your Kingdom.

But that I may prevail with you, I shall give you some grounds or motives to
press this Argument more home upon your consciences.

First of all, Repent; because Jesus Christ has commanded you under great
Penalties, if you do not.

My beloved, consider a little with your selves, who it is that speaks unto you
here in my Text.

It is not I, but it is Jesus Christ; and doubtless Christ would never have
persuaded you to this work of repentance, if it were not necessary.

This book is the counsel of the Physician of your Souls, and the Physician of
your Church, and the Physician of your Kingdom. He that says unto you, repent,
says, if you do not, Your sins shall not be blotted out. He that says unto
you repent, says, if you do not, Eternal death shall follow.

Repent, I say, or if thou do not, woe be unto thee; woe unto that man that
ever he was born; woe unto thee, it had been better thou had never seen the
Light: Thy Parents that bore thee, they may repent that ever thou were born. Oh
my beloved, it is a terrible thing to fall into the hands of the living God! Oh
my beloved, if your Parents should see any of you carried in a Cart to the
Gallows to be hanged, it would make them to repent that ever they brought you
forth into the world! How much more then do you think it would trouble them for
to see you thrown body and soul into Hell, there to be tormented with the Devil
and his Angels for ever. I say, repent, or else God will take away the Gospel
from among you; repent, or God will take away his Ministers from among you.

The truth of it is, I have made it the greatest part of my work, ever since I
took the Office of a Minister upon me, for to get people upon their knees, and
when I could prevail so far with them, as to get them upon their knees, I
thought with my self, that then the work was half done.

Secondly, Repent; for Christ has encouraged you with many precious promises,
if you will repent.

Object. But say you, This is a hard work: What! shall we ever go with tears in
our eyes? what will God give us for our reward?

Answ. My beloved, your Reward is great; would you know what you shall have?
For your forrow, you shall have Crowns of Glory, you shall have Joy
unspeakable; if you will but repent of your sins, God will blot them out. Me
things it should make thy heart for to ache, to think how God will deal with
thee at the day of Judgment how God will say, before all the holy Angels, and
before thousands of righteous Persons, Look what a hypocrite stands there. God
will then make known the most secret sins, before men and Angels, that thou
would not have men to know now.

Oh repent therefore, that your sins may be blotted out, and you shall never
hear more of your sins; repent, and you shall be saved; repent, and you shall
escape Hell.

Thirdly, Repent, because God has waited a long while upon you, how long has
God stayed at your doors, asking you if you would repent? how long, O thou
proud man or woman, has God waited upon thee? how often has God come, and
stood knocking at the doors of your hard hearts, you that are given to Taverns
and Alehouses, and rioting? how long will it be before I shall see you leave
these Taverns and Alehouses? and let me see you upon your knees in your
Closets.

Oh thou gray headed sinner, God has waited long upon thee, it may be ever
since thou were fifteen or sixteen years old; as I have known many eminent
Christians at those years, which has made me much admire at it. Oh thou
sinner, God has waited upon thee all this while, when will thou repent, Romans
2.4. Or despisest thou the Riches of his goodness, and forbearance and long
suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads to Repentance?

There is not a blessing thou have from God, but it has this written upon it,
repent of thy sins. Will thou think of what I say unto thee; when God puts thy
bread into thy hands, he says unto thee, Sinner, take this bread, eat it, and
repent: when God puts the cup of Beer into thy hand, he says unto thee,
Sinner, take this beer, drink it, and repent; when thou arisest in the morning,
he says unto thee, Sinner take this suit of clothes, and put it on, and
repent: Every mercy that thou receivest from thy God, calls thee to come along
with me; Come, will thou leave thy sins and go along with me? will thou leave
Hell, and go along with me? My beloved I will desire you to bear a little with
me, because I am so urgent in pressing this great work of Repentance: It is the
last time that I shall speak to some of you, and therefore I am something the
more earnest with you: the Lord grant that they that shall come after me, may
far exceed me in this work.

Fourthly, Consider, if you will return and repent, God will return to you; if
you will leave your sins, God will not be angry with you; if you will have the
means of grace, God will give you the means of grace. My beloved, God never
goes from you* until you go away from him, God has entreated you to return,
and God has promised to return to you.

My beloved, you have heard the Parable of the prodigal Son, how he ran away
from his Father, but at last when he was ready to perish with hunger he returns
to his Fathers house again.

So, my beloved, God is your Father, but you are Prodigals; all the sins that
you have committed against God is Prodigality. But yet, let me tell you, if you
are willing to come to Gods feet, he will take you about the neck, if you are
willing to forsake your sins, God is willing and ready to pardon your sins; if
you have been a wicked, sinful, rebellious people, yet if you will turn to the
Lord, he will turn to you.

Fifthly, Repent; because, if any misery does come upon thee, the fault shall
lie at thine own door: I say, repent, for if God does bring a Judgment upon
thee, thou may thank thy self for it.

Art thou a notorious sinner, and God lays his afflicting hand upon thy
Family, thy Family may thank thee for it, that the Lord is pleased to deal by
them as he does. Many a Family may curse the Head of their Family, Oh thou
drunken Master, God does send a Judgment upon thy Family, they may thank thee
for it: and I tell thee, if any evil come upon the Church, it is thy fault;
thanks be to you liars, thanks be to you Swearers, thanks be to you Drunkards,
that the Gospel and Ministers are a going.

Sixthly, Repent; because God sends his Messengers unto you for to entreat
you to repent: I am sent unto you this day, to entreat you to repent, now woe be
to you if you neglect my message. You know that it was one reason why God took
away his Prophets and Ministers from Jerusalem, because they would not hearken
to their Message, as you may read, Mat. 23.37, 38, 39. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee; How
often would I have gathered thy Children together, even as a Hen gathers her
Chickens under her wings, and you would not? Behold your house is left unto you
desolate: for I say unto you, ye shall not see me henceforth till ye shall say,
Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord.

I know thee Jerusalem, thou hate and killest my Prophets that are sent unto
thee; when I come to thee again, thou shall say, Blessed is he that comes in
the Name of the Lord.

Oh that you could apply this to your selves, Oh London! how often would I have
gathered thee, as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, but thou
would not, But thou have killed my Prophets, and cast them into prison Well,
we are now taking leave of you this day; I, and my Ministers are leaving of
you, but when we come again unto you I will have you to be of another manner of
temper then now you are.

Well, if all that I have said, will not prevail with you, I am sorry that
nothing would prevail with you but the flames of Hell. Oh then you will say, Oh
that we had but hearkened to the voice of God's Messengers that are sent to us!
Oh that we had our rousing Ministers to awaken us!

I have one of Advice to you that are the people of God, whose hearts God has
humbled, and I shall have done.

First, I advise you that God has humbled for sin, now to look to your selves,
God will not now lead you, you must learn now to go alone: If you would keep
tender hearts, then be afraid of sin: as well of the least sins, as of the
greatest: Be afraid of a vain thought; and if thou take heed of a vain
thought, thou will be afraid of telling a lie; and if thou take heed of
telling a lie, thou will be afraid of swearing an Oath.

Secondly, If thou will keep tenderness of heart, then lie under the best
Ministry you can get; that there is a difference between some men's. Preaching
and others, is plain by the effectual working of their Preaching upon the
hearts of their hearers.

First, Take heed of a blind ignorant Minister; If the blind lead the blind
they will both fall into the ditch. If one that understands not what sin is,
nor feels not the guilt of sin, Preaches Repentance, it is ten hundred to one,
if ever God does work upon your hearts by his Preaching.

Secondly, Take heed of, fly, shun, avoid an idle drunken Minister, If you
would ask me, what we shall do in such a case?

I Answer, Keep such a one out of your Parish, if you can; if you cannot, then
I advise you to take heed how you hear him.

First, Because all such Ministers, are no Ministers at all. No, what and are
ordained? No, because they are not sent from God. And let me tell you, that men
have no power to Ordain such to Preach the Gospal, as are not sent by God. I do
verily believe that God never sent any Minister for to Preach the Doctrine of
Salvation, but such as God has endowed with gifts and abilities to speak; and
if there be any Ministers that have not those qualifications that are fit for a
Bishop to have, then they are none of Gods Ministers, although they are made
Ministers by man, 1 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. This is a true saying, If a man
desire the Office of a Bishop, he desires a good work. A Bishop then must be
blameless, the husband of one wife; vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given
to hospitality, apt to teach, not given to wine, no striker, not greedy of
filthy lucre, but patient; not a brawler, not covetous: own that rules well
his own house having his children in subjection with all gravity. For if a man
know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take care of the Church of
God? Not a Novice, lest being lifted up with Pride, he fall into the
condemnation of the Devil. Moreover he must have a good report of them which
are without, lest he fall into reproach, and the snare of the Devil.

Here is all these excellent qualifications that a Minister of the Gospel ought
to be endowed with.

Secondly, I say that those Ministers that are not endowed with these
qualifications but are ignorant drunken Ministers, it is generally observed
that people grow more wicked, and that their hearts grow harder, while they
live under such a Ministry.

Object. But how if we are forced to hear such, and we can do no others wise;
if we will not hear them our purses must pay for it.

Answer. To this I answer, I wish that every place had an eminent Minister,
that you might gather up Manna at your own doors; But if your Minister be
wicked and profane, he is no Minister of Christ, and in such a case, you must
rather hazard your purses than you souls.

But the Doctrine that he preaches it is good: It Is true, it is so, if it do not
come out of a stinking vessel. The water that is drawn out of a sweet Well, if
it be put into a stinking cask, it will smell of the cask. But I would not have
you to be quarrelsome.

A Third advice that I shall give you is this, Be sure that you ply the company
of those that are of a tender heart: It is a true saying, Birds of a feather
will flock together. Take heed of being in the company of such as will swear,
and of living with such as scoff at religion. It Is true, a tender holy heart
may live among wicked company, as Lot did in Sodom; but let me tell thee,
there is danger, they will tempt thee to be like them.

Lastly, My advice is this, Be sure that the Bible be much in your hand, you
that can read, and beg of God to give you an understanding heart. When God bids
you to be holy, think of Heaven. Let the Bible be much in your hands, and let
God see you much in your Closets.

Mr. G. N. his Farewel-Sermon.
Romans 8.38, 39. For I am persuaded, that neither Death nor Life, nor Angels,
nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
Height, nor Depth, nor any other Creature, shall be able to separate us from
the Love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
IF divine Providence shall make this the season of our separation, it is good
for us to part with each other, in the meditation and consideration of that,
from which those that are Gods shall never be divided; that is, the Love of God
in Christ Jesus our Lord. The Apostle is very confident of it, I am persuaded.

We shall conclude the Chapter with our present Employment, and therefore shall
not stand long discoursing on every particular; but first briefly open them
unto you, and after improve them.

First, We meet with the. Apostles Confidence a strong persuasion; from whence
we may learn* Confidence belongs unto a Christian; yea it is the privilege
of the Gospel: Col. 2.2. That their hearts may be comforted, being knit
together in love, and unto all riches of the full assuring of understanding,
etc. This is what you may daily stand in need of, therefore be persuaded to
press toward it. The Apostle calls to give all diligence to make your calling
and Election sure. Great diligence it is you give to assure the title of your
earthly possession; is it not of far greater concernment, to assure your
Calling and Election, unto an everlasting enjoyment of divine Love? And that
you may do this, remember to live,

1. Lest unto this present World. 2. More in heaven.
For then will you be more acquainted with the concernments and counsels
thereof: Do but draw up your hearts out of the cares, pleasures and delights of
this present world, which choke the Word, and ye also may come to join with the
Apostle in saying, I am persuaded nothing shall separate me from the love of God
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Secondly, The Apostle is persuaded, neither Death nor Life can do this. Death
in its self has in it by reason of its terrors and torments, a great tendency
to separate those from Christ, which have not real firm hold of him: but those
that have seen everlasting love, and thereby have had love b^gotten in them
unto Christ, (that love also being everlasting) have something that will cause
them never to depart from him. Death is Christ's servant; he did abolish it; and
carry it Captive in his Resurrection, and then as it were renew unto it its
Commission, to bring his Beloved out of the world unto him: Therefore with what
terrors soever Death comes, it is granted to him by the Commission of the
Prince of Life; and this is only to show, that neither its terrors not torments
can overcome the love and life of Christ Jesus in the soul, but they remain
still everlasting.

Neither can Life separate us: Although a love unto Life, and a fear of Death,
are of like power to separate from Christ. It does sometime happen, that we see
persons outlive their goodness, and how much better had it been for such to
have died sooner? But the Apostle is confident, neither Life nor Death, could
separate him from Christ. This ye should expect, the trial of every Christian,
whether there is any thing he fears more then God, or loves more then
Christ; yea even his own life: And it is only Faith that makes this union with
the love of Christ, that neither life, nor death, can separate from him. Did we
understand the small value of this outward life, we should not adventure our
everlasting health for it.

Thirdly, Neither Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers. These are Powers on
which are built sereral gradations of Angelical eternal Dominions; and in each
Dominion are multitudes of Angels, diverse of which rebelled against God, and
these only he here mentions; for the other would not endeavor to make any
separation from Christ: neither are these able, though Angels in the highest
gradation of evil spirits, because stronger is he who comes to save us, than he
who attempts to destroy us: Yea Christ's derivative power is greater than the
power of evil: 1 John 2.14. I have written unto you young men, because ye are
strong, and the Word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one.

Fourthly, Nor things present: These were the Opposition, envy and malice of
the Jewe, they called the ways of the Christians Heresy, and resolved to
extirpate them under a sense that thereby they did God good service. 2.
Opposition from the Gentiles, who lived in common profaneness, and so contrary
to the Christian Profession. 3. That which the Apost a mentions with more
regret, the Divisions among the Christians them selves, some glorying to be of
Cephas, some of Apollo, and false Brethren also watching to betray them; yet
the Apostle says, while in the view of all these round about him, did persuade
him, all these could not separate him from the love of God in Christ Jesus tour
Lord.

Fifthly, Nor things to come. And this not only in reference unto the time of
the Apostles life on earth, but after also, so that the Apostle wroke not only
for his own faith, but of those also which were to be true Christians
hereafter: and he saw there was to come a time of Apostasy, wherein men would
give out Doctrine of Devils, and Wolves which should not spare the Flock; but
here was Faith which all these things could not separate from this love in
Christ. Many times things to come are greater terrors then things present,
because fear consults what they would be, and that is apt to multiply things in
the imagination, and render them also greater than indeed they are: how many
soever therefore of these may come upon us, let us see, that they have not
power to work this separation, in the Apostles example.

Sixthly, Neither height nor depth. Heights have in them a great power to
separate from Christ, high Gifts. Saint Paul himself says, There was a Thorn
given me in the flest, least I should be exalted above measure. God would not
have sent that remedy, had he not been in danger. And therefore Paul would not
have his Bishop a Novice, 1 Timothy 3.6. One newly planted in the faith, lest when
he is listed up in his Office, he he lifted up in pride also, and fall into the
Devils condemnation, being cast down for lifting up himsel too high: To fall by
pride is a dangerous snare to separate from Christ Jesus: These God beholds
afar off but gives more grace to the humble. It is a great grace to have
exaltations in temporals or spirituals, which leads us into no danger. Nor
depths; this is that the Pselmist tells us. Psalm. 44.9. etc. But thou have cast
us off, and put us to shame, and go not forth with our Armies: Thou make
us to turn back from the Enemy, and they which hate us spoil for themselves:
Thou have given us like Sheep appointed for meat, and have scattered us among
the Heathen. Thou sellest thy people for naught, and does not increase thy
wealth by their Price. Thou make us a reproach among our Neighbors, a scorn
and derision to them which are round about us. Thou make us a byword among
the Heathen; a shaking of the head among the People: My confusion is daily
before me, and the shame of my face has covered me: For the voice of him that
reproacheth and blasphemeth, by reason the enemy and avenger. All this is come
upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy
Covenant. The deep distress could not separate them from the Love of God in
Christ Jesus our Lord.

Seventhly, Nor any other Creature. Let it be what it will, so it be but
creature, and not God, it cannot separate from the love of the Creator: Exalt
Creator in your hearts, and creature will be but little in your eyes.

Eighthly, Shall not be able. There are many enemies want nor will, but they
shall not be able. So it was with the enemies of Gods King in the Psalms, Psalm.
21.11. For they intended evil against thee: they imagined an evil device which
they were not able to perform.

Ninthly, To separate us. To make us without the love of God in Christ Jesus:
they may drive us and turn us into it, but not beyond it, there the malice of
Man and the Devil leaving those that are truly Christ's; And this because it is,

1. The Love of God. 2. In Christ Jesus.
It must be something able to turn the Divine affections, which nothing can do,
nor alter the love of God in Christ Jesus: because it is not built on our
worthiness, or stability, but on Christ: And none can cause the Father not to
love his son: And if ye keep close unto Christ, not running into the vanities,
glories, and sins of this World, then are ye comprehended in Love wherewith God
loves his Son. Ye^ see the extension of the Apostles Faith, and the firmness
of it; this is written for our instruction, and Jesus Christ is the Author and
Finisher of that Faith, the issue whereof is this persuasion: Therefore look
not on it as a thing impossible to be attained; it is your privilege if you
seek it, Isa. 43 23.44 1, 2. Thou have not brought me the small cattle of thy
Burnt-offerings, neither have thou honored me with thy sacrifices; I have not
caused thee to serve with an offering, nor wearied thee with incense. Thou have
bought me no sweet Cane with money, neither have thou filled me with the fat of
thy Sacrifices; But thou have made me serve with thy sins, Thou have we ariod
me with thine Iniquities: Yet now hear, O Jacob my servant, Israel whom I have
chosen. Thus says the Lord that made thee, and formed thee from the womb,
which will help thee: Fear not, O Jacoh my servant, and Jesu^un whom I have
chosen; for I will pour water on him that is thirsty, and floods upon this dry
ground: I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my Blessing upon thy
Offspring. This speaks to us the Gentiles, who serve not with Sacrifices. If
they thirst after this spirit, it shall be poured out upon them and then shall
they be persuaded, let the World and the Devil say what they will, that they
are God's. This is the privilege of every true Christian, that hungers and
thirsts to be led in the true way of Righteousness and Peace.

The EXHORTATION.
If it be thus; let it be matter of encouragement and consolation: for whatever
ye be separated from, yet if ye be truly Gods, you have something never to be
taken from you; to wit, The love of God in Christ Jesus. God will not, Man nor
Satan cannot I may be separated from you yea from each other, body from soul;
yet it is comfort to hear there is something that can never be taken from us: It
should stir up our minds to consider whether I have union with it or no, or
whether it is attainable by me: and this is certain, it may be had: If you
forsake the sin and vanity of the world, you will naturally fall into the arms
of everlasting love, from whence ye can never be removed. It is a good thing to
have good thoughts of God, to be well persuaded of him, as the Apostle here,
who is confident of his goodness. Love readily and naturally uniteth to love;
and good thoughts of God are from a seed of Gods love to us And in order to the
establishing of us in this love, let us leave with you a few Exhortations.

1. In order unto your daily Conversation. 2. In order unto the particular
Divine Providence now ending of our Ministry unto you.
First, as to your conversation.

1. Think not your own Sins little. 2. Think not your own Righteousness great.
3. Always resigned unto God, humbly submitting unto his mercy.
Think not your own Sins little: He is in danget to sin against this love, that
is not sensible he has done enough already to separate him from it; ye that
have done the least sin, has done enough to condemn you for ever, Romans 5.17.
For if by one man's offenses, Death reigned, by one, etc. (...); it may be
understood by one offense: And if you think thus do not thing any sin little.

2. Think not your own Righteousness great: This is that we are very apt to do,
to think our selves less sinful, and more righteous than indeed we are: But the
Church says, All our Righteousness is as filthy rags. Consider things thus: ye
have done enough for ever to forfeit your interest in this Love: ye can never
do enough to deserve it. Therefore,

3. Always cast your selves upon it, that you may receive it. If your lives
have been blameless, think your selves to want as much Mercy to save you, as
any profane one: Jew and Gentile wanted one and the same Grace.

Secondly, Consider to be serious in the daily Consideration of,

1. Your Thoughts. 2. Your Words. 3. Your Actions.
1. Your Thoughts. Live less abroad and more at home: I mean in your own
hearts, a man never comes to see himself desperately wicked, until he comes
to see the heart. Christ says, from the heart does proceed murder, adultery,
etc. It may be upon a small vexation some can wish Death to any: this is murder
in the heart: so for Adultery, or the like: The sin in Gods sight is there,
look but in there, and you will find that shall make you despair of any thing,
but the mere mercy and forgiveness of Christ to make you righteous, and in
beholding of it, seek for the cleansing of it from him.

2. Your Words. It is Christ himself who says, By thy Words thou shall be
justified and condemned: Wherefore we pray you, think there is more depends
on words than generally is accounted: they are not only wind, but of such a
nature as either drives us nearer, or wafteth us farther off from this Love,
from which we are never to be separated. The tongue is set on fire of Hell: Be
careful of thine own words, if thou would grow acquainted with the Word of
God.

3. Your Actions. Be not persuaded to live at a venture. Consider, Christ
says, I must work the works of him that sent me; for this cause came I into
the world. Let every one ask himself this Question, Why came I into the world?
Christ said, be came not to do his own Will, but the Will of him that sent him:
Remember therefore in all your actions, you are moving toward, or off from this
eternal Love.

Thirdly, Consider how mere a necessity there is.

1. Of your Repentance. 2. Of your Forgiveness. 3. Of your becoming a new
Creature.
1. Of your Repentance. Christ says, Unless ye repent, ye shall all likewise
perish. Do not continue thinking such or such an one has deservedly met with
this or that punishment, but still consider Christ's words, Except ye repent, ye
shall all likewise perish. Cast in your mind, if you have any thing to repent
of, or ever had; then whether if it be an indifferent thing, or no, your
repenting; and if not, at what time ye did repent, what accidents did accompany
your Repentance which you yet remember?

2. Of your Forgiveness. WOE is the portion of any that have sinned, and find
not forgiveness from the mercy of God: you will find then it is more needful to
be forgiven, than to be either great or rich, or the like in this world, or for
any to go out to condemn another. That also you may obtain Forgiveness, Forgive.

3. Of your becoming a new Creature. It is not enough to be forgiven but ye
must be new Creatures: It is the new Man shall never be separated from the love
of God in Christ Jesus. Consult with flesh and blood and that will never teach
you to believe, but an ignorant, presumptuous Faith. This concerns me not to
have my thoughts plunged about this or that worldly care, but to become a new
Creature in the renewing of the spirit of the mind.

Fourthly, Consider ever.

1. To follow Peace. 2. To follow Holiness. 3. To exercise Patience.
1. To follow Peace. Two of these you have in the Hebrews, Heb. 14. Follow
Peace with all men, and Holiness, without which none shall see God. Do not
esteem it your interest to contend: Let the Peace of God rule in your hearts.
Fret not thy self because of evil doers. It is an easy matter to sin in our
Anger, a rare thing to moderate anger against sin, so as not to sin in that
anger.

2. To follow Holiness, Refuse Peace that cannot be enjoyed without Holiness.
It is upon the view of God, I shall see what kind of love he is; and Christ
says, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Resolve to follow
holiness, not greatness, riches, etc. And he that will do so, Christ says,
shall suffer persecution in this present world. Wherefore it will be good to
consider.

3. To exercise patience. Let us add upon that account,

1. Love not the World. 2. Love not your own Wills. 3. Value your own Souls.
1. Not the World The Text says, 1 John 2.15. Love not the World, neither the
things that are in the world If any man love the world, the Love of the Father
is not in him. For all that is in the world, the Lust of the flesh, the Lust of
the eye, and the Pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the World: And
the World passes away, and the lust thereof, but he that does the Will of the
Father abides for ever. The love of this world makes a man to be in respect
of the Prince of this world, as a Bird in the Fowlers snare. There is no way
sooner to sin away their everlasting Love, than to love this present World.

2. Love not your own Wills. That person is neither prepared to do for God, nor
to suffer for him, that nath not learned something of this lesson of
Self-denial. There is no divine service but in doing Gods Will, and that I
cannot do but by parting with my own; delivering up my self unto him, to be led
and guided by his holy Spirit. Christ says, If any man will be my Disciple,
let him deny himself, take up his Cross and follow me.

3. Value your own Souls. The great care and consult is for gratifying the
body: if but part of that time were spent on the soul, which is on the needless
care of the body, it might render it in a far better and more goodlier posture.
Let every one think, I carry that in my bosom is of more value than the whole
worl^ neither can the whole world recompense the loss of it: and if we have
such jewels, let us take care to secure them. A careless common spirit does not
become a Christian. Let none employ their time in disputing this or that vain
Opinion, but spend it on your souls.

Secondly, In order unto the particular divine Providence now ending of our
Ministry unto you.

1. Whatever happens on this account, let it be your exercise to cry out for
the holy Spirit of Christ, and he will grant you a greater supply, than you may
expect from any man whatever. So Christ comfort his Disciples; Though I go,
yet I will pray unto the Father, and he shall send you another Comforter: and
he bids them pray for it also. Even so as for what concerns us, this we
cannot be denied to pray that God would send out his holy Spirit among you, and
upon you; and while we may speak unto you, we desire you to pray for it also.
Our work did lie but to b^ing men to Repentance by conviction of sin, to
believing by the showing of Righteousness; and to convince of both by Christ's
conquest over sin. This Christ shows, his holy Spirit, the Comforter, can do,
Joh. 16.8, 9, 10, 11. And when he is come, he shall reprove the world of Sin,
of Righteousness, and of Judgment. Of sin, because they believe not on me: of
Righteousness, because I go to my Father and ye see me no more: of Judgment,
because the Prince of this world is Judged. This is a suitable and sufficient
reply, 1 John 2.27. But the Anointing which ye have received of him abides in
you; and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same Anointing teaches
you of all things, and is truth and is no lie: and even as it has taught you,
ye shall abide in him. That Anointing was the Spirit poured out on our Head
Christ Jesus, and ran down the skires of his garments: not that instruction
should cease, but this Spirit can either fill it administered, or supply it
being wanting. And the withdrawing of this present Ministry, may be to cause
you to pray more incessantly for this holy Spirit day and night. And Christ
promises, The Father will give it to them that ask it.

2. Be more frequent in your converse with the Scripture. It is the Pillar of
Truth; and by a frequent converse with it also, you will find a pure mind
stirred up to remember,

3. Be more frequent in Meditation: Let not the world swallow up all your time,
so as not to meditate on your Souls, the Scriptures, and Heaven, The meditation
on Gods Law, keeps us from the Counsel of the ungodly, from standing among
sinners, or sitting down in the seat of the scornful, Psalm. 1. It is worthy of
our wonder any should read the Scriptures, believing them indicted by a holy
Spirit, and yet scorn Holiness, Religion, etc.

4. Be more usual in personal, private and family Duties and Devotion. God does
call those that know how to address themselves unto him, to a more earnest,
private devotion. Jacob was alone when he wrestled for a blessing. There are
particular seasons in which God calls his people into a retirement, Isaiah 26
20, 21. Come my People, enter thou into thy Chambers, and shut thy doors about
thee; hide thy self as it were for a little moment, until the indignation be
over-past. For behold, the Lord comes out of his place to punish the
Inhabitants of the earth for their iniquities. So also, Zech. 12.11 12. And in
that day shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon
in the valley of Megiddon. And the Land shall mourn, every Family apart: the
Family of the House of David apart, and their Wives apart; the Family of the
House of Nathan apart, and their Wives apart; the Family of the House of Levi
apart, and their Wives apart: all the Families that remain, every Family apart,
and their Wives apart. In that day there shall be a Fountain opened to the House
of David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for Sin, and for Uncleanness.

If I cannot serve God in one way, let me not be discouraged, but be more
earnest in another. You may also now think it is a time for you to exercise
what you have learned God is calling you to see if you have not lost all the
advantages he has allowed you: ye have been a long time learning; as if God
should say unto you, Let me now see if you can do or endure, and if you have
forgot all, yet Christ has made a promise, the Spirit shall bring again to
remembrance, when there is occasion for it. Consider also, Christ is touched
with the feeling of the infirmities of a people in such a condition. Let none
of you be troubled in your hearts: you believe in God, believe also in Christ
Jesus: He says, In my Fathers House there are many Mansions, and in them many
ways of dispensing of his Grace. Read the 14, 15, and 16. Chapters of John.
Christ has promised to give Pastors according to his own heart, that shall
feed his Flock with Truth and Understanding. He can find one, or frame one,
that shall fulfill his Ministry better than a weak Instrument. He is the great
Bishop of our Souls, and is never non-resident: He has always a care of his
Flock. Think therefore of his care who has promised not only to be, but to
give unto you Pastors. The 34. Chap. of Ezekiel is but a Comment on that
promise. Let not your hearts be troubled, but let us commend you, yea, each
other to God, and let him do what is good in his own eyes.

Mr. WATSON's Sermon against POPERY.
1 Cor. 10.14. Wherefore, my dearly Beloved, flee from Idolatry.
WHen I consider that saying of the blessed Apostle St. Paul, I am pure from
the Blood of all men, Acts. 20.26. And that which made him say so* was, because
he had not shunned to declare (unto his hearers then committed to his charge)
the whole Council of God. Paul had been faithful to the Souls of people; he had
preached up Truth* and preached down Error. The consideration of which, has
put me at this time upon this Scripture, Wherefore, my dearly beloved, flee
from Idolatry. From whence I shall (by Divine permission and assistance) assert
the truth of the Protestant Religion, against popish Innovation; and amongst
all the Errors that are levelled against the Gospel, none are more gross,
dishonorable, nor dangerous, than those broached and set a running in the
Popish Conclave: and therefore there was good reason why the Apostle should
say, Wherefore, my dearly beloved, flee from Idolatry.

Idolatry does bud and blossom in the Popish Religion. It should be the
earnest prayer and endeavor of every good Christian that none of those
poisonous streams that flow from the Sea of Rome, may ever infest this British
Isle.

My main and principal design at this time is, to show unto you some few of
those many grand Errors that are in popery, or in the popish Religion, and
likewise to fortify you against them.

Among many others, there are these thirteen grand Errors in popery, that every
good Christian must take off, and flee from.

The first Error is this, The papists do hold, That the Pope is the Head of the
Church: This is diametrically, and point blank opposite to the Scripture, Col.
2.9. Christ is there called. The Head of the Church. Now to make the Pope the
Head of the Church is to make the Church monstrous by having two Heads. This is
to make the Spouse of Christ^an Harlot. I read, Rev. 13 1 of a Beast rising out
of the sea. By the Beast their Interpreters understand the mystical Antichrist,
i. e. the Pope. Now, if the Pope be the Beast there, and elsewhere spoken of;
how rediculous, yea, how impious is it to make a Beast the Head of Christ's
Church. That is the first.

A second Error, which I shall but name, is this, The Papists hold, That the
Pope is above Scripture, and that his Laws, Decrees and Canons bind more than
the Scriptures, than the Word of God. Well may he have that name written upon
his Miter, that is mentioned, Rev. 13, 1. And upon his head was written the
Names of blasphemy. But I add,

Their third Error, is the Mass, which indeed is gross Idolatry; there is in it
these two Errors.

1. Transubstantiation. Bellarmine, with other Popish Writers, say, that the
Bread the Host after consecration, is turned into the very body of Christ. Now
this is against Philosophy, as well as Scripture and Divinity. It Is against
Philosophy, for this is clear, if Christ's Body be in Heaven, then it cannot
possibly be in the bread: But Christ's Body is in Heaven, Act. 3 22. Whom the
Heavens must contain speaking of Christ) until the restitution of all things,
Moreover, that the bread in the Sacrament is not turned into the Body of
Christ, I prove thus; the wicked they do not receive Christ, 1 Cor. 2.14. But
if the bread be the very body of Christ, then the wicked, when they eat of the
bread do eat the very body of Christ. This is so gross an Opinion, that most of
the ancient Fathers wrote against it, as Cyprian, Origin, Tertullian, Austin,
Ambrose, with many others.

But 2ly. The second Error in the Mass is, they do daily offer up Christ in the
Mass. I grant there are Priests in Gospel times, and Sacrifices too, but they
are as such are spiritual; as the sacifice of Prayer of Praise, of a broken and
contrite heart. But that there should be any external offering of Christ by way
of Sacrifice, is a blasphemy against Christ's Priestly Office; for it supposes,
that Christ's Offering on the Cross was not perfect. That is notoriously
contrary to the very letter of Scripture. See Heb. 10.12. That man. i. e.
Christ, God-man, after he had once offered a Sacrifice for sin, sat down at the
right hand of God: and verse. 14. he says, That by this one offering he has
perfected for ever them that are sanctified. This Scripture shows the
compleatness of Christ's Sufferings and Sacrifice, and that now there needs no
offering up any more Sacrifices. That is the third: But,

Fourthly, A fourth Error is: the Doctrine of Popish Satisfaction; they hold
that we do, in our own persons, satisfy Gods justice by our Penance, VVhippig,
Fasting, Alms-deeds. Thus the Council of Trent, and the Popish Rhemes. But
where is any thing of this in Scripture? alas, what is our confession of sin,
that is no satisfaction for sin: If a Traitor confess his guilt, this is no
satisfaction for, but rather an agravation of his Treason. Alas, our
Repentance, Fasting, Humiliation, the best of our actions are be-leopard, and
mixed with very much sin; our Humiliation is mixed with very much pride, our
Repentance and Confession, with much Hyporrisie and Dissimulation. There Is much
of sin in the cream of our services, and sin cannot satisfy for sin. This is a
sure rule (and I pray you mark it) that what ever offering we bring to God for
acceptance, we must lay it upon the Altar Jesus Christ, for Gods Justice
accepts of no satisfaction, but by and through the Lord Jesus. And that is a
fourth.

Fifthly, A fifth Error is, There is distinguishing between sins Mortal and sins
Venial: Mortal sins are Murder, Perjury, Adultery, and such like; these (say
they) deserve Death and Damnation; but Venial sins, such as vain thoughts, rash
anger, concupesence, these (say they) do not deserve Death.

But we say and affirm, That there is no such sins as they call Venial. It is
true, the greatest sins being repented of, are pardonable through the blood of
Christ; but there is no sin of which we can say, that do not deserve death and
damnation. And this I Will prove by a double Argument.

1. If the very least sin be (as indeed it is) a breach and violation of Gods
Law, then it is no more venial than a greater: But the least sin is a violation
of Gods Law; therefore the least sin is no more venial than a greater. The
minor is clearly proved from Mat. 5.28. Whosoever looks on a Woman to lust
after her, has committed Adultery with her in his heart: In which place our
Savior makes a lascivious look, an impure glance of the eye, to be a breach
and violation of Gods Law. 2. If the least sin expose men to a Curse, then they
are no more venial than greater; but the least sin does expose men to a Curse,
Gal. 3.10. Cursed is he that continues not in all things contained in the Law,
to do them. He that fails in the least iota or punctillio, it exposes him
unto a Curse. And remember this (my brethren) That without repentance, God has
provided a great Hell for little sins. That is the fifth.
Sixthly, A sixth Error in Popery is, Their asserting the Doctrine of
free will. That Goliath of the Papists, Beliarmine, says, That man's will is
inclinable unto good, and that a man has an inate power to do that which is
good; but man's will being corrupted and depraved, is not inclinable to that
which is good, but quite contrary. And this is evident from our own experience,
had we no Bible to confirm it.

When the Rudder of a Ship is broke, the Ship is carried up and down, to and
again, which way the wind will: even so it is with man's will being corrupted.
Austin, in his Confessions, says, That before his ^onversion he did accustom
himself to fruit stealing, not so much out of a love to the fruit, as to
stealing. Hence is it that men are said to love evil, Mica 3.2.

Again, the will being depraved and corrupt, has no inate power to do that
which is good Indeed the Papists say, That man has some seed of good in him;
but the Scripture does not say so. Man as St. Ambrose well says, has a free
will to sin, but how to perform that which is good he finds not.

Sin has cut the locks where our strength lay. Therefore are we said to be
without strength. Romans 5.6. Sinners are said to be in the bond of iniquity, and
so not in a posture to run heavens Race. A man by nature cannot do that that he
has the least bent, and tendency to that which is good: he is so far from
performing a good act, as that he cannot so much as think a good thought. Hence
it is that man is said to have a heart of stone: he can no more prepare himself
for his Conversion, than a stone can prepare it self for the Superstruction:
Men naturally, are dead spiritually. In man's will there is not only impotency,
but obstinacy. Hence it is men are said to resist the holy Ghost, Act 7. But I
go on.

Seventhly. A seventh Error is, their Indulgencies. They say, the Pope has a
power to give a pardon and Indulgence, by virtue of which men are freed from
their sins in Gods sight.

Besides the Blasphemy of this assertion, what else is it but a cunning trick
and sly artifice to get money by. This is that indeed brings grists to the
Popes Mill. How contrary is this to the Scripture, which says, None can
forgive sin but God only? Mark 2.

This Doctrine of Popish Indulgence, is a key that unlocks and opens a door to
all manner of licentiousness and uncleaness: for what need persons care what
they do, if they (for their money) can obtain a pardon? Mr. Fox in his Book of
Martyrs, mentions one that at first was a papist, and being brought before
Bonner, said, Sir, at the first I was of your Religion, and then I cared not
how I lived, because I could with my money obtain a pardon. But now I am
otherwise persuaded and do believe, That none ca^ forgive sins but God only?

Eighthly, An eight Error is The Doctrine of Merits: they say that good works do
expiate sin and merit glory. Bellarmine says, a man has a double right to
glory; one by Christ's merits, and the other by his own, And for this he urges,
2 Iam. 4.8. Henceforth is laid up for me a crown of Righteousness, which the
just Judge shall give unto me, and not only unto me, etc.

Which is the just Judge. Now Bellarmine says, That God in justice does reward
our Works; and if he does it of right and in Justice, then certainly they merit.

To this I answer two ways:

1. God giving us in Justice a reward: It is not for the worthiness of our
work^, but for the worthiness of our Savior. 2. God as a just Judge rewards
our works, not because we have merited a reward, but because he has promised a
Reward, and so is just in giving what he has promised.
Object. I but they say, God crowns our works, ergo they merit,

Answ. God (to speak after the manner of men) keep, two Courts, a Court of
Justice, and a Court of Mercy: In his Court of Justice, nothing may come but
Christ's Merits; but in the Court of Mercy, our works may come Nay, let me tell
you, God in free grace crowns those works in the Court of Mercy, which he
condemned in the Court of Justice Now that we do not, nor cannot merit by our
good works, I Will prove by a threefold argument, and this threefold cord will
not easily be broken.

First of all, (and I beseech you mind it) that which merits at Gods hand, must
be a gift we give to him, and not a debt we owe to him. Now whatever we can do
for, or give unto God, it is but a just and due debt.

2. He who would merit at Gods hand, must give God something overplus: But alas,
if we cannot give God the principal, how shall we give him the interest? If we
cannot give him his due, how can we give him overplus.

3. He who would merit any thing at Gods hand, must offer that to him that is
perfect: But alas, can we give God any thing, that is perfect? are not our best
Offerings fly-blown with pride and corruption?

Beloved. Woe to the holiest man alive, if God weighs him in the Balance of the
Sanctuary and do not allow him some grains. I conclude this with that saying of
St. Ambrose, Good Works are the way to, but not the cause of Salvation.
Therefore when you have done all, say you are unprofitable servants.

I here is no Angel can merit (for he charge them with folly) much less vile
and sinful man. Therefore count all your own Righteousness but as dung and dogs
meat. In a word, rely not on our own merits, put the crown on the head of
Free Grace. That Is the eighth.

Ninthly, The ninth Error in the Popish Religion is, the Doctrine of Purgatory.
There is, say they, a middle and infirnal place, called Purgatory. Now what is
this but a subtle artifice and trick to get money? for when they (especially
those that are rich) are about to die and make Wills, if so be they will give
large sums of money, the Priests will pray for them that they go not into
Purgatory; or if they do, that they may be quickly delivered out of it. How
contrary and repugnant is this to Scripture, that holds forth no Middlle place?

The wicked when they die, their Souls go immediately to Hell, Luke 16.23. The
rich man was buried, and in hell he lift up his eyes.

It Is true there is a Purgatory in this life, and that is the Blood of Christ 1 John 1.17. If we are not purged by this blood, while we live, we shall never be
purged after by fire. Wicked men, when they dye, do not go into a fire of
purgation but damnation.

And, on the other hand, Believers when they die pass immediately to Heaven,
Luke 23.43. This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, Christ Jesus was now on
the Cross, and was instantly to be in Heaven; and the penitent Theif was
immediately to be with Christ: Here is no mention of any such place as
Purgatory. The ancient and Orthodox Fathers were all against Purgatory; as
Chrysostom, Cyprian. Austine, Fulgentius.

Tenthly, A tenth Error is, the Invocation of Angels, a praying unto them. This
is a certain rule, that Angel-worship is VVill-worship, expressly forbidden in
Scripture, Col. 2.18.

Their distinction of Mediators, of Redemption, and of Intercession, does not
help them; Though we pray (say they) to Angels as Mediators of Intercession,
yet we pray to Christ as Mediator of Redemption.

Answ. Jesus Christ in Scripture is not only called a Redeemer, but also an
Advocate: and it is a sin to make any our Intercessor but Jesus Christ. That it
is sinful to pray to Angels, is clear from many Scriptures: See Rom 5.10. How
shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed? Mark, we may not pray
to any but them in whom we believe: But we cannot believe an Angel, therefore
we must not pray to an Angel. So also in Heb. 10.17. Having therefore boldness
to enter into the holiest by the Blood of Jesus; He only is to be prayed unto,
by whom we have entrance into the Holiest: but it is by Jesus Christ that we
enter into the holiest; therefore it is only Jesus Christ that we must pray
unto. That is the tenth.

11ly. An eleventh Error is, Their Worshipping of Images; they burn Inccense
before the Image, which is a Divine worship unto the Image. Now this is
directly contrary to the very letter of the Command Exodus 20.4, 5.
Image Worship, and Idol-worship are terms synonimical. God says of Idols, that
they speak Vanity, Zach. 10.2. And is it not a vain thing to worship those
things that are vain, and that speak vanity* None can draw the picture of a
Spirit, who then draw the Picture of him who is the Father of spirits? This
Opinion of Image Worship has been condemned and exploded by several Councils
and Synods.

12ly. Another Error in the Popish Religion is, They deny Jesus Christ suffered
the pains of Hell in his Soul. Indeed, to give them their due, they do
aggravate the pains of Christ's Body, but they deny he felt the Pains and
Torments of Hell in his Soul. This Opinion does much lessen the Sufferings of
Christ for us, the same does l^ssen the Love of Christ to us. But it is clear,
Christ felt the pains of hell in his soul.

But when we say, Christ suffered the Pains of Hell in his Soul, we do not mean
that he felt horror of conscience, as the damned do; but we mean he felt that
that was equivolent to it, he felt the burden and pain of Gods wrath. Christ
Jesus suffered equivolently the pains of Hell, that so he might free us really
from the Torments of Hell.

13ly, And lastly, another Error is this, The Pope (say they) has a power to
absolve men from their Oaths. Of what sad consequence, and how dangerous this
may be to Protestant States, I leave themselves to judge. It has been often
determined by learned Casuists, that an Oath once taken (the matter of it being
lawful) persons cannot be absolved from it. But no more of this matter.

I Will now wind up all in a word or two of application, and it shall be in the
words of my text. Wherefore, my beloved, flee from Idolatry, flee from Popery;
take heed of that Religion that brings forth so many Monsters. And besides
these thirteen Errors, consider briefly these six or seven Particulars:

1. The Popish Religion is an impure, filthy Religion, they allow of Stews and
Brothel-houses for money: nay some of the Popes themselves have been guilty of
Sodomy and Simony. 2. It is a Superstitious Religion; that appears in their
Christening of Bells, in their using of Salt Spittle, and Cross in Baptism:
Indeed Paul gloried and rejoiced in the Cross of Christ. St. Paul had the Power
of the Cross in his heart, not the Sign of the Cross in his forehead. It is an
unspeakable indignity and dishonor to Jesus Christ, to use that in his
Worship that he never instituted 3. Popery is upheld by Deceit and Lying: How
have they belyed both Calvin and Luther. They say of Luther, that when he dyed,
the Devils were seen to dance about him, and that he dyed with much horror and
despair, when as he went severely and sweetly out of the world, his last words
being those of our blessed Saviors, Father, into thy hands I commit my Spirit.
4. The Popish Religion is an outside carnal Religion, it consists in external
things, as Whipping, Fasting, Chringing: There Is nothing of Life and Spirit in
their Worship it is but a skeliton and carcass; there is nothing of Soul and
Spirit in it. 5. The Popish Religion is an unedifying religion, it does not
build men up in their most holy Faith; it does not carry on the work of
Sanctification; there is more of Pomp then purity in it. 6. It is a cruel
Religion, it is maintained and propogated by Blood and Cruelty. The Pope will
have St. Paul's Sword, as well as St. Peter's Keys; and what he cannot maintain
by dint and force of Argument, that will he endeavor to maintain by force of
Arms. In a word, the Romish Church is a Purple Whore, dyed with the Blood of
Saints and Martyrs. 7. And lastly, the Remish religion is a self-contradicting
religion. One of their Canons says, a man (in some cases) may take the
Sacrament at the hand of an Heretic: another Canon says, he may not. A
learned and judicious Writer observes above an hundred Contradictions in their
Religion. Therefore again I press the words of my Text, Wherefore, my beloved,
nay, let me say, my dearly beloved. flee from Idola^ry.
To shut up all let me exhort you to these two or three things:

First, Hold fast the Doctrine of the true Orthodex Protestant Religion: the
very filings of this gold is precious. Keep all the Articles of the Christian
Faith; if you let one fundamental article of your Faith go, you hazard your
Salvation. When Samson pulled down but on Pillar, immediately the whole Fabric
tumbled: so, if you destroy one Pillar, if you let go one Fundamental of Truth,
you endanger all. Secondly, Hold forth the profession of the Protestant
Religion, I say: do not only hold fast the Doctrine of the Protestant Religion:
but hold forth the Profession of the Protestant Religion: Be not ashamed to
wear Christ's Colors. Christians remember this one thing, those Persons that
are ashamed of Christ, are a very shame unto Christ. The Religion I exhort you
to flee from, is a novelty: that which I press you to stand to, is a verity; it
is consonant to Scripture; it is built on the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, and has been sealed to by the blood of many Saints and Martyrs.
Thirdly, and lastly, do not only hold fast, and hold forth, but also adorn the
Protestant Religion: this is holy Paul's Exhortation to Titus, Tit. 2.10. Adorn
the Doctrine of God our Savior. Adorn Religion with a holy Conversation. There
is nothing hardens Papists so much as the looseness of Protestants. Therefore
adorn your holy Religion with a holy Conversation: Do as Christ did, tread in
his steps; make your Savior your Pattern. Let me assure you, I can hardly
think they do truly believe in Christ, that do not really, conform unto Christ
The Primitive Christians Sanctity, did much-what propogate Christianity. And
this is that beseech you carry home with you: Hold fast and hold forth the
Protestant Religion and adorn it with a Holy and Bible-Conversation; and when
you do not hear me Preaching to you, yet let me beseech you hear this good Word
speaking in you, Wherefore my dearly beloved, flee from Idolatry.
Consider what has been said, and the Lord make it advantageous to all your
Souls.

The Prayers of several of these Divines.
Mr. Calamy's Prayer at Aldermanbury.
OH most Holy! thou ever blessed Lord God, thou fillest Heaven and Earth with
thy Presence: We pray thee fill all our hearts with the Presence of thy Grace
and let it appear that thou art in the midst of us with that powerful
assistance of thy Spirit, that we may receive a token of thy love from thee at
this time It is a singular favor that the doors of thy Sanctuary are open to
us, and that yet we may meet together in thy Name; we pray the continue it to
us and sanctify it to us, that every Sabbath may add to our stature in Jesus
Christ, We confess we have forfeited all our mercies; we have heard much of
God, and Christ, and Heaven with our ears, but there is little of God, Christ,
and Heaven in our hearts.

We confess many of us by hearing Sermons, are grown Sermon-proof: We know how
to scoff and mock at Sermons, but we know not how to live Sermons.

It is a miracle of free grace, thou have not taken the Gospel from us ere this
time; but thou art a merciful God, and though we cannot please thee, yet Mercy
pleases thee; and we have no argument to bring along with us to beg thy
favors, but thy Mercy in Jesus Christ.

We pray thee that thou will glorify thy Sovereignty; in being gracious to us,
and pardon our many and great transgressions.

Thou make use of the malice of men for thy Glory: Thou killest Goliath with
his own Sword. O help us to put our trust in thee, thou that can kill, and
cure by killing.

Bless these Nations of England, Scotland and Ireland, and find out yet a way
to save us. Pour down thy blessings upon the head and heart of our Sovereign
Charles, by thy Grace, King of Great Britiain; thou have done great things for
him, let him do Great things for thee. Bless him in his Royal Consort, in his
Royal Relations, in his Council. Bless the Magistrates and Ministers of this
Realm: Lord forgive us, for we live as if we had been delivered to work
wickedness; we cannot sin at so cheap a rate as others do: we pray thee humble
us under our great and grievous sins, give us repentance unto Salvation, and a
lively Faith in the Blood of Jesus Christ: Quicken our graces, forgive our
sins, make alive our Souls, let us be such as thou would have us to be; make
us Christians, not only by an outward Profession, but an inward Conversation,
that we may live in Heaven, while we are on Earth, and come to Heaven when we
shall leave the Earth. To that purpose, bless thy Word unto us at this time,
and give us all grace to make conscience of what we hear, and how we hear, and
all for Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with thy blessed Self and Spirit, be all
Glory and Honor. Amen.

Mr. Nalton's Prayer at Foster-lane.
ETernal, most Mighty, and most glorious Lord God, thou art God alone, and
besides thee there is no Savior or helper: our strength stands in thy Name,
who have made both Heaven and Earth: of our selves we are able to do nothing
that is pleasing in thy sight; we can pollute thy Name, but we cannot honor
thy Name; we can run away from thee, but we cannot run unto thee, unless thou
do powerfully draw us by the holy spirit. We can grieve thy spirit, but we
cannot grieve for grieving of thy spirit.

Oh let thy strength be manifested in our weakness; look upon us with the
favor thou bear to thy children. Enter not into judgment with thy servants,
for we cannot answer thee one of a thousand, not one thought of a thousand
thoughts, not one word of a thousand words most of our actions have been
reproveable, and the best of our services have been unprofitable: our
omissions, commissions and presumptions have been multiplied intolerably. Oh!
how often have we take (...) Name in vain, while we have been confessing our
sins: how often ha^^ we run from confessing our sins, to the committing of
sins? and from committing sins, to the confessing sin again, as if we had but
mocked thy sacred Majesty. Though we know thy Favor is better than life, we
have parted with it upon easy terms. Oh the pride and stubbornness that is in
our hearts: All the mercies thou have bestowed upon us, have not melted us into
tears for our unkindnesse; and all those blows that have fallen upon our backs,
have not beat folly out of our hearts. We have been unprofitable all our days;
some have done thee more service in one year, than we in all our time: We have
forgotten thee in the day of prosperity, and sung a lullaby to our own Souls:
Oh that we could speak these things with broken and bleeding hearts! But as in
the time of our ignorance we could sin without reluctance, so now we can sin
without repentance. Oh that thou would smite the rock, that there might flow
out tears.

We can do nothing by way of expiation, if we would weep out our eyes; nothing
but the blood of Christ can take away our guilt. O that there might be a spring
of that blood upon our souls at this time! Oh that that blood may at this time
bring a report of love, and a message of mercy to us!

Do we beg any more than thou have promised? Oh have not thou accepted of that
satisfaction that Christ has made in his own person? If we had suffered the
torments of Hell, it could not have made that satisfaction that Christ has
made. Give us the witness of thy spirit and thy. Love and we will say we have
enough: give us hearts of flesh; crush the head of the serpent in our souls. O
Lord Christ, thou came into the world to destroy the works of the Devil in
our hearts and to build up the Kingdom of the spirit in us* Oh when shall we
see the old man decay in us, and the new man to live more and more!

O be wisdom to guide us and Righteousness to cleanse us from guilt, and
redemption to deliver us from the wages of sin: let us be nothing in our
selves, that we may be all in thee our savior; Oh honor us so far, that we
may honor thee We pray thee strengthen our weak says, quiet our consciences,
we would not live a day longer, than that we may honor thee: tread Satan under
our feet, fit us for our places and employments; let not our conditions be so
low, but that our hearts may be lower: we are posting to death; Oh let sin die
before, we die: let us know our names are written in the Book of Life, before
thou take away our life.

Look upon thy servant, our dread Sovereign, Charles, of Great Brit^^^n, France
and Ireland, King; oh enrich his Royal heart with all those saving graces of
thy Spirit, in order unto a wise and happy Government of these Kingdoms. Look
upon his Royal Consort, his Royal relations. the Lords of his Privy Council,
and make them blessings to this Nation. oh sanctify thy good word; oh give thy
gracious assistance to us, both in speaking and hearing: let us hear it as that
word by which we must be judged, that we may be convinced by it, and say, it is
the power of God to salvation to every soul of us. Let our meeting be for the
better to all of us, that we may be built up in the most holy Faith; and let us
know we have not sought thy face in vain for Jesus Christ his sake, our dear
Savior, for whom we bless thy Majesty, to whom with thee and thy Spirit be
praise for ever. Amen.

Mr. Jenkin's Prayer at Christ Church
MOst blessed and holy Lord God thou art infinitely beyond our apprehensions,
who wast infinitely happy before the world was made and want none of thy
creatures nor their services to make thee more excellent than thou art in thy
self: we daily want thee, thou never want us: thou art pleased to make use
of ordinances, Ministers, Sabbaths, as thy Institutions to accomplish and bring
about the great work of thy Glory, and man's Salvation: yet Lord thou do not
need them, thy Spirit is not made efficatious by these things, but it is that
that makes these things efficatious: though thou art pleased to tie us to them,
when we may have them and duly enjoy them, yet thou do not tie thy self to
them. We desire in these our addresses to eye the happiness of Saints that
depends upon him that depends upon none: we are here in thy presence by thy
goodness and grace: O whither should we go but to thee? and how should we come
but by thee? Oh strengthen our faith, kill our corruptions, inflame our love,
give us assurance of thy love to our souls oh that God would teach us how to
pray, that we may taste and see how good the Lord is this day, that our souls
may be filled as with marrow, that we may by our own experience be able to say,
It is good for us to draw nigh to God, and that a day in his house is better
then a thousand elsewhere; that there may be a communion between us and God let
there be a disunion between us and sin: we confess we brought sin enough into
the world with us, to cause thee to with-draw^th, blessed self from us: and to
cast such unproffitable servants as we are into utter darkness; we have been a
long time in thy school, and yet how dull are we? we might have been teachers
of others, but we need our selves be taught which are the first Principles of
the oracles of God: we love less than we know, and we do less than we love; we
have neither done that good, nor received that good which we should, or might
have done and received: We have been trees that have cumbred the ground in thy
orchard, but we have brought forth no fruit. Woe unto us that we have not known
the day of our visitation: many of us have one foot in the grave, and yet we
have lived without God in the world; we are wise in every thing but in our own
Salvation; we live as if Hell were a privilege: those of us that have some
knowledge of thee, have great cause to repent that we have walked so unworthily
of God. Which of us pray continually, and fervently, or live the life of says?
we confess we neither take our afflictions humbly, nor our mercies thankfully
nor want our comforts contentedly, nor fill up our relations fruitfully: We
live as if Hell were a scarecrow, as if all the threatenings of thy word were
an empty noise, as if there were neither sweetness in Heaven, nor bitterness in
Hell. When we come into thy presence, where are our hearts? what earthly
dispositions do we bring along with us? the sins of our Prayers cry louder then
the Supplications of our prayers; what hypocrisy and formality cleaves unto
us? If thou do not look upon the iniquities of our holy things with an eye of
pity, what will become of us? O Lord be pleased to smell a sweet savor of
rest and peace through thy dear Son. O Lord, it is only his precious Blood that
can sprinkle our hearts and quiet our Consciences, and no other thing: We do
renounce our own Works, and we cry out in our selves, Undone* undone.

It is through thy beloved Son that we are accepted: and therefore to that end
bring us to him by a saving operation on thy part, and by our lively trust
through the Covenant of Grace on our part: let there be such a unity between
Christ and us, that all the powers of Hell may not be able to separate us from
thee: speak peace to our hearts, still our consciences, say I have received a
sacrifice for you, I shall befriend you, I will be just and faithful to forgive
your sins; my Law is sully fulfilled by another, though broken by you: my
Justice is fully satisfied by another, though provoked by you: my wrath is
ceased by the means of another, though incensed by you.

Oh Lord what a cordial would this be! can not thou amongst this great
multitude of people espy some that through the Spirit of thy Son would worship
thee in thine own way? speak peace to every such soul. Is there any soul before
thee, O Lord, to whom thou have given the grace of desire? O lord give them
grace according to their desire: and thou which did regard us when we were
running from thee, do not reject us now we are drawing near thee. And thou
which bidst us believe by the command of thy Word, help us to believe by the
operation of thy Spirit; draw us that we may be able to follow thee: thy loving
kindness is better than life.

Some do say, Who will show us any good? But Lord, lift thou up the light of
thy countenance upon us, and thou will glad our hearts more than in the time
when Corn, or wine, or Oil increases. Let it be fair above head when it is
dirty below; let us see one contrary in another; let us confute an eye of sense
with an eye of faith; and when we come to see nothing here that can gratify
our senses, let us have something to quiet our souls.

We would fain be at war with sin, that we may be at peace with thee though we
cannot return as much as we have received, yet help us to return as much as we
can: give us repentance unto life, epentance from dead works; a mourning fat
greater for the remembrance of sin, than we have pleasure in the committing of
sin: those secret distempers in our souls, that no eye sees but thine, let us
cry out, Wretched men that we are, who should deliver us from this body of sin?
And as the fear of condemnation does decrease, so set the fear of transgression
increase. And because O Lord, thou have not made us to bleed with thy
greatness, O Lord make us to blush with thy goodness; let us as truly desire
that Heaven would enter into us into a way of holiness here, as we desire to
enter into Heaven in the way of happiness hereafter.

Let us see that our kindness to sin is cruelty to our Savior; let net that
live quietly one minuite with us, that would not let Christ live: let us see
there is nothing small by which the great God is offended, and an immortal soul
is damned. We are to be in the world but for a while, to take a turn or two and
be gone: Oh that we might make it the business of our life to get into Christ;
though it be the scorn of men, and burdensome to nature; yet this is that which
will bring us peace at last. Let us be what we profess our selves to be: let us
love Christ, and evangelically keep his commandments: let us live by faith,
let us keep thy Commandments, let us be above the world in the world; above
the love of life, and above the fear of death: let not the smiles of the world
allure us, nor the frowns thereof affright us from thee, but in all these
things let us be more than conquerers through Jesus Christ: Let us love him
much whom we cannot love too much: Help us to be above the power of Hell; let
us ever say, My soul, it is good for me to draw nigh to God. Let us be willing
rather to be faved with a few, than go to Hell in a crowd: let us live as if
Eternity were long, and life but short; let us thrive in holiness, and be
brought nearer to thy self by every dispensation; let us in this our day know
the things that concern our peace, before they be hid from our eyes, and know
the time of our visitation; and though God suffer long, he will strike at last
O Lord, bow the heavens and come down among us at this time, and be with the
unworthiest of thy servants, and give unto him a door of utterance, and to thin
great people a door of entrance, and let them be all taught of God; and let
them truly find that the great God is teaching to the heart, when that a weak
worm is speaking to the ear; let all the work be done by theo, and let all: he
praise redound unto thee; and let him that is with us be greater than he that
is in the world: behold us in the Son of thy love, smell aswee savor of rest on
these our poor prayers speak peace to our consciences, rebuke the tempter,
tread him under our feet shortly, raise us up to newness of life: let us
remember when that which is perfect is rome, that which is imperfect shall be
done away. Hear us, and help us, through our dear Redeemer: let us live for him
here, and with him hereafter, and all for his sake, whom not seeing, we love,
in whom believing we rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory: to whom,
with thee, and thy Sprit, be Glory and Honor, now an for ever. Amen.

Mr. Cradocott's Prayer at St. Sepulchers.
MOst glorious, and most gracious Lord God, who art God, and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who have put thine own Name and stamp upon this Day, will thou be
pleased to appear now, and prepare, and dispose our unprepared and indisposed
souls for holy. Observation of this thine holy day. Will the Lord vouchsafe us
the incomes of his spirit, and influences of his Grace, whereby we may be
enabled to offer up spiritual Sacrifice, which may be acceptable to Jesus
Christ; Lord thou requirest, praying hearts, but thou have not commanded us to
use Prayer-books; and if thou will give us the Spirit of Prayer, we shall not
need them, Lord, give us praying hearts at this time; let us find by,
experience that the Sabbath is a day of Souls opportunity, that thine
Ordinances are full of marrow, that thou have not said unto thy Children, the
seed of Jacob, seek my face in vain.

We acknowledge we are unworthy to lift up our eyes to heaven, we have cause
enough to cry out. God be merciful to us sinners, undeserving, ill-deserving
men and women; we acknowledge our natures are blots of all wickednesses; we are
by nature enemies to thy Majesty, heirs of death, children of darkness, slaves
to sin captives to lust, dead to sins and trespasses; how are our
understandings darkened, and our hearts-hardened? what are our hearts but a
store house of malicious thoughts? a brothel house of adultery? a palace of
pride? we are by nature wholly flesh, totally opposite to the holy Laws of thy
Majesty, and were it not for thy renewing and restraining grace we should break
forth into as vile abominations as the vilest of men: our lives have been a
continual piece of rebellion against God, who did make us, and does feed and
cloth us; all thy paths have been paths of mercy to us, but we have requited
thee evil for thy good, and hatted for thy love: Oh foolish men and women that
we have been I we acknowledge our Gospel-sins are of a deep dye: Thou have not
been a VVildernss or Land of darkness to us; we have been exalted to heaven in
the means of salvation: but, Oh! how short do we come of knowledge to the time
and means we have enjoyed; and our obedience comes short of our knowledge, we
have not walked up to that light which thou have given us.

We desire to lay our selves low before thee, Oh do thou open our eyes, and
present us to our selves; show us the vilenss of our lives: Blessed be thy Name
that thou have laid help upon one that is mighty to save all that come to thy
Majesty by him; and thou have promised all that believe on him shall not
perish, but have everlasting life. Oh help us to receive him in all his Offices
in our hearts; help us to give him the keys of our hearts; and help us to live
and die to him that died for us; and let our souls be united to thee by him,
that his death may be ours, and his life ours, and his intercession ours: Oh
let our unity to Christ be demonstrated to us by our communion with, and
conformity to him in grace and holiness.

And we pray thee, dearest Lord, pardon our sins in the Court of heaven, and in
the Court of our own consciences; besprinkle our conscienees in the blood of
Christ, and say to all before thee at this time, that desire to fear thee more,
and serve thee better, Sons and Daughters be of good cheer, your sins are
forgiven you.

And do not only justify us, but sanctify us, purge our consciences from dead
works; inform our understanding: conform our wills to thy holy Will; let our
hearts and lives be comformed to the Image of thy Son, that beholding thereof,
we may be changed from glory to glory; and let us have more knowledge of thy
will, that we may do thy will und suffer thy will with more patience, and be
filled with the fruits of Righteousness, which are to the glory of God. Let us
not be empty Vines that bring forth fruit to themselves, but let us bring forth
fruit to God; whereby thou may be glorified: Oh plant that great grace of
Self-denial in our souls, and let us take the Cross of Jesus Christ and follow
him wheresoever he goes.

Remember all thine; extend thy favor to those thou have cast on beds of
sickness and let there be a saving change wrought in them, before that change
by death shall come, and they that are drawing nigh their time of Travel, let
the arms of the All-sufficient God be under them, and be better to them than
their Faith or our prayers: and look graciously upon poor children entitle them
to an inheritance that fades not away, make them a blessing in themselves. and
a blessing to their Parents: And those that de^re the conversion of Relations,
that walk in ways of perdition, do not let them find peace in any way against
thy Majesty, and let them know that sin will be bitter in the latter eud.

Look upon us that are before thee at this time, before we go hence, and shall
be here no more: make thy face to shine upon us: let our coming together be for
the better and not for the worse to any of us; let thy poor Servant be able to
deliver thy Message plainly and powerful and give thy People hearing ears and
obedient hearts, and let us rejoice that we did wait upon thee in thy Worship
this day; and all For Christ his sake, in whose Name and Words we call upon
thee.

Our Father' which art in Heaven, etc.

Doctor Manton's Prayer at Covent Garden.
O Lord God, all that we can do is nothing of our selves, we can do nothing; Oh
let us have the gracious Assistance of thy Spirit as this time; let thy love
constrain us; say unto us, Thou art our Salvation. Do not say that we shall
fill up the measure of our Iniquities, and there shall be no hope for us. O
Lord, we are ashamed that we have waited so long in thine Ordinannances, and
have got no more profit to our toor pouls; but we have given up our hearts to
the pleasures and vanities of this world, that are but for a season; even those
that thou have drawn out after thee, do not walk worthy of thee (anseerable to
that blessed hope of future Happiness) in the midst of a crooked and perverse
generation, Jesus Christ is to many of us become a stumbling-blook, and a reck
of offense while our hearts are carried out after the wirld with such strong
affections Oh! when shall we carry our selves so, as those that profess
themselves to be secke's of a better life: We come into thy presence now for
strength, do thou manifest thy self to us; thou have promised to pour out thy
Spirit upon all Flesh; Oh let it be unto us according to thy promise.

O Lord, our hearts naturally are averse to thee, so that of our selves we
shall never be able to do any thing that may be wel-plensing to thee; but do
thou regulate us by thy blessed Spirit, that we may observe thy statutes and do
them, and that thy Commands may not be grievous to us, that it may not be
burdensome: for us to do the work of God; O Lord, when shall our hearts be made
sound in thy statutes? we wait upon thee in the use of thine Ordinances, that
we may have a new supply from thee, that at length we may come to see that thou
art at work with us to save our souls; O help us to be followers of them, who
with faith and patience do follow thee, and to do nothing unbecomming our holy
Call: suffer us not to swerve from thy Commandments, but let us have a constant
and earnest desire after thee.

Let the choicest of thy Mercies come down on our Sovereign Charles King of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, let His heart be guided by thee, and let
him always set the before his eyes that under the shadow of his Government, we
may have Peace in all Godliness and honesty: Bless him in his Relations, in his
Councils. Teach our Senators wisdom: Be with all thy Faithful Magistrates and
Ministers, let them be a terror to evil doers, and an encouragement to them
that do well. Be with us in the way of thy worship; we are here met together to
hear and handle thy holy Word, Oh do thou command it to light upon all our
hearts let it come in the evidence and demonstratian of thy Spirit; and all for
Christ his sake; for whom we bless thee: to him, with thee and thy holy Spirit.
be Praise and Glory for evermore.

Dr. Anesley 's Prayer at Giles-Cripplegate.
HOly and great God of Heaven and Earth, such his the condescension of thy
Grace, that thou art pleased to manifest thy special presence to thy poor
creatures, though thou hate sin with a perfect hatred, yet thou love
sinners with an infinite Love; though thou art of purer eyes than to behold
iniquity, yet thou art pleased to manifest thy Love to sinners that approach to
thy service O Lord, when shall we admire enough thy Grace and Love, how thou
art pleased to communicate thy self to a poor man. Dear Father, raise and fix
our hearts, help us to mind the business that we come about, and to deal very
faithfully with our own souls in the matters of eternal moment. Oh that we
could pray so, that our prayers through grace might be returned upon us with a
blessing. O that we could wait upon thee, to hear thy Word as the Oracles of
God; let us hear what Christ will discover to us for our spiritual benefit:
Lord grant that our souls may know what it is to be in the Spirit in the Lords
day: Dear Father thou can deal with such hearts as ours for the curing of
them, we pray thee do it; we must needs acknowledge, had not thou laid help
upon one that is mighty, that is able to save to the uttermost, we must have
perished to all eternity, for we do not know any upon the earth more vile then
our selves: The very agravations of our sins, to render us monstrously
abominable; the means of grace we have afforded us, the stirrings of thy spirit
in us, the patience and goodness of God toward us, makes it a wonder that our
hearts do remain so blockish. But dear Lord, we do find by experience, that our
immortal souls are much debased; all the faculties of our souls are out of
tune; our understandings are so dark, our conceptions of God are so low, our
consciences are so benumbed, that the stirrings of them are scarce discerned or
perceived; our affections are spent upon the creature, that we cannot gather
them up again; our wills are perverse, our memories are apt to retain the
dross, and let out all that is good: we pray thee for Christ's sake, make an
experiment upon our souls, what thou can do, what sinners Christ can save;
what corruptions the spirit of God can subdue in our souls; teach all our
hearts, do not stand behind the wall and look through the latice; do so much as
may leave us without excuse; but good Lord put thy hand in at the hole of the
door, and let thy fingers drop honey upon the handle of the Lock. And, oh; set
open these everlasting Doors, that the King of glory may enter in: Subdue us
entirely to thy self; do not ask our wills, whether we be willing or no, but
make us willing: do not ask us what we would have but give us what thou know
is good for us. Dear Lord, we pray thee deliver us from sin according to thy
hatred of it, and pour out thy grace upon us, according to thy love of grace,
that our souls may be refreshed that we may find thy thoughts are above ours,
as high as heaven is above the earth. Dear Father, it is thy promise, that
those that wait upon thee, shall renew their strengths we have no might; the
Devil bastles us, our own hearts are treacherous to us: The world intices us to
sin against. God: oh! deliver us from all these enemies and especially from the
plagues of our own hearts, that we may perfect holiness in the fear of God:
give us spiritual blessings, whatsoever thou give us, or whatsoever thou
deniest us; thou know thou art rather willing to give us spiritual
blessings, than any other mercies; and we want spiritual mercies most; Oh oh
give us spiritual Mercies, that we may say, This is the way of God in his
Sanctuary: Where grace is not wrought, work it; where it is begun, increase it.
Dear father, convince those that are not yet convinced: Make thy word a
quickening word, an ingrafted word, to the saving of our souls; help us to hear
as for our lives and as those that long after God. Hear Prayers for the King,
bless him in his Royal Relations, and grant under him, we may live a quiet life
in all godliness and honesty* Bless the Magistrates, and help them to remember,
that causes one day must be heard over again. Help thy Ministers to keep close
to thee in ways that are well pleasing. Be with us at this time. Lord, assist
the meanest of thy servants, let our souls now find that thou do magnify thy
word above all thy Name; do us good, receive us, quicken us, that we may live
in heaven upon earth, that we may know what it is to be filled with the fullness
of God, and know the height; breadth, depth, and length of thy love, that
passes knowledge. Communicate thy self to us as thou usest to do to thy people;
let us feel thy presence; let us not think of any thing, but the business, we
are about; let us with singleness of heart, set our selves to mind the
concernment of our immortal souls; and all we beg for Christ his sake, who has
taught us thus to pray. Our Father, etc.

Dr. Bates his Prayer at Dunstans in the West.
O Lord, thou art a most holy high God, the Glorious Angels when they stand
before thee, cover their faces (yet they d^d never violate thy Laws) and if
they, how much more need have we to do it?

We are sinful dust and ashes; our solemn Services are sin: We desire to
approach thy presence, and to have an eye to thy glory in all our services and
addresses.

We beseech thee give us a serious and a deep sense of our own hearts, and vile
affections, that we may cast our selves down at thy feet with all humility: We
have infinite reason to be abased in our selves; our God help us. We came into
the world with sin, and as soon as we did breath in the air, we infected it:
there is an infection and pollution in all our faculties; what coldness is
there in our affections and what unbelief in our faith, and our wills do stand
apopsite against thy holy nature.

We confess we have had ten thousand experiences of those corruptions that are
within us; for our while lives are full of provocations against God.

How many vain thoughts, and how many rebellious actions! Blessed Father, we
confess we are out of measure sinful, we have sinned against the clearest
convictions of thy word, and the tender compassions of thy Gospel, against the
most severe promises we have made of our service to God, against the checks of
our own Consciences; we confess the sins of the Heathens, who live without God
in the world, are small in comparison of ours, and we fear therefore a greater
degree of wrath will fall upon us.

O Lord, how many ways have thou used to reclaim us! what Arts has thy blessed
Spirit used! how many times have thou approached to our souls, and showed us
something of thy glory, and the glory of heaven, and the terrors of h^ll, the
one to allure us, and the other to scare us. But, Oh! how many times have we
grieved thy blessed Spirit, who came to seal us, and despised thy Son who came
from heaven to earth, and lived a sorrowful life, and died a shameful death?
how often has he offered us grace and glory, if we would how to his Scepter,
but we have preferred a base lust before that excellency that he has purchased
us: Oh how often have thou condescended so far, as to entreat us to be
reconciled, how easy have thou been to forgive! and how hard have we been to
be forgiven! We confess thou migh^est pass an eternal Doom upon us, for we are
sensible of the dishonor that we have brought upon thy Name.

Do thou at this time strike upon all these rocks that are in thy presence at
this time: give us hearts of flesh, let our repentance p^eprare us for
corversion, let there be such a through conviction, that thy grace and Mercy
may be admirable in our eyes.

We entreat thee hear us, pardon all our iniquities, let us be monuments of
thy grace and favor, speak peace to our Consciences; convey those clear evis
dences of th^^^ve unto us, that may enable us to scatter all our f^a^s, that we
may rejoice in God, and have hope of glory.

Let the image of thy Son be engraven on all our hearts, and let our souls be
made subject to him; while we are in the world, preserve us from the evil of it.

If thou give us out ward happiness, give us withat inward holiness: and if
we do suffer, help us with patience to bear all, knowing we are in our journey
and our passage to a better life; and let our whole time be spent in a serious
Preparation to appear before thy Tribunal, and let us consider the
unchangableness of that state hereafter.

Remember thy whole Church, make the Name of Christ glorious in the world; shed
abro^d thy light and thy truth: heavour backslidings, and love us freely: Let
thine Ord^nances continue among us; and let thy blessing descend upon our
sovereign Lord the King, of England, Scot and, France, and Ireland, Defender of
the Faith; Incline his heart to thy Law, make him an instrument of public
good, protect his person. and give him prosperous affairs. Bless his Royal
Consort, his Relations, his privy Counsel, let them promote solid Piety, and
real Godliness. Bless the Minister of thy Word and Sacraments: Let their
labors be precious in thy sight; and remember all afflicted ones: revive thy
Mourners, and let thy grace answer all their fears. Let thy presence be in the
midst of us, and help us to hear as our last; and let us be raised nearer
heaven, and make thy word powerful and effectual to all our souls, and let thy
word subdue our lusts; and a^l we beg for the sake of Jesus Christ; in whose
Name and words we sum up our imperfect Prayers.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Dr. Jacomb's Prayer at Martins Ludgate.
BLessed God, thou art a God blessed for ever; thou give Mercy to all
returning and repenting sinners; thou art worthy to be praised by all that draw
nigh unto thee,

Thou have vouchsafed to us one Sabbath more; Oh that we might all of us be in
the spirit upon the Lords day, that whatever we do, we may do it in the
strength of God, that we may offer spiritual Sacrifices to God this day,
through our Mediator the Lord Jesus.

It is a very great condescension, that thou should suffer such as we are to
come unto thee; O Lord, we are unclean, we are unclean, from the crown of the
head to the sole of the foot, we are overspread with the leprosy of sin; all
the faculties of our souls are defiled; our understandings are darkened; our
wills are corrupted; we have affections but they are carnal; we have hearts,
but they are impure; we have consciences but they are seared: and as our inward
man, so our lives are unholy; as the fountain is, so is the stream: besides
that, our general guilt that we brought into the world, we are guilty of
innumerable actual transgressions against thy holy Law: We think, O Lord, there
are no greater sinners in the world than we; our sins are attended with many
aggravations.

We have finned against Prayers, against vows and promises; we have had as much
light shining before us, as any in the world have had: great is our unbelief Oh
that we could lay these things to our hearts! We do refuse to come to Christ;
we go about to establish a righteousness of our own, and neglect the
righteousness of God by faith in Jesus Christ: how are our hearts glewed to the
present things of this world! Oh! what do we do for thy glory? How unreformed
are we under all the ways of God, that he has taken to make us a holy people!
Give us a sight of our sins O Lord; we confess sometimes we do make a formal
confession but we do not find our hearts melted for sin as they should.

Oh take away from every one of us this heart of stone, and give a heart of
flesh; give us tender hearts, make us sensible of all our departing from thee.
Oh let us look upon him whom we have pierced and let us mourn* that the Water
of penitential sorrow may flow from us; we are strangers to our selves, we do
not see what a hell there is in our nature: Oh! how should we put our mouths in
the dust, and loath our selves, if so be there might be hope. O Lord convince
us of sin, give us such a sight of sin as may make us fly to thee; give us
such a sight of our own guilt, that ma^^ prepare us for the Grace of God^; now
we are s^ung with the fiery Serpents, help us to come to Jesus Christ our
brazen Serpent; give us the holy Spirit to bring us out of the state of nature,
to let that God that made us Creatures, make us new Creatures O Lord, we are
thine own work, but we are dead in trespasses and sins; give us grace, and
speak a word to them that are dead; put out thine Almighty Power, and draw some
sinner to Christ this day; and those that have any breathings after thee, Oh!
thou that gave them that desire, carry on thine own work in them; where thou
have begun a good work, carry it on; let sin, as the house of Saul, grow weaker
and weaker, and grace, as the house of David, grow stronger and stronger: Oh!
increase our faith; O Lord at this time we do not only stand in need of grace
but of a great measure of grace. Oh! help us by faith to rely upon God, that
thou may help us at last: Bless with us all thine; remember thy people from
one end of the world to the other: Thy people are very low; this is a time of
Jacobs troubles, the Bush is burning every day. Oh thou the Hope of Israel and
the Savior thereof! show thy self in mercy to these Nations We bless thee for
all thy mercies that thy judgments do not seize upon us every day, that thou
do not sweep us away, that thou do not rain Fire and Brimstone on England,
as thou did on Sodom: our sins cry aloud to heaven for vengeance: God is
greatly provoked every day, and it is a miracle of patience that thou have not
destroyed us. God can pardon the sins of the Nation at once; but we are not fit
for pardon; we do not humble our selves; O Lord, humble us, give repentance to
England from the highest to the lowest* that we may return unto thee.

We desire to bless thee, that our Eemies have not had their wills over us:
they said, they would pursue and overtake, and satisfy their lusts, but God
did blow upon them, and they did sink in the mighty Water and thou have yet
preserved thy Church; we pray thee do not leave us, nor remove thy Gospel,
whatsoever thou do.

Pour down elle: choicest of thy b^essings upon our Sovereign Charles, by thy
Grace of England, Scotland, France* and Ireland, Bless him with the Blessing of
Heaven and Earth; make him a blessing to all of us: Bless him in all his
Relations; the Lords of the privy Council. Look on them that have desired an
interest in our, prayers, known to thee are all of them; know their souls in
this time of adversity; make their beds in their siekness: Give Faith to them
that complain of unbelief: give the Spirit of Prayer to those that complain
they cannot pray: be a Councellor to those that wan council in their affairs,
either by Sea or Land, let thy blessig go with them wherever they go: Spare
the lives of Children if it be thy will.

Prepare us for thy good and holy Word, let it be a savor of lise unto life,
and let it come with power unto us; Oh let us hear it as thy Word, not as the
word of a poor man, but as the Word of God; and all for the Lord Christ his
sake; for whom we bless thee; to whom, with thee and the Spirit of Grace, be
given Glory and Honor for evermore.

Mr. Waltons Prayer in Walbrook.
O Lord God, all our springs are in thee, it is good for us to draw nigh to
thee through Jesus Christ; thou art all fullness, thou art the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and in him our Father, thou art our light; thou give us
these blessed opportunities of enjoying communian with thy self, God blessed
for ever.

These mercies are forfeited mercies we have abused the blessings of thy House;
we have grieved thy blessed Spirit; therefore it is just with thee to deprive
us of these comforts, and to make us know the worth of these mercies by the
want of them.

Lord, we desire to judge our selves, that we may not be condemned with the
world: Righteous art thou, O Lord, and just in all thy judgments: we confess
we are unworthy to have any converse with so holy a God: we are polluted dust
and ashes not worthy to tread thy Courts, and it is of thy mercy that we are
not consumed; how often have we plucked fruit from the forbidden tree! we have
sinned presumptuously against the clearest Light, and the dearest love: always
have we sinned; thy footsteps have dropped fatness, thou have shown mercy to us,
but the better thou have been to us, the worse we have been to thee; thou have
loaded us with thy mercies and we have wearied thee with our sins, when we look
into our selves, Oh the poison of our natures, whatever the Leper did touch,
was unclean. Thus do we by our spiritual Leprosy infect our holy things; our
prayers had need have pardon, and our tears had need have the blood of
sprinkling to wash them: how vain are our vows! how sensual are our affections!
we confess we are untuned and unstrung for every holy Action; we are never out
of tune to sin, but always out of tune to pray: we give the world our male
affections and our strong desires: we should use this world as if we used it
not, and alwies we pray, as if we prayed not; and serve thee, as if we served
thee not: there is not that reverence, nor that devotion, nor that activeness
of faith that there should be Lord, if thou would say that thou would
pardon all our sins to this time, only judge us for this prayer, woe unto us;
what breathings of unbelief and hypocrisy is there now, when we approach unto
thee! we pray thee pardon us for Christ's sake. Who can tell how often he does
offend? we can as well reckon the drops of the Ocean, as number our sins; we
have filled the number of the Nations sins, but we have not filled thy bottle
with our tears: This is that that does exceedingly aggravate our sins, that we
cannot mourn for sin; we can grieve for our losses, but we cannot mourn for our
unkindnesses we have crucified the Lord of life; sin has not only defiled us,
but hardened us: nothing can melt us but the love of Christ, nothing can soften
us but the blood of Christ: O withold not thy mercies from us, O help us to
eat the Passover with bitter herbs. let us look on Christ, and weep over him;
let us look on a broken Christ with broken hearts, and on a bleeding Christ
with bleeding hearts* let us mourn for our dis-ingenuity, that we should grieve
that God that is always doing us good. Oh! humble us for our unkindnesse, and
for Christ's sake blot out our transgressions; they are more than we can number,
not more than God can pardon.

Though we have lost the duty of children, thou have not lost the goodness of a
Father: Let us be held forth as patterns of mercy, so shall we trumpet forth
thy praise to all Eternity. Whatever afflictions thou layest upon our bodies,
let not our sins be unpardoned, let not sin and affliction be together upon us;
let their be peace in Heaven, and peace in the Court of Conscience: We have
found this part of thy Word true. In the world we shall have troubles; let us
find the other part true, in Jesus Christ we shall have peace. Oh let peace and
holiness go together: make us new Creatures, that we may be glorious Creatures:
Without Faith Christ will not profit us; when we can call nothing in the world
ours, let us call Christ ours.

Lord, draw thine Image every day more lively upon us, a more lively hope, and
a more inflamed love to Christ; let us have a spirit of courage and resolution;
keep us from the fallacies of our own hearts; keep us from the defilements of
the times; make us pure in heart, that we may see God that we may have Gospel
spirits, humble spirits; meek spirits: as Christ did take our flesh, let us
partake of his Spirit. Why do thou imbitter the breast of the Creature to us,
but that we should find the sweetness of the Promises? There is as much in the
Promises as ever; let us live upon God, let us cast anchor in Heaven, and we
shall never sink.

Shower down thy blessings (even the choicest of them) upon the head and heart
of our dread Sovereign Charles, by thy appointment, of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith; let him see wherein his
chiefest interest lies; let him count those his best subjects, that are
Christ's subjects: Bless him ^n h^s Royal Consort, in his Royal Relations, the
Lords of his Privy Council; let them be a terror to evi^ doers, and incouragers
of those that do well.

Bless all thy Ordinances to us, make them to be fullness of life to every one
before thee: we are come this day to partake of them. Oh pour in Wine and oil
into our souls, let us be a watered garden; let this blessed Sacrament be a
poison to our lust, and nourishment for our Grace. Hear us; be our God, follow
us with mercy, crown us with acceptance and all for Christ his sake, whom not
seeing, we love in whom believing, we rejoice; to Christ, with thee and thy
holy Spirit, be Glory, Honor, and Praise, now and for ever, Amen.

Mr. Lie 's Prayer at Allhallows Lumber-street,
O Lord our great God, thou can do all things, for thou do dispose and
govern all the ways, and works and words of thy Creature to th^ne own praise;
We thy poor Creatures, the workmanship of thy hands, the price and purchase of
thy Sons blood do desire this morning to fall down and humble our selves at the
Throne of thy Grace; we desire to lift up an eye of Faith to thee, that thou
may dart an eye of Love to us: since thou have commanded us to come unto
thee, Oh bless us now we come: Let it not be in vain for any of us, from the
highest to the low'st, from the richest to the poorest, that we have sought thy
Face this morning Blessed Father, pour down a spirit of Prayer, a Spirit of
preaching, a Spirit of Rejoicing, a spirit of Practicing in the midst of us;
let us not only be enabled to know what to do, but to do what we know. Thou
that distd cure the eyes of the blind with clay and spittle. Oh heel that
natural dimness that is in the best of us: Thy Rod in the hand of Moses,
brought water out of the Rock: Oh do thou strike upon those rocky hearts, that
our adamantine hearts being softened, may gush out into Rivers of tears. Oh
drown our sins in the Red sea of our saviors blood; help us to smite upon our
thigh, and to ask our selves what we have been, and what we have done? and
humble us under the omission of any commanded duty and the commission of any for
bidden sin; sins of thoughts, words and dieds; sins against the Law, against
the Gospel, of youth, manhood, and old age; sins before, under, and since
conversion; sins against prayers, vows, promises, covenants and oaths. Oh Lord,
if thou did prefer thy Bill against us, we could not stand; if we were
weighed in the balance of the Sanctury, we should be found too light: but holy
Father, remember not against us our former sins, but rather have mercy upon us
according to thy loving kindness; cross, and blot out our iniquities, blot them
out so fully and wholly, that it may be to us as to Judath in the promise, that
the sins of Judath should be sought for and not found.

O bathe our souls in that Fountain that was set open for Judah and Jerusalem;
though our sins have been as Scarlet, let them be as white as Snow; though they
be red like Crimson, let them be like Wool.

We have read that a flood of sin brought down a deluge of water, that they
covered the tops of the mountains. Oh let thy deluge of mercy cover the tops of
the mountains of our sins.

It is the glory of a God to pardon great sins: We desire to turn unto thee
with our whole hearts; do thou subdue our iniquities; let us be not only
cleansed, but let us have the efficacy of the spirit of Christ to wash us from
the guilt of sin, because we boast we are not under the Law but under Grace.

Be gracious to our Sovereign Lord Charles, King of England, Scotland, France
and Ireland: It is thy promise that Kings shall be Nursing Fathers to thy
children; grant that under the shadow of his Majesty thy people may be
protected, that we may live a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and
honesty. Oh let thy people possess the Land from Dan to Beersheba. Oh give us
Scripture-Magistrates, and Gospel Ministers, as long as the Sun and Moon
endures.

Let thy Word be sanctified to us; let it not be only as water, to get out our
spots, but as a Refiners fire to purge our dross, and take away our tin.

And holy Father, where thou have begun a good work, do thou go on and bring it
to perfection; let not the light that is in us, be like the glimmering light of
the evening, but as the light of the morning that shines more and more to the
day. Let our best wine be kept to the last; let the end of our lives, be the
end of sinning.

Thou have cast our lot in the midst of temptations of all sorts, thou have
brought many of us through the red Sea; but we are in the wilderness with Zeba
and Zalmunna, and those that dwell at Tire, the children of Ammon, Moab, and
mount Seir, and all the forces that Hell can make against us: Oh put upon u^
all the whole Armor of God. Now in these days of Error, gird us with the
Girdle of Truth: Oh now in these days of falsity, give us a helmet of Hope

Now the Devil darts at us, give us the Shei^d of Faith: Oh, give us the Sword
of the Spirit, of the word of God, that it may enable us to confute the
gainsaying of foolish men.

Oh help us to pray with all manner of prayer constantly, fervently,
faithfully, feelingly, that we stand and not fall, and that not in our
strength, but in Gods.

To this end be with us, upon this thine own day; our Manna falls every day,
and it is doubled upon the Lords day: Oh let us be as thy servant John, in the
Spirit upon thine own day; let God by his Spirit come into our spirits,
understandings, consciences, wills, memories and affections, that all our
conversations without, and affections within, may be obedient to thy Word.

Enable thy Servant to deliver thy Word faithfully: God forbid thy Servant
should stand upon so sandy a foundation, as the Wisdom of Man: one iota of thy
Word has more wisdom in it, then all men and Angels have.

Good Father give thy people a hearing ear it is too much they have played by
the light of the Candle, slighted thy Manna so long: Oh now therefore to day
give us to hear and know, and believe, and do the things that concern our
everlasting peace: Hear us for Christ his sake: to whom, with thy blessed Self
and Spirit, be glory now and for ever:

The Prayer of Mr. Caryl, at Magnes, Bridge foot.
OH our Father, what a privilege is this that we may draw near to thee! all
our springs are in thee: the Creature is but a dry heap a barren wilderness,
it is but a Cistern, and a broken Cistern, It has no water of its own, nor can
it hold that which is poured into it: Oh that our hearts were taken off and
dis-engaged from all things on this side thy self, that we could say with thy
Servant, Whom have we in heaven but thee? and on earth there is none that we
desire in comparison of thee: Then, though our flesh and hearts fail us, yet
God would be our portion for ever.

We pray thee manifest thy Grace to us at all time, and especially at this
time, that we may come before God in this public worship as we should: Let us
see thy goings out in thy Sanctury, and let us be satisfied with the fatness of
thy house, and drink of those pleasures that are for evermore,

Lord, we have given thee cause to withdraw from us; for we have not labored
to be fruitful under means: and therefore thou in judgment might make them
hereafter to be fruitless unto us: and because we have taken no pains to get
good by them, thou might justly say, they shall do you no good. We have
heard much of thee, but we know thee but little: we acknowledge thou might
judge us because we know so little: and thou might punish us, because we do
so little of what we know, according as that faithless Servant was punished,
which knew his Masters will, and did it not.

Oh where be those manifestations of God that we have had? Have we had not the
light of the knowledge of God shining to us in the face of Jesus Christ? But we
have not rejoiced in this light, but have compassed our selves about with
sparks of our own kindling and therefore it is just we should down in sorrow;
and yet thou lengthenest out thy patience to us, and yet we have one
opportunity more to come unto thee. Oh, we pray thee, let us understand the
things belonging to our peace, before they be hid from our eyes: let our souls
be bound in the bundle of life with Christ Jesus: We pray thee, that that
Spirit of thine may strengthen us, that the Spirit may guide us, and lead us
into all truth: leave us not to our own strength, nor to our own council, but
show us the secrets of thy Word and Works: Thou have promised, Thy secret shall
be with them that fear thee, and thou will show them thy cevenant.

And as thou do give us thy Sabbaths, so give us to thrive by them; and help
us to grow as the Herb, and sent forth our fruit as Lebanon.

Let thy Word come with power one every one of us, that it may not be as the
beating of the air, but let it fit us for Duty that we may honor our God in the
midst of these changes, until we come to that place where there is no change;
and all for the sake of our dear Lord Jesus, to whom, with Thee and the blessed
Spirit: be Glory and Honor now and for ever.

Mr. Venning's Prayer at Olaves, before Sermon.
OH Lord God, thou art the Fountain of Life, yea, thou give to all Life; It
is necessity draws us now unto thee, and we acknowledge it is a very great
favor that thou will admit us to come into thy presence: Indeed the services
we do, are not worthy thy acceptance, thou gettest nothing by them, but the
gain of godliness is to our selves. But woe unto us what a loss, and what a
curse will ^t be to us, to have a form of Godliness, and yet be ungodly? Oh
Lord, how should this indear thee, and thy word and thy service, that thou
would have us do good for our own sakes! thou turnest our obedience into
privileges; thou have made the means of our happiness a part of it: If there
were no other glory but to glorify thee, oh what a glory would it be to be
found doing thy will! there is a sweetness to be found in it more than in the
Honey or in the Honey comes. It is a great happiness to be conformable to God,
to be loving to God, to be like to God, is the greatest happiness that we can
be capable of; if we were now in heaven; we could not have other happiness, but
this in a greater degree. O Lord, how should our souls be drawn forth to
acknowledge thee? may we not cry out in admiration, Lord what is man? and among
the sons of men, what are we that thou art so mindful of us? Thou might have
displayed thy Word to many thousands in the world, and we left ignorant: But
blessed be thy Name, thou art pleased to admit even us also thereunto: Oh let
it not be a small thing unto us, seeing we may yet live to serve God. Oh Lord,
in Christ it will be worth our while to live; and in him 'twill be worth our
while to die: Oh that we may mind the end of living, and the end of dying that
whether we live or die, we may be the Lords. Indeed, it were not worth our
while to live, and spend so much time in the world, if it were only to have
pleasure and honor, and gratify our selves to eat and drink, and to be merry;
this is not worth our while: What would it be, O Lord, to die in our sin, and
be eased of the miseries of this world, and be sent to the place of torment?
But seeing thou have provided for our living and our dying well, give us to
improve these means, and that we may live and dye well, let not our affections
though our bodies be upon the earth, though we converse with flesh yet let not
our conversation be after the flesh, but let us be like them which have sent
their hearts up to heaven, and do but tarry here to finish their Masters
business, and then we shall go where our hearts are and where our dear Lord
Jesus Christ is.

Indeed, Lord, we have cause to complain of our hearts, how we mind this
world, as it never would have an end: and the world to come, as if it would
never have any beginning: as if we had no souls to mind, or had no mind to look
to our souls.

We live as if all those glorious Reports thou have made, were but as a tale
that is told; we have cause to be ashamed that we have the means and the names
of Christians, and have not lived answerable to the discovery of the Lord Jesus
Christ: Indeed we have cause to bear our shame; and yet how few of us know what
it is to be ashamed, to sigh over our sins, and groan over our iniquities I how
few out of tenderness do mouru for sin, but as if it were indifferent to us,
whether we have our sins purdoned, or the grace that we beg to be granted; and
if we do beg to be pardoned, where are the souls that desire to be purged? If
thou should let us have our wills, Oh then we should think thou were a good
God; whereas it is thy great Love that thou do deny us our wills: we poor
wretch, we are up and down as the things of this world do come into us, and go
from us; if God give us great things, then we think our selves in Paradise, and
if God take from us, then we fall out with God himself, Oh! how ill do we take
it at thy hands, if thou do not give us what we would, or take from us what
we would, The doctrine of self-denial is a mere riddle to us; we would fain
spend the strength of our youth in following the lust of the eye, and gratify
our sensual affections; and when we come to die it may be we would have a Lord
have mercy upon us in our mouths, and think it strange if God should not give
us what we ask.

O Lord, convince us now, that we may be willing to be crucified to the world,
and to die to sin: Lord, we may flatter with our selves, but our hearts do but
abuse us, while we think there is such contentment in the enjoying of this
world; what is this when we come to die* Alas, if we were not besotted, content
is sooner gained by self-denial, than by pleasing our selves. Can we think we
shall be at ease till we come to God? Is it like to be well with us while our
ways are contrary to the ways of God? are not thy ways the ways of peace?
Oh! how can we be at rest when our ways are contrary to thine? Oh! un-lust us;
we had better part from our idols here, that that they should part us from God
hereafter. Lord, if there were no other hell, this is damnation to be a sin,
for this is the nature of sin to separate us from God. Oh help us to account
the reproaches of Christ, better than the honors of the Cross of Christ, better
than the Crown of the world. O show us the sinfulness of sin, and the emptiness
of the world, that we may take thy Counsel and mind thy Glory, and be ruled by
thy Will: Oh how happy would it be with us if our souls were brought into such
a frame! We are, Lord, as yet great strangers to the life of God; Oh! let us
know what it is to live with thee, and to thee, and with thee, that we may say,
For us to live in Christ, and to die is gain; and that we may say, Whom have we
in Heaven but thee, O Lord? We depend upon thee, let thy goodness be seen, do
not put us off with the means of grace, but give us grace it self. And seeing
thou art pleased to make use of such a poor thing as the preaching of the
Gospel is, and seeing this is the means to bring our souls to eternal life, Oh
let it be so to us, that we may repent from sin, and believe in the
righteousness of the Gospel: Oh Lord, thou know all our frailties, and all
our necessities: find out them that are dead in sins, and quicken them; find
out the hard hearts, and soften them; find out the proud hearts, and humble
them; find out the formalists, and bring them to the power of godliness and
pour in wine and oil into the wounds of the wounded in spirit; and let the
administration of the Gospel, be in the demonstration of the Spirit, that as
the truth is delivered to us, we may be delivered to the truth, that while we
touch the hem of thy garment, Virtue may come out from thee. Thou have said
that mercy pleases thee, we are sure it will pleasure us, Oh let us not loose
our time, but do thou teach us to profit, and supply our wants, for the sake of
our dear Lord; to whom with Thee and thy Spirit, be given more Glory, from now,
unto eternity.

Nr. G. N. his Prayer.
TO thee, O Lord Jesus, we commend our selves: To thee who judges rightly, thy
poor Servant resigneth, and commiteth this Congregation. The Lord pardon unto
me wherein I have been wanting unto them: The Lord pardon unto them, wherein
they have been wanting in the hearing of thy Word, that we may not part with
sin in our hearts. Unto thee who judge uprightly I commend them. The Bishop
of Souls take care of them: Preserve them from the love of the World: teach
them to wait on thee, and to receive from thee whatevor any one or Family may
stand in need of.

Provide them a Pastor according unto thine own will, only in the mean time
give us that Anointing shall lead us out of our own wells and ways, that we
may walk in the ways of Christ Jesus. The Lord Jesus say now amongst them, I
am your Shepherd, you shall not want. Say to them as thou did to thy
Disciples, Let not your hearts be troubled; you believe in the Father, believe
also in me So far as we are able we put thy Name upon them: we name the Name of
the Lord Jesus over them. The Lord Jesus bless them; teach them to follow
Holiness, Peace, and a Heavenly Conversation. The Lord make them useful to
each other. The Lord Jesus be a blessing to them, and me and all ours. The God
of Peace and Consolation fill them with blessings according as thou see every
one stand in need of. To thee, O Lord, we commend then, do thou receive them,
that under thy counsel they may be preserved blameless, until the day Jesus,
where we may all meet crowned with Glory. Amen.

FINIS.
Mr. GEORGE THORN of Weymouth, HIS FAREWEL-SERMON.
PSALM. 37.34. Wait on the Lord, and keep his Way.
NOt knowing whether ever I shall speak to you more from this place, being
willing to leave a word in season, I shall recommend to you what in answer to
prayer I have recived of the Lord for the directing me in my course in this
gloomy dark day; being well assured that as many of us as work by this rule,
and fall by this compass (how ever we may be scatered by the tewpestuous storms
we meet with here in the Sea of this World) shall shortly arrive at, and meet
in our desired Port, the Haven of Eternal Rest and Happiness; What therefore
the Lord has said to me, and that with a strong hand, that say I unto you in
the Name of the Lord; Wait on the Lord, and keep his Way.

The scope of this Psalm, is to direct the People of God, and to encourage them
to keep on in the course of Godliness at such times, as when the Wicked
prosper, flourish, and grow great, and the godly are afflicted, trouble,
persecuted, and oppressed: And there are two general parts of the Psalm
intermixtly spoken unto throughout. The one is for Direction; The other for
Encouragement. The text appertains to the former part. And the sum of the
Directions may be reduced unto two Heads.

First, That they take head of such inward Commotions, and Perturbations of
Spirit, as through the remainder of Corruption they are subject unto; and by
the temptations of Satan, and the provocations of wicked Men, they will be put
upon through this occasion: More particularly he forewarnes them to take heed
of Envy, Verse 1, and 7. and of Aanger, Verse. 8. And what need there is at such
a time to watch against the exorbitant workings of these Passions, none that
observe their own hearts, can well be ignorant; such being the unworthy
insolent, and provoking Carriage of the Wicked, toward the poor people of God,
as is able, as we may say, to move a Saint. Hence that of Psalm. 73.23 But as
for me, my feet were almost gone, my steps had well-nigh slipped; for I was
envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked: Attend
therefore to the Counsel of the Holy Ghost. Fret not thy self because of
evildoers, neither be thou envious at the workers of iniquity. Fret not thy
self because of him that prospers in his way, because the man that brings
wicked devices to pass: Cease from anger, and forsake wrath. Fret not thy self
in any wise to do evil. Secondly, That they so carry themselves toward the
Lord in keeping on in their way of following him, as becomes those that firmly
believe and steadfastly hope in him for his Salvation, There are many
particular directions to this purpose, verse. 3. Trust in the Lord, and do good,
verse. 4. Delight thy self also in the Lord, ver. 5. Commit thy way unto the
Lord, ver. 7. Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for Him. ver. 27. Depart
from evil, and do good; and here in that text, Wait on the Lord, and keep his
way.
These words contain Advice and Counsel for the People of God, and it is
considerable, either with respect to the troubles and temptations of the people
of God in general; or with respect to that particular that is immediately
touched on before the text, ver. 33. The wicked watches the righteous, and
seeks to slay him. Upon this something is spoken by way of encouragement to
the Righteous, ver. 33. The Lord will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn
him when he is judged. Though he may let him fall into the hands of the Wicked,
he will not leave him there; though the Wicked may sit in Judgment on him, and
pass sentence against him, yet the Lord will not condemn him; yea, when he is
judged he is chastened of the Lord, that he should not be condemned with the
World. Thus for the encourgement of the Righteous.

2. There is something by way of direction in the words read: VVait on the
Lord, and keep his Way.

From the words, consider under this double reference, we have this profitable
point of Doctrine.

However it go with the truly Godly in this world, more especially when the
Wicked watch the Righteous to do them a mischief, it is their best way to wait
on the Lord, and keep his way.

I shall not spend time to show you who are truly Godly, and who are Wicked. It
is said of the Godly man, ver. 31. the Law of God is in his heart, Such then as
from the Law of God in their hearts have respect to all his Commandments,
walking in all the Statutes, and Ordinances of God blameless. Luke 1.6. such
are truly Godly: And such as from the dominion of sin in them, are evil Doers,
workers of Iniquity, walking according to the Lusts of the flesh; and of the
mind, according to the course of this world, of the Prince of the Power of the
Air, etc. they are wicked.

In the handling of this point, according to my wonted method, I shall speak
first to what is supposed, and then to what is expressly laid down.

Here are two things supposed in this point: the one more General, the other
more Particular.

First, In General; It Is supposed, that the condition of the truly godly, may
be full of troubles, afflictions and distresses in this world, for when it is
said, However it may go with the truly godly, the meaning is, how evilly, how
badly soever, though they be never so much troubled, afflicted and distressed;
wherein it is supposed that it may go very ill that the truly godly may be full
of troubles, sufferings and distresses: this not only plainly held forth in
Scripture, in such texts as these, Psa. 34.19. John 16.33. Acts 14.22. but so
sadly experienced in all ages, that we need not spend time in the clearing of
it.

Secondly, More particularly; It is supposed, That is the manner and guise of
the wicked to watch the Righteous to mischief them: so verse. 32. and verse 12.
The wicked plotteth against the just; (or as the margent practices) i. e. his
wit and skill, his labor and judgment is employed against him: and verse. 14.
The wicked have drawn their sword, and bent their how to cast down the poor and
needy, and to slay such as be of upright conversation. so psalm. 64.2. the
Psalmist prays, Hide me from the secret counsel of the wicked, from the
insurrection of the workers of iniquity, who whet their tongues like a sword,
and bend their bows to shoot their arrows, even bitter words, that they may
shoot at secret in the perfect: suddenly do they shoot at him, and fear not. so
we read in that Isai. 29.20.21. of those that watch for iniquity that make a
man an offender for a word that lay a snare for him that reproves in the gate
and that turn aside the just for a thing of naught. Thus it has been over
since the beginning. So wicked Cain watched righteous Abel to kill him, Genesis
4.8. and Cain talked with Abel his brother; and it came to pass that when they
were in the field, that Cain rose up against his brother Abel, and slew him.
And thus have Cain's brood done all down along (for he was of the wicked one; 1
John 3.12.) so has Esdu watched righteous Jacob Genesis 27 41.42. comforting
himself, that he should shortly have a time to do him the mischief that he
intended him so Saul watches righteous David, 1 Samuel 19.11. Saul sent
messengers to David house, to watch him and stay him in the morning: And so did
others, his wicked adversaries, watch him, as you have him complaining, psalm.
38.12. They that seek after my life, lay snares for me; and they that seek my
hurt, speak mischievous things, and imagine deceit all the day long. And Psalm.
140.5. The proud have laid a snare for me, and cords; they have spread a net by
the way side; they have set gi^s for me. So did Jeremiah's Familiars, as he
calls them, Jer. 20.10. For I heard the defaming of many, fear on every side:
Report say they, and we will report it: all my familliars (or as in the
Margent, every man of my peace) watched for my haltings; saying, peradventure
he will be enticed, and we shall prevail against him, and we shall take our
revenge of him. While they pretended friendship and peace, they intended
nothing but mischief, even the taking of their revenge on him. So the
Presidents and the Princes, watched righteous Daniel to mischief him, Dan. 6.4.
where first they seek to find occasion against him, concerning the Kingdom,
they would gladly have found any occasion against him, to have accused him of
Disloyalty; Sedition, Treason, Rebellion, or at least falsehood and
unfaithfulness; but here they could find no fault, his very enemies being
Judges, ver. 5. In the next place, therefore they plot, to find occasion
against him from the Law of his God; and therefore enticing the King to make a
Law against the Law of Daniels God, they quickly catch him. So you may see the
Scribes and Pharisees watched the Lord Jesus, that Just One Luke 67. And the
Scribes and Pharisees watched him, whether he would heal on the Sabbath day,
that they might find an accusation against him. It seems they had a Law against
doing good on the Sabbath day. So, Luke 20.19, 20. And the chief Priest^es and
the Scribes, sought to lay hands on him, and they feared the people; for they
perceived that he had spoke this parable against them, and they watched him,
and sent forth spies, which should fain themselves just men, that they might
take hold of his words, that so they might deliver him to the power and
authority of the governor. They endeavor to trapan him, that they might give
him over to the secular Power. Time would fail to show how they watched the
Apostles, and the Saints, all down along throughout all Ages: Neither need we
search the Records of former ages, in this matter, for evidence, our own times
affording pregnant proof, more then enough in this thing; and as it has been,
and now is, so it will be to the end of this wicked world, the guise and manner
of the Wicked, thus to watch the Righteous to do him a mischief.

1. For that there is the same principle of hatred and enmity in the Wicked
against the Rigeteous now, as ever, yea, and ever will to the worlds end. That
enmity that we read of in Genesis 3.15. is a lasting enmity, as long as there is
any of the seed of the Serpent in the world, it will work; it is an enmity in
nature, Prove. 29.27. He that is upright in the way is an abomination to the
wicked; and the wicked must cease to be wicked, ere this will cease to be: As
there are some Creatures that have an enmity in nature, as the Woolf and the
Sheep, so that enmity is propagated to all of the kind that partake of that
nature: So is the enmity that the children of the wicked one have against the
children of God: As therefore the Wolf need not be taught to watch to devour
the Sheep, it being natural to him; so the wicked need not be taught to do the
Saints a mischief, having a principle within them inclining, and instructing
them thereunto.

2. There is the same necessary ground and occasion of their hatred of them:
though there be no just ground of the wicked hatred of the righteous, (hence
David speaks of their hating him without a cause, Psalm. 69 4. that is, without
just cause on his part) yet there is a necessary ground of their hatred, and
that continues now as heretofore, and will continue as long as there are any
truly godly, and what that is, you may see in that. Psalm. 38.20. They also that
render evil for good, are mine adversaries; because I follow the thing that
good is. The true ground and reason of their being adversaries unto David, was
this, Because he followed that which they hated.

Thus our Savior showing his Disciples how they should be hated of the world,
acquaints them with the true cause and ground of the worlds hatred, John 15 19.
If you were of the world; the world would love his own; but because you are not
of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world
hates you. And that this is the proper ground of the worlds hatred, is most
manifest, for that the same person, whom the world loved while he was of the
world, when called out of the world into the Kingdom of Christ, then is he
hated of those that before loved him; as in Paul. And if a person that
professes himself the Disciple of Christ, and is hated of the world, shall
forsake the assembly of the Saints, and turn back from the way of
righteousness, and run into the same excess of riot with the profane world,
none more the worlds darling then he (...). So that it is Godliness, Holiness,
and true Religion, that is the true ground of the worlds hatred. So 1 John
3.12. Not as Cain who was of the wicked one, and slew his brother; and
wherefore slew he him? because his own works were evil, and his brothers
righteous. This was the true cause of his hatred; and while that the cause
remains, while godly men continue to walk in the ways of godliness, the
wicked will continue to hate them.

3. The Devil, whose Children these wicked ones are, 1 John 3.8. 10. is still
as malicious and industrious as ever, to put them upon this. We read of Satan
in that, 1 Pet. 5.8. that he goes up and down like a roaring Lion, seeking
whom he may devour; and as far as the Lord permits him, he acts wicked men in
whom he rules, Ephesians. 2.2 to do what mischief they can to the Godly; yea, and
in the last times he is so far from abating his rage, as that we read, his
wrath grows the hotter, because he knows he has but a short time, Rev.
12.12.

While therefore the principle of enmity, which is in the wicked against the
Saints, remains, and while the ground of their hatred continues, and Satan is
as industriously stirring them up as ever, naught else can be expected, but
that they watch the righteous to do them a mischief.

But now, what shall the righteous do? shall he render evil for evil, and watch
the wicked that he may mischief them? God forbid: what shall he forsake his
righteousness, and leave off to be godly? no, in no wise. But if you would
know, O ye Saints and righteous Ones, what to do in this case, I am sent of God
at this time to instruct you, That it will be your best way to wait on the
Lord, and keep his way.

And so I come to what is expressly asserted in this point, That however it go
with the truly godly here in this world, more especially when the wicked
watches the righteous to mischief them, it is their best way to wait on the
Lord, and keep his Way.

Here I shall speak by way of Explication, in showing, 1. What it is to wait
on the Lord. 2. What it is to keep his way.


First, To wait on the Lord, is taken more largely, or more strictly.

1. More largely. And so it is the same with serving the Lord attending and
following the Lord, and takes in the whole duty of the Saints; waiting on the
Lord as a Soldier on his Captain, or as a servant on his Master: Psalm. 123.2.
Behold as the eyes of the Servants look to the hands of their Masters, and as
the eyes of a Maiden unto the hand of her Mistress; so our eyes wait on the
Lord our God. So in that: Hos. 12 6. Turn thou to thy God, and keep mercy and
judgment, and wait on thy God continually. 2. More strictly. And so it intends
a patient expecting the Lords Salvation. It Is the continual exercise of Faith
and Hope; It is Faith and Hope eekt out: so here, Verse. 7. Rest on the Lord,
wait patiently. So Psalm. 130. when he cries out of the depths, as he says, v.
1. then v 5 I want for the Lord, my soul does wait, and in his words do I hope:
My soul waits for the Lord, more then they that watch for the morning; I say,
more then they that watch for the morning. We have both these together in that,
Lam, 3.25, 26. The Lord is good to them that wait for Him; to the the soul that
seeks Him. There it is taken as largely as seeking after God but it follows,
It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the Salvation of
the Lord: there it is taken for the continued exercise of hope; for a pati^n^
expectation of the Lords Salvation.
Secondly, What it is to keep the Way of the Lord: here mind; The way of the
Lord may be understood; of that way wherein he walks toward his People,
which is aptly styled, the way of his Providence, or, in that way wherein he
requires his People to walk toward him; and is properly styled, the Way of
his Precepts,

1. ^vere is the way of Gods Providence, in which he walks toward us: of
which, that Psalm. 18.30. speaks; As for God, his Way is perfect. So Psalm.
25.10. All the Paths and Ways of the Lord, are Mercy and Truth unto such as
keep his Covenant, and Testimonies.

Now if it be thus taken here, Then to keep his Way is diligently to attend
his Hand, and to observe his Carriage, and ordering, in all that befalls his
People, more especially in all that trouble that comes on them: For whatever
trouble comes upon the People of God and whoever be the instruments of
inflicting, the Lord has his way in it, Mit. 6.9. ordering it, as to the kind,
as to the measure, as to the season, as to the continuance, and as to the ends
and fruits.

Now, to observe the Lord's Hand, and to attend his Way, in ordering his
Providence, and our troubles; this is to keep his Way. So Isa. 26.8. In the
way of thy Jugements we have waited for thee: as if he had said, We have
waited on the Lord, and kept his Way.

2. There is the way of God's Presepts; in which he commands his People to
walk: And thus is this phrase most commonly taken. So 2 Kings 21.21. where it
is said of Amon: He forsook the Lord God of his Fathers, and walked not in the
Way of the Lord: i. e. not in the Way of his Commandments. Thus David spoke
of the way of his Precepts, in Psalm 119 27. Make me understand the Way of thy
Pr^^pts: And if it be taken thus, then to keep the Way of the Lord, is to walk
in his Statutes and to observe his Commandments to do them. So Genesis 18.19. the
Lord testifies of Abraham; I know him, thet he will command his Children and
his household after him, annd they shall keep the Way of the Lord, to do
Justice and Judgment. So in Job. 23.11, 13. My feet have held his steps, his
Way have I kept and not declined, neither have I gone back from the
Commadments of his lips: So to walk in his VVays, and to keep his Commandments,
are the same, Deuteronomy. 26.17. and Psalm. 119 1, 2.

So that the sum of all is; However it be with the truly Godly, more especially
when the wicked do wateh them to do them a mischief, their best way is, to
attend on the Lord, to follow him, to walk on in the ways of his Commandments;
so eying the hand of the Lord in all that befalls them, as that they patiently
expect, and quietly wait for the Salvation of the Lord. Thus for Explication.

I now come to the Demonstration, which shall be dispacht by clearing, That it
is the honestest, the wisest, the safest, the most comfortable, and most
honorable Way.

First, This is the most innocent, just and honest Way; yea truly, this is the
only good, honest and right Way.

I am to show what is the best for a Godly man, to whom no way is good, but
what is just and honest. There are indeed other ways which a man may take when
he is in trouble, through the wickeds watching him to do him a mischief,
whereby to escape the mischief intended him; but they are not just and honest.
I shall instance in these.

1. By sinfully complying with the wicked in their ungodly ways, thereby to
abate the edge of their wrath: This was the way Peter took when in the High
Priests Hall, he not only denies his Master, but backs his denial with an Oath;
yea, being among a cursing crew that should seem would not believe him else, he
falls a cursing and swearing that he knew not the man, Mat. 26.74. 2. By sinful
shifting or shuffling through Lies or deceitful Equivocations, to avoid the
mischief intended: This was the way that Abraham took to escape the mischief
that he thought at one time the Men of Gerar might do him, Genesis 20. and that
the Egyptians might do to him at another time for his wives sake: wherein,
though Abraham did not tell a downright untruth, as he excuses the matter to
Aebimelech, yet he did sinfully shuffl^ in making use of a deceitful
Equivocation for his safety. 3. By angerly and revengfully rendering Evil for
Evil, thereby thi^king to pay the wicked in their own Coin, and to avenge a
man's own quarrel This was the course that David was about to take against
Na^al. had he not been prevented by Abigals wisdom, 1 Samuel 25.33. 4. By basely
deserting the Place that the Lord has put a man in, and requires him to abide
in This was that which Shemaiah would have p^t Nehemiah upon; but he refused to
hearken to him, in Nehem. 6.10, 11. not but that a man forsake his place, not
only of habitation, but also of public station and employment, in some cases
when that the Lord calls him off; but this is of no base deserting; Base
deserting is, when out of cowardliness, and base fear, a man withdrawes himself
from his place, in which, and at that time, when the Lord requires him to
abide, that he may provide for his own safety: This was the way Moses would
have taken, when the Lord was sending him to deliver his People, had the Lord
left him to himself, as you may see at large in the third and forth chapters of
the Book of Exodus. 5. By rebelliously and traitorously slepping out of the
place that God has set a man in. This was that way they tempted David unto, in
1 Samuel 24.4. and which Abshai would have taken, had not David hindered him, 1 Samuel 26.9. Now none of these ways are just and honest, being all of them
contrary to the Command, and a departing from God to the Creature; as I shall
clear particularly.
First, That sinfully to comply with the wicked to abate the edge of their
wrath, is contrary to the Command, is clear from these Scriptures, Ephesians. 5.7.
Be ye not therefore pantakers with them; that is, with the wicked, with the
Children of disobedience: Now one way of partaking with them, is by sinful
compliance: hence verse. 11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness; have you no hand, do not you bear a part, be not drawn in to comply
in these things: To this purpose, is that. Romans 12.2. Be not conformed to this
World. Nonconformity to this world, is a Christians duty.

Secondly, That sinfully to shift and shuffle through Lies and deceitful
Equivocations to provide for ones safety, is contrary to the Command of God,
clear is that, Genesis 20 9. where Abimelech reproving Abraham for his practice,
tells him, Thou have done things to me that ought not to be done.

Thirdly, That to render evil for evil, and to avenge our selves, is against
the Command of God; clear is that Prove. 20 21. Say not thou, I will recompense
evil, but wait on the Lord, and he shall save the. 1 Thessalonians. 5.15. See that
none render evil for evil to any man Romans 12.17. Recompense to no man evil for
evil: and 19. Dearly beloved avenge not your selves.

Fourthly, That basely to desert the place that God has put a man in, is
against the Command of God; clear is that, 1 Cor. 7.24. ^rethrin, let everyone
wherein he is called, therein abide with God. and as in the condition wherein,
so in the place whereunto; till God remove him.

Fifthly, That rebelliously to step out of a man's place, is against the Command
of God, is clear from Eccles. 10.4. If the spirit of thy Ruler rise up against
thee, leave not thy place; for yielding pacifieth great offense. Subjects are
here directed how to carry themselves when that the spirit of the Ruler rises
up against themselve counsel that the Spirit here gives, is. That they keep
their place, not in a way of rebellious opposition, but in way of yielding
subjection; leave not thy place as a subject, contain thy self within the
bounds of thine own calling and condition, bridling all disloyal passion, and
forbearing all unlawful attempts, toward off the wrath of the Ruler: he
speaks not against a prudent withdrawing from a storm, as David from Saul,
Elias from Ahab, and Christ frm Herod, but against a disloyal and rebellious
defection; as Israel to their T^ms, 1 Kings 12 16. So that whatever the
provocations be that the Rulers give, Subjects must submit themselves, by
yielding active obedience in a I things which they command according to God,
and by patiently enduring what they inflict on us, though for righteousness
sake; keeping our selves in the same humble, obedient and loyal temper, what
ever provocations we meet with to the contrary.

And that in all these ways there is a departing from God the Creature arising
from a distrust of his All sufficiency to provide for us in his way, and from a
conceit of our own wisdom to provide be^ter for our safety, is most manifest:
therefore these ways being contrary to the Command of God, and injurious to his
All Sufficiency, are not just and honest; but to wait on the Lord and to keep
his way, this is the good the right, and the honest Way. See 1 Samuel 12.23.
where he tells them, that He will show them the goood and right Way, and what
that is, he acquaints in the nxt verse, Only fear the Lord, and serve him in
Truth, with all your heart, which is to the same purpose, with wait on the
Lord, and keep his way; that is, the honest and good Way, in which the Lord
commands his People to walk, 2 Chronicles. 6.27. His Commandments being holy,
just, and good, Romans 7.12. The way of his Comandments must needs be good, just,
and honest; and his Cammandments being the Rule, the goodness of a way lies in
its conformity thereunto; and this is the way that is agreeable to the Command
of God, as in the Text.

2 This is the wisest way: When a man has many wise, subtle, and powerful
enemies watching to mischieve him; he had need behave himself wisely. Hence
when our Savior sends forth his Disciples as Sheep among Wolves, Mat. 10.26.
he says to them, Be wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves, he advises them
to the wisest, as well as the honestest way. Now however carnal men do think
some one of the forementioned ways to be the wiset, yet it will be apparent,
that to wait on, he Lord, and keep his Way, is the wisest course; by these two
arguments.

First, It is the Way which the truest and highest Wisdom, the Wisdom of God
does direct unto, so here in the Text So in that Psalm. 27.14. he complains of
his enemies, and of false witnesses that were risen up against him, that did
breath out cruelty, verse. 12. and then by the Spirit he commends to himself and
others, suitable advice in such a case, verse. 14. Wait on the Lord. So Exodus
14.13. there Pharaoh and all his Hosts are at the heels of the poor Israelites,
and he counts of nothing but of destroying them, Exodus 15.9. and they for their
parts knew not how to escape: Now says Moses to them, Fear ye not, stand
still, and see the salvation of the Lord. So that whatever distress the People
of God are in, this is the way the Wisdom of God directs unto; for what the
word of God in the Scripture directs to, that the Wisdom of God directs, as is
clear from that, Luke 11.49.

2dly. This is the way that the wisest men have taken. David was a wise Man; we
read of him 1 Samuel 18.30. that David behaved himself more wisely then all the
Servants of Saul, so that his name was much set by: Now this was the way that
he took, as you have him speaking in that Psalm. 18.21. I have kept the ways of
the Lord, and not wickedly departed from my God; for all thy judgments were
before me: and I did not put away his statutes from me, etc. So Psalm 119 110.
The wicked have laid a snare for me, yet I erred not from thy precepts.

Daniel was a wise man; hence that Proverb, Ezeck. 28.3. Wisen than Danirl; and
he took this course when that his Enemies had laid a snare for him to take away
his Life: yet (Dan. 6 10.) he declined not from the way of the Lord, but waited
on the Lord, and kept his way, as aforetime; as you may there rend.

Yea, Jesus Christ, the Wisdom of God, he took this course, as you may read,
Luke 13 where when certain of the Pharisees came; saying to him, Get thee out
and depart hence, for Hered will kill thee, verse. 31. He answered verse. 32. Go
ye and tell that Fox, Behold, I cast out Devils, and do cures to day and to
morrow: that is, I will do the work of my Father: I will follow what he has
sent me about, and keep his Way, whatever becomes of me. Thus you see it is the
wisest way.

3dly. This is the safest way: when a man is beset with the wicked that seek to
mischieve him, it is a time to look after the safest way: now to wait on the
good Lord, and to keep his Way is the safest course a man can take: Pro. 10.9.
He that walks uprightly, walks surely. And 28 18. Whose walks uprightly,
shall be saved. I know carnal wisdom thinks otherwise; and mocks at this: But I
am speaking to the People of God, who are capable of receiving and
understanding what I shall offer, and to the moths will appear to be the safest
way by these two Particulars.

First, This is the readiest way for the People of God to escap^ that mischief
which the wick^d devise, and intend against them, Prove. 18.10. The Name of the
Lord is a strong Tower; the Righteous fly to it, and are safe: But how do they
fly to this strong hold but upon the wings of Faith and Hope, whereby they wait
on the Lord? and being fled for refuge to this strong hold they are safe, and
continue safe by abiding there, which is by keeping the way of the Lord: Hence
that, Prove. 16.7. When a man's ways please the Lord he makes even his enemies
to be at peace with him. Now for those whose ways please him, who wait on him,
and keep his way, he makes even their enemies to be at peace with them, these
several ways.

1. Sometimes by changing their hearts, and by making them even of Enemies to
become Friends. So we find he changed the heart of Ahasuerus that whereas his
enmity was so enflamed by the misinformation of Haman, as that he had signed
the Decree for the utter destroying of the People of God; yet afterward he
grants unto the Jews to gather themselves together, and stand for their lives,
to destroy, slay, and cause to pe^ish all the power of the people of the
Province that should assault, both little ones, and women, and to take the
spoil of them for a prey. So he changed the heart of Nebuchadnezza^, with
respect to the three Worthies; whom in the heat of his fury he commanded to be
cast into the fiery Furnace, heated seven times hotter than aforetime; yet
afterward his heart is turned toward them, as that he greatly promotes them
in the province of Babylon; as you may read Dan. 3. So the Lord changed the
heart of Paul, who of a persecuting Saul, became a preaching Paul, Gal. 1.23.
abounding in love to Christ and his members, as he did before in rage and
cruelty against them. 2. By restraining sometimes their envy and fury; so that
though their hearts continue as full of bitterness, malice and revenge, as
formerly, yet he binds up their hands, so as that they cannot execute the
mischief they intend against his people. So Psalm. 76.5. The stout-hearted are
spoiled, or disarmed; they have slept their sleep; and none of the men of might
have found their hand. All which expressions tend to show the restraint that is
laid upon them; and by whom, you may see, verse. 6. At thy Rebuke, O God of
Jacob, both the Chariots and the Horses are cast into a dead sleep: Hence that,
verse. 10. Surely the wrath of men shall praise thee; that is, as much of it as
he suffers for to break forth; for the remander of wrath will thou restrain. We
have a notable example of this in Laban, Genesis 31. who is not only rebuked by
the Lord in his hot pursuit after Jacob, with a charge not to hurt him, but is
overruled to tell Jacob how the God of his Father spoke to him, as you may
read, verse. 29, whatever be the fury and the rage of the enemy, he can say unto
it: Thus far shall thou go and no farther, as Job 38.11. 3. He makes their
enemies to be at peace with them, sometimes by enclining them to use his People
well, and to treat them peaceably after that they have them in their power and
under their hand, Jer. 15 11 The Lord said, Verily it shall be well with thy
remnaut: verily; I will cause the enemy to treat the well; in time of evil, and
in the time of affliction. So we read, Psalm. 106.46. He made them to be pitied
of all them that carried them away captives. 4. Always by over ruling what
they do against them, so as that it shall not hurt them, So Isa. 54.17. No
weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper. But of whom is this spoken?
it follows there, This is thee heritage of the Servents of the Lord: It may
prosper to put them to smart but not to hurt them: As the Lord promised Paul,
Acts 18.10. I am with thee, and no man shall set on thee to hurt thee. So he
promises all his, in that Isa. 41.10 So that the readiest way to escape the
mischief that our enemies design against us, is, to wait on the Lord and to
keep in his way, whatever carnal wisdom thinks or suggests to the contrary: It
is true, this is the way to be hated, and to have many enemies, who from their
malice and rage, will devise and design much mischief against us: but Romans
8.31. If God be for us, who shall be against us? that is it matters not who
they are that are against us. This then is the safest way; hence Prove. 1.31.
Whosoever hearkneth unto me shall dwell safely.
I know this seems a Paradox to the men of the world, and they think some other
ways to be more safe.

First, Some think that sinful compliance is a safer way: but their error will
be manifest to any that duly consider, 1. That hereby they do more encourage
the wicked World against them, whilst they partly comply, but will not run into
the same excess of riot with them. So Lotts compliance with the wicked
Sodomites in offering them his Daughters, did but encourage them the more
against him, Genesis 19.9. And they said, Stand back: which words may either refer
unto Lot, and then they hold forth how they were enraged by his motion: and
this agrees with the following words: And they said again This one fellow
came to sojourn, and he will needs be a Judge; Now will we deal worse with
thee, than with them; and they pressed sore upon the ^^an: so far were they
from being appeased by his sinful compliance, as that they grew the more
furious against him. 2. Hereby you provoke the Lord to withdraw the Covert of
his Protection from you; while you wait on the Lord, and keep his way; you have
the promise of his Protection, 2 Chronicles 152. but if by sinful compliance with
the wicked, you forsake him, he will forsake you: you forfeit his Protect on,
Had not Jehosaphat's compliance with Ahab like to have cost him his life? 2 Chronicles. 18. and hear what the Prophet says to him, 2 Chronicles. 19, 2. Should
thou help the ungodly, and love them that have the Lord? therefore is wrath
upon thee from before the Lord: And through the wrath of the Lord that is upon
men for their sinful compliance, those very evils are brought upon them
sometimes, which they think to escape: As notable is that instance which Mr.
Fox gives account of, one Richard Denton, in Queen Mary's days; who by his
sinful compliance with the wicked World, in disowning the Truth of the Gospel,
thought to escape burning; and was afterward burnt in his own house, according
to that of our Savior, He that will save his life shall lose it, Mat. 16.25.
Secondly, Others think, that to avenge themselves in paying the wicked in
their own Coin, doing mischief unto them, is the safest way, but their error
will be manifest, from that of our Savior, Mat. 26 52. Put up again thy Sword
into its place; for all they that take the sword, shall perish by the sword:
this way in which they think to provide for their safety, is in the judgment
of our Savior, the ready way to their ruin. Thi^^ly, Others think by
Shuffling Lying and Equivocating, to provide better for their safety; then by
keeping the way of the Lord; but however, some present security sometimes has
been obtained by such way, yet in the end they are most pernicious and
destructi^e for us: Prove. 19.5. He that speaks lies, shall not escape: and
verse 9. He that speaks lies shall perish. And for such as comfort themselves
as they Isa. 28.25 We have made lies our refuge, and und^y falsehood have we hid
our selves: Mind what the Lord says to them, verse 17. Judgment will I also
lay to the line, and righteousness to the Plimmet; and the ^a^^ shall sweep
away the refuge of lies; and the waters shall ever flow the hiding place: and
your Covenant neith death shall be disanulled, and your agreement with Hell
shall not stand; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through then shall on
be trodd^ down by it; and then where is your safety? they think to secure
themselves from the wrath of man; but they mind not how to be secured from the
wrath of God. Fourthly, Others think by basely deserting their places, to
provide better for their safety, than by following the Lord, and keeping his
way. But the hazzards David was in when he took this course, 1 Samuel 27 may
convince these men of their mistake, especially if they consider that he that
leaves the place God has set him in, our of base fear, is sure to carry his
fear with him where ever he go, if not (in the place fie promised himself
greatest security) to meet with the evil he feared: As the Lord threatens them
in that, Jer. 42.17, There it shall com^ to pass, that the Sword which ye
feared, shall overtake you there in the Land if Egypt; and the Famine whereof
you were afruid, shall follow close after you in Egypt, and there ye shall dye.
Fifthly, Others think it a safer way rebelliously to step out of their places
for the overturning the power of those that are in Authority over them because
they g^ant power to the wicke^ to oppress and mischieve them: But had Zim^i
peace that slew his Master? the experience of all ages testifies how ill they
provide for their safety, at the long run, who take this course: let that
instance suffice which we have in 2 Chronicles. 25.3.
So that what^ver men may think, there is no such way to escape the mischief
intended against us by the wicked, as to wait on the Lord, and keep his way.

2. It will yet further appear to be the safest way, for that it is the ready
way to have good by all their troubles, by all that the wicked do against them:
Wait on the Lord, and keep his way, then no matter though the wicke watch
against you to do you a mischief: for they shall not only prove abortive in
all the mischievous designs they are big with, as Job. 5.12. but according to
his promise, all shall work together for good, Romans 8.28. for he that has
promised, is infinite in Power. Wisdom, Godness and Faithfulness, to overruled
all the devices and designs of his and your Enemies, so as to make those
things that are in their own nature against you, to work together for your
good: As you know what Joseph says, in that ^en. 50.20. As for you, ye thought
evil against me, but God meant it unto good, to bring to pass, as it is this
day, to save much people alive. Thus does God over rule the malice and revenge
of men for good to his People; but they must then wait on the Lord, and keep
his way; as you may see Psalm. 81.8, etc. For all the paths of the Lord are
Mercy and Tr^^ hunto such as keep his Covenant and his Testimonies. When the
wicked smite and oppress the people of God, they are the Lord's Rod, Isa. 10.5.
wherewith he chastises his People: And that of the Apostle holds in this, as
well as in other chastisements, Heb. 12.10. He for our profit, that we might
he partakors of his Holiness; as also what-follows in verse 11. Now no
chastisment for the present seems joyous but grievous; nevertheless,
afterward it yields the fruit of Righteousness to them which are exercised
thereby; so as that they wait on God in the Way of his Judgments, and keep the
Way of his Commandments. Thus I have cleared it to be the safest Way.

3. This the most honorable way; though it were a safe way, yet if it be not
an honorable way, it is not the best way: That proved a safe way that David
took, in 1 Samuel 27.1, 2 3. but it was a dishonorable way; however, under the
power of temptations he concludes it best; yet afterward he finds, by woeful
experience, his mistake. It was a safe way that they advised Nehemiah to, in
Neh^m 6.10. but because it was dishonorable he would not take it; verse 11. And
he said, Should such a man as I fly? and who is there, being as I am, would go
into the Temple to save his life? I will not go in: He would not so dishonor
his place. To run hazards in an honorable way has always been more eligible
to Spirits truly noble, th^n sneekingly to provide for safety in a bale
dishonorable way. Now the way that is before you, is the most honorable way,
as will appear in these following particulars.

First, It Is the way of true valor and courage, when the wicked watches to
mischief you; when the wicked, even your Enemies and Foes come upon you to eat
up your flesh, as sal. 27 2. then to wait on the Lord, to stand your ground, to
follow the Lord, to keep his way; This is an argument of a brave and gallant
Spirit Was it not a proof of a heroic and brave Spirit in Paul, when he says
to them, Act. 21 13. What mean you to weep, and to break my heart? for I am
ready, not to be bound only, but to dye a Jerusalem for the N^me of the Lord
Jesus. When men are bold and daring in a wicked way, and will resolutely keep
on, whatever difficulties or opposition they meet with this is not true valor,
but a mad hardiness, and desperate stoutness of spirit: But when men are
cou^arious and undaunted in following the Lord, steadfastly keeping and walking
on in his way, maugre all opposition that Satan and wicked Men make against
them this is true valor and galantry of Spirit. Such brave and heroic Spirits
were they mentioned, Heb. 11 35, 36, 37. who have this honorable Testimonial
of the Lord verse 38, of whom the World was not worthy: Persons, whereof every
one was more worth than the World, or too excellent to abide in the World,
being worthy of better and greater honor than the world could give them.

4. It Is the way by which you shall most victoriously triumph over all your
enemies: wait on the Lord, and keep his way, and you shall go on conquering and
to conquer, over Sin, Satan, the World and Antichrist; over all our enemies;
Though, God you shall do valiantly, for he it is that shall tread down all your
enemies. Psalm. 108.13. For this is the victory that overcommeth the world, even
your Faith, 1 John 5.4. Through Faith, whereby we wait on God, and keep his
Way, we shall overcome the world, that is, Satan and all his wicked crew, with
all the instruments of mischief they make use of against us. Hence that, Romans
8.37. In all these things we are more than Conquerours, through him that loved
us: and this honor have all they, that wait on the Lord, and keep his Way.

3 It Is the way by which you shall bring most honor to God, to the Lord Jesus
Christ the Captain of your Salvation. That the people of God are employed in
service whereby God is honored, that reflects hunour upon them; and the more
God is honored, the more honor have they that serve him: the Queen of Sheba
counted Solomon's servants happy, who waited continually upon him, 1 King.
10.8. how much more honorable is it to wait on the Lord, in that a greater
than Solomon is here? Now wait on the Lord, and keep his way; herein you will
greatly honor the Lord. As they that dissert and forsake the Lord and his
ways, when it comes to any hard service, do greatly dishonor him; as if there
were not enough to be had to make amends for all their hardships they endure;
so they that follow the Lord, and heep his way, through sharp oppositions and
sufferings they greatly honor him in the world: to cleave to the Lord, and
follow him, when all the world are about out ears for his sake; to keep his
Way, when that his Way is every where spoken against; to continue faithful in
his service, when nothing but bonds and persecutions attend us for it; this
commends his Service, and tends much to the honor of his Name and Ways.

4. This is the ready way to true Honor; As the wise man has it in that,
Prove. 27.18. He that waits on his Master, shall be honored: So wait on the
Lord and keep his Way, and you shall be honored, and that with true Honor,
even that honor that is of God. In that John. 5.44. our Savior distinguishes
between that honor that is of men, and that Honor that is of God; and that is
the the true Honor that is of God: For as they say, Honor est in honorante,
non in honorate, in him that honors; and then that is true and highest honor
that is from the only true God, that high and only One. Now, this honor have
all they that waiting on the Lord, and keeping his Way, do honor: 1 Samuel
2.3^. Him that honors me, I will honor: and says our Savior, John 12.26.
If any man serve me, let him follow me; and where I am, there shall my servant
be: and what honor that is. you may gather from that Col 3.4. and it further
follows, If any man serve me, him will my Father honor: Thus it appears to be
the most honorable way.

5. Lastly, This is the most comfortable way. It must be granted, it is a way
that is attended with sufferings, tribulations and distresses, 2 Timothy 3.12. and
yet it is the most comfortable way, as will appear, In that,

1. It is the ready way to have peace, inward peace, the best peace in the
midst of all the trouble the world can bring upon you; in that, Joh. 16.33. the
Lord Jesus says to his Disciples, that in the world they should have
tribulation, but in him they should have peace. And to wait on the Lord, and
keep his Way, is the ready way to attain his Peace, as appears from Isa. 26.3.
Thou shall keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because he
trusts in thee. That which rendered perfect peace, i^ [Peace, Peace] in the
Original, the reduplication, according to the Idiome of the Hebrew, denoting
the excellency, perfection, abundance, and duration of Peace. But to whom is
this promise made? says the text, to him whose mind is stayed on the Lord, and
trusts in him; and in verse 2. to the righteous Nation which keeps the
Truth: which, according to the point in hand, may be expressed, to them that wait
on the Lord, and keep his Way. So Psalm. 119.165. Great Peace have they that
love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them. 2. It Is the ready way to have the
holy Ghost, who is styled the Comforter, to abide with us. What more
comfortable way, than that wherein we may be sure to have the Comforter to be
with us, to abide and continue with us? Wait, on the Lord, and keep his Way, so
shall the Comforter abide with you for ever. Express is that of our Lord to
this purpose, John 14, 15.16. If you love me keep my Commandments; and I will
pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter; that he may abide
with you for ever. So, ver. 23 If any man love me, he will keep my words, and
my Father will love him, and we will come and make our abode with him. So that
this is the way to have Father, Son and holy Ghost, to come to us, and abide
with us. 3. The Comforts which are to be had in this way, are true, solid,
substantial and abiding Comforts, such as fill the soul with inward joy and
mirth, under the forest outward trouble, so as that they can sing in prison,
and leap in the flames. Notable is that expression of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3 4 I
am filled with comfort, I am exceeding joyful in all our tribulations in
following the Lord. He tells us in the next verse, that his flesh had no rest,
that he was troubled on every side, and yet exceeding joyful: yea, he tells us
in another place, 2 Cor. 1.5. that as his afflictions did abound for Christ, so
his consolations did abound by him. 4. This is the way to arrive speedily where
the wicked shall trouble you no more, where there shall be no more sorrow nor
weeping, but where you shall have respect rest and peace, fullness of joy and
comfort for evermore That of the Lord Jesus to his Disciples, Luke 22.28, 29.
is plain for this, Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations
and I appoint you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me: with John
10: 27.28. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and I
give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man
pluck them out of my hand. As Caleb and Joshua waited on the Lord, and kept his
way, following him fully, and so entered Canaan, and had a peaceable and
comfortable possession there, Josh. 14.14. so they that wait on the Lord and
keep his way, shall have abundant entrance into that heavenly Canaan, 2 Pet.
1.11. where there is fullness of joy; and fullness for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. and
thus it appears to be the most comfortable way, to conclude: this we say, all
is well that ends well. Now, Psalm. 37.37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the
upright; for the end of that man is peace.
Thus then we have cleared, that however it go with the people of God here in
this world, more especially when the wicked watch them to do them a mischief,
it is their best way to wait on the Lord, and keep his way; for that is the
honestest, the wisest, the safest way, and the most honorable and most
comfortable way. And though I doubt not but enough has been spoken to persuade
and prevail with those that have an understanding to discern, and a heart to
perceive what has been set before them: yet I question not, but carnal reason
has many things to object, and such as may prevail with carnal hearts to
disbelive all that has been spoken, so far at least as to prefer the ways of
carnal wisdom before this way of the Lord: But I rest satisfied with that
answer of our Savior, Mat. 13.11. It is given to you to know the mysteries of
the Kingdom of heaven, but unto them it is not given.

Thus you have the Doctrinal part of the point: I proceed to the application;
and we shall make use of this.

1. To admonish and forewarn all the followers of Christ that have owned
engaged, and walked in the way of the Lord, to take heed that they be not
stumbled, moved, and turned out of the way of the Lord. The Aposte in Heb.
12.13. advises them to make straight paths for their feet, lest that which is
lame should be turned out of the way, but let it rather be healed.

There is some lameness remaining with the best; with some more, with some
less; but with all some; it lies therefore in all to take heed lest they be
turned out of the way. Hence that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.12. Let him that
thinks he stands, take heed lost he fall; and let him that thinks he is
stablished and settled in the way of the Lord, take heed lest he be offended
and turned out of the way. Oh that a holy Jealousy in this thing may possess
and fill all your hearts.

More particularly, I would forewarn you to take heed lest you be offended,
through some things, and by some persons, in this day of temptation.

1. Take heed lest you be offended at the Cross: Our Savior in the Parable of
the Sower, Mat. 13. tells us of some, who though they hear and receive the Word
for a season with joy, yet when tribulation or persecution arises for the
Word, by and by they are offended. How is this fulfilled in our days: how many
are there, who while the way of the Lord was the way of Preferment, did profess
and walk in it; who now that it is opposed and every where spoken against; do
decline and forsake it? Be you admonished to take heed, lest the
stumbling block of others sufferings, especially of faithful Ministers, do turn
you out of the way: The Apostle labors much in removing this
stumbling block, as you may see, 2 Cor. 1. Phil. 1.1 These. 3.3. Therefore I do
the more earnestly forewarn you of this; and take heed lest what sufferings
come on you for the Gospels sake, do turn you out of the way: you are no
Disciples for Christ; unless you take up your Cross and follow him, Luke 14.27.

Take heed lest you be offended by the falls and apostacies of hypocritical
Professors: this is that Satan and his instruments will lay before you to turn
you out of the way of the Lord: our Savior does therefore forewarn of this,
Mat. 24. so likewise his Apostles, 1 Timothy 4.1. 2 Pet. 2.1, 2. and 1 John 2.19.

3. Take heed that you be not stumbled by the scorn, contempt, and reproach
that is cast on the way of the Lord, and those that walk in it. This is that
Satan and his instruments will lay before you; that the way of the Lord and his
followers are every where under reproach and contempt: for as they said to
Paul, so has the false Church said to those that teach the way of the Lord
truly, Act. 28.22. For as concerning this Sect, we know that every where it is
spoken against, the Original is, Heresy: the way of the Lord is commonly thus
branded in the world; and they that walk in it are counted a company of
Sectaries and Heretics. But this should not stumble us no more then it did
Paul, who there ( v. 23.) boldly teaches this way, and ( Acts 24, 14.) freely
professes it. But this I confess to thee that after the way which they call
Heresy, so worship I the God of my fathers.

4. Take heed you be not offended at the Prosperity of the wicked, especially
when he brings wicked devices to pass: This was that had almost turned the
Psalmist out of the way, Psalm. 73.2, 3. As for me, my feet were almost gone, my
steps had well nigh slipped, for I was envious at the foolish, when I saw the
prosperity of the wicked. To see those that despise hate, and persecute the way
of the Lord, and those that walk in it, to prosper and flourish; while those
that love it, own it, and walk in it, are in an afflicted and suffering
condition; this not only overturns formal Professors, but many a time puts
sincere Believers to a stand. Hence that advice in Psalm. 37.7. Fret not thy
self because of him who prospers, because of the man who brings wicked
divices to pass: and as verse. 8. Fret not thy self in any wise to do evil.

2. Take heed of such persons, as by whom if you be not the more watchful, you
may be so offended, as to be turned out of the way More particularly.

1. Take heed of your selves. This is that our Savior calls for, in that, Mat.
16.24. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself. Our greatest danger
is from our selves, while we have within a deceiver and a traitor, who is still
conspiring to turn us out of the way, Take heed therefore of your own selves,
consult not with flesh and blood, Gal. 1.10. 2. Beware of Satan. This is that
which the Apostle suggests, 2 Cor. 3. I fear by any means lest as the Serpent
beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the
simplicity that is in Christ. And out of the like fear concerning you, I
beseech you beware of Satan, and the rather, for that, as the Apostle says,
verse, 14. Satan is transformed into an Angel of light.
2. Beware of false Teachers. This is the advice of our Savior, in Mat. 7.15.
Beware of false Prophets, which comes to you in sheeps clothing, etc. And
though I cannot say, I know, with the Apostle in Acts 20.29. yet I am greatly
afraid, that after my departing shall grievous Wolves enter in among you, not
sparing the flock; and that of your own selves shall men arise, speaking
perverse things, to draw away disciple after them.

4. Beware of worldly Friends, such as will counsel you to spare your selves,
such as savor not the things of God, but those that be of men. This our
Savior calls for in that of Luke 14.26. Answer them as Christ answered Peter,
Mat 16.22, 23.

The proper use of this Point, with respect to the people of God, is, to exhort
and persuade them, to wait on the Lord, and keep his way, however it be,
whoever they are that watch and plot against them, however they may prosper in
bringing wicked devices to pas^; however, they may prevail in oppressing the
poor Saints, yet this is the Exhortation that I have received from the Lord for
you, Wait on the Lord, and keep his Way. There are two branches of the
Exhortation, I shall speak to both of them distinctly.

And because the latter of them is the main, and the former a help thereto in
bad times, I shall invert the order of the Text, and speak to what is here, the
latter in the first place, and the other as time will give leave.

1. However it go, Saints, though the wicked watch to do you a mischief, yet
keep you the Way of the Lord, diligently observing the way of his
Commandments, the way of your duty to walk therein. For as much as it has
been the design of m^ preaching all along, to expound the Way of God to you,
and to instruct you in the way of the Lord; And I am now directing my speech to
the Saints of God, who know, own and profess the way of the Lord; I shall not
spend much time (while I have so little left) in recounting to you what I have
taught you concerning the way of the Lord, only in general, that way of truth
and righteousness, the way of faith and holiness which I have taught you from
the word, is intended. You know the way of Gospel-Doctrine, Gospel-Fellowship,
Gospel Worship, Gospel-Discipline, and Gospel-Conversation, which I have
preached, and you have received. And here beloved, I call God to witness, in
whose Name I have preached to you, that I have preached the way of the Lord
sincerely and faithfully, as I have received of the Lord by the teaching of his
Spirit through the Word; I therefore beseech and entreat you, out of that
hearty love I bear to you, and that affectionate care I have for you that as
you tender the Glory of God, your own Peace here, and eternal Happiness
hereafter, and the spiritual and eternal good of others, that you will remember
how you have heard, and received, and keep the way of the Lord.

In the prosecuting of this, I shall speak to these two things.

First, Open this duty in a few particulars. Secondly, Give you some directions
to help you herein.
For the first of these, take it in these particulars.

1. Be exhorted to keep the way of the Lord in your memories: So Rev. 3 3.
Remember therefore how thou have received; and heard, and hold fast. I am
speaking to those that have received the knowledge of the way of the Lord, that
they retain what they have learned, and that they maintain an actual
remembrance of it: and the rather take heed to this, every one of you, with the
greater diligence, for that you are like to be deprived of the help of your
Remembrancers, viz. the faithful Ministers of Christ, 1 Timothy 4.6. you have had
their help a l^ng while, in putting you, from Sabbath to Sabbath, in
remembrance; but this is taking from you: as the Apostle in another case, Heb.
2.1. Therefore ye ought to give the more earnest heed to the things ye have
heard, lest at any time ye should let them slip. 2. Keep the Way of the Lord in
your judgments and Consciences: I am speaking to those whose judgments are
enlightened, and Consciences renewed, to approve of the Way of the Lord: As
therefore the Apostle unto them 2 Pet. 3.17 Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye
know these things before, beware, lest ye be led amay with the error of the
wicked and fall from your own stedfastness. So say I, seeing ye know the Way
of the Lord, and approve of it, beware lest being led away with the error of
the wicked; and your own judgments being thereby corruped, and your
Consciences defiled, you fall from your own stedfastness: and I the rather
press this, for that, as the Apostle has it, 2 Cor. 11.3. I fear lest by any
means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should
be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. 3. Keep the Way of the Lord
in your Profession: I am speaking unto those, who, as Romans 10.10. with the
heart, believe unto Righteousness; and with the month, make confession unto
Salvation: And you have the Exhortation in the words of the Apostle, Heb.
10.23. Let us hold fast the profession of the Faith without wavering: Be not
ashamed of your profession; as our Savior speaks, Mar 8.38. Whosoever
therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of my Words, in this adulterous and
sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes
in the Glory of his Father, with his holy Angels; with Mat. 10.32, 33.
Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before
my Father which is in Heaven: But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will
I also deny before my Father which is in Heaven. 4. Keep the Way of the Lord in
your hearts and affections, loving, rejoicing, and delighting in the Way of the
Lord: The keeping of it in your memories, judgments, and profession, will be
but in vain, unless you keep it in your hearts. Lay up and hide the Word of God
in your hearts; let the desire and delight of your soul be in the Way of the
Lord; with the Psalm. 119.111. Thy Testimonies have I taken for mine heritage
for ever, for they are the rejoicing of my heart: It Is the Caracter of the
Godly man, Psalm, 1.1, 2. He delights in the Law of the Lord; and in his Law
does he meditate day and night. 5. Keep the Way of the Lord in your lives and
conversation; walking therein conscientiously; observing the Commandments of
God, to do accordingly: I am speaking to those who have chosen the way of the
Lord to walk in; and they may read what the Lord says in that, Deuteronomy. 5.32. You
shall observe to do as the Lord your God has commanded you: you shall not turn
aside to the right hand, or to the left: you shall walk in all the Ways that
the Lord your God has commanded you: and to as many as walk according to this
rule, peace shall be upon them, and upon the Israel of God.
Having this opened this Duty, take these few Directions among the many that
might be given.

1 Let the Spirit of Christ be your guide and principle: I am speaking unto
such as have the Spirit of Christ: Now if you consult that Ezekiel 36.27. You
shall find that the Lord promises his people, that he will put his Spirit
within them: and to what promise? viz. both to incline, enable, and guide them
to walk in his Statutes, and to observe his Commandmen^s to do them. There is
no entering into the way of the Lord, but by the Spirit, Joh. 3, 3. we all
naturally being gone astray, wander from the way of the Lord, and it is the
spirit only that can, and does reduce men into this way; and the best being but
lame, and having not only a principle of halting in, but declining from it,
there is no walking in this Way, but by the assistance and guidance of the
Spirit. Let therefore the Spirit of God be your guide; it is comprised, that he
shall lead you into all truth, John 16.13. Let the spirit be your principle:
walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5.16, then you shall not fulfill the lusts of the
flesh; but shall keep the way of the Lord. 2. Make the Word of God your rule. I
have heretofore, from that John 6 39. and 1 Timothy 3.15. and several other
places, cleared to you, that it is given of God for this end, to be the rule
both for Faith and Practice Keep therefore unto this, and by no means depart
from this, if you would keep the Way of the Lord. Here you have the Lord
revealing his Way, and that clearly and plainly, so that the most simple, that
apply themselves to it, may understand it: the Scriptures are a perfect and a
constant rule: Therefore, as in that, Isa. 8.26. To the Law and to the
Testimony; if they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no
Light in them. There are some that make the Light within* their rule and that
in opposition to the Word: but the Light in such is Darkness: for if they speak
not according to this Word (if it be but diverse from, though not directly
opposite unto it) then there is no light in them. Indeed the Light within, that
is Concience enlightened, is a rule; but it is, Regula, Regulata, a Ruled Rule:
There is Regula Regulans, and Regula Regulata, A Ruling Rule, and a Ruled Rule:
The former is a Rule to the latter, by which it is to be tried and approved:
The Word of God is a Ruling Rule, and Conscience is a Ruled Rule, which is to
be obeyed, as far as it speaks according to the Word, and no further. If
therefore you would keep the Way of the Lord, do not despise Conscience, do not
neglect the Light within, but make it not thy Rule; make the Word of God thy
Rule; admit not of any thing that is belonging to the Way of the Lord, that is
not grounded upon, or not warranted by his Word. If you would keep the Way of
the Lord, hold fast to what is written, stick to the Word.
That saying of Austin is famous:

Sive de Christo, sive de Ecclesia, sive de quacunque alia re non dico si nos
sed si Angelus sed coelo vobis annunciaverit praeterquam quod in Scripturis
accipistes, Anathema sit: Not to say, If we, but if an Angel from heaven shall
preach any thing of Christ, or of the Church, or of any other thing besides
what ye have received in the Scripture, let him be accursed. Like to that, Gal.
1.8, 9. The Word is the heavenly Compass whereby we may be directed to steer
our course aright to the Haven of happiness: Keep you to the Word, while one
says, this is the way, and another that: Try all things by the Rule of the
Word, and make that your Rule to walk by. Hence, when Paul was taking his leave
of the Church at Ephesus, in that Acts 20. in his Farewel-Sermon; that after
his departure, they might keep the way of the Lord: you may read, what he
commends to them, verse 32. And your brethren, I commend you to God, and the
Word of his Grace, which is able to build you up, and give you an inheritance
among those that are sanctified: He commends the Word of God to them. So,
Beloved, now that I may no more speak to you from this place, for the teaching
of you the right and the good way, I recommend to you the Word of the Lord;
which will be a light to your feet, and a Lanthorn to your paths, to guide you
in the Way of the Lord, till you attain the end of your Faith, the Salvation of
your souls. What knowledge I have of the way of the Lord, what I have taught
you of the way of the Lord, I have been taught by the Spirit of the Lord,
through the Word: and though you want the great help of a plain, powerful, and
faithful Ministry for the future, yet let not those that are sincere, in
desiring to walk in the way of the Lord, be discouraged by those who would make
them believe, that the Word is hard to be understood: for that, as it is more
from malignity in us, than difficulty in the Scriptures, that the most do not
understand them; so they are easy to be understood by them that sincerely
endeavor; it being not only most plain and clear in teaching the way of the
Lord, but also appointed to enlighten the eyes, and make wise the simple, Psalm.
19 7, 8. Yea, the entrance of it gives light: it gives understanding to the
simple, Psalm. 119.130. And how weak and simple soever any of the Saints may be
in worldly matters, and in the Worlds account, yet of them all is that spoken,
1 John 2.27. But the anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you,
and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you
of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, even as it has been taught you, ye
shall abide in him. Though they corrupt and pervert this Text, that make use of
it to the disannulling of all Ministerial teaching; for if John had meant so,
to what purpose did he write this Epistle? yet when God depriveth us of this
help, this Scripture affords support and comfort to the Saints, that by the
Spirit in them, they shall be enabled to understand what he teaches in the
Word, so as to abide in the Lord and in his Way, as they have been taught.

Having then the Spirit for your principle and guide, let the Word be your
Rule, and you shall keep the Way of the Lord; according to that promise, Isaiah
35.8. The wayfaring-men, though fools, shall not err therein.

3. Let the example of Christ be your pattern, that you may keep the Way of the
Lord; set this Copy always before you. He always kept the Way of the Lord; as
he came down from Heaven to do the Will of his Father, John 6.38. so he did
always those things that did please him, John 8.29. He never departed in the
least from the Way of the Lord: He knew n^ sin, neither was guile found in his
mouth. If then you would keep the Way of the Lord, learn of him, follow him,
walk even as he walked: Indeed in the things that are proper to Christ, as God,
or as Mediator, therein he is not to be imitated by us; but in the things that
he did, or suffered as man, he left us an example or pattern, that we should
follow his steps, 2 Pet. 2.21. Hence that Exhortation of his, Mat. 11.29. Learn
of me, for I am me^k and lowly in heart. That then you may be directed as well
as encouraged to keep the Way of the Lord, look to Jesus, and walk as you have
him for an example. Indeed, the Apostle exhorts to walk, as you have him for an
example, Phil. 3.17. But knowing that he could give you but an imperfect Copy,
he exhorts in that, 1 Cor. 11.1. Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of
Christ. It may be of good use to us, to mind the examples of the Apostles and
faithful Ministers of the Gospel, that have walked on in the Way of the Lord
before us: But forasmuch as there in none of them, even Peter himself, but went
awry more or less; therefore make the example of Christ your pattern. Time will
not permit to prosecute this at large: I shall only offer some few particulars
from the example of Christ to you, such as may be most seasonable to further
you in keeping the Way of the Lord.

1. It was the work and business of the Lord Jesus Christ to do the Will of his
Father, to do what pleased him. As he came down from Heaven to do his Father's
Will, as you before heard from John 6.68. so he made it his work and business.
To this purpose is that, Luke 2.49. How is it that ye sought me? wist ye not
that I must be about my Fathers business? with that John 4.34. Jesus says unto
them, My meat is to do the Will of him that sent me, and to finish his work. If
then you will keep the Way of the Lord herein, be ye followers of Christ; let
it be your work and business to do the Will of the Lord, and to walk in all
well-pleasing before him: Let the Exhortation be in the words of the Apostle, 1
These. 4.1. Furthermore, then we beseech you Brethren, and exhort you, That as
you have received of us how you ought to walk and please God, so ye would
abound more and more.

1. It was the practice of the Lord Jesus Christ, to look on all the sufferings
that came upon him, as coming from the hand of his Father in accomplishment of
his Word, and therefore quietly to submit to them. To this purpose is it that
he tells Pilate in John. 19.11. Thou could have no power at all against me,
except it were given thee from above; He looks beyond Pilate, to him that was
above. So John 18.11. The Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink
it? He overlooks the instruments, and looks on his sufferings, as a Cup put
into his hand by his Father: And as he observed the hand of his Father in the
sufferings that came upon him, so he takes notice that they are in
accomplishment of Scripture, Mat. 26.53, 54. Think thou that I could not now
pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve Legions of
Angels? but how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be?
and he takes notice that the Scripture had foretold that thus it must be, and
that he must suffer, and enter into glory, as he clears i^ in that of Luke
24.25, 26. Therefore though he prayed, if it be possible, as Matthew has it;
and, if thou be willing, let this Cup pass from me, as Luke has it; yet he
quietly submits to his Father's Will, with a, Not my will, but thine be done.
And as Mat. 26.42. If this Cup may not pass away, except I drink it, let thy
will be done. Thus you see how by looking to the Fathers hand, he willingly
submits to what sufferings came upon him. That you may keep the Way of the Lord
in the midst of all the sufferings you are like to meet with, herein following
the Lord Jesus Christ, eying the hand of your gracious Father in all the
sufferings that come upon you, of what nature soever, and by whomsoever
inflicted; and what ever may be the ends of those by whom you suffer, yet that
they are all ordered by him in accomplishment of his Word. Do ye not believe
this? I know that ye do believe it by Faith; therefore improve it for the
quieting of your hearts in all your sufferings. This is that the Apostle
presses the Saints unto in the 12th of the Hebrews, where he takes for
granted, that all kind of sufferings, (more especially such as come upon us by
the contradiction of sinners) are fatherly corrections from the Lord, and so in
accomplishment of the Word of God, according unto that Psalm. 89.30, 31. and
therefore humbly to be submitted to: so Heb. 12.9, 10. Furthermore we have had
fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: shall we
not much rather be in subjection to the Father of Spirits, and live? for they
verily for a few days chastened as after their pleasure; but he for our profit,
that we may be partakers of his holiness. Seeing therefore whatsoever befalls
you in the way of the Lord, is by your Father's ordering in accomplishment of
his Word for your profit, that ye may be partakers of his Holiness, submit your
selves to him, eye your Fathers hand and end, and be quiet.

3. It was the practice of Jesus Christ in his state of humiliation, to give
unto Civil Magistrates and Rulers what was their due, yea, to forgo somewhat of
his Civil Right rather than to offend them: For giving unto Civil Magistrates
their due, notable is that of Mat. 22.21. Render therefore unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's. And as he
taught them, so he practiced himself; for he was not of those that say and do
not, but his practice was always conformable to his Doctrine: When therefore
they that received Tribute-money at Capernaum, came and demanded of him; he
will rather recede from his Civil Liberty than offend them, Mat. 17.25, 26, 27.
Now go ye and do likewise. If ye will keep the way of the Lord, give unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar's; be subject unto the King, and all that are
in Authority: Let the Exhortation be that, 1 Pet. 2.13. Submit your selves to
every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake. What is here meant by Ordinance of
man, is clear from what follows; whether to the Kings as Supreme, or unto
Governors, etc. Be ye therefore subject, Saints, not only for wrath, but for
Conscience sake, for the Lord's sake; and as Romans 13.7. Render to every one
their due; Tribute to whom Tribute, Custom to whom Custom is due, etc. Such
subjection to Magistrates as thwarteth not our obedience unto God; ^^es within
the Way of the Lord: Yield therefore active obedience unto ^he King, as far as
Conscience toward God will give leave: Fear God; and honor the King, 1 Pet.
2.17. Give all that honor to the King that is consistent with the true fear of
God. Let nothing but Conscience toward God, hinder you at any time from
yielding active obedience to all the King's Laws.

And here Beloved, I shall take occasion to open my heart sincerely to you. You
know what is required of me if I will continue a public Minister in this
Kingdom: I hope no sober persons can think me such a humerous perverse
Phanatick as to throw away my Maintenance, much less my Ministerial Capacity
(which is much more dear to me than Livelihood, yea, than Life) out of a proud
humor and vainglorious fancy. In brief therefore, as I shall answer it before
the great God, the searcher of all hearts, and the righteous Judge, Did not
Conscience toward God forbid me, I would willingly and readily do all that the
Act requires. But seeing I cannot declare an unfeigned Assent and Consent, as
the Law requires: As from the fear of my God I dare not; so from the Love you
generally have to me, I know you would not have me dissemble with God and men.
I do therefore humbly choose to submit to the Penalty, rather than by a
hypocritical conformity (for such it must be in me, if any) to dishonor my God,
wound my own Conscience, and dissemble with men; knowing assuredly that my God
has no need of my sin; And if he have any work for me in the public Ministry,
he will incline the King's heart to grant Liberty and Encouragement therein to
me, with the rest of those who desire to be faithful in preaching of the
Gospel; which that the Lord will grant, I promise my self the help of all your
prayers, who have been favored with any spiritual blessings through my
Ministry.

4. It was the practice of Jesus Christ to be so far from making resistance by
the Sword to keep himself from suffering, that he refused such help as was
offered him that way: So Mat. 26.52. Then said Jesus unto him, Put up again thy
Sword into his place, for all they that take the Sword shall perish by the
Sword, (...), it is not all that use, but all that take the Sword without a
lawful call. So John 18.11. Put up thy Sword into thy sheath: The Cup which my
Father will have me to drink, shall I not drink it? If you would keep the way
of the Lord herein, follow Christ so, as not to resist those that are in
Authority, however unjustly you may suffer from them: for, 1 Pet. 2.19. This is
thank-worthy, if a man for Conscience sake toward God, endure grief, suffering
wrongfully.

It was the practice of Jesus Christ to be so far from avenging himself, as to
render good for evil; to forgive his enemies, to seek their good and welfare.
So in Luke 23.34. Then said Jesus, Father, forgive them, for they know not what
they do.

Thus follow Christ, according to that he teaches in Mat. 5.34. Love your
enemies; Bless them that curse you; do good to them that hate you; and pray for
them which despightfully use you, and persecute you. And what the Apostle
exhorts in Romans 12.19, 20. Dearl, beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather
give place unto wrath: for it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay,
says the Lord. Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give
him drink, etc.

6. The Lord Jesus Christ had great compassion for poor wandering sinners, Mat.
9.36. Great love for his Saints, John 13.1. with tender pity toward them in
all their sorrows and afflictions, Isa. 63.9. Herein also be ye followers of
Christ, according to that Col. 3.12, 13. Put on therefore as the Elect of God,
holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long-suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another; if any man
have a quarrel against any, even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye.

7. The Lord Jesus counted not his life dear, when that he was called to give
it up in bearing witness to the Truth: as you have it in that John 18.37. he
bears witness to the Truth when called to it, with the hazard of his life.

Herein follow Jesus Christ, in bearing Witness to the Truth of God, though
with the hazard of your lives, as Paul does in that Acts 20.24. What ever
mischief be threatened by wicked men, yet deny not, be not ashamed of the Words,
Truths, and Ways of Christ; for it is the Word of the true and faithful Witness,
which we have, Mark 8.36. Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and my
words, in this adulterous and sinful Generation, of him also shall the Son of
Man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father, with the holy
Angels. And, Oh how sad, if this be thy portion! for if in that day Christ
shall be ashamed of thee, Woe be to thee for ever, thou shall be wretched and
miserable to all Eternity. But be faithful, courageous, and constant, in
confessing him, and his Ways and Truths; for he has said, Mat. 10.32.
Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess before my
Father that is in Heaven: And, Oh how comfortable, if this be thy portion! for
if Jesus Christ confess thee at that day, Peace be to thee for ever, thou shall
be blessed and happy to all Eternity: Though therefore thy confessing of him,
be attended not only with eproaches, and Revilings, but with Fines, Bonds,
Imprisonment, yea, Death it self; yet herein follow him, in bearing witness to
the Truth, when called unto it, whatever hazard you run by it; yea, though it
come to the drinking of the Cup that he drank of, and to the sealing of your
Testimony with your blood; knowing that if ye suffer with him, ye shall also
reign together with him. Thus if you follow the Lord, walking in his steps, in
these and other Particulars, wherein he has given us an example, you shall be
sure to keep the Way of the Lord. And this shall suffice for the third branch
of the Direction.

4. Let the Glory of God be your End, if that you would keep the way of the
Lord: if you have sincerely entered the way of the Lord, then the Glory of the
Lord is your last End; and if you would keep on steadily in this way, look to
the Glory of God as your main End. Though it be possible for a man that has
the Glory of God for his End, to step out of the Way of the Lord; yet it is
impossible for a man to keep the Way of the Lord, unless this be his utmost
End: Yea though it be possible for one that is right in his End, to err in
this or that particular, so as to stray from the Way of the Lord, in some
lesser matters that shall not prejudice his Salvation; yet it is impossible,
that such a one should ^o mistake about the Substantials of this Way, as to
turn aside, and to walk totally and finally in the Way that leads to
destruction, and et^^nal perdition. Though the purity of the End, will not make
ame^ds for the viciousness of the means; yet where a man is right in his End,
much Error as to the means shall be forgiven him; yea, and to have the Glory
of God for your End, in all your natural and civil A^^ions, i^ (...) way to
sanctify them, and to inscribe Holiness to the L^^d on them. Thus may the
meanest actions of your particular Callings become Religious, if they be done
as to the Lord, in obedience to his Command, and with respect to his Glory:
Therefore as the Apostle has it, 1 Cor. 10.32. Whether you eat or drink, or
whateuer ye do, do all to the glory of God: Make this your scope, and it will
be of special use to guide you when the way is doubtful, being indeed
propounded by the Apostle for that end: As a man that is traveling on
Salisbury Plain toward the City; he comes sometimes where there is no beaten
paths, and sometimes where two or three ways meet; now to keep his eye on the
City, is the ready course to keep him in the right way: So if a man were to
draw a straight Line to such a Point, and has not a rule to draw by, his
readiest way is to keep his eye upon the Point. So when your way is doubtful,
and you know not which way to take, take that which is most for the glory of
God: where you see not your Rule, keep your eye on the glory of God, and it
will be of choice use to keep you straight in the Way of the Lord. And so much
for the first branch of the Exhortation.

2. Be exhorted to wait on the Lord, for without this you will not long keep
the Way of the Lord, there are such troubles, distresses, and tribulations that
attend the way of the Lord, that as the Apostle has it, Heb. 10.36. Ye have
need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, you may inherit the
promise. So say I, you have need of Waiting, that you may keep the way of the
Lord, and continue therein to the end.

Wherein the Nature of this Duty lies, and what Encouragements there are to it
in the worst of times, I have lately shown you, when I preached on that, Lam.
3.26. It is good that a man hope, and wait quietly for the Salvation of the
Lord. Whence I observed, That however it go with the people of God, it is good,
it is best for them to hope and wait quietly for the Salvation of the Lord: I
shall therefore only recommend this duty to you, as the work of this dark Day,
and conclude with that of our Savior, Luke 12.35, etc. And let your Loins be
girded about, and your Lights burning, and ye your selves like to men that wait
for their Lord when he will return from the wedding; that when he comes and
knocks, they may open to him immediately. Blessed are those Servants, whom
the Lord when he comes, shall find watching. Yea, Keep the Way of the Lord,
and wait on him: For, as ver. 42.43. Who then is that faithful and wise
Servant, whom his Lord shall make Ruler over his Household, to give them their
portion of meat in due season? Blessed is that Servant, whom the Lord when he
comes shall find so doing.

FINIS.

