THE Compendious Schoolmaster: Teaching the English-Tongue After a more easy
and demonstrable Method than has been hitherto Published or Taught.

Wherein are contained,

I. Facil and Familiar Directions for the True Sound of Letters.

II. Proper Pronunciation of Syllables and Words, according to their different
Derivations, Alphabetically Digested; with Exact Rules for the Right Division
of Words from Two to Seven Syllables.

III. The Art of Fair and Fast Writing, with Cautious Copies to Write and Walk
by, Alphabetically Composed.

IV. Short Rules of Arithmetic easily attained by the meanest Capacity, and
retained by the weakest Memory.

All these Adorned with variety of Copper Cuts; Together with Significant
Comparisons, Proverbs, Sentences, Poems, Prayers, Graces.

By a LOVER of LEARNING, And a hearty Well-wisher to his beloved Country.

LICENSED, Nov. 29. 1687. ROB. MIDGLEY.

London: Printed for Samuel Lowndes, near Exeter-Exchange in the Strand.
MDCLXXXVIII.

CAMBRIDG

OXFORD

THE Compendious Scholmaster

Learning makes a man

Learning advances men of mean degree To high seize, wealth, and dignity.



To all Lovers of Religion, Loyalty and Learning: Health, Peace, and Prosperity.
Ingenious and Ingenuous READER,
IT was not the vain Itch of Ambition to appear in Print, but a Zeal to serve
my Generation according to the Will of God, prompted me to the Publication of
the following Work. I know some will be ready to accost me with that well-known
Sentence, Facile est, inventis addere; It is easy to build where another has
laid the Foundation, and prepared meet Materials for carrying on of the Work,
but to Propound and Contrive the Model, and advantageously manage the design,
Hic labor, hoc opus est. Here lies the difficulty, and herein he approves
himself an expert and exquisite Artist. I foresee it will be objected, that
Sundry Learned Worthies have already Labored in this Work. The Old Spelling
Book and English Schoolmaster, were many Years since Published, and of late Mr.
Hunt, Mr. Coals, Mr. Young, Mr. Lane, Mr. Clark and others, have Ingeniously
offered their Pains this way: And what necessity (will some say) of your now
attempting that Work, which is effectually done already by other Hands.

To this I answer, that those Learned Men, before mentioned, designed and
deserved Well, in their Generous Offers for a General Good. But it should be
considered, that a most Wise God has so distributed his Talents, that no one
has all, but every one has something which the other wants, and it is
possible for another to come after them, that may be preferred before them; for
adding many Cubits to their Stature, by a further Progress and Proficiency than
they attained, or pretended unto. It is one thing, imperfectly to prepare
ordinary Materials in the Rough for a Building, and another, Cautiously and
Curiously to pick and choose only such as are useful among them, and supply what
is wanting with a better choice, and place them Sprucely and Briskly in the
Building, the peculiar Work of a Master Builder.

Memorable is the Modest, Ingenuous Answer, Judicious and Generous Gideon
returned, by way of Question or Expostulation, to the Angry and Envious
Ephramites. Judges 8. 2. What have I done now in Comparison of you? Is not the
Gleaning of the Grapes of Ephraim, better than the Vintage of Abiezer? As there
was great Humility in Gideons Commendable and Exemplary Condescension,
wherewith he judiciously and dexterously disarmed the hasty hotheaded
Ephramites Indignation; so there was no less Verity and Ingenuity in that
Metaphorical Expression, by comparing the Fight and the Success of it to a
Vintage, the Victory which himself and his Abiezerites had gained, to the first
gathering of the Grapes, and the Ephramites Slaughtering the Midianites in
their Flight, to the Gleaning of the Vintage. The Work was happily begun, but
not perfected, by Gideon, Ephraim like the Gleanings of the Vintage swept them
away with the Besom of Destruction, and slew their Princes Oreb and Zeeb, which
had passed Gideon's Victorious Arms. As many a fair Ear of Corn escapes the
hasty Harvest-Mans Hand, that the Ingenious Gleaner gathers up: So those that
escaped the Sword of Gideon, are Slain by the Sword of Ephraim, who effectually
did that which the other had left undone. Moreover, it cannot be denied that
the Gleanings (for quality) may be preferred before the Vintage, because the
fairest Fruit grows high, out of the Gatherers ready reach, and therefore the
Gleanings of the Vintage may be the choicest Grapes, as well as the Gleanings
of the Harvest the purest Grain.

My unworthy self, though the Least of my Brethren, and the Meanest of my Mothers
Sons, have, for some Years past, been very Studious and Curious in Gleaning
Pearls of the English Eloquence, and by a diligent Search as for hid Treasure,
have found and furbisht sundry choice ones that before lay hid, which are here
courteously and heartily offered to court the Ingenuous Acceptance of the
Judicious and Generous Reader, as an invincible demonstration of the Authors
unfeigned and fervent affection to the English Nation; whose Eye has been long
fixed on the Mark, and his Will upon the Work, and he hopes his Hand has now
answered both, in Hitting the White he aimed at, by bidding fairer for an
advantageous Conclusion, than those that left the Work very Imperfect.

I have observed Sundry Country Schoolmasters, that knew not how to give
Letters nor Syllables, their true Sounds, being altogether in the Dark, as to
their different Derivation and Pronunciation, and unable to render a reason,
why the same Letter is pronounced with one Sound in one Word, with a different
Sound in another, and not at all Sounded in a Third. I have likewise observed,
that in long Words of Three, Four, Five, or Six Syllables, though some Petty
Schoolmasters have sometimes luckily stumbled upon the right Sound of the
Word, giving it its proper Name in the Lump, (more by Luck than Learning) but
when for their Scholars better Instruction and Satisfaction, they were to take
the long Word asunder, and particularly Pronounce each Syllable, apart by
itself, they have been sadly puzzled both in the proper Division, and true
Pronounciation of them, to their Scholars manifest detriment and
discouragement, and their own expressless prejudice and disparagement. Which
great Remora in the way of English Learning, I have, in this Work, fairly and
effectually removed for rolling a way that Reproach.

As it is most absurd, for any Man to offer to build a House without a
Foundation, so it is no less ridiculous to attempt the acquiring a proficiency
in any Art, without propounding such Rules, as have a direct tendency to the
end propounded, as a Key to the Work, or clue to direct him through that
Labyrinth, wherein he is in danger to lose himself and his design, without the
ingenious conduct of such a Guide, the effectual finding out this, has not
been the least part of the Authors Pains, in this his no less laborious than
laudable enterprise, for removing and explaining the difficulties of the
English Tongue, in such a plain, familiar and demonstrative, Method, as may be
most conducible to their advantage, for whom the Work was primarily and
principally intended.

I make no flourish of a Supernumerary Table of a Thousand Words more than
others have, in a confused manner drawn up in a full body to look big upon the
Reader, nor have I committed a Rape upon the English Tongue, in forcing it
beyond the due Limits of Modesty and Ingenuity, by pulling in by Head and
Shoulders such Words as are never to be reconciled to Sense, for making up that
Number. I deliver my Words not by Tale, but by Weight, reducing them to Rules
of Practice, ranking them in due Place and Order into such regular Squadrons,
and proper Divisions, as might most dexterously and effectually encounter and
conquer the hitherto invincible difficulties of our native Dialect, which, I
presume, is here done to the clear conviction and ample satisfaction of the
Judicious Ingenuous Master, the ease, benefit and delight of the Studious
Ingenious Scholar, and the delectation and approbation of the solid, serious,
sharp-sighted Reader.

Moreover, that nothing may be wanting for accomplishing my English Scholar. I
have also prescribed some short and right Rules for Reading Readily and
Gracefully, and a Singular Method of Fair Writing Two Spruce Dexterous Hands,
without taking Pen from Paper in drawing any Letter, either Small or Capital,
fairly Engraven on a Copper Plate, and Copies Alphabetically composed to Write
and Practice by, tending to Holiness and Happyness; with short and right Rules
of Arithmetic, plainly demonstrated, and easily attained and retained by the
meanest Capacity and weakest Memory.

Furthermore, I have here presented thee with Sundry Pertinent Comparisons,
Proverbial sayings, and Select Sentences both Moral and Divine, Alphabetically
digested, and English Elegancies pleasantly improved, and Alphabetically
disposed in familiar Discourses, for exercising the most Industrious and
Ingenious: With some Raptures of Poetry on the Commandments, and on the
Dolorous Ruins, and Glorious Resurrection of the most Renowned City of London,
from the devouring Flames: With some serious and seasonable Poems on Time and
Death, to whet the Readers Ingenuity with a delightful Variety, to bring on my
hopeful Scholar, with the greater facility and dexterity, to affect and effect
the noble Study of Good Letters, and the right Knowledge of himself, by
understanding Books and Men. Thus craving thy Candid acceptance of this
well-meant Work, which I earnestly Recommend to thy Christian Consideration,
and thy self to the Divine Protection. Vale.

October 23. 1687.
TO THE Judicious and Generous READER.
Candid Reader,
MY many Years intimate Acquaintance with the studious ingenious Author, has
introduced me into the knowledge of the Man, and his Communication, who some
Weeks since was pleased to Communicate his Design, to publish the present Work
for a general Good. And that he might not deceive himself with a partial
Opinion of his own Performance, he requested me cautiously and heartily to
peruse it, and give my Judgment of it, whether it were worthy to see the Light:
Conjuring me by the Laws of Friendship, not to favor any Error in it, through
Modesty or Civility as a Friend, but thoroughly and strictly scan it with the
Eye of an Enemy, by noting every Fault in it, as a most severe, but ingenuous,
Corrector. To which I readily condescended, and with greatest Dexterity and
Integrity (according to my slender Ability) have performed. And now think my
self further obliged to render the Reader this following Account of the Work
and Workman. I must, as a Friend to Truth as well as Charity, declare, That the
Work is well designed for the benefit both of Natives and Strangers, that
desire to attain the Knowledge of the English Tongue in the Latitude and
Elegancy of it, which now appears as great as any Vulgar Speech or Language in
the World, being indeed the Quintessence of all Languages, which, like so many
Egyptian Jewels, and Hebrew Handmaids, serve to adorn this Queen. But in
respect of the singular Copiousness and Significancy of it, above all other
Vulgar Dialects, it is not so reducible to Rules of Grammar as other inferior
Languages are, which renders it the most difficult of all others to be attained
by Strangers. Wherefore the Author, who is a great Admirer and Observer of the
Curious Criticizms of this Lofty Language, has, to the just Commendation of
his singular Industry and Ingenuity, abundantly labored in this Work, and
reduced it to so facil and familiar a Method, that he that runs may read, and
he that reads may understand, what before he was altogether a stranger to.
Which taking Method will pleasantly charm Squirrel-pated Boys into a love of
Learning, and commendable Emulation to excel each other in the Elegancies and
Significancies of their Native Tongue, never before so plausibly, plainly and
particularly, expressed and explained, as in this present pleasant Work of the
worthy Author. I have also seriously perused Eight or Nine several Authors that
have attempted to write on this Subject, and without Prejudice or Partiality I
affirm, that they have all come short of what in their flourishing Fronts they
(or somebody for them) so confidently pretended; wherein (upon due
Examination) I observed many things superfluous, some things very impertinent,
and the whole very imperfect. I must ingenuously acknowledge, that this Work
far exceeds all I ever yet saw, whose comprehensive Method, and ingenious
Management of the Design, as far surmounted my Expectation, as the dull
Contrivance of a Vulgar Apprehension. And to render this Work useful and
acceptable not only to Boys, but Men, the Author, in the later part of his
Book, liberally entertains the ingenious Reader with a rich variety of pleasant
and profitable Matter, both in Curious Prose and Lofty Verse, worthy the
Readers Caution and Practical Observation in the Course of his Conversation, to
oblige both the present and future Generations to praise the Fountain of
Goodness, for giving such Gifts unto Men, and a Will to improve them for a
General Good.

The Good Lord prolong the Elaborate and Orthodox Author's Life, to finish
those Excellent Designs he has now in Hand: And the Lord increase the Number
of such Men. And let me advise thee, Reader, to buy whatsoever proceeds from
this Authors Pen, whose Parts and Pains are not ordinary, his Style lovely, and
his Design holy. Thus, wishing thee Health and Happiness, I cease to write, but
not to remain,

The Author's Friend, and thy Servant, R. W.
October. 31. 1687.
THE COMPENDIOUS Schoolmaster, etc.
FIrst of Letters in general, and particularly of Vowels, Consonants, and
Dipthongs.

A Letter is the least part of a Word, and to every Letter three things belong.

1. Name, whereby it is called. 2. Figure, whereby it is known. 3. Force,
whereby it is pronounced.
Of Letters are made Syllables, of Syllables Words, of Words a Speech, which is
either Prose or Verse.

Letters are distinguished two ways, 1. By Shape. 2. By ^ound. According to
their Shape,

First, Into Great or Capital Letters, as

A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V U W X Y Z etc.

Secondly, Small, as

a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s s t v u w x y z and etc.

Great Letters are to be written in the Front or Title of a Book, as,

THE BOOK OF PSALMS.

Also in the Glorious Names of God, as, I AM JEHOVAH LORD, And such like.

Also to begin a Sentence, as, Go to the Ant, thou Sluggard, consider her ways,
and be wise.

Proper Names of Men, Charles, James, etc. Of Women, as Mary, Elizabeth,
Patience. Of Dignities, as Majesty, Highness, etc. Of Arts, as Grammar, Logic,
etc. Of Trades, as Tailor, Barber, etc. Of Countries, as England, Ireland, etc.
Of Cities, as London, Oxford, Bristol, etc. Of Towns, as Bedford, Buckingham,
etc. Of Villages, as Newington, Kensington, etc. Of Rivers, as Thames, Tine,
and Tweed, etc. Of Months, as January, February, etc.
To begin a Verse, as, Falls have their Risings, Wainings have their Primes,
And desperate Sorrows wait their better Times.


Letters are also divided into Vowels, which are five, a e i o u and y sounding
like i in the middle or end of a Syllable, is a Greek Vowel.

And Consonants which are 19, and thus pronounced: be cee dee of gee iee ca el
em en b c d f g i k l m n pee cu ar es tee you ex wi zed. p q r s t u x y z.

A Vowel has a perfect sound by itself without any other Letter, as, (A) good
Man (I) ought to prize. (O) that this Age abounded with such Worthies.

Consonants be so called, because they cannot be sounded without a Vowel, as Gd
sv th Kng, which with their Vowels added to make up the Sense, is, God save the
King.

Consonants are of two sorts, single and double.

Single Consonants are 19, as before expressed: b c d f g h j k l m n p q r s t
v x y z.

Y being both a Vowel and a Consonant, as appears in sundry Examples, P. 18.
etc.

Double Consonants are these seven, ct ff fl ss sl sh st.

A Dipthong is the sound of two Vowels in one Syllable; Dipthongs are proper,
or improper.

The proper Dipthongs are eight, ai, ei, oi, au, eu, ee, oo, ou.

The improper Dipthongs are six, ay, ey, oy, aw, ew, ow.

They differ not much in sound, but differ very much in writing; for the proper
Dipthongs are to be used in the beginning and middle of a word, as in Oister,
fair, Air, either; but when you have the same sounds in the end of a word, you
must write ay, ey, oy, as prey, may, joy.

Though Letters usually have the same sound, yet it should be considered, that
some Letters are to be differently sounded according as they are placed; And
Secondly, that some Letters in sundry words lose their sound, being not at all
pronounced, as by many pertinent Examples of both kinds Alphabetically
considered, shall plainly appear to the ample satisfaction of the studious
ingenious Reader.

First, some Letters are to be differently sounded, according as they are
variously placed, as in these following Alphabetical Examples.

A Is generally pronounced sharp, as in bat, cat, fat, hat, lat, sat, mat, etc.
But when A comes before ll, it is pronounced after the French manner, as au in
ball, call, fall, hall, shall, wall, gall, which we pronounce like gaul, etc.

C Before a, o, oo, u, always sounds like k, as cade, came, cane, can, cap,
cart, cast, caught, cave, cavel, etc.

Also before o, oo and u, C has ever the same sound, as Court, Cold, Cook,
Custom, Curious, and the like.

Also C in the beginning of a word, having a Consonant following it, is ever
like k, as claim, clean, clime, clown, clue, crave, cram, creed, cry, crown,
crowd, crew, etc.

C before e or i, in all Latin and English words, is ever pronounced like s, as
Cedar, Cellar, City, Civil, and the like.

But all Hebrew and Greek words that have e following c in the beginning of the
Syllable, c is to be pronounced like k, as Cedron, which is pronounced as
Kedron; and Aceldama, as Akeldama, etc. except Cephas and Cenchrea, where c
sounds like s.

Ch in words purely English, have a peculiar sound with them both before and
after Vowels.

Before Vowels, as Charles, church, charge, charity, chariot, cheer, cheat,
child, chirp, charter, chapter, chase, chance, chant, cheap, cherry, cheese,
chose, choose, chine, chip, chop, chup, churl, and the like.

Also after a Vowel ch is pronounced as before a Vowel, as ach, reach, rich,
roche, such, teach, preach, breach, etc.

But in words of a Hebrew or Greek derivation, Ch sounds like k, both before a
Vowel in the beginning of a word, and after a Vowel in the middle or end of a
word, as in these following Examples plainly appears.

In the beginning of a word, as in Chilion, Chim-ham, Che-dar-la-o-mer, Chios,
Choos, Cher^th, Choler, etc. where Ch is pronounced like k, as if it were
written Kilion, Kim-ham, Ke-dar-la-o-mer, Kios, Koos, Kerith, Koler.

Thus after a Vowel in the middle of a word, Ch is pronounced like k, as Achan,
Achor, Achaiah, Archelaus, Michol, Michmas, Michael, Nicholas, Bich^y,
Machination, Procherus, Eschol; as if these words were written Akan, Akor,
Akaiah, Arkelaus, Mikol, Mickmash, Mikael, Nickolas, Bickey, Mackination,
Prokerus, Eskol.

Ch is likewise pronounced like k in the end of a word, as in Adramelech,
Abimelech, Ahimelech, Enoch, Lamech, Mesech, Molech, Monarch; as if these words
were written Adrameleck, Abimeleck, Ahimeleck, Elimeleck, Enok, Lameck, Meseck,
Moleck, Monark, etc.

But some few Hebrew and Greek words, custom (that controuls Grammar) has
exempted from this Rule, as Cherubim, Tychicus, Antioch, and Rachel, which, by
the same Rule, should be pronounced Rakel, but because that would be of a bad
sound, we say Rachel.

As also words compounded of Arch, as Archer, Arches, Archi-tecture,
Archbishop, Archdeacon, Archduke; but we pronounce Archangel, as if written
Ark-Angel, according to the former Examples, as is ever to be observed.

For pronouncing e at the end of a word, is not so ingeniously reduced to any
special Rule in the English Tongue, the French more exactly observe an e
masculin, and an e feminin; the e masculin they mark and pronounce sharp, like
the Latin Adverb Maxim; the e feminin, without any thing over it, is almost
swallowed up in the pronunciation.

But though e in the end of an English word generally loses its sound, as in p
more plainly and particularly appears; yet in the following words e is ever
fully pronounced, as in he, she, we, ye, be. As also in some other words for
distinguishing both the sense and sound from words of the same Orthography or
Spelling, as bate from bat, care from car, cate from cat, fate from fat, fare
from far, mare from mar, pare from par, ware from war, fire from fir, made from
mad, mile from mill, quite from quit, bide from bid, ride from rid, gate from
gat, hate from hat, and such like, where it alters not more the sense than
sound.

Also e at the end of an English word softens the sound of g coming next before
e, as in age, cage, rage, stage, sage and singe, where g has a much softer
sound than in cag, rag, stag, sing, which is plain to the meanest Capacity.

FIs always pronounced like itself, but in words borrowed from the Greek ph is
used for it, as Philip, Philemon, Phebe, Phenice, Phantasy, Physic,
Phlebotomy, and the like.

G Before a, o, or u, is pronounced short and sharp, sounding like the Greek
(g) Gamma, as in these following Examples, Game, gone, gun, gaudy, godly,
guilty, and such like.

But in Haggai, the first g is pronounced short, and the second g, though a
follows it, sounds flat, like an j Consonant, as if it were written Hagjai.

G before e or i in English words, is sometimes pronounced long or flat, like an
j Consonant, as gill, gin, gipsy, gem, gender, giant, generation, genealogy,
gentility, generosity, geometry, gesture; and some proper Names, as Gervase,
George, Gerard, Germany, Gifford; but the last may be, without Censure,
pronounced either way, and gill, the gill of a fish, is pronounced short and
sharp, as in gild; and gill, a gill of wine is pronounced long or flat, as in
giant.

In all Hebrew and Greek words which we find in the Bible, or other Writings,
this Rule is without Exception, that e following g, ever sounds sharp like
itself, as before a, o, or u, as Gebal, Geber, Gedaliah, Gerezim, Genazareth,
Geshur, Gershom, Gethsemane, etc.

Also when i follows next after g, as in Gibeon, Gideon, Gihon, Gilead; and
girl, gillary, with all Hebrew and Greek Names of Persons or Places; it is
absurd to pronounce g like an j Consonant, according to the English and Latin
pronunciation of it before noted.

G before a Consonant is ever pronounced sharp, as in Gregory, Grevile,
Glanvile, Grantham, grave, greasy, grim, ground, grind, grace, great, grief,
gruel, gravel, grain, grapes, glass, grass, grow, glow, glide, glen, green,
groan, grown, glean, grim, graffe, griffon, grimston, griest, and the like.

Gh is sounded like ff in laugh, tough, cough, enough, but not at all
pronounced in though, which is sounded tho.

H Has a perfect found in the beginning of all English words, as Henry, Hicks,
Hugh, Hunt, Herbert, Hildersham, Hambleton, Harrington, Harrison, Holbourn,
hand, heart, house, have, etc.

Ph is sometimes sounded like f, as in Philip, Philemon, Phebe, etc.

As also in the middle of a word, as Orphan, Sulphur, Sophister, Sophisticate.

And also in the end of a word, as gulf, triumph, and the like. But if ph be
in two Syllables, then they are otherways pronounced, as in Shep-herd,
Clap-ham, and the like.

Q Is always followed by u, though u add nothing to the sound of it, as in
quaint, quail, quart, quarter, quarrel, quaker, queen, quill, etc.

Qu is pronounced like ck in Exchequer, Liquor, Catholic, Apostolic,
Authentic; which words may be indifferently written with ck or que, as also
frantic and pedantick.

R When it comes single, and when it comes double in the same Syllable, it is
sounded alike, as in bar, bar; far, or far; mar, or mar; jar, or jarre;
war, or war; e in the end of a word always following a double r, softens the
sound, as if it were written with a single r, the r and the e being
superfluous, as also in confer, refer, defer, infer, and the like,
where single r is enough to express the proper sound of the Syllable.

S Is pronounced like z in some words, as in easy, bosom, lose, use, abuse,
sins, sons, desire, as has, was, etc.

Single s and double s sound alike at the end of a word, as bless,
transgress, helpless, hopeless, wantonness, wickedness, righteousness,
and the like, the single s being enough to express the sound, and therefore
best written with a single s.

There is a long s, and a short s, and you must always write long s at the
beginning and middle of words, as son, soul, save, sanctuary, sister, solid,
sold, and the like; and write s short in the end of words, as in sisters, sons,
mothers, husbands, lands, etc.

TI when it begins a word, it is always fully pronounced, as in Tide, Tiber,
Tiler, Tiburn, Titus, and the like.

Likewise in the middle of a word, when s comes immediately before ti, then ti
retains its perfect sound, as A-na-bap-tis-ti-cal, Bum-bas-ti-cal, Rus-ti-cal,
Ce-les-ti-al, Fan-tas-ti-cal, Com-bus-ti-on, Fus-ti-an, Ques-ti-on,
Tes-ti-mo-ny, Jus-ti-fy, and such like.

When ti begins a Syllable in the middle of a word, though s comes not before
it, ti is pronounced as after s, in these words prag-ma-ti-cal, sab-ba-ti-cal,
cer-ti-fy, gra-ti-fy, for-ti-fy, for-ti-tude, gra-ti-fy, gra-ti-tude,
sanc-ti-fy.

Also all words ending in ti or ty, they are to be pronounced as before, as in
the following Examples is ever to be observed.

ad-ver-si-ty car-na-li-ty ca-la-mi-ty cer-tain-ty de-for-mi-ty e-nor-mi-ty
en-mi-ty ex-tre-mi-ty im-pi-e-ty cru-el-ty hos-pi-ta-li-ty hos-ti-li-ty
in-fi-de-li-ty ge-ne-ra-li-ty ma-lig-ni-ty mo-ro-sity im-pu-ri-ty im-mu-ni-ty.
le-vi-ty li-be-ra-li-ty im-pu-ni-ty spe-ci-al-ly sure-ty se-cu-ri-ty
cer-tain-ty per-plex-i-ty in-dig-ni-ty stu-pi-di-ty cre-du-lity cha-ri-ty
ci-vi-li-ty hu-ma-ni-ty se-ve-ri-ty pro-spe-ri-ty
Which Reading will make familiar and pleasant to the serious ingenious Reader.

But ti in the middle of a word is generally pronounced like ci, or si, as in
these following Examples plainly appears.

a-du-la-ti-on ab-di-ca-ti-on ab-ju-ra-ti-on a-bo-mi-na-ti-on ce-le-bra-ti-on
com-bi-na-ti-on com-mi-na-ti-on com-mu-ni-ca-ti-on con-fla-gra-ti-on
con-ster-na-ti-on dis-si-mu-la-ti-on de-po-pu-la-ti-on de-pe-cu-la-tion
di-la-pi-da-ti-on de-col-la-ti-on de-ci-ma-ti-on dis-lo-ca-ti-on de-fec-ti-on
de-tec-ti-on de-trac-ti-on de-cep-ti-on de-jec-ti-on dis-pu-ta-ti-on
dis-sen-ti-on dis-pro-por-ti-on de-pra-va-ti-on de-pri-va-ti-on de-plo-ra-ti-on
de-por-ta-ti-on de-fa-ma-ti-on de-gra-da-ti-on dis-trac-ti-on de-so-la-ti-on
de-struc-ti-on ex-pos-tu-la-ti-on ex-as-pe-ra-ti-on ex-al-ta-ti-on
era-di-ca-ti-on ex-e-cu-ti-on fac-ti-on frac-ti-on func-ti-on fic-ti-on
hu-mi-li-a-ti-on in-no-va-ti-on in-fa-tu-a-ti-on in-tox-i-ca-ti-on
in-si-nu-a-ti-on in-sul-ta-ti-on in-can-ta-ti-on in-dig-na-ti-on
in-sur-rec-ti-on ju-ris-dic-ti-on la-men-ta-ti-on os-ten-ta-ti-on
pre-va-ri-ca-ti-on pa-ti-ence pol-lu-ti-on pre-sump-ti-on pro-vo-ca-ti-on
pro-po-si-ti-on re-can-ta-ti-on re-cri-mi-na-ti-on re-demp-ti-on re-jec-ti-on
se-di-ti-on se-duc-ti-on se-pa-ra-ti-on se-ques-tra-ti-on sal-va-ti-on
sti-pu-la-ti-on tem-ta-ti-on tri-bu-la-ti-on trans-la-ti-on vex-a-ti-on
vi-o-la-ti-on vi-si-ta-ti-on vo-ca-ti-on u-sur-pa-ti-on
And in many the like words, which custom and diligence in reading will make
familiar and pleasant to the judicious Reader.

And these words, con-sti-tu-ti-on in-sti-tu-ti-on res-ti-tu-ti-on
es-ti-ma-ti-on su-per-sti-ti-on jus-ti-fi-ca-ti-on sanc-ti-fi-ca-ti-on
have the first ti pronounced, as in the beginning or end of a word, and the
last ti to be pronounced like ci, or si, as is ever to be observed.

Note, That an j Consonant, and an v Consonant, as they differ in shape, so in
sound from an i Vowel, and an u Vowel, as much as one Letter does from another.

I When written as a Vowel in the beginning of a Word, is thus ever to be
pronounced, as Ibleam, Iconium, Idumea, Iturea; if, ignorance, illuminate,
illustrious, imprudent, impudent, irreverent, incoherent, inconvenient,
injuricus, incommodious, and the like.

An J Consonant is always pronounced like g, as in James, Jacob, Job, Joseph,
Japhet, Jebus, Jesus, Jerusalem, Jury, Judah, July, Judicious, Justice, and in
all other Words which begin with an j Consonant, as is ever to be observed.

U Is variously pronounced, as a Vowel when written u, and as a Consonant which
is written v, as by sundry pertinent Examples shall more plainly and
particularly appear.

An u Vowel in the beginning of a Word having a Consonant following after, must
be ever pronounced as in these following Words is ever to be observed.

Vriah, Urania, Urban, Vzziah, Ulysses, Vbiquity, Vtility, University,
Universality, Unity, Unite, Understanding, etc.

An u Vowel is commonly set in the midst of a Syllable, having a Vowel after
it, as due, sue, continue, retinue, revenue, value, Venus, Virtue, and such
like, where it is pronounced flat, as in you.

V Consonant begins a Syllable with a Vowel after it, having a different sound
from a u Vowel, being strongly pronounced, as in vain, vaunt, vile, vermin,
vengeance, vice, voice, vulture, Venice, venison, value, vow, etc.

And it is further to be noted, that an J Consonant, nor an v Consonant never
end a Syllable, but begin it.

An j Consonant begins a Syllable, as in these Examples plainly appears,
ab-ject, ob-ject, ob-jure, ad-jure, ad-journ, ad-join, ad-judge, con-jure,
con-join, dis-join, de-ject, enjoy, enjoin, Eli-jah, per-jur'd, so-journer, and
such like, as you will find in Reading.

And thus an v Consonant begins a Syllable, as in these Examples following.

ad-vance ad-vice ad-vise ad-vent ad-verb an-vil be-vil ca-vil con-vent
con-verse con-vert con-vey con-vince con-vict Da-vid Dan-vers De-vil de-vour
de-vote de-vout de-vice de-vise di-verse di-vide di-vine di-vorce di-vulge
dri-ven dri-ver dri-ving en-vy e-ven e-vent e-ver fa-vour fer-vent fla-vel
gra-vel gra-ven gra-ver gra-ving gra-vy har-vest ho-vel in-vade in-vent in-vite
in-voke kna-vish li-ver li-ved li-ving lo-ver lo-ving mar-vel o-val o-ven o-ver
pa-ved pa-ving per-verse per-vert pre-vail pre-vent pri-vy pro-ved pro-ving
pro-verb pro-vide pro-vince pro-voke ra-ven ra-vish re-veal re-venge re-verse
re-view re-vile re-vise re-vive re-voke re-volt ro-vers sa-ved sa-ving sa-vage
sa-voy sa-vour sa-vi-our scur-vy sel-vedge ser-vice ser-vile ser-ving shi-vers
sho-vel star-ved swer-ved ta-vern tra-vel tra-verse wa-ver wea-ver wo-ven
A v Consonant is sometimes placed in the middle of a Syllable, having an e
after it to end the word, as brave cave crave drove drive drove dove dive five
gave give grieve grave grove have heave hove leave live love move pave rave
rove save sieve salve wave weave wove
and the like.

Which foregoing Words of one Syllable, with diverse others of the same kind, as
knave, slave, shave, deceive, reave, cove, thrive, strive, etc. must never be
written with an u Vowel, because it gives the Syllable a flat and a false
sound, sounding like ew, as Hebrew, due, sue, etc. This is intended for a
modest Rebuke to Scholars and Printers that frequently, but corruptly write and
print a u Vowel for a u Consonant, in sundry of the Examples before named, to
the weak Reader's Prejudice, and the Penman and Printer's Reproach.

X In the beginning of a Word is pronounced soft like z, as in Xocrates,
Xenophon, X^^tippe: But in the middle of a Syllable x is pronounced more
sharply, as in Exit, Exodus, Xerxes, where the first x is pronounced soft, and
the last sharp; and in Artaxerxes, where x in both places sounds briskly.

Y Before a Vowel in English is a Consonant, as in your, yonder, younger, yard,
year, yesterday, yeoman, etc.

But y after a Consonant is a Vowel, as my, cry, dry, fry; and also after a
Vowel in the end of a Syllable, is always a Vowel, as bay, buy, boy, coy, key,
lay, may, nay, pray, prey, say, way, and the like.

When j and y are Consonants, they are very differently pronounced, as jack,
jet, joke, and yate, yet, yoke; and it is further to be observed, that y is
never set before u, and never before i, but in yield.

Note that ic, and y, are promiscuously used in the end of a Word, as beauty,
beauty; charity, charity; civilitie, civility; duty, duty; and many other
Words, wherein ie or y may be indifferently used; but in many words, as bay,
day, gay, bay, lay, may, coy, joy, and the like; Custom carries it with y, and
I give my Vote for y to conclude the rest.

Thus having considered the proper sounds of Letters, and the several sounds of
the same Letters variously placed in the same Words, according to their
different Derivations, I now proceed to a second Alphabetical Prospect, in
pursuit of the Elegancy of the English Tongue, to show that Letters which must
be written in a Word, are not at all sounded in the proper pronunciation of
those Words, with such plain and pertinent Examples, that he that runs may
read, and he that reads may understand what many Country Schoolmasters and
Schooldames are ignorant of, as follows.

A In some Words loses its sound: For Example, we write Pharaoh, but we read
Pharo, where neither a nor h is pronounced. And likewise in Isaac, Balaam, and
Canaan, where the later a in those three Words is not pronounced by the Learned
in the English Tongue, as if they were written Isac, Balam, and Canan; but in
Baal both are pronounced to lengthen the sound, like the bleating of a Sheep,
Baa-lam, to distinguish Baal from bal, ball, and baul.

When ea come together, as in earth, wealth, beat, beauty; and oa, as boat,
moat, abroad, etc. a in both is but little sounded, only draws the Syllable
long to soften it, and sweeten the sound, like e in come, home, some, and the
like.

B In the end of a Word is not pronounced, as in lamb, limb, dumb, numb, thumb,
womb, as also in debt, doubt, and the like.

C Between a Vowel and k is not pronounced, as in back, black, check, jack,
lick, lock, suck, truck, dick, duck, buck, muck, luck, and the like.

C after s is not pronounced, as in descent, conscience, ascent, disciple, and
the like.

D Is not pronounced in badge, drudge, bridge, hedge, judge, lodge, trudge,
friendship, handmaid, wednesday, etc.

E Is usually written, but not pronounced in these Words, honey, money, month,
truth; as also at the end of Words, as sue, due, hear, tear, fear, near,
dear, and the like, as if they were written honey, money, month, truth, su, du,
hear, tear, fear, near, dear, in which Words (except sue and due) the e is left
out in writing.

But you must ever except some Words of a Foreign derivation, as Jesse,
Jubilee, Epitome, etc. where e at the end sounds strongly, as in the Latin
Adverb certe, where e, like the French e Masculin, is ever briskly pronounced.

G Is not pronounced in reign, sign, phlegm, assign, design, and the like.

Gh in the middle of a Syllable are but softly pronounced, as in light, bright,
might, night, right, as also in thought, straight, strength, slaughter; and in
high, thigh, nigh, gh are not at all sounded.

H Is written, but not sounded in sundry Words, as Christ, Crystal,
Christopher, Thomas, John, Zachary, Achan, Achor, Anchor, Aristarchus,
Shadrach, Mesech, Scholar, Eunuch, Myrrh, Chronicle, Authority, Choler, Rhine,
Rhenish, Rhetoric, Melancholy, Rheum, Scheme, and the like.

Also the sound of h is lost in the beginning of Words that are either in whole
or in part borrowed from Hebrew: For Example, we should write Jerusalem, which
we now pronounce, and Custom has of late introduced the writing of it without
an h, as Jerusalem, and h is almost swallowed up in Humphrey and humble.

But h beginning Words derived from the Greek, is pronounced, as Hierarchy, etc.

H also loses its sound at the end of diverse Words, as Micah, Micaiah,
Hezekiah, Hannah, Hilkiah, Hananiah, Elkanah, Obadiah, Jonah, Jeddidiah,
Josiah, Joshuah, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Jeconiah, Goliath, Gemariah, Vriah, Zerviah,
Zechariah, Zedekiah, with many other names of Persons and Places mentioned in
Holy Scripture. But in ah, oh, foh, h is pronounced.

I Is not sounded in adieu, suit, fruit, fashion, bruised, cousin, carriage,
translation, and the like; and after e, as deceive, etc.

K Is very little sounded in back, beik, buck, deck, dick, duck, sack, sick,
suck, rick, rack, wrack, ruck, pack, peck, pick, track, trick, truck; in all
which, and the like Words, c takes off the sound from k, c being there
pronounced like k.

L Loses its sound in calf, half, stalk, salve, falcon, salmon, Lincoln,
Bristol, Holbourn, Norfolk, Suffolk, etc.

N Is not sounded in solemn, condemn, contemn, column, autumn, hymn, and the
like; yet n is written after m in the foregoing words, to show their derivation
from the Latin.

O Is not pronounced in blood, courage, damosel, jailer, jeopardy, people,
nourish, flourish, pious, scourge, young, yeoman, and touch, which is
pronounced like such, much, etc.

P Is not sounded in Psalm, Psalter, Psaltery, receipt, receipt, redemption,
Simpson, symptom, sumptuous, tempt, etc.

S Is not sounded, but always written in Isle, Viscount, Island, which are
pronounced I Will, Vicount, Island.

T Loses its sound before c, as catch, hatch, latch, match, snatch, stretch,
wretch, and the like.

U Vowel is not sounded in guard, guest, guide, guile, buy, build, built,
guise, guilt, guilty, circuit, conduit, error, horror, mirror, bury, busy,
plague, plagued, tongue, prologue, epilogue, catalogue, rogue, vogue, and such
like, where u is not pronounced.

VV After o is softly sounded in grow, slow, blow, yellow, shadow, widow,
sorrow, shallow, borrow, fallow, follow; and in wrack, wrath, wroth, wretch,
wrinckle, wranckle, wright, w is not at all pronounced.

Y Is not pronounced in chimney, journey, key, kidney, monkey, pulley, and such
like.

And now Reader consider, that albeit the Learned have rendered a Reason why
these superfluous Letters should be written in the words foregoing where they
are not pronounced, because they show from whence the words are derived; yet it
is much to be desired, and has been by some of late ingeniously endeavored to
write Words as we speak them, which would make our Tongue abundantly more
familiar and useful both to our selves and strangers. And it would tend no less
to the Honor, than the Interest of our Nation, so far to decline the wordy
frothy French, as to read as we write, and speak as we think.

Thus having showed not only the different sounds of Letters according as they
are placed in a Word, with sundry pertinent Alphabetical Examples; but also
where Letters are written, and not at all pronounced in Reading, exactly and
effectually to teach my Scholar the proper pronunciation of Words, according to
their different Derivations, which is the Key of the Work: I now proceed to
consider Syllables, of which Words are made, with some Examples of Words of One
Syllable, which is the business of the Second Chapter.

Of Syllables, and Words of One Syllable.
A Syllable is the pronouncing one Letter or more with one breath, as, O Lord;
and gives a perfect sound, consisting of one Letter or more of any Number under
Nine, as in these following Examples.

I do see that brave Amazon brought strength. Of Letters are made Syllables,
and of Syllables Words.

Easy Syllables for Young Learners.
ab eb ib ob ub ac ec ic oc uc ad ed id od ud af of if of uf ag eg ig og ug ak
ek ik ok uk al el il ol ul am em im om um an en in on un ap ep ip op up ar er
ir or ur as es is os us at et it ot ut ba be by bo bu by ca ce ci co cu cy da
de di do du die fa fe fi fo fu fie ga ge gi go gu gy ka ke ki ko ku ky la le li
lo lu ly ma me mi mo mu my na ne ni no nu ny pa pe pi po pu py ra re ri to ru
ry sa se si so su sy ta te ti to tu ty va ve vi vo vu vy wa we wi woe ^^ wy
Examples of Words of One Syllable.
A
Ace add age ah ale ape are a^^ aw ax ay
B
Babe back bake bald ba^^ bark bare base bath bay beg beam bears beast belch
C
Cage cake calf calve came cane can can catch cave caught change chance
charge
D
Dare date dance dawn dead deaf deal dealt dear dearn delve den
E
Each ear earth ease eat edge eigh them e^e end ere err ew
F
Face fact fade fail faint fair faith false fame fare fault fear feast feed
G
Gain gat gate gave gay gaze ghost give g^ad glass g^ean g^^^h g^^t goat
H
Ha had hail hair hare have hatch hate has haunt hawk here hear
I
Jaw jack jot joy join joint judge just joyst juice inn ink in ice i^
K
Keen keep kept key kick kind kine kiss kite knee kneel knew knife knock know
L
Lace lack lad lade lake lamb lame lamp lance lanch land late laud loud
M
Made maid make match march mark mast make mate meal meat meet met
N
Nail name nag naught nay neigh nigh new next night nine noon noise none nurse
O
Oar oath odd of off often oats old one ounce ought our out own ox
P
Pace pack pad page peace piece pearl price pomp pump pond pure purge purse
Q
Quack quaff quail quake quart queen quench quick quill quince quit quite quote
quoit
R
Race rack rage rail rant reach read realm ream reap rich ride rob robe run
S
Sack safe said seal seek seize serve sift sight sign sold some soon sun
T
Take taste taunt the thee them then thigh thin thing thine took tool tooth tun
V
Vail vain vale vamp veal vein vend vent vile vine vice voice void us
W
Want wade waft wail wealth wean weave whine whip whisk win wit worm worn wrung
Y
Yard year yea ye yarn yearn yield yell yew you your yours young youth
Z
Zeal Zone
Sundry short exact Rules for dividing Words of Two Syllables, with a pleasant
Variety of pertinent Examples to each Rule, never to be forgotten.
The First Rule shows, That one Consonant in the middle of a Word between two
Vowels, is usually joined to the later Vowel, as in the following Examples is
to be observed.
A
A-base a-b^^^ a-bide a-b^r^ a-bode a-bove a-bound a-bout a-buse a-corn a-cre
a-dieu a-dopt a-^^^ a-dorn a-dore a-far a-fore a-fraid a-fresh a-gain a-gainst
a-^^^ a-^^^ a-gree a-gue a-^^^ a-lack a-larm a-las a-lass a-like a-live a-loft
a-lone a-light a-long a-loof a-loud a-maze a-mend a-men a-^^^^^ a-miss a-mong
a-mongst a-^^^^^ a-^^^^ a-ny a-^^^^ apart a-piece a-p^ill a-pron a-^^^ a-right
a-rise a-rose a-sleep a-wake a-^^^^ a-^^^^ a-way a-wake a-woke au-gu^^
B
Ba-con ba-^^^^ ba-^^^^ ba-k^ ba-king barefoot bare-leg base-ness (...) (...)
ba-son bay salt bea-ver be-came be-cause be-come be-fall be-fell be-fore be-gan
be-g^t be-g^^ be-g^^ be-^^^ be-gin be-g^^^ be-^^^ be-half be-have be-^^^^
be-^^^^ be-hind be-hold be-^^^^ be-lieve be-^^^ be-^^^ be-low be-long be-^^^^
be-neath be-^^^^ be-^^^^ be-^^^^ be-^^^^ be-set be-sides be-som be-^^^
be-s^^ght be-^^^^ be-times bi-teth bla-med bla-meth blame-less bla-zing bla-zon
ble-mish bo-dy bo-dice boo-by boo-ty bo-rough bo-red bo-rage bo-som bra-sen
bri-nish bro-ken bro-ker brui-sed bu-ry bu-sy
C
Case-ment ca-ses cau-ses cau-sing ca-reer cea-sing ce-dar ce-ment cha-fing
cha-ces cha-sing chea-pen chea-per che-rish chee-ses chi-ding choi-cest cho-ler
choo-ser chu-sing choo-sen cla-mor cla-ret cla-ry clo-ses clo-ser clo-set
clou-dy coheirs co-lour come-ly co-meth co-ming co-nies co-py co-ping co-ral
cou-rage cou-sin cra-sy cre-dit crea-ture cree-pers cree-ping cu-bit cu-rat
cu-red cu-pid
D
Dai-ry da-mask dai-ly daylight dea-con de-base de-bate de-coy de-cease
de-ceit de-ceive de-coct de-cent de-fame de-face de-feat de-fend de-fence
de-fer de-file de-form de-fie de-lay de-light de-lude de-luge de-mand de-mean
de-mise de-mur de-mure de-nounce de-ny de-pute de-part de-pend de-pose de-ride
de-sart de-sert de-sign de-serve de-sire de-sist de-tain de-ter de-test di-ned
di-rect dole-ful dole-wood do-ting dove-house do-zen dra-gon dra-per du-ring
du-ty du-ties duke-dom
E
Ea-ger ea-led ea-sy e-dict e-gypt e-ject e-lect e-nough e-qual e-rect eu-nuch
eyelids eye salve eyesight eyesore
F
Fa-ces fa-cil fa-deth fa-ding fa-got fa-mous false-ly false-ness fa-mine
fa-misht farewell fe-lon fe-male fi-ling fi-gure fi-nal fi-ner fi-nest fi-nish
flou-rish fo-ling fo-ming fo-ment foo-lish fore-go forehead fore-horse
foreknow foreman fore-most forepart foresaw foretell foretold fore-warn
for-lorn fra-med free-dom free-leave free-ly freeman free-gift fre-quent
free will fri-day fro-ward fro-zen fu-ry
G
Ga-ped ga-zer ga-ping ga-zing gli-ding gloo-my glo-ry glue-pot gou-ty gra-tor
grea-ter gree-dy grea-sy gri-ping gro-cer gro-ping gross-ly gui-ded
H
Ha-bit hai-ry ha-ling ha-sel ha-ted hate-ful ha-ter ha-ting hea-dy hei-fer
hei-nous he-rald he-roe here-by here-with hi-ding hi-red hire-ling hoa-ry
ho-cus hoi-sed ho-ly ho-mage home-born home-ly ho-nest ho-nour ho-ney ho-ping
hope-ful hope-less horseback horseman horse-leech hou-ses house-wife hu-man
hu-mour hy-men hy-sop
I
Ja-cint ja-ded jay-lor i-dol jea-lous Je-sus joy-ful joy-ner i-ron i-tem
jui-cy ju-ly ju-ry
K
Ki-bed knea-ding knee-deep kneel-ing
L
La-bour la-ced lace-man la-den la-ding la-dy la-dies la-ment la-ter la-tin
late-ly la-zy le-per lea-sing lea-sure le-gar le-mon lea-per leo-pard li-bel
li-cense like-wise like-ly li-ning live-ly lo-cal lo-cust lo-ser lo-sing low-ly
ly-zard
M
Ma-dam ma-dest ma-gick mai-den ma-ker ma-king makebate ma-lice ma-lign
ma-nure ma-rine ma-son may day may game mea-dow mea-ly mea-sure mee-ter mi-ner
mi-nor mi-ry mo-dest mo-del mo-dern mo-dish mo-gul mole-hil mo-ment mo-ney
mo-ping mo-pus mo-ted mu-sing mu-sick my-ter
N
Na-ked na-med name-ly na-tive na-ture nee-dy neu-ter nine-pence nine-pound
nine-teen nine-teenth nine-ty noi-som noi-sed no-ses no-sing no-ted no-tice
no-ting nou-rish
O
Oa-ten o-bey o-dors o-live o-men o-mer oi-ly o-mit o-nix o-pen o-range
P
Pa-ces pa-cing pa-ler pale-ness pa-lace pa-late pa-rents pa-rish pa-per
pa-ring pay-day pay-ment pea-cock pea-hen pease-cod pea-sant pe-nal pe-rish
pe-ril phea-sant phra-ses pide-bull pie-ces Pi-lat pi-lot pi-ous pi-ped pi-ping
pla-ces pla-cing pla-gued play-fair play-foul play-not plea-der plea-ding
plea-sant plea-sing plea-sure plu-ral poi-son po-sy po-sing prai-ses prai-sing
pra-ter pra-ting pre-cept pre-cise pre-cede pre-dict pre-fer pre-face pre-late
pre-lude pre-pare pre-sage pre-sence pre-sent pre-sume pre-tence pre-tend
pri-son pri-zes pri-zers pri-zing pro-bate pro-bing pro-ceed pro-cess pro-cure
pro-duce pro-duct pro-fane pro-fess pro-phet pro-fit pro-found pro-long
pro-mote pro-mise pro-nounce pro-per pro-tect pro-logue pro-pose pro-pound
pro-rogue pro-test pru-dence pru-dent pru-ned pru-ning pu-mice pure-ly
pure-ness pye-meat
Q
Qua-ked qua-king que-ry quo-rum quo-ted
R
Ra-cy ra-dish ra-ged ra-ging rai-ment rai-ny rai-sed rai-sins rea-sons
rake-hell ra-pine re-pine rare-ly ra-zor rea-dy rea-per rea-ping rea-son
re-bate re-bel re-build rebuilt re-buke re-bound re-ceit re-cite re-call
re-ceive re-cant re-ceipt re-cess re-cord re-coil re-count re-dound re-fer
re-fine re-form re-fuge re-fuse re-fute re-gain re-gard re-hearse re-late
re-lease re-lief re-lieve re-lict re-lish re-ly re-main re-mand re-mind re-miss
re-mit re-mark re-morse re-mote re-move re-new re-nounce re-nown re-pair
re-past re-pay re-peal re-pel re-peat re-pent re-pine re-ply re-pose re-port
re-pute re-quire re-quite re-quest re-serve re-side re-sist re-sign re-solve
re-sort re-sult re-tain re-tard re-tire re-turn re-ward ri-der ri-ding ri-gor
ri-pen ri-per ri-sen ri-sing ro-man rou-sing ru-by ru-ler ru-ling ru-mor
S
Safe-ly safeguard safe-ty sa-ges sa-lute sa-tan sa-tyr scho-lar sco-ring
scou-ring scra-ping scrive-ner sea-son sea-ted se-cond se-cure se-duce sei-sed
se-lah se-nate sense-less sea-led sha-dow sha-dy sha-king sha-med shame-ful
sha-ped sha-ring shea-ring she-kel she-riff shi-ning sie-ges si-lence si-lent
si-der sli-der slu-ces smi-ter smo-test sno-red sno-ring sna-ring so-der
so-lace so-lar so-lemn so-lid soo-ner sore-ly sore-ness so-rer snea-king
spa-nish spa-ring spa-rib spee-dy spi-ces spi-der spi-rit spite-ful spo-ken
sta-ble state-ly sta-ture sta-tutes stea-dy sti-pend sto-ned sto-ny sto-ry
stri-king stu-dy su-gar sure-ly sure-ness sure-ty sy-nod sy-rup
T
Ta-ber tai-lor ta-ken ta-lent ta-med ta-per there-by there-fore therewith
tho-row thou-sand threefold ti-dings ti-ling ti-ring time-ly tra-ding to-ping
to-ries to-tal to-ward tra-ded tray-tor trea-cle trea-son tre-ble tre-foil
tri-bute tri-bune tri-dent tru-ly tu-lip tu-mult tu-tor tu-mor twilight
ty-rant ty-ler
V
Va-cant va-lor va-lue va-nish va-por vi-car vi-ces vi-gils vi-lest vile-ness
vi-per vi-sage vi-sit vo-mit vo-ting u-nite u-rine u-sage u-sed u-ses use-less
use-ful u-sing u-surp
W
Wa-ding wa-fer wa-ger wa-ges wa-king wa-ter way-side wea-ry wea-ring wea-sel
where-to wherewith whining whi-ting white-ness whoo-rish who-so wi-dow wi-der
wi-ping wi-ring wise-ly wi-ser wo-ful wo-man wo-men wri-ting wri-ter
Y
Yeo-man yeo-men yo-ked
Z
Zea-lous zea-lot ze-nith
But as there is no General Rule but may be liable to some Exception, so the
foregoing Rule is here contradicted in sundry Words wherein a Consonant placed
in the middle of a Word between two Vowels is not always joined to the later
Vowel, as in the former Examples, but sometimes to the former Vowel, as in the
following Examples is to be observed.
A
Aid-ed ail-ed ail-eth aim-ed air-ed arm-ed ax-ed
B
Bear-er bear-ing beak-er beat-en beat-ing bind-er bind-ing bleat-ing blend-ing
blind-ed bloom-ing blow-eth blow-ing blush-ing boast-ed boil-ed boil-ing
boot-ed bow-ed bow-els bow-er box-ing break-er break-ing breed-er breed-ing
brew-er brief-er broad-er broad-est broil-ed broil-ing
C
Chain-ing chain-ed cheer-eth cheat-ing chew-ed chew-ing chief-est choak-ed
ciel-ing claim-ing clasp-ing claw-ing clout-ed coat-ed coin-ing cook-ing
cool-ing coop-er crook-ed croud-ing crow-ing
D
Daub-ing deal-er deal-ing debt-or dis-ease draw-er draw-ing dream-ed dream-er
dread-ing drew-est
E
Ear-ed ear-ing eat-en eat-ing eat-er end-ing ew-er ex-act ex-alt ex-ile
F
Fail-ed fail-ing faint-ed fair-er fair-ing fear-ing feel-ing few-el few-er
fix-ed fix-ing float-ing fool-ing foot-ing foul-ed foul-er fox-es freez-ing
G
Gain-ed glean-ed glean-ing gnaw-ing goat-ish greet-ing groan-ing grow-ing
H
Hail-ed headache heal-ing heal-er heap-ing hear-er hear-ing hew-ing hog-ish
hook-ing hoop-ing hoot-ing
I
Jeer-ing jew-el jew-ish join-ed im-age
K
Keen-er keep-er keep-ing knew-est know-est know-ing knit-ting
L
Lead-er lead-ing leak-ing lean-ing leap-ing lift-ed lift-ing load-en low-der
low-er
M
Maim-ed mean-ing meet-ing mix-ed mix-ing moan-ing mop-ey'd moor-ish mow-ed
mow-er mow-ing
N
Nail-ed nail-ing near-er new-er
O
Ox-en
P
Pain-ed paw-ing plait-ing plead-ing plow-ed plow-ing pour-ed pour-ing pout-ing
pow-er proud-er prow-ess pun-ish
Q
Quoit-ed quart-ale
R
Rail-ed rail-ing read-er read-ing rear-ing roar-ed roar-ing root-ed root-ing
row-ed row-ing row-ers
S
Said-est sail-ers sail-ing scoul-ing scorn-ing seal-ed sear-ed sew-ed seek-ing
shear-ing shew-eth shew-ing shoot-ing shout-ing shread-ing shrub-ing sleep-ing
sneak-ing sneez-ing soar-ing sow-er sow-ing speak-er speak-ing spew-ing
spread-ing sprout-ing stain-ing steer-ing stew-ard stew-ing stick-ing stoop-ing
strain-ing strawed stream-ers stroak-ing sub-urbs suck-ing suit-ed swear-ing
sweat-ing sweep-ing sweet-er
T
Tax-es tax-ing tear-ing teem-ing took-est tow-el tow-er tow-ed train-ing
tread-ing troop-er
V
Vail-ed view-ed vow-ed vow-el
W
Wain-ing wait-ing wax-ing wax-ed wax-eth weed-ing weep-ing wheat-en wheez-ing
wood-en ward-er ward-ing walk-ed walk-er walk-ing work-ing
Thirdly, When two like Consonants come together in the middle of a Word
between two Vowels, they are to be divided, as in the following Examples is
ever to be observed.
A
Ab-ba ab-bot ab-by ac-cept ac-cess ac-cord ac-count ac-cuse ac-curst ad-ded
ad-der ad-dict af-fairs af-fect af-firm af-ford al-lay al-ledge al-lure an-nex
an-nise an-noy ap-peal ap-pear ap-pease ap-point ar-raign ar-rears ar-rest
ar-rive ar-row as-sail as-say as-sent as-sess as-ses as-sign as-sist as-soon
as-sure at-tach at-tack at-tain at-taint at-tend at-tempt at-tire
B
Blad-der bid-ding beg-ging beg-ged beg-gar bag-gage bud-ding buf-fet buf-foon
bal-lance bal-last bel-low bel-lows bel-ly bul-lock bil-let bit-ten bit-ter
bit-tern brim-mer ban-ner ban-ning bar-red bar-rel bar-ren bar-row bor-row
bon-net bon-ny ber-ries bles-sed bles-sing blos-som bos-ses blot-ting blot-ted
bot-tom but-ter but-ting but-tock but-tocks but-ton
C
Cab-bage cab-bin cof-fee cof-fer cof-fin cog-ging clog-ging col-lar col-ledge
col-lops col-lumn cuf-fing com-mand com-mend com-mence com-merce com-mit
com-mon com-mune cum-min chan-nel con-nive con-nex cop-per cop-pice chap-pel
clap-per clap-ped car-reer car-ry cor-rect cor-rode cor-rupt cur-rent cur-rant
cur-ry cot-tage cut-ting
D
Dif-fer dag-ger dig-ger dig-ged dal-ly dril-led dril-ler dril-ling dal-ly
dam-mage dip-ped dip-per dip-ping drop-ping droop-ping dres-sing dres-ser
dis-solve
E
Ef-fect er-rand er-rant er-ror earrings es-say es-sence
F
Fal-len fal-ling fel-led fel-ling fel-low fol-low fol-ly ful-ler fil-led
fil-let fil-ling fer-ret fer-ry for-reign fur-row fat-ted flat-ter flut-ter
fret-ting fet-ters fit-ting fit-ted
G
God-dess gid-dy gal-lant gal-ly gal-led gal-lows gul-led gul-let gram-mar
gum-med grin-ning gun-ner ghes-sing glas-ses glos-sy gos-sip got-ten glit-ter
grit-ty gut-ter gut-ting
H
Hal-low hol-low ham-mock hem-ming hum-ming har-pen hap-py hip-ped har-rase
her-ring hor-ror hur-ry his-sing hat-ter hot-ter ham-mer
I
Jag-ged jag-ger j^b-ber jol-ly jel-ly jog-ging jar-ring jet-ting im-mense
in-ner is-sue
K
Kil-ling Kis-ses. kis-sing knot-ty
L
Lad-der led-dest lag-ging lol-ling lin-nen lap-ping lop-ping lop-ped las-ses
les-sen les-son les-ser lat-ter lat-tice let-ter let-ting
M
Mad-der midday mud-dy mag-got mug-gets mal-lard mal-lows mel-lon mel-low
mal-let mil-ler mil-led mul-led man-na man-ned man-ners man-nage man-nour
mar-red mar-ring mar-row mar-ry mer-ry mur-rain mur-rey mas-sy mes-sage mes-ses
mis-sing mor-row mat-ter mat-tock met-tal mit-tens mut-ter
N
Nog-gin nod-dy nod-ding nig-gard nul-led nul-ling nap-ping nar-row new-wine
nut-ting
O
Oc-cur of-fence of-fend of-sals of-fer of-fice op-pose op-pugn o^-ris ot-ter
P
Pad-der pad-ding pud-ding puf-fing peg-ging pil-lage pil-lar pil-ling pil-low
pul-let pul-ling pol-lish pol-led pol-lute plum-mer plum-met pin-nace pep-per
pip-pin pas-sage pas-sing pres-sed pres-sing pis-sing pos-set pup-py pop-ping
pat-tern pat-tens pat-tent pet-tish pet-ty pret-ty pit-ty plat-ted plat-ter
plot-ter pot-tage plot-ting plot-ted pot-ter pot-ted pot-ting put-ting
Q
Quaffing quel-led quil-led quil-let quar-rel quar-ry quit-tance quit-ted
quit-ting
R
Rab-bet rib-bond rob-ber rob-bing rub-bing rub-bish red-dish rid-dance rid-den
rud-dy rag-gad rug-ged rol-ling rol-led run-nest run-ning run-ner rot-ten
rut-ting rut-ter
S
Sab-bath scab-bard scab-by shab-by stab-bed stub-born sub-born suc-ceed
suc-cess suc-cour sted-dy stud-dy stud-ded slug-gard shed-ding sod-den
scof-fers scof-fing scof-fed snuf-fers snuf-fing stuf-fing suf-fer suf-fice
scaf-fold stag-ger sug-gest shal-low shril-ler sel-ler sel-ling smal-lest
skil-let spel-ling spil-ling shil-ling stal-led stil-led swal-low swol-len
swel-ling swil-ling sum-med sum-ming sum-mer stam-mer sham-my sin-ner sin-ned
sin-ning shun-ning span-ning spin-ning spin-ner sun-ny ship-ped ship-ping
skip-per skip-ping ship-ped slip-pers slip-ping sop-ping step-ping stop-per
stop-ping strap-ped strip-ped strip-ping sup-ped sup-per sup-pose sup-port
swap-ping swap-ped spar-row star-ry stir-ring sor-rel sor-row sor-ry stir-rup
smit-ten spit-ting spit-ted sot-tish set-ter set-ting scat-ter squat-ting
T
Trod-den tag-ged tug-ged tug-ging traf-fick tal-ler tal-low tal-ly tel-ling
til-lage til-ling tur-ret tram-mel tam-my thum-mim thum-ming trim-ming tan-ning
tan-ned tun-ned tun-ning trap-ping trip-ping tar-ras tar-ry tor-rent tos-sed
tos-ting tos-tings
V
Val-lens vil-lage vol-ley vil-lain vel-lum up-per vas-sal ut-ter
W
Wed-ded wed-ding wag-ging wag-gon wal-led wal-let wal-low wil-ling wil-lows
win-ner win-ning win-now wrap-ped war-rant war-red war-ring was-sel whetting
whet-ter wit-ty writ-ten
* Note also that these like Consonants, tho they be placed between a Vowel and
a Consonant, are thus divided as follows. Ap-ple ap-ply ap-plaud ap-plause
ap-prove ap-proch as-swage bab-ble bub-ble brit-tle chat-tle crep-ple dub-ble
and the like.

When two unlike Consonants come together in the middle of a Word between two
Vowels, they are ever to be divided, as in the following Examples is plainly
and particularly expressed.
A
Ab-hor ab-sence ab-sent ab-solve ab-surd ac-quaint ac-quit ac-tive ac-tor
ad-here ad-mit af-ter al-so al-tar al-ter al-way am-ber am-bush an-gel an-ger
an-guish ar-bor ar-gue ar-my ar-mor as-cend as-cent as-perse aug-ment
B
Bab-ler bab-ling bad-ger bal-som ban-ded ban-dy ban-quet bap-tize bap-tism
bap-tist bar-bed bar-ber bar-gain bar-ter bas-ket bas-tard bec-kon bil-boe
blan-ket blis-ter bod-kin bon-dage bor-der bow-man bow-ler bow-ling bran-dy
bran-dish bran-disht braw-ny breakfast break-neck bugbear bul-rush bul-wark
bur-den bur-gess bur-nish bris-tol but-ler
C
Com-bat com-bine com-fort com-pact com-pass can-cel can-ker cap-tain cap-tious
cap-tive car-cass car-man car-ter cam-pagn car-nal cen-ser cen-sure cham-bers
chan-cel chan-gers chan-ced chan-ceth chan-ter chap-lets chap-man chap-lain
chap-ter char-ming char-ter cheer-ful chas-ten ches-nut chim-ney chris-ten
chrys-tal chur-lish cir-cuit cis-tern clean-ly clean-ser clean-seth clear-ly
clear-ness clear-sight clow-nish cob-ler clus-ter cod-lings com-pare com-pose
com-port com-pute con-ceal con-ceit con-ceive con-cise con-cern con-cord
con-course con-coct con-demn con-dign con-dole con-duce con-duct con-fess
con-fer con-firm con-form con-fide con-found con-fute con-geal con-gy con-quer
con-quest con-sent con-sist con-serve con-sort con-sult con-sume con-tain
con-temn con-tend con-tent con-test cool-ness cor-ner cor-net coul-ter coun-sel
coun-cil coun-ter coun-tess coun-ty cour-ses craf-ty crim-son cros-bow
cros-ness cros-way cur-led cuc-kow cud-gel cur-ses cur-sing cur-tain cus-tom
cus-tard cut-ler cym-bal cyn-der
D
Dain-ty dam-ned dam-sen dan-ces dan-cing dan-ger dar-ling dead-ly dead-ness
dear-ly deep-ness dis-cern dis-course dis-count dis-card dis-dain dis-guise
dis-may dis-miss dis-pair dis-patch dis-pence dis-perse dis-pose dis-pute
dis-taffe dis-tance dis-tant dis-tinct dis-til dis-taste dow-ry drop-sy drow-sy
dim-ness drun-ken drun-kard dul-ness doc-tor
E
Ear-ned ear-nest eas-ter em-balm em-pire en-camp en-dorse en-dear en-dow
en-due en-duce en-dure en-force en-gage en-gine en-hance en-large en-quire
en-rich en-sign en-sue en-sure en-ter ex-ceed ex-cel ex-cept ex-cess ex-cize
ex-cuse ex-haust ex-hort ex-pect ex-pel ex-pence ex-pert ex-pose ex-port
ex-pound ex-pire ex-tant ex-tend ex-tinct ex-tol ex-tort
F
Fac-tor fat-ness fat-ning faul-ty faint-ing fear-ful fen-ced fier-cer fit-ly
footman foot-pad foot-way for-bad for-bear for-bid for-born for-ced for-ces
for-gat for-get for-gave for-give for-got for-ged for-ges for-gers for-ging
fif-teen fif-teenth fif-ty fig leaves fin-ger fingers flood-gate for-lorn
for-mal for-sake for-sook for-sooth for-ty for-ward foun-der foun-tain
fourfold four-teen fow-ler frag-ments frin-ges fruit-ful ful-ness fur-bish
fur-bush fur-long fur-nace ful-som fur-nish
G
Gar-den gar-land gar-lick gar-ment gar-ner gar-nish gen-der gen-tile ges-ture
gin-ger glad-ly glad-ness glib-ly glis-ter gob-lets gob-ling godhead god-ly
godward gol-den good-ness gor-get gos-ling gos-hawk gos-pel gainsay
great-ness guil-ty graf-ted griz-led gun-room
H
Hag-ling hag-ler han-sel han-dy har-den headlong headstrong hen-bane hour-ly
has-tings har-bour har-lot har-ness har-per has-ten has-ty hat-band headpiece
hear-ty hel-met hem-lock him-self hin-der hin-ges hol-pen hor-net har-vest
hor-ses how-ling hun-ger hun-ter hur-led hur-ling hus-band
I
Jaw Bone jaw-teeth im-balm im-barque im-part im-pede im-port im-pose im-post
im-pute in-fect in-force in-gage in-tice in-tail in-tire in-tomb in-camp
in-cense in-sert in-cest in-dear in-due in-dow in-dure in-quire in-rage in-debt
in-dent in-dorse in-duce in-deed in-dulge in-come in-fant in-fer in-form
in-hance inlet in-mate in-mates in-rol in-cence in-fide in-tend in-tent
in-ward jour-ney jour-nal jud-ges jug-ler jug-ling
K
Ken-tish ker-seys ker-nel kid-ney kit-ling know-ledg
L
Lan-ces lan-cing lan-guage lan-guish lan-tern lap-wing lap-sed las-ting
law-ful law-less law-terms leaf-gold lear-ned lear-ning lec-ture led-ges
len-tiles lim-ner lin-tel lod-ger log-wood lof-ty lon-ger low-ly lus-ty
M
Madman mad-ness mag-pye main-tain man-ger man-gy mankind man-ly manhood
mar-gin mar-quess mar-tin mar-tyr mas-ter meal-tub med-lar med-ling meek-ness
meer-ly mem-ber mer-cer mer-cy mer-cies mer-maid mid-lent midnight midwife
mid-wives mil-dew min-ced min-cing mis-laid mis-lead misled mis-hap mis-like
mis-pend mis-take mix-ture mois-ture mol-ten mon-key moun-tain moun-tains
mon-day mor-ning mor-gage mor-sel mor-tal mor-tar mor-ter moul-dy moul-ting
mul-sack mur-der mur-mur mus-tang mus-ter
N
Nap-kin neat-ness need-ful need-less nec-tar neg-lect net-led network
new-ness nonsense nonsuit noonday noon-tyde nor-man num-ber num-bers nur-ses
nur-sing nut-meg nur-ture
O
Oat-cake ob-lige ob-serve ob-tain of-ten of-ter of-test oi-ster on-ly onset
or-dain or-der or-gans outcast outdo out-go outlaw outrun out-^^^e out-ward
out-went out-work
P
Pac-quet pad-lock pad-nag pail-ful pain-ful pal-mer pain-ter pal-sy pam-per
par-boil par-cel par-don par-ley par-lor par-ty par-ties par-ting pas-tor
pas-ture pas-tures pas-time pas-ty paw-ned pear-main ped-ler ped-ling pen-sive
per-ceive per-due per-fect pid-ling pew-ter prac-tice proud-ly per-force
per-form per-fume per-haps per-mit per-^i^ per-son pi^-^^^e pi^^-^er pil-fer
pin-box pin-case pip-kin pan-cake pis-tol pit-coal pit-hole plan-ter plais-ter
pled-ges plen-ty plowman plun-ged pon-der pop-lar por-ker por-ter pot-lid
pot-luck pos-ture poun-dage poun-ding pow-der pran-cing prin-ces prin-cess
prin-ter prin-ters psal-mist psal-ter pub-lick pub-lish pul-pit pur-ging
pur-ges pur-ling pur-loin pur-pose pur-ses pur-sing pur-sue pur-ses
Q
Quag-mire quar-tern quar-ter quar-ters quin-ces quod-ling
R
Raf-ter raf-ters rag-man rainbow ram-pant ram-ping ran-cour ran-dan ran-dom
ran-ging ran-sack ran-som rainbow raw-bone raw-ness red-lead red-ness red-coat
red-cow rem-nant ren-der ren-ding rin-sed rear-ward res-pit rup-ture
S
Sad-ler sad-ness so^-d^^ s^n-dals san-dy s^n-g^^^ (...) scar-let scep-ter
sel-dom sen-ses sen-tence ser-pent ser-mon shar-pen sheep-coat sex-ton
sheepfold sheep-giue shel-ter shep-herd ship-bord ship-man shor-ten shor-ter
shoul-der shif-ted shif-ting sif-ted sif-ting sig-net sin-cere sin-ful sin-ged
sin-ger sis-ter sim-per six-teen six-teenth six-ty skil-ful slan-der slan-ders
slin-ger slow-ly slum-ber sof-ten sof-ter sor-did spar-tan spar-tans speer-man
speer-men spec-tors spen-ding spraw-ling spot-less squab-ling squan-der
stan-dard starlight stool-ball stor-my stout-ly stout-ness strag-ling
stran-ger strip-ling strug-ling strum-pet stur-dy stur-geon sub-dean sub-due
sub-lime sub-mit sub-mits sub-sist sub-til sunburned sun-day sun-der sur-fit
sur-ly sur-mise sur-mount sur-name sus-pect sus-tain swad-led swad-ling
sweet-ly sweet-ness stil-ness scrip-ture scrip-tures spik-nard sides-man
sides-men sym-bol sym-nel
T
Tam-per tan-kard tan-sy tap-lash tar-dy tar-get tal-king tat-ling tem-per
tem-pest ten-der ten-pence thir-teen thir-teenth thir-ty thor-ny threat-ning
thrif-ty thun-der tim-ber tin-der tin-sel tip-ling tom-boy tor-ment tor-toise
tor-ture trap-ball trap-door tres-pass trin-kets troun-cing trum-pet trum-pets
thros-ter toil-som trus-ty tub-man tur-ky tur-moil twen-ty
V
Van-quish var-nish ven-ture ver-duro ver-ses ves-pers ver-tue ves-ture vic-tor
vin-tage vir-gin un-der un-do un-done un-couth un-fold un-kind un-lade un-less
un-load un-loose um-ber un-seen un-serv'd un-sent un-sound un-taught un-til
un-wise up-held up-hold up-right up-rore up-side up-wards ur-ged ur-gent
ur-ging vul-gar vul-tures
W
Wal-nut wal-nuts wan-der wan-ting wan-ton war-fare weak-ning weak-ness
wed-lock wel-come wel-done welfare wood-cock wil-ful whis-per whol-som win-dy
win-dow win-ter wis-dom won-der wor-ser wrin-sed wrin-sing
Y
Year-ly yon-der
Lastly, Note, That when three or four Consonants come together in the middle
of a Word between two Vowels, they are so to be divided as may best express the
proper sound of the Word, for which there is no particular Rule to be
prescribed, but the Reader's own Observation must direct him, for whom I have
mustered up the following Examples.
A
Ab-stract al-pha al-tho am-ble an-chor an-gle an-gred an-gry ar-cher
arm-strong
B
Back-parts backside back-slide back-ward bank-rupt beck-ned bed-sted
birthday black-box bondman bondmen bond-slave bon-grace bound-less
breast bone breast plate breath-less brick-wall brim-stone bum-kin bun-dle
bur-glary
C
Cam-brick cam-phire cart-rope cart-wheel cart-horse cas-tle childhood
child-less chil-dren christ-mas church porch cold-ness com-plain com-plaint
com-pleat con-clude con-flict con-front con-stant con-spire con-strain
con-tract con-trite con-trive corp-ses cost-ly crack-ling crafts-man crafts-men
crost-let
D
Dip-thong dis-charge dis-claim dis-close d^s-creet dis-grace dis-prove
dis-please dis-praise dis-play dis-tress dis-train dis-trust doc-trin doomsday
doubt-ful doubt-less down-bed down-ward dung-cart dung-hil dung-port
E
Earl-dom earthquake eastward eigh-teen eigh-teenth emp-ty Eng-land eng-lish
en-trance en-try en-throne en-thral en-trust ex-change ex-claim ex-clude
ex-plain ex-ploit ex-press ex-tract ex-tream ex-treams
F
Fast-ned faint-heart faint-ness faith-ful faith-less fals-hood far-thing
fault-less feast day fil-thy first-ling fir tree firstborn first day
first fruits first-month fish-gate fish-hook fish-pool fish pond fish-spearl
flesh-hook flesh-ly fleshpots flint-glass fond-ness foot-cloth footsteps
footstool for-swear for-sworn forthwith apiece four-score friend-ly
friend-ship front-lets frost-work frus-trate fur-ther
G
Gam-ster gan-grene gen-tle gen-tly gen-try ghost-ly goldsmiths gold-watch
gras-plat ground-less guilt-less
H
Hack-ney ham-lets hailstones hand-ful han-dle han-dling handmaid hand-saw
hand-som hard-ned hard-ness hard-ly harm-less hars-let hast-ned headstrong
heark-ned heads-man herds-man high-ness hind-leg hind-most hind-part highway
hourglass hum-ble hum-bled hum-bly hun-dred hun-dredth hunts-man hunts-men
hur-dle hurt-ful hum-phrey
I
Jack-daw jack-line jack-straw jack-weight im-brace im-plead im-plore im-ploy
im-prove in-chant in-cline in-close in-clude in-flame in-fringe in-spect
in-spire in-stant in-struct in-thral in-trench in-snare joynt-heirs joynt-stool
judg-ment jus-tle just-ly
K
Ker-tle ker-chief kin-dle kind-ness knuck-le
L
Lamb-py lamb-skin lamb-stones landlord landmark lan-dress laugh-ter
left hand left-leg light-ness lewd-ness light-ning light-som ling-ring list-ner
list-ning lob-ster lobs-pound lord-ly
M
Main-prize malt-ster man-drake man-child man-tle mar-ble mar-bling march-pane
mar-shal migh-ty milch-cow milk-pail milk-sop mild-ness mil-stone mind-ful
min-gle ming-ling min-strel mis-chief mis-tress mis-trust moist-ning month-ly
mon-ster mon-strous mourn-ful mum-ble mum-bling myr-tle
N
Naugh-ty nec-trel neigh-bor nightmare nightshade nim-ble ninth-ly north-gate
north-point north pole north-port north-side northward north-west north wind
nos-trils
O
Ob-scene ob-scure ob-struct offspring oft-ner old-cole old man old-gold
old-friend old-time orch-ard or-phan os-trich
P
Pal-fry pack-thred pan-ther pan-try pan-sly part-ners par-tridge pas-chal
past-bord past-boul past-brush pathway parch-ment pear-main pear-plumb
pear tree per-plex per-swade pes-tle pick-le pick-lock pick-thank pie-plate
pigs-head pigs-ty pil-chard pil-grim plow-share plumb-line plush-coat
pock-holes pomp-kin post-boy post-horn post-horse post house post-stage
pos-tage pot-sherd poul-try pour-tray priesthood pur-blind pur-chace pur-ple
Q
Quart-pot quaint-ness quar-tern quar-ter quest-men quick-ly quick-ness
quicksands
R
Ran-cle rash-ly rash-ness rats-bane ren-dring rich-ly right-ly rough-ly
rum-bling
S
Sack-butt sackcloth salt-ness sam-ple sat-chel scant-ling scram-ble scorn-ful
sem-ster self-will sham-bles sharp-ness sheepskins shewbread shipwreck
ship-wright sic-kle sick-ly sick-ness sim-ple sim-ply sin-gle slaugh-ter
sloth-ful slum-ber slum-bring smooth-ness soft-ly soft-ness sound-ness
southward south-west south wind sour-ly spang-les spark-les spark-ling
speck-led speech-less spend-thrift spin-dle spin-ster sprin-kle star-tle
straight-ly straight-ness strang-ling stum-bled stumb-ling sunshine swift-ness
symp-tom
T
Tem-pler temp-ter temp-ting tenth-part thank-ful thick-ness thim-ble third-ly
thirs-ty this-tle through-ly tim-brel tinc-ture tin-gle tink-ling tip-staff
tombstone tos-pot tough-ness town-clark town-bull townhouse tram-ple
tran-scend trans-form trans-gress trans-late trans-plant trans-pose trans-port
trap-stick trem-ble trem-bling tren-ches tren-cher tick-le tick-ling tum-bler
tumb-ling turn-coat twink-ling
V
Vest-ment vest-ry vint-ner un-cle un-clean un-known vouch-safe up-braid
ur-chin
W
Wardrobe wash-boul wash-pot wash-ball wash-house watch-ful wast-ful weal-thy
wednes-day weigh-ty wel-spring westward west-wind whirl-pit whirlwind
witchcraft withdraw withdrew withheld withold with-stand with-stood
workhouse world-ly worm-seed wor-ship wain-scot wors-ted worth-less wor-thy
wrath-ful wran-gle wrink-le wrong-ful
Y
Young Man youth-ful young-ster
Words of Three Syllables divided.
A
A-ban-don a-ba-sed a-ba-ted a-ba-sing a-bi-ding ab-hor-red ab-hor-ring
ab-ju-red ab-ju-ring a-bo-lish a-bor-tive a-bun-dance a-bun-dant a-bound-ed
a-bound-ing a-bu-sive a-bu-sing ab-sent-ed ab-sent-ing ab-sol-ving ab-so-lute
ab-stain-ing ab-sti-nence ac-cep-tance ac-cept-ing ac-cept-ed ac-ci-dent
ac-com-plish ac-cord-ing ac-cord-ed ac-count-ed ac-count-ing ac-cu-sed
ac-cu-sing ac-cur-sed ac-cus-tom ac-know-ledge ac-quaint-ance ac-quaint-ing
ac-quit-tance ac-quit-ted ac-qui-red ac-tive-ness ac-tu-al ac-ti-on a-da-mant
ad-dict-ed ad-dres-sed ad-dres-sing ad-he-ring a-dorn-ed ad-joyn-ed ad-joyn-ing
ad-journ-ed ad-journ-ing ad-judg-ing ad-ju-ring ad-mi-red ad-mi-ring
ad-mit-tance ad-mit-ted ad-mo-nish a-dopt-ed a-dopt-ing a-do-red a-do-ring
ad-van-ced ad-van-cing ad-van-tage ad-ven-ture ad-ver-tise ad-vi-sed ad-vo-cate
af-fected af-firm-ed af-firm-ing af-flict-ed af-flict-ing af-ford-ed
af-ford-ing af-fright-ed af-fright-ing a-fore-hand a-fore-time af-ter-noon
af-ter-word a-go-ny a-gree-ing a-gree-ment al-layed al-lay-ing al-ledg-ed
al-ledg-ing a-li-en al-li-ed al-low-ed al-low-ing al-low-ance al-lu-red
al-lu-ring al-ma-nack al-mond-tree al-migh-ty a-ma-zed a-maze-ment an-di-ron
an-cle-bones an-ci-ent an-noy-ance ap-pa-rent ap-peal-ed ap-proch-ing
ap-pro-ving ar-ray-ed ar-raign-ed as-sault-ed a-sha-med a-scri-bed aug-ment-ed
a-vouch-ed a-wak-ed
B
Back-bi-ter back-sli-der back-ward-ly ba-nish-ed ban-quet-ing bap-ti-zing
bar-ba-rous bar-gain-ing beau-ti-fy be-guil-ed be-head-ed be-hold-ing
bed-cham-ber bed-fel-low be-fore-hand be-gin-ning be-ha-ved be-li-ed
be-lie-ving be-lo-ved be-moan-ing be-ne-fice be-night-ed be-quea-thed
be-rea-ved be-seech-ing be-seem-ing be-tray-ed be-troth-ed be-wail-ed
be-witch-ed be-wray-ed bish-op-rick blas-phe-mer blind-fold-ed blis-ter-ing
blood-thir-sty boi-ste-rous bond-ser-vant bond-wo-man bol-ster-ing boun-ti-ful
bran-dish-ed bram-ble-bush bra-ve-ry bre-vi-ty bri-be-ry bride-cham-ber
broi-der-ed bro-ther-ly buf-fet-ed bul-rush-es bur-den-som bu-ri-al bu-ry-ing
bur-nish-ed bur-nish-ing bu-si-ness but-ler-ship but-cher-ing but-ter-ed
but-ton-ed
C
Cab-ba-ges can-dle-mas can-dle-stick ca-bi-net ca-len-dar ca-lum-ny can-ker-ed
can-ker-worm can-cel-ed ca-pa-ble car-bun-cle care-ful-ly care-les-ly
ca-res-sing car-nal-ly car-pen-ter car-ri-age car-cas-ses car-ry-ing cast-a-way
ca-ta-logue ca-te-chize ca-te-chism ca-tho-lick ca-te-rer ca-vel-ling
ce-le-brate cer-tain-ly cer-ti-fy cen-su-red chal-len-ged cha-li-ces
cham-ber-ing cham-ber-lain cham-pi-on chan-cel-lor change-a-ble cha-rac-ter
cha-riot cha-ri-ty cha-sten-ing chea-pen-ing chear-ful-ly chees-mon-ger
che-ru-bims child-ish-n^^^ chol-le-rick chris-ti-an chris-ten-dom cir-cum-spect
cir-cum-stance cir-cum-cise cla-mo-rous clean-li-ness cle-men-cy col-li-er
co-lo-nel co-lo-ny co-lour-ed com-bat-ing com-bi-ning com-mand-ing com-mit-ting
com-mo-ner com-mon-ly com-pa-ny com-pa-ring com-pas-sed com-pel-^^^
com-plain-ing com-pleat-ing con-ceal-ing con-ceit-ed con-cern-ed con-clu-ding
con-cu-bine con-du-cing con-duct-ing co-part-ner co-pi-ous co-py-ing cor-di-al
cor-mo-rant co-ve-nant co-ve-ring co-ver-ed cre-a-tor cre-di-tor cru-ci-fy
cru-el-ty cun-ning-ly cur-sed-ly cum-ber-ing cur-ry-comb cus-to-mer cus-to-dy
cus-tom-house cur-rent-ly cup-bear-er cush-i-on cu-ri-ous
D
Dal-ly-ing dam-na-ble dam-ma-ges dam-ni-fy dan-ge-rous da-ring-ly dar-ken-ed
de-ba-sing de-ba-ting de-cay-ing de-cea-sed de-ceit-ful de-cei-ver de-cen-cy
de-cent-ly de-ci-ded de-cla-red de-cree-ing de-cli-ning de-di-cate de-fa-cing
de-fa-ming de-feat-ing de-fend-ing de-fy-ing de-fi-ling de-fraud-ing de-fi-ning
de-fray-ing de-gra-ding de-ject-ed de-lay-ing de-li-cate de-light-ful
de-lin-quent de-li-ver de-lu-ded de-mand-ing de-mean-or de-me-rit de-mi-sed
de-mo-lish de-mur-ring de-mure-ness de-ni-al de-noun-cing de-part-ing
de-plo-red de-po-sed de-pra-ved de-pri-ved de-pu-ted de-ri-ded de-scri-bed
de-sign-ed de-ser-ving de-si-ring de-test-ing de-vi-sing di-rect-ing dis-a-gree
dis-ap-point dis-ap-prove di-vi-ding di-vine-ly di-vor-ced di-vorce-ment
doc-tri-nal do-mi-neer drop-si-cal du-ra-ble drow-si-ness drun-ken-ess
du-ti-ful du-ra-ble dul-ci-mer do-lo-rous dole-ful-ness
E
Ea-ger-ness ear-li-er ear-nest-ly earth-li-ness ea-si-ness e-di-fy e-du-cate
ef-fect-ed e-ject-ment e-le-gant e-le-ment e-le-phant e-le-vate e-le-ven
e-lo-quent em-bas-sy em-bol-den e-mi-nent em-pe-ror en-camp-ed en-coun-ter
en-com-pass en-cou-rage en-da-mage en-dan-ger en-dea-vour en-dow-ment
en-du-reth e-ne-my en-ga-ged en-fla-ming in-for-ced en-fran-chise en-gage-ment
en-gra-ving en-joy-ment en-joyn-ing en-large-ment en-light-en en-mi-ty
en-qui-ring en-rich-ing en-stal-ling en-su-ing en-tail-ed en-tan-gle
en-ter-course en-ter-prize en-tomb-ed en-vi-ron en-tire-ly e-pi-cure e-pi-gram
e-pi-logue e-qui-page e-qui-ty e-rect-ed e-sca-ping e-schew-ing e-spy-ed
e-spou-sing es-say-ing e-sta-blish e-steem-ed es-ti-mate e-strang-ing e-ter-nal
e-ven-ing e-ven-song e-ven-tide e-ver-more e-ve-ry e-vi-dence e-vi-dent
ex-act-ing ex-act-er ex-act-ness ex-alt-ed ex-a-min ex-am-ple ex-ceed-ing
ex-cel-lent ex-cept-ed ex-ces-sive ex-chang-ing ex-clu-ded ex-clu-sive
ex-che-quer ex-cu-sing ex-empt-ed ex-er-cise ex-e-crate ex-claim-ing ex-e-cute
ex-haust-ed ex-pect-ing ex-pen-ces ex-pi-red ex-plo-ded
F
Fa-bu-lous fac-ti-ous fa-cul-ty fa-ding-ly faint-heart-ed faith-ful-ly
fal-la-cy fa-mi-ly fa-mish-ed fan-ta-sie fan-tas-tick fa-shi-on fas-ten-ed
fa-ther-less fa-vour-ed fa-vou-rite fear-ful-ness fea-ther-ed feel-ing-ly
feign-ed-ly fel-low-ship fer-ven-cy fer-vent-ly fes-ti-val fet-ter-ed
fil-thi-ness fi-li-al fi-nal-ly fi-nish-er fin-ger-ing fir-ma-ment fi-sher-man
fish-ing-nets flat-ter-ing fleg-ma-tick flou-rish-ing fol-low-ing fool-ish-ness
for-bear-ing for-bid-ding for-feit-ing fore-fa-thers fore-know-ledg
fore-run-ner fore-see-ing for-swear-ing for-ge-ry fore-warn-ing for-get-ful
for-get-ing for-gi-ving for-give-ness fo-reign-er for-mer-ly for-sa-ken
frau-du-lent fre-quent-ly fro-ward-ly fruc-ti-fy frus-tra-ted fu-gi-tive
ful-fil-led fu-ne-ral fu-ri-ous fur-ni-shed func-ti-on fur-ni-ture fur-ri-er
fur-ther-ance fur-ther-end fur-ther-side fur-ther-more fur-ther-off fur-ther-on
fus-ti-an fus-ti-tripes
G
Gab-ble-ing gain-say-ers gain-say-ing gal-lan-try gal-le-ry gal-ley-slave
gar-di-ner gar-ni-shed gar-ri-son ga-ther-ing ga-zing-stock ge-ne-ral
gen-tle-ness gen-tle-man gid-di-ness gin-ger-bread glis-ter-ing glis-ter-pipe
glit-ter-ing gloo-mi-ness glo-ry-ing glo-ri-fy glo-ri-ous glu-ten-ous
glut-ton-ous glut-to-ny god-li-ness good-li-ness gor-ge-ous go-vern-ment
go-ver-nour gos-sip-ing gra-ci-ous grand-chil-dren grand-fa-ther grand-mo-ther
grai-ne-ry gra-ti-tude gras-hop-per gra-vel-ling gra-vi-ty gree-di-ness
grie-vous-ly grid-i-ron grudg-ing-ly guar-di-an gun-ners-mate gun-pow-der
gut-ter-ing guil-ti-ness guile-ful-ly guilt-les-ly
H
Ha-bi-ted hal-low-ed ham-per-ing han-dy-craft han-dy-work hand-ker-chief
hand-mai-den hand-wri-ting han-dle-ing hand-som-ness hap-pen-ed hap-pi-er
har-bour-ing har-den-ed har-mo-ny har-ras-sing har-vest-time has-ti-ness
hate-ful-ly hay-ma-king haugh-ti-ness hea-di-er heal-thi-er hear-ken-ed
hear-ti-er hea-then-ish hea-ven-ly heed-les-ness heed-ful-ness here-af-ter
here-to-fore he-re-tick he-ri-tage ho-li-ness ho-nes-ty hor-rib-ly hor-rid-ly
hum-ble-ness hus-band-ry hy-po-crite
I
I-dle-ness i-de-a je-lou-sy jeo-par-dy jeer-ing-ly je-su-it jew-el-ler
jew-el-ling ig-no-ble ig-no-rance ig-no-rant il-le-gal im-be-zil im-balm-ing
im-a-ges im-a-gine im-bold-ned im-mer-sed im-mi-nent im-mo-dest im-mor-tal
im-part-ing im-per-fect im-pi-ous im-plo-ring im-ploy-ed im-ploy-ment
im-port-ance im-por-tune im-po-sed im-post-hume im-pos-tour im-pos-ture
im-po-tent im-prove-ment im-pro-per im-pu-ted im-pu-test in-as-much in-car-nate
in-cen-sed in-chant-ed in-chant-ment in-sert-ed in-cli-ning in-clo-sed
in-clu-sive in-con-stant in-crea-sing in-croach-ing in-cul-cate in-cum-bent
in-cum-brance in-dear-ed in-debt-ed in-den-ture in-dent-ed in-di-ting
in-di-gent in-di-rect in-dis-creet in-dor-sed in-du-ced in-dul-gence
in-dul-gent in-fa-my in-fa-mous in-fan-cy in-fan-try in-fect-ed in-fe-rence
in-fer-nal in-fi-del in-fi-nite in-flict-ed in-fla-ming in-fold-ing in-for-mer
in-for-ming in-form-ing in-form-ed in-flu-ence in-fring-ing in-graft-ing
in-gage-ment in-grate-ful in-ha-bit in-he-rent in-he-rit in-jus-tice
in-joyn-ing inn-keep-er in-ner-most in-no-cent in-rol-led in-so-lent in-spi-red
in-stant-ly in-sti-tute in-struct-ed in-stru-ment in-tan-gle in-tend-ing
in-ter-cede in-ter-cept in-te-rest in-ter-nal in-ter-pose in-ter-pret
in-ter-val in-ter-vene in-ti-mate in-tire-ly in-trea-ty in-tru-ding in-tro-duce
in-trust-ed in-va-ding in-veigh-ing in-vei-gle in-vent-ing in-vi-ron
in-volv-ing in-vi-ting in-ward-ly jour-ney-ing i-vo-ry joy-ful-ness ju-bi-le
ir-ri-tate is-su-ed ju-da-ism jus-ti-ces ^us-ti-fy
K
Ka-len-dar kind-nes-ses kil-der-kin kins-wo-man kis-sing-crust know-ing-ly
knuc-kle-bone knock-down-ale
L
La-bour-ing la-byr-inth la-dy-day la-dy-ship la-ment-ed lan-guish-ing
lan-gua-ges lat-ter-end la-zi-ly lea-ven-ed lec-tu-rer left-hand-ed le-che-ry
le-ga-cy le-gi-on length-en-ed le-o-pard le-pro-sy learn-ed-ly les-sen-ing
let-ter-case let-ti-ces le-vel-ling le-vi-ty li-ber-tine li-ber-ty li-bel-ling
li-be-ral light-en-ing li-o-ness lin-ger-ing lis-ten-ing live-ly-ness
loath-som-ness lof-ti-ness lone-som-ness love-li-ness low-li-ness
lon-don-bridge low-er-most luke-warm-ness lu-na-tick
M
Ma-ca-roons mac-ke-rel ma-gi-strate mag-ni-fy mag-ni-tude ma-ga-zine
maid-ser-vant ma-je-sty main-te-nance main-tain-ed male-chil-dren ma-lig-nant
ma-nage-ment ma-na-cles ma-ho-met ma-ni-fest ma-ni-fold man-si-on ma-nu-ring
ma-nu-script man-ser-vant man-slay-er man-slaugh-ter mar-gi-nal mar-ket-ing
mar-ket-cross ma-ri-ner mar-ri-age mar-ry-ing mar-ma-let mar-ques-dom
mar-tyr-dom mar-vel-lous mas-cu-line mas-sa-cre mas-te-ry match-ma-ker
mea-su-ring me-di-cine me-di-ate me-di-tate me-lo-dy me-mo-ry men-ti-on
men-plea-ser^ men-steal-ers men-stru-ous mer-chan-dise mer-ci-ful mer-cy-seat
mes-sen-ger mes-si-as mes-su-age me-ta-phor me-theg-lin mid-dle-most
migh-ti-ness milk-ing-pale mil-li-ons mi-ni-ster mi-ne-rals min-ish-ed
mi-ni-string mind-ful-ness mi-ra-cle mis-cal-ling mis-car-ry mis-chie-vous
mis-lead-ing mis-li-king mis-ta-ken mis-trust-ing mis-pend-ing mis-u-sing
mock-e-ry mo-de-rate mo-de-sty mol-li-fy mo-nar-chy mo-ra-lize mo-nu-ment
more-o-ver mor-ti-fy mo-ti-on move-a-ble moun-te-bank mourn-ful-ly mur-mur-ing
mul-ti-ply mu-ta-ble mul-ti-tude mur-der-er mu-si-cal mu-tu-al mus-tard-seed
mus-ter-ing mut-ter-ing mys-te-ry
N
Na-ked-ness nar-row-ly nar-ra-tive nas-ti-ness na-ti-on na-tu-ral
naugh-ti-ness neg-lect-ed neg-li-gence neigh-bor-hood neigh-bor-ly net-ma-ker
news-mon-ger nib-ble-ing nig-gard-ly night-in-gale nim-ble-ness no-ble-ness
nip-ping-frost noi-som-ness non-suit-ed no-ta-ble no-ta-ry north-bor-der
north-quar-ter no-vel-ty no-vem-ber no-vi-ces nou-rish-ment nul-li-ty
num-ber-ing num-ber-less nur-se-ry nu-tri-ment
O
O-bey-ed o-bey-sance o-bi-lisk ob-ject-ed ob-li-ged ob-ser-ved ob-ser-vant
ob-scure-ness ob-sti-nate ob-struct-ed ob-tain-ed ob-vi-ous o-cu-list
oc-cur-rence o-ce-an oc-to-ber o-di-ous of-fen-ces of-fend-ed of-fen-sive
of-fer-ing of-fi-cer of-fi-ces off-scour-ing of-ten-times o-live-tree
o-live-yard oil-o-live al-ler-ton o-lym-pick om-i-nous o-ni-ons o-pen-ed
o-pen-ing o-pen-ly op-po-ser op-po-sing op-po-site op-pres-sed op-pres-sor
o-ra-cle o-ra-tor or-dain-ed or-dain-ing or-der-ed or-der-ing or-der-ly
or-di-nance o-ran-ges o-range-trees or-na-ment os-trich-es o-ther-wise
o-ver-wise o-ver-all o-ver-bid o-ver-bake o-ver-boots o-ver-came o-ver-cast
o-ver-did o-ver-do o-ver-drive o-ver-flow o-ver-match o-ver-much o-ver-throw
o-ver-turn o-ver-whelm out-bid-ding out-stretch-ed out-ward-ly o-zi-ers
P
Pa-ci-fy pack-sad-dle pa-gan-ism pain-ful-ness pa-la-ces pa-la-tine pal-pa-ble
pa-ra-ble palm-er-worm pa-pa-cy pa-per-mills pa-ra-dise pa-ra-mount pa-ra-mour
par-don-ed par-don-ing par-ish-es par-ta-kers par-ti-al par-tridg-es pas-sa-ges
pas-sen-ger pas-si-on pass-o-ver pas-to-ral pas-tu-ring pa-ti-ence pa-ti-ent
pa-tri-arch pau-ci-ty peace-a-ble pa-ter-nal peace-ma-ker pe-di-gree
pee-vish-ness pe-li-can pe-nal-ty pe-ni-tent pe-nu-ry pen-ny-worth pen-te-cost
pen-sive-ness per-fect-ing per-form-ance per-fu-med pe-ril-lous per-ju-ry
pe-ra-wig pe-rish-ed per-mit-ted per-se-cute per-plex-ed per-sist-ing
per-se-vere per-so-nate per-swa-ded per-spect-ive pes-ti-lence per-tain-ing
per-vers-ness per-vert-ing pha-ri-see phi-lis-tines pi-e-ty pil-gri-mage
pi-ous-ly plea-sant-ness plen-ti-ful pleu-ri-sy pli-a-ble po-e-try poi-son-ing
po-li-cy po-lish-ed po-li-ticks pom-gra-nate pon-der-ing po-pe-ry po-pu-lous
por-ti-on pos-ses-sed pos-si-ble po-si-tive post-mas-ter po-ten-tate po-ver-ty
pow-er-ful prac-ti-cal prac-ti-sed pre-ce-dence pre-ci-ous pre-cise-ness
pre-fer-ment pre-pa-red pre-scri-bed
Q
Qua-ker-ism qua-li-fy qua-li-ty quan-da-ry quan-ti-ty quar-rel-ers
quar-rel-ing quar-ter-ed quar-ter-ing quar-ter-ly que-ri-ster que-ru-lous
ques-ti-on quick-en-eth quick-en-ing quick-sil-ver qui-et-ness qui-et-ly
qui-et-ing quin-tes-sence qua-ver-ing qui-ver-ed qui-ver-ing quin-bo-rough
quib-ble-ing
R
Ra-di-cal ra-dish-es ra-di-ent rag-ged-ness ran-som-ed ra-pi-er ra-ri-ty
ras-ber-ries ras-kal-ly rat-tle-ing ra-ven-ous ra-vish-ing rea-di-ness
rea-son-ing re-bel-ling re-bu-king re-bu-ked re-build-ed re-cei-ver re-cei-ving
reck-on-ing re-claim-ing re-com-mend re-com-pence re-con-cile re-cord-ed
re-cord-er re-count-ing re-cre-ate rec-ti-fy re-deem-er re-deem-ed re-dres-sed
re-fe-rence re-fi-ner re-fi-ning re-flect-ing re-form-ed re-strain-ing
re-fresh-ment re-fu-sing re-gain-ing re-gard-ed re-gard-ing re-gi-ment re-gi-on
re-gis-ter re-gis-tred re-gu-lar re-hear-sal re-hear-sing re-ject-ed
re-joy-cing re-laps-ed re-la-ted re-lea-sed re-lent-ing re-li-ed re-lie-ving
re-lin-quish re-lish-ed re-mand-ed re-main-ed re-main-der re-me-dy re-mem-ber
re-mem-brance re-mind-ed re-mit-ted re-miss-ness re-mo-test re-mo-ved
re-mo-ving ren-der-ed ren-de-vous re-new-ed re-noun-cing re-pair-ed re-pay-ed
re-peal-ed re-peat-ed re-pel-ling re-pen-tance re-pi-ning re-plant-ing
re-ple-nish re-ply-ing re-port-ed re-po-sed re-pre-hend re-pre-sent re-print-ed
re-pro-bate re-pro-ved re-pug-nant re-pul-sed re-pu-ted re-quest-ed re-qui-red
re-qui-ted re-qui-site res-cu-ed re-sem-ble re-sent-ed re-ser-ved re-si-ding
re-sign-ed re-si-due re-sist-ed re-sol-ved re-so-lute re-sort-ed re-spect-ed
re-sto-red re-strain-ed
S
Sa-cra-ment sa-cri-fice sa-cri-ledge sa-cred-ness sad-du-ces sa-lu-ting
sanc-ti-fy sa-ti-ate sa-tis-fy sa-vage-ness sau-cy-ness sau-sa-ges sa-ving-ly
sa-vi-our sa-vou-ry scan-da-lous scar-ci-ty scat-ter-ed sca-ven-ger
schis-ma-tick school-mas-ter school-mis-tress scorn-ful-ness scor-pi-on
scof-fing-ly sot-tish-ness scrip-tu-ral scri-vi-ner scru-pu-lous scul-li-on
sea-son-ed sec-ta-ry se-cond-ly se-cre-cy se-cret-ly se-cure-ly se-cu-red
se-cu-lar se-du-cer se-du-cing seem-ing-ly se-na-tor se-ni-or sen-su-al
sen-si-ble sense-les-ness sen-ten-ces sep-tem-ber se-pa-rate se-pul-chre
se-ques-tred se-ri-ous se-ra-phims ser-pen-tine ser-vi-tor ser-vi-tude
ser-vant-maid ser-ving-man se-ven-fold se-ven-score se-ven-teen se-ven-ty
se-ve-ral se-ve-red sha-dow-ing shal-low-ness shame-fa-ced shame-les-ly
shame-ful-ly shoo-ma-ker shel-ter-ing shep-herd-ess shop-keep-er sig-ni-fy
si-lent-ly sil-ver-smith sing-ing-man sin-gle-man sin-gu-lar skil-ful-ness
sla-vish-ness slan-der-ing slaugh-ter-house sin-cere-ly sin-gle-ness slip-pe-ry
sloth-ful-ness slo-ven-ly slug-gish-ness slum-ber-ing slut-tish-ness so-ber-ly
so-ber-ness so-journ-er so-lem-nize spa-ring-ly spe-ci-ous spec-ta-cle
spec-ta-tor spee-di-ly squan-der-ing
T
Tal-ka-tive tam-per-ing ta-pe-stry tar-ras-walk tar-ry-ing task-mas-ters
taunt-ing-ly te-di-ous tem-po-rize tem-pe-rance tem-pe-red tem-po-ral
ten-der-ness ten-ter-hooks tes-ta-ment tes-ta-tor tes-ti-fy thank-ful-ness
thank-wor-thy thanks-gi-ving there-un-to thrif-ti-ly thrif-ti-ness
thun-der-bolt thun-der-ing tip-ple-ing ti-ring-room tire-wo-man to-bac-co
to-ge-ther to-ward-ly tor-ment-ed tor-men-tors tor-tu-red tor-toise-shel
tot-ter-ing trac-ta-ble tra-ge-dy tra-gi-cal trans-la-ting trai-te-rous
trans-fer-red trans-form-ed trans-gres-sed trans-pa-rent trea-che-rous
trea-che-ry trea-su-rer trea-su-ry tres-pas-ses tri-bu-nal tri-ni-ty tri-vi-al
tri-um-phant truce-break-ers tur-bu-lent tur-pen-tine ty-ran-ny ty-ran-nize
ty-thing-men tri-umph-ing tri-umph-ant tra-vel-ler
V
Va-can-cy va-ga-bond va-len-tine va-li-ant va-lu-ed va-nish-ed va-ni-ty
van-quish-ed va-pour-ing va-ri-ance va-ri-ous ve-he-ment ve-ne-mous ver-tu-ous
ven-tu-rous ve-ni-son ve-ri-ly ve-ri-ty vi-car-age vi-ci-ous vic-to-ry
vic-tu-als vi-gi-lant vil-la-ges vil-la-ny vi-ne-gar vin-to-ner vi-o-late
vi-o-let vi-o-lin vir-gi-nals vine-dres-sers vi-o-lence vi-o-lent vi-si-on
vi-sit-ed un-a-wares un-be-lief un-cer-tain un-clea-ness un-come-ly
un-con-cern'd un-co-ver un-daunt-ed un-der-ling un-der-mine un-der-neath
un-der-stand un-der-take un-e-qual un-e-ven un-faith-ful un-feign-ed
un-fruit-ful un-fold-ed un-gird-ed un-god-ly un-ho-ly u-ni-corn u-ni-form
u-ni-on u-ni-verse u-ni-ted u-ni-ty un-just-ly un-kind-ness un-la-ding
un-lap-ped un-law-ful un-learn-ed un-load-ed un-man-ly un-mask-ed un-mind-ful
un-qui-et un-quench-ed un-ready un-ru-ly un-seem-ly un-skil-ful un-spot-ted
un-stop-ped un-ta-med un-tap-ped un-thank-ful un-time-ly un-tomb-ed un-to-ward
un-vail-ed un-wash-ed un-wash-en un-weigh-ed un-wor-thy un-weil-dy un-wise-ly
un-whole-som vo-lu-ble vo-mit-ing vo-ta-ry voy-a-ges
W
Wag-gon-er wa-ken-ed wal-low-ing wan-der-ing wan-ton-ess warm-ing-pan
war-rant-ed watch-ful-ness wa-ter-ed wa-ter-brooks wa-ter-course wa-ver-ing
weal-thi-er water-springs way-fa-ring wea-ri-some wea-ri-ness well-do-ing
well-pleased well-plea-sing whis-per-ing whis-per-er whore-mon-ger wick-ed-ly
wick-ed-ness wid-ow-er wid-ow-hood wil-der-ness wil-ful-ly wil-ling-ly
wil-low-tree will-wor-ship win-now-ed win-ter-ed wise-heart-ed with-draw-ing
wi-ther-ed with-hold-eth wit-nes-sed wit-nes-sing wit-nes-ses wit-ti-ly
wit-ting-ly work-man-ship wor-ship-ed wor-ship-er wor-ship-ful won-der-ful
wo-man-ish wor-thi-ness wrong-ful-ly wretch-ed-ness
X
Xe-no-phon Xo-cra-tes
Y
Youth-ful-ly yes-ter-day ye-ster-night
Z
Ze-bo-im zea-lous-ly
Of Words of Four Syllables.
A
A-ban-don-ed a-bi-li-ty a-bo-lish-ed a-bo-mi-nate ab-ro-ga-ted ab-so-lure-ly
a-bun-dant-ly a-bu-sive-ness a-ca-de-my ac-cep-ta-ble ac-ces-sa-ry
ac-com-plish-ed ac-com-plish-ment ac-com-pa-ny ac-ci-den-tal ac-co-mo-date
ac-cor-ding-ly ac-cu-rate-ly ac-cur-sed-ly ac-know-ledg-ment ac-ti-vi-ty
a-da-man-tine ad-di-ti-on ad-mi-ni-ster ad-mi-ra-ble ad-mo-nish-ed a-dop-ti-on
ad-van-ta-ges ad-ven-tu-rous ad-ver-sa-ry ad-ver-si-ty a-dul-te-ry a-dul-te-rer
a-dul-ter-ess a-dul-te-rous af-fec-ti-on af-fi-ni-ty af-flic-ti-on a-la-ba-ster
a-la-cri-ty a-li-e-nate al-le-gi-ance al-le-go-ry al-to-ge-ther a-ma-zed-ly
am-bas-sa-dor am-bi-gu-ous am-bi-ti-on a-mi-a-ble a-mi-ca-ble a-na-the-ma
a-na-to-my an-nu-i-ty an-swer-able an-ta-go-nist an-ti-qui-ty an-ti-pa-thy
an-ti-ci-pate an-ti-qua-ry a-po-cri-phal a-po-lo-gy a-po-lo-gize a-po-stle-ship
ap-per-tain-ing a-po-sta-cy a-po-sta-tize a-pa-rel-led ap-pa-rent-ly
ap-per-tain-ing ap-pre-hend-ed ap-pre-hen-sive ap-pro-pri-ate ap-pur-te-nance
ar-bi-tra-ry arch-bish-op-rick arch-dea-con-ship ar-chi-tec-ture ar-gu-ment-al
a-rith-me-tick ar-rear-a-ges ar-ro-gan-cy ar-ti-fi-cer ar-til-le-ry
as-per-si-on as-so-ci-ate a-sto-nish-ed a-sto-nish-ment a-stro-lo-ger
a-stro-lo-gy a-stro-no-my at-ten-tive-ly at-ten-ti-on au-tho-ri-ty au-da-ci-ous
au-di-to-ry au-then-ti-cal au-tho-ri-zing
B
Ba-by-lo-nish bar-ba-ri-an bar-ba-ri-ty bar-ba-rous-ly be-a-ti-tudes
be-ha-vi-our beau-ti-ful-ly beau-ti-ful-ness be-ne-fac-tors be-ne-fi-cence
be-ne-vo-lence be-nig-ni-ty be-to-ken-eth blas-phe-mous-ly blood-guil-ti-ness
boi-ste-rous-ly boi-ste-rous-ness boun-ti-ful-ness boun-ti-ful-ly
bur-den-som-ness burnt-of-fer-ings burnt-sa-cri-fice bu-sy-bo-dy
C
Ca-la-mi-ty ca-pa-ci-ty ca-pa-ci-ous ca-pri-ci-ous cap-ti-va-ted cap-ti-vi-ty
car-ri-a-ges car-na-ti-on car-na-li-ty ca-tho-li-cal ca-te-chi-sing
ca-ter-pil-lar ce-le-ri-ty ce-le-bra-ting ce-les-ti-al cen-tu-ri-on ce-re-mo-ny
cer-ti-fy-ing cer-ti-fyed cer-ti-fi-cate cha-rac-te-rize cha-ri-ta-ble
cha-ri-ta-bly cir-cum-ci-sed cir-cum-spect-ly chi-rur-ge-on cir-cum-fe-rence
ci-vi-li-ty cock-a-tri-ces co-e-ter-nal col-la-tion col-la-te-ral col-lec-ti-on
col-le-gi-ate col-le-gi-ans com-for-ta-ble com-bus-ti-on com-me-mo-rate
com-mi-se-rate com-mis-si-on com-mo-di-ous com-mo-di-ty com-mo-nal-ty
com-mo-ti-on com-mu-ni-cant com-mu-ni-cate com-mu-ni-on com-mu-ni-ty
com-pact-ed-ness com-pa-ni-on com-pas-si-on com-pen-di-ous com-pa-ra-ble
com-pa-ri-son com-pla-cen-cy com-ple-men-tal com-plex-i-on com-pre-hend-ed
co-me-di-ans com-pul-si-on com-punc-ti-on com-pre-hen-sive con-ca-vi-ty
con-cep-ti-on con-ces-sion con-ci-si-on con-clu-si-on con-cu-pis-cence
con-de-scend-ing con-di-ti-on con-fe-de-rate con-fec-ti-on con-fes-si-on
con-fi-dent-ly con-for-ma-ble con-for-mi-ty con-fu-si-on con-gra-tu-late
con-jec-tu-red con-junc-ti-on con-nex-i-on con-sci-en-ces con-sis-to-ry
con-se-cra-ted con-sid-er-ed con-sid-er-ing con-spi-ra-cy con-struc-ti-on
con-sump-ti-on con-ta-gi-on con-temp-ti-ble con-temp-tu-ous con-ten-ti-on
con-ti-nen-cy con-ti-nu-al con-ti-nent-ly con-ti-nu-ance con-tra-dict-ing
con-tra-dic-ti-on con-tra-ry-wise con-tri-bu-ted con-tri-ti-on con-tro-ver-sy
con-tro-ver-ted con-tu-ma-cy con-tu-me-ly con-ve-ni-ent con-ven-ti-on
con-ver-si-on con-vic-ti-on con-vul-si-on co-o-pe-rate co-pi-ous-ness
co-ri-an-der cor-po-ral-ly cor-po-ra-ted cor-po-re-al cor-rec-ti-on
cor-ro-bo-rate cor-rup-ti-on cor-rup-ti-ble cos-ter-mon-ger co-ve-nant-ed
coun-ter-vail-ing coun-ter-feit-ed co-ve-tous-ness coun-te-nan-cing
cour-te-ous-ly cre-a-ti-on cru-ci-fi-ed cu-ri-ous-ly cus-to-ma-ry
D
Dam-na-ti-on dam-ni-fi-ed de-bi-li-tate de-ceit-ful-ness de-ci-si-on
de-coc-ti-on de-di-ca-ted de-fec-ti-on de-fi-ci-ent de-for-mi-ty de-ge-ne-rate
de-jec-tion de-jec-ted-ness de-lec-ta-ble de-li-be-rate de-li-ca-cies
de-li-cate-ness de-li-ci-ous de-li-ne-ate de-lin-quen-cy de-li-ve-rance
de-li-ve-red de-lu-si-on de-mo-lish-ed de-mon-stra-ted de-no-mi-nate
de-plo-ra-ble de-pres-si-on de-ri-si-on de-scrip-ti-on de-ser-ti-on
de-sign-ed-ly de-si-ra-ble de-so-late-ly des-pe-rate-ly des-pi-ca-ble
de-spite-ful-ly de-struc-ti-on de-ter-mi-nate de-ter-mi-ned de-tes-ta-ble
de-vo-ti-on dia-me-ter dif-fer-en-ces dif-fi-cul-ty di-ges-ti-on dig-ni-fi-ed
di-gres-si-on di-li-gent-ly di-mi-ni-shed di-rec-ti-on dis-al-low-ed
dis-a-nul-led dis-ad-van-tage dis-a-gree-ing dis-ap-point-ed dis-ap-pro-ving
dis-com-fit-ed dis-com-po-sed dis-con-tent-ed dis-con-ti-nue dis-con-so-late
dis-co-ver-ed dis-coun-te-nance dis-cou-ra-ged dis-cour-te-sie dis-cre-dit-ed
dis-cre-ti-on dis-dain-ful-ly dis-en-ga-ging dis-fi-gu-ring dis-hear-ten-ing
dis-ho-nes-ty dis-ho-nour-ing dis-in-he-rit dis-junc-ti-on dis-o-bey-ed
dis-ob-li-ging dis-or-der-ly dis-pa-rage-ment dis-per-si-on dis-pos-ses-sed
dis-pu-ta-ble dis-qui-et-ness dis-sen-ti-on dis-se-ver-ed dis-tem-per-ing
dis-tinc-ti-on dis-tin-guish-ed dis-trac-ti-on dis-tri-bu-ting di-ver-si-ties
di-ver-si-on di-vi-ni-ty di-vi-si-on do-mi-neer-ing do-mi-ni-on dox-o-lo-gy
E
E-di-fy-ing e-di-ti-on e-du-ca-ted ef-fec-tu-al ef-fe-mi-nate ef-fi-ca-cy
ef-fi-ci-ent ef-fi-gi-es ef-fu-si-on e-gre-gi-ous e-gyp-ti-an e-lec-ti-on
e-le-gan-cy e-le-gant-ly e-le-va-ted e-lo-quent-ly em-bas-sa-dor em-broi-der-ed
em-bol-den-ed em-pha-ti-cal e-na-mour-ed en-com-pas-sing en-coun-ter-ing
en-cou-ra-ging en-cum-ber-ing en-da-ma-ged en-dan-ger-ing en-dea-vour-ing
en-fran-chise-ment en-ter-med-dle en-ter-tain-ment en-thu-si-asm e-mi-nent-ly
e-nor-mi-ty en-ter-pri-ses en-ter-min-gle en-vi-ron-ed e-pis-co-pal e-qua-li-ty
e-qui-ta-ble e-qui-va-lent e-qui-vo-cate er-ro-ne-ous es-sen-ti-al
e-sta-blish-ment e-ter-nal-ly e-ter-ni-ty e-va-cu-ate e-van-ge-list
e-ven-ing-tide e-ver-last-ing e-vi-den-ces e-vi-dent-ly ex-ac-ti-on ex-a-mi-ned
ex-as-pe-rate ex-ceed-ing-ly ex-cel-len-cy ex-cep-ti-on ex-ces-sive-ly
ex-e-cu-ted ex-e-cu-tors ex-em-pla-ry ex-emp-ti-on ex-er-ci-ses ex-hi-bit-ing
ex-pe-di-ent ex-pe-ri-ence ex-pe-ri-ment ex-pi-a-ted ex-po-si-tor
ex-pos-tu-late ex-pres-si-on ex-qui-site-ly ex-tem-po-re ex-te-nu-ate
ex-ter-nal-ly ex-tin-guish-ed ex-tor-ti-on ex-tra-va-gant ex-tre-mi-ty
F
Fa-bu-lous-ly fa-ci-li-ty fac-ti-ous-ly fal-la-ci-ous fal-si-fy-ing
fa-mi-li-ar fan-tas-ti-cal fa-vou-ra-ble fe-bru-a-ry fel-low-ser-vant
fi-de-li-ty for-ma-li-ty fore-or-dain-ed for-get-ful-ness for-give-nes-ses
for-ni-ca-tor for-ti-fi-ed foun-da-ti-on frau-du-lent-ly fru-i-ti-on
fun-da-men-tal fu-ri-ous-ly
G
Ge-ne-ral-ly ge-ne-rous-ly ge-o-gra-pher ge-o-gra-phy ge-o-me-try ge-o-man-cy
glo-ri-fi-ed glo-ri-ous-ly gor-ge-ous-ly gra-ci-ous-ly gra-du-al-ly
H
Ha-ber-dash-er ha-ber-gi-on ha-bi-ta-ble hal-ber-dier ha-le-lu-jah
he-re-ti-cal he-ro-i-cal he-te-ro-dox hi-e-rar-chy ho-nou-ra-ble how-so-e-ver
hu-ma-ni-ty hu-mi-li-ty his-to-ri-an hos-pi-ta-ble hy-po-cri-sy hun-ger-bit-ten
I
I-do-la-ter i-do-la-try ig-no-mi-ny ig-no-rant-ly il-le-gal-ly il-li-te-rate
il-lu-mi-nate il-lus-tri-ous im-a-gi-ned im-ma-cu-late im-mo-de-rate
im-mo-des-ty im-i-ta-ting im-mu-ta-ble im-me-di-ate im-mi-nent-ly im-par-ti-al
im-pa-ti-ence im-pe-di-ment im-pe-ni-tence im-pe-ra-tive im-pi-e-ty
im-pi-ous-ly im-pla-ca-ble im-por-tu-nate im-pos-si-ble im-po-ver-ish
im-pres-si-on im-pri-son-ment im-pro-ba-ble im-pro-per-ly im-pro-vi-dent
in-ca-pa-ble in-ces-tu-ous in-com-mo-date in-com-pe-tent in-con-gru-ous
in-con-sist-ent in-con-stan-cy in-con-ti-nent in-cor-po-rate in-coun-ter-ed
in-cou-ra-ged in-cre-di-ble in-cre-du-lous in-cul-pa-ble in-cu-ra-ble
in-de-fi-nite in-dea-vour-ing in-de-li-ble in-de-pen-dent in-dif-fer-ent
in-dig-ni-ty in-di-rect-ly in-dis-creet-ly in-dis-po-sed in-do-ci-ble
in-dul-gen-ces in-ef-fa-ble in-dus-tri-ous in-fal-lib-ly in-sec-ti-ous
in-fe-ri-or in-fer-nal-ly in-fi-nit-ly in-flex-i-ble in-for-tu-nate
in-fir-mi-ty in-flu-en-ces in-ha-bi-tant in-cor-rupt-ed in-ge-ni-ous
in-ge-nu-ous in-gra-ti-tude in-he-ri-tor in-he-ri-tance in-i-qui-ty
in-ju-ri-ous in-ligh-ten-ed in-no-cent-ly in-or-di-nate in-no-cen-cy
in-qui-si-tive in-scrip-ti-on in-sen-si-ble in-se-pa-rate in-si-nu-ate
in-so-lent-ly in-spec-ti-on in-sti-tu-ted in-struc-ti-on in-stru-men-tal
in-te-gri-ty in-tel-li-gence in-tem-pe-rance in-ten-ti-on in-ter-ces-sor
in-ter-cept-ing in-ter-med-dle in-ter-min-gle in-ter-po-sing in-ti-ma-ting
in-ter-pre-ter in-ter-pre-ting in-ter-rup-ting in-ter-ve-ning in-trac-ta-ble
in-tro-du-cing in-va-si-on in-ven-ti-on in-ven-to-ry in-vi-sible in-vin-ci-ble
in-vi-ro-ned ir-re-ve-rent ju-di-ca-ture ju-di-ci-al ju-di-ci-ous jus-ti-fi-ed
K
Knight-ba-ro-net knip-per-do-ling ken-tish-pip-pins
L
La-bo-ri-ous la-men-table las-ci-vi-ous le-gi-ti-mate li-be-ral-ly
le-vi-a-than li-cen-ti-ous le-vi-ti-cal long-suf-fer-ing look-ing-glas-ses
lo-ving-kind-ness lux-u-ri-ous le-vi-ti-cal
M
Ma-gi-ci-an mag-ni-fi-cence mag-ni-fi-cent mag-ni-fi-cal mag-ni-fi-cat
mag-ni-fy-ing ma-ho-me-tan ma-le-fac-tor ma-le-vo-lent ma-li-ci-ous
ma-lig-ni-ty ma-ni-fest-ed man-si-on-house mar-ri-a-ges mar-vel-lous-ly
mas-ter-buil-der ma-te-ri-al ma-the-ma-ticks ma-tri-mo-ny ma-tu-ri-ty
meat-of-fer-ing me-di-a-tor me-di-a-ting me-di-ta-ting me-lan-cho-ly
me-lo-di-ous me-mo-ra-ble me-mo-ri-al men-ti-on-ing mer-chan-di-zing
mer-ci-ful-ly mes-su-a-ges me-tro-po-lis mi-no-ri-ty mi-ra-cu-lous
mis-car-ri-age mis-chie-vous-ness mis-hap-pen-ed mi-ti-ga-ting mo-de-rate-ly
mo-nar-chi-cal mo-ra-li-ty mor-ta-li-ty mo-ti-on-ed mu-ni-ti-on mol-li-fi-ed
mo-ny-chan-gers mul-ber-ry-trees mul-ti-ply-ing mut-ton-mon-ger mu-si-ti-an
N
Nar-ra-ti-on na-tu-ra-lize na-ti-on-al na-ti-vi-ty na-vi-ga-ble na-tu-ral-ly
ne-ces-si-ty neg-li-gent-ly ne-cro-man-cer ne-cro-man-cy ne-ver-the-less
no-bi-li-ty no-to-ri-ous not-with-stand-ing nu-me-rous-ly nun-ne-ri-es
nur-se-ri-es nu-me-ri-cal
O
O-be-di-ence ob-jec-ti-on ob-la-ti-on ob-li-qui-ty ob-li-vi-on ob-sti-nate-ly
ob-struc-ti-on ob-scu-ri-ty oc-ca-si-on oc-cur-ren-ces o-di-ous-ly of-fi-ci-ous
om-ni-po-sent om-ni-pre-sent om-ni-sci-ent o-pe-ra-ting o-pi-ni-on
op-por-tune-ly op-pres-si-on o-ra-ti-on o-ra-to-ry or-di-nan-ces or-di-na-ry
o-ri-gi-nal or-na-men-tal o-ver-char-ged o-ver-co-meth o-ver-flow-ed
o-ver-lay-ing o-ver-run-ning o-ver-sha-dow o-ver-ta-ken o-ver-throw-eth
o-ver-turn-ed o-ver-whelm-ed out-ra-gi-ous
P
Pa-ci-fi-ed pa-la-ta-ble pa-pis-ti-cal par-li-a-ment par-ti-al-ly
par-ti-cu-lar par-ti-ti-on pa-ti-ent-ly pas-si-on-ate pa-tri-mo-ny pa-vil-li-on
pe-cu-li-ar pe-ni-tent-ly pe-nu-ri-ous per-ad-ven-ture per-di-ti-on
per-fec-ti-on per-fi-di-ous per-ni-ci-ous per-pe-tu-al per-se-cu-ted
per-se-ve-rance per-so-na-ble per-mis-sion per-plex-i-ty per-se-cu-ted
per-swa-si-on pe-ti-ti-on phi-lo-so-pher phi-lo-so-phy phy-si-ti-an
plen-te-ous-ness plu-ra-li-ty po-e-ti-cal po-li-ti-cal pol-lu-ti-on
pos-ses-si-on po-si-ti-on po-ste-ri-ty prac-ti-cal-ly pre-ce-den-cy
pre-ci-ous-ness pre-ci-si-an pre-de-ces-sor pre-des-ti-nate pre-dic-ti-on
pre-fi-gu-red pre-ju-di-ced pre-la-ti-cal pre-pa-ra-tive pre-he-mi-nence
pre-pos-te-rous pre-ro-ga-tive pres-by-te-ry pre-scrip-ti-on pre-sump-ti-on
pre-sump-tu-ous pre-ven-ti-on prin-ci-pal-ly pro-di-gal-ly pro-di-gi-ous
pro-hi-bi-ting pro-pa-gatted pro-pri-e-ty pro-phe-ti-cal pro-por-ti-on
pro-se-cu-ted pros-pe-ri-ty pro-tec-ti-on pro-fes-si-on pre-me-di-tate
pro-fi-ta-ble pro-ge-ni-tors pro-mo-ti-on pro-phe-sy-ing pros-pe-rous-ly
pro-vi-si-on pro-ver-bi-al pro-vin-ci-al pru-den-ti-al pur-ga-to-ry pu-ri-fi-ed
pur-ga-ti-on
Q
Qua-li-fi-ed qua-ter-ni-on ques-ti-on-ed quo-ti-di-an que-ru-lous-ness
R
Ra-ti-o-nal ra-ve-nous-ly re-a-li-ty rea-so-na-ble re-bel-li-on re-cep-ta-cle
re-cep-ti-on re-com-mend-ed re-com-pen-sed re-con-ci-led re-co-ve-red
re-cre-a-ted rec-ti-fy-ing re-demp-ti-on re-fer-en-ces re-flec-ti-on
re-frac-to-ry re-gis-ter-ing re-gu-lar-ly re-jec-ti-on re-la-ti-on re-li-gi-on
re-lin-quish-ed re-luc-tan-cy re-mem-ber-ed re-mis-si-on re-mu-ne-rate
re-nu-me-rate re-ple-nish-ed re-pre-sent-ed re-proch-ful-ly re-so-lute-ly
re-spec-tive-ly re-sp^^-^i-ble re-sto-ra-tive re-ta-li-ate re-ten-ti-on
re-ti-red-ly re-ver-si-on rhe-to-ri-cal righ-te-ous-ness ri-go-rous-ly
ri-ot-ous-ness re-ve-ren-ced
S
Sa-cer-do-tal sa-cra-men-tal sa-cri-fi-cing sa-cri-fi-cer sa-ga-ci-ty
sal-va-ti-on sanc-ti-fi-ed sanc-tu-a-ry scan-da-lous-ly schis-ma-ti-cal
scru-pu-lous-ly se-cre-ta-ry se-cu-ri-ty se-den-ta-ry se-di-ti-on sen-su-al-ly
sen-ten-ti-ous se-ri-ous-ly ser-vice-a-ble se-ve-ral-ly se-ve-ri-ty
shame-fa-ced-ness sig-ni-fy-ing si-mi-li-tude sim-pli-ci-ty sin-ce-ri-ty
sin-gu-lar-ly so-bri-e-t^ so-ber-mind-ed so-ci-a-ble so-ci-e-ty so-lem-ni-ty
so-lem-ni-zed so-li-ci-tor so-li-ci-tous so-li-lo-quy so-li-ta-ry
sor-row-ful-ness so-ve-reign-ty spe-ci-al-ly spe-ci-ous-ly spe-cu-la-tive
spi-ri-tu-al slan-de-rous-ly stu-di-ous-ly stu-pi-di-ty stu-pi-fy-ing
sub-jec-ti-on sub-mis-si-on sub-scrip-ti-on sub-stan-ti-al sub-trac-ti-on
sub-ver-si-on suc-ces-si-on suf-fi-ci-ent suf-fo-ca-ted sug-ges-ti-on
sum-ma-ri-ly sump-tu-ous-ly sta-bi-li-ty su-per-flu-ous su-per-la-tive
su-pre-ma-cy sym-pa-thi-sing
T
Ta-ber-na-cle te-di-ous-ness tax-a-ti-on tem-pes-tu-ous tem-po-ri-sing
temp-ta-ti-on ter-res-tri-al tes-ti-mo-ny ter-ri-fi-ed tes-ti-fy-ing
to-le-ra-ble to-le-ra-ted tra-di-ti-on trai-te-rous-ly tran-quil-li-ty
trans-ac-ti-on trans-fi-gu-red trans-gres-si-on tran-si-to-ry trans-la-ti-on
trea-che-rous-ly trea-so-na-ble tri-bu-ta-ry tu-i-ti-on tu-mul-tu-ous
tur-bu-len-cy
V
Va-ca-ti-on va-li-ant-ly va-lo-rous-ly va-lu-a-ble va-ri-a-ble va-ri-e-ty
ve-he-ment-ly ve-ne-ra-ble ve-ra-ci-ty ver-mil-li-on ver-tu-ous-ly vex-a-ti-on
vi-cis-si-tude vic-tu-al-ler vi-gi-lan-cy vi-o-lent-ly vir-gi-ni-ty
un-ac-quaint-ed un-ad-vi-sed u-na-ni-mous un-be-lie-ving un-be-lie-vers
un-bla-ma-ble un-ca-pa-ble un-cer-tain-ty un-change-a-ble un-der-stand-ing
un-con-dem-ned un-co-ver-ed un-cor-rupt-ed un-der-ta-king un-de-ser-ving
un-doubt-ed-ly un-faith-ful-ly un-feign-ed-ly un-for-tu-nate un-fur-nish-ed
un-de-fi-led un-god-li-ness u-ni-ver-sal un-law-ful-ly un-learn-ed-ly
un-e-qual-ly un-lea-ven-ed un-lim-it-ed un-mea-su-red un-mer-ci-ful
un-mo-va-ble un-mar-ri-ed un-na-tu-ral un-qui-et-ly un-quench-a-ble
un-pre-pa-red un-sa-vo-ry un-search-a-ble un-sea-son-ed un-speak-a-ble
un-thank-ful-ness un-wea-ri-ed un-whol-som-ness vo-lup-tu-ous u-su-al-ly
un-tem-per-ed un-wit-ting-ly vo-ca-ti-on vo-lun-ta-ry
W
Wa-ter-cour-ses wa-ter-ing-tub wel-be-lo-ved what-so-e-ver when-so-e-ver
where-so-e-ver who-so-e-ver whom-so-e-ver whose-so-e-ver won-der-ful-ly
won-der-ous-ly
Words of Five Syllables.
A
A-bo-mi-na-bly a-ca-de-mi-cal ab-so-lu-ti-on ac-cep-ta-ti-on ac-ci-den-tal-ly
ac-cla-ma-ti-on ac-com-mo-da-ted ac-cu-sa-ti-on ad-mi-ra-ti-on ad-mo-ni-ti-on
a-du-la-ti-on ad-van-ta-gi-ous al-ter-a-ti-on
B
Ba-by-lo-ni-ans be-a-ti-fi-cal be-ne-dic-ti-on be-ne-fi-ci-al be-ne-vo-lent-ly
burnt-sa-cri-fi-ces
C
Ca-te-chis-ti-cal ce-re-mo-ni-al chri-s-ti-a-ni-ty cir-cum-ci-si-on
co-es-sen-ti-al co-gi-ta-ti-on com-bi-na-ti-on cir-cum-spec-ti-on
com-men-da-ti-on con-se-cra-ti-on con-so-la-ti-on con-ten-ta-ti-on
con-ver-sa-ti-on cu-ri-o-si-ty
D
De-cei-va-ble-ness de-di-ca-ti-on de-cla-ra-ti-on de-cla-ma-ti-on
de-fa-ma-ti-on de-fi-ni-ti-on de-so-la-ti-on de-mon-stra-ti-on di-a-bo-li-cal
dis-o-be-di-ent dis-po-si-ti-on dis-pro-por-ti-on dis-so-lu-ti-on
E
E-du-ca-ti-on ef-fec-tu-al-ly ef-fi-ca-ci-ous e-gre-gi-ous-ly e-pis-co-pa-cy
ex-pec-ta-ti-on ex-hor-ta-ti-on ex-em-pli-fi-ed ex-com-mu-ni-cate
ex-tor-ti-on-er ex-pe-di-ti-on ex-pi-a-ti-on ex-pla-na-tion ex-po-si-ti-on
F
Fa-ce-ti-ous-ly fa-mi-li-ar-ly fe-lo-ni-ous-ly fa-vou-ra-ble-ness
fel-low-ci-ti-zen fel-low-la-bou-rer fel-low-pri-so-ner for-men-ta-ti-on
for-ni-ca-ti-on fun-da-men-tal-ly
G
Ge-ne-a-lo-gy ge-ne-ra-ti-on geo-gra-phi-cal ge-o-me-tri-cal
H
Ha-bi-ta-ti-on har-mo-ni-ous-ly he-re-ti-cal-ly he-ro-i-cal-ly
his-to-ri-cal-ly hy-po-cri-ti-cal hos-pi-ta-li-ty
I
Je-su-it-i-cal ig-no-mi-ni-ous il-le-ga-li-ty il-le-gi-ti-mate il-lu-mi-na-ted
il-lus-tri-ous-ly im-be-ci-li-ty im-me-di-at-ly im-mo-de-rat-ly im-mor-ta-li-ty
in-cen-di-a-ry in-ces-tu-ous-ly in-con-ti-nent-ly in-spi-ra-ti-on
K
Ka-desh-bar-ne-a ke-desh-nap-tha-ly kib-roth-hat-taa-vah
L
La-bo-ri-ous-ness la-men-ta-ti-on las-ci-vi-ous-ness li-be-ra-li-ty
li-cen-ti-ous-ness li-mi-ta-ti-on lux-u-ri-ous-ness
M
Ma-ho-me-ta-nism ma-te-ri-al-ly ma-the-ma-ti-cal ma-tri-mo-ni-al
me-di-a-tor-ship me-di-ta-ti-on ma-di-o-cri-ty ma-li-ci-ous-ly
ma-li-ci-ous-ness mag-ni-fi-cent-ly mag-na-ni-mous-ly mis-con-struc-ti-on
mo-de-ra-ti-on
N
Na-vi-ga-ti-on ne-ces-sa-ri-ly no-to-ri-ous-ly non-con-for-mi-ty
no-bi-li-ta-ting nu-me-ra-ti-on
O
Ob-li-ga-ti-on ob-ser-va-ti-on oc-cu-pa-ti-on of-fi-ci-ous-ly om-ni-po-ten-cy
om-ni-sci-en-cy o-pe-ra-ti-on op-por-tu-ni-ty op-po-si-ti-on or-di-na-ti-on
o-ri-gi-nal-ly or-na-men-tal-ly os-ten-ta-ti-on o-ver-sha-dow-ed
P
Par-ti-a-li-ty par-ti-cu-lar-ly pe-nu-ri-ous-ly per-fi-di-ous-ly
per-ni-ci-ous-ly per-pe-tu-al-ly per-se-cu-ti-on pro-se-cu-ti-on
pre-pa-ra-ti-on pro-pa-ga-ti-on pro-vo-ca-ti-on pub-li-ca-ti-on pu-ri-ta-ni-cal
Q
Ques-ti-on-a-ble
R
Ra-ti-o-nal-ly re-bel-li-ous-ly re-cre-a-ti-on re-for-ma-ti-on re-no-va-ti-on
re-pa-ra-ti-on re-pe-ti-ti-on re-pre-hen-si-on re-pro-ba-ti-on re-pa-ta-ti-on
re-so-lu-ti-on re-trac-ta-ti-on re-ve-la-ti-on re-vo-lu-ti-on
S
Sa-cra-men-tal-ly sa-cri-le-gi-ous sa-lu-ta-ti-on sa-tis-fac-ti-on
se-di-ti-ous-ly sen-su-a-li-ty se-pa-ra-ti-on se-que-stra-ti-on sin-gu-la-ri-ty
si-tu-a-ti-on so-li-ta-ri-ness spe-cu-la-ti-on suf-fi-ci-ent-ly suf-fi-ci-en-cy
su-per-a-bound-ing su-per-fi-ci-al su-per-flu-ous-ly su-per-la-tive-ly
su-per-na-tu-ral su-per-scrip-ti-on su-per-sti-ti-on su-per-sti-ti-ous
sup-p^i-^^-ti-^^ sup-po-^^-ti-on sup-po-^^-to-^y sym-pa-the-ti-cal
T
T^^^^p^s^^^^ous-ly te^^p^y (...) (...) tra-di-ti-o-nal trans-for^^a-ti-on
tri-bu-^ tu-mul-tu-^^^^^^ ty-ran-ni-cal-ly
V
Va-ri-able-ness ve-ne-ra-ti-on vex-a-ti-ous-ly vic-to-ri-ous-ly vi-o-la-ti-on
vi-si-bi-li-ty vi-si-ta-ti-on un-ac-ces-si-ble un-ac-cus-to-med un-ad-vi-sed-ly
un-na-ni-mous-ly un-cha-ri-ta-ble un-de-ser-ved-ly un-ex-cu-sa-ble
un-for-tu-nate-ly u-ni-for-mi-ty u-ni-ver-si-ty un-mea-su-ra-ble
un-mer-ci-ful-ly un-na-tu-ral-ly un-ne-ces-sa-ry un-righ-te-ous-ly
un-search-a-ble-ness un-sea-son-a-ble un-speak-a-ble-ness un-wea-ri-ed-ness
vo-lup-tu-ous-ness un-cir-cum-ci-sed un-pro-fi-ta-ble un-re-buke-a-ble
un-righ-te-ous-ness un-^a-ti-a-ble un-gra-ci-ous-ly un-com-for-ta-ble
un-pre-pa-red-ness un-^^^p^^ra-ble vo-lun-ta-ri-ly
W
Wh^^ther-so-e-ver
Words of Six and Seven Syllables.
A
A-bo-mi-na-ti-on a-bre-vi-a-ti-on ac-com-mo-da-ti-on ad-mi-ni-stra-ti-on
ad-di-ti-o-nal-ly af-fec-tio-nate-ly al-pha-be-ti-cal-ly al-suf-fi-ci-en-cy
an-ti-chris-ti-an-ism
C
Cir-cum-lo-cu-ti-on com-me-mo-ra-ti-on com-mi-se-ra-ti-on com-mu-ni-ca-ti-on
con-sci-en-ti-ous-ly con-si-de-ra-ti-on con-ti-nu-a-ti-on
con-sub-^^^^-^i-^^^^-on
D
De-ge-ne-ra-ti-on de-li-be-ra-ti-on de-no-mi-na-ti-on de-ter-mi-na-ti-on
dis-ad-van-ta-ge-ous-ly dis-con-ti-nu-a-ti-on dis-pro-por-ti-o-na-ble
dis-pro-por-tio-na-ble-ness
E
Ec-cle-si-a-sti-cal e-di-fi-ca-ti-on ef-fi-ca-ci-ous-ly en-thu-si-as-ti-cal
e-nu-me-ra-ti-on e-ja-cu-la-ti-on e^j^^cu-la-to-ry e-qui-vo-ca-ti-on
e-va-cu-a-ti-on e-van-gel-li-cal-ly ex-a-mi-na-^i-on ex-as-pe^^a-ti^on
ex-com-mu-ni-ca-ted ex-com-mu-ni-ca-ti-on ex-pos-tu-la-ti-on
ex-tra-or-di-na-ri-ly
F
Fa-mi-li-a-ri-ty fruc-ti-fi-ca-ti-on for-ti-si-ca-ti-ons
G
Ge-o-gra-phi-cal-ly ge-o-me-tri-cal-ly glo-ri-fi-ca-ti-on gra-ti-fi-ca-ti-on
H
He-te-ro-dox-i-cal hu-mi-li-a-ti-on hy-po-cri-ti-cal-ly he-te-ro-dox-i-cal-ly
I
Je-su-it-i-cal-ly ig-no-mi-ni-ous-ly im-par-ti-al-i-ty im-pos-si-bi-li-ty
in-com-mu-ni-ca-ble in-com-pre-hen-si-ble in-con-ve-ni-ent-ly
in-cor-ri-gi-ble-ness im-mu-ta-bi-li-ty im-pro-ba-bi-li-ty im-pro-pri-a-ti-on
in-de-fa-ti-ga-ble in-dis-po-si-ti-on in-di-vi-du-al-ly in-ef-fec-tu-al-ly
in-fal-li-bi-li-ty in-sa-ti-a-ble-ness in-si-nu-a-ti-on in-ter-pre-ta-ti-on
in-ter-ro-ga-ti-on in-com-prehen-sible-ness
M
Ma-ni-fes-ta-ti^on me-ri-to-ri-ous-ly mor-ti-fi-ca-ti-on mul-ti-pli-ca-ti-on
ma-the-ma-ti-cal-ly ma-the-ma-ti-ci-an
O
O-be-di-en-ti-al oc-ca-si-o-nal-ly o-be-di-en-ti-al-ly
P
Pa-ci-fi-ca-ti-on par-li-a-men-^^-^y pre-des-ti-na-ti-on pre-va-ri-ca-ti-on
pro-cras-ti-na-ti-on pro-nun-ci-a-ti-on pro-pi-ti-a-ti-on pro-pi-ti-a-to-ry
pro-por-ti-o-na-ble phi-lo-so-phi-cal-ly pu-ri-fi-ca-ti-on
pre-con-si-de-ra-ti-on pro-por-ti-on-a-ble-ness
Q
Qua-li-fi-ca-ti-on
R
Ra-ti-fi-ca-ti-on re-ge-ne-ra-ti-on re-^^-^-ra-ti-on re-nun-ci-a-ti-on
re-pre-sen-ta-ti-on re-^^-li-^-ti-on re-con-ci-li-a-ti-on
S
Sanc-ti-fi-ca-ti-on sa-tis-fac-to-ri-ly sig-ni-fi-ca-ti-on so^lem-ni-z^-ti-on
su-per-fi-ci-al-ly su-per na-tu-ral-ly su-pe-ri-o-ri-ty su-per-sti-ti-ous-ly
sur-rep-ti-ti-ous-ness su-per-er-o-ga-ti-on
T
Trans-fi-gu-ra-ti-on tra-di-ti-o-nal-ly
V
Un-ac-ces-si-ble-ness un-cha-ri-ta-ble-ness un-cir-cum-ci-si-on
un-con-sci-o-na-ble un-con-si-de-rate-ly un-com-pas-si-o-nate
un-ques-ti-o-na-ble u-ni-ver-sa-li-ty un-pro-fi-ta-ble-ness
un-rea-so-na-ble-ness un-sea-so-nable-ness un-con-sci-o-na-ble-ness
un-ques-ti-o-na-ble-ness
Proper Names of Three, Four, and Five Syllables.
A
A-bra-ham Al-phe-us A-bed-ne-go A-bi-a-thar A-do-ni-be-zek A-do-ni-ze-dek
B
Bar-na-bas Ba-rab-bas Ba-ra-chi-ah Bar-tho-lo-mew Bar-ti-me-us Bo-a-ner-ges
C
Clau-di-us Cle-o-phas Cor-ne-li-us Cy-re-ni-us
D
Da-ni-el Da-ri-us De-me-tri-us Di-o-tre-phes Dy-o-ni-si-us
E
E-li-jah E-li-sha E-li-a-kim E-li-za-beth E-sar-had-don
F
For-tu-na-tus
G
Ge-ha-zi Ga-bra-el Ga-ma-li-el Ge-da-li-ah Ge-ma-ri-ah
H
Hab-ba-kuk Ha-za-el He-ze-ki-ah He-ro-di-as
I
Jo-na-than Jo-si-ah Je-re-mi-ah Je-ro-bo-am Ig-da-li-ah
K
Ke-mu-el Ke-tu-rah
L
Lu-ci-us Leb-be-us Ly-si-as Ly-sa-ni-as
M
Mat-thi-as Mi-cha-el Mel-chi-se-dec Me-phi-bo-sheth Mer-cu-ri-us
N
Na-a-man Naph-ta-li Na-tha-na-el Ne-he-mi-ah Ne-bu-cad-nez-zar Ne-bu-za-ra-dan
O
O-ba-di-ah O-bed-e-dom O-ne-si-mus O-ne-si-pho-rus
P
Phi-le-mon Pub-li-us Po-ti-phar Pris-cu-la
R
Rab-sha-keh Re-be-kah
S
Sa-mu-el So-lo-mon Sa-la-thi-el She-ma-ri-ah
T
Ta-bi-tha Ti-mo-thy Thad-de-us To-bi-ah Ti-me-us Ty-chi-cus
V
U-ri-ah Uz-zi-ah
Z
Za-che-us Ze-be-dee Ze-bu-lun Ze-lo-tes Za-cha-ry Ze-cha-ri-ah Ze-de-ki-ah
Ze-pha-ni-ah Zo-ro-ba-bel
I Pre-sume, some will be rea-dy to cen-sure this Work, as de-fi-ci-ent, for
two things. First, be-cause I have not u-sed so ma-ny Words, as one Au-thor
has done be-fore me. And Se-cond-ly, for not wri-ting Words of se-ve-ral
Syl-la-bles whole, as well as di-vi-ded, as se-ve-ral Au-thors have thought
re-qui-site to do.

To the First Ob-jec-ti-on, That I have not as ma-ny Words, as one that has
writ be-fore me, I an-swer, That I pre-tend not to write a Dic-ti-o-na-ry of
Words, but Rules of Di-rec-ti-on for the due re-gu-la-ti-on, dis-tinct
di-vi-si-on, and pro-per pro-noun-ci-a-ti-on of them: And my Rules, both for
di-vi-si-on, and pro-noun-ci-a-ti-on, are so per-ti-nent, and clear, that
no-thing can be made more plain to an in-ge-ni-ous Read-er.

To the Se-cond Ob-jec-ti-on, That I have not writ the same Words whole, as
well as di-vi-ded, I an-swer, That I Judge it su-per-flu-ous so to do, be-cause
long Words are ea-si-ly read, when right-ly di-vi-ded. It is there-fore my
hum-ble mo-ti-on to the Learn-ed, That the Psal-ter, and New Tes-ta-ment might
be Print-ed with the Syl-la-bles di-vi-ded, ex-act-ly done, for the use of
Chil-dren, which would tend much to the ad-vance-ment of Eng-lish Learn-ing,
and the Ease and De-light both of Teach-er and Learn-er; which ad-van-ta-ge-ous
Me-thod I have there-fore ob-ser-ved in this Book.

The LORD's Prayer.
OUR Fa-ther, which art in Hea-ven, Hal-low-ed be thy Name, thy King-dom come,
thy Will be done on Earth, as it is in Hea-ven; give us this day our dai-ly
Bread; and for-give us our Tres-pas-ses, as we for-give them that tres-pass
a-gainst us; and lead us not in-to temp-ta-ti-on; but de-li-ver us from e-vil,
for thine is the King-dom, Pow-er and Glo-ry, for e-ver and e-ver, Amen.

The Apostolic Creed.
I Be-lieve in God the Fa-ther Al-migh-ty, Ma-ker of Hea-ven and Earth, and in
Je-sus Christ his on-ly Son our Lord, who was con-cei-ved by the Ho-ly Ghost,
born of the Vir-gin Ma-ry, suf-fer-ed un-der Pon-ti-us Pi-late, was
cru-ci-fi-ed, dead and bu-ri-ed; he de-scend-ed in-to Hell, the third day he
rose a-gain from the dead, he as-cend-ed in-to Hea-ven, and sit-teth on the
Right hand of God the Fa-ther Al-migh-ty, from thence he shall come to judge
both the quick and the dead; I be-lieve in the Ho-ly Ghost, the Ho-ly
Ca-tho-lick Church, the Com-mu-ni-on of Saints, the For-give-ness of Sins, the
Re-sur-rec-ti-on of the Bo-dy, and the Life e-ver-last-ing, Amen.

The Ten Commandments.
The Pre-face. AND God spoke all these Words, say-ing, I am the Lord thy God,
who brought thee out of the Land of E-gypt, out of the House of Bon-dage.

I. Thou shall have no o-ther Gods be-fore me.

II. Thou shall not make un-to thee a-ny gra-ven I-mage, or a-ny like-ness of
a-ny thing that is in Hea-ven a-bove, or that is in the Earth be-neath, or that
is in the Wa-ter un-der the Earth; thou shall not bow down thy self to them,
nor serve them; for I the Lord thy God am a jea-lous God, vi-sit-ing the
i-ni-qui-ty of the Fa-thers up-on the Chil-dren, un-to the third and fourth
Ge-ne-ra-ti-on of them that hate me, and shew-ing Mer-cy un-to thou-sands of
them that love me, and keep my com-mand-ments.

III. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord
will not hold him guilt-less that ta-keth his Name in vain.

IV. Re-mem-ber the Sab-bath day to keep it ho-ly, six days shall thou la-bour
and do all thy work, but the se-venth day is the Sab-bath of the Lord thy God,
in it thou shall not do a-ny Work, thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daugh-ter, thy
Man-ser-vant, nor thy Maid-ser-vant, nor thy Cat-tel, nor thy Stran-ger that is
with-in thy Gates, for in six days the Lord made Hea-ven and Earth, the Sea,
and all that in them is, and rest-ed the se-venth day; where-fore the Lord
bles-sed the sab-bath day, and hal-lowed it.

V. Ho-nour thy Fa-ther and thy Mo-ther, that thy days may be long upon the
Land which the Lord thy God gi-veth thee.

VI. Thou shall not kill.

VII. Thou shall not com-mit A-dul-te-ry.

VIII. Thou shall not steal.

IX. Thou shall not bear false Wit-ness a-gainst thy Neigh-bour.

X, Thou shall not co-vet thy Neigh-bours House, thou shall not co-vet thy
Neigh-bours Wife, nor his Man-ser-vant, nor his Maid-ser-vant, nor his Ox, nor
his Ass, nor a-ny thing that is thy Neigh-bours.

The First Chapter of St. Matthew.
THE Book of the Ge-ne-ra-ti-on of Je-sus Christ, the Son of D-avid, the Son of
A-bra-ham.

2. A-bra-ham begat I-sac, and I-sac be-gat Ja-cob, and Ja-cob be-gat Ju-das
and his Bre-thren.

3. And Ju-das be-gat Pha-rez and Za-ra, of Tha-mar, and Pha-rez be-gat Ez-rom,
and Ez-rom be-gat A-ram.

4 And A-ram be-gat A-mi-na-dab, and A-mi-na-dab be-gat Na-as-son, and
Na-as-son be-gat Sal-mon.

5. And Sal-mon be-gat Bo-az of Ra-chab, and Bo-az be-gat O-bed of Ruth, and
O-bed be-gat Jes-se.

6. And Jes-se be-gat Da-vid the King, and Da-vid the King be-gat Sa-lo-mon of
her that had been the Wife of V-ri-as.

7. And Sa-lo-mon be-gat Ro-bo-ham, and Ro-bo-ham be-gat A-bi-a, and A-bi-a
be-gat A-sa.

8. And A-sa be-gat Jo-sa-phat, and Jo-sa-phat be-gat Jo-ram, and Jo-ram be-gat
O-zi-as.

9. And O-zi-as be-gat Jo-a-tham, and Jo-a-tham be-gat A-chas, and A-chas
be-gat E-ze-ki-as.

10. And E-ze-ki-as be-gat Ma-nas-ses, and Ma-nas-ses be-gat A-mon, and A-mon
be-gat Jo-si-as.

11. And Jo-si-as be-gat Ja-kim, and J-akim be-gat Je-cho-ni-as and his
Bre-thren, about the time they were car-ri-ed a-way to Ba-by-lon.

12. And af-ter they were car-ri-ed away in-to Ba-by-lon, Je-cho-ni-as be-gat
Sa-la-thi-el, and Sa-la-thi-el be-gat Zo-ro-ba-bel.

13. And Zo-ro-ba-bel be-gat A-bi-ud, and A-bi-ud be-gat E-li-a-kim, and
E-li-a-kim be-gat A-zor.

14. And A-zor be-gat Sa-doc, and Sadoc be-gat A-chim, and A-chim be-gat
E-li-ud.

15. And E-li-ud be-gat E-li-a-zer, and E-li-a-zer be-gat Mat-than, and
Mat-than be-gat Ja-cob.

16. And Ja-cob be-gat Jo-seph, the Husband of Ma-ry, of whom was born Je-sus,
who is cal-led Christ.

The X Commandments in X Distichs
The sum of Sinais sacred Law see here
A standing Rule how thou the Lord shall fear:
Which Law shall not be nulled till ye last day
When Heaven, and Earth, and Time, shall pass away.
JEHOVAH

I
All other Gods disclaim, me only have;
Who am thy God, and thee alone can save.
II
Idols and Image worship still decline,
Else for that Sin I Will visit thee and thine.
III
Rash and false oaths, and imprecations fly,
Do not my Name dishonor, last thou die.
IIII
My day of rest keep holy unto me,
Both thou, thy self, and all that dwell with. thee.
V
Honor thy Parents to prolong thy days,
That thou may live, and prosper in thy ways.
VI
Fly wrath, rash anger, and malicious strife;
Be tender of thy own, and neighbors life.
VII
All lustful Acts, and wanton dalliance fly,
Lasivious language, and lewd company.
VIII
Thy neighbor no way wrong by craft or might,
Use no deceit to gull him of his right.
IX
Do not thy neighbor any way defame,
To spoil him of a jewel, his good name.
X
Let not thy roving rambling thoughts aspire
Thy neighbors wife or wealth for to desire.
These pregnant Prcepts holy just and true,
My heart, O Lord, persuade still to pursue.
before page: 60.



17. So all the Ge-ne-ra-ti-ons from A-bra-ham to Da-vid are four-teen
Ge-ne-ra-ti-ons; and from Da-vid to the car-ry-ing to Ba-by-lon, four-teen
Ge-ne-ra-ti-ons: and from the car-ry-ing a-way in-to Ba-by-lon, un-to Christ,
are four-teen Ge-ne-ra-ti-ons.

CHAP. I. Of Proper Christian Names.
THere is a threefold use of Names, wor-thy my Read-ers Ob-ser-va-ti-on.

First, to di-stin-guish Men and Wo-men one from an-o-ther, by their
Chri-sti-an Name, as one Fa-mi-ly from an-o-ther, by their Sir-names.

Se-cond-ly, That they might be stir-red up to ve-ri-fie the va-ri-ous
sig-ni-fi-ca-ti-ons of their Names.

There-fore let e-ve-ry Al-fred be all for Peace, e-ve-ry Bar-na-bas, a Son of
Con-so-la-ti-on; every Ben-ja-min, a Son of the Right hand; every Charles,
(that love-ly name) whol-ly No-ble; e-ve-ry Con-stan-tine, con-stant; e-ve-ry
Fran-cis, free and friend-ly; e-ve-ry Fe-lix, ho-ly and hap-py; e-ve-ry James,
(that re-nown-ed Name) a Sup-plant-er of Er-ror, and a Main-tain-er of the
Truth; e-ve-ry Jo-nah, a Dove; e-ve-ry John, gra-ci-ous; e-ve-ry Mark,
re-mark-a-ble for good-ness; e-ve-ry O-ba-di-ah, a Ser-vant of God; e-ve-ry
O-ne-si-mus, pro-fi-ta-ble; e-ve-ry Paul, lit-tle in his own eyes, and great in
the eyes of good Men; e-ve-ry Pe-ter, a Rock im-preg-na-ble a-gainst
Temp-ta-ti-on and Per-se-cu-ti-on; e-ve-ry Ro-ger, peace-a-ble; e-ve-ry
Rich-ard, rich heart-ed, and li-be-ral hand-ed; e-ve-ry The-o-phi-lus, a lo-ver
of God; e-ve-ry Ti-mo-thy, a true Wor-ship-per and Ho-nour-er of God; e-ve-ry
Vin-cent, vic-to-ri-ous o-ver his own Lusts; e-ve-ry V-ri-ah, zea-lous for God;
e-ve-ry Wil-li-am, a help and de-fence to ma-ny; and e-ve-ry Za-cha-ri-ah,
mind-ful of the Lord.

Let not those that have good Names be-ly them in their Lives, like Ab-sa-lom,
who was not the Fa-ther of Peace, (or his Fa-ther's Peace) as his Name speaks,
but a Son of Se-di-ti-on, and un-na-tu-ral Re-bel-li-on; nor like Phi-le-tus,
which sig-ni-fies a-mi-a-ble, who pro-ved a hate-ful A-pos-tate, de-ser-ved-ly
o-di-ous to God and Man; or like Di-o-tre-phes, not nursed by God, as his Name
im-ports, but puffed up by the De-vil to op-pose the pro-gress of the Gospel;
or like our late O-li-ver (the peace bring-ing Olive, as his Name sounds, who
was a fa-tal Thun-der-bolt of War, and a Firebrand of Hell, to dis-turb and
de-stroy our Peace with our in-com-pa-ra-ble Prince.)

Let e-ve-ry A-bi-gal be her Fa-ther's Joy; e-ve-ry Ann, mer-ci-ful; e-ve-ry
A-my, love-ly and be-lo-ved; e-ve-ry Fran-ces, ge-ne-rous and in-ge-ni-ous;
e-ve-ry Fi-de-li-a, faith-ful; e-ve-ry Grace, gra-ci-ous; e-ve-ry Phe-be, clear
and bright, without spot; e-ve-ry Pa-ti-ence, meek and mute; e-ve-ry
Pru-dence, dis-creet, and vir-tu-ous; e-ve-ry Ra-chel, a Sheep, not a Fix-on;
and e-ve-ry Su-san-na, a Li-ly, and a Rose, in the Beau-ty and Fra-gran-cy of a
good Life.

Third-ly, Names are gi-ven, to in-cite and in-vite us to i-mi-tate the
Vir-tues of those wor-thy per-sons who have been bear-ers of them.

Let e-ve-ry A-bra-ham be faith-ful; e-ve-ry I-sac, quiet; e-ve-ry Ja-cob,
pain-ful; e-ve-ry Jo-seph, chaste; e-ve-ry Mo-ses, meek; e-ve-ry Job, pa-ti-ent;
e-ve-ry Da-vid, de-vout; e-ve-ry Da-ni-el, re-li-gi-ous, and re-so-lute;
e-ve-ry Na-tha-na-el, without guile; e-ve-ry Jo-si-ah, zea-lous; e-ve-ry
Ha-na-ni-ah, a fear-er of God; e-ve-ry Ne-he-mi-ah, a be-ne-fac-tor to his
Coun-try; e-ve-ry Sa-mu-el, sin-cere; e-ve-ry Ste-phen, con-stant, and
cha-ri-ta-ble; and e-ve-ry So-lo-mon, be wise, and be-ware of Wo-men.

Let e-ve-ry Sa-rah be o-be-di-ent to her Hus-band; e-ve-ry Re-bec-ca, modest,
and ju-di-ci-ous; e-ve-ry Han-nah, devout, cir-cum-spect, and re-li-gi-ous;
e-ve-ry Dor-cas, a Doner to poor Wi-dows; e-ve-ry Ly-di-a, o-pen heart-ed, and
hand-ed, to God and Good-ness; and e-ve-ry Pris-cil-la, zealous, and stu-di-ous
in the best things.

Let them al-so care-ful-ly a-void those Sins, for which the Bear-ers of the
Names stand brand-ed to Pos-te-ri-ty.

Let e-ve-ry Jo-nah be-ware of fro-ward-ness; Tho-mas, of dis-trust-ful-ness;
Mar-tha, of world-li-ness; Ma-ry, of wantonness.

If there be two, of our Names, the one ex-ceed-ing-ly good, the o-ther
no-to-ri-ous-ly e-vil; let us de-cline the Vices of the one, and prac-tice the
Vir-tues of the o-ther.

Let e-ve-ry Ju-das not fol-low Ju-das Is-ca-ri-ot, who be-tray-ed our
Sa-vi-our, but Ju-das, the Bro-ther of James, the wri-ter of the ge-ne-ral
E-pis-tle; each De-me-tri-us, not fol-low him in the Acts, who made Sil-ver
Shrines for Di-a-na, whose gain was his chief-est god-li-ness, but De-me-tri-us
in the third E-pis-tle of S. John, who had a good re-port of all men; e-ve-ry
Ig-na-ti-us i-mi-tate the ve-ne-ra-ble Ig-na-ti-us, the wor-thy Mar-tyr of the
Pri-mi-tive Church.

And if it should chance, through the In-dis-cre-ti-on of Pa-rents, and
God-fa-thers, that a bad Name should be im-po-sed on any; because Na-bal is his
Name, let not fol-ly be with him, but in such a case let them strive to
fal-si-fie; disprove, and con-fute their Names: o-ther-wise, if they be good,
they must an-swer them. And let not my Rea-der be of-fend-ed at my
re-pre-sent-ing and re-pre-hend-ing three sorts of peo-ple, as wor-thy of
re-proof, for their ill choice of Names; I ha-ving no de-sign to cast a-ny
in-ju-ri-ous or dis-in-ge-nu-ous re-flec-ti-on on a-ny per-son, (high, or low)
in the World; but faith-ful-ly to of-fer my o-pi-ni-on, as a can-did
Chris-ti-an, for pre-vent-ing the like mis-takes, for the fu-ture Ge-ne-rations.

1. Those con-ceit-ed fan-tas-tick No-vi-ces that fix Ro-man-tick Names up-on
their Chil-dren, ta-ken from the fond fic-ti-ons of Pa-gan Po-ets, and
ri-di-cu-lous Ro-man-cers, names of no good sig-ni-fi-ca-ti-on, and names of
Per-sons that never were, which sa-vours more of Ro-man-tick le-vi-ty, than of
se-ri-ous Chris-ti-a-ni-ty.

2. They are (in my o-pi-ni-on) no less blame-wor-thy, that bring in Sir-names
of great Fa-mi-lies (pos-sibly less e-mi-nent for good-ness than great-ness) to
jus-tle out Christian names; as if a de-baucht great one were more
ho-nou-ra-ble than the high and ho-ly one of God, by e-steem-ing it a great-er
ho-nour to be a Gen-tle-man than a Chris-ti-an, in pre-fer-ring him be-fore the
Chris-ti-an. And some in-fe-ri-our per-sons, am-bi-ti-ous to i-mi-tate their
Su-pe-ri-ors, to look great, in-stead of a Chris-ti-an name, will have a great
Surname to stand be-fore their lit-tle one, to pass for no small ones a-mong
their Neigh-bours; which pre-pos-te-rous piece of im-per-ti-nent pride must not
pass without the de-ser-ved re-proof of an im-par-ti-al Pen.

3. They are ne-ver to be ex-cu-sed that make an ill choice of Scrip-ture
names, such as ought not to be fixed on Chris-ti-an In-fants. Some will have
their Son na-med Im-ma-nu-el, (which is by In-ter-pre-ta-ti-on God with us) a
Name pe-cu-li-ar to the ho-ly one of God; and those Mi-nis-ters are
blame-wor-thy, that bap-tize the sin-ful Son of a-ny sin-ful Man with that
sa-cred Name, which, like that bles-sed Name, Je-sus, is on-ly ap-pli-ca-ble to
the im-ma-cu-late Son of God, God the Son. An-o-ther Pre-ci-si-an will have one
Son called Praise-God, an-o-ther, Love-God; an-o-ther, Fear-God; an-o-ther,
Thank-God. An-o-ther will bap-tize his Daughter Pa-ti-ence till Pope be down:
And I knew a cra-zy brained Sec-ta-ry, that (a-bove for-ty years since) would
have his Son bap-ti-zed Pe-leg, which sig-ni-fies Di-vi-si-on, as if that Son
had been born to ush-er in those dis-mal dis-trac-ti-ons in those do-lo-rous
days of Eng-land's fa-tal in-fa-tu-a-ti-on, when, for the Divisions of Reu-ben,
there were great thoughts of heart; a Name al-to-ge-ther un-wor-thy a
Chris-ti-an, who is cal-led un-to Peace.

CHAP. II. Of Words of the same Orthography, and Sound, but different
signification, Alphabetically reduced to pleasant Discourses, for the Pleasure
and Profit of the Studious Ingenious Reader.
I Did after (ac-cord-ing to) my Mas-ter's di-rec-ti-ons, and went after
(behind, not be-fore) him, but came (too late) af-ter he was gone.

Thou art a Mas-ter of Art.

I saw an Asp (or ve-ne-mous Newt) ly un-der an Asp Tree, whose Leaves, like
Lambs Tails, and Wo-mens Tongues, are al-ways wag-ging.

I saw a Bay horse stand-ing by a Bay Tree, at the end of my new Bay of
Build-ing, near the Bay or Ha-ven, where my Dog did Bay a Pheasant, and
dis-turb a Dear at Bay.

The black Bull tossed Good Man Bull up-on his Horns, when he had the Pope's Bull
(Mandate) in his hand; and a Woman with a Bulls Fea-ther (Curls, or Towers) on
her Forehead, put a base Bull up-on her Hus-band, and threw him the Cuck-olds
Horns for his Fortune.

Mr. Case sta-ted the case (or mat-ter,) but for want of a case (or cover) for
his new Hat, it was in an ill case (or con-di-ti-on) by wearing it in a wet day.

I made a foo-lish con-tract, (or a-gree-ment,) and did thereby con-tract (draw
upon me) great in-con-ve-ni-en-ces, which did soon con-tract (re-duce) my
es-tate to a small scant-ling.

I did draw (drag or pull) the seen, and I did draw near (ap-proach high) the
Cel-lar to draw some Beer, and did draw a Scam in my Coat; and I did draw
(com-pose) a com-ple-men-tal E-pi-stle, and by that did draw in (per-swade and
de-c^y) my Friend to be bound for me; which did draw (suck and drain) his Purse
dry, to pay what I had drawn him to.

I ^^ood up-on e-ven (plain) ground, and I weigh-ed the Sil-ver in an e-ven
(exact) ba-lance, and I was e-ven (almost) at deaths door, and I will be e-ven
(quit scores) with you.

It is sit (re-qui-site) that you should fit (fur-nish) your Cus-tom-ers with
Shoes, to be fit (pre-pared, or ready) for a good Market; and let the Pair of
Shoes I spoke for, fit (be ex^ct and easy for) my Foot, or I shall fit
(punish) your neglect, and put you in-to a trem-bling fit of an A-gue.

I will give (be-stow) my Alms to the Poor, and I will give (pay) the
La-bour-ers their hire, and I will give (pawn or leave) a Pledge in your Hand
for the pay-ment of what I owe you, and you shall give (re-store) me my Pledge
or Pawn when I pay the Debt, and I will give (grant) you a Warrant to search
for your Goods, and seize them wherever you find them.

He was too hard (sub-til) for me, and sold me a hard bargain, (a pinch-ing
pennyworth,) and he made me car-ry a hard (heavy) Load, put me in a hard (not
soft) Bed, and gave me hard, tart, sour Beer, that was not pleasant, and he
made me tra-vel hard, (fast, a great pace,) and gave me a hard Les-son,
(dif-fi-cult to learn,) and gave me hard Words, (bi-tings, Taunts and bitter
Re-proa-ches,) and he gives me a hard Cha-rac-ter, (a scan-da-lous Name,) and
he gave me hard Blows, (which were not ea-sie,) and it was my hard fate (cru-el
for-tune) to fall in-to the Hands of such a hard hearted Wretch, so ob-du-rate
and des-pe-rate, but hard by (near at hand) I have now met with a bet-ter
Mas-ter.

Jack, wind up the Jack, and take the black Jack full of strong Beer to the
Ringers, and attend the Gen-tle-men in-to the Bowl-ing-Green; and take the Jack
which you hid, and throw it out on the Green, that the Game-sters may Bowl
after it.

I bought a kind (a like-ly, thri-ving) Swine of my kind Neigh-bour Good Man
Do-well.

Mr. Long, my old Gown is too short, but it will be long e-nough ere I get a
new one. I long for the Ve-ni-son Pas-^y on your long Ta-ble, not the
coun-ter-feit Pas-ties on the O-val Ta-ble, where the Mut-ton Pas-sies are set
to co-sen the Co-ry-dons.

A lean Man that did lean on a Staff, did lead me to the Lead-Mine, which I
call mine.

I shall, with my Bro-thers leave, (al-low-ance, or li-cence,) leave (or quit)
my Con-cerns to my Son, and leave (be-queath) my Bro-ther a li-be-ral Le-ga-cy,
and hope to have e-nough to leave (spare) to car-ry on my Sons bu-si-ness
bri^k-ly.

I rose when it was light, (not dark,) and did light (kindle) the fire, and
sad-led my light (met-tle-some) Horse, and I gave him some light (not sad)
Bread, and I did light on (find) my Friend, and I did light (des-cend) from my
Horse, and went in-to the Alehouse, where was one Man that had a light Heart,
mer-ry; a-no-ther, light-head-ed, drunk; a-no-ther light wit-ted, mad;
a-no-ther, light-hand-ed, (slight of hand) a Jug-ler; a-no-ther,
light-fin-ger'd, (thie-vish:) And a Wo-man that was light heel'd, (who-rish,)
who left me a light Purse, which is a hea-vy Curse, and I came a-way with a
light re-pu-ta-ti-on, of mean es-ti-ma-ti-on, light-ly and slight-ly es-teem'd
of for keep-ing such Com-pa-ny, and want-ing Mo-ney to pay the Reck-on-ing.

I took the List of the Cloth which was bought for the Sol-di-ers, and I read
the List of their Names that were to wear it; but I list not to wear such
Cloth, or to be a Sol-di-er.

Mark, you must mark (observe) your Mas-ters In-struc-ti-ons, to mark (brand
and Ear-mark) the Sheep, but re-move not the an-ci-ent Landmark, nor fail to
hit the Mark you are now to shoot at for the Wa-ger.

I will make (com-pel) you to do your Task, and I will make you (take pains in
in-struct-ing you to be) a Workman; and I will make you a Man, ma-nage,
ac-com-mo-date, and ac-com-plish you in your Cal-ling, for your pros-per-ous
pro-gress in the way of Trade.

I went o-ver (cross) the way, and I o-ver-went my Bro-ther, (got be-fore him,)
and I came o-ver (cir-cum-vent-ed) my Friend by a Wile, and I did o-ver-come
(con-quer) mine E-ne-my by Strength and Po-li-cy.

He took great pains (hard la-bour) to get Money, and was much trou-bled at the
pains (or penalties) of the Court, and his part-ing with so much Money there
for no-thing, had like to have brought up-on him the pains of death.

I bought a par-cel of Quick-set, and bid my Man be quick in set-ting the
Quick, and I called for a Glass of Ale (that was quick, not dead) for my Supper.

I will re-mem-ber (not forget) what you told me, and I will re-mem-ber
(^e-lieve) the Poor-man in want, and I will re-mem-ber (per-form my pro-mise
to) my Friend, and I will re-mem-ber (re-quite) your for-mer kind-ness to me,
and I will re-mem-ber (re-venge) the da-ring in-so-lence of my in-grate-ful
E-ne-my.

I will sus-pend (de-fer, or delay) the de-cla-ring my judg-ment in this
mat-ter, and will sus-pend (de-grade) the scan-da-lous Scho-lar of his
De-grees, and cause the Bish-op to sus-pend (dis-charge) his fac-ti-ous Brother
from his Li-ving, and I will sus-pend (hang up) the Tray-tor for hatch-ing
Trea-son a-gainst his So-ver-aign.

I have a War-rant to take (at-tach) you, and I will take (re-ceive) you in-to
my Fa-mi-ly, to de-fend you from fur-ther dan-ger; and I will take (choose) you
for my Ad-vo-cate to plead my cause in a weigh-ty con-cern, be-cause I take you
(es-teem you) to be a Man of great A-bi-li-ty and In-te-gri-ty, and I will take
(chal-lenge) you for one fall, and I will take (swear, sub-scribe, and observe)
the Oaths of Su-pre-ma-cy and Al-le-gi-ance to my So-ver-aign, which the May-or
of the Town takes up-on him (as-sumes the Au-tho-ri-ty) to ten-der me.

The Book you tear, shall cost a Tear, and you shall pay for the Flax Tear
which you bought; and I will tire (at-tire) my Head, and tire (wea-ry) my Horse
in Hunt-ing, and I will serve the Prince of Tire, and re-tire my self from such
tire-some ex-er-cise.

CHAP. III. Of Words of the same sound, but dif-fer-ent sense and spel-ling,
shew-ing the Sig-ni-fi-can-cy and E-le-gan-cy of the Eng-lish Tongue.
Al-pha-be-ti-cal-ly di-gest-ed.
YOung A-bel is now a-ble to ring a Bell, who did al-ter the Work at the
Al-tar, and he did as-sent that there should be an as-cent to the Al-tar of
In-cense; and he would not in-cense the Workmen: There he smelt a sweet scent,
and sent the com-pa-ny a-way.

The Chil-dren of Ba-bel did bab-ble, and played with a Bau-ble, and Good Man
Ball kicked the Football, and plead-ed for Ba-al, and he gave bail for the
Mo-ney due for the Bale of Pa-per which he bought.

A Tan-ner of Bark-shire brought his Barque (or Boat) here, to fetch a-way his
Oak-Bark, and the Dogs did bark at him.

I did call for the Caul (or Fat) of the Sheep, and the Cawl of the Per-ri-wig,
and I let off the Can-nons of the Cas-tle to de-fend the Ca-nons of the Church,
and the Can-ons of the Bells from them that want the Rope; and Mr. Cal-lis went
to Ca-lice, and took the Chal-lice to his own House.

My dear (in-dul-gent) Fa-ther, calls me his dear (not be-lo-ved, but cost-ly)
Son, be-cause my Ex-tra-va-gan-cy has cost him dear, for steal-ing the Kings
Deer, who could ne-ver di-gest Ve-ni-son, that sau-sy Meat, since he paid
For-ty Pound to save a pre-ci-ous Rogue from Lobbs Pownd.

He was of good descent, (or pe-di-gree,) and was ve-ry decent in ap-pa-rel,
and did dis-sent from them that were against me; and when he had paid the shot,
(or reck-on-ing) he shot a Dragon, and a Dra-goon at one shot; and when he had
done, he mount-ed Dun to Dun his Mas-ter for Mo-ney due to the Spanish Don.

Doc-tor Ea-ton in-vi-ted me to E-ton College to Dine with him; but he had
eat-en his Din-ner be-fore I could get thi-ther.

I gave an Ear to your Dis-course which you whis-per-ed in my Ear, and ere
(be-fore) we part, I will show you a large Ear of Corn, which grew on that Land
which I purpose to Ear (Plow, or Till) the next Year; And I will set a Hedge on
the Edge of that Land to se-cure it, and Est-her shall stay till Eas-ter to
look to my Con-cerns.

I saw a Ra-ven-ous Fowl (or Bird) fly at a Fly o-ver a foul (dirty) way; and I
saw a Flow-er stick in the Wheat-Flour on the Plaister-Floor, and because I
felt it did freeze, I went in-to the Sheep-cote, and put on my Frieze Coat
lined with Furs, and fetched some Furze to warm me that Fros-ty Morning.

The Blood on my Sword with the Gilt Hilt, shows my Guilt in shed-ding my
Bro-thers Blood, which the Gilt or Gelt Sow drank up.

It is ve-ry hard (un-rea-son-a-ble) that I can-not be heard (ob-ser-ved) by a
rude Herd of in-cul-ti-va-ted Co-ry-dons, and ne-fa-ri-ous Ne-bu-lons, tho I
live hard by, and was never hard, tart, or cru-el to them. I come here, but
they will not hear Rea-son; and I did hire him that is the Heir, but he is now
high-er than to work for me, or Mas-ter Air, who can-not live up-on the Air. I
saw the young Spark last Ho-ly-day cut down a Hol-ly-Tree, and his Bro-ther
Hugh did hew with the Col-li-ers, and made his Face of a strange hue, and was
fol-low-ed with a Hue and Cry, and ta-ken for a Fe-lon that had swept a
Chim-ney, and a Chest that was li-ned with Sil-ver.

My Neigh-bour Job did me a Jobb, I find the Man very in-ge-ni-ous, (an a-cute,
ex-pert, and dex-te-rous Ar-tist,) and he was ve-ry in-ge-nu-ous (can-did and
cour-te-ous) in his De-mands for what he did: Al-so he did in-cite (in-vite and
stir me up) to get an in-sight in that Inn, that I might keep it, and live like
a Man.

I ken that Man who is of my Kin, (or Kin-dred,) who is ve-ry keen a-gainst me,
be-cause I did res-cue my Kine from him when he was dri-ving them to the
Pin-fold; and he did bar-ba-rous-ly kill his own Bro-ther at the Kiln for
tel-ling him of his un-kind-ness to his Kin-dred.

Mr. Li-man was wea-ry of his Le-man, and gave her a Lem-mon and an O-range to
be rid of her, whom he did loathe (abhor) and was loath (un-wil-ling and
a-sha-med) to be seen in her com-pa-ny, for he had lost a Limb, and did now
learn to Limn for a Live-ly-hood.

Mat-thew Mar-tin caught a Bird cal-led a Mar-ten, and and made his Man
Mau-rice dance the Mor-ris hard by the Moat, and pull out the Mote out of his
Bro-thers Eye; and after his u-su-al man-ner went in-to the Man-nour Yard, and
car-ry-ed a-way the Ma-nure for Ma-nu-ring the Land; and Mas-ter Man-nours took
him in the man-ner, (act,) and told him he shew-ed no good Man-ners in do-ing
that thing; and for a Mite, I might, if it were meet, mete with a Yard-Wand the
Meat my Mate did eat in the Mea-dow, and get my Mate to make up the breach
be-tween my Man and Mr. Man-nours.

My Niece was ve-ry nice, and af-front-ed Mas-ter Nigh, who dwells nigh (near)
this place, tho he did (never) say her nay in what she de-si-red of him: But
the Horse would not (neigh) she bought of him, being naught, good for naught,
(for no-thing,) and there-fore proved a bad Bar-gain.

The Wa-ter-man took an O-ny-on to weep for his Friend Mr. Vn-win, and de-sires
U-ni-on with his Neigh-bours; and he took his Oar, to help me over the Ferry,
and told me of his Lead-Ore Delph in Dar-by-shire.

The Prin-ces of Ger-ma-ny in-vi-ted the Prin-cess of Au-range to a Treat, and
pre-sent-ed her with a can-ded O-range, which she can-did-ly ac-cept-ed.

An Eng-lish and French Peer, met at the Peer of Do-ver, where they did
dif-fer, and de-fer their mat-ter to a Com-peer, (or e-qual,) then walk-ing on
the Rampire, (or Bul-wark,) who did Um-peer (or com-pose) the dif-fe-rence, and
it did ap-pear, that all this con-test was a-bout a Pear.

He did pal-li-ate (or cloak) his kna-ve-ry un-der a pre-tence of cour-te-sie,
and plea-sed his pa-late (or taste) with cost-ly cates at a no-ble Din-ner; and
af-ter he had di-ned, he lay down on his pal-let (or couch) to rest him af-ter
his sore la-bour, to ve-ri-fie the Old Pro-verb, When the Bel-ly is full, the
Bones would be at rest.

I went to the Stone quar-ry, and saw the Hawk had her qua-ry, and I made a
que-ry, whether the Hawk, if he should fly a-way were worth our en-qui-ry
after, or bet-ter lost than found to de-vour the ow-ner: I there was of-fend-ed
at a sau-sie Se-di-ti-ous Woman, and I sent a quoit on an an-gry er-rand to
re-quite the queen, that a-bu-sed the Queen.

I did raise my cou-rage, when I saw the Rays of the Sun, and be-fore I run my
race, I took a raze of Gin-ger to com-fort my Sto-mach; but I had more rea-son
to take a Rai-sin, and go to Mar-ket Rai-son, to raise one up-on his Legs, who
is not a-ble to stand or rise without help, and that morn-ing I did Oil the
Rein of my New Bri-dle, to save it from the Rain, and it ser-ved me all the
last Kings Reign, without rot-ting or breaking.

I went with a Gen-tle-man Sewer, (one that ush-ers up, and pla-ces the Dish-es
of Meat on a No-ble-mans Ta-ble,) and af-ter din-ner wa^ o-ver, we went up-on a
com-mis-si-on of Sew-ers to view the Ri-ver, and I told my Friend, here will be
pre-sent-ly a great Shour, and we shall be sure to be wet to the Skin, if we
get not pre-sent-ly in-to some House hard by, to se-cure us from the Storm, a
lit-tle de-lay will put it out of our pow-er to be kept dry, when the Rain will
pour down upon us like wa-ter out of a buck-et.

Here I will rest, and will hear the rest be-fore I go to Rest-Park, to ar-rest
my bro-ther, and wrest the pow-er out of his Hand.

Mr. Cel-li-er, and Mr. Sel-ler, went in-to the Cel-lar, and both be-ing
af-front-ed by an im-per-ti-nent Wo-man, a-greed to sell her for a shoul-der of
Mut-ton, and there came in some Scul-lers to sea-son some Scho-lars with some
nap-py Ox-ford Ale in a good sea-son, when Mas-ter Would-have-more was ta-king
li-ve-ry and sei-sin (pos-ses-si-on) of the Land, he bought of Mr. Had-land,
and Mr. Ne-ver-e-nough, ready to seize on the Goods and Cat-tel on the Ground,
for the neg-lect of pay-ing three Months in-te-rest when he paid the
prin-ci-pal in.

I sent a pair of Gloves, that had a good scent to my ab-sent Friend, who could
not be pre-sent at this time, and I gave the poor Wo-man a safe-gard to ride
in, and two Men for her safeguard, to con-duct her safe-home-ward, the one is
a Sing-er, and the o-ther a Sin-ger, the one brought up to sing Songs, and the
o-ther to singe Swine, but let them that are for Sing-ing and Sin-ging take
heed of Sin-ning and Swing-ing; this they both took for sage (wise) coun-sel,
which went well down with a glass of good sage Ale, which I gave them.

Jack Jol-ly and I, we two did go to a Flax-mans Shop, and were too blame for
hurt-ing the Shop keep-ers Toe, and for not pay-ing him for his Tow, and I was
bar-ba-rous to throw a dart that pierced tho-row his body, but, through (or by)
the fa-vour of a friend that came by, we got a way, a pri-vate way, and
af-ter-ward took time to set the Thime in the Gar-den, which we bought of the
Gar-den-er.

The Sow did spoil what I did sow, which made the Sow-er look sour to view
his sore loss, and to see de-vour-ing Rooks and Jack-daws soar a-loft, that had
done me much hurt, and I did sew my Coat, and sue my Ser-vant Su, for look-ing
no bet-ter to the Sow; and pre-sent-ly there came some Men for a Sum of
Mo-ney, and I cal-led my Son to fetch it, but the Sun be-ing ve-ry hot, though
the Lad was be-fore in Health, safe and sound, fell into a swound, and I had
much a-do to save his Life.

I had ra-ther have this friend-ly Toast, and this con-ve-ni-ent quan-ti-ty of
strong Beer, with this com-fort-a-ble mix-ture of Nut-meg and Su-gar in this
Chim-ney Nook, near so good a Fire, than to be tossed up-on the Sea, in a
tat-te-red shat-ter-ed Ship, where there is more, but worse, li-quor, and less
safety, and I es-teem this pair of Tongs in my Hand, a-bove all the ly-ing
Tongues in the World.

In the Va-ca-ti-on, I fol-low my Vo-ca-ti-on in ex-pec-ta-ti-on of a good
cus-to-mer in good time, to take my ware off my Hand, be-fore I am a-ware, I
last Night when I was wea-ry, took a Vi-al with Cor-di-al Wa-ter, and drank a
lit-tle, and then took my Vi-ol, and played a Les-son, and my Fa-ther did
lis-sen, and did not les-sen his kind-ness to me, but now I am bound for
Ve-nice, an a-vow'd Vo-ta-ry of Ve-nus.

Mr. Wright did teach to write, and he did right in ob-ser-ving the Rite, the
Sign of the Cross, which he was not Cross, or per-verse, to op-pose.

I wrote a Let-ter, which I have by Rote, and that Let-ter wrought good
ef-fects on my Friend.

The Lord May-or of York ex-a-mi-ned the Trades-mens Weights and Mea-sures,
whether they were right, and the poor Wid-ows prayed for him, and the waits of
the Ci-ty played be-fore him, and no ho-nest Man fear-ed hard mea-sure from
him, who is a righ-teous (right-wise) Man, who al-ways does right things.

I yield, that you should fell and sell the Yew-tree, and kill the Ewe that
feeds in the close.

Right-hand-ed Com-pari-sons, wor-thy the Rea-ders Con-si-de-ra-ti-on.
AS bright as the Sun. As clear as a Spa-nish Sky. As righ-te-ous as Noah. As
just as Lot. As faith-ful as A-bra-ham. As mo-dest as I-sa-ac. As chaste and
ge-ne-rous as Jo-seph. As meek as Mo-ses. As ju-di-ci-ous as Je-thro. As
re-li-gi-ous as Jo-shu-a. As strong as Samp-son. As va-li-ant as Gideon. As
sin-cere as Sa-mu-el. As de-vout as Da-vid. As wise as So-lo-mon. As
beau-ti-ful as Absalom. As du-ti-ful as the Re-cha-bites. As love-ly as
Jo-na-than. As loy-al as Me-phi-bo-sheth. As in-ge-nu-ous as Bo-az. As
boun-ti-ful as Bar-zil-lai. As zea-lous as Jo-si-ah. As pa-ti-ent as Job. As
pe-ni-tent as Pe-ter. As wel-com as Flow-ers in May. As wil-ling-ly as a
want-ing Wo-man went to be mar-ry-ed. With as good a will as e-ver I came from
School.
Left-hand-ed Com-pa-ri-sons, worthy the Rea-ders Con-si-de-ra-ti-on.
AS an-gry as a Wasp. As bold as a Bum-bai-liff. As cold as Cha-ri-ty. As
crafty as A-chi-to-phel. As cruel as Ne-ro. As bru-tish as Ne-bu-chad-nez-zar.
As da-ring as Go-li-ah. As dull as Dun in the mire. As de-ceit-ful as
De-li-lah. As spight-ful as a Sa-ma-ri-tan. As ma-li-ci-ous and jea-lous as a
Jew. As bar-ba-rous as a Turk. As pre-cise as a Pu-ri-tan. As faith-less as a
Pha-ri-see. As fickle as a French-Woman. As false as a -- As fit as a Flawn for
a -- As pre-sump-tu-ous and pertinacious as Pha-ra-oh. As pu-sil-la-ni-mous and
per-si-di-ous as Pilat. As tray-tor-ous as Judas. As im-pe-ri-ous as
Pen-ni-nah. As in-so-lent as Ish-ma-el. As in-fa-mous as a Pub-li-can. As proud
as Lu-ci-fer. As pro-fane as E-sau. As ob-scene as So-lo-mons strange Wo-man.
As sub-til as a Ser-pent. As frau-du-lent as a Fo-res-ter. As mu-ta-ble as the
Moon. As in-con-stant as a Wo-man. As light as a Wa-ter-Wag-tail. As drun-ken
as a Dutchman. As pert as a Pear-mon-ger. As wanton as a Calf with two Dams.
As wild as a Buck. As wi-ly as a Fox. As le-che-rous as a Goat. As ra-ve-nous
as a Wolf. As fierce as a Ty-ger. As sur-ly as a Butch-ers Dog. As chur-lish as
Na-bal. As kna-vish as La-ban. As pie-vish as Xan-tip-pe. As sea-son-a-ble as
Snow in Sum-mer. As wel-com as wa-ter in-to a Ship. With as good a will as a
Thief goes to the Gal-lows.
Pi-thy Pro-ver-bi-al Say-ings, col-lect-ed from the Au-then-tick Wri-tings of
Lear-ned Wor-thies of se-ve-ral Na-ti-ons; with the Au-thors
Am-pli-fi-ca-ti-on, wor-thy the Rea-ders Ob-ser-va-ti-on, Al-pha-be-ti-cal-ly
di-gest-ed.
A.
A Bad Cus-tom, like good Cake, is bet-ter bro-ken than kept. A Bird in Hand is
worth two in the Bush. A Dumb Man can-not lie. A Wo-man con-ceals what she
knows not. A Man's best or worst For-tune is a Wife. A Wo-mans Mind, and a
Win-ters Wind, change often. A proud Wife and a Backdoor, often make a Rich-man
poor. A Fat House-keep-er makes Lean Ex-e-cu-tors. A fair Hos-tess makes a foul
Reck-on-ing. An ear-ly Man o-ver Night. A Va-li-ant Man be-fore the Bat-tel.
All are not Thieves that Dogs bark at. A Fools haste is no speed. As a Man is
be-friend-ed, his Mat-ter is end-ed. A Friend in Court is worth a Pe-ny in a
Man's Purse. A hun-gry Hawk will seize on a dir-ty Prey. A rough Cur ne-ver
makes good Spa-ni-el. A hea-vy Purse makes a light Heart. An emp-ty Purse makes
a bash-ful Mer-chant. Al-most and hard by, saves ma-ny a Lie. A lof-ty Ship
car-ries great Sails. A lit-tle Stream drives a light Mill. A small Sum pays a
short Reck-on-ing. A short Horse is soon cur-ri-ed. A Horse can-not e-va-cu-ate
Oats that ne-ver eat them. A good Lead-er makes a good Fol-low-er. Aw makes Dun
draw. A Wool-sel-ler kens a Wool-buy-er. All is well that ends well.
B.
Be-fore thou mar-ry, be sure of a House where-in to tar-ry. Bet-ter sit still,
than rise and get a fall. Bet-ter Rule than be Ru-led by the Rout. Bet-ter
learn by thy Neigh-bours loss than thy own. Bet-ter give than take. Bet-ter
spare at the Brim than the Bot-tom. Bet-ter leave than lack. Bet-ter say here
it is, than here it was. Bet-ter be en-vy-ed than pi-ty-ed. Bet-ter a lit-tle
Fire that warms, than a mickle that burns. Bet-ter be a-lone than in bad
com-pa-ny. Bet-ter Chil-dren cry, than the A-ged weep. Brab-ling Curs ne-ver
want sore Ears.
C
Cat af-ter kind. Cut thy Coat ac-cord-ing to thy Cloth. Count not thy
Chick-ins be-fore they be hatched. Com-mend a fair Day at Night. Con-fide not in
an un-fixt fa-mi-li-ar. Com-pa-ri-sons and Ex-am-ples are sometimes o-di-ous.
Com-mit not the We-ther to the Wolfs tu-i-tion.
D
Death keeps no Ka-len-der. De-sert and re-ward go not always together. Drawn
Wells have the sweet-est Wa-ter, and are sel-dom dry. Drink not o-thers
Healths, and for-get thy own. Drink-ing, drab-bing and du-el-ling kill many.
E.
Ea-ten Bread is soon for-got-ten. Ear-ly to bed, and ear-ly to rise Makes a
Man heal-thy, weal-thy and wise. E-ven-ing Orts are good morn-ings fod-der.
E-ve-ry Her-ring must hang by its own Gill. E-ve-ry can-ker'd Cur snaps at a
stran-ger. E-ve-ry one is for a-do-ring the Ri-sing Sun. E-ve-ry one bast-eth
the fat Hog, while the lean one burn-eth. Es-sex styles, Kentish miles,
Nor-folk wiles, ma-ny Men be-guiles. Ex-pe-ri-ence makes Fools wise.
F.
Fat-pan-ches make lean pates. Flat-te-ry pro-cures Friend-ship, but truth
ha-tred. Fools make Feasts, and Wisemen eat them. Fools build Houses, and wise
Men buy them. Fools lade Wa-ter, and Wise Men catch the Fish. Foul Wa-ter
quench-eth Fire. For-bear-ance is no ac-quit-tance.
G.
Give to the poor, to increase thy store. God, our Prince, our Pa-rents, our
Mas-ter and our Mi-ni-ster, can ne-ver be re-qui-ted. Good to be-gin well,
bet-ten to end well. Good Wine needs no Bush. Good Will should be-taken in part
of pay-ment. Goods are theirs that use them. Green Wood makes a hot Fire. Grace
will last, but fa-vour will blast. Great Spen-ders are bad len-ders.
H.
Half an Acre is good Land. Hall Ben-ches are slip-pe-ry. Hap-py is he, whose
Friends were born be-fore him. Has-ty climb-ers have sud-den falls. Have ma-ny
Friends, but one con-fi-ding fa-mi-li-ar. He would fain fly, but wants
fea-thers. He has a rea-dy mouth for a ripe Cher-ry. He car-ries his screw
al-ways with him. He draws a strong Bow. He shoots a sharp Ar-row. He talks
much, but speaks little. He that speaks what he should not, hears what he would
not He plays well that wins. He rides sure that ne-ver falls. He that is
wel-come, fares well. He that comes un-call'd sits un-serv'd. He is Meek that
was ne-ver mo-ved. He is Wise that can make a Friend of a Foe. He that does
lend, shall lose his Friend. He that buys a House rea-dy wrought Has ma-ny a
pin, and nail for naught. Hed-ges have Eyes, and Walls have Ears. He shall
ne-ver pur-chase good pe-ny-worth, that is a-fraid to ask the price. He wants
not much, that is con-tent with lit-tle. He that has most salt must not put
too much in-to the pot. He loves for little, that hates for no-thing. He is his
own E-ne-my, that is no Man's Friend. He that has but one Hog makes him Fat,
and he that has but one Son, makes him a fool. He that can-not pay, let him
pray. He is poor that can pro-mise no-thing. He pro-mi-seth like a Mer-chant,
and pays like a Man of War. He goes far that ne-ver turns. He may free-ly
re-ceive cour-te-sies, that knows how to requite them. He gives twice, that
gives in a trice. Help thy self, and God will help thee. He dwells from
Neigh-bours, who has no ones praise but his own. His Heart is in his Hose. He
that winketh with one Eye, and looks with a-no-ther, I will not trust him, though
he were my bro-ther.
I.
Ill Weeds need no sow-ing. Ill Will ne-ver spoke well. Idle com-pa-ni-ons lack
no ex-cu-ses. In-dus-try is Fortunes right Hand, Fru-ga-li-ty her left. In a
thou-sand pound of Law, there is not an Ounce of Love. In time of pros-pe-ri-ty
Friends will be plenty, In time of ad-ver-si-ty, not one a-mong twenty. In
Gol-go-tha, are Sculls of all Si-zes. It Is ea-sie rob-bing an Or-chard, when
none keeps it. It Is a sad bur-den to car-ry a Dead Man's Child. It Is an ill Dog,
that de-serves not a Crust. It Is un-safe wa-ding in an unknown water. It Is a
run-ning plague to a Horse, when a has-ty Ass rides him. It Is a fil-thy Flock,
where the Sow bears the Bell. I like not a Fox, lick-ing a Lamb.
K.
Keep good Com-pa-ny, and be of the Number. Keep thy Tongue in Pri-son, to have
thy Heels at li-ber-ty. Keep thy Shop, and thy Shop will keep thee. Keep some
till fur-ther-more come. Knot-ty Wood must have smooth wed-ges.
L.
Life is half spent, be-fore we know what it is. Lend thy Horse for a long
Journey, and take the skin for thy re-com-pence. Let thy Let-ter stay for the
Post, not the Post for thy Letter. Light gain and quick re-turn makes a hea-vy
purse. Like good, like Blood, and like Age, make the hap-py-est Mar-ri-age.
Long-looked for comes at last. Lit-tle said is soon a-mend-ed. Lit-tle strokes
fell great Oaks. Lit-tle for the Rake to get af-ter the Bee-som. Love will find
out the way. Love will creep, where it can-not go. Love lives in Cot-ta-ges
as-well as in Kings Courts. Little does the pam-per'd Steed know, what the poor
Packhorse does un-der-go.
M.
Make Hay while the Sun shines. Ma-ny Hands make light work. Man pur-po-seth,
but God dis-po-seth. Ma-ny a good Cow, has a bad Calf. Man-ners makes a Man,
said Wil-li-am of Wick-ham. Mis-un-der-stand-ing brings mis-takes to Town.
Mis-reck-on-ing is no pay-ment. My Mind to me a King-dom is.
N.
Na-ture pas-seth nour-ture. Ne-ces-si-ty has no Law. New Lords, new Laws.
Need makes the Old Wife Trot, and the young Man gal-lop. No more haste than
good speed. No Sunshine without some Sha-dow. No body bears all the blame. No
Man loves his Fet-ters, though made of Gold.
O.
Old Friends, old Wine, and old Gold are worth prizing. Old Wood sets Green on
Fire. On paint-ing and fight-ing look a loof off. One Flow-er makes no
Gar-land. One Swal-low makes no Som-mer, nor one Wood-Cock a Win-ter. One Eye
of the Master sees more than ten of the Ser-vants. Op-por-tu-ni-ty makes
Thieves.
P.
Pa-ti-ence, a Flow-er that grows not in e-ve-ry Gar-den. Play, Wo-men and
Wine, un-do Men laugh-ing. Pe-ny and pe-ny, laid up will be ma-ny. Praise the
ford as you find it. Prize an ap-pro-ved Friend, and keep his friend-ship to
the end. Po-ver-ty part-eth good Fellow-ship. Prop and sit, build and flit.
Pud-dings and Pa-ra-mors, should be hot-ly hand-led.
Q
Quar-rel not with a quon-dam Cro-ny. Ques-ti-on not the fi-de-li-ty of a
faith-ful Friend. Quib-ble not with a cap-ti-ous Crit-ick. Qui-et-ness a Je-wel
worth pur-cha-sing. Quick at Meat, quick at Work.
R.
Rome was not built in a day. Rowl-ing Stones gather no Moss.
S.
Self-love a Mote in e-ve-ry Man's Eye. Sell not the Bears skin, till the Bear
be dead. Sit in thy place, and none can make thee rise. Soft Fire makes sweet
Malt. Soft and fair go-eth far. Strike while the I-ron is hot. Speak as in the
pre-sence of an E-ne-my.
T.
The ab-sent par-ty is still faul-ty. The ear-ly bird catch-eth the Worm. The
least boy car-ry-eth the great-est Fid-dle. The best Workman makes the fewest
chips. The more No-ble, the more hum-ble. The sweet-est Wine makes the
sharp-est Vin-e-gar. The sharp-est Vin-e-gar makes the sa-vo-rist Sauce. The
De-vils meal is half bran. The Life of man is a Win-ters day, and a Win-ters
way. Three ills come from the North, cold Wind, shrinking cloth, and c -- The
first point of Hawk-ing is hold fast. The Pos-tern Door makes Thief and Whore.
The great-est Wealth is con-tent-ment with a lit-tle. The great-est strokes
makes not the best Mu-sick. That is well spo-ken, that is well ta-ken. The
Gown's hers that wears, and the World his that enjoys it. The fair-est Silk is
soon-est stained. The Old Man's Staff a Rap-per at Deaths Door. They need much,
whom-no-thing will con-tent. They that can-not do as they will, must will as
they may, and do as they can. Time is the Ri-der, that breaks Youth. Time and
Tide stay for no Man. Think no place without a wit-ness. Try be-fore you
trust. Truth and Oil will be up-per-most. Tithe well and thrive well.
V.
Va-lour that par-lies is near yield-ing. Ven-ture a small Fish to take a great
one. Use makes per-fect-ness.
W.
War makes Thieves, and Peace hangs them. When the Cup is ful-lest bear it
e-ven-est. White Sil-ver draws black Lines. What thou see a-miss in
a-no-ther, mend in thy self. Wel-com Death, quoth the Rat, when he fell in the
Trap. Where-e-ver you see your Kind-red, make much of your Friends. Wil-lows
are weak, yet bind o-ther Wood. Wine in the Bot-tle does not quench thirst.
Wo-mens Tongues, like Lambs Tails, will be wag-ging.
Y.
Young Lamb-Skins go as soon to the Mar-ket as old Sheep. Young Men may die,
Old Men must die. Youth Rides well when Age holds the Reins. Youth and White
Pa-per take a-ny Im-pres-si-on. You shall have as much fa-vour for a Box on the
Ear at Billings-gate. You crip-ple the dex-te-ri-ty of a Draw-er by run-ning on
the Score.
A-pho-risms, or Se-lect Sen-ten-ces Mo-ral and Di-vine, wor-thy of
Ob-ser-va-ti-on.
A.
A Good Name more to be de-si-red than a great. A good Name is like a Sheep,
e-ve-ry place is the bet-ter for him where he comes. A wick-ed Man is like a
Goat, e-ve-ry place where he comes is the worse for him, who leaves an
un-sa-vo-ry smell be-hind him. A wick-ed be-gin-ning is com-mon-ly at-tend-ed
with a wretch-ed end-ing. A clear Con-sci-ence, like a Mar-ble Stone, shi-vers
the Shafts of Li-cen-ti-ous Tongues that are shot a-gainst him that has it. A
clear Con-sci-ence need-eth no ex-cuse, nor fear-eth any Ac-cu-sa-ti-on. A
faun-ing glo-sing Tongue the In-dex of a frau-du-lent Heart. A frown-ing
Coun-te-nance a sus-pi-ci-ous sign of a gen-tle and ge-ne-rous Na-ture. A
frau-du-lent Man can ne-ver be a Friend to him-self, nor faith-ful to his
con-fi-ding Fa-mi-li-ar. A-chil-les ha-ted not the Gates of Hell so much as he
did those that did not speak as they thought. A false faun-ing flat-ter-ing
Tongue is like Poi-son in a Gold-en Cup. As Vir-tue is a Gar-ment of Ho-nour,
so Wick-ed-ness is a Robe of In-fa-my. As Kings have Ho-nour to coun-te-nance
their Ac-ti-ons, so poor Men have Ho-nes-ty to com-mend their
Con-ver-sa-ti-ons. Ad-mo-nish thy Friend in pri-vate, com-mend him in pub-lick.
An-ger is soon bu-ri-ed in a Wise-mans Bo-som. An Oath not fit to be ta-ken,
ought to be bro-ken, be-cause an un-law-ful Oath ob-li-geth the Ta-ker to no
more than re-pen-tance. A qui-et com-pe-tent Living a Por-ti-on worth pri-zing.
A vi-gi-lant care and di-li-gent en-dea-vour to walk wor-thy thy Vo-ca-ti-on,
is the in-dis-pens-a-ble Du-ty of a Chris-ti-an.
B.
Be cau-ti-ous-ly cha-ri-ta-ble, and cha-ri-ta-bly cau-ti-ous. Be cir-cum-spect
in thy con-fe-rence, and cau-ti-ous in thy con-fi-dence. Be not fond of fair
Words, to pre-fer the Flow-ers of May be-fore the Fruits of Au-gust. Be not
proud, po-pu-lar, nor pre-cise, but pre-fer sin-gle-ness of Heart be-fore
seem-ing Sanc-ti-ty or Sin-gu-la-ri-ty of O-pi-ni-on. Be-ware of a
Re-con-ci-led E-ne-my. Be an Ar-bi-tra-tor as lit-tle as thou can be-tween
thy Friends, lest in at-tempt-ing to make them Friends, they for thy
In-te-gri-ty and Cha-ri-ty be-come thine E-ne-mies.
C.
Cae-sar had not been so ea-sie a prey to the tray-to-rous Se-nats
Bar-ba-ri-ty, if he had not been de-coy'd by flat-te-ry in-to an o-ver
cre-du-lous care-less Con-fi-dence of his own safe-ty. Chri-sti-ans should
en-ter-tain no o-ther sor-row for the Dead, than what is con-si-stent with the
hope of the Re-sur-rec-ti-on. Cu-ri-o-si-ty is a tur-bu-lent and im-per-ti-nent
e-vil; sel-dom is a cha-ri-ta-ble Man cu-ri-ous, or a cu-ri-ous Man
cha-ri-ta-ble. Ca-pi-tal De-lin-quents sometimes com-mit Crim-son Crimes with
more ap-plause than a can-did con-sci-en-ti-ous Mi-ni-ster re-proves them;
whilst the Re-pro-ver that dares be ho-nest in tel-ling Men faith-ful-ly of
their Faults, must (with the mud-dy-brain'd Rab-ble) pass for a Rayl-er, and
the cant-ing Cri-mi-nal ac-count-ed a sin-gu-lar Saint. Cau-ti-on ought to be
u-sed in cast-ing of Pearls.
D.
Do not pros-ti-tute thy Soul for Gain.
E.
E-ve-ry Ac-ti-on of Christ was for our In-struc-tion, but his Mo-ral Ac-ti-ons
on-ly for our I-mi-ta-ti-on.
F.
Faith does jus-ti-fie us be-fore God, and good Works tes-ti-fie our Faith and
Faith-ful-ness be-fore Men. Forget the In-ju-ries, but not the Kind-ness, of an
E-ne-my. For-ti-tude in Tri-bu-la-ti-on an Ar-gu-ment of a gra-ci-ous and
ge-ne-rous Dis-po-si-ti-on. Fear not that which can-not be a-void-ed.
G.
Grieve not for that which can-not be re-cal-led. God hates an ob-sti-nate
Sin-ner, but loves a re-lent-ing Pe-ni-tent. Go as thou would be met, sit as
thou would be found. Good Wine needs no Bush, and he needs not be his own
Trumpet that re-al-ly is what he seems. Great Im-ploy-ments call for great
En-dow-ments: The high-est Pla-ces require the chief-est Gra-ces.
H.
Have Peace with all Men, War with Vice. Ho-nes-ty is the best Po-li-cy, and
no-thing can be pros-pe-rous that is not in-ge-nu-ous. He that would keep
him-self from Wick-ed-ness, must ad-mit no fel-low-ship or fa-mi-li-a-ri-ty
with wick-ed Per-sons. He that will no e-vil do, must keep from all that tends
thereto. Have ma-ny Friends, but one con-fi-ding fa-mi-li-ar, in whose sig-nal
a-bi-li-ty and fi-de-li-ty, thou may-est re-pose con-fi-dence with
sa-tis-fac-ti-on and safe-ty. Have Com-mu-ni-on with few, be in-ti-mate with
one, Deal just-ly with all, speak e-vil of none.
I.
I des-pise B's ar-gu-ments, which are more wit-ty than weigh-ty, ha-ving more
sub-til-ty than sub-stance, or sin-ce-ri-ty, in them, and I hate the
pre-pos-te-rous pre-sump-ti-on of those that pro-mote per-verse
dis-pu-ta-ti-on, for am-bi-ti-on and fac-ti-on, ra-ther than for con-vic-ti-on
and sa-tis-fac-ti-on, whose fol-ly and fal-la-cy ap-pear in their
par-ti-a-lity, who seek not Ve-ri-ty but Vic-to-ry. In the midst of thy
jol-li-ty, be mind-ful of thy Mor-ta-li-ty. It is dan-ge-rous for a Man to Live
in such a con-di-ti-on, where-in he is a-fraid to die. It is the height of
Im-pi-e-ty to be har-den-ed with Im-pe-ni-tency. I de-test the vile
Hy-po-cri-sie of those that com-mit Vil-la-ny un-der a Mask and Man-tle of
Sanc-ti-ty. It is re-qui-red that Mi-ni-sters should be Lo-vers of
Hos-pi-ta-li-ty; and it were well if un-con-sci-on-a-ble Pa-trons and
Op-pres-sive Im-pro-pri-a-tors would suf-fer them to show Hos-pi-ta-li-ty as
well as love it. It is bet-ter to weep with Ma-ry Mag-da-len, than to laugh and
quaff with Bel-shaz-zar. It is com-mon with pro-fane Ma-ri-ners to pray in a
storm at Sea, when the Dol-phins be-gin to play, and the Sea to prey up-on
them, and to be seem-ing-ly ear-nest in their De-vo-ti-on, with so-lemn Vows of
fu-ture re-for-ma-ti-on, for their pre-sent pre-ser-va-tion; but as soon as the
Tem-pest is o-ver, and the Seamen safe on the shore, their dan-ger and
de-vo-ti-on are both for-got-ten. If the Rude Rab-ble once get a Re-port by the
end of something ill done by their Prince, whe-ther the Re-port be true or
false, it is in their Mouths like Wildfire that can-not be quench-ed. I have
known the great-est Sin-ners, the great-est Sec-ta-ries; and the great-est
Pro-fes-sors, the great-est Trans-gres-sors in the Nation.
K.
Keep with-in com-pass. Keep thine own coun-sel. Know thy self.
L.
Love and For-tune fa-vour the most Re-so-lute. Love o-thers to be be-lo-ved
thy self. Love has a large Man-tle to co-ver the In-fir-mi-ties, and a sweet
and shrill Trum-pet to pro-claim the Ex-cel-len-cies of an in-jur'd,
in-no-cent, and ab-sent Friend. Let a-no-thers Woes make thee wise. Let them
teach us, that they may not touch us. Look on the Vi-ces of o-thers as their
shame, not thy ex-am-ple; with cau-ti-on and de-tes-ta-ti-on, not as thy Rule
for I-mi-ta-ti-on.
M.
Make not thy self a Fool to make o-thers mer-ry, nor jest so long till thou
be-come one.
N.
Name not a Rope in his House that hanged him-self, or fell into the Hands of
the Hangman. No-thing to be ac-count-ed pro-fit-a-ble but what is ho-nest.
No-thing could teach them, let them teach us.
O.
Ob-sti-na-cy and Im-pe-ni-ten-cy ad-ded to Im-pi-e-ty, pro-voke the God of
Re-com-pen-ces to sig-nal Se-ve-ri-ty. The Sin-ners de-fence mul-ti-plies the
of-fence to the high ag-gra-va-ti-on of the trans-gres-si-on, and the just
vin-di-ca-ti-on of the Trans-gres-sors con-dem-na-ti-on.
P.
Par-don ma-ny things to o-thers, but no-thing to thy self. Pi-e-ty is the best
Po-li-cy, and the cir-cum-spect Chris-ti-an the great-est Po-li-ti-ti-an. Pass
by with a si-lent care-less neg-lect those bark-ing Curs that can-not bite, but
on-ly grin and show their Teeth; let them a-lone, and they will be soon out of
breath with barking: But dex-te-rous-ly shun those si-lent sharp-bit-ten Dogs,
that, like the Curs of Congo, bite, but bark not. Pride se-ver-eth a Man from
God, ha-tred from his Neigh-bour, an-ger from him-self. Pre-ju-dice cast-eth a
false co-lour on the most splen-did and can-did Ac-ti-ons of the most
vir-tu-ous and in-ge-nu-ous. Pro-spe-ri-ty pro-cu-reth, Ad-ver-si-ty pro-veth,
Friends. Prize an ap-pro-ved Friend as thy most pre-ci-ous Trea-sure.
Q.
Quench not the Spi-rit by smo-ther-ing those good Mo-ti-ons of the Ho-ly Ghost
with-in thee, that striwe with thee to make thee ho-ly and hap-py.
R.
Ren-der not e-vil for e-vil, nor rail-ing for rail-ing: If a Dog barks at a
Sheep, a Sheep will not bark at a Dog,
S.
Sin leaves a sting and a stain up-on the Con-sci-ence, to check and choke the
wick-ed Man's mirth, who has many a secret gripe with-in, e-ven then when his
coun-te-nance coun-ter-feit-eth a smile without. Show can-dour and kind-ness
in thy car-ri-age to-wards all Men, so shall thou car-ry a good Con-sci-ence
with thee, and leave a good Name be-hind thee.
T.
The pu-rest Gold is most duc-til, and that is com-mon-ly a good Blade that
bends well. The an-ci-ent Ro-mans so pla-ced the Tem-ple of Ho-nour, that none
could come at it, but through the Tem-ple of Virtue. Think al-ways what thou
speak-est, but speak not all that thou think-est. Trust not a fa-ding Co-lour
in the Coun-te-nance of thine E-ne-my. True Friend-ship is on-ly a-mong good
Men. The love of feign-ed Friends is like the Win-ters Sun, which casts a
good-ly Coun-te-nance when it shines, but af-fords very lit-tle warmth or
com-fort, ha-ving less life than lu-stre in his beau-ti-ful Beams. There is no
af-fec-ti-on or de-tes-ta-ti-on like that of a Woman; These Pas-si-ons of love
and ha-tred are strong-est in the weak-est Sex: Those whom they love, they love
dearly; and those whom they hate, they hate dead-ly. Truth seeks no cor-ners,
nor fears no co-lours; she smiles before the Judge, and is nei-ther a-fraid of
the Ac-cu-sa-ti-ons of Men, nor the Frowns of Ty-rants. The Judg-ment of
Cha-ri-ty is not al-ways the Judg-ment of Ve-ri-ty. The con-stan-cy of a Man's
good be-ha-vi-our dis-coun-te-nan-ceth Ca-lum-ny, and makes the Ca-lum-ni-a-tor
to be de-ser-ved-ly ab-hor-red. The best means to get more than we have, is to
be thank-ful for what we have al-rea-dy. The Ce-re-mo-ni-al Law was the Gos-pel
pro-mi-sed, and the Gos-pel is the Ce-re-mo-ni-al Law ful-fil-led. The
Mys-te-ries of Sal-va-ti-on were co-ver-ed un-der the Ce-re-mo-nies of the Law,
but are now dis-co-ver-ed in the Doctrine of the Gos-pel. The more thou
i-mi-ta-test the Vir-tues of a Saint de-part-ed, the bet-ter thou
ce-le-bra-test that Saints day. God is not pleased with sur-feit-ing for his
sake, who with his fast-ing so of-ten plea-sed his God.
U.
U-ti-li-ty a strong In-duce-ment to In-dus-try and In-ge-nu-i-ty. U-ni-ty and
A-mi-ty a-dorn Chris-ti-a-ni-ty. How a-mi-a-ble and ac-cept-a-ble, how love-ly
and laud-a-ble, how come-ly and seem-ly, how de-cent and plea-sant a thing it
is for Bre-thren to dwell to-ge-ther in U-ni-ty! It is like Aa-rons pre-ci-ous
and fra-grant Oynt-ment, which ran down from his Head to the Skirt of his
Garment; or like Her-mons Pear-ly Dew, that re-fresht and en-richt the pla-ces
where it fell. Nor is Bro-ther-ly Con-cord more pro-fit-a-ble to Man, than
plea-sing to God, who cau-seth Bles-sed-ness to set-tle there. As it were
so-lemn-ly en-act-ing a Law, that U-ni-ty and Fe-li-ci-ty shall dwell
to-ge-ther: For there the LORD com-mand-ed the Bles-sing, e-ven Life for
e-ver-more. Wise-ly prize and praise the sig-nal ar-den-cy and sin-ce-ri-ty of
the ne-ver-fail-ing un-feign-ed and fer-vent af-fec-ti-on of thy firm,
fa-mi-li-ar and faith-ful Friend. Where Flat-te-ry bears sway, Fi-de-li-ty is
thrust a-way. Wor-thi-ly are they made Ex-am-ples, that will take none.
Rules for Grace-ful Reading.
HA-ving in the fore-go-ing Chap-ters, ful-ly shew-ed my Rea-der the pro-per
pro-noun-ci-a-ti-on of Let-ters and Syl-la-bles, ac-cord-ing to their
dif-fe-rent De-ri-va-ti-ons, and pre-sen-ted my Read-er with In-fal-li-ble
Rules for the Re-gu-lar Di-vi-si-on of Syl-la-bles in long Words,
il-lus-tra-ted with Five large Ta-bles of Al-pha-be-ti-cal Ex-am-ples; (a
Ta-ble to each Rule.) And made a plea-sant im-prove-ment of the va-ri-ous
Sig-ni-fi-ca-ti-ons and E-le-gan-cies of the Eng-lish Tongue, in Two
In-ge-ni-ous Al-pha-be-ti-cal in-stan-ces, the like ne-ver be-fore Ex-tant.

1. Of Words of the same Or-tho-gra-phy, or Spel-ling, being ex-tend-ed to
their ut-most Sense, as far as Gram-mar and Cu-stom have made them known to the
Learn-ed, one Word ad-mit-ting of 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. or more dif-fe-rent
sig-ni-fi-ca-ti-ons, as they are fre-quent-ly u-sed in the Eng-lish Tongue.

2. Of words of the same Sound, (or near it,) but far dif-fe-rent Sense and
Spel-ling, to ac-quaint my Read-er with the quaint Cri-ti-cizms, and cu-ri-ous
Charm-ing Ele-gan-cies of the Eng-lish Tongue, for ac-com-plish-ing my Scho-lar
with the Flow-ers of Rhe-to-ri-cal Sense, and Arm him a-gainst the
per-ni-ci-ous Ser-pent-ine sub-til-ty of craf-ty cant-ing Cri-ticks, that
stud-dy how to speak du-bi-ous-ly, like the De-vil, in the O-ra-cles of Old,
Dark-Lan-thorn Lan-guage, in the cun-ning choice of such Words, as bear
va-ri-ous coun-ter con-struc-ti-ons, to put the bet-ter co-lour on their
de-sign-ed de-lu-si-ons; which are here dex-te-rous-ly dis-co-ver-ed, and
plea-sant-ly ex-plain-ed and im-pro-ved. And to ren-der this Work wor-thy the
ob-ser-va-ti-on both of Boys and Men, I have ta-ken no-tice of the pro-per
sig-ni-fi-ca-ti-on of Chris-tian Names, with such ne-ces-sa-ry cau-ti-ons and
in-struc-ti-ons, as ought to be pur-sued and ob-ser-ved by all Good
Chris-ti-ans.

And be-cause Pro-verbs are the Wis-dom of a Na-ti-on, a-like plea-sant and
pro-fi-ta-ble to speak them, wor-thy a Wise-mans ob-ser-va-ti-on. I have
pre-sent-ed my Read-er with a rich va-ri-e-ty of the choi-cest Pro-verbs,
care-ful-ly col-lect-ed from the most ju-di-ci-ous and in-ge-nu-ous Au-thors,
with some of my own, ne-ver be-fore Print-ed, Al-pha-be-ti-cal-ly di-gest-ed.
And to im-print good things in the Me-mo-ry of Youth, I have, with no small
pains, pre-sent-ed my Read-er with sun-dry se-lect Sen-ten-ces, (in an
Al-pha-be-ti-cal Order,) both Mo-ral and Di-vine, some of them bor-row-ed from
wor-thy Au-thors, and some (not a few,) mine own; which are all a-bove the
Read-ers con-tempt or con-troul.

My next bu-si-ness, is, to pre-scribe short Rules for Grace-ful Read-ing, the
de-sign of the pre-sent Chap-ter, as fol-low-eth.

1. Let e-ve-ry Let-ter in a Syl-la-ble, and e-ve-ry Syl-la-ble in a Word, have
their due Sound, ac-cord-ing to the Rules fore-go-ing, e-ver to be ob-ser-ved.

2. A-void Stam-mer-ing in your Speech, a na-tu-ral im-pe-di-ment in some, and
an af-fect-ed fault in o-thers, which at first they took a Pride in, and got an
ill ha-bit which they could not leave.

3. Speak not too broad or clown-ish-ly af-ter the rude Cu-stom of the Vul-gar
in the re-mo-ter Nor-thern and Wes-tern Coun-ties of Eng-land.

4. A-void the con-tra-ry ex-tream, to mince your Words, nor speak fi-ni-cal-ly
or af-fect-ed-ly, as ma-ny con-ceit-ed su-per-ci-li-ous No-vi-ces, that think
it be-comes them to play the Fool in speak-ing ri-di-cu-lous-ly.

But pro-nounce your Words plain-ly and pro-per-ly, without ei-ther
af-fec-ta-ti-on, nice-ness, or slo-ven-li-ness, as the Sound of the Syl-la-ble,
or Word, will best bear and may be best un-der-stood.

And as you are to keep due time in Speak-ing, by giv-ing each Word its pro-per
pro-noun-ci-a-ti-on, long or short, ac-cor-ding to Rule and Cu-stom, so you are
to al-ter your Tone or Voice, (modestly, not af-fect-ed-ly,) when in Read-ing,
the Read-er per-so-nates sun-dry Per-sons, ques-ti-on-ing and ans-wer-ing one
a-no-ther; as God and A-dam, the Wo-man and the Ser-pent, Sa-mu-el, Saul, and
the Witch of En-dor, Christ and the Temp-ter, and the like. I should now also
show how to pro-nounce an in-ter-ro-ga-ti-on point, or note of ad-mi-ra-ti-on,
which is not so briskly to be done by the Pen of the learn-edst Au-thor, as by
the more pow-er-ful and pre-va-lent in-struc-ti-on, ac-ti-on and
de-mon-stra-ti-on of a Li-ving Tu-tor, to the am-ple sa-tis-fac-ti-on of the
ob-ser-vant and di-li-gent Read-er. And for place-ing Pa-ren-the-sis,
Pe-ri-ods, Com-ma's, Co-lons, etc. I judge those things too ear-ly to pro-pound
to a young Read-ers con-si-de-ra-ti-on, and there-fore I de-sign-ed-ly re-serve
them, with o-ther things for my next Book, if this well-meant Piece, (for my
en-cou-rage-ment,) find ac-cep-tance with the ju-di-ci-ous and in-ge-nu-ous.

CHAP. IV.
MY next Task is to Teach my Read-er how to write Spruce-ly and Dex-te-rous-ly,
without ta-king Pen from Pa-per, ei-ther in ma-king Small or Ca-pi-tal
Let-ters, for two Neat Hands, with Let-ters of the same Cut, and on-ly
dif-fe-rent in their size and shape, the la-ter be-ing lar-ger and more O-val
than the for-mer, with choice co-pies com-po-sed by the Au-thor, for the
Read-er to learn and live by, as fol-low-eth.

Copies Alphabetically composed for the Instruction and Observation of Boys and
Men.
These Copies scan, and follow seriously,
They are Right Lines to Learn and Practice by.
ADvance in Wit and Learning; grow in Grace,
And all good Motions let thy Soul embrace.
Bear and forbear, Triumph in Troubles past;
Thy Faith and Patience shall be crowned at last.
Count that day lost, whose low descending Sun,
Views from thy hand no Virtuous action done.
Disdain thou no Man; hate base Taunts and Brags:
Reverence the Hoary Head, though clothed in Rags.
Envy thou not the Oppressors prosperous days,
But be content and learn none of his ways.
Fear thou God and the King; The Laws still keep,
And thou shall sing, when Rebel Rake-hells weep.
Give them that want of thy convenient Store.
And for thy Bounty God will give thee more.
Honor thou every Man in his Degree;
For in so doing, Men will Honor thee.
Improve thy precious Time and Talents well;
Detest dire Drunkenness, that Rode to Hell.
Know well thy self, and thy Relations own;
And prize that Friend, whose faithfulness is known.
Live every day as thou would then be found
When Christ shall come, and the last Trump shall Sound.
Make use of Time, now wisely lay in Store
For Elder Years, when thou can save no more.
No coupled Miseries so sadly greet,
As Age and Want, when they together meet.
Offer the Strength and Prime time of thy Youth;
And riper Age to serve thy God in Truth.
Prepare for Trying-Tottering Times, my Friend,
Be patient, prudent, constant to the end.
Quench follies flames, all Satan's charms defy;
Avoid vile Vice and Vicious Company.
Render to God and Caesar, both their due;
Unto thy Sovereign, and thy Soul prove true.
Submit thy will always in every thing,
To what Gods Righteous providence shall bring.
Trust still the Living God, and well is thee;
In dark and gloomy days, thou Light shall see.
Unto thy Parents, yield observance due;
That God may bless thee, and thy Age renew.
Weigh well the end, ere thou a work begin;
So shall thou tremble at the thought of Sin.
Xantippe, that imperious peevish Wife,
Made patient Socrates not fond of Life.
Young Men be Sober, Serious, Chaste and True,
Lest thy Gray Hairs thy Youthful follies rue.
Zealously learn to practice these things well;
And thou in Grace and Glory shall excel.
Numeration Table.
C Millions. X Millions. Millions. C Thousands. X Thousands. Thousands.
Hundreds. Tens. Units. The Right Hand. 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 The First Place. 9 8 7
6 5 4 3 2 1 987 Mill. 654 Thousand 321 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 98 Mill. 765 Thousand
432 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 9 Mill. 876 Thousand 543 9 8 7 6 5 4 987 Thousand -- 654 9 8
7 6 5 98 Thousand -- 765 The 9 8 7 6 9 Thousand -- 876 Left 9 8 7 -- 987 Hand.
9 8 -- 98 9 -- 9

Numeration teaches how to form the Numeral Figures as they must be writ, and
to pronounce them with their various Significations as they must be read, as
the foregoing Table and following Examples plainly demonstrate.

1. 11. 111. 1111. 2. 22. 222. 2222. Each Figure on the Left Hand being ten
times the value of that on the Right.

Addition.
ADdition teaches you to add two or more Sums together, to make them one whole
or total Sum.

Example: I delivered several Parcels of Sheep to my Shepherd, and desire to
know how many they are in all.

At one time 253 At another time 121 More 312 More 125 More 434 The whole 1245

For the working of this, and all others of this kind, you must begin with the
first and highest Figure on the Right Hand, saying, 3 and 1 is 4, and 2 is 6,
and 5 is 11, and 4 makes 15; then set down 5 directly under that Row, and carry
1 to the next place, saying, One 10 which I carry and 5 make 6, and 2 makes 8,
and one 9 and 2 make 11, and 3 make 14; then write down 4 under the Row, and
carry one to the next place, saying, 1 that I carry and 2 make 3, and 1 is 4,
and 3 is 7, and 1 make 8, and 4 make 12; the 2 you are to set down under the
Row, and 1 to the Left Hand; and your whole Number of Sheep is 1245.

A General Rule.
Observe to set down all that is above 10 or 10's under the Row cast up, and
for every 10, carry 1 to the next place, until you come to the last place,
which must always be set down, as in the former and following Examples plainly
appear.

9 8 7 6 9 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 5 4 6 5 3 2 5 7 8 9 7 6 9 9 9 9 5 0 6 5 9

Addition of Money.
NOte, That 4 Farthings make a Penny, 12 Pence a Shilling, and 20 Shillings a
Pound. Turn your Farthings into Pence, your Pence into Shillings, and your
Shillings into Pounds, and the Work is done; but first get this Table by Heart,
as follows.

d. s. d. 20 is 1 8 30 is 2 6 40 is 3 4 50 is 4 2 60 is 5 0 70 is 5 10 80 is 6
8 90 is 7 6 100 is 8 4 110 is 9 2 120 is 10 0

A Steward received several Sums of Money for his Lord, who desires to know how
much he has received in all.

l. s. d. 99 19 11 33 00 00 45 15 06 63 05 09 29 19 06 13 13 04 15 10 10 51 15
05 353 00 04

For casting up this Sum, say, 3 Farthings and 2 is 5, and 1 is 6; set down a
Halfpenny, and carry a penny to the pence, saying, 1 and 1 is 2, and 6 is 8, and
9 is 17, and 6 is 23, and 4 is 27, and 5 is 32, and 10 is 42, and 10 is 52; set
down 4 pence under the pence, and carry 4 shillings to the shillings, saying, 4
and 9 makes 13, and 5 18, and 5 23, and 9 32, and 3 35, and 5 40, and 6 10's
make the 40 shillings 5 pounds; set down 2 Ciphers under the shillings, and
carry 5 pound to the pounds, saying, 5 and 9 is 14, and 3 is 17, and 5 is 22,
and 3 is 25, and 9 is 34, and 3 is 37, and 5 is 42, and 1 is 43; set down 3 and
carry 4, saying, 4 that I carry and 9 is 13, and 3 is 16, and 4 is 20, and 6 is
26, and 2 is 28, and 1 is 29, and 1 is 30, and 5 is 35, which you are to set
down as in the Example. And the Sum total is 353 l. 00. 04.

To prove that it is right cast up, do it without the upper line, and then add
the upper line to it, and if both makes up what it is cast up to, it is right,
else not.

Subtraction.
SUbtraction teaches how to take any lesser Number out of a greater, and to
know what remains, as in these Examples:

I at several times took into my custody 1597 Sheep, and I delivered forth
1359. I would know how many yet remain with me.

Received 1597 Delivered 1359 Remains 0238 Proof 1597 Received 95459 Delivered
39569 Remains 55890 Proof 95459

If all the Figures of the smaller Sum, except the last Figure to the Left
Hand, or any one of them be greater of the Sum to be subtracted, than those of
the upper line you must subtract from, you must borrow ten, and add 1 to the
upper Figure next to be considered, as in the foregoing Example.

Take 9 out of 7 you cannot, but 9 out of 17, and there remains 8; the 1 that I
borrowed and 5 makes 6, take 6 out of 9 and there remains 3; take 3 out of 5,
and there remains 2; take 1 out of 1, and there remains 0 nothing. For proof,
if what you delivered, and what remains, make up the whole number received, it
is right cast up, as in the foregoing Example plainly appears.

I received 1597 I delivered 1359 Remains 0238 Proof 1597

9 and 8 is 17, write down 7 and carry 1; then 1 and 5 is 6, and 3 is 9; 3 and
2 is 5, and 1 is 1, as in the Example.

Subtraction of Money.
THis Rule teaches how to take any lesser sum out of a greater, and to know
what Remains.

Note, that if some Figure or Figures be greater in the lesser or lower Sum
than in the upper, borrow one from the next Denomination, as in Pence to borrow
a Shilling, in Shillings you must borrow a Pound, and in Pounds you are to
borrow Ten, as before in Addition, and in the following Examples more plainly
appear.

l. s. d. Received 432 10 4 Paid 256 19 9 Remains 175 10 7 Proof 432 10 4

Which foregoing Sum is cast up thus, take 9 out of 4, that you cannot, but
take 9 out of one Shilling 4 pence, and there remains 7, which you set down
under the pence, and say, the Shilling that I borrowed to make 4 pence one
Shilling 4 pence, must be paid to the 19 Shillings, saying, 19 and 1 that I
borrowed makes 20, take 20 Shillings out of 10 Shillings I cannot, but take 20
Shillings out of one Pound 10 Shillings, and there remains 10, which is set
down under the Shillings, then say 6 and 1 that I borrowed makes 7, take 7 out
of 2 I cannot, but take 7 out of 12 and there remains 5. 1 that I borrowed and
5 make 6, take 6 out of 3 I cannot, but take 6 out of 13, and there remains 7,
the one that I borrowed and 2 make 3, and take 3 out of 4, and there remains 1,
which is to be proved as in the former Rule.

Multiplication Table.
2 times 2 is 4 3 6 4 8 5 10 6 12 7 14 8 16 9 18 3 times 3 is 9 4 12 5 15 6 18
7 21 8 24 9 27 4 times 4 is 16 5 20 6 24 7 28 8 32 9 36 5 times 5 is 25 6 30 7
35 8 40 9 45 6 times. 6 is 36 7 42 8 48 9 54 7 times 7 is 49 8 56 9 63 8 times
8 is 64 9 72 9 times 9 is 81 10 times 10 is 100

Multiplication.
MUltiplication serves in stead of many Additions, and teaches of two Numbers
given to increase the greater as often as are Units in the lesser.

Three things strictly to be observed, viz.

1. The Multiplicand, or Sum to be multiplied. 2. The Multiplyer, or Sum you
multiply by. 3. The Product, or Sum produced from both.
Example: In 52 Weeks, which is a whole Year, I would know how many days are
there: To do this, first, set down the greatest Number, and the lesser under
it, beginning at the Right hand, thus.

52 Multiplicand. 7 Multiplier. 364 Product.

Come to the Multiplyer, and say, 7 times 2 is 14, then write 4 under 7, and
carry 1 to the next place, saying, 7 times 5 is 35, and 1 I carried makes 36,
which you are to set down, having no further place to carry them; and so it
appears that there are in 52 Weeks, 364 Days.

A Second Example.
I Would know how many Farthings are in 712 Shillings: Note, that 48 Farthings
make a Shilling; and to answer your question, first set down your Multiplicand,
and under that the Multiplyer, thus: 712 Multiplicand. 48 Multiplyer. 5696
Product. 2848 34176

For the second Example of Farthings, after you have set down your Sum as you
see, then say, 8 times 2 is 16, set down 6 and carry 10, as in Addition, and
say, 8 times 1, and 1 I carried, makes 9, which you are to set down; then say,
8 times 7 is 56, which you must set down; then say, 4 times 2 is 8, which you
are to set down; 4 times 1 is 4, which you set down, and 4 times 7 is 28, which
you are to put down, and sum up the whole, and it appears that there are 34176
Fa^things in 712 Shillings.

A Compassionate Sigh for Londons dismal Conflagration, On the Authors amazing
view of those devouring Flames, that laid London's Glory in the Dust, Sept. 4.
1666.
BEhold what Desolation's made by Sin,
In England's most Renowned Mother-City;
We to those furious Flames did fuel bring,
To the spoiling Her, whose Ruins Challenge Pity.
Stay, wondering Passenger, let us now begin
To show our Pity, and lament our Sin.
What Man so impious as to smile? Alas!
The Christian World for this has cause to mourn;
'Twas England's Sin, brought London to this pass,
And made the Fire imperiously to burn:
Our want of Love did London thus inflame,
To many Thousands loss, and Englands shame.
God highly was displeased, when thus he brought
So much of that great City to the Dust;
And had he then consumed us all to naught,
We must acknowledged, LORD, that thou are just.
Thou great Preserver, we thy Love admire,
In saving us, as Brands snatched from the Fire.
O Happy Citizens, and English Nation,
If London's Flames refine us from our Dross;
If Plague and Fire produce a Reformation,
How great will be our gain by London's loss!
Then from her Ashes Phoenix-like shall fly
A Glorious City, fair and rich and high.
And let all Sons of Hell, that shall conspire
How on the rest they may Destruction bring,
Receive at Tyburn their deserved hire;
LORD, plead our cause, preserve us, and our King.
That we and ours, Love, Peace and Truth may nourish;
The Church may Prosper, and the Crown still flourish.
A Cordial Congratulation of London's Glorious Resurrection, from the late
dreadful Conflagration, on the Authors view of the Superlative Splendour of that
Famous City, May 29. 1683.
SEe England's Royal City shine in State;
London, that saddest spectacle of late,
Which almost totally subscribed to Fate.
Behold! A Phoenix from her Ashes rise,
In Sixty Six made a burnt Sacrifice,
Which now her self, and all the World out-vies!
Her splendid Structures, uniform you see:
O did her Citizens so well agree,
And manifest their joint conformity
Then on this joyous City Heaven would smile,
And be entreated for this sinful Isle,
If, Dove-like, we lived without gaul and guile.
Let London now be Loyal, Chaste and Wise;
No Whores nor Traitors mischiefs here devise,
The fatal causes of our Miseries.
New Hearts new Houses would adorn full well:
May Faithfulness in these fair Mansions dwell,
And London's Glory all the World excel.
Farewell, fair City, I must still love thee,
For Quondam candid kindnesses to me,
Which make me long for thy Felicity.
Let lovely London live in Wealth and Bliss;
May Righteousness and Peace each other kiss
And all Incendiaries their purpose miss.
May neither Plague nor Flames, nor bloody Wars,
Foreign Invasions, nor Intestine Jars,
Come near to touch these stately Gates and Bars.
May Truth and Peace, LORD, here be ever found;
And Right and Left Hand blessings still abound,
And all her Foes Con-vert, or else confound.
May Court and City well accord always,
And mutual dues still to each other pay;
And may the Scepter over this Sword bear sway,
Till time shall be no more, till the last day.
The Scho-lars Pray-er for the Morn-ing.
MOst Gra-ci-ous God, and in Christ Je-sus my most Mer-ci-ful Fa-ther, I thy
un-wor-thy Ser-vant, de-sire in all hu-mi-li-ty and sin-ce-ri-ty, to of-fer up
my self, Soul and Bo-dy, a li-ving Sa-cri-fice, ho-ly and ac-cept-a-ble un-to
Thee, which is but my rea-son-a-ble Ser-vice, which I be-seech Thee ac-cept for
thy Sons sake, in whom thou art well plea-sed. I bless thy Name for thy
pre-ser-va-ti-on of me this last Night, and bringing me to be-hold the Light of
a chear-ful Morn-ing, cause thy Face to shine up-on me this Day, that I may
walk in the Light of thy Coun-te-nance, quick-en my dul-ness to seek Thee,
en-light-en my Dark-ness to know Thee, en-li-ven my dead-ness to serve Thee.
Give me the Faith and Faith-ful-ness of A-bra-ham, the Fear and fi-li-al
O-be-di-ence of I-sa-ac, the In-dus-try and In-te-gri-ty of Ja-cob, the
Chas-ti-ty and Cha-ri-ty of Jo-seph, the Mag-na-ni-mi-ty and Meek-ness of
Mo-ses, the De-vo-ti-on of Da-vid, the Re-so-lu-ti-on of Jo-shu-ah, the Pi-e-ty
and Pa-ti-ence of Job, and the Pe-ni-ten-cy of Pe-ter. Di-rect me in thy Way,
e-sta-blishe me in thy Truth, keep me in thy Fear, pro-tect me by thy Po-wer,
sup-port me by thy Grace, and con-duct me to thy Glo-ry. Send thy Gos-pel,
where it is not, and pros-per it where it is. Be Gra-ci-ous to these Church-es
of Great Bri-tain, and Ire-land, and let the Chris-ti-an Re-li-gi-on,
ac-cord-ing to the Pro-fes-si-on of the Church of Eng-land, flou-rish in these
King-doms, so long as the Sun and the Moon en-dure. Bless the Kings Most
Ex-cel-lent Ma-jes-ty, my Gra-ci-ous So-ve-raign; that he may Reign long to Thy
Glo-ry here, and E-ter-nal-ly with Thee in Glo-ry here-af-ter: Bless him in his
Roy-al Re-la-ti-ons, bless him in his Coun-sels, bless him in his Na-vies and
Ar-mies, bless him in all his Sub-jects, and bless all his Sub-jects in him,
that we may be all hap-py in the Love of our So-ve-raign, and our So-ve-raign
hap-py in the Loy-al-ty of his Peo-ple. Bless my Dear Pa-rents, and near
Re-la-ti-ons, my Guar-di-ans and Go-ver-nors, my Mas-ter and Mi-ni-ster set
o-ver me in the LORD, with all my Chris-ti-an Friends and Ac-quaint-ance, and
re-pay all their kind-nes-ses to me, an Hund-red Fold in-to their Bo-soms.
Bless me in my Me-di-ta-ti-ons and Con-ver-sa-ti-on, that in both I may be
ser-vice-a-ble to thy Glo-ry in my ap-poin-ted Sta-ti-on, by ser-ving my
Ge-ne-ra-ti-on ac-cor-ding to the Will of God; give me a quick
Ap-pre-hen-si-on, a right Vn-der-stand-ing, and a Faith-ful Me-mo-ry to re-tain
and prac-tice what is Good, and suf-fer me ne-ver to dis-ho-nour Thee with the
Mer-cies re-ceiv-ed from Thee. Sea-son my ten-der Years with thy Grace, that I
may fly youth-ful Lusts, and cleanse my way by ta-king heed ac-cord-ing to thy
Word, give me Wis-dom to dis-cern, Hu-mi-li-ty to Im-brace, and con-stan-cy to
hold fast the Truths of the Gos-pel, give me a sin-cere love to thy Ser-vants,
a de-light in thine Or-di-nan-ces, a Re-ve-rence to thy Sab-baths and
Sanc-tu-a-ry, and a Zeal for thy Glo-ry, that I may bring forth Fruit un-to
Ho-li-ness, and reach my much de-si-red end, e-ver-last-ing Life, and all for
Je-sus Christ's sake, the Son of thy dear-est Love, in whose most pre-ci-ous and
pre-va-lent Name and Words, I conclude my im-per-fect pe-ti-ti-ons, say-ing as
he him-self has taught us in his Ho-ly Gos-pel, Our Father, etc.

Pre-vent me, O LORD, in all my do-ings, with thy most Gra-ci-ous Fa-vour, and
fur-ther me with thy con-ti-nu-al help, that in all my Works, be-gun,
con-ti-nu-ed, and end-ed in Thee, I may glo-ri-fie thy Ho-ly Name, and
fi-nal-ly, by thy Mer-cy, ob-tain E-ver-last-ing Life, through Je-sus Christ
our LORD. Amen.

The Scho-lars E-ven-ing Pray-er.
MOst Glo-ri-ous and most Gra-ci-ous LORD God, who art the Fa-ther of Mer-cies,
and the God of all Con-so-la-ti-on, the Au-thor of my be-ing and well-being, I
beseech Thee for Je-sus Christ's sake, ac-cept my E-ven-ing Sa-cri-fice of
Praise and Thanks-gi-ving, for thy great Good-ness to me this Day, in
pre-ser-ving me from the dan-gers of it, for rai-sing me up Friends, for
sup-ply-ing my Wants, and pros-pe-ring my En-dea-vours. Par-don my Sins, O
LORD, which ren-der me un-wor-thy the con-ti-nu-ance of thy Fa-vours, sub-due
my Cor-rup-ti-ons, sanc-ti-fie my af-fec-ti-ons, and en-a-ble me to e-ve-ry
good Word and Work. Af-fect my Heart with the L^ve of Thee, that I may ne-ver
for-get the great things thou have done for my Soul, that thy Pa-ti-ence,
For-bear-ance and Lo-ving Kind-ness to-wards me, may lead me to Re-pen-tance,
O-be-di-ence and Thank-ful-ness- Keep me from the Sin of Vn-cha-ri-ta-ble-ness,
that my Soul may ne-ver be Im-bit-ter-ed with Ma-lice, nor my Hands de-fi-led
with Blood, give me the Wis-dom from a-bove, which is first Pure and then
Peace-a-ble, gen-tle and ea-sie to be in-treat-ed, full of good fruit without
par-ti-a-li-ty and without Hy-po-cri-sie; Adorn my Soul with that Ex-cel-lent
Orn-a-ment of a meek and a qui-et Spi-rit, which is in thy sight of great
price, that I may ne-ver be o-ver-come of E-vil, but may o-ver-come o-thers
E-vil with my Good. Look down in Mer-cy up-on all Jews, Turks and In-fi-dels,
bring them to the know-ledge and ac-know-ledg-ment of the Truth, as it is in
Je-sus, that they may be a wil-ling Peo-ple in the day of Thy Pow-er. Re-move
all im-pe-di-ments out of the way, that hin-der the com-ing of thy King-dom.
Bl^ss all the Plan-ta-ti-ons of the Gos-pel be-yond the Seas, and per-pe-tu-ate
the pros-pe-rous pro-gress of it in these Na-ti-ons. Bless the Kings Most
Ex-cel-lent Ma-je-sty, the Queen and Roy-al Fa-mi-ly, the Coun-cil, the
No-bles, the Judges, the Ma-gi-strates, the Mi-nis-ters, the Gen-try and
Com-mons; his Ma-jes-ties N^-vies and Ar-mies, all Sorts and De-grees of
Peo-ple. Par-don our Pro-vo-ca-ti-ons, u-nite our Di-strac-ti-ons, com-pose our
un-hap-py dif-fer-ences, and made up our un-Chris-ti-an breach-es that Glo-ry
may dwell in our Land. Bless the Roy-al City, let Truth and Loy-al-ty, Peace
and Plen-ty be with-in her Walls, and Pi-e-ty and Pros-pe-ri-ty with-in her
Pa-la-ces; That nei-ther the de-stroy-ing Sword, the dread-ful Pes-ti-lence,
nor the de-vour-ing Flames, may ne-ver a-gain Tri-umph o-ver her Dwel-lings.
Bless the Go-ver-nors and Go-vern-ment of it, that Of-fend-ers may be
pun-ish-ed, Wick-ed-ness ban-ish-ed, Rude-ness re-strain-ed, Drunk-en-ness
de-tect-ed, Swear-ing and Blas-phe-my se-vere-ly cen-su-red, Want-on-ness
chas-ti-zed, Per-ju-ry stig-ma-tiz'd, Fac-ti-on curb-ed, Schism and He-re-sie
re-bu-ked, Pride hum-bled, Hy-po-cri-sie un-mask-ed, the Na-ked clo-thed, the
Hun-gry re-fresh-ed, the Fee-ble streng-then-ed, the Nee-dy re-lie-ved, the
af-flic-ted com-for-ted, the Lan-guish-ing Soul sup-por-ted, the Hum-ble
ex-alt-ed, the Vir-tu-ous re-ward-ed, Gods pure Word and Wor-ship main-tain-ed,
his faith-ful Mi-ni-sters en-cou-rag-ed, Su-per-sti-ti-on and Pro-fane-ness
dis-coun-te-nan-ced, and all the E-ne-mies of the Truth sup-pres-sed, the
King-dom of Grace ad-van-ced, and the King-dom of Glo-ry has-ten-ed, and so
come Lord Je-sus, come quick-ly. Bless my Dear Pa-rents, and en-a-ble thine
un-wor-thy Ser-vant in some mea-sure to re-quite them for their Pa-ter-nal
kind-nes-ses to me, and their ten-der care o-ver me, bless all my Re-la-ti-ons,
Faith-ful Friends and good Neigh-bours. Let the bles-sings of both Worlds be
their por-ti-on, for-give mine E-ne-mies, and suf-fer it not to be in the
pow-er of their Hand to do me hurt, but in-cline their Hearts to do me good.
Let my ways so please Thee, that mine E-ne-mies may be at Peace with me. Take
me in-to thy Tu-i-ti-on this Night, suf-fer no E-vil to come nigh my Per-son or
Ha-bi-ta-ti-on, light-on mine Eyes that I sleep not the sleep of Death, but
raise me up in the Morn-ing, a-bund-ant-ly re-fresh-ed with thy Mer-cy,
in-a-bled with chear-ful-ness to do Thee Ser-vice. And Grant that I may Live in
thy Fear, and Die in Thy Fa-vour, and rest in thy Peace, and Rise in thy
Pow-er, and Reign with Thee in Thy Glo-ry. And all for the sake of the Son of
Thy Love, Je-sus Christ the Righ-te-ous, for whom I for e-ver de-sire to Bless
Thee, and in whose most Bles-sed Name and Words, I fur-ther call up-on Thee,
say-ing, Our Father, etc.

The Grace of our LORD Je-sus Christ, and the Love of God, and the Fel-low-ship
of the Ho-ly Ghost be with us all e-ver-more. Amen.

A short Pray-er, or Grace be-fore Meat.
MOst Gra-ci-ous God, we be-seech thee com-mand a Bles-sing on these thy good
Crea-tures pro-vi-ded for us. Give us Grace, to re-ceive them Thank-ful-ly, as
from thy Hand, and to use them so-ber-ly, as in thy sight, through Je-sus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Thanks-gi-ving af-ter Meat.
WE Bless thy Name, Most Boun-ti-ful God, for re-fresh-ing us at this time with
Thy good Crea-tures. We hum-bly be-seech Thee, like-wise to re-ple-nish our
Souls with thy Grace, and pre-pare us for thy Glo-ry.

Bless thy V-ni-ver-sal Church, our Gra-ci-ous King, the Queen, the Roy-al
Fa-mi-ly, and these Realms, and give us Health, Peace and Life E-ver-last-ing,
Through Je-sus Christ our LORD. Amen.

Be-fore Meat.
O LORD, we be-seech Thee, bless these thy good Crea-tures to us, which thou
have boun-ti-ful-ly be-stow-ed upon us. Give them strength to nou-rish us, and
us grace in that strength to Glo-ri-fie Thee, Through Je-sus Christ our LORD,
A-men.

Af-ter Meat.
BLes-sing, and Glo-ry and Praise, be gi-ven to Thee, most Gra-ci-ous God, for
these and all other Thine in-es-ti-ma-ble Be-ne-fits to us, streng-then us by
thy Grace, and fit us for thy Glo-ry, make us wise to prize and im-prove them
to thy Glo-ry.

Bless thy V-ni-ver-sal Church, with Truth and V-ni-ty, the Kings Ma-jes-ty,
the Queen and Roy-al Fa-mi-ly, with Tem-po-ral and E-ter-nal Fe-li-ci-ty, these
Na-ti-ons with Peace, Plen-ty, and Pros-pe-ri-ty, and in-crease Bro-ther-ly
Love and Cha-ri-ty, Through Je-sus Christ our LORD, Amen.

FINIS.

