CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COMPANY OF SCOTLAND, Trading to AFRICA and the INDIES.
THE COMPANY of SCOTLAND, Trading to AFRICA and the INDIES, have upon Mature
Deliberation Agreed, and Concluded upon the following Rules, Ordinances, and
Constitutions, as appearing the most Reasonable, Equal and Suitable unto them,
To be Binding and Obliging to the said COMPANY.

1. The Direction and Government of this COMPANY, shall be, and remain in a
COURT of Fifty DIRECTORS; Twenty Five whereof shall be made, and chosen, by
Majority of Votes of the COMPANY in SCOTLAND, taken by Scroll and Scrutiny,
upon Thursday the Seventh Day of May, One Thousand six Hundred Ninety six;
every Hundred Pound sterling. having One Vote, Which DIRECTORS so chosen, are to
Choose and Admit other Five and Twenty, to complete the Number of Fifty.

2. Upon some Day or Time in the Month of March, yearly, One in every Ten shall
be l^^t out of the Number of DIRECTORS, by the COURT of DIRECTORS, and Others
Elected and Chosen in Their Place, by the COUNCIL GENERAL. And in case of the
Death, Resignment, or other Removal of any of the DIRECTORS, others shall be
chos^n in their Place, by the COURT of DIRECTORS of this COMPANY.

3. The COURT, or COUNCIL GENERAL of this COMPANY, shall consist of the COURT
of DIRECTORS the^eof, together with One Person, other than a DIRECTOR, being a
Proprietor, to represent every Ten Thousand Pounds sterling. Property in this
Joint Stock, or Capital Fund, either by his own Right, or by Deputation from
others therein concerned* In which Representation, the DIRECTORS (being Members
of the COURT) shall have no Votes, not Representation chosen by themselves: But
in such Case, or when any of the Subscribers shall neglect to give in their
Nomination of Representatives, at, or before the Second Wednesday of June, One
Thousand six Hundred Ninety six, for the first Time, and from thence forward,
at, or before the last Wednesday of February Yearly; the other COUNSELORS,
(exclusive of the DIRECTORS) shall Nominate others to complete the Number of
One Councellor, for every Ten Thousand Pound Stock, which Election is to
continue for that Year.

4. The Annual Meeting of the GENERAL COUNCIL, shall be upon the Second
Wednesday in March Yearly, wi^h Power ^o them to Adjourn to such other Diets,
as they think sit; and to the DIRECTORS to Call a GENERAL COUNCI^ as occasion
Requires.

5. The General Accounts, and other Affairs of the COMPANY, shall Yearly, or
oftener (if Required) be laid before the COUNCIL GENERAL, who may displace or
remove any of the DIRECTORS, or COUNCIL, for Mis-demeanors. No Person or
Persons, whetherof the COURT of DIRECTORS or COUNCIL, being allowed to Vote in
the Matters wherein He or They are Concerned.

6. The Major Part of the COUNCIL GENERAL, or COURT of DIRECTORS in being for
the Time, shall always be a Quorum.

7. The COUNCIL or COURT of DIRECTORS, may from Time to Time make and
Constitute Committees, or Sub-Committees of their Own Number, to Act in their
Respective Names and Places; who shall keep Exact Minutes, Journals, and other
Accounts of their Proceedings.

8. No Dividend of the Profits or Product of this Joint Stock, or Capital Fund
shall be made, but by Consent and Advice of the COUNCIL GENERAL.

9. If any of the Proprietors of the said Stock, shall not Pay or cause to be
Paid, the Proportionable Part of His, or Their Subscriptions, in such Time and
Manner, as shall be Appointed by the COMPANY; Or in case they or any of them
shall become Indebted to the said COMPANY, any other way howsoever, the share
of Stock belonging to such Person or Persons, shall in either case be Rouped
and Sold to such as will pay the Sum Required, or the Debt due to the COMPANY,
and the Superplus, if any be, shall belong to the Party.

At EDINBVRGH, the Seventeenth of April. One Thousand Six Hundred Ninty and
Six. AGreed unto, and Concluded upon, by a General Meeting of the said Company,
And ordered to be Recorded in Their Books and Registers.


TARBAT. J. P. C.


