Note,
THIS Discourse was drawn up during the Regency and Authority of the Old
Service Book, since which time, the many Diseases cleaving to it, have (it
seems) occasioned the Death of it: and this, the raising up of another in its
stead, of a new Calculation: So that, I know not whether the Scrutinie here
made into the former Book, will in all Points touch with the latter: I suppose
the Herings in the one Barrel, differ not much from those in the other.

Common Prayer Book DEVOTIONS, Episcopal Delusions; OR, THE SECOND DEATH OF The
Service Book.

WHEREIN, The unlawfulness (with advantage) of the Imposition of Liturgies, or
stinted Forms of Prayer, or of the Worship of God (and more especially of the
English Service Book) is clearly and plainly demonstrated from the Scriptures,
and grounds in Reason; with Answers to the Arguments and Pleas insisted on, in
Defense of the said Impositions.

But they shall proceed no further: for their folly shall be manifest unto all
men, as theirs also was, 2 Timothy 3.9.

His Spirit was stirred within him, when he saw the City wholly given to
Idolatry. Acts 17.16.

For this cause was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I
should bear witness unto the Truth, John, 18.37.

-- And so will I go in unto the King, which is not according to the Law: and
if I perish, I perish; Hester 4.16.

Am I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth? Gal. 4.16.

Adulterum est, impium est, sacrilegium est, quicquid humano furore
instituitur, ut dispositio divina violetur. Cypr. Lib. 1. Ep. 8.

Veritati potest nemo prescribere, non spacium temporum, no patrocinia
personarum. Teitul. de Veland. Virg.

Doctis, and in speciem sanctis, hoc consuetum, ut caeteris Christo obnixius
resistant. Mulculus in Mat. p. 423.

Printed in the Year, 1666.

To the Conscientious Reader.
CHRISTIAN READER,
THIS ensuing Discourse needs no Epistle to commend it, nor humane Patron to
protect it, an Epistolary Porch can add no more to its worth, than a well
placed Beauty-Spot to a good Complexion, whose Brightness is set off by the
contrary Blackness; The Workman was a person as well furnished with Stuff,
Tools and Skill for Temple-work, as most this last learned Age has produced,
and the weighty Truth he so strenuously presses in this ensuing Tract, was not
the exercise of his Skill and Parts, but the genuine birth of his Heart and
Conscience; a Truth so dear to him, that he chose rather to part with Liberty,
Livelihood, and dear Relations, than to shake hands and bid farewell to so
endeared a Companion: a Truth for which he had been a Sufferer in former
Persecutions, and for adhering to which, he ended his days in a kind of Exile,
in this present Storm; a Truth that was so revived upon his Heart, and so
powerfully pressed upon his Conscience, when the Blossoms of the Grave were upon
him, and the welcome messengers of Death had summoned him to his Rest, that he
could not Dye till he had Commended it, nay, Commanded it to all that fear the
Lord. The subject matter being a Defense of Pure Primitive Worship, needs no
Patron but he that is our Lord and Lawgiver, who stands with his Sword drawn
to beat off all Copemates in this his Prerogative, and although FILII
PERDITIONIS may tug hard to justle Jesus Christ out of his Throne, and to sit
Paramount in the Temple of God, chopping and changing Divine Institutions for
Humane Inventions, yet the day is at hand, when the Builder of the
Gospel-Temple, shall plead his right with fury poured out: How light soever
some Scepticks, Latitudinarians, and others, homines omnium horarum, may set by
Instituted Worship, yet in all Ages of the World, the sincere Servants of God
have chosen rather Banishment and Death, than to embrace the Customs of the
Heathens, or the Institutes of Roman Babylon in their Divine Service, as both
the Scriptures and Ecclesiastical Writers fully demonstrate. Come we to our
late times, even since the Witnesses in the Marian days; Where were more
Learned, more Godly Men in the World, than Cartwright, Parker, Reynolds,
Greenham, Ames? and who knows not that these and many more of the same
heavenly stamp, suffered extreme Persecution, Deprivations and Banishments,
rather than they would touch with the Graven Images, the work of the Craftsmen,
that then were, and now are, the Snares and Nets upon Mispah and Tabor? Holy
Cotton, Shepherd, and many others, eminent for Piety and ability, chose rather
to end their days in a howling Wilderness, than to defile themselves with
Idols. Learned Cotton answering the greatest Prelate then living, that Cultus,
non Institutus, was Idolatry. But because some who have been Professors have
now their eyes opened, with tasting the Honey of Preferment, Gain and Security,
and therefore will not take the Persons before mentioned as competent Witnesses
in the Case; I might summon in a Jury of the ablest Conformists in former
days, to give in their Verdict, for the Araignment and Condemnation of
Invented Worship. In a word, all out Protestant Writers, who contend with the
Papists, do use the same Arguments against their numerous Holy Days, their
Oyl-Crisme, their Holywater, Mass, etc. as we do against Holy Days, and other
retained Services and Ceremonies: But because I will not keep you too long from
the Banquet this Book presents you with, take only a most famous Prophet of
their own, the Learned Bishop of Winchester, Dr. Andrews, in his Exposition
upon the Second Commandment; his words are these. This Commandment which
concerns the manner of Worship, contains a Precept set down by way of
Prohibition in these words, NON FACIES TIBI SCULPTILE: The Sanction in these
words, EGO ENIM DEUS TUUS SUM ZELOTYPUS. Showing how they shall be corrected
that will not be directed by this Law.

Concerning the Performance of this Worship, two things are commanded, first,
God will have MODUM A SE PRESCRIPTUM. Our service must be done in that manner
himself prescribes. Non simulacrum, non Imago damnatur sed non facies tibi,
thou shall not make (...), Invented and Will Worship, devised by Man, is here
forbidden. -- Men would have Worship of their own, whereas God has told them,
whatsoever thing I command you, observe to do it; thou shall not add thereto,
nor diminish from it. Hoc tantum facere, quod Deus precepit; and he brings in a
reason assigned by Chrisostom, Qui honoratur, is maxim eo honor delectatur,
quem ipse vult, non quem nos volumus, non est honor, sed dedecus, si vel
contra, vel preter mandatum fiat. It is rather a disgrace than honor to God,
to Worship him either against or besides his own Rule.

Since therefore you have such a Cloud of Witnesses, let us run with patience
our present race, and follow them who through great Tribulation have adhered to
Jesus Christ. If you can stand before the wrath of a jealous God, if you can
drink the dreggs of the Cup of his fury, then adventure upon Worship of a
humane Original and Generation. But I leave you to the conscientious perusal of
the ensuing Discourse, which is full fraught with cogent Arguments, for the
Authority of Jesus Corist, and against the frothy Impositions of defiling
Inventions in the Worship of God. The Lord grant that the living Words of this
Dead Saint, may be blessed to the purpose by him intended, to the awakening of
some who are now snoreing in the Lap of the Nah. 3.4.
well-favoured Harlot, and to the establishment of others in the present Truth.

C. W.

Common Prayer Book Devotions, Episcopal Delusions: OR, The second Death of the
Service Book.
THE Liturgy, or Common Prayer (commonly used in our Parish Churches) relates
unto the conscience of him that uses it, and of him that desires to be
understandingly satisfied about the lawfulness or unlawfulness of the use of
it, both in the matter and form, or substance, but especially in the injunction
or imposition of it by men. I shall (at present) not say much unto it in the
former relation; only, in case the imposition were taken off, and Ministers and
People left at full liberty, the one whether they would read it, the other
whether they would attend upon it or no; these (amongst many other) particulars
would be very considerable.

1. Whether God, under the New Testament, or since Christ ascended on high to
give gifts unto men, ever commanded, or required, or spoke a word of such a
thing? or, whether ever it came into his mind, or heart, (Jer. 7.31. and 19.5.)
to be worshipped by his Saints in their Public Assemblies, by a stinted form
of Liturgy and Prayers, not to be altered or varied from, from generation to
generation, upon any imergencies of Providence whatsoever, unless the Powers
and Potentates of the Earth shall interpose with their Swords and Scepters to
command it? and consequently, whether they who draw near unto him in this
Worship, have not as much cause to fear the breaking-out of his Jealousy upon
them, as Nadab and Abihu had for offering strange fire before the Lord, which
he commanded them not? (Levit. 10.1.) and whether the patience and
long-suffering of God, exercised toward persons offending in this kind in
these days, be not to lead them to repentance? Romans 2.4.

2. Whether, in case it were (or, upon good grounds, could be) supposed, that
it may be pleasing enough unto God to be worshipped by his Saints in their holy
Assemblies, with set forms of Liturgies and Prayers, being left free, and not
imposed, [namely if they be, for matter and form, irreprovable, or such as they
may be] it could notwithstanding reasonably be supposed withal, that Worship
according to any model or draught of Liturgy, or Prayers whatsoever, would be
thus pleasing unto him; More particularly, whether a Worship, conform to the
image of such a Liturgy, as we shall now characterize, or describe (in part)
would be in any degree pleasing unto him; as viz. 1. which shall be a rhapsody,
medley, or confused heap of a multitude of ingredients, heterogeneal, and of
opposite natures, Mollia cum duris, sine pondere habentia pondus,
Things soft and hard, things weighty, and things light,
(as the Poet describes the constirution of the old Chaos) no more meet to be
molded together into the same body of an Evangelical Worship, than God under
the Law judged an Ox or an Ass to be yoked together for service in the same
plough; as for instance, Canonicals, and Apocriphals, the heavenly sayings of
Christ, and the fabulous reports of Tobit, the Psalms of David, and the Song of
S. Ambrose, Magnificat, and Quicunque vult, passages and expressions, some
grave and serious, solid and distinct; others, ludicrous and light, barbarous,
obscure and truthless. 2. Wherein the Prayer-devotion prescribed, is, or shall
be, ordered with that strange unsutableness to the simplicity of the Gospel,
that 1. the Lord's Prayer, which was delivered by him with a special intent to
prevent battologies, or vain repetitions in prayer, ( Mat. 6.7, 8, 9. compared)
is it self enjoined to be repeated, over, and over, and over, (and I know not
how often) without any reason given (or easy to be taken) for any one of these
repetitions in their respective places: this disposition of it can be resolved
into no other reason or cause, but the mere phansy and will of the Contriver,
who by it, seems to have been acted by the spirit of this superstition
(condemned by Christ, Mat. 6.7.) that men shall be heard for their much
speaking, or for the tale and number of their prayers, only said over and
repeated. Besides, this Prayer is ordered to be at the same time audibly
pronounced by all the Congregation and Minister together, in some of the said
places. Again, 2. the great body of this Prayer-devotion is so ill handled (not
to mention the unsound constitution in several veins and parts of it) that it
is divided in sunder, and some parts of it severed from others, in several
places, by Psalms and Songs, by Chapters, and broken pieces of Chapters (under
the false titles of Epistles and Gospels, whereof they are but small snips or
shreds) by Creeds or Confessions of Faith thrust in between: and besides, it is
in some places, chopped or minced into small pieces or particles, and a
distribution of them made, some to the Minister and some to the People, as if
the People were to be the mouth of the Minister unto God, as well as he theirs
in the public Assemblies: yea, when Minister and People are acting their parts
in these strains of Prayer interchangeably assigned unto them, there is such a
bandying and tossing of devotions to and again, from one to the other, in a
gingling and mymmical manner, that it much resembles the jolly scene of a set
of Ale-inspired Companions, chanting their drunken Catches upon a bench. 3.
Where this great body of praying-devotion is compounded and made up of many
lesser bodies of prayers, the greatest part of which are more entire and
distinct bodies in this kind, than the main body or bulk rather, made up of
them all, being closed and sealed up (respectively;) with so many Amens. Which
is a method, or manner of praying, no where recommended unto us in the
Scriptures by the Holy Ghost. 4. Where there are appropriate devotions, as
Prayers (under the Apocryphal name of Collects) Epistles, Gospels, select
Chapters, etc. for several days (forced by the unjust hand of humane powers;
out of that allowance of six days in the week, which God himself was pleased
to make unto men, to provide themselves by their honest labor of things
needful for this present life, and dedicated by men to the honor and service
of certain Saints long since dead) and so these days, though but of humane
consecration, are here made equal in all points with the Lord's days
themselves. 5. Where the Service prescribed and enjoined under the specious
pretext of being Divine, consisting of short pieces or Sentences of Scriptures,
of a Confession of Sins, of an Absolution, of the Lords Prayer, repeated, and
repeated, and repeated; and so of the Doxology (so called) in like manner
repeated, over, and over, and over; of whole Chapters for Lessons, of broken
Chapte^s for Epistles and Gospels; of pieces of Chapters, as Magnificat,
Benedictus, Nunc dimittis, etc. (with the Song of S^ Ambrose) to separate
between Lesson and Lesson (as if there were some danger, or inconvenience at
least, if they should come too close together) of the Ten Commandments, with as
many Lord have mercy upon us's; of a long Letany (so called) of Versicles and
Responds, of Collects and Prayers in abundance, some for all men, some for
Christ's Church militant here on Earth, some for Bishops, Pastors and Curates,
(as if these were Members of the Church triumphant) and some for such other
occasions as the Policy and Piety of the Compilers could agree upon) and lastly
of a pair of Creeds, the repeating of one of which being required of the whole
Congregation, requires the most ignorant and profane wretch in it, to profess
and say that he believes as much (if not more) as the most knowing and
worthiest Christian; yea, and that he believes that which I believe no man
understands upon any good grounds what it means, (I mean that Christ
descended into Hell) the other imposing upon all men such a Faith as of
absolute necessity unto Salvation, which the Scriptures no where require upon
such terms, of any man, and which is not found in many sound Christians, if in
any. Where (I say) the Service enjoined, consisting of all these Members and
Parts now mentioned, must needs be tedious and tiresome unto the People,
spending and wasting the best and freshest of their attention, and so
indisposing them to attend unto the preaching of the Gospel, and the words by
which they must be saved: as if the project and design of it had been to
intercept the great Duties of preaching and hearing the Gospel preached, by
rendering the wearied Minister less capable of the one, and the wearied People
less capable and desirous of the other. Now then, I repeat from afar, and ask,
Is it not very considerable (or rather indeed is it worth any consideration at
all?) whether God will be pleased with a Worship presented unto him in the
shape and form of such a prodigious Liturgy as that which has now been
described? unless (happily) men think that a Worship made up of various pieces,
and these of different colors, is as honorable, and so as acceptable unto
God, as Jacob thought a parti-colored Coat would be unto Joseph his Son: Or
does not the Liturgy, the lineaments and feature of which have been presented,
as perfectly resemble the Common Prayer Book, as face answers face in the
water?

3. It calls for some consideration likewise, whether it be possible (in an
ordinary way, or without a piece of a miracle) for a man or a woman, to keep up
his heart so much as in a tolerable posture of devotion, reverence, and
attention unto such prayers, which having been framed by men, and these not of
any known excellency above their neighbors, are, in respect of their original,
less considerable, and after long familiarity more obnoxious to contempt,
especially when he can (well nigh) say them by roat beforehand, and of which he
is able to say (with him in the Comedy) Plus millies jam audivi, I have heard
them more than a thousand times over already. The common saying (verified by
experience more than enough) is, familiarity breeds contempt and neglect. And
God himself judges it necessary to consult his Glory, [I mean, a religious
awe, reverence, and esteem of his Counsels and Works from men] by concealing
the one and the other, until the time of their bringing forth, that so they may
come fresh and new unto them. It is the Glory of God to conceal a thing, Pro.
25.2. And speaking of his Works ( Isa. 48.7.) They are created now, and not of
old, and even before this thou heardest them not, (so the former Transtation)
lest thou should say, Behold, I knew them; implying, that men (commonly at
least) less mind or regard the declaration of such things unto them which they
knew before. And upon this account (doubtless) our Savior speaks thus ( Mat.
13.52.) Therefore every Scribe [i.e. every Doctor, or Teacher] which is
instructed unto [or, for] the Kingdom of Heaven, [ i.e. is worthily or meetly
qualified for the work of the Ministry of the Gospel, by which the Kingdom of
Heaven is promoted in the world] is like unto a man that is an householder,
which brings forth out of his treasure things new and old. Now an ability to
pray, being as necessary an endowment for a worthy Minister of the Gospel, as a
gift of preaching, the Apostles themselves (as it seems, Act. 6.4.) giving it
the pre-eminence in the exercise of their Ministry: that Minister who shall
pray little, but only read a longsome beadroll of Prayers long and short, (if
yet they may be called Prayers, some of them being termed Collects; the greater
part or number of them being imbodied, and this body surnamed Letany) a work,
the performance whereof requires not the best of the abilities of an ordinary
Schoolboy of seven years of age, and therefore very improper and uncomly for
him to bestow so much time upon, who should be, yea and who pretends to be an
Ambassador from Christ unto the World, one of a thousand, etc. such a Minister,
I say, that shall perform the praying part of his Ministry at such a despicable
rate as this, is not like to draw many into part and fellowship with him in his
worship of God, but such who know not that God whom they worship, nor care much
either to know him, or how to worship him as they ought. The ignorance, the
profaneness, the wickedness, the licentious and debauched lives of the
greatest part of that generation, both men and women, who are the zealous
followers of the Common Prayer Book Ministry in the Nation, will seal the truth
of these sayings fast and sure.

4. Neither is this to be lightly passed over by those that stand in any awe or
dread of the jealousy of God, that the Liturgy or Common Prayer we speak of,
smells rank of the Popish Mass Book, being (indeed some slight interpolations,
or new surbushings, with some accommodations to secular or civil ends and
purposes amongst us, only excepted) little else but the substance, matter, and
contents of this Book. This consideration alone is sufficient to render it the
abhorring of their souls, that understand any thing (almost) of the nature and
dreadful severity of divine jealousy; as that any little spark, not only of
right-down or broad-fac'd Idolatry, but of any tiffling dalliance, or wanton
compliance with it, will cause it to smoke against those that shall provoke it
in this kind. Husbands that are jealous, are not able to bear, not only the
gross act of Adultery in their Wives, but not so much as any familiarity or
correspondence, any light or loose behavior, with known Adulterers, or persons
strongly suspected of that Wickedness. Under the Law God strictly prohibited
such things unto his People, which were in themselves lawful enough, (though
not necessary) because they were observed by their idolatrous Neighbors. See,
read, consider and compare at leisure, Levit. 19.27, 28. and 21.5, 6. Deuteronomy.
14.1, 2. with Isa. 15.2. Jer. 48.37. and 9.26. and 25.23. and 49.32. (according
to the import of the Original, noted in the margent of your larger Bibles, at
these three last Texts) and Deuteronomy. 12.30. they are charged by him not to ask or
enquire, How did these Nations [being idolatrous] serve their gods, that I may
do so likewise? And in the New Testament, Christ insisteth upon the practice of
the Gentiles, as an argument to dissuade his Disciples from taking thought for
outward things, For after all these things do the Gentiles seek, etc. Mat.
6.32. Besides, for Saints to borrow of a superstitious, wicked and idolatrous
Generation, Enemies unto God, and to all that truly love and fear him, a Model
or Platform of Worship to be presented unto him, by which they have (in
conjunction with other unhallowed Artifices) supported, nourished, and kept up
an Antichristian Interest for a long time in the World; when as they [the
Saints] have the manifold Wisdom of God before them in the Scriptures, and may
have his Spirit also for the asking, to direct and teach them how to worship
and serve him acceptably, from time to time, must needs, in the eye of Reason
it self, be spiritually unnatural, and most unbecoming those who pretend to the
high honor and dignity of being Children of Light. The Apostle Paul pleads
this twice together, by way of bar to the eating of things offered unto Idols,
by Christians; The Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, 1 Cor. 10.26,
28. The connection of this reason, with that which he desires to persuade unto
by it, is this, It is most unworthy the Sons and Daughters of God, to defile
themselves with eating the Devils meat, [that which has been sacrificed and
given unto him] whereof he has no great plenty neither, whenas their Father is
Lord and Owner of a world of Provisions clean and wholesome, wherewith they
have no cause to fear or doubt but that he will sufficiently supply them. And
of those who did or should presume to eat of the Devils portion, he demands
argumentatively, and with great earnestness and vehemence of spirit, thus: Do
we provoke the Lord unto Jealousy? [that is, to the fiercest of his
displeasure against us] Are we stronger than he? [meaning otherwise that we are
not like to escape the severity of his anger, if we continue so to provoke him]
1 Cor. 10.22. Is it not altogether as ill consistent with the Wisdom, Honor,
and Peace of Believers in these days to be found of that Worship which has
been devised, contrived, formed and fashioned (no man knows by what Rule, nor
by whose Directions) by men justly given up by God unto strong delusions, and
to believe (...), that Lie of Lies, 2 These. 2.11. and to walk in abominable
Idolatries (as Peter speaks) whenas God, in and by the Scriptures, and
supplies of his Spirit, has vouchsafed unto them means and opportunities in
abundance to enable themselves to worship him with a Worship pure and clean, no
ways charged or encumbred with any suspicion or jealousy of Satan's interposure
with the least of his Fingers in the moulding and framing of it.

That which is commonly pretended to hide the baseness of the Parentage or
Original of the Liturgy impleaded, is but a vail that is transparent, and
easily seen through, by those that are willing to examine it, and look a little
narrowly into it. For the Martyrs, and other pious and learned men, in whose
weakness the importune Commenders and Obtruders of this Liturgy (our apocryphal
Lord Bishops, with those that are younger Brethren in the same iniquity with
them) do so much glory for advantage sake, as if they were the Fathers or
Compilers of it; the truth is, they were neither so, nor so, unless in a
diminutive sense only, and that which is not much considerable for their
purpose. And if they had been as desirous to honor those Martyrs and pious men
they speak of, as they are to exalt themselves, they should, with the good Sons
of Noah, have cast some covering over their nakedness, and not publish it upon
all occasions, as now they do, unto the world; with an intent to cover, or
rather to justify their own by it. Some, afterward Martyrs, and other good
men, were (indeed) the Authors of our English Liturgy, as such, (I mean as
English) and (happily) as wanting many strains of that gross Superstition, Error
and Idolatry which are sound in the Latin Mass Book; and likewise as having
some few things of lesser moment added and inserted by way of accommodation to
the Civil State; the Romish yoke, as well in Civil as Ecclesiastic affairs,
having been newly cast of by it. Nor do I doubt but that much may be pleaded,
and this very Christianly, for the justification of those worthy and good men,
in respect of the uprightness of their hearts, the honesty and sincerity of
their intentions in the Work; who by a little refining of the said Popish
Devotions, and by altering the property of the Language wherein they were
written, thought they might make them commodious enough for English
Protestants: yea, and (probably) they might suppose that when they brought the
Service of God (such as it was, and they it seems esteemed it such as by a
little purgation might be cleansed from all the noysom dregs of Popery, and so
become lawful) out of an unknown Tongue, into a Language which the People
understood, they had (in a good sense) brought light out of darkness, and so
might be well apaid in their Consciences with their Work. But though it be
granted that they were persons of eminent worth, both for their Piety and
Learning, yet (questionless) they were no Prophets; or else the spirit of
Prophecy failed them, in reference to the event and consequence of their
Common Prayer Book Achievement. For had they so much as once dreamed that this
Book would prove such a Root of Bitterness unto the Nation, as it is too well
known it has been; that it would create those sad distempers, those divisions,
distractions, tumults, and confusions, whereby both sin and sorrow have been
abundantly increased amongst the inhabitants of the Land; or that it would be
an Engine in the hands of men of unmerciful and high-imposing Spirits,
wherewith to rack the Consciences, and wreck the Comforts, Liberties, Estates,
etc. of many thousands of the Saints and dear Children of God in the Nation,
being at this day employed, and like to be employed in these bloody executions,
(unless the Righteousness of God will please to restrain the remainder of the
wrath of men.) Had (I say) the good men we speak of, but once dreamed of those
prodigies of mischief whereunto our unhappy Service Book has been highly
accessory, we may be groundedly confident that they would never have found
either heart or hand to lift up toward the promoting of it. But in them is
fulfilled the latter part of this old Distich: (...):
(...).
Good Fruit on bad Intendments sometime grows;
And from good meanings sometimes Evil flows.


5. (And lastly upon the present account) It is not unworthy his consideration
whose heart is firmly set within him to please God in worshipping him, that the
Liturgy or Prayer Book, into which we are yet enquiring, is like unto a Net,
which seldom encloseth any good Fish, but multitudes and great sholes of those
that are bad. It is sufficiently known that the great body or bulk of those
that go wondering after it, and can savor no other kind or manner of Worship
(at least none comparatively) but that which the tradition of this Book
teaches them, are (more generally) men and women of one or more of these sad
characters, ignorant, profane, superstitious, time-servers, fearful,
unbelieving, haters of those that are good, Drunkards, Adulterers,
Extortioners, Covetous, etc. And though the proportion of one of a City, and
two of a Tribe, of persons of Conscience, and truly fearing God, at whose
Judgments and Consciences the Convictions of the Unlawfulness of that Worship
are not yet arrived, may be found in that Crowd; yet it is hardly credible that
such as these should at any time partake in it with any great contentment, or
good apayment of Soul. Persons of crazy and ill-aboding Consciences,
especially, if they be as well outwardly as inwardly obnoxious, are therefore
(in all likelihood) so impotently devoted to the Book and Prayers we speak of,
because these take pity on them, and entreat them gently; according to the
common saying, Missa non mordet, THE MASS BITES NOT: It is not like unto the
Spirit of God in the mouth of his able, faithful and zealous Ministers, of a
searching, expostulating, convincing, sharply-reproving nature; the sound of it
is not like that of Thunder, to awaken or terrify men, but as the noise which
a soft and gentle stream makes among Pebble Stones, which disposes unto sleep.

Now amongst many Arguments which war strongly against the said Book, and
Worship dictated therein, this (methinks) should do through execution upon the
Judgments and Consciences of those that are spiritually-minded, and make
treasure of the Love of God, viz. That they that are so zealously addicted unto
them, even to the hatred and persecution of those that in the use of them
cannot say Amen with them, are more generally, if not universally, persons much
estranged from the life of God, and affectionate lovers of this present world.
For it is no light presumption of the Carnality of a Worship, and that it is
such as pleases not God, when it so pleases his Enemies, (for such are all
those that live not in subjection to his Laws, Luke 19.27. Romans 8.7.) and
withal, is of an uncouth and horrid taste unto those that love him and keep his
Commandments. It is a sign of the voice of a stranger, and not of Christ, when
the Sheep of Christ do not hear it, but slay from it, John 10.4, 5, 27. And the
reasoning of this Apostle (1 John 4.5.) about matter of Doctrine, is as
demonstrative in the case of Worship now before us: They are of the World [i.
e. Teachers of whom I admonish you that you take heed, are of the same genius
with the generality of men in the world, who love Ease, Pleasure Riches,
Honor, etc.] therefore speak they of the World, or (...), out of, or from the
world; [that is, they enquire and observe how matters go in the world, that so
they may know how to promote their worldly Interest, and accordingly they frame
their Doctrines and Teachings:] And the World hears them; [that is, persons
worldly-minded fall in readily and greedily with them, their Doctrine so well
suiting their Principles, Dispositions and Desires.] So when a Form or Method
of Worship (for there is the same reason of Worship and Doctrine, as to the
consideration in hand, as was lately hinted) shall generally court and comport
with the Humors, Fancies, and Consciences (such as they are) of loose,
ignorant, superstitious and earthly-minded-men, it is an argument concluding
above all peradventure, that the complexion, frame and constitution of it
answers the genius, temper, and spirit of these men, much like as (in
Solomon's resemblance) face answers to face in the water. That manner or kind
of Worship which God seeks and delights in, is not like to relish with the
corrupt taste of sensual and carnal men, any whit better then Paul's preaching
did (...), amongst those that were lost, [or rather perishing, that is, in
imminent danger of being lost] to whom it was the savor of death unto death,
(2 Cor. 2.16.) that is, it filled their Consciences ever and anon with strong
resentments of the wrath of God coming out against them like an armed man, to
destroy them for their sins. It is recorded of Antisthenes, that when the
unworthy multitude, contrary to their wonted manner of dealing by virtuous and
worthy men, commended him, he expressed himself in this question, (...)? Alas,
what evil have I done? If the Common Prayer Book did no evil, we may very
reasonably judge, that the great host of the present Proselytes and Admirers of
it, would leave it as solitary as a Beacon on an hill. And it was the right
saying of another, Recti argumentum est, pessimis displicere; it is no light
argument of the goodness whether of a person or thing, when those that are very
bad are displeased with either. Nero's hatred of the Gospel, was by ancient
Christians construed as a testimony of the excellency and worth of it.
Certainly the right and approved Worship, or way of worshipping God, will never
make glad the hearts of such a Generation of men as now rejoice in, and glory
over the Book of Common Prayer. But

2. Though these general considerations relating only to the matter and form,
or substance of this Book (unto which many others of a more particular import,
and drawn from the unmeet expressions and passages in it, which are very
numerous, might be added upon the same account) are too considerable and
weighty to be easily removed off the Judgments and Consciences of serious and
considering-men; yet the little finger of the imposition of it, and of the
Worship (so called) directed and held forth in it, is by many degrees heavier
then the loins of a thousand such considerations, and of a more tremend aspect
in the eye of every Conscience that is enlightened, duly and clearly to
apprehend the nature and consequence of it. For suppose the property of the
Book should be so far altered, that whereas it is now like the politic Body of
the Jewish State in Isaiah's days; The whole head is sick, and the whole heart
faint: from the soal of the foot even unto the head, there is no soundness in
it, but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores (Isa. 1.5, 6.) Suppose (I
say) it should be so far altered from the present deformity and deplorable
condition of it, as to become as praiseworthy for Beauty as Absalom, of whom
it is said, that from the soal of his foot even to the crown of his head there
was no blemish in him, (2 Samuel 14.25.) and that a general Council of Elect
Angels should assemble to reform and amend it, and should make all the crooked
things in it straight, and all the rough things in it smooth, yet would not
this Angelical purity and perfection of it, (wherein its Admirers might in this
case safely glory) justify either the Imposition of it from imperious
Blasphemy, or the use of it in worshipping God, as, or because imposed, from
base and wretched Idolatry.

This is demonstrable from this clear and pregnant ground, attested both by the
Scriptures, and by the Light of Nature, or sound Principles of Reason,
consonant to the Scriptures: It is as well or as much the incommunicable
Privilege or Prerogative of God, to prescribe, appoint, and command his own
Worship, as to be worshipped; [I mean as to be worshipped in his Divine or
God-like Capacity.] This being a Truth, (as we shall presently, God assisting,
evince it to be) it undeniably, by a nearhand consequence, and whereof every
man is or soon may be capable, follows:

1. That he that shall authoritatively, under any penalty to be inflicted on
those that shall not obey, command any Form, Model, Method or manner of Divine
Worship, to be observed by men, makes himself God, or equal unto God,
obtrudeth himself as God, or in Gods stead upon men, claiming, assuming, and
usurping such a power, which is a branch of the appropriate and incommunicable
prerogative of God. Even as he that claims and exercises Regalia, such Power
and Authority, which are the appropriate Rights of Kings, makes himself a
King, and says (in effect, and in a more significant expression then the
plainest words that way would amount unto) I am a King. In like manner whoever
acts or exercises any of those Divine Rights, Authorities, or Powers, which
are inseparably annexed to the Throne of Heaven, and so declared and asserted
by him that sits thereon; though in words he should deny it, yet in deeds,
which speak loudest, he professes and says, I am God. It is like that they
who stumble at this stone, may think they walk inoffensively in their way; and
(probably) intend no such thing as an arrogation of Divinity unto themselves in
what they do: But this is common to the greatest Offenders of all, not to
intend the formality, but only the matter of their wicked actions; to intend
only the Text, not the interpretation of their sins: The grossest Idolater
that is, does not intend to commit the sin of Idolatry; but he intends the
doing of that, which being truly interpreted, is the committing of the sin of
Idolatry. There is the like consideration of the Blasphemer, of the Persecutor
of the Saints, and of many other most enormous Transgressors: And thus it is
like to be with those who count it a goodly thing to say with the King of Babel
of old, We will ascend above the heights of the Clouds, WE WILL BE LIKE UNTO
THE MOST HIGH, (Isa. 14.14.) We will give Laws to the Judgments and
Consciences of Men, as well as He: It is like (I say) that though they speak
thus in their actions, yet they do not intend to make themselves Corrivals in
Authority and Power with God, or to supersede and make void his Laws concerning
his Worship, with devotional Laws and Statutes of their own. From the said
ground it clearly also follows:

2. That whosoever shall accept of, submit unto, or worship God with, any such
Worship, or form of Worship, which is prescribed, imposed, and commanded by men
(especially if he shall submit unto it, as, or because thus commanded)
commits spiritual whordom, and brings the heavy guilt of the sin of
Idolatry upon his soul (besides the strengthening the hand of the imposer in a
very sinful way) The reason hereof, upon the former ground, is plain: namely,
because he exhibiteth that honor, reverence, and homage unto a creature, which
are due unto God alone, and (as it were) turns creature unto him that is no
God, unless a God may be made of dust and ashes. For if it be the Prerogative
of God to appoint and command his own worship, they who approve and justify
men assuming and exercising this Prerogative, entertain the creature with
divine reverence and honor, saying (constructively, and in effect) unto it,
Thou art God, or, I acknowledge and own thee for my God. Persons of this
Character are all those, who practice the Worship commanded by men, upon the
account, or because of their command; whether they do it willingly, I mean,
before, or without any outward violence, or compulsion; or whether they do it
upon sufferings, or through sear of suffering; though the sin seems to be much
greater in the former case. Ephraim is oppressed, and broken in Judgment,
because he WILLINGLY [that is, readily, and with forwardness of compliance,
without asking any question for conscience sake] walked after the commandment
[meaning after the idolatrous commandment of their King Jeroboam, seconded and
enforced by all his successors.] Hos. 5.9. He that lives under the Authority
and Government of a lawful King over him, and shall subject himself unto the
commands of another, commanding him as his King, or such things, which his King
only has, by the Laws, a right of Authority and Power to command him,
renounceth his Allegiance unto his own Prince, and becomes a Traitor to his
Crown and Dignity.

3. From the ground aforesaid, it follows yet further, that such persons who
do obey the Commands of their Princes, or other Magistrates, wherein they
enjoin them any form, method, or manner of divine Worship, are in such their
obedience, their greatest enemies, thereby exposing them to the stroke of the
jealousy, and high displeasure of God. The reason of this consequence is,
because to make an Idol of any creature, or to set up any, whether thing or
person, in competition with God, and to ascribe divine honor unto it, renders
it the object of his severe wrath and jealousy. The Scripture is abundantly
pregnant with testimony of this truth, as well in the case of persons as of
things. The People ascribing divine honor unto Herod, in giving a shout in
applause of his Oration, The voice of God and not of man, brought sudden
destruction upon him, and this in a most loathsome and grievous manner: And
immediately (says the text) the Angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave
not God the glory [whereby he might indeed have prevented the judgment] and he
was eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost, Acts 12.22, 23. So dangerous a thing
it is for Princes, and Great men to accept of divine honor, when it is cast
upon them: how much more when they shall themselves compel men by threatening
Laws and Edicts, to ascribe it unto them (as all they do, who by severe mulets
and penalties constrain men to worship God, not as he pleases, or commands,
but as they please themselves.) It was not simply Jeroboams Idolatry, nor yet
his Edict or Command unto the People, to worship his Idol-Calves, but it was
the compliance of his People with this Command, that occasioned his ruin, and
the rooting out of his House and Posterity (as it did likewise occasion the
like misery to all his Successors; yea, and the utter ruin of his whole State
and Kingdom in a short time) This is clear from the express tenor of the
context, 1 King. 12.30. compared with verse. 34. of the following Chapter. In
the former place we read thus: And this thing [namely, Jeroboam's setting up
his two Calves, verse. 28, 29.] became a sin; or, turned to sin (as our former
translation had it) meaning, that in time, and this not very long neither, it
became sin to the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off, and to destroy it from
off the face of the earth. It was a sin simply, yea, a very great sin, as soon
as it was acted: that is, the setting up of the Calves, and the pressing of the
People to worship them, was a great sin in Jeroboam, whatsoever the consequence
of it had been, or whether the People had worshipped them or no, or though,
himself repenting of it, it had not been his ruin. But it did not BECOME a sin
of that sad consequence, as to be destructive to Jerohoam and his house, but by
means of the Peoples compliance with him in it, as is manifest from the former
place, where this (in the latter part of the verse) is rendered as a reason, or
an account, why and how Jeroboams act in setting up the Calves, and causing the
People to worship them, became a sin of that heavy consequence unto him, viz.
that the People (generally) approved and practiced that worship: And this
became a sin: for the People went to worship, before the one, even unto Dan,
or, as far as Dan; [implying it seems, that the King himself, and his Nobles,
and Attendants, worshipped before the other, which was set up in Bethel, the
Kings Court or Chapel being here, Amos 7.13. Or else it may import the great
zeal and forwardness of the People in comporting with their King in his
Idolatrous Worship, and that even those of them that dwelt in Bethel, and in
places near to it, would needs travel as far as Dan, which was at the furthest
distance from Bethel the Land would afford, to worship before the Calf set up
there, that in Bethel not being prepared and fitted for such Devotion till some
while after, as may be gathered from verse. 32, 33.] From which passages
compared, it plainly appears that had not the People obeyed him in his
idolatrous device, it might have been a lengthning out of his Tranquillity, and
his Posterity after him might have sat upon his Throne: Yea, and (probably) it
might through the Blessing of God, have proved a means or occasion of his
Repentance. It is not unlike but that Jeroboam's Priests, made of the basest of
the People, having once tasted of the Kings Favor and bountiful Allowance
settled upon their Priesthood, strengthened his hand all they could, in his
Idolatrous Worship, bewitching him with this, or some such lying and dangerous
notion as this; No Calves, no King; (even as those who are known by the Name of
Bishops, but not by the properties or works of Bishops indeed, being advanced
unto large Revenues and much worldly Pomp and Power by Christian Kings, are
very solicitous and careful to nourish this preposterous and importune conceit
in them upon all occasions, No Bishop, no King) But as unto Jeroboam, Calves
and no King, had been the more prudential and safe Maxim of State; not the
want or pulling down of his Calves, but the setting of them up, being the true
and real cause (as we lately heard from the Records of the holy Ghost himself)
why after a short time he was no King, nor any of his house long after him: So
is it more then conjecture, that BISHOPS, AND NO KING, would make the far
better Article in the Politic Creed of Christian Kings, and more worthy to be
believed than the contrary, No Bishop, no King. But this by the way. It has
been showed from the Scriptures, that to idolize a Person, or to ascribe Divine
Honor unto any man, either directly (as the People did unto Herod) or
indirectly, (as the Ten Tribes did unto Jeroboam their King, in accepting that
way of worshipping God, which he prescribed unto them) is to awaken the eye of
Divine Jealousy upon him, unless he refuses or disclaimeth it when it is
tendered unto him: which though Angels and holy Men have always done, yet it
has not been the wisdom or manner of Kings and Great Men in the World so to
do. Jacob (we know) loved his Wise Rachel very tenderly and affectionately; yet
when she required of him that which was proper only unto God to give, and so
reflected Divine Honor upon him, [Give me Children or else I die] he being (as
it seems) suddenly struck with the apprehension of the danger which such a
saying might expose him unto, reproves her sharply for her inconsiderateness
therein; but withal, amandeth and dispatcheth away that Divine Honor which was
put upon him, unto him who was the right owner of it: Am I (says he) in Gods
stead? etc. Genesis 30.1, 2.

And as they who comply with Kings and Rulers in their Commands concerning
Forms of Worship of humane device, are in such their compliance great Enemies
unto them; so on the other hand, they who choose rather to abide the bitterest
blast of their displeasure, then to please them with conforming themselves to
their wills and pleasures in such cases, are in this detrectation of their
Obedience unto them, their real Friends. Thus Daniel, notwithstanding his
refusal to obey the Decree of King Darius, being unlawful, said unto him, Also
unto thee, (or against thee) O King have I done no hurt, Dan. 6.22. In which
words he seems as well to imply that they who had obeyed him in that his
Decree, had been unfaithful unto him, had cast a snare upon him, and done him
harm; as to assert his own integrity and goodness of heart toward him: And
that the holy man was so far from doing any hurt to the King by changing his
Command, that he did him much good by it, appears by the sequel of the Chapter,
where we und hi^, by means hereof, enlightened with the knowledge of the true
God, and giving a full testimony to his excellent Greatness and Power, and
recommending his Worship and Service unto all his Dominions, verse. 26, 27. Of
like happy consequence unto King Nebuchadnezzar, was the like disobedience of
those three faithful Servants of God and the King, Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego, in refusing to submit to his Command about the worshipping of his
Golden Image, Dan. 3.28, 29.

Again, That other Creatures, whether animate or inanimate, by being contrived
or converted into Idols, or vested with any honor appropriate unto God, are
hereby prepared for the swifter destruction, by reason of the Jealousy of God,
the Scriptures testify yet more abundantly. Notwithstanding I shall not insist
upon this at present, but mention one place only, and point at others: And the
strong shall be as tow, [that is, the Idols, though made of never so strong and
durable materials, as Iron, Brass, Stone, Silver, Gold, etc. or rather the
Strong, that is, the Idols in which you put your confidence, supposing them to
be strong and able to protect you against all dangers, shall be as the most
light and combustible matter, not able to make the least resistance against the
fire, when it is put to it] and the Maker of it as a spark, [that is, they that
made them Idols, by this very contrivance of them, shall be the means or
occasion of their breaking to pieces, their defacement, or stamping to powder:
even as they that make Idols of men, as was lately showed, do hereby occasion,
and hasten their ruine] and they shall both burn together, [Idol, and
Idol-maker, shall be destroyed together, i. e. as well one, as the other] and
none shall quench them: [that is, they shall certainly perish, what means
soever shall be made to preserve, the one or the other] Isa. 1.31. See more of
this Truth, 2 King. 18.4. Exodus 32.20. 2 King. 23.4, 5, 6, etc. 2 Chronicles. 15.16.
Jer. 10.11. Isa. 2.18. Jer. 50.2. Ezekiel. 6.4, 6, 8, 11, 12.30.13. with others.

4. From the aforesaid Principle or Ground it follows likewise, That in case
the greatest and most lawful Authority amongst men, should under any civil
penalty, or otherwise, impose upon those under them, that very Worship, manner,
or kind of Worship, which God himself, either in his Word, or by the Law or
Light of Nature, has imposed on them; although this imposition of it by men
does not render it unlawful, nor yet dissolve the necessity of performing it,
which the Law of God imposes on them: yet, if waving the Commandment of God in
the case, they shall perform it merely upon, and out of respect of the
Commandment of men; and upon such terms that they would not practice or perform
it, did not their Superiors on Earth command it: such a performance as this,
even of the purest Worship that is, otherwise, would be idolatrous and
unlawful: although this Worship, considered in it self, or (in the
School-expression) in actu signato, would still be the pure and true Worship of
God. The reason of this consequence from the premises is, because if it be the
Prerogative or proper Right of God to command his own Worship, they who shall
reject or disown him in the claim hereof, and entertain or submit unto any
Creature claiming it, is like a Woman that admits a stranger into her
husbands Bed, shutting him out of his own d^ors.

5. (And lastly, for matter of consequence) This conclusion also springs
naturally from the same root with the former: That not to accept or submit unto
any Form or Model of Divine Worship, which has been contrived and framed by
men, can be no disobedience to any Law, truly so called, in any politic State,
Kingdom, or Commonwealth whatsoever. The reason of this consequence is pregnant
and clear; namely, Because there is, there can be no Law, truly and really such
(I mean which has the nature, essence, and binding force of a Law indeed) that
requires any thing of men, which is made or declared sinful or unlawful by a
superior Law. Any Act, Sanction, Decree, Law, Statute or Constitution, which
enjoyneth or imposes any thing contrary either to the Law or Mind of God in
the Scriptures, or to the Law of Nature, or Light of Reason, by what Authority
soever it be enacted, becomes void and null as soon as made, being like unto a
Child that is still born. Nor is this any ways repugnant to the Law of this
Nation; the effect and substance of the notion being (as I understand) the
acknowledged sense of some of the greatest Lawyers themselves, and will not (I
presume) be denied by any that understand themselves like men in their
Profession. Yea, the Grand Debater himself (though a man of as high an
imposing-spirit as Episcopal Zeal can lightly make him) acknowledges as much,
in saying, It Is true, a Superior cannot command a thing unlawful; Grand
Debate, page 62. His meaning can be no other, but that when he does command any
such thing, his Command is null, and not obliging: However, that Case is plain
enough. Certain it is, that all Authority and Right of Power, is Originally
vested in God himself; and consequently, that whatever Authority is seated in
any Creature, one or more, they have it by derivation and gift from him,
according to the Apostles Doctrine, Romans 13.1. Again, As certain it is, that
God gives no Authority or Right of Power unto any man, or numbers of men
whatsoever, against himself. Therefore no Act or Law (so called) whatsoever,
that is made with repugnancy to his Interest of Authority, or Sovereignty of
commanding, has the nature or force of a Law; the Makers of it, whoever they
be, having received no Authority from God to make any such: but on the
contrary, stand charged by his Law to forbear all acting and Law-making in that
kind; yea, and lie under a severe threatening from him, in case they transgress:
Woe unto them that decree unrighteous Decrees, etc. Isa. 10.1. And as by the
Laws of this Land, Nullum tempus occurrit Regi, There is no prescription of
Time against the King: so by the Law of Nature and common Reason, Nulla
authoritas occurrit Regum Regi, No authority whatsoever, is of force against
the King of Kings. And as in the order and subordination of Civil Authorities,
the Command of an inferior Magistrate does not bind against the Command of the
Superior, (supposing this to be lawful;) the Warrant or Command of a Country
Justice of Peace, is not to be obeyed (under the Proviso mentioned) against the
Order or Command of a Judge; nor the Command of a Judge, against the lawful
Command of the King. How much less does the Authority of a weak and sinful
Creature, though the Name of it might be Legion, and they never so many, oblige
any person against the least (...), or tittle of any the Commands or Laws of
God, these being all unquestionably righteous and just? And as the Scripture
teaches us to resolve the case without any demur or consideration at all,
between God and men, when they speak contradictingly the one unto the other, so
that the one must needs speak truth, the other that which is false; Let God be
true, and every man [whatsoever his interest or repute for truth be with men] a
liar (Romans 3.4.) So when there is any inconsistency or contest between any of
the Laws of God, and the Laws of men, the case is soon decided as concerning
the equity or binding force of either; Let the Law of God be just, and holy,
and good, and even upon this account also, challenge (with authority) obedience
from men; but the Law of men unjust, unholy, and evil, and so a nullity, and of
no authority at all to require subjection to it. Thus Peter (with other
Apostles) in the presence of the high Priest, and a great Council with him, was
very positive and definitive in the case, We ought rather to obey God, then
men, Act. 5.29. not long before being, with John, brought as guilty persons
before another full Council, he judged the equity of the case so notorious and
broad on Gods side, that he feared not to make the Council it self his
Arbitrators, although they were Parties, and his Adversaries; Whether it be
right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you [or, to obey you, according to
the former translation] more [or, rather, (...)] than God, judge ye? Act. 4.19.
So those three Servants of God (lately mentioned) being commanded by King
Nebuchadnezzar to worship the Golden Image which he had set up, and in case of
refusal terribly threatened to be presently cast into the midst of a fiery
Furnace, declared unto him, That they were not careful to answer him in the
matter, (Dan. 3.16.) the contrariety between the Kings Command, and the Command
of God, was so manifest, that they required no time to consider of an answer,
or what to do in the case, but immediately resolved to keep fast and close to
the Command of God, though in so doing they must and did disobey the
Commandment of the King. Therefore if it be the Prerogative of God to appoint
and command his own Worship; that Law, or humane Constitution, which attempteth
to divest him of it, and to communicate it unto any Creature, one, or more, or
never so many, is indeed no Law, but an Usurper of the name and title of a Law,
wanting the Spirit, Life, and Soul of a Law, which stand in an equitable force
to bind to the observation of it. But no equity binds any man to give away
the glory of God to another: So then, not to submit to any form of Divine
Worship, devised and imposed by men, is to do the will of God, and consequently
not to transgress or disobey any Law of man.

Now for the demonstration and proof of that Assertion, or Ground, (formerly
mentioned) out of which the five Conclusions lately argued, grow as naturally,
as so many Boughs or Arms of a Tree out of the Trunk or Body of it: Let us,
first, hear, weigh, and consider diligently and impartially, whether the
Scriptures do not speak to the heart of it, and whether God himself does not
here claim such a Prerogative as therein is asserted unto him. Secondly, We
shall consult some of the Maxims of Nature, and Principles of Reason, about
the truth of it.

For the first. I intend not to insist upon all places which offer themselves
willingly enough to serve in the present warfare: this would carry us far
beyond the bounds of our intended brevity; but shall argue only some few of
those which speak more plainly to our purpose.

First, Where God reproves, rejects, or condemns any Worship, Form, or
manner of Worship, upon this account, That He commanded it not; especially when
there are other things in it, one or more, very hateful and highly reproveable,
he plainly declares and asserteth it as his Prerogative, to appoint and
command all Worship: Else why should he make this the emphatical character of
such a Worship which his Soul abhors, That He commanded it not? especially
when this Worship is (as was now said) otherwise, and in it self, abominable?
If men had any authority to appoint, or command a Worship, this were no
reasonable or just exception against any Worship whatsoever, That God commanded
it not: but if it be justly reproveable, it must be for some intrinsecal evil
either in the matter, or in the form of it, or in both. But passages of the
import now specified, the Scripture affords many: And they have built the
high Places of Tophet, which is in the Valley of the sons of Hinnom, to burn
their sons and their daughters in the fire, WHICH I COMMANDED THEM NOT, Jer.
7.31. So again, They have built also the high places of Baal, to burn their
sons with fire unto Baal, WHICH I COMMANDED NOT, nor spoke it, neither came it
into my mind; Jer. 19.5. In both these places it is observable, that though the
man-devised worship mentioned, was in it self abominable, full of unnatural and
barbarous cruelty, and besides, performed to the honor of a most filthy and
abominable Idol; yet God in reproving it, takes no notice of either of these
abominations, but insists only upon this, that HE COMMANDED IT NOT, as being
the greatest abomination of all, and which (comparatively) justified all the
rest. Again; And they built the highplaces of Baal, -- WHICH I COMMANDED THEM
NOT, neither came it into my mind, that they should do this abomination. Jer.
32.35. By comparing this expreshon (in all these passages) WHICH I COMMANDED
THEM NOT, with the express Command of God (Lev. 18.21.) Thou shall not let any
of thy seed pass through the fire unto Molech, it plainly appears, that in the
case of Worship, for God not to command and expressly to forbid, are of one and
the same consideration: Even as in a Conveyance of Lands, whatsoever is not
expressed, is no more conveyed than what is excepted. Yea, and it is very
observable from the said passages, that God intending to put the sharpest
accent upon the breach of his Law in the matter of Worship (which doubtless he
does intend in reproving and condemning it) He does not place it in matter of
simple disobedience unto such his Law (this being found in every sin, I mean,
disobedience unto his Law, 1 John 3.4.) but rather in the presumption of men to
attempt any thing in that kind, without, besides, or beyond his Command.

Several other passages there are, besides those mentioned, of like character
with them. If there be found among you -- man or woman that has wrought
wickedness in the sight of the Lord thy God, in transgressing his Covenant, and
has gone and served other gods, and worshipped them, either the Sun, or Moon,
or any of the Host of Heaven, which I HAVE NOT COMMANDED, etc. Deuteronomy. 17.2, 3.
Thy People which thou broughtest out of Egypt, have corrupted themselves: they
are quickly turned aside out of the way, WHICH I COMMANDED THEM, etc. (Deuteronomy.
9.12.) implying, that in the Worship of God (of which he here speaks) to turn
aside out of the Way WHICH HE HAS COMMANDED, is to corrupt a man's self [that
is, to dispose, or prepare himself for ruin and destruction] unto what way
soever he shall betake himself otherwise. And Nadab and Abihu, the sons of
Aaron, took either of them his Censer, and put fire therein, and put Incense
thereon, and offered strange fire before the Lord, WHICH HE COMMANDED THEM NOT.
And there went out Fire from the Lord, and devoured them, and they dyed before
the Lord. Lev. 10.1, 2. In this high-provoking act of the Sons of Aaron, for
which the severe jealousy of God brake out immediately upon them in a consuming
fire, there was no disobedience to any Command, (I mean, unto any particular or
express Command) of God: he had no where forbad them (at least, explicitly or
directly) to offer ordinary or common fire (which is termed strange fire,
because the Commandment of God knew it not) in their Priestly Ministrations:
nor is any disobedience in this kind charged on them by the holy Ghost, nor so
much as mentioned as any cause of that terrible execution, which was suddenly
done by the immediate hand of God himself upon them: their only crime and guilt
was, that they offered strange fire before the Lord, WHICH HE COMMANDED THEM
NOT: they presumed to worship God otherwise than he had appointed, or
commanded. The sin of Uzzah in putting forth his hand to stay the Ark (for
which he likewise suffered the same measure from the provoked jealousy of God,
being by him struck dead in the place) was of like nature and consideration.
For neither did he therein transgress any express Command of God: for he had no
where commanded that none but the Levites should touch or meddle with the Ark:
only he had commanded that the Levites should wait upon the Tabernacle with
what appertained to it. So that the provocation in his sin also, only was his
intermedling with the holy things of God relating to his Worship, without his
Command. And thus David, upon the ground that we maintain (namely that all
Worship uncommanded, or unappointed by God, is unlawful and displeasing unto
him; or, which is the same, that his order and appointment are requisite to
legitimate any Worship or holy Service) proved it to have been unlawful for any
other to carry the Ark of God, but the Levites only. None (says he, 1 Chronicles.
15.2.) ought to carry the Ark of God, but the Levites: for them has the Lord
chosen to carry the Ark of God, and to minister unto him for ever. It was
unlawful for all other persons, the Levites excepted, to carry the Ark of God;
not because he had prohibited them by the letter, or direct import, of any Law,
to carry it, but because he had not chosen, or appointed them, as he had the
Levites. Again,

Secondly, Of the same, or like import, with the texts already cited, are all
those also, in which God stigmatizeth the Worship which men performed unto him,
with this character of his hatred, that it was of their own choosing, or
devising, after the imagination of their own heart, etc. In all such places as
these (which are not a few) he asserteth unto himself the appointment of his
own Worship, as belonging, prerogative-wise, unto himself, and wherein he will
not endure any creature to have part and fellowship with him. For otherwise (as
we reasoned before) no Worship were reprovable simply upon this score, that it
is of men's own choosing or devising. We shall not stand to argue any of these
places, as we did most of the other: the inference or result now mentioned from
the general tenor of them all, is pregnant and convincing enough. And if it be
an hateful brand upon any form of Worship to be of humane extraction, or to
call any man, or any numbers of men, Father; how much more hateful and
provoking in the fight of God must it needs be, to attempt to bind any such
spurious and base worship upon the generous and heaven-born consciences of the
sons and daughters of God (or, indeed, upon the consciences of any men) with
the hard cords of Imprisonments, Confiscations, Banishments, or what other
Cruelties Satan shall please to suggest unto men for the promoting of his
worship and service in the world, under the delusive pretense of the Worship
and Service of God? But places of the late mentioned character, are these (with
their fellows) And it shall be unto you for a fringe, that ye may look upon it,
and remember all the Commandments of the Lord, and do them: and that ye seek
not AFTER YOUR OWN HEART, AND YOUR OWN EYES, after which ye use to go a
whoring; Numb. 15.39. Take heed unto your selves that your heart be not
deceived, and ye turn aside, and serve other Gods, and worship them, and then
the Lords Wrath be kindled against you, etc. Deuteronomy. 11.16, 17. -- And it comes
to pass when he hears the words of this Curse, that he blesses himself in
his heart, saving, I shall have peace, though I walk IN THE IMAGINATION OF MINE
OWN HEART; [That is, in such a way of worshipping God, as I conceive to be
pleasing to him, as appears by the mention of God's Jealousy in the words
following] to add drunkenness to thirst. The Lord will not spare him, but the
Anger of the Lord, and his Jealousy shall smoke against that man, etc. Deuteronomy.
29.19, 20. So he [Jeroboam] offered upon the Altar which he had made in Bethel
the fifteenth day of the eighth month, even in the month WHICH HE HAD DEVISED
OF HIS OWN HEART, etc. 1 King. 12.33. He that burns Incense, is as if he
blessed an Idol: yea, they have CHOSEN THEIR OWN VVAYES, and their soul
delights in their abominations, Isa. 66.3. From whence it is very observable
(and makes with an high hand for our present purpose) 1. That it is incident
to men to choose ways and methods of their own [i. e. of their own devising]
for the worshipping of God, in stead of, and before, the ways prescribed by
himself for that purpose. 2. That these ways of men's own devising and choosing,
are their abominations [that is, ways for which they must answer to God, as for
things that are abominable in his sight] or at least, may be, yea, and
sometimes are such. 3. (And lastly) that notwithstanding such ways be their
abominations, yet they are wont animitus deperire, to love and delight in them
with their whole soul; and to be enflamed with zeal over them (as the Scripture
testifies in many places, and our own experience in the importune and bloody
Promoters of the Service Book, does confirm) as if God himself loved and
delighted in them as much as they.

There are many more texts and passages of like notion with those now cited,
and which offer the right hand of fellowship unto the Doctrine, which has been
made good by them: but those already mentioned, I judge abundantly sufficient
for the eviction of this Truth, That all worship of humane device, or
contrivement, is of an unpleasing resentment with God, and will be cast as dung
in the faces of those, that shall offer it unto him, of how sweet a savor
soever it may be unto themselves; and consequently, that the appointment and
commanding of his own Worship, is a darling prerogative unto him, the glory
whereof he will not give unto another. The truth of this Doctrine runs clearly
enough in other veins of Scripture, besides those in which we have seen it
already; by the opening and arguing of which we might have more enterviews and
appearances of it in somewhat differing shapes. How strict is the charge of God
unto men, neither to add to, nor take from, the Word which he has commanded
them? that they turn not aside from it, either to the right hand, or to the
left? Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 5.32. and 12.32. and 17.20. and 28.14. Josh. 1.7. Pro.
30.6. Rev. 22.18, 19. Doubtless they who turn their backs upon the Appointments
and Commandments of God concerning his Worship, and will impose Apocryphal
Forms and Models of Worship upon men, saying (in effect) first to God himself,
Except thou will be pleased with that worship which we prescribe and enjoin,
thou shall not be worshipped at all, as far as we have to do: and then unto
Men, Unless you will worship God after our mode, and with the worship which we
enjoin you (be it good, or be it bad, true, or false) you shall not worship
(...) at all, if we can help, or prevent it; such m^n (I say) is these, do, ^o
a very broad sense, both add unto, and diminish from, the Word (...) God has
commanded. I shall not need to interpre^^r pre^^ (...) of this assertion. And
(indeed) for the conviction and (...) of those, that are spiritually ingenious,
and tremble to detain the truth in unrighteousness, that which has been
already argued and pleaded from the Scriptures, I know cannot but suffice. But
for those that are contentious [or of cavilling spirits] and do not, will not,
obey the Truth, if it touches the apple of their eye, and thwart their carnal
interest, the Sun and a Sackcloth, the Light of the Noonday and the Darkness
of the Midnight, seven Demonstrations from the Scriptures, and seven Stories
out of the Golden Legion, are much alike. Yet let us (in a few words) further
weigh and consider that ingenuous acknowledgment of the great Apostle Paul to
the Corinthians, that he had not a dominion over their Faith, 2 Cor. 1.24. To
have dominion over a man's Faith, requires a lawful Authority to impose any
thing upon him to be believed, which the Impo^er pleases, or judges meet,
upon the account of his own judgment and will, and under what penalty he
pleases: and again, to prohibit him the believing any thing upon the like
terms. Now then evident it is, that neither Paul, nor Cephas, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, nor Cherubims, nor Seraphims, nor all the Angels in
Heaven, have any dominion over the Faith of men, but only He, whose judgment is
universally, and in all things, infallible, and his will in like manner
impeccable. Especially the Dominion we speak of, is not competent unto, cannot
reasonably be imagined to be vested in such a creature, that knows but in
part, that sees darkly, and through a glass only, and besides, is sold under
sin, and in, or with, his flesh, serves the Law of sin: all which our Apostle
acknowledges of himself; and that which concerns imperfection of knowledge,
he affirms of all men without exception even of the most enlightened
Christians, 1 Cor. 13.9, 12. And if so great an Apostle, who was so high in
favor with God, as to be taken up into the third Heaven, where he heard words
that were unspeakable, and which it was not lawful [or, possible: these were
the same with Paul] for a man to utter; and who (doubtless) knew more of the
mind of God, and of Christ, than all the world besides; and beyond all this,
was so mightily subdued under the Truth, that (as he professes) he could do
nothing against it, but [do, and suffer all things] for it; yea, and was so
effectually mortified unto the world, that he could most gladly spend and be
spent, for the souls of men; if (I say) an Apostle thus highly accomplished
above all his fellows, and in the largest capacity amongst ten thousand, to be
made a Lord over the Faith of men, yet was not by God judged meet for such an
investiture (himself declaring, and professing as much, as we heard) how
intolerable is it in men, who, being compared with Paul, scarce hold the
proportion of the snuff of a Candle to the Sun, to claim, and exercise that
most high and sacred Dominion we speak of, as if it were vested by God in them?
Or do they any whit less than claim and exercise it, who under sore mulcts and
penalties, impose a necessity upon men to believe, subscribe unto, and teach
what conceits, opinions, and tenets they please, in things appertaining to God,
and withal, to renounce and abjure all such opinions and persuasions which
please them not? Or do not they broadly usurp the Dominion we speak of, who
command men at the peril of their Estates, Livelyhoods, Liberties, etc. to
believe that such or such a Form of divine Worship, which pleases them,
pleases God also; yea, and that it pleases him better than any other Form,
yea, than any other Worship whatsoever, which they are capable of performing,
or exhihibiting unto him? Or do they thus command men to use their Form of
Worship, whether they, whom they command, believe it to be pleasing unto God or
no? If this be the sense of their command, it is yet more imperiously impious,
and horridly profane. Therefore in commanding them to use it, they
implicitly, yet next to explicitly, command them to believe it to be lawful
and good. Nay if they rightly understood the nature and import of that command
of theirs we speak of, they do not only command those, on whom they impose it,
to believe that the Form of Worship enjoined them, is simply lawful, but that
it is better and more acceptable unto God, not only than any other set Form of
Worship they can use, but then any other Worship, kind or manner of Worship
whatsoever, of which they are capable. For he that shall use any set Form of
Worship, without such a belief as this (I mean, without being persuaded in his
soul, that he cannot Worship God better in any other way, or by any other Form)
exposes himself to the curse denounced, Mal. 1.14. Cursed be the Deceiver,
that has a male in his flock, and voweth, and sacrifices unto the Lord a
corrupt thing. [debile, a weak thing, as the Latin renders; which Grotius
explains, by vitiosum, aut foemininum, that which is faulty, or feminine] For I
am a great King, says the Lord of Hosts, and my Name is dreadful among the
Heathen.

What has been demonstrated from the Scriptures concerning the Prerogative of
God touching his own Worship, is not obscurely taught by the Light of Nature it
self, and by the Principles of Reason; especially if we shall allow them now
and then a little assistance and relief from the Scriptures. For,

1. The Light of Nature carries us up to the Truth we contend for, by these
gradations or steps. 1. It teaches us that God is to be worshipped by his
creature, Man. 2. That he is to be worshipped with such Worship, which is most
agreeable unto the excellency of his Nature and Divine Being, and which is most
honorable for him to receive. 3. It teaches us further; That that Worship
which is most agreeable unto his Nature, and most honorable for him to
receive, is to be dictated and prescribed by the most perfect knowledge of his
Nature and Being, that is to be found. For he that is in any degree ignorant of
these, cannot direct a Worship, or manner of Worship, agreeable to Him, or to
his Nature, as he may, who perfectly knows Him, and comprehends all his
Perfections. 4. The same Teacher likewise informs us, That every creature is
finite, and partaketh of Entity and Being but by measure, and that God the
Creator of all things, is Infinite, and He only. 5. From the same hand, we are
clearly instructed yet further, That the most perfect of Creatures, being
Finite, is not able, no not by the greatest enlargement of its endowments or
abilities from God, to know perfectly, or to comprehend the Infinite Perfection
of the Divine Being: but that God, by the advantage of his Infinity, is able
fully to comprehend it, yea, that he does actually thus comprehend it. By this
series, or chain of natural Maxims, we are advanced unto the ground of our
present contest; namely, That God himself is only competent to prescribe and
dictate his own Worship, all Creatures being strangers, in comparison of
himself, to his most transcendent Excellency and Being, and consequently,
incompetent to contrive or frame a Worship suitable unto him; and much more to
impose (some, upon others) and this with extreme rigor, any Form of Worship of
their own devising, this (being interpreted by the premises) being a Worship
unsuitable to the Nature of God, and so unacceptable unto him. Again,

2. The Light of Nature enlighteneth our Judgments with this Truth, That the
Worship, manner or kind of Worship, which is agreeable to the Nature of God,
and so accepted with him, is but one and the same Worship, or kind of Worship,
as his Nature is but one and the same. So that though he commands every
Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation under Heaven, to worship him, yet
the Worship which he requires of them all, is for manner, and kind, but one
and the same, nor diversified in any such respect as these, by any exigency of
circumstance, one, or more, whatsoever. What this one kind of Worship is, which
we affirm God requires of all, shall be showed in due place, and this ere
long. In the mean time proceed we with our Argument in hand. If God requires
one and the same kind of Worship of all People and Nations, doubtless he has
not invested any of these Nations, much less the Rulers or Governors of any of
these Nations, with any authority, or right of power to worship him, with what
kind, or form of Worship they please. Much less has he given authorrity to any
one part, or party, in any of these Nations, to impose upon all the rest in
their Nation, contrary to their Judgments and Consciences, what manner, form,
or kind of Worship they fancy to be best pleasing unto him. Or if he has given
any such authority as this unto the ruling or prevailing party, in any one of
these Nations, questionless he has given the like, or the same, unto the like
party or parties in them all: for there is no competent Reason assignable, why
any difference should be made between them in this case. If then the Rulers and
Governors of all Nations under Heaven, have an equal right of Power derived
unto them from God, to impose upon the People under them, what Worship seems
good in their eyes, Idolatrous Princes shall have as much, and as lawful
authority to impose any Idolatrous Worship upon those under them, as those that
know God, and are truly religious, have to impose a better Worship upon those
that are subject unto them. For there is little question to be made, but that
in the eyes of an Idolatrous Prince, an Idolatrous Worship will seem as good
(or better) as the truest Worship does in the eyes of a Prince truly Christian.

If it be said, A Prince imposing an Idolatrous Worship, abuses his Authority:
but this ought not to be pleaded in Bar to the regular and due exercise of the
like Authority, by another Prince. I answer,

1. If he has Authority from God to impose such a Worship, which he judges
to be good, and pleasing unto God, he does not abuse this Authority by acting
according to the tenor and purport of it, which he does when he imposes only
such a Worship, which he really judges to be good, however he be mistaken in
his judgment in the case.

2. A Prince professing Christian Religion, abuses his Authority as much (or
rather more) when he imposes upon his Subjects, being Christians, any false
Worship, or such which is displeasing unto God. And however, when he
adventures to impose any Worship at all, not being infallible, he runs a
double hazard of abusing his Authority. For first, he may mistake the Worship,
which he imposes, supposing it to be legitimate, and pleasing unto God, when
(indeed) it is spurious, and an abhorring to his soul. Men of great learning
and parts, and studied in the Scriptures far above the ordinary rate of
Princes, have, with great confidence, built errors and mistakes as great and
dangerous as that, upon misprisions of Scriptuere. Secondly, The Prince we
speak of, runs yet a greater hazard of abusing his Authority in imposing any
Worship at all, because he cannot know, no nor yet conjecture upon any
probable or competent grounds, that it is pleasing unto God, that he should
impose any thing in this kind. Yea, it is scarce any question at all, but that
to compel men by penal threatenings and executions, to submit to any form or
kind of Worship, be it never so plausible, is an abuse of any created Authority
whatsoever.

Besides all this; If God imposes one and the same Worship, or kind of
Worship, upon all Nations under Heaven (which is a supposition of
unquestionable Truth, as was lately hinted with the ground of it) he should act
contrary to his own Design or Command in this behalf, in case he should give
Authority to the Rulers of these Nations, or to any party in them
(respectively) to set up or impose what forms or kinds of Worship they should
apprehend and judge to be most fitting to be imposed or set up. The grant of
such Authority would be a direct course to fill the world with as many forms
and shapes, or kinds of Worship, as there are Nations in it, and Rulers over
them; yea, and all that enormous variety of superstitious, idolatrous and false
Worships, which are, or have been imposed, countenanced, practiced in the
greatest part of these Nations, and which has been hitherto charged by
Christians generally upon the Devil, and his subtilty and bloody malice against
the precions Souls of men, must, upon a supposal of such a grant from God to
the Rulers of these Nations, as that mentioned, be rather resolved into God.
This Argument might be further improved, but that we make haste. Therefore

3. Neither does it in the Eye of Reason, look like one of the ways of God, to
leave some Men's Consciences free, and at liberry, to serve and worship him
according to the best of their understandings, and of that light of Knowledge
which he has given them; and yet withal, to subject and enslave the
Consciences of others unto the humors, wills, and fancies of men, in these
most high and sacred concernments. Least of all seems it to have any affinity
with his Righteousness, Wisdom and Impartialness, visible enough in all his
other Administrations, to subject the Consciences of such men who have known
the Scriptures from their youth, and have spent all their days, it may be many
years, in a conscientious and diligent study and search of them; and withal,
are known to be men of Integrity, of signal Piety, of great Knowledge in the
things of God, of a virtuous and Christian Conversation, etc. to subject (I
say) the Consciences of great numbers of such Persons as these, in matters
appertaining to the Worship of God, unto the pleasures, dictates, and conceits
of a few men, who have wholly (in a manner) addicted themselves either to other
studies, or to secular employments (if not to ways and practices more
alienating from God then these) and so must needs be (comparatively at least)
strangers to the Scriptures, and unacquainted with the mind of God here, is a
device or contrivance of quite another Spirit then that which breaths in all
the Councils, Dispensations, and Administrations of God. He did not make the
lesser but the greater Light to rule the Day: though he gave a great
pre-eminence in strength unto the Lion and the Unicorn, above Man, yet did he
not judge it meet to give unto either of them, Dominion over the Works of his
Hands, or to put all things under their feet: His Wisdom and Goodness invested
his Creature Man, (having furnished him with knowledge and understanding) with
this honor and dignity. Neither did he intend or make the Body to be the light
of the Eye, but the Eye to be the light of the Body, Mat. 6.22. Nor did he
order or intend the dim-sighted World for a light unto the Apostles, nor the
unsavory Earth to be as Salt to season them; but the Apostles to be the light
of the one, and the Salt of the other, Mat. 5.13, 14. They who are called to
places of Magistracy, or Rule, and to the honor of Law-making, in any State,
or Community of Men, look upon themselves as being at full liberty to abrogate
or repeal any Establishment, or Law, made by their Predecessors for the
worshipping of God in any external way or form of Worship; and consequently, as
being at liberty themselves to worship God for the future either with a set
Form, or without, as in their Consciences they shall judge it best pleasing
unto God. Yea, they claim a liberty, though they shall make a penal Law to
constrain the generality of their People to such or such a stinted Form in the
Worship of God, yet to grant unto what persons they please, whether of
themselves or others, an exemption from this Law. Now this is that which I
affirm, as the clear dictate of Reason, That God has left the Consciences of
all men equally bound, and equally free, in the matter of his Worship; and
that, as he has commanded and bound Kings and Princes, and Lawmakers
themselves, as well as meaner men, to worship and serve him with the best of
their understandings; so has he exempted even the meanest sort of men, as well
as Kings and Princes themselves, from all compulsion, whether by Laws, or
otherwise, to worship or serve him upon any other, I mean upon any lower,
meaner, or worse terms.

4, (And lastly, at present) Reason it self prompteth us with this Dilemma also
in the case: Either God has himself prescribed unto men how, or with what kind
of Worship he will be worshipped; or else he has done nothing in this kind,
but left men at liberty to worship so or so, as their own Judgments and
Consciences shall teach and direct them: If this latter be affirmed, (which yet
is not so Christian to affirm) then whosoever shall impose a particular form of
Worship upon men, opposes the Counsel and Design of God about his Worship,
which (according to the supposition we now argue) is to be worshipped as every
man's own Judgment and Conscience, not other men's, shall teach and direct him.
If the former horn of the Dilemma be taken hold of, and acknowledgement be
made, that God has himself prescribed and commanded his own Worship, the terms
and manner of it, (which I presume will be the sober Christians choice) then
for men to impose any other, any form of Worship of their own or other men's
devising, must needs be presumption in the highest. For what is this but to set
their thresholds by Gods threshold, and their posts by his posts? Ezekiel. 43.8.
yea, to affront the Wisdom of God with their wisdom, his Authority with theirs;
and as much as in them lies, by their Commandments to make the Commandments of
God of none effect.

If it be replied and said, That though it be granted, that God has prescribed
and commanded his own Worship, yet this is to be understood only of the matter
or substance of it in general (together with the inward manner of performing
it) not that he has prescribed any particular form of words, wherein or
wherewith he would have men constantly to worship him. If this were so, they
should sin as much against his Commandment of Worship, who worship him in or
with conceived Prayer, as they who prescribe forms of Prayers unto others;
inasmuch as no conceived Prayer is any whit more prescribed or commanded by
God, then a form of Prayer imposed; and as for the matter of either, conceived
Prayer is much more likely to be delinquent, then the other. For that which
has been deliberately composed and digested by many, and these equal (or
rather much superior) in Piety and parts of Learning, is like to have more
spiritual weight and worth in it, and be more acceptable unto God, then any
thing conceived, and uttered ex tempore, and without premeditation, by a single
person, and he (it may be) less considerable in both. To all this, I answer:

First, Conceived Prayer, is, for the nature and kind of it, that very Worship
(at least, as far as Worship consists in Prayer; for there may be other
Worship, or parts of Worship, then that which is exhibited or performed unto
God in Prayer) which he prescribes and commands, at least unto those that
are, or by the use of means, may be, capable of it, as all Ministers of the
Gospel generally are presumed to be. By conceived Prayer, I do not mean only
that kind of Prayer which is conceived and uttered ex tempore, without study or
premeditation, or which is never used but once by him that utters it; but
that likewise which is or has been conceived, framed, and digested by him that
utters it, although with deliberation and study, and has been frequently at
several times, especially if with any occasional variations, used by him. In
the Scriptures, especially in the New Testament (where the light shines
clearest for the discovery of the mind of God in all points concerning Prayer
and Worship) we hardly find the same prayer used the second time by the same
person. For though Christ be said to have prayed the same words a second and a
third time, yet by comparing Mat. 20.39. with v. 42. and 44. and Mark 14. v.
35. with 36. it appears that it is to be understood of the same words in sense,
matter, and import, or in effect; not the same in sound, letters, or syllables,
(words being put for matters or things frequently in the Scriptures:) yea, all
the Prayers here recorded to have been made, either by Christ himself, or by
his Apostles, or other holy persons, and which found acceptance which God, were
framed by them with a special and particular reference unto the present
occasions that were before them (respectively) and therefore cannot but be
judged to have been conceived Prayers (in the strictest sense of the Words)
yea, all the Exhortations unto the heavenly Exercise and Duty of Prayer,
delivered either by Christ or his Apostles, intended only that kind of Prayer,
which we commonly call conceived Prayer, which the Saints were to conceive and
indite by the help of the Spirit of God, ( Romans 8.27.) which they who believed
did receive, John 7.39. Act. 5.32. Romans 5.5. and 8.14, 15, 16. 2 Cor. 5.5. Gal.
3.2. Ephesians. 1.13. 1 These. 4.8. 1 John 2.27. and 3.24. and 4.13. which places,
(at least the most of them) cannot be understood either of the miraculous Gift
of the Holy Ghost, or of the giving of him to the Apostles only, and some
particular Christians with them. This will be evident unto those that shall
please to take a little pains to peruse and ponder them. Several others of like
import might be added unto them. Besides, that the said Exhortations unto
Prayer, were meant of conceived Prayer, and not of praying by any stinted form
imposed, at least by any Civil Authority, least of all imposed with threatenings
of Civil Mulcts and Penalties; are all of them Truths so full of their own
Light, that to levy any further proof of them, would be but as the lighting up
of a Candle to help men to see the Light of the Sun. Books, and forms of Prayer
of humane contrivance and imposition, would (we may very reasonably presume)
have been in the days of those Exhortations, and for many days after them, as
prodigious and astonishing unto Christians, as the turning of the Sun into
darkness, and the Moon into blood.

2dly. Whereas it was pleaded, That a Prayer framed by the concurrent abilities
and gifts of several pious and learned men, and this upon mature consideration,
must needs in Reason be a more effectual Prayer, and better accepted with God,
than a Prayer conceived and brought forth on the sudden by a particular man,
and he (many times) of no great parts or learning neither. I answer,

1. This plea of comparison between prayer and prayer, (be it admitted) does
not make the face of our Common Prayer Book to shine at all. For who can make
affidavit that the prayers here are the issue of the abilities or gifts, I do
not say of many, but of any pious or learned man? There is little question to
be made, but that in Latin it first saw the light of the Sun, when the gross
darkness of Popery was spread over the face of the Earth (in these parts of the
world) and when the mother of it (the Church of Rome I mean) was guilty but of
little Learning and less Piety. It is likest to have been the officious
elucubration of some superstitious Monk or Friar, calculated by the best of his
art and skill, for the meridian of the devotions of that Apostate Church in his
days. As for those worthy and good men in King Edward's days, who with a much
better intent than event, took pains to fetch it out of Latin into English,
making account that they had left all the dregs and excrementitious matter
behind them, we were their compurgators formerly that they were not the Authors
or Compilers of this unhappy Book, nor guilty of the folly committed in the
begetting of it.

2. The goodness or excellency of a Prayer for matter, phrase and structure, is
rather an argument why it should be left free for men to use, when, and as far
as they see cause, than why it should be imposed. Because, 1. The imposition of
it is rather matter of prejudice, and disparagement unto it, than otherwise;
Imposers seldom dealing in such commodities which are choice, sound and good,
but very frequently in those which are faulty, and base. 2. The imposition of
it alters the property of the goodness of it, and makes it to become an Idol
(as we formerly argued the case) and consequently exposes it to the jealousy
and high displeasure of God, and hereby to an utter abolition and ruin (as we
concluded likewise from the Scriptures) And therefore, as it is better, of the
two, to make an Idol of Dirt or Clay, or some such vile material, than of
Silver, or Gold, or of any thing of value, because it is better that that which
is of little worth should perish and be lost, than that which is more precious
and useful: so is it, in this respect at least, more to be wished, that such
prayers, and such forms of Divine Service (so called) which are corrupt, and
not fit to be used by any good Christian upon any terms, should be imposed,
than those which are more commendable, and might be some ways serviceable and
helpful to the piety and devotions of good people otherwise. 3. (and lastly,
for this) As Samuel in reproving Saul, demands; Has the Lord as great
delight in burnt offerings and Sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord?
Behold, to obey is letter than jacrifice, and to hearken, than the fat of
Lambs; 1 Samuel 15.22. So is a Prayer conceived and brought forth in obedience
unto the Counsel and Will of God, though it be not so eloquent, nor the matter
of it so choice, nor the method or frame of it so exact, of better acceptance
with God, than a Prayer read out of a Book, whether without or contrary unto
the Command of God; (for it has been proved from the Scriptures, that these
two, in the case of Worship, are but of one and the same consideration) yea,
though this prayer, for matter, language and frame, should be of as happy a
calculation, as the piety and parts of men in their greatest perfection, are
able to advance. But,

3. (And lastly) To the reason or ground of the Plea mentioned, I answer; That
in case a great number of men (supposing them both pious and learned) should
conveen and take what time they please, to compose a Prayer, with an intent to
impose it, or with a desire that it should be imposed upon their Christian
Brethren, it is not so probable (as is pleaded and pretended) that the Prayer
framed by them upon such terms should have any spiritual or real worth in it,
or prevailingness with God, above the prayer conceived and uttered without
premeditation (I mean, in reference unto this particular prayer, more than unto
others) by a person in gifts and parts of learning, inferior to them, only
supposing him to be a good man, and fearing God. For they who are employed
about making Prayers to be imposed upon Christians, are about Satan's work,
making Iron yokes and snares for the Sons and Daughters of God: and certain it
is that God takes no pleasure to be assisting unto men, no not unto his own, in
the way of such an occupation: and where God with his blessing is absent, no
undertakeing, especially no spiritual undertakeing, is like greatly to prosper
in the hands of men, though never so well accomplished for their work. Whereas
he that conscientiously addresleth himself unto God by prayer, and is careful
to pray according to his Will, does the work of God; and consequently, may (as
it were) of course expect the assisting presence of God with him in his way,
which many times acts men above their line and sphere; and at no time, when
it is vouchsafed, suffers them so to miscarry, as to lose their acceptance
with God.

And thus we see that all Worship, formed, prescribed, and imposed by men, is
heterogeneal and spurious, and which the Scriptures, yet and all principles of
sound reason disdain to give the right hand of fellowship unto.

What will our zealous and severe Promoters of the Common-Prayer-Book-Worship,
say to these things? If God be against them in their Cause, who or what can be
with them (to any purpose?) The colors wherewith they commonly paint the face
of it, to give it the best complexion it will take, are very washy, faint, and
fading: So that what Austin spoke in a case that would not so well bear it, I
may, upon a tried account, say concerning the Cause that now has been argued:
Scio contra hanc, quam defendimus, sententiam, neminem nisi errando disputare
posse: I know that no man can dispute against the opinion we maintain, but by
erring [from the Truth.] The common Pleas for the lawfulness of the use of
stinted Forms of Prayer, I pass over, only with these two Memorandums: 1. That
the most substantial proof of the mere lawfulness of them, will not reach the
justification of the use of them by any Person (much less will it justify the
penal imposition of them:) the reason is, because there is nothing done by any
person in or about the Worship or Service of God, but is either more then
lawful (as either expedient or necessary) or else unlawful. That which is
expedient, or fitting to be done in the case we speak of, is (to a degree at
least, or in a sense) necessary; and so more then simply or merely lawful: that
which is not expedient, or not fitting to be done, is (questionless) if it be
done, unlawful. Therefore they that undertake to prove the lawfulness of set
Forms of Prayer, and no more, though they should make good their enterprise,
yet would they not hereby lay a sufficient Foundation for any person actually
to use them. The reason hereof may be touched before we conclude. Yea, it is as
true of all deliberate and moral actions, that the lawfulness of them simply
and indefinitely considered, does not prove it to be absolutely or universally
lawful for any man to do them; but only under and with appropriate and due
circumstances. Therefore (to put in this by the way) to justify the lawfulness
of the use of things indifferent in the Worship of God, merely upon this
ground, that they are indifferent in themselves, and out of the Worship of
God, and so lawful, is sufficiently ridiculous and childish: but to justify
this use of them against the grain of so many material and weighty
circumstances as rise up against it, and with greatest importunity dissuade
from it (especially in this Nation) is little less then bidding a defiance to
all Christian Ingenuity, and a disclaiming of all respects both to God and Man.
2. That the lawfulness of stinted Liturgies, or set Forms of Prayer, though
never so demonstratively proved, would be no salve to heal the sore (or rather
the many sores) of the English Service Book: Some account hereof was given
toward the beginning.

The bent of the present discourse has stood chiefly against the imposition of
Forms for the Worship of God, and partly against a submission to the use of
them upon the account of such imposition. Let us now taste the spirit of those
Arguments, or of some of the chief of them, by which the Lords and Masters of
these impositions are wont to endeavor to make that which is crooked,
straight. They that of old pleaded for Idols, had (it seems) their strong
Reasons (such as they thought strong) to maintain the Cause of their Clients.
Produce your Cause, says the Lord: bring forth your strong Reasons, etc. Isa.
41.21. And men of imposing Principles, appear upon all occasions, to be as
confident as they were, who went before them in the way of their iniquity,
binding heavy burdens, and grievous to be born, and laying them on men's
shoulders, (as our Savior charge the Scribes and Pharisees to have done in
his days, Mat. 23.4.) Some of these, in the height of their confidence, that
whoever were ignorant, they were men of knowledge, and of profound and sharp
understandings, demanded of Christ (in the name, as it seems, of all their
fellows) not with a little indignation, Are we blind also? ( John 9.40.) being
jealous that he had sorely disparaged them, in binding them up in the same
bandle with the ignorant world. But as highly conceited as they were of their
knowledge and wisdom, the Lord Christ, dealing plainly with them, in reproving
them, calls them fools, and blind guides, over and over, Mat. 23.16, 17, 19.
And (if it be lawful to call a Spade a Spade) the great Proctors of the
Impositions we speak of (reserving unto them all the honor due unto their
learning and parts, otherwise) when they rise up in their might to plead for
these (...), professing themselves to be wise [and to carry all clear before
them] they become fools [and leave their Cause quite behind them] Romans 1.22.
yea in these Disputes they seem scarce men, or to have put away childish
things. A late great Hyperaspistes of Liturgical devotions, and withal (as you
may presume) of all their appurtenances, and pre-requisites, as 1. Episcopacy
(the Pillar, and Groundwork of all) 2. Of Penal Impositions of them, without
which they would not be suffered to live, where the light of true Christianity
shines. 3. Of subjection to the Com^ands of Authority, whether with scruple,
or without, a Principle that will enable men to swallow them, though they be
Camels (with several other Hierarchical notions, and devices, necessary for
the supporting of that frame) this Champion (I say) of Liturgies, who allows
us not the liberty of calling him by his Name, yet insulteth with this
Argument, over all that opposes him in his way. That Service of God which is
consonant to holy Scripture, is lawful:
The Service of God performed by a Prescribed Liturgy, is consonant to holy
Scripture. Ergo.
This Syllogism, were it narrowly sifted, how much dross would be found in it!
Both Propositions being ambiguous, and speaking nothing distinctly, the whole
Argument amounts to nothing, unless it be a snare to catch the unwary and less
considerate. For the Philosophers Rule is true: (...). Not to signify one
thing [distinctly, and with determination] is to signify nothing. Let us touch
a particular or two, in either Proposition. In the Major,

1. The word lawful, signifies both that which is lawful simply, or in the
nature of it, and circumstances secluded, or that which is lawful in the
practique of it, where circumstances always have to do, and many times render
that unlawful in the doing, or to be done, which in the nature of it, was
lawful enough, and might have been lawful also in the Practice. We shall not
need to give Instance: the Notion is common and clear. So then, this
Proposition, That Service of God which is consonant to the holy Scripture, is
lawful, may be true in the former sense of the word lawful, and yet false in
the latter (which yet, questionless, is the sense of the Syllogizer: for he
argues for the lawfulness of the use or practice of the Service he speaks) For
that Service of God, which is really, truly, and in it self consonant to holy
Scripture, may be distonant and contrary hereunto in the judgment and
conscience of those on whom it is imposed, and so the use of it, during this
state of their judgment, unlawful unto them. There are other circumstances,
besides this now mentioned, which may render even such a Service of God as is
consonant to holy Scripture, unlawful to be practiced. But we shall leave these
at present, to exercise the Thinking faculty of the Disputer. Only I desire
leave to put this Question to him at this turn: Whether, it being supposed,
that the Service of God, contained in the Liturgy of Basil, Gregory, or any of
those now used in many of the Reformed Churches, is as consonant to the holy
Scripture, as that set forth in the English Service Book, is notwithstanding
lawful to be used by the Ministers of this Nation? If not (for I presume he
will appear on the denying hand) then is there somewhat more than a conso^ancy
to holy Scripture, required to make the Service of God LAWFUL in the practique
of it, and this, in the judgment of this Argumentator, must be the Command of
that Authority, within the Jurisdiction of which it is performed. A worthy
Position! the Consequences whereof I wish he would seriously and unpartially
compute at his leisure. But,

2. Neither is this expression, or phrase, consonant to the holy Scripture,
free from ambiguity in the sense and meaning of it, as the Episcopal dialect
has enlarged its signification. For they who are wont to plead for an
imposition of Liturgies and Ceremonies, call that which is not contrary to the
express letter of some particular prohibition or other, in the Scripture,
consonant to the Scripture, as well as that which is agreeable to some express
command there. Now then, if by consonant to holy Scripture, he only means, not
repugnant, or not contrary, to some express prohibition in holy Scripture, his
Proposition is broadly repugnant unto the Truth. For it has been formerly
proved from the holy Scripture, that in matter of Worship, not to be commanded,
and to be prohibited, are of a like consideration before God. Therefore that
Service of God, which is consonant to the holy Scripture only in that
Episcopally-appropriate sense of the phrase, is not upon such an account,
lawful. And that this is, or must be his sense of the said phrase, or
expression, is evident from hence, because otherwise his Argument would have
nothing to do with his Cause. For certain it is, That prescribed Liturgies, or,
the Service of God performed by them, are not consonant to holy Scripture in
the other sense of the phrase; that is, are neither formally, or expressly, nor
yet virtually, or consequentially commanded there. Thus we see the Major
Proposition of the Grand Sylegism in the Grand Debate, is homonymous, captious,
and fallacious: which is enough to lay the credit of the Argument managed in
it, in the dust. Yet neither is the Minor better conditioned, if not worse. For,

1. Here we have our double-tongu'd expression again, Consonant to holy
Scripture. So that here is lying in wait also for those that do not look well
about them.

2. These words, a Prescribed Liturgy, are as double-minded, as those other.
For they may signify, either a Liturgy only penned, or drawn up, in a method,
or form of words, and phrases, and proposed to be used direction, wise, in, or
about the Service of God: or else, a Liturgy imposed by Authority, under civil
mulcts and penalties. The word, Prescribed, is, and may be taken, either in the
one, or in the other of these significations. Though in the former sense of the
words, the Proposition should be admitted, yet in the other it will make
Anti-Scriptural Divinity. For, The Service of God performed by an IMPOSED
Liturgy, is (as has been formerly proved) so far from being consonant to holy
Scripture, that the high displeasure of God is here revealed from Heaven
against it. But enough of this in the Premises. Yet,

3. (And lastly) Suppose we should be so prodigal, as to give away all we have
in exception against both this and the former Proposition, (which amounts, as
we have found by computing it, to be no small sum) and so grant Conclusion
and all, and all in the Disputers own sense (so that this be not too
unreasonably exorbitant from his words) yet should we not hereby gratify him
at all in (the beloved of his soul) the English Service Book. For when he says
(in this latter Proposition) The Service of God performed by a prescribed
Liturgy, is consonant to holy Scripture, I cannot think that by A Liturgy, he
means, any Liturgy whatsoever, or that is possible to be invented by men
(although the expression, whatsoever his meaning be, is not competent or
workman-like) but such a Liturgy which shall contain nothing in it, either in
matter or form, contrary to any precept, or direction found in the Word of God.
Because it is too too plain and palpable a case, that the Service of God
performed by any other Liturgy, than one of this calculation, cannot be
consonant to the holy Scripture. Now then this being his meaning in the Minor
Proposition, his Argument with the largest indulgence of approbation and
consent, concludes nothing in favor of his Service Book, nor proves, that The
Service of God, performed by it, is consonant to the holy Scripture. For that
there are some things contained in this Liturgy, or Book, which are contrary
to precepts and directions found in the Word of God, was showed toward the
beginning of this Discourse; and might be proved in many more particlars, than
are there produced. We need go no further than to the Letany (so called) of
which such glorious things are spoken by this Author, page 8. that he seems to
adore the fullness of it, as much as Austine did, plenitudinem Scripturae, the
fullness of the Scriptures themselves: and more generally, the men of his
inspiration are impotent in their Elogiums and commendations of this piece, as
if in it they saw the Service Book in all her glory. Yet unto him that shall
weigh it exactly in the balance of the Sanctuary, it will (I believe) appear
to be a very corrupt member, and in which the unclean Spirit of Will Worship
acts his part, in some things more childishly, but in more, more
contradictingly to the right rule of Worship, than in any other part of the
Book. Yea, were there a diligent and narrow search made into it, a just volumn
might be made of the weak and unworthy things (only with their sober and
necessary explications) that would be found in it. First, It is no good Omen,
that in the very Inscription, or Title of it, where it is ordered, or
commanded, to be used on certain days, as on Sundays, Wednesdayes, and
Fridayes, there is a manifest contrariety to the Holy Scripture, which
reproves and consequently prohibiteth, the observation of Days and Times, as
well as of Months and Years, Gal. 4.10. And why not on Tuesdayes and
Thursdayes, as well as on Wednesdaies and Fridaies? Doubtless upon no better
account, than that on which Jeroboam offered upon the Altar which he had made
in Bethel, on the fifteenth day of the eighth month, even the month which he
had devised of his own heart, 1 Kings 12.33. If such devices as this be not the
very quintessence, and spirit of Will Worship, I confess I have no
understanding in the Mystery. Again, when it is commanded to be USED on
Sundays, etc. the meaning of the word used (as the use and practice allowed, if
not commanded also, in those Churches or Chapels, termed Collegiate,
interprets it) is (distributively) either sung or said, the like liberty
being granted in these words, concerning, venite exultemus. Now the Scripture
in the New Testament makes a slat opposition between praying and singing, Jam.
5.13. Nor does it speak any where of singing any thing, but either of Psalms,
or Hymns, or Songs. Now then if the Letany be a Prayer, one or many, and not a
Psalm, Hymn or Song, it cannot be sung with any consonancy to holy Scripture.
Thus we see the very door opening into the admired Letany, is polluted: let us
view the Fabric it self a little, we shall soon find more irregularities, and
pollutions here.

1. How often do they that pray by this Letany, transgress our Saviors rule
concerning Prayer, (...) use no battologies or needless repetitions? 1. When
the Minister prays, O God the Father of Heaven, have mercy upon us miserable
sinners, I desire to know, 1. Whether this be an entire Prayer, or a piece of a
Prayer. 2. Be it an entire Prayer, or a piece of a Prayer, Whether it is not
intended that the People present should join with him in it, and pray for the
same thing, when and whilst he prays? If this be so, (and I presume that for
shame it will not be denied) then it is a battologie, or needless repetition,
for the People immediately, and as it were with the same breath, to repeat or
pray over the same words again; O God the Father of Heaven, etc. So then
according to this account, if the Minister prays with the People, as they
pray with him, our Saviors rule against needless repetitions in prayer, is no
fewer than four several times broken on both hands, within the compass of the
four first petitions, or Prayers of the said Letany. Or if such repetitions as
these be not vain and needless, and such as Christ prohibited, I desire the
great Master of this piece of devotion, that he will (...) Distinguish between
repetitions, and repetitions, and define which are needless, and which are
necessary, and then 2. Give us a substantial account that those mentioned, are
of the latter, not of the former kind. But to our Query; If the words queried
upon, contain an entire Prayer, why do not the People testify their consent
and desire to have it granted, by saying Amen at the end of it, (as himself
says, p. 14. that men are obliged to say unto such Prayers, and as is more
agreeable to holy Scripture, 1 Cor. 14.16.) rather then instead thereof to
repeat the words of the Prayer? Certainly there cannot be a more pregnant
instance of a vain and needless repetition then this, since the word Amen would
signify altogether as much, yea the very same thing which this repitition
does. If the said words be to be taken as a Petition only, and as a member and
part of a Prayer, why do the People interrupt the Minister in the midst of his
Prayer, seeming rather to affront and mock him, by saying the same words after
him, then to express any seriousness of Devotion with him? Therefore in this
notion of the words, there is in the Peoples repetition of them, a manifest
insurrection against that Apostolical Precept, Let all things be done decently,
and in order. Or is it decent and orderly, that the Minister should not be
suffered by the People to finish the Prayer which he has begun, without their
interruption? Again,

2. This unchristian misdemeanour of battologizing, is committed seven or eight
times over, in the repetition of these words by the People, Good Lord deliver
us. For why should not the prolation of them only once, be as effectual for
all needful ends and purposes, as the making of so many sounds of the same
words, so nigh together? But it is well, as the case stands, that the fond
spirit of VVill-VVorship contented himself here with so few miscarriages in
vain repetitions, as seven or eight, when as, upon as good an account in
reason, he might have multiplied them to seventeen or eighteen, or to a greater
number: at which stone, being blind, he stumbled soon after, in prescribing
these words, We beseech thee to hear us good Lord, to be repeated twenty, or
one and twenty times over, within the compass of so much devotion as may be
dispatched without making haste, within the space of half a quarter of an hour.
But

3. Besides these gross and palpable Battologies, which cannot lightly escape
any man's eye, that does but cursorily view that highly honored, but more
justly condemned, Model of Devotion, the Letany: there are several others
obnoxious enough to a little observation. For, 1. Presently after request here
made for deliverance from all evil and mischief, and from sin; another request
is made for deliverance from some evils, and some sins, as from Pride,
Vainglory, Hypocrisy, etc. from Fornication, and all other deadly sin, [as if
Pride, Hypocrisy, Malice, Envy, etc. were but sins venial.] By the way, They
that are so desirous to cover the shame of the Romish Parentage of their
sarling Letany, much forget themselves, to suffer so express a linea^ent of her
Mothers feature to be seen in her face, as the making only of some sins
deadly, (which supposes others to be venial.) 2. After deliverance begged from
the crafts and assaults of the Devil, the like deliverance is within two or
three lines begged again from all the deceits of the Devil; and afterward,
from those evils which the craft and subtilty of the Devil works against us.
3. After prayer made for deliverance from contempt of Gods Word and
Commandment, prayer is here again made that we may diligently live after his
Commandments; and the third time, that we may amend our lives according to his
holy Word. Passages and expressions symbolizing in words, sense, and meaning,
as near as these, found in the conceived Prayer of an Anti-formist, would be
called tautologies, to the great disgrace and contempt of it, by persons who
have addicted themselves to Liturgical (I had almost said, Lethargical)
Devotions. 4. When prayer has been here made unto God to give and preserve to
our use THE FRUITS OF THE EARTH, so as in due time we may enjoy them; we are
compelled to pray again in dry weather, for such moderate rain and showers,
that we may RECEIVE THE FRUITS OF THE EARTH to our comfort, etc. and yet again
in wet weather, for such weather whereby we may RECEIVE THE FRUITS OF THE EARTH
in due season; and yet after all this, That our Land may yield us HER FRUITS of
increase. 5. After the People have prayed, Have mercy upon us, (being beholding
to their Minister for a Vocative-case) they must pray out of hand yet again,
Lord have mercy upon us; and for all this, yet again, Christ have mercy upon
us; and after all these agains, yet again (once more) Lord have mercy upon us:
and now all the Beads of this string are told. 6. This Prayer, O Lord arise,
help us and deliver us for thy Names sake; is presently after corrected and
amended only thus, O Lord arise, help us and deliver us for thine Honor. 7.
When we have prayed, From our Enemies defend us, O Christ; we must pray unto
Almighty God, (as if our Letany did a little Socinianize) Save and deliver us
from -- the hands of our Enemies. 8. About the middle of this Letany, after the
thick and short Prayers, the Minister, as if the People and he had been idle
until now, or at least about some other business then praying, admonishes his
People to pray; saying unto them, Let us pray. 9. (And lastly, to pass by
several other impertinent Duplicats and Multiplicats, or vain repetitions of
Petitions within the compass of the Letany only) When the Minister and People
shall have prayed with the uttermost devotion they can make between them, for
Charles our most gracious King and Governor, for our gracious Queen Katharine,
Mary the Queen Mother, James Duke of York, etc. they must recruit their
Devotions very speedily, or else they will pray the second time (which is not
far off) but coldly for our most gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles, our
gracious Queen Katharine, etc.

2. Neither is this admired piece of Devotion so notoriously deformed (as we
have seen) with Tautologies and empty Repetitions only, it has sundry other
Ailments and Diseases hanging upon it. 1. All those eight Petitions or Prayers
(if such they be) put into the mouth of the Minister, unto which so many
Good-Lord-deliver-us's are subjoyned, as far as the Minister utters or
prays them, are absolute and gross Nonsense, having no Verb at all in them,
only the People are enjoined to supply the defects of their Minister, and to
underprop his pendulous words with a principal Verb; and so between the
Premises of the one, and the Conclusion of the other, we have (with much ado) a
Syllogism of Prayer formed. That the Minister should pray by halves, or make
half a Prayer, and the People pray another half Prayer, and these two halfs be
clapped together to make a whole Prayer, is (certainly) a newfangled device of
praying, and such whereof the Scripture, yea, and all Principles of Reason, not
superstitionized, are ashamed. But, 2. Though Good-Lord-deliver-us, joined to
the preceding words of the Minister, make a competent and grammatical sense
together; yet those one and twenty Some-whats, (for Prayers they are not, and
what distinct appellation to give them, I know not) which are relieved with the
like number of We-beseech-thee to-hear-us-Good-Lords, do not of themselves make
any sense at all, nor any very good sense in conjunction with the words
assigned unto them for their relief: For to say, That it may please thee to do
this and that, We beseech thee to hear us good Lord, is little better then a
Soloecism; at the best but an unusual and harsh construction.

3. Here are several expressions and passages besides, not so considerate or
well-digested. 1. To pray to be delivered from Deadly Sins, (which supposes
the distinction of Sins into venial and mortal, to be consonant to the
Scriptures) sounds rather Pontifician then Protestant Devotion (though I think
the distinction may in a sense be admitted) this was touched before. 2. To pray
unto God to preserve all that travel by Land or by Water; is it not to pray for
High-way-men and Thieves, Pirates, and Murderers (if they be traveling either
by Land or Water) that they may escape the danger of being apprehended and
punished for their wickedness, and consequently that they may have peace and
continue undisturbed in their horrid practices, as well as honest and harmless
men in such a condition? 3. These expressions, By thy Agony and bloody Sweat,
by thy Cross and Passion, etc. be they intended, whether sensu Mediatorio,
Adjurativo, re-memorativo, or in what sense soever, make no good sound in the
ears of a good Conscience, especially that is tender and unlearned. 4. Every
person that is enjoined to pray for the sending down of the HEALTHFUL Spirit of
Grace upon our Bishops and Curats, etc. hardly understands, in what sense, why
or how, the Spirit of God is here termed healthful. 5. That God should be
considered in his power of working Great Miracles, when he is desired to send
down his Spirit upon our Bishops and Curats, etc. Does it imply (for it seems
so to do) that God works a great Miracle when he sends down his healthful
Spirit upon any of our Bishops and Curats? etc. 6. (And lastly) That Bishops
should be here twice prayed for, whenas the Lords of the Council, and all the
Nobility, have only one prayer allowed them, and this a very short and simple
one, may reasonably be imputed to their great need of being often prayed for,
their wants being great and many, and their temptations many through their
great abundance: which might likewise unhappily occasion their desire, that the
Prayer for them, and their Curats (for so they are wont to interpret, Pastors
and Ministers of the Church) might have the precedence of the Prayer of the
Lords of the Council and all the Nobility. Thus much (by the way) concerning
the Letany, the Head Quarters of the Service Book, where the highest strains
of Devotion, that rule here, are supposed to lodge and reside. That they so
much admire it who are so deep in love with it, needs be no man's admiration. It
is a riming Proverb (I suppose) of the same race and descent with the Book it
self: Si quis amat ranam, ranam putat esse Dianam.
One silly Frog who dotes in love, will swear,
Diana's beauty shines not more clear.
I have at (present) taken notice only of a few of the deformed lineaments in
the face of it; in my survey of it, I discovered many more: but those mentioned
I judge competent to break the snare, which the zealous and importune
commendations of it by some, who have (most unworthily) enslaved themselves in
Devotion to it, may prove unto others, who (happily) would be more enclinable to
worship God purely, and with acceptance, were not this uncouth Form of
Devotion with swelling words of vanity obtruded on them. Never was there (I
verily believe) a Liturgy, or piece of any Liturgy, of so wild and barbarous,
of so misshapen, odd and disordered a contrivance, that ever presumed to look
the world in the face; or at least, that was gloried over at the tenth part of
that rate, at which so many men of commendable parts, learning, and
understanding otherwise, make boast of the English Letany. The Apostles
expostulatory question to the Galatians, might be very seasonably put to them
at this turn, (...), Gal. 3.1.

We now return to the pursuit of our main undertaking, where we brake off from
it upon occasion of that diversion, with which the Reader has been made
acquainted. We had proceeded so far in asserting it, as the incommunicable
Prerogative of God, to appoint and enjoin his own Worship, that there remained
nothing of what was further intended herein, but only the satisfying of such
Arguments, or pretenses, by which this Prerogative of God is attempted to be
overthrown, by entitling men to a right of power to impose Worship of their own
prescribing, as well as He.

First, The examples of the godly Kings in Juda, as of David, Asa, Jehoshaphat,
Hezekiah, Josiah, etc. interposing and imposing, in Religious affairs, are
frequently employed for the justification of the imposition of Forms of Worship
by the Christian Magistrate, and this under very grievous mulcts and penalties,
at this day. I answer, they may be employed for such a purpose, and yet to very
little or no purpose at all. For,

1. These Kings had holy Prophets amongst them, immediately inspired by God,
who from time to time, upon all occasions, were sent unto them with the mind of
God in their mouths, 1 Samuel 22.5. 2 Samuel 7.4, 5. and 12.1. 2 Kings 19.2, 6, 7,
etc. 2 Chronicles. 15.1, 2. and 18.7, 18, etc. and 19.2. and 20.14, 15, etc. and
25.7, 8, 9, 15. and 26.5. and 34.21, 22, 23, etc. Whereas Magistrates in these
days have no such internuncij between God, and them, infallibly to declare his
mind unto them in difficult cases.

2. They had the mouth of God himself always near unto them by Urim and
Thummim; by consulting by these, they might know his mind in all cases of
concernment, and be resolved in all their doubts, without any danger of
mistake. See and compare, Number. 27.21. and 1 Samuel 23.2, 4, 9. and 30.7. and
28.6. Surplice and Lawn-sleeves are not Urim and Thummim.

3. However the said Kings interposed with their Authority in matters of
Religion, yet they never imposed upon their People any new Form of Worship,
either of their own or other men's devising: but on the contrary still
interdicted and prohibited all such kinds, methods, and manners of Worship
which were of Humane Invention, as being provoking in the sight of God,
defacing, abolishing, and destroying all their accoutrements, and whatsoever
was relating unto such Worship, either in a way of allurement or provocation,
or of subserviency in any kind; yea, they spared not the Priests themselves,
the Grand Promoters of this Worship, but did severe execution upon them also, 1
Kings 13.2. compared with 2 Kings 23.20. and 2 Chronicles. 34.5. Now then to reason
thus; The Kings of Juda had power to enjoin the Worship of God appointed and
commanded by God himself, and to abolish all other kinds of Worship of a
Foreign and Humane extraction: Therefore Christian Magistrates have a right of
Power to appoint and in join what Forms or Kinds of Worship they please,
whether they be prescribed and appointed by God or no; to reason thus (I say)
plainly argues, that men have taken some bribe, or other, to blind the eyes of
their minds and understandings.

4. Whatsoever was done by the godly Kings of Juda in matters of Religion, was
plainly commanded by God himself in the Law of Moses: in what they did upon
this account, they neither added to, nor took from his Word. See Exodus 23.24.
Deuteronomy. 7.5. and 12.2, 3. Exodus 34.13. And for the Commands of God, relating unto
his external Worship, and to the preservation hereof in purity, which were
delivered unto the Jews, other than such which the Law and Light of Nature also
teaches (which were not many, if any in this kind) are not only not oblieging
upon any other Nation, but are no sufficient Warrant unto any to practice, or
put in execution, the things commanded in them. One reason whereof, may be,
because they were given unto the Jews with special reference unto the counsel
and design of God in, and about that Nation and People, and are not serviceable
for any design, which at this day he has on foot, in, or about any Nation in
the World; as (for instance) to make any of them typically holy. I suppose that
no considering man will affirm, that those Laws, or Commands, laid down, Deuteronomy.
13.5. and v. 8, 9, 10. and v. 15, 16, 17. which were as effectually binding
unto the Jews, and their Rulers, as any Moral Precept, will justify in these
days any Nation or Magistrate, that shall do the things contained in them. So
then, that the godly Kings of Juda did that in matters of Religion, lawfully,
yea or commendably, which they were by God commanded to do, is only a
prevaricating Argument, to prove, that Christian Magistrates may do that,
either commendably, or lawfully in matters of the same concernment, which God
has not commanded them.

5. When these Kings did command the observation of those very things by the
People, which God himself had commanded them in his Law, the People, (at least
such as feared God, and best understood themselves among them) did not so much
mind the Kings Authority in commanding them, as the Command of God himself
concerning them. When that good King Josiah made a Covenant before the Lord, to
walk after the Lord and keep his Commandments, etc. and caused all that were
present of Jerusalem and Benjamin, to stand to it, it is expressly said, That
the inhabitonts of Jerusalem did according to the Covenant of God, the God of
their Fathers; implying, that it was the Covenant or Commandment of God for the
doing of those things, which the King caused them to promise they would do,
which principally moved them to that obedience which they yielded unto them,
and not the motion, or (if we will not be content without more than is due) the
command of the King. 2 Chronicles. 34.31, 32.

6. The Kings we spoke of, were Types of Christ, who was as well a Prophet, as
a King: and in this respect it was proper for them to take care of, and to
interpose in, matters relating to the Worship of God, as well as to the Civil
Government. But since Christ's coming in the flesh, types either in persons, or
in things, have no place in the Church. So that to vest a power of regulating
and ordering the Worship of God in Christian Kings, is to make them Types of
Christ, and consequently to deny, that Christ is come in the flesh. Upon the
like account the High Priests among the Jews, being also Types of Christ, who
was as well a King as a Priest, the better to answer and fill their relation to
their Great Antitype, were admitted by God into part and fellowship of the
Civil Government. But for Ministers of the Gospel to admit of politic
investitures, or to accept or exercise any Civil Power, is to Judaize, and to
deny him that bought them, to be as yet come into the World. But that the Kings
of Judah were Types of Christ, is evident, and withal generally acknowledged in
the persons of the two first of that race, which was in special manner
appointed by God to sit upon that Throne, David and Solomon: and there is
little reason to question the same relation in the rest, considering that they
also were Heads over the same typical Nation, and exercised the same Bipartite
power in governing it, which the other did; not to add that they were also in
their Loy^s, when they acted in the typical relation mentioned, and so in a
sense (frequently owned in the Scripture) were that, and did that, which they
(their forefathers) were, and did.

7. The Nation and People over which these Kings reigned, were designed, and
accordingly prepared and fitted by God, to be made a Nation and People
typically holy; that is, presignificant, or pre-figurative, by and in their
external and ceremonial Holiness and Conformity to the Worship of God then
prescribed unto them, of the real sanctity and holiness, as well inward as
outward, which was to be found in Christian Churches, and in the People of God
under the Gospel. This typical consideration of the Nation of the Jews, is more
then overtur'd or sparingly intimated in the Scriptures: The Apostle Paul
plainly asserteth it, where he says, For we [Christians and true Believers]
are the Circumcision [that is, the People prefigured by those that were
circumcised, meaning the Jews; the Antitype being often expressed by the name
of the Type, as Romans 1.28, 29. Jer. 30.9. Ezekiel. 34.23, 24. and 37.24, 25. Mat.
11.14. and 17.2. Heb. 13.10. Rev. 2.9. and 3.9. with others] which worship God
in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, etc. Philip. 3.3. See further to
this purpose, 1 Pet. 2.9. and what Expositors generally, and more especially
the Dutch Annotators write hereon. Now to order this Nation so, that it might
serve the Counsel of God in its typical Relation specified, upon the better and
more significant terms, it was necessary that by a strong hand, and by the
Authority and Power of their chief Rulers, they should be kept in a Conformity
to the Law of God concerning his Worship (especially) and not suffered (as far
as might be) to corrupt themselves with any false Worship, or by going a
whoring after any strange God. And it was the rather necessary that they should
be thus restrained from polluting themselves with Idolatry in any kind, because
they were (more generally) excessively prone to break out in this way of
sinning, and had many temptations from the Nations round about them, to entice
and provoke them accordingly; the means of Grace (in the mean time) by which
men are, contrary to their sinful propensions, drawn to love, and fear, and
cleave fast, and close unto God, being but very sparingly, and by scant
measures, in respect of Gospel-allowance, vouchsafed unto them. Now then, there
being nothing of all this long story, belonging unto, or found in Christian
Churches, who live under Christian Kings, but all things contrary or otherwise,
it is very importune, and against the grain of all reason, to subject these
Churches unto these Kings upon the same terms on which the Church or Nation of
the Jews was by God himself subjected under theirs. The Rule in reason is,
Contrariorum contraria [non eadem] sunt consequentia: Contraries have
Consequences, not the same, but as contrary as themselves.

8. The Kings of Judah were nominated and appointed by God himself immediately
unto this Kingdom: the Throne whereof was settled by him upon David and his
Posterity, as an heritage for ever, (1 Samuel 16.12. 2 Samuel 7.12, 16. 1 King.
2.4. and 8.25. and elsewhere:) So that though the People accepted them
[respectively and successively] for their Kings, and invested them with their
Ensigns of Royalty, and so are said to have made them Kings; yet their Right
and Title to the Kingdom, was given unto them by God without the People, and
before they had declared their acceptance or owning of them. Now then, as they
were Kings extraordinarily called by God, without any dependence upon, or
mediation of the People by their election unto the Throne: so their Authority
and Power were in an extraordinary way also, and by an unusual line, measured
and set out unto them. For as God, when he unbareth his Arm, and works
Miracles, is observed in such works as these, to exceed that rate of Perfection
at which he works in the ordinary and standing course of his Providence, and
in conjunction with inferior and second Causes, (many fair overtures, if not
full proofs whereof, the Scripture affords us, and the reason likewise of the
thing, is not far of, although we shall not now touch it:) So likewise when he
gives Authority and Power unto Kings and Princes immediately by himself, it is
very reasonable to conceive that he gives it by a larger measure, then when he
imparts and communicats it by the People: For, as observing the course of
Nature, he cannot cause a Sheep to bring forth a Lion, although by his
unlimitted Power he is able to create a Lion of what stature, and strength, and
fierceness he pleases: So when he joyneth himself with the People in deriving
Authority and Power unto Kings (which he always does, when he uses their
mediation in the election of Kings) he can derive no more of these unto them,
then what is competent for the People to derive with him; yea, no more then
what he makes the People willing as well as able to derive with him: However,
(as has been said) if he pleases to make Kings immediately, of and by
himself, without the People, he may invest them with what proportion of both he
pleases. So then, the measure or proportion of Authority and Power which was
vested by God in, and accordingly exercised by the Kings of Judah, is no steady
ground whereon to warrant the same proportion or measure unto Christian Kings.
The reason hereof has been expressed already; namely, because no King of this
denomination received his call unto his Royal Dignity immediately from God, as
those Kings received theirs; but all of them mediante Populo, mediately by and
from the People: and consequently can have no other, no more, or greater Power
then what is or was inherently in the People, and lawful for them to part with
unto them. And certain it is, that no person can lawfully or reasonably give a
power unto any man to regulate his Conscience about the Worship of God, as he
pleases; himself having no power in this kind, but only to regulate it
according to the Will and Commandment of God. Neither had the Kings of Judah
themselves any such power as this given unto them by God, as has been formerly
showed.

9. (And lastly) Notwithstanding all the great power they had from God, yet
when any of these Kings did cause their People to enter into a Religious
Covenant or Oath, they did it not against the wills, no nor without the consent
of their People; yea, these were as forward and active in the business as the
Kings themselves: And they [King Asa, with the generality or Body of his
People, as appears from the Context, both subsequent and preceding] entered
into a Covenant to seek the Lord God of their Fathers, with all their heart,
and with all their soul; That whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel,
should be put to death, whether small or great, whether man or woman. And they
swear unto the Lord with a loud voice, and with shouting, and with Trumpets,
and with Cornets. And ALL Judah rejoiced at the Oath: for they had sworn with
all their heart, etc. 2 Chronicles. 15.12, 13, 14, 15. So that the King imposed
nothing upon the People, but what they most freely, yea most joyfully imposed
upon themselves. And that is observable by the way, that there is no other
penalty or punishment any where threatened against any transgressor of any
Order, Edict, or Imposition, concerning Religion, or the Worship and Service of
God, published by any of the said good Kings, either with or without their
People, but only that of death; which is the punishment expressly commanded by
God himself to be inflicted in such cases; I mean upon Idolaters lawfully
convicted, ( Deuteronomy. 17.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.) Yea, Jehosaphat would not so much as
appoint Singers unto the Lord to go before the Army, without consultation first
had with the People about it, 2 Chronicles. 20.21. See also concerning Hezekiah, 2
Chro. 30.2, 4, 5. They who would compel the good Kings of Judah to invest
Christian Magistrates with their power, in matters of Religion, do very
unworthily in restraining them from instructing these Magistrates by their
worthy Examples in and about the exercise of this power. But I trust that from
henceforth these good Kings will be innocent from the great offense of
strengthening the hand of Christian Magistrates in oppressing the Consciences of
their good Subjects with penal Impositions in matters of Religion.

Secondly, Some plead, That God has admitted Caesar (the Christian Caesar)
into part and fellowship with himself in matters of his Worship, so far, as
with the advice of his Spiritual Senators, (his Lord-Bishops) to make what
Bylaws in matters of this nature, he pleases, and to impose any Form, one or
more, of Divine Worship, upon his Subjects, under what Penalties he thinks fit;
so that the Worship imposed in these Forms be consonant to the Word of God.
These men would fain incorporate this notion into the Body of our Faith, That
the things of Caesar would otherwise be too narrow and inconsiderable, for a
Person of so august and sacred an investiture, unless it be supposed that the
Almighty gives unto him the right hand of Fellowship in ordering the Affairs
of his Worship, in forming and reforming, in changing and altering it at his
pleasure; yea, and in punishing with great severity, those that shall not bow
down to his present establishment, whatever it be.

Although the spirit of this plea has been quenched already, yet let us take
the pains to draw a little more water to cast upon it. There sore,

1. The Masters of this Plea, in pleading the Cause of their Tithes, often make
use of an Emblem, which though colorable only for that service, will be of a
real accommodation here: The Eagle setting her Nest on fire, and so destroying
her young ones, with a burning Coal, which stuck (though she minded it not) to
the piece of Flesh that she had sacrilegiously snatched from off the Altar, and
carried to her Nest, upon which the disaster happened; is an apt Resemblance of
those Calamities and Judgments which sooner or later fall upon the Houses and
Families of such Kings and Princes and Grandees of the World, who entrench upon
the Quarters of Him whose Name is Jealous, and cannot be content without being
adored as Domini utriusque Seculi, as having Dominion over the things of both
Worlds. If men will presume to set their posts too near unto the posts of God,
he will up with them again, and burn them with fire. Instances hereof may be
found in the premises. But,

2. It never yet was, nor (most certainly) ever will be proved, either from the
Scriptures, or from any Principle of sound Reason, that Kings or Magistrates
are by God joined in Commission with himself, to impose Models or Forms of
Worship, such as they please [onely with this Condition, That they think or
suppose them to be agreeable to the Scriptures] upon their Fellow Creatures,
(the Sons and Daughters of Men) yea, upon such Persons who in all likelihood,
and according to all experience in like cases, know and understand the mind and
will of God concerning his Worship, much more perfectly then themselves; yea,
and whom God has commissioned to teach and instruct them in his Worship and
Service [I mean the faithful, able, and learned Ministers of the Gospel.] But
this Nail has already been hammered sufficiently.

3. As for those Spiritual Senators, mentioned in the Argument by the name of
Lord Bishops, without whose advice the Commission granted to Kings and
Magistrates (as is pretended) to umpire the Worship of God, is (it seems)
superseded; the Scripture is so far from authorizing or appointing them to be
Assistants or Advisers unto Kings and Magistrates, in or about the execution of
such a Commission, that it takes no knowledge of any such Generation of Men,
unless it be to shut the door against them, that they might not get into the
world, ( Mat. 20.25, 26.) though since they have committed Burglary, and broke
open this door, and are gotten in the House of God, to the great anoyance and
disturbance of the peace of it. The Scripture makes mention only of one in
those days, who did (...) (3 John 9.) wish, or desire, to be a Lord-Bishop;
whose character was, that he would not suffer faithful Ministers of the Gospel
in the Church, no not the Apostle himself, who was so peculiarly loved by
Christ, but prated against him with malicious words. And to me it is the
firstborn amongst many Arguments, that such a kind of Officers in the Church,
as these men pretend themselves to be, were never intended by the Lord Christ;
namely, that neither by Christ himself, nor by any of his Apostles, he has
given any name whereby the Church should know or call them, or distinguish them
from others. It opposes all the believing faculties of my Soul, to think that
Christ should either forget or neglect to mention the prime and Head-Officers
of his Church, (as our Bishops (so called) conclude themselves to be; and as
indeed they are, if they be any at all) by an appropriate and distinct name,
whenas he has provided and given such names unto those that are esteemed
subordinate and inferior to them, as Pastors, Teachers, and Deacons. For those
Apocryphal Officers we speak of, have sacrilegiously robbed those true Officers
of the Church, Pastors and Teachers, of the name Bishop, which was given in
common unto them; and having altered the property of the Divine Consecration of
it, have sanctified and devoted it unto themselves, lest being (...), without a
name, they should be found (...) also, spurious and illegiti^^ate. Besides, as
Christ left such Officers no name, so neither has he left them any work. For
he sufficiently provided for all the spiritual occasions of his Church in all
Ages, by those Officers whom the Apostle expressly names, Ephesians. 4.11. Read
this verse, with the three next following, and you will find the Bishop to be a
superfluous, and very impertinent Officer, in, and for the Church. But as being
left by Christ without a name, they made a dishonest shift (as we have heard)
to get one: so being left without work also, they found out an employment
likewise for themselves; as namely, to serve the Church with indifferent [that
is, with impertinent, and needless] things, with a few harmless Ceremonies
[lenitate verbi tristitiam rei mitigante] as Tippits, and Rochets, Caps and
Hoods, Black Gowns and White Surplices, Crossings and Cringings, Standings up,
and Kneelings down, with several others of the like profound calculation: all
which both jointly, and severally, are as effectual and proper to build up the
Church in Unity, Love, and Peace, as the confusion of Tongues was to promote
the building of the Tower of Babel, and the poison of Asps to nourish and
preserve the natural Life of Man. As for their employment about Ordination,
which together with their Name and Title of Bishop, they have injuriously
wrested out of the hand of those true Officers of Christ, Pastors and Teachers
(with their respective Congregations) this takes up so little of their time,
and so seldom engages them, that had they not found themselves other work,
which might last all the year long, and so fill up the void spaces between
Ordination and Ordination (which the management of Ceremonies, as they trouble
themselves, and others about them, does) the inconsiderableness of their work
would have rendered their importune and loud claim of grandeur and great things
in the Church, very obnoxious. Therefore (certainly) that kind of Officer we
speak of, having neither Name, nor Work in the Church, assigned unto him by
Christ, was not designed by him to any part or fellowship with those that bear
Office here.

4. There was a generation of men in the world, who were wont to make the King
glad with their wickedness, and the Princes with their lies, Hos. 7.3. I^ our
Lord Bishops be not the servants of this impiety, the world is uncharitable,
and the thing it self next to a miracle. For they lie under greater
temptations, to ensnare them in this kind, than flesh and blood (ordinarily) is
willing to resist. And the desires of the great things of the world, unto which
they are advanced, (for these things are not wont to be found of those that
seek them not) proclaim them to be no mighty men of valor to resist
temptations. Therefore in this respect also they are not competent to make
Advisers unto Kings or Rulers in any their consultations about forming or
setting forth the Worship of God. P^ssimum genus Consiliariorum Adulatores.

5. The Worship of God being of a most tender resentment with those, who truly
know and fear him, and tremble to offend him, these men being violent and
importune obtruders of Forms and Ceremonies, are the most unfit men in the
world to be called unto Counsel, when this affair is to come under
consideration.

6 Concerning the pretended narrowness of the Authority and Power of Kings, in
case they should be confined within a Politic sphere, and not stretch
themselves unto Spiritual things also: I answer; 1. That God understands
better than the wisest of men, what measure, or degree of Power makes, both
the most commodious, and the most comely proportion for any man: and
(doubtless) unto whomsoever he gives it, in this proportion he gives it.
Therefore for any man to call that narrow, or unmeet, which God in his Word
judges large enough, and comely, is an unsavory presumption. Are our weights
and measures better, or more exact, than his? 2. I believe that Kings and
Princes would find full employment for their Authority and Power, within their
Politic spears (respectively) work enough to fill their heads, hearts and
hands, were they conscientiously intent upon what God, yea and their own
honor, comfort and peace, require of them here. But, 3. (and lastly for this)
If God should allow unto Christian Kings and Magistrates, a right of power to
impose Forms of Worship upon men, he should allow them a greater power or
liberty than he has, or has judged meet to leave unto, himself. For if Kings
may impose Forms of Worship, they may impose, one while one, and when they
please, another. For who, or what, shall hinder them? For if God has given
unto them a grant for such unpositions, doubtless he has not limited, or
confined them in this grant unto one Form only: not has he prescribed any one
Form determinately, which it shall be lawful for them to impose, and not any
other. Such a conceit as this, never (I suppose) entered into any of those heads
which belong unto the hearts, out of which the sad Doctrine of Impositions do
proceed. Therefore if Kings and Magistrates may impose, their Impositions, o^
Forms of Worship imposed, may be as numerous, as the Idolatrous Altars of
Israel were of old, which are compared to heaps [of stones, gathered up and
laid in rowes] in the surrows of the field. Hos. 12.11. Yea, if they shall vary
and change their Forms never so often, as (suppose) every day in the year,
especially if they see cause (as very probably they may if they look narrowly)
or shall imagine or think they see cause, so to do, who can justly reprove them
for it? They may (in Scripture phrase) shake, not the Earth only, but also
Heaven, as often as they please: they may distu^b and amu^e the World with
Mutations and Changes in the Worship of God without end. Whereas God himself
has given security unto the World, That he will not alter the terms of his
Worship declared in the Gospel, or ever impose any new Model or Form hereof
upon the children of men, whilst the World stands. And whereas he
interprets this saying of his, Yet once more I shake not the Earth only, but
also Heaven, in the notion of a Promise; But now he has PROMISED, saying, etc.
( Heb. 12.26.) there is little question but that part of the Grace, or good
thing here promised, consists in this, that he will once more [only, or, but
once more] shake the Heavens (these restrictive praticles, but only, etc. being
frequently omitted, and left to be understood) By shaking the Heavens, he
means the dissolving or removing, the present external frame or form of
Religion, or of his Worship, together with the great commotions, or high
workings in the minds and consciences of men, that would ensue hereupon. But
enough in answer to the second Argument.

Thirdly, Some plead aloud, and with no small confidence, for the
joynt-interest of the Christian Magistrate with God himself, in imposing Forms
of Worship, by an Argument to this effect: That which is lawful, may be
lawfully commanded or imposed by the Civil Magistrate: But the Worship of God
performed by stinted Forms, if these be consonant to the Scriptures, is lawful:
Therefore such Worship as this may be lawfully imposed by the Magistrate. To
both Propositions I answer in their order. To the former,

1. By distinguishing, and explaining in what sense, and how far, it is to be
admitted. 1. It is not lawful for the Magistrate to command very many things,
which may notwithstanding be lawfully done by those that are commanded. A
single man may lawfully marry, or marry such or such a man's daughter, but the
Magistrate cannot lawfully command him to do either the one of the other. So a
man may lawfully give the one half of his goods unto the poor, as Zacheus did;
yet the Magistrate cannot lawfully impose this upon any man. Such cases as
these are without number. Therefore it is but a lame consequence: It is lawful
for a man to pray, or worship God, by a set Liturgy, or stinted Form of
Prayer: therefore it is lawful for the Magistrate to impose this upon him.

2. Some things, simply, and indefinitely considered, and circumstances
secluded, may be lawful, the property of the lawfulness whereof may be altered
by circumstances, one, or more, intervening. It is a rule approved and made use
of by a late learned Bishop of this Land: Quod licitum est mutatur ex
superveniente causa: That which is lawful may be changed, and become unlawful,
by means of some circumstance coming in the way, and lighting on it. This has
been explained, and argued formerly. Marriage or a married life, simply and in
it self considered, is lawful for men. But if men be either Eunuchs from the
womb, or made such by men (as our Savior speaks) to them it is not lawful;
and other circumstances besides these, may render it unlawful unto others.
Stinted Forms of Prayer, in themselves, unto some men, under some circumstances
may be lawful, yet the use of them, especially the constant use of them, to
some other men may be unlawful; as particularly unto those, upon whom God has
poured out the Spirit of Prayer upon such terms, that by the exercise hereof
they are enabled to glorify God, more than themselves (and many worthy
Ministers) are by their gifts of preaching. As though men that are impotent in
their limbs, or lame, may use crutches for their support, or relief in going.
Yet it had been very sinful for those, who by the special savor and power of
God, were, either by Christ, or his Apostles, perfectly restored unto the use
of these limbs, to have either neglected, or concealed, the grace of God
vouchsafed unto them in that kind, by walking upon Crutches afterward: Yea, it
had been unlawful for the Council, or any Magistrate, to have commanded them
thus to do. So that things that are simply and in themselves lawful, but unto
some men are, and unto others may, by circumstances, become unlawful, cannor
lawfully (by a general command at least, and which shall equally, and without
exception, exact obedience from all men) be commanded by the Magistrate: and
consequently, the use of set Forms of Prayer, though lawful in it self, cannot
lawfully be thus commanded by him.

3. (And lastly, for the Proposition in hand) Things that are merely, and only
lawful (or in such a sense, as things lawful, are opposed unto, or
di^^inguished from things that are expedient, as the Apostle himself opposes
them, 1 Cor. 6.12. and 10.23.) doubtless are not in whole, or in part, the
object of the Magistrates Authority, nor can lawfully be commanded by m^n. The
reason is, because the Power and Authority of a Magistrate is too serious,
solemn, and sacred an Ordinance of God, to busy or employ it self about
trisles, or impertinencies, or things of no concernment to the benefit, or good
of those under him. The Apostle speaking of the Magistrate, He is (says he)
the Minister of God to thee for GOOD [that is, for thy good, or, thy wealth, as
the former translation had it] He has no Deputation, or Commission from God to
use his Authority or Power for the gratification o^h^s own humor, or fancy, as
by trying conclusions upon thee, whether thou will obey him in doing such or
such things at his command, which have no reasonable tendency, either to his
good, or thine, or any other man's. No, the tenor of his Commission ingageth
him to impose only such things upon thee by his Authority, which have a natural
and direct tendency to the benefit and welfare of the State in which thou
live, and consequently to thine own. He cannot lawfully, nor without the
manifest dishonor of the sacred Ordinance of Magistracy, command thee to pill
straws, or throw stones against the wind: which actions notwithstanding are
more unquestionably innocent and lawful (in the sense explained) then the using
of those indifferent things called Ceremonies, in the Worship of God; and of as
much conducement to the Public Good, as they. Therefore it is far beneath the
sublime Dignity of the Divine Ordinance of Magistracy, to interest it self in
commanding either the one, or the other.

2ly. The Minor Proposition was, But the Worship of God performed by stinted
Liturgies, if these be consonant to the Scriptures, is lawful. This has been
alleady weighed in the Balance, and found light: Yet to give measure heaped
up; we repeat, and add (together)

1. In that sense of the word lawful, in which the same word must be taken in
the former Proposition to make that passable (as it was lately declared and
distinguished) this Proposition is to be denied. For the Worship of God here
described, though it should be admitted lawful in some sense, or with reference
to some persons; yet this proves it not to be of that kind of things lawful,
which the Magistrate has a lawful power to command, especially by a general
Command, and which he intends shall obliege all men. It has been showed and
proved, 1. That there are many things lawful to be performed and done by many,
which the Magistrate cannot lawfully command them to do. And, 2. That some
things may be lawful for some men to do, which are not lawful for all, and
consequently cannot lawfully be commanded unto all. So that the Syllogism is
fallacious and captious, having four terms in it, (as Logicians speak) instead
of three, and so proves nothing, unless (happily) the intent of the Author to
deceive.

2. A Liturgy may be consonant to the Scriptures either in respect of the
Matter of it, or of the Form, or in respect of both: Nor can it in truth be
said to be consonant unto them, unless it accords with them in both. Our
great Liturgy-Masters, in their Discourses upon this subject, and pleadings for
the Service Book, seem to estimate the consonancy we now speak of, only by the
Matter of the Liturgy, not bringing the Form to account in their reckoning this
way. And (indeed) in reference to the defense of their Service Book, they do
very providentially and prudently, to take no notice of any necessity of such
or such a Form in a Liturgy, to make it consonant to the Scriptures. For the
greatest part of the Matter of this Book, is justifiable enough by the
Scriptures: and for those passages and expressions which are guilty, by
far-fetched and forced interpretations, and by authoritative wranglings, or
some semblable phrases, or sayings found in some counterfeit or suspected
Antiquity, they are able to qualify (in part) the demerit of them. But the
Form of this Book, and the disposition of the several parts of the matter
contained in it, is so strangely and daringly extravagant and exorbitant from
all Patterns, Methods and Carriages of Prayer or Worship, recorded in the
Scriptures, that I know not what salve they are able to find out for the
grievous sore of this so broad and monstrous a dissonancy of it from them. And
(doubtless) the Form of a Liturgy, or Prayer, is not a thing so inconsiderable,
but that, though the matter of it be never so savoury and sound, yea, nothing
but the very words and sayings of the Scripture it self, yet may the wisdom of
the flesh (which is foolishness with God) have so much to do, and so ill acquit
it self in the putting them together, that the composition will not be meet to
be exhibited or presented unto God. So then, if by a Liturgy consonant unto the
Scriptures, the Proposition means consonant in Matter only, whatever the Form
be, (which seems to be the meaning of it) it is manifestly untrue: A Worship
performed by a Liturgy consonant to the Scriptures [onely in such a sense] is
not lawful.

3. (And lastly, for this also) The Worship performed by a Liturgy consonant to
the Scriptures may be lawful [namely if it be left free, and uncommanded] and
yet be unlawful, if imposed. It was lawful for the People of Israel to use an
Altar made of whole Stones, to offer their Sacrifices upon; but if any man had
lift up a tool upon the same stones, the Altar made of them had been polluted,
(Exodus 20.25. Deuteronomy. 27.5. Josh. 8.31.) A lawful Worship, or Form of Worship, by
the lifting up of an authoritative Command upon it by Men, becomes hereby
unlawful, [especially if performed upon the account, or by virtue of this
Command, as has been formerly signified] because in such a case the Creature
commanding, has Divine Honor done unto it, and is admitted as an Umpire, and
as having Authority over the things of God. For what can we imagine should be
the things of God, as contra-distinguished by our Savior himself, unto the
things of Caesar, if matters appertaining to his Worship, and the disposal
nereof, be none of those things, but must be inventoried amongst Caesar's goods
also? He that shall give unto Caesar the things which are Gods, and so
dismember and cut sho^t his Patrimony in the World, it is much to be feared
that he will send him unto Caesar for his Reward. But of these things at large
already. We see by what has been argued upon both Propositions, that in the
whole Argument there is little but fraud and confusion.

Fourthly, Some there are who count it a small thing to contend for the
lawfulness only of imposing Liturgies and Forms of Prayer; they run for a
higher prize, attempting to evince and prove that there is a singular
expediency, and so a kind of necessity of such Impositions. The Argument by
which they hope to effect this great thing, shows it self in these or the
like Colors.

That which is a proper and effectual means to prevent many great and sad
inconveniences, and dangerous eruptions of spirit, whereinto Ministers, being
left at liberty in their praying publicly, are apt to fall; is very expedient
and necessary to be done.

But the imposition of limited and set Forms of Prayer by the Magistrate, is a
proper and effectual means for such a purpose. Ergo.

By the sad inconveniences and dangerous eruptions of spirit, etc. (here
mentioned) the Argumentators mean confusedness of method, tautologies, or
needless reiterations of the same things, broken sentences, and
ill-accommodated with sense (with suchlike) on the one hand: and on the other,
Complaints unto God against Truths, under the name of Errors; ventings of
dis-affection to the present Government or Governors; Petitions and passages
savouring of Sedition, Treason, Rebellion, etc. All these, and the like (say
these men) may be effectually prevented by a strict confinement of Ministers
unto such Petitions and Forms of Praying which are sound and wholesome, and
free from all such strains of scandal and offense. This reason is, all that it
is, in face; the heart of it is hollow and empty. For,

1. Let the Promoters of it tell us whether they approve of this arguing or no
(which we shall immediately subjoyn) or whether it be not parallel unto theirs.

That which is a proper and effectual means to prevent the sins of adultery,
fornication, incest, theft, murder, sedition, treason, rebellion, etc. into
which men are apt to fall, cannot but be judged expedient and necessary to be
put in execution.

But for the Magistrate to put all men capable of these sins into strong
Prisons, and there to keep them close in Chains and Fetters of Iron, all the
days of their lives, Is a proper and effectual means to prevent the
perpetration of these Sins.

Ergo, This course is expedient and necessary to be taken and put in execution.

There is no reasonable ground of exception against the parallel or comparison:
For the means specified in the latter Argument is every whit as proper and
effectual (nay, of the two, both the more proper and more effectual, as might
be showed, if need were) for the end and purpose here mentioned, as the means
pretended in the other, for the end commended there. Wherefore if it be a
course most importunely and sencelesly injurious and tyrannical, to keep men in
Prison and Chains as long as they live, to prevent their miscarryings in the
high misdemeanors mentioned, or the like, before they have offended in any of
them: It cannot reasonably but be judged very preposterous, and most unworthy
men of Reason and Conscience, to confine the Spirit of Prayer in the most
worthy Ministers and Servants of God, (in whom (possibly) he delights to show
himself in much of his glory) within the limits and bars of stinted Forms of
Prayer, and these of humane contrivance, only for fear lest this Spirit
failing them, they should fall to pray by an unclean spirit; and pray either
their ignorance, or distempered passions, sedition, treason, or the like. Penal
sufferings may and ought (indeed) to be inflicted for the prevention of Sin;
but only upon those that have sinned, not upon the Innocent.

If it be replied, That to be commanded by the Magistrate to use a set Form of
Prayer, is not penal unto any man: I answer, 1. That as the unclean
conversation of the men of Sodom was vexatious to the righteous Soul of Lot; so
must needs the Commands of Authority, which are spiritually unclean, and
provoking to defile the Marriage Bed wherein God vouchsafe^h the enjoyment of
himself as a Spiritual Husband (I mean his Worship; for so the Scripture
resembles it frequently, Cant. 1.16. Isa. 57.7, 8. Ezekiel. 23.17, 41. and in all
those places, which are many, where Idolatrous and false Worship are
metaphorically expressed under the terms of Whoredom, Adultery, Fornication,
etc.) such Commands (I say) must needs be much more afflicting and sadding to
the Spirits and Souls of Conscientious and holy Men, when they cannot conceive
or apprehend them but as such, [I mean as spiritually unclean, and tempting
unto folly with a strange God.] 2. To him that cannot, with the good leave of
his Conscience, submit to such a Command, which is imposed on him with a
penalty, it is (constructively) the same, to have the penalty inflicted on him
without the Command given, and to have the Command imposed on him upon such
terms.

2. To the Argument under debate, I answer further, That to impose a Form of
Prayer, is no effectual or proper means to prevent any of the evils mentioned,
unless a Form of Preaching be imposed also. For they that are apt to transgress
in any of the miscarriages specified, are as likely to do it in Preaching as in
Praying; and have no less opportunity (if not a greater) for the doing it, in
the former than in the latter. And if all, both Preachings and Prayings, shall
be reduced unto Forms, the ABCdarian Schools may send forth Boys as well
accomplished for the public work of the Ministry as the Academian-men.

3. If the Impositions contended for, were in any degree proper, and necessary
to prevent the sins mentioned, it is more strange than to be believed, that the
Lord Christ, who was as faithful unto God in all his house, as was Moses, Heb.
3.2. and withal, as great an enemy to the misdemeanors expressed in the
Argument, as the most zealously-devout Formalist can be, should
notwithstanding, neither by himself, nor any of his Apostles, speak the least
word of any such thing; especially, having by the greatest of these given men
warning (...), not to presume (as the former translation rendered it) or, not to
be wise, above that which is written (1 Cor. 4.6.) yea and by himself (as was
prophesied of him, Dan. 9.24.) sealed up the Vision and Prophecy, Rev. 22.18.
and so left no place for Humane Wisdom to interpose for the introducing any
more Laws or Constitutions, for the Government or Advancement of his Kingdom,
than those, which he has left us expressly, and in so many words, in the New
Testament, together with such, which are vertually, and truly included, and
contained in these, not such, which either by forced, or far-fetch't, or by
subtle and glossie consequences, derive their Authority from them.

4. Men that are in any degree meet to be admitted unto the Office and Work of
the Ministry, are not so apt, or prone, to fall into any of the foul
miscarriages feared in the Argument, or so like unto the Horse or Mule, that
have no understanding, that their mouths need be held in with the bit and
bridle of imposed Forms of Prayer, lest they come too near unto them that are
afraid to be touched, or behave themselves so extravagantly and unchristianly
in that sacred part of their function, as is suggested against them that they
are like to do. If they be of the household of Faith, in case they know not what
they should pray for as they ought, the Spirit [of God] helps their
infirmities, Romans 8.26. But they that Impose Forms, take this work out of the
hand of the Spirit, and help men's infirmities themselves, inabling and
directing them by Book, what they should pray for as they ought. I am far from
supposing the sin of imposing Forms, to be that sin against the Spirit, by
which men are sealed to the vengeance of eternal fire: but am very near
believing, that it is an high affront and indignity offered unto him. For,
whereas it is his most glorious interest, 1. To raise what variety of spiritual
and heavenly strains of Devotion he pleases, in the hearts and minds of his
Ministers, whilst they are ministering in the Assemblies of his Saints: And, 2.
To give them what sweetness of Lip, what pleasantness of Utterance he pleases
(as being the Lord of all Language and speech) for the communicatnig of those
blessed impressions and conceptions, unto the People before them, to the best
advantage for their edification and comfort; they who confine these Ministers
unto their Forms of Prayer, say (in effect) unto the Spirit, Thy Ministers, in
their public service, shall be at our allowance, and not thine, both for the
strains of their inward Devotion, and for the Language and Words, wherein they
shall utter them unto the People. Thou either wilt not, or can not, order
them regularly, and according to our minds, and as we think meet, in their
prayings; at least, we can have no assurance of thee that thou will do it.
Therefore we judge it better, and more safe for us to thrust such words into
their mouths, and so to necessitate and force such dispositions and desires
within them (unless their tongues go one way, and their hearts and thoughts
another way, at the same time) which we are sure are innocent and good, then to
leave them to thy guidance and assistance (whereof we are so uncertain)
although thy purpose and intent may be to glorify thy self at a far better
rate, in them and by them, as in the manifoldness of thy Wisdom, and excellenty
of thy Power, the riches of thy Grace and Bounty toward thy People, etc. in
case we should leave them free unto thee. Whether such a greeting as this be
not highly reproachful to the ever-blessed Spirit of Grace, and not far (if any
thing) short of Blasphemy? and whether men's impositions of Forms of Prayer
(being duly and without any straining, or wresting, interpreted) do not speak
all this, yea and more in the same kind unto him, I refer to the consciences of
these men themselves, when they shall be thoroughly awakned, to judge. In the
mean time, if care were taken closely to pursue the Apostle Paul's orders about
the Ministerial Function, so as to lay hands upon none, but such as are Sober,
Watchful, Just, Holy, Temperate, Lovers of good things, Apt (or Able) to Teach,
not Self-willed, not soon Angry, etc. They need not be taught, as we use to
teach Children, and defectives in understanding, how to speak, nor yet be
feared, or suspected, as persons likely to break out in any of those dangerous
and enormous miscarriages of themselves, which the Argument pretends. Or if
those that are created Ministers, be but Episcopally given, and true-born Sons
of the Church (as some love to speak) even Birds of this Feather are not so
unnaturally evil, as to defile their own nest, or to blaspheme either the
Government, or Governors, that are so propitious and indulgent unto them.
Therefore,

5. (And lastly, for this) There are pregnant grounds of suspicion, that the
invention and device of the first Imposer of Lyturgies, and Forms of Prayer,
are not so highly praised, or so hotly prosecuted, by their Posterity in these
days (especially amongst us) for the prevention of the evils suggested in the
Argument, but rather for the promoting of other evils, or prevention of some
Good things, because they seem evil unto some. It is a frequent policy, which
this Verse expresses: Ut verae lateant causae, finguntur inanes. False grounds
for actings sometimes are pretended,
To hide from sight those really intended.
Tautologies, needless repetitions, broken sentences, etc. in the conceived
Prayers of Ministers, are no real grief of heart to our Impoposers: the
Liturgy which they impose, and which gives pleasures to their soul from the
one end of it unto the other, is full of these Warts on the Face of it (as we
have seen formerly) nor are their consciences so strait and narrow, but that
they can swallow Gnats of a larger kind than these. And those things, which in
the prayers of Godly and conscientious Ministers they desire, and intend to
prevent, under the hateful names of venting disordered passions, discontents
against their Governors and Government, Petitions and passages savouring of
Sedition, Treason, etc. are the Christian, zealous, and faithful deportments of
such Ministers, in confessing before God the sins of their Kings, Princes, and
Governors, in reproving them, and denouncing the judgments of God against
them, unless they repent: in admonishing and warning the People committed unto
them, that they be not ensnared to destruction, by following their evil
examples, or complying with them in things displeasing unto God, in praying for
them, when they walk in ways that are not good, that God will please to
forgive them and turn their hearts unto his Testimonies, etc. Instead of these,
and such like worthy and faithful dealings with their Rulers and Governors,
according to the example of the true Prophets of God, and other godly persons
of old (as they are recorded in the Scripture) the Forms of praying for them,
which are now imposed on Ministers, are flat and flattering, no ways agreeable
or proper to their states or conditions, if they be not persons truly fearing
God: which the World too well knows not to be the case and condition of all
that bear Rule in it. Yea, in some of these Forms of Prayer, whereof we now
particularly speak, such persons are recommended unto God, which are not so
much as in being: and in others of them (indeed in most of them, if not in all)
such things are desired of God for them, which, if granted, are more like to
turn to a snare, or curse unto many of them, than to a blessing indeed. They
are more (generally) o^ a very erroneous and much mistaken calculation, for the
real good of many of them.

With what other motives, and carnal projections our high Clergy Men (for
these are the Masters of the Mint of all our imposed Forms, with their
respective Impositions) are enthusiased into their fiery zeal to have the
Consciences of the free People of Christ, both Ministers and People, yoked with
the iron yokes of Lyturgies, and stinted Forms of Devotion, I shall not now
enquire. They claim the highest pre-eminence of Office in the Church of Christ:
and there being little or nothing for them here to do, as such by Christ's
assignment (as was formerly hinted) they were tempted by the grandeur of their
usurped Office, to cast about for some employment answerable hereunto, lest
their nakedness should be seen by men, and they bear the reproach of being
Clouds without water. How prudently and appositely to their purpose, they have
pitched upon the ordering and exercising the Christian World (as far as they
have to do in it) with imposed Lyturgies, and Forms of Prayers, would make too
long a story to be told here: it may be related elsewhere at one time or other.

Several other pretenses are insisted on to entitle men to a joint right of
Power with God, for the appointment of his Worship by Lyturgies especially, and
limited Devotions, (for the Procurators of this Cause are so deep in love with
it, that unless they carry it, they dye) which are so empty and weak, that to
enter into a contest with them, would be to make more of them than they are.
Recitasse, refutasse est. For they plead, 1. That a Liberty left unto Ministers
to use publicly their acquired faculty of Praying, or of talking boldly unto
God before People (as our Grand Debater, profanely enough, praseth t^ For to
acknowledge a gift of Prayer in any man, is unto these men as the shadow of
Death) is but fuel to feed the evil h^mour; of pride, vainglory, etc.
therefore it is better denied then granted unto them. But would they, who thus
argue, be content, upon the credit of their Argument, to be denied the
possession and enjoyment of their great places of Power and Domination in the
Church, or of their luxuriant Revenues? For (doubtless) these are a kind of
fuel more apt and dangerous to feed the fire of Pride, Ambition, Lordliness
and Cruelty, in them. Or do they think it better for them, that God, by some
stroke of Sickness, or the like, should deprive them of their Memories, Wits,
Understandings, Learning, etc. because they may make fuel of them, to feed and
nourish the sinful humors of Pride, and Vainglory, then that he should grant
unto them the liberty of using and enjoying them? The notion of Truth in this
Verse, is too hard for the Argument: Nil prodest, quod non laedere possit idem.
There is no profitable thing,
But what may hurt and damage bring.


2. The loveliness of Uniformity and Consent amongst Ministers united under the
same Civil Government, ravisheth the Judgments of some into an high approbation
of Liturgies and Forms of Prayer imposed. But may not Ministers be uniform and
consenting in Doctrine, unless they all preach, and this constantly, one and
the same Sermon verbatim? Or would it argue that the Metropolitan and his
Diocesan were at odds, [if in case THEY should happen to preach] the one should
take his Text out of St. Paul, the other out of St. Peter? Apage quisquilias!

3. Our Grand Debater tells us sad Stories of men, whose names, for their most
admired and rare faculties in extemporary Praying, might have been Nonesuch;
and who for their horrid and unparalled wickedness and blasphemies likewise
need not have changed this name. Of both these characters, compassing the Earth
to and fro, he finds three men; in Germany, one Swenckfield, (a notorious
Arch-Heretick) in England, one Hacket, a Blasphemer; in Muscovia, John
Basilides, (Duke of this Country) who (it seems) was an horrid Hell-Hound. For
these wicked men's sakes conceived Prayer must be cast out of the Church as a
menstruous Cloth, and Liturgies and Forms of Prayer imposed, like fine pure
white shining Linen, brought into the Church in its stead. Similes habeat labra
lactucas. Like Cause, like Plea. A carnal Interest (I see) is as bad as a Gift,
which (as the Scripture says) blinds the Eyes of the Wise: Otherwise a man
of his Parts and Learning would never have leaned on such a broken Reed as
this, which pierces his own hand. For is not this reasoning of the same
calculation, or rather of a far better? Bishop John the thirteenth was a man
monstrously vicious, guilty of the foul crimes of Incest, Murder, Perjury,
Extortion, and what not? Bishop Silvester the second, was a Sorcerer, and
compacted with the Devil for his Bishopric. Bishop Hildebrand was a most
wicked and reprobate Monster, a Necromancer, a Conjurer, a Murderer, a man of
whose villainies Histories are ashamed: All these were Bishops of one and the
same See, and this called Apostolical: And besides these three, there have been
seven times three more, Bishops also of the same See, equal unto these in ways
and practices of all kinds, hateful and abominable in the sight of God and men:
And how many others of the Episcopal Investiture in other parts of the World,
have been evil Beasts, idle Bellies, Pests and Vipers, where they have had to
do, who is able to conceive or comprehend? Therefore down with the Hierarchy,
down with it even to the ground, and let the place of it in the Church know it
no more, but let Pastors and Teachers govern the Churches of Christ in its
stead. Will the Gentleman acknowledge any concluding force in such an Argument
as this? Yet evident it is, that it has ten times more strength in it, for the
removal of Episcopacy out of the Church, then his reasoning has against
conceived Prayer. Because Satan sometimes transformeth himself into an Angel of
Light; is it any reason why an Angel of Light indeed, should, if it were
possible, transform himself into some dark and dull Creature? But (doubtless)
such Arguments as these will never bring Liturgies into, nor conceived Prayers
out of, request.

Yet there is one Argument more, wherewith the Friends of Liturgy-Devotion
imposed, please themselves not a little in their way. This we shall take into a
little consideration, and herewith conclude. The Plea is this: That not the use
only, but the imposition also of Liturgies and Forms of Prayer, however now
quarelled by some amongst us, have been allowed and practiced in the Christian
Church anciently; yea, and are at this day admitted and practiced in many, if
not in all the Reformed Churches abroad. I shall not enlarge the discourse,
either with an examination of the truth of what is here affirmed, or in
weighing the validity or pertinency of the pretenses, in case they should be
found Realities and Truths, otherwise then as I find them ready weighed to my
hand in the Balance of the Sanctuary. Only these two things by the way: 1.
That I do not believe the imposition of Liturgies to be so ancient amongst
Christians, as seems to be suggested in the Plea. 2. That I know that the
Liturgies (if they must be so called) which are used in other Reformed
Churches, taste much more savourly of the Reformation, then that imposed upon
us.

When our Savior prophesies thus, Every Plant which my heavenly Father has
not planted, (...), shall be plucked up by the Roots, (Mat. 15.13.) he clearly
supporeth that Practices and Opinions in the Church, which are not pleasing
unto God, because not of his planting, may not only spring up, and get in
hither, and find place here, but a so take rooting, [that is, may work and wind
into, and (as it were) wrap themselves about the Judgments and Consciences,
yea, and insinuate into the affections al^o, not only of multitudes of the
common or meaner sort of men, but even of many pious, learned, and great men
likewise; for without this, they could never take such deep and fast rooting,
as is here intimated they may.] Now this rooting of the Plants we speak of, in
the Church, supposes a possibility, or rather a probability of their long
continuance here, before they come to be plucked up by the Roots. Plants that
have thrust their Roo^s well into the Earth, and have spread and wrapped them
about the Clods and Stones thereof, are like to grow, and flourish, and bring
forth Fruit for many years. The Metaphor, by which ^he abolition and casting
out of these Apocryphal Pr^ct^ces, and D^ctrines, from the Church, is here
expressed, (...), shall being e^, pulled, or (rather) torn up by the Roots;
implies, that when God will endure them no longer, but set his Laborers and
Servants on work effectually to oppose them, in order to their utter and final
abolishment, the service may prove somewhat hot, and that the Persons strongly
devoted to them, are like to swell, and rage, and fume, and to endeavor to
raise a great dust both amongst great and small, to turn every stone; yea, and
Acheronta movere, to dig into Hell, (as the Prophet Amos speaks, Chap. 9.2.)
to save their darling Inventions, their old Idol-Practices and Doctrines, if it
were possible, from the hand of Heaven, which is now stretched out against
them. Even as a Tree that has been a long time growing in a Soil proper for
it, and where it has thriven amain, so that with the numerous Roots of it, it
has taken strong and fast hold on the Earth round about it, far and near; in
case it should be forced, or turned up by the Roots, either by a Tempest, or
strong gust of Wind, or by some Engi^e devised for such a purpose, or the like,
it would tear up the Earth on every side of it, and raise and bring up with it
Stones, and Gravel, and Dirt, and whatsoever it could take hold on, to secure
it against the force that now attempteth the extirpation and downfall of it.

Again, That Hay, Wood, and Stubble in spiritual and Church-Buildings, may for
a long time be in equal esteem with, and pass (more generally) for Silver,
Gold, and precious Stones; and yet in process of time (it may be not till after
many Ages) be detected to be but a base kind of material, very improper for
such a building; and so come to be pulled out of it, and thrown away; the
Apostle Paul emphatically declares, 1 Cor. 3.12, 13. in these words: Now if
any man build upon this Foundation, Gold, Silver, precious Stones, Wood, Hay,
Stubble, every man's Work shall be made manifest. For the day [that is, says
Grotius, with other Interpreters, longum tempus, length of time] shall declare
it: because it shall be [or is to be] revealed by fire, etc. Meaning, 1. That
Time, in the duration, progress, and continuance of it, will be sound as severe
and searching an Examiner or Trier of men's Church-work in every kind, as Fire
is of Metals. 2. That there are, or may be, some bad Materials made use of in
Church. Work, the badness whereof will not (in reason cannot, or is not like
to) be discovered or made manifest, until they have passed the test and trial
of many Generations. So then, the long continuance, whether of the free use
only, (which is the more tolerable) of Liturgies, and stinted Prayers in the
Church of Christ, or of the Imposition of them, (which is the more unchristian
and insupportable) is an Argument of no interest or weight at all, to justify
or prove, either the lawfulness, much less the expediency, either of the one,
or of the other. I end with the saying of Tertullian: Veritati potest nemo
praescribere, non spacium temporum, non patrocinia personarum: that is, There
is no prescription [or Plea] neither of any length of time, nor of the
patrocinations [or Authoritative Assertions of the contrary] of any Persons
whatsoever, that is of any force or value against the Truth.

Postscript.
NOn attendamus quid ante nos aliquis fecerit, sed qui ante omnes est, Christus
prior fecerit. Cypr.

Sapientiam sibi adimunt, qui sine ullo judicio inventa majorum probant, and ab
aliis pecudum more, ducuntur. Lactant.

Magnos Errores magnorum virorum Authoritate persuasi, transmittimus. Vadianus.

Cautum debet reddere, non sequacem, Error alienus. Ra. Ardens.

Honestissimum, majorum vestigia sequi, si recto itinere praecesserint. Plin.
Ep. 8.5.

Mala Pax est, and Concordia, quae inter Pastores and Lupos est. Chemnit. Harm.

Maledicta sit Charitas, and Concordia, propter quam conservandam periclitari
necesse sit Verbum Dei. Luther in Gal. 5.

Pios hoc nomen and titulum in mundo oportet gerere, quod Seditiosi, ac
Schismatici, ac infinitorum malorum Authors sunt. Idem ibidem.

Heu, heu, Domine! ipsi sunt in persecutione tua primi, qui in Ecclesia tua
videntur principatum diligere, and gerere principatum. Bern. de Conver. S.
Pauli, Sermon. 1.

Ignosci potuit simpliciter errantibus: post inspirationem vero, and
revelationem factam, sine ignorantiae venia peccatur. Cypr. Ep. 63.

Qui vero me errare existimant, etiam atque etiam diligenter, quae sunt dicta,
considerent, ne sortassis ipsi errent. August. De Bono Persever.

These Sayings may be Englished as follows:

Let us not regard or mind what some have done before us, but what Christ, who
is before all, has first done.

They take a course never to attain unto wisdom, who, without Judgment,
approve of the Inventions of their Forefathers; and like unto Sheep, are led
by others.

Sometimes we let pass great Errors [as if they were Truths] being persuaded
[hereunto] by the Authority of Great Men.

The Errors of others should not move us to follow, but to look about us.

It is most honest [and honourable] to follow the steps of our Forefathers, if
they have gone before in a Right Way.

It is no good Peace or Agreement that is made between Shepherds and Wolves.

Accursed be that Charity and Accord, for the conservation [and maintenance]
whereof, the Word of God must be endangered.

Godly [and good] men must be content in the World to bear the name and title
of being Seditious, Schismatical, and the Authors of a thousand Mischiefs.

Alas, Lord, alas! they are the prime men in persecuting thee, who are seen to
affect Primacy in thy Church, and to bear Rule there.

God might pardon them, whilst they simply [and for want of Knowledge] went
astray: but when they have received the Truth by Inspiration and Revelation,
they sin without any allowance of Favor for their Ignorance.

They who think I am in an Error, let them again and again diligently consider
what has been said, lest (happily) themselves prove to be the Men that err.

FINIS.

