Begun in the Year 1640. by the Special Command of King CHARLES I. of Blessed
Memory, and continued to the happy Restoration of the Government, and the
Coronation of King CHARLES II.
THere has been very much Money disbursed, and great Pains taken, and many
Hazards run in making an exact Collection of all the Pamphlets that were
published from the Beginning of that Long and Rebel-Parliament, which began
November. 1640. till His late Majesty's Happy Restoration and Coronation,
consisting of near Thirty Thousand several Sorts, and by all Parties.

They may be of very great Use to any Gentleman concerned in Public Affairs,
both for this Present, and After-Ages, there being not the like in the World
neither is it possible to make such a Collection.

The Collection contains above Two Thousand bound Volumes all of them uniformly
bound, as if they were done at one Time, and all exactly Marked and Numbered.

The Method that has been observed, is Time, and such punctual Care was taken,
that the very Day is written upon most of them, when they came out.

The Catalogue of them fairly written is in Twelve Volumes in Folio; and though
the Number of them be so great, (when the Books are set in their Order
according to the Mark set upon each of them) the smallest Piece, though but one
Sheet of Paper, being shown in the Catalogue, may be found in a moment; which
Method is of singular use to the Reader.

In the whole are contained near one Hundred several MS. Pieces that were never
printed, all, or most of them on the King's behalf, which no man durst then
venture to publish without endangering his Ruin. But the Peruser now may by
them be let into the Knowledge of many Occurences in those Times, which have
passed hitherto unobserved.

This Collection was so privately carried on, that it was never known, that
there was such a Design in hand; the Collector designing them only for His
Majesty's Use that then was: His Majesty having occasion for a Pamphlet, could
no where compass the Sight of it but from him, which His Majesty having
perused, was very well pleased with the Design, and commanded a Person of
Honor to restore it with his own Hands, and withal expressed His desire of
having the Collection continued: This was the great Encouragement to the
Undertaker, who had otherwise desisted prosecuting so difficult and chargeable
a Work, which lay a heavy Burden upon himself and his Servants for above Twenty
Years.

To prevent the Discovery of them, when the Army was Northwards, he packed them
up in several Trunks, and by one or two in a Week sent them to a trusty Friend
in Surry, who safely preserved them; and when the Army was Westward, and
fearing their Return that way; they were sent to London again; but the
Collector durst not keep them, but sent them into Essex, and so according as
they lay near Danger, still, by timely removing them, at a great Charge,
secured them, but continued perfecting the Work.

And for a farther Security to them, there was a Bargain pretended to be made
with the University of Oxford, and a Receipt of a Thousand Pounds given and
acknowledged to be in part for them, that if the Usurper had found them out,
the University should claim them, who had greater Power to struggle for them
than a private Man.

All these Shifts have been made, and Difficulties encountered to keep the
Collection from being embezel'd and destroyed; which with the great Charges of
collecting and binding them, cost the Undertaker so much, that he refused Four
Thousand Pounds for them in his Life time, supposing that Sum not sufficient to
re-imburse him.


