A COMPANION FOR Debtors and Prisoners, AND Advice to Creditors IN TEN LETTERS:
From a Gentleman in Prison, to a Member of Parliament. Wherein, First, the
Villianies and Insolences of Bailiffs. Secondly, the Evil Practices of Jaylers
and Pretended Solicitors, and Thirdly, the Irregularities of Prisons in
General, are briefly Detected and Exposed.

Together with a Particular Description of Newgate, the Marshallsea, the two
Compters, Ludgate, the Fleet, and Kings Bench, with Reflections upon Prisons in
general, and Proposals for regulating the whole.

LONDON, Printed, and Sold by A. Baldwin, in Warwick Lane. 1699. Price 6 d.

TO THE Right Honorable Sir Francis Child, LORD MAYOR OF THE CITY of LONDON.
My Lord,
IT IS Natural for Persons in distress to fly somewhere for assistance; That Is
a Principle Ingrafted into the very Being and Constitution of Men, and in many
particulars may be well enough justified and allowed; but then my Lord, there
is a very great difficulty in choosing out the Persons, and Representing the
Grievances; and truly, I Am afraid our mistakes in those Points have been the
cause why so many good Endeavors have proved Insuccessful. That I have made a
right Election of the Person I am well assured, both from your Lordships
Character of a good as well as of a great Man, and Lord Mayor of London: So
that if the things are well Represented, which I humbly submit to your Honors
Judgment, and withal are Reasonable in themselves, and necessary to be
redressed, why then I presume there is but small grounds to suspect the
success. As for the Papers themselves, they are indeed what they pretend to be,
the Letters of a Gentleman in Prison to a Member of Parliament; who, if he had
not been called off from us, by a hasty fate, had long since attempted the
Regulation of Bailiffs and Goals, but Sir, this great work (tho there have been
some advances made toward it) is yet unfinished, and the Poor Debtors and
Prisoners do now more then ever, labor and struggle under the Wracks and
Tortures of these unmerciful Wretches. My Lord, I need not aggravate the
Circumstances to you, they are bad enough indeed, and but too bad without it; So
that as things are now, the Regulations of Prisons, and the suppressing the
Insolence and Extravigance of Bailiffs, would be a work almost as Meritorious
as that of your great Predecessor, Sir William Waller and deservedly Entitle
for your sake, the Lord Mayor of the City of London, to another Character and
Sword of Honor for ever. I would not spend your Lordships time in useless
flattery, or Complement your Honor Infinitely above 'em both; only this I must
say, that since your Lordships Election, the drooping Genius of the City is
strangely Revived, and Men and things have put on a new Face. But Sir, short
Books should have but short Dedications, or rather none at all, neither had I
given your Honor the trouble of this but upon some particular Motives: Well my
Lord, considering the whole Circumstance, and especially, the Errand these
Papers come upon, I cannot much dread your acceptance of 'em, and withal, that
you will Pardon their Author, who is, and shall ever esteem it a happyness to
be thought worthy to subscribe himself,

Your Lordships, most Obedient Servant, E S.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
THE chief Arguments that urged me to Publish the following Letters are,
briefly these two; first, to let the World see what kind of Creatures Bailiffs,
Goalers and pretended Solicitors are, and then to direct 'em how to manage
themselves, and to Fence and Guard against 'em with the most security, upon
occasion, how far they will Answer this Design, must be left to the Judgment of
those that think them worth their perusal, only with this caution, that the
matters here related are no Chymerical Notions or Forgerys, but pure matters of
Fact and Truth; Indeed, there is here and there a supernumerary expression
intermixed, to make the dismal Relation go down a little the more gratefully,
but still the main and substance of the matter is kept within the bounds of
every Days Practice and Experience. That there will be some out-crys against
them, is not to be doubted, and especially among Bailiffs, or some such kind of
Creatures, who perhaps may be so impudent to charge them with falsehood, etc.
And what if they do, considering the Testimony of such kind of People is but an
indifferent Evidence at best, especially when they are Witnesses in their own
Case, I think I need not trouble my self much about that matter; the other part
of my design is to propose a medium, how these Great and Intolerable
grievances may be rectified and redrest, or at least, if I fail in it my self,
to set some better Heads to work about it.

For I Am confident, as cases stand, these matters require a very speedy
redress. The Evil Practices of Bailiffs, etc. Being now one of the greatest
miseries of the Nation, but especially of this Town, and must grow every Day
worse and worse, till at last they become intolerable.

LETTER I. OR, THE INTRODUCTION.
SIR,
WHEN I had received your Letter, wherein you are pleased to command me to give
you the best Account I was able of the Villainous Practices of Bailiffs and
their Assistants; the Irregularities of Prisons in General, and the Miseries
and Calamities of Poor Debtors in their respective Confinements, I must
confess, my wounds began to bleed a fresh, and truly at first sight I could not
choose but think, but that your request was very like that of Queen Dido to
Aeneas, when she desired him to give her tho^s^d Relation of his Ten Years War,
together with the destruction of his City and Country. But ^^^, this Notion
from a very few second thoughts was soon superseded by another, which I since
am satisfied was far more agreeable both to your Inclination and Design. I
quickly foresaw that a Person of your Extraordinary Character could not be
guilty of the Barbarous Vanity, to Insult and play upon the Agonys of the
Unfortunate, but rather that you had some good Design, after you were fully
Instructed in these kind of matters, to Propose an Expedient to your Honorable
House for the putting these Affairs in a better Posture. This is indeed a work
well Becoming an English Gentleman, especially one of the great Representatives
of the Nation; And truly it is a subject both of our wonder and sorrow, that it
has unluckily happened to lie so long Unattempted. It Is pity sure that
England, that is the Mistress of the best Laws as well as the best Religion in
the Christian world, should suffer such a dangerous Contagion to rage so long
in her very Heart and Bowels, without Endeavoring by some means or other to
suppress, or at least to curb the Distemper. Well, Sir, I am Mightily Affected
with your Generous Design, and since you have been pleased to pitch upon me to
give you this Ungrateful Relation, you may Depend upon it, I shall do it very
fairly and Impartially, and only Declare to you the pure matters of Fact, and
such other Occurrences that have fallen within the Compass of my own dear
bought Experience; but then Sir all this will be too much to be drawn into the
narrow Compass of one letter; and therefore for method sake I Will Divide it into
particulars, and so continue it from Post to Post till I have finished the
whole.

LETTER II. In which is an Account of the base Proceedings of Baylifs in
General, and the Villainous tricks and Stratagems they use to extort Money both
from the Debtor and Creditor.
BAILIFFS in General are a sort of Desolute Wretches made up of the Dregs and
Refuge of Mankind; they are commonly a kind of Beasts of Prey, that for their
Jude and vicious behavior are Banished from the sober Conversation of their
fellow Creatures; and sure then it is great pity that such vermin as these,
which ought rather to be Chained up and driven out from the rest of the World,
should be let at large, and withal Entrusted with a privilege that Entitles
them to a larger opportunity then ordinary, to Transact and Propagate their
Villainous Practices. Sir, I hope you will not mistake me; I am not Declaiming
against or Arraigning the Office of a Bailiff, but the persons that Execute it.
I confess it is highly Expedient there should be such kind of Officers, and
truly 'twould be morally Impossible for the Nation to Subsist without some
body to Execute the Law in some Cases, but then it is very hard that none, or at
least very few but Profligate Rogues and Canibals should be singl'd out for
such an Employment. I Am confident (with Submission to better Advice) there
might be a Medium found out to put the Management of this Affair into sober
hands, which would not only be a very great advantage to poor Debtors, but
likewise a Considerable ease to Creditors, and a Benefit to the whole Kingdom
in General. Sir, I think it will be needless to trouble you with the strange
kind of tricks, they use, and the cunning stratagems and devices they have to
get Men into their Clutches; that is something Foreign to my Purpose, and
therefore I will not Insist upon it; But rather proceed to show you how Basely
and Villanously they use them when they have once got them

To go on then, when the Master Bailiff, or Officer (as he terms himself) has
got the Writ; why then according to the Nature of the person that is to be
Arrested, he immediately whistles for two or three Dogs, or Followers, that are
always Lurking about his House upon such occasions; and out he goes, and having
bon'd or Nab'd this Defendant (as they call it) why then their next Business is
to run him to a Spunging House, which is commonly one of their own; and having
sixth him there, if they perceive he is a stranger to their Managements, and
under any kind of fear or Apprehension of 'em, then they turn in to him a
Kennel of deep mouthed Hell Hounds, that eat and Drink upon him at Discretion;
and in the interim another party of Curr's are sent out to hunt the Town to try
if they can find any more Creditors that they can by any means Incline or
seduce to enter their actions against him; and so having sufficiently gorged
themselves, the Master of the Ceremonys call's for the Reckoning, which the
poor Prisoner is forced to pay; be it what it will; and then under Pretense of
removing him out of sight, etc. They Conduct him to one of their strong Rooms,
which they have for such purposes. There the Wretch is left alone, and what is
worse, if he call's for Pen, Ink and paper to send to any of his Friends, it is
ten to one but they open his Letter, and send or not send it as they find it
will best answer their Ends. Well, but he must not continue in this kind of
Separation long neither, before one of the Gang is sent up to him, who under
pretense of a great deal of Civility and Compassion to his misfortune, wheedles
and Cajoles him into a Confession of his Circumstances: Which he directly
Relates to a Cabal of Rogues below, who are all the while debating which way
they may make the most of him. Having thus furnished themselves with the Nature
of his Abilitys, etc* another of the surliest Curs in the whole Kennel is sent
again to him to put him in mind of a Barbarous Custom they have, i. e. Civility
Money; this Gentleman, with a kind of Unmannerly Impudence, Represents to him
the dismalness and charge of going to Prison, and withal let us him know that
if he does not Instantly Compound with the Officer for his liberty to stay
there, That he will in a little time call a Coach and carry him away; and thus
having worked him up to the highest Pitch of Despair and fear, he leaves him.
After these two have Finished their Managements, the Officer in Chief soon
makes his Appearance. Come Sir, says he, what do you intend to do? I dare not
keep you, besides, if I durst, I must live by my business, I cannot keep my
Servants and my self to wait upon you for nothing. You know our Methods, and if
you have a Design to stay here to night, why then let me see some Money from
you. Here the poor Man is again forced, to speak in their own Dialect, to Lug
out, and gives him what he has, or at least what this Unmercifull Governor is
pleased to extort from him; upon which Consideration he is Admitted to the
favor of being strongly Locked and Barrocaded up for that night in a Prison,
which in all points is equal, and in some worse then that which according to
Law, he ought to be carried to; but still they have not done with him neither,
the next that Attacks him is the good Mistress of the House, but she like an
honest Conscientions Woman does not want much of him, only six or seven
Shillings which the Officers men have Drunk below, and two Shillings for his
Bed, and then she will lay on the sheet's; well there is no Remedy, but this must
be paid too as well as the rest, or else after all, he must to Prison. Well
Sir, to make as short of this sad Relation as I can, upon these and some other
Terms of the like Nature, he is at last Locked up till the next morning, and
then they begin to play the former Game over again, till at last finding that
they have Wracked him as far as the Nature of the thing will bear, they then
come to him, and in good Earnest tell him that there are other Actions against
him, and that Unless he can raise Money to remove himself to the Fleet or Kings
Bench, he must after all prepare to go to Prison. From this short Account I
Presume you will be able to Judge at the Miserable Condition of those poor
Wretches, whose Misfortunes have thrown them into the Jaws of these kind of
Vermin. I shall therefore only trouble you with two or three lines more to
show you likewise how they abuse the Person's that Employ em, and so take my
Leave till the next Post. And this they do Chiefly two ways. First, by taking
Money to Arrest the Person that is the Debtor; and after, accepting a Bribe
from the Creditor, etc. this is a Cheat so common among them; and so well known
to every body, that has been forced to make use of them, that I think I need
not Enlarge upon it. It Is an Act that they pride themselves in, and look upon
it as an Extraordinary point of Honesty and Civility; Insomuch that I have
heard one of the Chiefest Masters of the Order, with a kind of vanity,
acknowledge, that if he did not get more by Betraying the Creditor, then he did
by Arresting the Debtor, he could not get bread by the Employment.

The other Trick that they use to Cheat the Creditor out of his money, and
Sometimes out of his Debt too, is to Persuade him to lay his Action,
notwithstanding he knows the Debtor is resolved to bring a Habeas Corpus; nay,
I have known some Cunning Debtors my self in such a case, give a Bailiff a List
of all the Creditors they were Apprehensive would give them any Trouble, with
Directions to go to them and get them to enter their Actions against them,
under the Notion, that when once they had made themselves Prisoners in the
Fleet or Kings Bench, they would not then think them worth any further trouble.
In short, the Villainous Devices, and the Base and Insolent Behavior of these
sort of People, have rendered 'em one of the Greatest Grievances of the Nation,
but of this Town more Especially. Sir, I Appeal to your own and to the thoughts
of every Considering Man, whether it be not a sad Prospect to see whole Herds
of these kind of Creatures Ranging about the Town with Swords by their sides,
exactly Answering the Devils Character, Going about seeking whom they may
Devour.

To wind up this Unpleasant Narrative; It Is Doubtless a very Unlucky case that
the Executive part of the Law should be committed to such Hangmen as these.
Indeed I can give no other Reason for it, but that the Nation has been yet
Insensible of the Inconveniency that attends upon it, or rather have thought it
a trifle not worth their Notice. But Sir, since you have been so Generously
kind to Embark your self in the Matter, I will not at all question but you will
soon bring it to a Happy Issue.

LETTER III. Wherein the Practices of the Bailiffs belonging to the Sheriff of
Middlesex, are particularly exposed and detected; together with a short
Description of Newgate, etc.
THE Bailiffs that belong to the Sheriff of Middlesex are only permitted to
execute the Kings Writts, etc. but then because they cannot hold a person to
Bail for a debt under 10 l. they commonly join themselves with a brother
belonging to the Marshalsea; and these two, together with the assistance of 2
or 3 Followers, are a complete Set to carry on the worthy Occupation.

Their chief business here (as in all other Counties in England, is to attend
upon the Sheriff or his Deputy at the Execution of Criminals, as well as to
serve his Warrants and levy his Executions; and for this formerly they had
their settled Fees and Allowances; and withal, instead of their Swords and
Battoons, which they march with now, were obliged to carry only a White Wand in
their hands, to distinguish them from other persons. How this good Custom came
to be worn out and discontinued. I know not; but this I know, that for want of
having their Fees and Dematds fixed, and some sort of means used to bridle their
Insolence and Extravagance, the meaner sort of people are strangely insulted
and imposed upon by 'em.

Well Sir, when one of these sort have Arrested their Man, after they have
managed him as I mentioned in my last, why then he must go to Newgate, which is
the chief Goal belonging to the County of Middlesex: And here, Sir, I will beg
your favor to stop a little, while I trouble you with a short description of
that dismal place.

The Description of Newgate, together with their manner of Government, etc. as
it relates to Debtors.
Newgate (as I said) is the chief Prison for the County of Middlesex, for
Debtors, as well as Felons and Traitors, and is divided into Three different
Stations or Degrees. The first is called the Press-Yard, whither none but
persons that have Money to pay extravagant Prizes for their Lodging and
Entertainment are admitted. The Second is the Common Side, where the Rogues and
Thieves, Whores and Pick-Pockets, together with some Miserable Debtors, are all
Jumbled one among another, and truly make a very deplorable sight indeed. The
Third is the Debtors side, to which miserable place (for I cannot name it
without a great deal of Agony and Disorder) my Misfortunes brought me. The
manner of it was thus: About a twelve monthago One of these Sparks took me up
upon an Execution; and finding that I knew their Tricks too well to be imposed
upon, he forthwith conducts me to Newgate: I think 'twas about ten of the Clock
at Night before I reached my New Quarters. He had no sooner thrust me into the
Lodge, but Cerberus the Turn-Key, with a great many other Dogs of Lower Stations
came howling and grinning about me. Their first Complement was, Sir, have you
any money? If not, you must go on the Common Side. Tho I was not much terrified
with their Threats and Oaths, however I told them, If they wonld give me
Liberty till the morning, to enquire into the Custom of the Place, I would be
conformable. Well, with much ado and a great deal of Swearing, Cursing and
Hectoring, they unlocked the Door that leads up to the Debtors Apartment: but
here I was in a worse state than before; being left in the dark upon a dismal
pair of Stairs, not daring to stir a foot for fear of tumbling into some hole,
and breaking my Neck: and to mend the matter too, comes one of the Dogs that
brought me thither, and insults over me for not compounding with the Officer,
etc. Well, Sir, between this and the nauseous stink that came down the Stairs,
I confess I had much ado to support my self; however I was forced to do it for
an Hour at least before I could persuade any body to come to my assistance upon
any terms. At last comes an under Turn-Key, and with a great deal of
Indifference and more Impudence, asked me what I Would have? I found now 'twas no
time to urge Justice or Humanity to him; and therefore in short I told him, If
he would change my Station, I would gra^^fle him to his satisfaction. Here he
began to soften a little, and withal told me, That their Custom was to Lock up
all their Doors at Eight of the Clock exactly; which were not to be opened
again but upon particular Considerations; but however, for half a Crown he would
open the Door of the Debtors Hall, and turn me in there, where I should find a
bed and company. With this I soon complied; and so in he lets me; but withal
leaves me in the dark again: but here I had not been long before one of the
Prisoners calls to me; and finding me to be a stranger and a Debtor, strikes a
Light; by the help of which I got a view of my new Lodging; which I must own to
you was dressed up with so many wretched and deplorable Circumstances, that in
the whole Accounts of my Life, I never met with any thing like it: In this
Common Hall (as they call it) were 12 beds at least, and two persons in every
one of them. Where some lay naked, others with shaved Heads without any Caps
upon 'em, and most of them taking Tobacco; which together with the Smoke and
Stink, made such a dismal Spectacle; that I defy any Poet or Painter to fancy
or describe the like: However, Sir, there was no Remedy, but here I must stay;
and truly, as cases stood, I was pretty well satisfied I was here too. To make
as short of the matter as I can, I walked in this Noble Hall till Morning, when
about 7 my Chamber-fellows began to turn out of their respective Kennels, and
came to me to demand their Garnish, which they told me was 6 s. and 8 d. This
truly I paid without any grudging, and they spent it as freely in good Bread
and Cheese, and Ale and Beer; and to make me ameuds, drank my Health, and
wished me an happy Enlargement, etc. 'Twould make a man wonder indeed to see
with what Cheerfullness and Courage some of these poor Wretches undergo this
miserable consinement, and how many hard shifts and stratagems they are forced
to use, to get half a Crown against Saturday night, to pay for their beds, to
prevent being turned over to the Common side, among the Felons, as they
certainly are upon the first default. But to proceed: this Ceremony of the
Garnish was no sooner over, and indeed it did not last long, but I was called
to another, i. e. to come to pay my Entrance Fees, and for my Enrollmant, etc.
which, as near as I remember, was either 8 or 9 s. more. Upon the whole, I
found my charge of walking in the Hall for a Night was about 20 s. which I hope
you will be pleased to remember in its proper place. Well, Sir, I continued still
walking in the Hall till about 3 in the afternoon, and had struck up an
agreement with a man in a shire to Enkennel with him at night; but my Creditor
coming in the interim, and discharging me, that Adventure went off. However, I
did what I could to equip my self as far as my stay would give leave, with the
nature and manner of the place. I went through all the Debtors Division, and
found it all over so Dismal and wretched, that it almost put me out of conceit
with Mankind, to think they could be so exaltedly cruel and barbarous to
Creatures of their own Species. But now my Discharge being come* One of the
Curs that barked and snarl'd at me but the very last night, comes up to me
shaking his Tall, and fawning upon me. Sir your Discharge is come, and Mr T --
would desire you to walk into the Lodge; where Mr Clerk of the papers meets me,
and wishes me Joy of my Liberty, but withal tells me there is a small matter to
be paid first, only Seventeen shillings more for Fees; and so I may go
whither I please, This new Demand of Fees I confess Disturbed me more then all
the rest; however I found a down right denial would not do, and therefore
thought 'twould be best to plead Inability; but 'twas all one, this plea was no
better then the other; all the answer that I could get was, that they never
trusted any body, and that I must send out for money, and in the Interim return
and take a turn or two more in the Hall. Truly with his leave I did not care
for walking any more in the Hall neither; and so after a great deal of
Wrangling and Swearing, I made up the matter for ten and Six pence. But still,
before I must have my Quietus, the Groom of the Chambers must be satisfied too;
and his demand was half a Crown for Sheets. Says I, Friend, I had no Sheets; I
have not lain down since I came into your Territories. That Is all one to me,
says he, you might if you would; and I will not lose my Fees by you. I must
confess I could not choose but smile at this, tho indeed it vexed me too.
However, to be quit of them all, I threw him a shilling; and so we parted. Sir,
that I may not trespass too far upon your patience, I Will stop here, and trouble
you with the Remainder of this Adventure the next Return.

LETTER IV. Being the Continuation of the Description of Newgate.
SIR,
HAving, as I told you in my last, satisfied and discharged my Obligations to
my respective Governors, I had still a Curiosity to inspect a little further
into the Constitution and Rarities of this Famous Citadel; and accordingly to
carry on my design, I took one of the Gentlemen of the body to the Tavern, and
told him I had a great inclination to be a little more satisfied in the Manners
and Conditions of their House, and withal told him, that if he would do me the
favor to show me the Rest, I would greatify him for his pains; with this he
readily compli'd, and immediately goes and fetches the Keys, and leads me first
into the Common Side; where I must confess to you I was encounterd with so many
dismal Objects, and so many amazing Scenes of horrid misery, that I cannot
begin my Relation of 'em without the deepest Reluctance and Concern. In one
part lay an heap of Rogues and Theives, in another a Clump of Whores and
Pick-Pockets, and in a Third a Strange Cluster of Whores and Rogues Jumbl'd
together, and here and there a poor miserable Debtor was scattered amongst 'em,
who for want of money to pay his Chamber Rent, was turned over from the other
side. Some were almost naked, others almost starved; some were swearing,
drinking and blaspheming, others howling and yelping, and lamenting their
wretched condition, whilst others were laughing at 'em, and deriding 'em. In
short, there was such a constant smoke, such an unwholesome and contagious
smell; such a wild Herd of Rude Creatnres, and such an unaccountable confusion
and disorder among them, that I was forced to speak to my Guide to hasten me
out from 'em as fast as he could. The next place he led me to was the Master
Felons Apartment: This indeed was a little better than the former, and but a
little; but hither none are admitted but those that have money. Here I confess
they did not look quite so deplorable, but bad enough too, and I think their
Manners and Behavior, if possible, are worse than the other. Well, Sir, I had
soon my belly full of all these kind of Curiosities; and so I desired him to
let me have a short view of the Press-yard, and then I Would have done with him.
When I came there, I must own I was something surprised to find such a great
alteration both in the place and persons. The place it self was well enough,
only a little obnoxious by an ungrateful stink, which I suppose might be
derived to it from the Common Side: The persons had most of 'em the Looks and
Carriage of Gentlemen; and, to give 'em their due, behaved themselves with a
great deal of Courtisie and Civility to me as a Stranger. My Guide would have
showed me the Lodgings and the Keeper's house; but these I thought were hardly
worth my trouble, and so I desired him to go and take another Pint and I Would
discharge him. While we were drinking our Pint, I asked him several Questions,
but particularly concerning the management of Prisoners that were under close
Consinement; he told me that was good business indeed, and two or three for a
time were enough to set up a Waiter in an Alehouse, but (said he) that is a
Mystery we must not disclose, and so I pressed him no further. I asked him
likewise the nature of their buying off their Fetters, and what might be the
ordinary Charge of that? He told me, they always measured that by the Ability
and Circumstance of the Person they were to deal with, and had Irons of several
sorts and sizes for that purpose. I was putting some other Questions to him
concerning the Fees of the Officers of their Family, their Way of Government,
and Rules of ordering condemned Persons, etc. but here he smelt me, and so to
avoid all future Discourse with some kind of Concern and Jealousy that I had
drawn him too far into a Confession and Discovery of their Secrets, he left me.

And now, Sir, I have done with my lamentable Description of that famous
Prison, and yet but only given you a short insight of the Calamities of those
unfortuuate Wretches that are forced into it. I don't doubt but there are many
more aggravating Circumstances attending upon it, sufficient to make it one of
the most complete and exalted Seats of solid and substantial Misery upon the
Face of the Earth. However, I am very well assured that I have said enough to
show any sensible Man the Nature and Circumstance of the place, and to urge
him, if he has any Bowels, to contribute his Assistance toward the Redress of
it. But I know the Relation will fall into good hands; and therefore I shall
not press it any further, but proceed to give you an Account much of the same
kind with the former; which shall be the Substance of my next.

LETTER V. Wherein the Practices and Proceedings of the Bailiffs belonging to
the Marshals Court are exposed, together with some short Reflections upon their
Constitution and Government, with a Description of their Prison.
SI^
HAVING briefly laid before you the Character of Bailiffs in general, and
particularly of those belonging to the Sheriff of Middlesex, together with a
short Description of Newgate, I proceed now, in conformity to your Commands, to
give you an Account of the Behavior and Practices of another sort of Vermin,
i. e. the Bailiffs that belong to the Marshals Court. These are a sort of
Creatures that are in all Respects as bad, and in some, a great deal worse than
the former; and truly, considering every thing, have a great deal more
Opportunity to be so. As to the original Constitution of this Court, I have
nothing to do to enquire into it; only, as I am told, this Court at the
beginning was only appointed to determine Causes and Differences between the
King's Servants; and that by little and little it has crowded it self into the
Practice it has now got; and truly I am very much inclined to be of this
Opinion, because I cannot find that there is any regular Method established for
their Proceedings, especially in the great Case of taking of Bail, which is
generally made to the Jailer, and is so odd a kind of Practice, that it seems
to me as if they were at a loss for some body to do this Office for them, and
so were forced to make use of the Jailer. What was the original Practice and
Constitution of this Court, I confess, I am not Master of, neither does it much
matter as to my Purpose; but this I know by woeful Experience, that there are
more villainous Actions committed by the Bailiffs that belong to it than by half
of the Kingdom beside.

It Is a most incredible what a strange number there is of this sort of
Creatures, some say Fifteen hundred, some a great many more; in truth, I
believe there may be a thousand of them that are Commission Officers, besides
Subalterns and Cadres, viz. Followers and Setters. I have heard a Gentleman
say, that has been long acquainted with them, that if 'twere possible to bring
'em to a general Rondezvouze they could muster at least Three thousand chosen
Men, able to draw Swords upon Occasion. Now Sir, who can reflect upon this
strange Multitude, and withal consider that they are turned loose to prey upon
the meaner sort of People only; (for they hare rarely any Business with any but
such) but must soon imagine they must needs make a very strange Havoc and
Destruction among them. Sir, I Will trouble you with a short Relation that
happened within the Compass of my own Experience: some time before my
Misfortunes broke in upon me, the Person in whose house I lodge was seized by
one of these Parties for a small Debt of about Thirty Shillings that was in
dispute between him and a Neighbor; the Man was as honest a reputable Man as
any in the Street, and his Word I believe would have went for a hundred Pound
in any part of the Town. Well, but for all this, these Sparks had got him, and
the Constitution of this worthy Court must not be broken upon any account; he
must either pay the money together with the charge of the Writ and the Arrest,
or give Bail, or go to Prison. Upon which he sent for me and another Friend,
and so we signed a Bail-Bond of 5 l. to indemnify Mr. C -- L --, who is the Mr.
of the Goal. Their demands for the Bail-Bond, etc. tho I filled it up my self
(for as I remember never a one of those could write) was 4 s. and 6 d. and 3 s.
and 6 d. more, which they had sucked up in the interim, made 8 s. for this Job:
but what was worse, my Landlord being unskilled in these sort of Practices, and
not Feeing an Attorney, according to the Rules of their Court, the very next
Friday, which I think was but about 3 days after this Bail Bond was assigned,
and upon the Saturday morning following, the former Partizan, with a stronger
Detachment came and beat up all our Quarters. Here was my Landlord, his Friend
and my self, all arrested at the Suit of Mr. C -- L --, and kept in strict
Durance for the weighty consideration of 30 odd shill. Well, to make up the
matter, we sent for the Plantiff, who would have took his Money and given a
Discharge, but that, it seems, would not do now, the Tables were turned, Mr.
Christophea Lowman was the Plantiff, and he must be comprehended in the
Articles of Peace, or the War must go on* there were several new Fees to be
paid, both to the Court and Prison, before we could come to a separate Treaty.
In short, the Commander in Chief told us we must give good Guarrantees to
answer the Damages that should be awarded against us, and that it was not in
the Directions of his Commission to come to any other Terms. Well, there was no
Remedy but we must send for some substantial Housekepers to give separate Bail
to the Keeper's Actions, or else we must every one of us, in propria Persona,
prepare to take a Turn over the Water. To make short of the Matter, we gave
fresh Bail, which together with the Spunging, etc. amounted to about 14 s.
more. Now Sir, I appeal to your self whether this be not a very hopeful mess of
Law, when 6 or 7 Persons must be engaged, nay, exposed to such a barbarous Gang
of Miscreants as these for the poor Sum of 30 s. But to finish my Relation, my
Landlord told me, that beside the Debt, he was above 3 l. out of Pocket before
he made a perfect end of the Business. It seems the Pretense of this Court at
the Original was to recover small Debts at easy Rates, and to bring them to a
speedy Issue, this it is true was the specious pretense that this Court at
firstgot a Reputation by, and this they pretend still; but how well it answers
those Ends, I think any man may judge from the Relation aforesaid, as well as
from the Sequel of their Practice in General; it is true, I think, their Writs
for 99 s. cost but 2 s. 4 d. and those for 39 s. something less; but what then?
they make them Returnable every Court-Day, which is once a Week, and commonly
too they crowd in 3 or 4 Names into every one of them, so that when every thing
is considered, the Charge of a Writ, and a Suit in that Court, is as expensive
as in any Court in Westminster Hall in a Case of Debt. But, Sir, it does not
agree with my Design to give you a particular History of their whole Practice
and Proceedings, but only some cursory Hints to let you see in short what a
Cluster of Inconveniences attend it. As for their Bailiffs, I confess I cannot
think of a Name bad enough to call 'em by; they are the very Sink and Outcast
of Bailiffs themselves, a sort of Creatures so Ravenous, Wild and Despicable,
that some of the better sort of the Masters of this Order are ashamed to herd
with 'em. And is not this then a very dismal thing, that such a prodigious
Multitude of these intolerable Vermin should be suffered to prey about among
the poor People as they do, and to run in common with them, carrying about
Lies, and setting them upon little Quarrels, etc. that they may force their own
Trade, and get an Opportunity to lay their Venomous Paws upon 'em; what a sad
Object is it to see 4 or 5 of the Vermin luging and tearing a poor Wretch,
first to the Spunging-house, and then to their Jayl, for an inconsiderable Debt
of 10 or 20 s. perhaps leaving the miserable Wife and Children to beg or
starve, or to be kept upon the Parish Charge in the Interim: This is the common
practice of every Day; and indeed it is almost incredible to be reported, how
many honest Tradesmen and Laborers, poor Widows, and the like, have been
perpetually ruined and undone by their Villainy. But, Sir, I believe my
Description of these Matters will be as unpleasant and ungrateful for you to
read as they are for me to write, and therefore I Will leave 'em in the Middle,
and so carry you to their Prison and show you a few of the Miseries there too,
and then shut up till the next Opportunity.

This Jayl is almost of the same Nature with Newgate, and considering it is a
common Receptacle for Felons and Pirates as well as Debtors, you must believe
it is seldom without good store of Guest. For my part when I saw it, I must own
I was much amazed at the Multitude that was there, which, as one of the
Prisoners told me, was about 160, and near 100 of 'em for small Debts under 5 l.

Whilst I was making my Observations, I was accosted by one of the most
deplorable Objects I ever beheld, a Woman almost naked and perished, who, as
she told me, had been kept in there 17 months, for only calling* Mr. B.... the
Bailiffs Wife Whore Here they live all together promiscuously all Day, till at
Night the Keepers drive 'em into their respective Holes and Caverns. As near as
I remember, there is no Allowance at all for Debtors that are brought in by the
Marshals Writs, so that unless they have Money to subsist themselves, they must
inevitably be starved to death. Just as I was making my Exit one of their
Partymen brought in an Old Gentlewoman, whereby I had the opportunity of seeing
the Garnish Ceremony performed. I think they demanded in the whole 6 s. i. e. 1
for Footing, the other 5 for Garnish; but what was worse, it seems she had been
a Fortnight at the Bailiffs House before, who had not left her a Farthing to
help her self; so that the poor Matron begged heartily of her Fellow Prisoners
to be excused in that Point, but all would not do, they call a Jury immediately
upon her, and from a very shor Consideration bring her in Guilty to the Value
of 6 s. and that unless the Master of the Cellar would take her Word she must
prepare to strip, etc. But, Sir, I would not tire you with these melancholy
Curiosities neither; I have said enough, I presume to let you see what kind of
Court and Government this is; there are, indeed, abundance of other things that
might be mentioned, viz. the extravagant Fees and Demands of the Jailer and
Turn-Keys, and the Tricks and Devices of the Waitors to extort Money from the
poor Prisoner, etc. But I have detained you too long already; and therefore
I Will take my leave for to night.

LETTER VI. In which is a Relation of the Behavior and Practices of the
Sergeants and Yeomen belonging to the Two Compters, together with the
Respective Practice of these Courts; and also a short Account of the Prisons
appertaining to the City of London.
Sergeants are generally a sort of over grown Bailiffs, and in their Nature and
Practice the very same as they are: Indeed they pretend to a Kind of
Superiority, both in their Morals and Honesty, beyond the rest of the
Brotherhood; but truly in the course of my Misfortunes I always found them to
be Creatures exactly of the same Temper and Species. Their business is chiefly
to attend upon the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs at their Respective Courts at
Guild Hall, at the Sessions House in the Old Bailey, and at the time of
Execution of Criminals, and at all other times and places, according as they
are commanded; in consideration of which they have a Gown, and some other Fees
and Immunities allowed 'em; but this, tho it was Originally the chief business
for which they were intended, is become now but only the Shell and Husk of the
Office: the Sweet and Profit of it consists in the Execution of Actions and
Detachments, and it is by the Exorbitant Demands and Advantages they make from
thence that several of 'em get considerable Estates in a few years. I knew one
of them intimately, that in less then 12 years purchased 200 l. per ann. Land
of Inheritance; How he got it, I need not inform you; but it seems there was
some Grumbling in his Gizzard afterward; for, in a deep Disgust and
Dissatisfaction, he quitted the Worthy Occupation, and turned Quaker, and in a
little time became one of the powerfullest Holders forth in the whole Town.
These Gentlemen commonly buy their places of the Mayor or Sheriffs, and so do
the Yeomen too, which are a sort of Under Vermin that are joined to 'em to
help 'em in their Managements, etc. They generally march out in small Bodies,
seldom more than two in a Party, viz. a Sergeant and a Yeoman, unless it be
upon great Expeditions; such as are the Storming of a Shop, or the Bombarding
of a Warehouse, or as it was in former Days before a Peace was concluded
between them and their Old Enemies the Alsatians. Now I think there is none but
the Knights Templers hold out against them, and there truly I saw the other day a
strong Party of 'em handled very scurvily. The manner of it was thus; It seems
they had undertaken upon very large Considerations to lay violent Hands upon a
certain Gentleman that had thrown himself into the Temple to secure his best^
Effects, and accordingly finding him in a place where they thought they might
make their Attacks upon him with least hazard, they fell on with a great deal
of Fury and Resolution, but truly the Gentleman perceiving the Enemy upon the
Walls, and withal knowing how dangerous it was for him to quit his Fastness,
immediately gives the Alarm, the Sentinels soon took it, and in a very few
minutes a strong Party from the Garrison came to his Relief; the Fight at first
was very bloody and obstinate, and several swinging Bastinadoes were exchanged
on both sides, but then the later being every moment recruited with fresh
Forces, the former were forced to retreat with a running Fight and leave their
Booty behind 'em, and what was worse, two of 'em were taken Prisoners, which
according to an ancient Custom in that Garrison were forthwith taken to the
Pump, and from thence to the House of Office, and there I Will leave them and go
on with my Relation. These Sparks are indeed a limited Number, and withal, are
prohibited to arrest any Freman for any Debt under 40 s. They have a Court of
Conscience in the City of London for such purposes, where small matters are
determined with a great deal of Ease and Moderation; but then for the
Foreigners they have no Regard to them, one of them rather than fail may be
bon'd and held to Bail for 9 d. and what is worse, be forced to give the
Gentleman that does him this Kindness, 5 s. for his Reward, or else he will put
him in the Compter. It Is true, the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs do often take 'em in
Considertion, and sometimes displace them for their Villainy and Extortion; but
for all that, I Am confident they generally want to be new regulated as much as
those that belong either to the Marshalsea or to the Sheriff of Middlesex. They
have their Pretenses and Artifices to wrack and screw Money from their
Prisoners, under the Notion of Civility as well as they; they have their
Spunginghouses and Spungers too, as they have: they can betray the Creditor,
and trappan and deceive the Debtor as they can; in brief, they can Swear, Lie,
Hector, Domineer and Cheat as well as the best of 'em all, and are in the main
a very lewd, dissolute and disorderly Gang. Sir, I would not seem in the least
partial, or to represent Men and Things wors' than they are: I must confess
there are diverse of 'em, that, abstracted from their Office, as Times go now,
may pass Muster well enough; but then consider them in their Function, and
there is never a Barrel the better Herring, they are all of 'em of a Piece;
Money's the grand Game they all Hunt, and have it they will, and they matter
not which Way. As to the Rules of their Courts and their Methods of
Proceedings, I must own, they are in a great many Particulars very Regular and
Expeditions, and withal, I believe, formerly a Suit might be commenced and
carried quite through for a very small Charge, but then they have well improved
the Business here of late, and drawn up the Fees of their Respective Offices to
that unaccountable height, that a small Debt is entirely swallowed up before
the Cause is half determined. There are several things which upon a general
Enquiry will require a Regulation; but for peace sake I will not mention 'em, only
these two I cannot pass, viz. their Juries, and their Foreign Pleas. As to
their Juries, I cannot help being a little out of humor with some of 'em,
especially with their Causecatchers. I mean those Worthy Citizens that have got
Estates by being Jurymen, and attend upon it as their ordinary Employment: I Am
afraid indeed there is very often some Daubing in those Cases, and that too
many of them know which Way the Case will go before they hear either the Court
or the Evidence. I Am told there is a a particular Set of 'em, who to make
Matters easy and equal among themselves have wisely agreed, that each should
have his Case in his turn. This would be worth enquiring into upon Occasion,
but at present it is out of my Road. And then for their Foreign Pleas, it is a
barbarous thing, that they should wink at, or rather incline Persons to enter
their Actions, fee Attorneys, and perhaps run through the whole charge of their
Courts, notwithstanding they know that if the Defendant joins Issue, and pleads
that his Debt was contracted out of the Verge of their Jurisdiction, the
Plantiff must be nonsuit, and so not only loose all his own Charges, but
likewise be obliged to pay his Adversary's too. Well Sir, to make as short of
these Matters as I can, they are an equal Composition of good and bad, and if
their Rates were reduced to their Ancient Custom, we might even let 'em rest
under the Umbrage of an Old Proverb, that when the Old is gone seldom comes a
better. But then in the second Place, for their Prisons, there indeed there is
Work enough both for Pity and Regulation: Indeed they are not so often
interrupted with Thieves and Highwaymen as they are at Newgate and other Jayls,
but excepting that, I see very little Difference; their Fees are very
extravagant, and their Turnkeys and Under Officers strangely insolent and
unmerciful; and for their Common Side, which the poorer Sort are consigned to,
it is as fulsom and nauseous, and their Beds and Lodgings as loathsome and
wretched as any of the rest, Newgate itself not excepted: It Is true, if a Man
has Money he may be furnished with a tolerable good Lodging in either of the
Compters, and so he may in any other Prison about Town; but if his hard
Circumstances turn him in common among those that are exposed to live upon the
Charity and Customs of the House, why then, were it lawful to wish the Misery
and Destruction of an Enemy, we could not consine him to a place better adapted
for this purpose than the Common Side in one of these Jayls. Beside the two
Compters, there is another Prison belonging to the City of London, i. e.
Ludgate; but thither none but Freemen and Clergymen are admitted. This is the
best Prison about London, both in Regard to its Endowment and Government, and
yet here too, as I Am told, they have lately swelled their Fees to a very
strange Bigness. In short, the Jayls all over England want to be surveyed, and
to have their Fees and Demands fixed, their Endowments restored, and their
Ancient Customs and Immunities new settled and restablisht.

LETTER VII. Wherein the Evil Practices of Pretended Solicitors are exposed,
and their Knavish Tricks and Artifices detected, which they make Use of to
deceive Poor Prisoners and others, both out of their Money and Liberty.
SIR,
HAving in my former Letters given you a cursory Account of the base Practices
of the Bailiffs and Sergeants in general, and hinted to you some of the most
common and material Miscarriages of the London Prisons, I shall now lead you a
little further, and briefly expose to you another Sort of Viperous Creatures,
which, if possible, are of a Nature and Disposition more venomous and dangerous
than the former. These are a kind of Vermin that pass upon the World under the
Character of Sollicitors, and usually derive their Original from Superannuated
Bailiffs, or from other Outcast Wretches, that in Knavish Suits and contentious
Wranglings have consumed their Estates, and so, are forced to turn Rogues and
Trappanners to get their last Bread; the Places of their Rendezvous were
formerly the Mint and Friars, but those Constitutions being happily dissolved,
they have since been forced to Range at venture about Town. The chief Places
they frequent now are the King's Bench Walk in the Temple, where they ply
constantly, but in Term-time especially, that they may be ready to help an
honest Client upon Occasion; or at the Grates of the Compters, Marshalsea,
Newgate, and other Jayls, where under Pretense of a great deal of Knowledge in
the Tricks and Turns of the Law, they inveigle poor Wretches that are ready to
ca^ch at every Deceitful Twig for Liberty, to fix their Confidence and
Dependence upon 'em. Sir, it would be the Work of a Volume to descend into
Particulars, and trace these Varlets through the whole Course of their
Villainous Practices, I will only therefore, as in all my former, take notice of
a few of their most practical and notorious Rogueries, from whence you may well
enough judge of all the rest. Their chief Business is Perjury, and this they do
to an Hairs breadth; for so much an Oath, they will swear you through a whole
Cause, and, what to an honest Man looks a little strange, do it so nicely and
exactly, and withal join the Circumstances and Evidence so well together that I
defy the best Counsel of 'em all to catch or trap 'em in it; but then the
Person that uses them had best take care too, for if he stops his Hand and does
not feed 'em on, or gives 'em any Disgust, it is ten to one but they turn Tail,
join the contrary Party, and by some Knavish Stratagem or other come off from
what they swore before, and impudently turn a Witness on the other side.

This is very ordinary amongst 'em, and to be a good proficient in this useful
Art of Changing of Sides, they esteem among themselves to be one of the most
profitable and commendable Qualifications belonging to their Order. Another
Inhuman piece of Knavery they have (as I mentioned before) is to cheat and
deceive poor Prisoners: If they can once pass the Gates and get in among 'em,
they are safe enough; and first, to initiate themselves, they put on the Looks
and Behavior of Hypocrites, pray and cant nay, rather than fail, shed some
Crocodiles Tears which they are always provided with to color their Villainy.
When they have drawn any of the poor Wretches into a Conference, why, then the
first thing they entertain 'em with is, the mighty things they have done for
Prisoners in Distress, and all, as they insinuate, in pure Pity and
Commiseration to their Condition, without the least Reward or Expectation of
Profit or Advantage. Here they pretend they have such a Judge that is their
particular Friend and never denies 'em any thing, such an Attorney is their
Relation, and will do their Business almost for nothing; such a Judge's Clerk
they have obliged by several Kindnesses and Services, and that the Marshal of
the Kings Bench and Warden of the Fleet are so much their Slaves and Vassals
that they dare not oppose any thing they request of 'em. By such kind of Lies
and Shams as these, backed by their Hypocritical Cants and Formalities, it is
great Odds but some of 'em are caught. Well, when he finds he has a Bite, he
first gives him a little more Line that he may have time enough to pouch the
Bait, and when he perceives he is sufficiently hampered he prepares by little
and little to draw him to Land. Here he must be called aside forsooth, and
enjoined Secrecy under the Forfeiture of his Kindness, and withal, solemnly
conjured to make an ample and true Discovery of all his Concerns, by Virtue of
which he gets fully Instructed which way to steer his Managements with the most
Advantage; when he has sounded him to the very Bottom and finds that his Estate
or Effects will answer, he proposes in consideration of some small Matter,
which they will not fall out about, to procure him Bail. This he can do well
enough, for they have always belonging to their Gang some honest charitable
Housekeepers that for a valuable Consideration will bail a man at any time;
what if they are not in Strictness of Law worth double the Debt? it is all one
they will swear they are, and then there is no refusing, but their Bail must be
taken. And here their Came begins, when they have Bailed the Person, and got
him entirely into their own Clutches, then Mr. Solicitor opens the Nature of
the Case to him. Sir, says he, you see what we have done for you, you are now
at Liberty, and free from the Dismalness and Expense of a Prison and let loose
again into the World, and all this is done for you by perfect Strangers; but
then, says he, I know you are a man of Sense and Gratitude, and so I need not
trouble you with the Nature of the Obligation: Here he calls him aside and
directs him what kind of Offers he should make to 'em; if he says he has no
Money, says he, you must raise what you can, and give 'em your Note for the
rest; well, when this is complied with, then one of his Worthy Bail begins his
part in the Management; Sir, says he, we find you are a very honest civil
Gentleman, and you may depend upon it, that if you should at any time fall into
any sort of trouble, if you send for us we'll come and deliver you immediately:
That we will, says the other Cannibal, but then, considering the Gentleman's an
absolute Stranger, I think he ought to give us some kind of Security to
indemnify us; this is agreed to without doubt, and so a Bond and Judgment,
without either Limitation or Defeasance, are forthwith Signed and Sealed, and
then they have done with him for the present; but still the worst part is
behind; it is ten to one but by some Villainous Stratagem or other they get
themselves arrested upon his Account, and then they have a good Pretense to
fall upon him with their Judgment and sweep away all he has, and so the poor
Man is ruined and undone for ever. But in the second place, when this cruel
Varlet finds the Circumstances of the Prisoner too bad, and dangerous for him
to be Bailed, and that there is nothing to be made of him by that experiment,
then he tryes another, and advises him to bring a Habeas Corpus, and remove
himself to the Fleet or Kings Bench, and he will go and compound with the
Marshall or Warden (both which he persuades him he has at his beck) for his
Liberty, and withal, rather than fail, urges him to sell or pawn his Goods,
Clothes, or Working Instruments to raise Money to defray the Charge. When he
has brought this Habeas Corpus, for which he exacts commonly twice as much as
the real Expense of the thing is, and has fixed him in one of these Places, he
certainly leaves him there to get his Liberty how he can, unless he finds he
can make a clandestine Bargain, and cheat him out of 2 or 3 Guineas more by
some new sort of Artifice: But then, in the third place, if he find the
Prisoner too poor and too far in Debt to be Bailed, and that his Condition is
so very miserable and low that he cannot by any manner of means raise Money to
remove himself, then he possesses him that the Action is wrong laid, and if he
will summons the Plaintiff before a Judge, by Virtue of a particular Interest
there, he need not question but he will have him discharged; upon which Motive
the poor Wretch parts with all that he has in the World that should assist him
in his miserable Consinement, and gives it to him to encourage him to hasten
the Business, which when he has once got into his perfidious Paws, it is a
thousand to one if ever he comes near him any more. Well, when by such kind of
Tricks as these they have rendered themselves so hateful and obnoxious to all
the Prisons about Town, that they dare not come near any of 'em for fear of
their Pumps or Houses of Office; then they steer to the Old Baily, and
endeavor to crowd themselves into the Company of condemned Criminals or their
Friends and Relations, and tell 'em that if they can raise any Money, they can
make an Interest at Court to get their Friend a Pardon or at least a Reprieve
sine Die; this has been a very useful part of their Practice formerly; indeed
it is a little blown upon at present, and truly I am afraid that many a
miserable Creature has been deceived not only out of his Money but his Soul
too by it. Sir, their Tricks and Villainies are numberless, and 'twould amuse a
sober Man to think what exalted Lying and Impudence they impose upon the World;
how strangely and mysteriously they twist themselves into the Secrets and
Affairs of poor Debtors, and then how barbarously and perfidiously they sell
and betray them to their Creditors. It Is methinks one of the greatest Riddles
that this Town affords, how so many thousands of 'em do to subsist. I Am
confident I have seen a hundred at a time scouring among their Clients, the
Whores and Thieves at Hicks's Hall, at a Sessions, and some of them in pretty
good Habits too. Well Sir, I will trouble you with them no longer. In short,
you see that each of these Pretended Solicitors is a Composition of Solid and
Substantial Villainy, a Wretch so compendiously wicked, dangerous and
despicable, that in my Opinion the Suppressing of them would be a Work of equal
if not greater Consequence, than that of Bailiffs and the Regulation of Jayls.

LETTER VIII. Which gives a general Account of the Fleet, and King's Bench, and
briefly shows Men their Mistake in Purchasing a Pretended Liberty or Freedom
from either of them, and withal discovers the certain Danger and Charge that
depends upon it.
SIR,
THE Fleet and King's Bench are the two Chief Prisons in England, and provided
with several eminent Privileges and Advantages above the rest. The Fleet in
particular, is a well built convenient House, accommodated with good Water, a
Conduit, a Chapel where there is constantly Prayers twice a day, handsome
Lodgings and Appartments, and so many other Conveniences that at first Sight
it appears to a Stranger rather like a College than a Jayl. The Kings Bench is
much of the same Kind, enjoys the Benefit of large Rules, good Rooms and a
Bowling-Green, etc. So that if things were honestly and sincerely managed, an
Unfortunate Man might wade through his Consinement with a great deal of Comfort
and Satisfaction in either of them. I suppose indeed, it was the Original
design in granting these Prisons so many Immunities beyond others, to fit 'em
for Sanctuaries for such Persons whose Misfortunes had deprived 'em of their
Liberty; but then, here is the Misfortune on it, the Government of 'em too often
falls into ill Hands, and then all these Advantages signify nothing. As to the
Governors themselves they are commonly Gentlemen, and Men of Parts, and I dare
engage for one or two of 'em, they are above a little Kravish Trick or Design;
but then they are pestered with so many devouring Officers, Pretenders and
Hangers on, that if the Prisoner be not first instructed in the Nature and
Temper of the Vermin, it is ten to one but they devour him. I was once
intimately acquainted with the Chief Person that had the Management of the
Fleet; and truly I took the Freedom to tell him my Sentiments concerning the
Irregularity of his House, and what a noise it made, and how it was resented in
the World; upon which he frankly told me he was very sensible there were
several things transacted that ought not to be, and what was worse, as Cases
stood then, it was out of his Power to remedy them; and withal, he told me with
some concern, that amongst all that great Herd he had constantly depending and
preying upon him, there was not two that he knew, upon whose Honesty and
Integrity he might absolutely rely, and indeed I found his Words true; for in a
little time after, he narrowly escaped being eat up by his own Dogs: but Sir,
this is a little Foreign to your Question, and so, if you please to pardon the
short Digression, I Will go on with your Design. When a Prisoner has brought his
Habeas Corpus, and is removed from an Inferior Prison, to the Fleet or Kings
Bench, the Waiter or Tipstaff, that receives him from the Jailer at the Judges
Chamber, carries him directly to one of these Places, or at least to some Place
near, if he has a mind to compound for his Liberty, without going into the
Gates; when this Ceremony of Compounding is over, and he has given Bond and
Judgment to Indemnifie the Warden or Marshal, and Security if he has any; why
then, he is honored with a little bit of Paper, which first delivers him out of
the Talons of the Scoundrel that waits upon him, and withal allows him the
Liberty to walk into the Rules, alias whither he pleases; but yet for all his
haste, there is something else for him to do before he must march; next comes
the Gentleman of the Papers, and he must have 25 s. for the Fees of the
Servants of the House, and 44 s. more for his Commitment Fee, and then he may
move, and yet it is very hard if Mr. Waiter parts with him without half a Piece
for his Attendance; no, no, that must be done too, or else that Gentleman's
highly displeased, and God Dam him, he will be even with him; and so he certainly
will, for they are the cursedst Vermin in the whole Gang; but I intend to have
a Touch with 'em all by and by, and so I Will let him alone till I come at him
among the rest.

But now the Prisoner has past all these Pikes he may go home, and how long
must he stay there? why, till he is arrested again, or till the Officers in
Chief, or some of the Subalterns want to speak with him, and then a Runner is
dispatched to him, to bring him along with him, with Instructions to tell him
there is a Declaration come, or that there has been a Plaintiff threatening to
sue the Office, and they must understand him a little better, and have better
Security, or else he must go into the House. To make short of the Story, it is
Ten to One but this is all a Device and Contrivance between a Waiter and some
little pretending Officer, to get half a Piece, or a Guinea, to equip him at
Night with a little Wine and a Supper. But then if they find he will be
terrified by such kind of Projects, for the future, they will suck him with a
vengeance, and take their Rounds till every One has had his snack of him. In
short, Sir, as Cases stand now, I cannot see what kind of Liberty this can be
they pretend to allow a Prisoner. If his Debt be upon Main Process, why then he
may be Arrested again, and so must be forced to bring a New Habeas Corpus, or
go to another Jayl. If he be under Execution, why then if the Creditor meets
him out of the Rules, he presently falls upon the Office for an Escape, and the
Office consequently upon the Security; and then it is some odds but there is 2 or
3 undone into the bargain. But as Cases stand with me, I must not dive too deep
into their Secret History: I know enough to serve my own turn: and I suppose I
have said enough too to let any Rational Person see the Expense and Danger he is
exposed to from this kind of Freedom. Indeed I cannot tell how far it may suit
with some Persons Circumstances and Convenience more than others: however, in
the main, I am very confident there must be more Cost than Worship, and that
the Advantage in general, can never answer the Charge.

And now I would have done with 'em, but that I have forgot to pay my Respects
to a few honest Gentlemen, that perhaps would take it in dudgeon, if I should
miss 'em, I mean their Worthy Waiters. These are, it is true, but the Fag-end of
the Corporation; but for all that, they are Persons of Considerable Power now and
then. I would not spend much time upon 'em neither, and therefore I Will have
done with 'em as soon as I can. The business of these Gentlemen is to wait upon
Prisoners when they go out upon their Day-Rules, and to fetch in those that are
Escaped, if they can catch 'em, and to run of Errands, etc. These are indeed
the uses they are designed for; but truly the Gentlemen being sensible of their
own high Qualifications and Merit, have wisely found out some other
Employments: some set up for Wardens and Marshals, some for Tipstaves, some for
one sort of business, and some for another: so that in short, they have almost
drawn in all the Second hand matters of both the Prisons into their own hands.
One of the worthy Knights of this Order, not long since, did me the honor of
his Company, once a Fortnight, for a considerable time together, and, as he
said, came every time with directions from the Warden to bring me into the
House; but for half a Crown and a Quartern of Brandy, we still made up the
matter, and parted good Friends. Well, Sir, to sum up this Relation, The Fleet
and Kings Bench, with all these Inconveniences, are still the best Prisons in
the Kingdom: And truly, if a man finds his Circumstances are like to continue
him a Prisoner for any considerable time, I think he cannot lay out 40 or 50 s.
better than to remove himself to one of 'em; here he will be secure to find good
Company, good Lodging, and the Opportunity of a Chapel, and indeed every thing
convenient, with a little prudent Management, to sweeten the bitter Draught,
and make the Nanseous Consinement go down a little the more easily.

LETTER IX. Which contains a Short Reflection upon all the Rest, and also
shows, that the Irregularities and Evil Practices of Country Jayls, are in all
Cases equal, and in some worse than those at London.
WELL, Sir, to draw as fast as I can toward a Conclusion of this Unpleasant
Task: I shall in this only trouble you with a few short Reflections upon what I
have said in my former, together with a hasty View of the Miseries and
Oppressions of poor Prisoners in their Consinements in Country Jayls. As to
what I have said in general, you may depend upon it for Truth; most of these
unhappy Occurrences are Matters that I have either Experienced my self, or been
an Eyewitness of in others. I well knew your Design, in giving your self and
me this Ungrateful Trouble, would not admit of Trifles, and therefore I only
singled out some of the most material Passages, and leapt over all the rest
that I thought were any ways Trivial or Impertinent. In my Expressions, I
confess, I have now and then used a little Freedom and Indecency; but then it
was no where but when I had a Wretch, or some base Action to describe, that I
wanted a Name or Title to call 'em by. And for my Method, 'twas the best I
could think of upon such short warning. Besides, I considered I was to write
Letters, and not Books, and so confined to comprehend what I had to say in as
narrow a compass as I could. Sir, I will not trouble you with very many
Apologies. I have given you, in as few Lines and Words as I thought the Nature
of my Relation would bear, a Dismal Account of the Sufferings of poor
Prisoners; first from the Tyrannick and Insolent Usage they are exposed to from
Bailiffs in general; and then laid before you some of the Grievances and
Hardships, and but some of them neither, which they are forced to under go in
their Respective Jayls and Confinements belonging to this Town. And now, Sir, I
will only make a short turn into the Country, and take a transitory View of the
State of the Prisons and Prisoners there, and then trouble you no further upon
the Subject. The Villainies of Bailiffs and Jaylors is an Epidemick Distemper,
and has unhappily spread it self over the whole Nation; and truly I think,
when every thing is considered, rages with as much Violence in the Country as
it does here in Town. In the Country the Bailiffs have Commenced the Villainous
Methods of Spunging, and Civility-money; Nay, they have Improved the Practice
of betraying the Creditor, and bringing the Debtor under Contribution: There
they Ride Lords and Masters, Insult and Hector even the Gentry and Clergy, and
the Common People, especially. Those that are in Debt are their very Slaves and
Vassals, and stand in more awe of 'em than they do of their Justices of the
Peace. There they live at large, have no body to curb or inspect their
Insolence; but are in a manner let loose, like Mad Dogs, or rather like Wolves
and Vultures, to snap at and prey upon every thing they come nigh. There the
poor Prisoners are forced to bear the severe Usage and Hardships of their
Keepers and Jaylors, and have no body to pity or hear their Complaints, or at
least no body to redress their Grievances, or to comfort or support them in
their Agonies: There Is no Judge there, nor no Tipstaff in the Country to take
these merciless Wretches into Custody; but they are lest entirely to the
Guidance of their own Pride, ill Nature and Avarice, to Insult and Domineer,
Fetter, Confine, Cheat and Impose upon their wretched Captives how they please:
And truly their Behavior in general is inhuman and barbarous enough; and
what is the greatest Misfortune of all too, their distance from London, has
rendered their Removal by Habeas Corpus almost impracticable. Sir, I have been
a little Curious in these Affairs, and, as Occasion offered, have now and then
made it my Business to pry into these unpleasant Mysteries, and indeed through the
whole Course of my Observations I never found any thing that could distinguish
the Practices of Bailiffs and Jaylors and the ill Management of Prisons in the
Country from these in Town, unless it be that the former are attended with
greater Hardships and Severities.

And now, Sir, I have done with the Subject, and shall only put you in mind of
One Thing more, and take my leave. The Cries and Groans of these Miserable
Wretches have already taken Wing, and dispersed themselves over the Face of the
whole Kingdom: Whether they will stop here or no, I cannot tell; but this I know,
That if there is not some sudden means used to redress their Grievances, in all
probability, they will assail Heaven too, and call as loud for Vengeance from
thence, as they do for Pity and Assistance here.

LETTER X. In which some short Methods are proposed for putting those Affairs
into a better Posture: And then the whole is Humbly Submitted to better
Judgment and Examination.
AND now, Sir, I am come to the concluding Part of your Commands, viz. to give
you my Sentiments how these great Evils may be Redrest and Rectified. And here
indeed I must own my Insufficiency; This is the greatest work of all: And to
speak my Thoughts of the Matter, seems rather to require the Judgment of a
whole Nation than the Single Opinion of a private Person. Sir, all that I can
do in this great Affair is only this, to give you my poor Thoughts how both the
Debtor and Creditor may best fence and defend themselves against the Frauds and
Violence of these kind of Vermin; and then in answer to what you are pleased
to urge, add my short Sentiments how the whole may be put in a better Posture.

First, therefore, for the Creditor, when things are come to that unhappy pass
that he is forced to use Extremity, I passionately advise him never to deliver
the Writ out of his hands or suffer the Bailiff out of his Sight till he has
done his Business; for if he does, it is ten to one but he is betrayed, and at
once loses both his Debt and Charge. The Writ is the general Basis upon which
they build their consequent Rogueries; when they once get that, they are
thoroughly equipped either to betray the Creditor or compound with the Debtor, and
they may both depend upon it that for a shilling advantage they will be false to
either Party. And then for the Debtor, let him take this with him too, that
although by a large Bribe and Promise or something like it, he dearly purchases
their Forbearance for once or twice, whenever he slacks his hand the Peace is
broke and all the former Kindnesses are forgot, and the Word is then, according
to the common Cry, Bail, Jayl or Money.

In the second place, when they have got him into their Clutches, I caution him
as a Friend not to be decoyed by 'em into a Spunging-house, but if he finds he
cannot comprehend the Business in a very short time, to repair directly to
Prison, for tho that be a very melancholy Remedy it is the lesser Evil of the
two and consequently the better to be chosen. They may pretend that this will
expose him to disgrace and to the rest of his Creditors, and put him to Charge
and what not, but this is all but a Knavish Blind and a Trick. They make it
their Business to do that for him as soon as they have got him. Besides he is no
longer welcome with them than his Money lasts, and when they have wracked him
out of what he has, he must march to Jayl after all. The only Objection that I
know of, is the extravagant Fees of the Jailer, and can there be no remedy
found out to regulate it? That Is strange indeed! I know the grand Pretense is,
That their Prisoners are very numerous, and that they are forced to keep a
great many Servants, etc. but then, must this be all thrown upon the Wretched
and Unfortunate? Why, where is the Justice and Humanity of that? For my own part
I tremble to think of these things, and certainly they must be the Subject of a
great deal of Wonder and Sorrow to any body that will give himself the Trouble
to Reflect upon 'em. Well Sir, to give you my hasty* Thoughts of the whole
Matter; This infections Distemper spreads it self so fast that unless Care be
taken, and proper Medicines applied to suppress it, it will at length swell
into a general Contagion. But then how this may be done, is the great Query.
Why, very easily certainly; Let but the Fees of the Bailiffs be settled, let
them be prohibited under severe Penalties, to detain any person in their
Custody above such a time; Let their Swords be taken from their sides, and
their Battoons out of their hands, and their White Wands restored in their
places: Let their Number be restrained and limited, and honest men put into the
Office; and that part of the great Work's done, And then for Prisons, let there
be but a general Survey made, their Ancient Liberties and Immunities restored,
and Commissioners appointed to inspect into their Indowments, and inquire into
their Irregularities in general, let their Fees be Established, and a Copy of
'em fixed continually upon each of their Gates, I Am confident a great many of
the Miseries of these unfortunate Wretches, would vanish in an instant; and
good Old Hospitable England lie no longer under the ungrateful Reflection of
being the most severe and mercyless to her Prisoners, of any other Nation in
the Christian World. But, Sir, you have begun the business, and I don't doubt
but your Piety and Charity will urge you on till you have happily brought it to
an end, which will at once entitle you to the blessings of both Worlds, to the
Prayers of the Prisoners and Captives, to the Thanks and Praises of the Debtors
and Creditors, and to the good Wishes and Commendations of all, but especially
of,

Your Obedient Servant.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
I. THE First Letter is only an Introduction to the rest, and briefly shows the
Cause and Intent for which they were writ. II. The Roguish and Villainous Tricks
of Bailiffs in general, and the strange Stratagems and Devices they have to
extort Money both from the Debtor and Creditor. III. In the Third the Irregular
Practices of the Bailiffs belonging to the Sheriff of Middlesex are
particularly detected and exposed, together with a short Description of
Newgate, as it Relates both to the Debtor, Felon and Traitor. IV. The Fourth
Letter is the Continuation of the Description of Newgate, and especially of the
Common Side. V. In the Fifth the base Practices of the Bailiffs belonging to
the Marshals Court, are exposed, together with some short Reflections upon
their Constitution and Government, with a Description of their Prison. VI. The
Sixth gives the Relation of the Behavior of the Sergeants and Yeomen belonging
to the two Compters, together with the manner of Proceeding in those Courts;
and also a short Account of the Prisons belonging to the City of London. VII.
In the Seventh the Evil Practices of pretended Solicitors are exposed, and the
Cunning and Knavish Stratagems and Artifices they make use of to deceive poor
Prisoners, and others, both out of their Money and Liberty. VIII. The Eighth
gives a general Account of the Fleet and Kings Bench; and briefly shows Men
their mistake in purchasing a pretended Liberty or Freedom from either of 'em;
and withal discovers to 'em the certain danger and charge that depends upon it.
IX. The Ninth contains a short Reflection upon the whole Subject of the rest,
and then shows that the Irregularities and ill practices of Country Jayls and
Bailiffs are in all cases equal, and in some much worse than those at London.
X. In the Tenth and last, some short Proposals are offered for the putting
these Affairs into a better Posture, and then the whole is Humbly submitted to
better Judgment and Examination.

