A COMPENDIOUS HISTORY OF THE TAXES OF FRANCE, And of the OPPRESSIVE METHODS Of
RAISING of them.

LONDON: Printed by J. M. and B. B. for Richard Baldwin near the Oxford Arms in
Warwick Lane. MDCXCIV.

To the RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS EARL OF STAMFORD, Lord Gray of Grooby, etc.
MY LORD,
THE Design of this Treatise being only to inspire the English Nation with a
greater Love of their LIBERTIES, by representing (in its true Colors) the
miserable Slavery to which France is reduced, it could not properly be
addressed to any other then to a public Assertor of the public Liberty. But
amongst the several Competitors for that glorious Title, I think, I may with
justice say, no Person has so good a claim to it, as your Lordship: Your being
committed to the TOWER, and a SCAFFOLD erected for your Trial, are
Demonstrations that they who then conspired the Ruin of England, looked upon
your Lordship as a principal Bulwark that obstructed their Designs; and
theresore did their utmost to remove you, in order to their farther Progress.
Your Lordship's SUFFERINGS for the Nation's safety entitled you to the General
Thanks of the Kingdom; though I must not say, your Lordship was the only
Nobleman that was struck at by the Persecution (not to say Tyranny) of those
Times.

But whosoever recalls to mind the Transactions of 1688, must withal remember
the important Services wherewith you signalized your self for the RESCUE of
this Nation. You, my Lord, amongst the illustrious Undertakers, durst show a
good Example by appearing the FIRST in Arms, and displaying in open Field the
Colors of Liberty, thereby giving Life to that famous, but languishing,
Association, when it had been almost cast away in a Storm at Sea.

This is a glorious Circumstance, and (must be allowed) peculiar to your
Lordship.

There are some Persons in the World, who appear very zealous for their
Country, and for their Princes; and yet have been so unhappy, as not to escape
the Prejudices of having their Zeal been thought to have chiefly centred on
their private Interests: What your Lordship has done, leaves no room for any
such Suspicion: for nothing can be found more disinteressed.

You have vigorously asserted the Right of your Country, and as vigorously
expressed your Zeal to their MAJESTY'S, in contributing so much to the placing
the Crown on their Heads, and afterward, your Fidelity, in that great Share
which it is well known your Lordship had in its farther Settlement by the
Recognition-Bill,

You have done all to an Eminent Degree, and all this too at your own Expense:
For hitherto your Great and Noble Services have only been their own Reward.

What I have as yet mentioned concerning your Lordship, has been only with
relation to public Affairs, and the Service of their present Majesty's; but
what could I not say of those shining Qualities and Virtues which are
conspicuous in your Lordship, and render you eminently valuable to all those
who have the Honor of being personally acquainted with you.

These are Particulars I could easily enlarge upon, without fearing any other
Censure than that of your own Modesty, which I am unwilling to offend; but
Justice obliges me (at least) to say, that what your Lordship has performed for
the Public deserves the Gratitude that distinguished the first Age of the
Roman Commonwealth; and will be admired so long as People retain any Sense of,
and Love for Liberty.

These, my Lord, must needs be the Sentiments of all true English Men; since
even Natives of other Countries are charmed with so extraordinary a Merit, for
which I cannot but express the greatest Veneration, though I was born and bred
up in a Country wholly infected with Servitude. Wherefore upon so just an
occasion, I thought it my Duty, as it is my Ambition, to profess my self with
all imaginable Respect and Sincerity,

My LORD, Your Lordship's Most Humble, And most obedient Servant.

A COMPENDIOUS HISTORY OF THE TAXES OF FRANCE.
HOW very great the Tyranny is, that the French King exercises over his
Subjects, I hope this English Nation, in general, are not to learn now, because
so many Learned Pens have, in their various excellent Ways of Writing,
endeavored to acquaint all the World with it. This I must confess; but yet at
the same time I cannot forbear to say, That, in my Opinion, none of those
admirable Authors have hit upon the True Turn of it: For though it is plain and
manifest, that the French King could never have built so many beautiful and
costly Palaces, never have bought so many Towns, corrupted and bribed into his
Interests so many Men in all the Courts of Europe, and kept such numerous
Armies as he has in Pay, without vast Sums of Money; and that that Money could
be no other than the Blood and Sweat of his People: Yet, in my Judgment, such a
Consequence, how natural and plain soever it be in it self, is not fitted for
all Capacities. This very Consideration alone, has obliged me to take another
Method; and that I may the better convince all Men of the excessive Tyranny of
Lewis XIV. I will not make use of the pathetical Figures of Rhetoric, but only
set before the Eyes of this Nation a Compendious History of the Taxes, which
the French King's Subjects are forced to pay to their insulting Master; and, if
I am not extremely mistaken, these will give us a true and impartial Idea of
the Gentleness of the French Government, which is so much talked of, and so
much admired by the Enemies of the Felicity of England.

Though the execution of my Design may seem at first pretty easy; yet when it
is narrowly and thoroughly examined into, it will be found attended with
innumerable Difficulties; and I dare say, that the matter I design to handle
now, is not only an Original, but also a very dark Mystery, almost impenetrable
to Strangers, and much unknown to the greatest part of Frenchmen themselves.
It Is not then to be expected that I shall be nicely exact in every particular;
that is what I dare not promise: But what I engage my self to do, is, to
advance nothing in these Papers, but what shall be most certainly true, and
which I have set down, as they have occurred to my Mind, without having any
regard to the Antiquity of the Taxes I speak of. Another difficulty which has
been almost insuperable to me, is a genuine Translation of the Names which the
French have given to those Impositions: For as England has always vigorously
preserved Her LIBERTIES, the very Words which express the Servitude and Slavery
of other Nations, are wanting in her Language. O fortunate Island! may thou
for ever continue in that happy Ignorance.

ARTICLE I. Of the TAILLE.
THe Taille is a Tax, or Subsidy, which was formerly granted to the Kings of
France, by the Three Estates of the Kingdom, upon some extraordinary and
emergent Occasions: But in process of time, it became a Tax Jure Divino, and
was continued in succession by Arbitrary Power. Lewis XI. who was the first
that openly invaded the Liberties of his Subjects, was also the first that
raised this Tax without the Consent of the Three Estates, and who made it
successive likewise. The Taille is threefold; viz. Real, Personal, and Mixed.
Real, is when it is only imposed upon Lands, as in some parts of the Province
of Gueinne, where a Man must pay a certain Sum to the King for every Acre of
Land he is possessed of. Personal, is when it is Assess'd upon any Personal
Estate; that is, among the French, the Money that a Man is supposed to have in
his own hands, or to be worth in Lands, and Houses in his Industry, Art, or
Ability, to get Money. Lastly, the Mixed is so denominated, because in some
parts of that Kingdom the Lands are not only assessed so much per Acre, but the
Proprietor besides is taxed for his Money, Art, and Ability. This Explanation I
thought necessary for the better understanding of my Subject.

The Real Taille, though very burdensome, yet however it is the least heavy
upon the People: For if a Man has but forty Acres of Land, he cannot be
assessed for fifty; whereas in all Provinces of France, except Guienne, the
Taille being everywhere Personal, or Mixed, a Man is assessed for what he has,
and for what he has not, that being at the Discretion of the Intendants of the
Provinces, or some other Officer, called Eleus, who are not only appointed for
those things. Hence it comes to pass, abundance of People are assessed much
more than what their yearly Rent is really worth; and a Cobbler, or other poor
Fellow, that has nothing in the World to live on but the benefit of his Arms,
shall yet notwithstanding be taxed four or five Crowns a Year. Were it not
beyond my Design, I could easily give you many instances of the extreme
heaviness of this Tax; but for brevity sake I shall content my self with this:
That a Baker of Gonesse near Paris, was assessed for his Personal Estate,
though he had not an Inch of Land, 1200 French Crowns a Year; that is, 270 l.
Sterling. This is a Pattern by which we may readily judge of the whole Piece.

To say positively what the whole Sum amounts to, that is imposed upon the
Kingdom for this Taille, it is in a manner impossible; for the French King does
increase or diminish it according as he Himself pleases: That is to say,
according to the Expenses he sees himself obliged to be at. An. 1684. when I
was in France, the said Sum amounted to Forty millions of French Livres; that
is, above Three millions Sterling: But if we consider, that at that time the
French King had Peace with all the World, we may easily believe that this Tax
exceeds now Fifty millions and above. How this Tax is imposed and levied, all
inquisitive Persons, I hope, will be glad to know; and therefore for their
satisfaction, I Will relate it as plainly as the darkness of the matter will
permit.

The King resolves first in his Council what Sum of Money is to be levied on
his Subjects; then Commissions are issued forth to the General Treasures of the
Generalities of the Kingdom, to give them power to levy the Sum agreed upon.
These Commissions being received, the Treasurers make a Division of the Sum to
be levied, proportionable to the extent of the several Elections under them;
which Division, or Repartition, is sent to the King, who thereupon sends a
Commission to the Officers of each Election, by which they are ordered and
enabled to raise such a Sum in their respective Districts. These Officers
meet, and make the Registers of Taxes, wherein each Town, Borough, Hamlet, or
Parish, is assessed. Each Parish has one of those Registers sent to it,
whereupon the Inhabitants make choice of one or more of them to raise the Sum
assessed by the Officers of the Elections. These are called Collectors, and
they tax each Inhabitant according to his Estate: But though they are forbiden
to do it out of any ill will or malice, yet they will ease their Friends,
though they crush the others: And this is the cause of a great many Mischiefs,
and of diverse Families being absolutely ruined by these unjust Stewards.

The Kingdom of France being so very great, it is not Forty nor Fifty millions
that would ruin its Inhabitants, were that Sum but equally shared; but, as I
have already observed, some being eased, when others are overcharged, and this
Misfortune coming upon every Man in his t^^^, the Collectors being changed so
every Year, it happens that at last all become poor and miserable. Well; we
have now seen how that Tax is imposed; let us in the next place see how it is
levied. Should I say that the manner of collecting the Taille, is very near as
grievous as the Taille it self, I should say nothing but what is very true,
though at first it seems almost incredible. To clear therefore this point, I
shall observe to you only, That the People being grown very poor, they cannot
exactly pay all that they are assessed; and upon failure thereof, which must be
Quarterly, the General Receiver, or Treasurer of each Election immediately
sends an Officer, called Porteur de Contrainte, or Commissary, to quarter upon
the Collectors, or Inhabitants of such a Parish, which is so in Arrear, with
two or three Men, whose Pay amounts to Thirteen or Fourteen Shillings a Day,
where they remain till they have other Orders from the Receiver, which he never
grants but upon full payment. And though this way of Levying is rude and severe,
yet it is very gentle, if compared with what they do in some Provinces of
France, where the Receiver, instead of Commissaries, make use of Soldiers, whom
they Quarter at discretion upon those who make the least default in payment.
And this is nothing less than Dragooning. It Is also worth our Remark to
observe, That when an Inhabitant is become so poor, as he is utterly unable to
pay his Tax, or suppose that the Collector should prove a Rogue, and play away
the King's Money, the other Inhabitants are bound to answer for each of these
Disasters.

There are some Provinces in France that are not liable to the Taille; for
those of Burgundy, Brittany, and Languedoc, are free from it, at least as to
the Name: For truly at the bottom, they pay too as well as the rest; but with
this only difference, That instead of Taille, their Subsidy is called Don
Gratuit, a Free Gift of the Estates of those Provinces. What those of Burgundy
give, I cannot tell at present; but the Free Gift of Brittany and Languedoc
amount every Year to above Six hundred thousand Pounds of our English Money.
Those who are not thoroughly acquainted with the State of France, will likely
fall into a great Mistake at the first reading of this, and fancy to
themselves, That the State of those Provinces are like the Parliament of
England; but lest I should give any occasion for so great an Error, I think it
necessary to explain my self. The truth is, That the States of Languedoc and
Britanny were formerly like those of England, but now they are only a Shadow of
what they have been. They meet every Year, and upon their meeting, the
Governor of the Provinces, or some other Great Lord, demands from them, in the
Name of the King, Three or Four millions of Livres, more or less, as the King
pleases. His Speech, for the Formality sake, is indeed taken into
Consideration; but the Sum must be granted, with this only Shadow, or Remain
of Authority, That they grant somewhat less, perhaps by Fifty Crowns, than the
King has demanded. This is all; for they have no Power to meddle with any
other Affairs. After such a Digression, which I have thought necessary for my
Reader's Information, give me leave to resume the Thread of my Discourse.

Some Towns also are free from the Taille; but instead of that, they pay some
other Duties, more than an Equivalent with that Horrid Tax: Those Duties are
called Entries; but they deserve to be considered apart by themselves in
another Article, which will be no less curious, or useful to be known. Where
the Taille is Personal, the Noblemen and Chief Magistrates, as Counselors in
Parliament, are also free from it, at least as to their Personal Estate; but
their Lands are assessed, as well as those of other Men, except seven or eight
Acres, and provided they plough them themselves, that as the King is resolved
to lose nothing, it happens that their Farmers are a great deal more Taxed than
other Men; and I remember thereupon, That a Farmer of a Manor at Villeneuve
St. George, called Les Bergeries, about four Leagues from Paris, was Assessed
every Year 69 l. 4. s. 6 d. sterling.
Nine hundred Livres, though he paid but Five hundred to his Landlord, Monsieur
de Commartin, Councellor of State.

These are the Observations I have thought fit to make upon the Taille, which,
I hope, will give a pretty clear Idea of it: I will now proceed to consider the
Consequences of it: For it is not of this Monster, like that of the Naturals,
that those die without any Issue, but this has a numerous Posterity. The first
is the Taillon, which is an additional Tax, and that was raised at first by
Henry II. Anno 1549. toward the increase of the Pay of his Gens d'Armes, who
then lay Billetted in Villages, and to enable them to pay their Hosts whatever
they had from them. The poor Countrymen thought then to have got a little
ease; but soon after they became as much oppressed by their unruly Guests as
ever: So that whatever had been pretended to them for their Ease, proved only a
Trick to drain their Purses the more. Now everybody knows, that the custom of
Billetting the Gens d'Armes in Villages, has been laid aside; but for all that,
the Taillon is still continued, and so the People are bound to pay it, which
amounts to above the Third part of the Taille.

The other Children of that Monster, are the Contributions which the French
King raises upon his Subjects, and a Subsidy for the Winter Quarters of his
Soldiers. To explain this, it must be observed, That in time of War, the French
King is obliged to Quarter his Troops upon the Frontiers, as also, or at least
the greatest part of them in time of Peace, because of the numerous Garrisons he
is forced to have: Now to keep them in Pay, there is a general Assessment laid
upon most of the Towns of the Kingdom, whereby they are forced to pay the
Subsidy called the Winter Quarters, at the rate of Five pence a Day for each
private Sentinel; and because the Country People are bound to contribute Oats
and Hay for the maintenance of the Horse that are Garrisoned in the Towns, when
the Troops are in Flanders, or in other Frontiers, they are likewise forced to
convert those Oats and Hay into Money; and this is called Contribution, which
brings to the King a great Sum of Money; those Commodities being valued at the
Discretion of those Officers who are appointed for that purpose. Now what Sum
that Subsidy, or Contributions produce, it is impossible to determine; but it
cannot but be very great, considering the vast number of Soldiers that the
French King has in Pay, and the numbers of the Towns he has in France.

And yet how chargeable soever that Subsidy is, the French Soldiers are such
insulting and saucy Guests, that the People would pay twice as much more, if
they could but free themselves from those troublesome Visits: And this
Insolence is countenanced by the Government so much the more, because of the
great Advantage the King receives by it, many Towns paying more to be free
from their Winter Quarters, than they do for the Taille; which they should not
do, were these Soldiers kept under as severe a Discipline as they are in
England, and only Quartered in Public Houses.

ARTICLE II. Of the GABELLE.
THIS is not so much a Tax laid by the French King upon his People, as it is
the engrossing of a Trade to Himself, whereby his Subjects are forced to buy
the Salt from him at his Granaries, and at his own Price. How great a Profit he
makes of that Commodity, few People know; and I am afraid, that few will
believe what I am going to say upon that Subject: For though we are used to
hear of the great and advantageous Returns, that our Merchants receive from the
East and West-India's, yet they are not to be compared to what the French King
gets upon his Subjects by this Gebelle.

How common Salt is in France, those that have traveled in the Pays d'Aunix,
or Xaintonge, cannot be ignorant of; but for those who have not seen the
Salt-Marshes of that Country, I hope, it will be sufficient to let them know,
That a certain Measure, called Muyds de Bosse, weighing 5200 Pounds, is bought
there, at some times, for Three shillings and Six pence, and never dearer than
Four shillings and Six pence of Engglish Money. It Is there that the French King
buys that Commodity, to sell it again to his Subjects, in all the Provinces of
his Kingdom, except Poictou, Xaintonge, Guienne, and Britanny, where the
Gabelle is not as yet imposed. There may be also some other Tracts of Land free
from that Tax, but they are very inconsiderable.

Now to understand what Profit he makes upon that Merchandise, it ought to be
observed, That the Muyds de Bosse contains 52 other Measures, called Minots,
that is, 100 Pounds weight; and that each Minots is sold, at this time, in
Paris at the King's Granaries for 64 Livres: So that there being 52 Minots in
each Muyds de Bosse, as I have said, it follows, That the same quantity of Salt
that the French King buys for Four shillings and Six pence at utmost, is sold
to his Subjects, at his Granaries in Paris, for 3328 Livres; that is, 256 l.
Sterling. It Is true, it is not sold at that rate in all the Provinces where the
Gabelle is imposed; but there is a very inconsiderable difference; and now
everywhere near Paris, as in Normandy, etc. it bears the same Price.

I don't question, but that at the first sight of so extravagant a Price, many
People will be apt to think, that I impose upon their Credulity; but there are
so many considerable Witnesses of what I say in this Kingdom, it is very easy
for any Man to enquire into the Truth of this matter: I must only give you this
Caution, That in time of Peace, the Minots which is now sold for 64 Livres, was
then bought for 44 l. but with this difference alone, the whole Account is but
pure matter of Fact.

How necessary soever the Commodity of Salt be, that high Price would
discourage many People from making use of it; but to prevent that, there are
such good Orders made, that it is impossible to avoid it. 1. The importing of
foreign Salt, is forbidden upon pain of Death: So that let the Salt of the
King's Granaries be never so dear, yet because it is absolutely necessary, the
French are forced to buy it. 2. Salt is imposed upon the People there, as the
Taille; so that each Family must take every Year a certain quantity of it,
proportioned to the number of their Family and Estate; and so let them be never
so willing to eat their Bread and Meat without Salt, yet the King will lose*
nothing by it.

This is the reason that some Provinces are said to be liable to the Salt of
Granaries, and others to the Salt of Imposition. To understand this
Distinction, it must be observed, That in Paris, and some other Cities and
Countries, Salt is not imposed upon the Inhabitants as the Taille; and that if
they buy any, it is out of necessity, and not from any other violence: But in
Normandy, Picardy, Champaigne, Anjou, and other Places, there are Officers
appointed to examine each Family, and to assess them a Minot more or less,
according to their Number and Estate. Let People say what they will, as, That
they are so poor as that they are unable to pay it, they must take the quantity
assessed; and if they do not pay it within six Months after, they must expect a
Military Execution; and God knows how severe that is.

A Man so compelled to buy a Commodity, which is a great deal too dear for his
Purse, would gladly sell it again, could he find a favorable Opportunity. And
there is nothing in this, but what is very natural; but there are such
Penalties, both for the Buyer and Seller, that it is very dangerous for either
of them to drive on such a Trade. The first Offense is punished with a Fine;
but in case the Offender be unable to pay it, he is condemned to the Penalty of
the second Offense, which is Corporal; viz. To be branded with a Red
Flower-de-Luce upon the Cheek, or the Shoulder. And so hard a Punishment ought,
one would think, to deter any Man from Offending twice: Yet there are some who
Offend a third time; and those, upon Conviction, are sent Slaves to the
Galleys, were it only for a Pound of Salt, given, sold, lent, or bartered. The
same Punishment is inflicted upon the Faux Sauniers; that is, a sort of People,
who invited by the high Price of Salt, convey it secretly from Poictou and
Britanny, into the Provinces liable to the Gabelle.

The Fishermen, and other Inhabitants of the Seacoasts, would have a very
officious Neighbor, were they but suffered to make use of Salt Water: But to
hinder it, there are Watches appointed; and were a Man once convinced for
having made use of it, he would be no less severely punished than a Faux
Saunier.

How heavy that cursed Gabelle is upon the French Nation, will appear, I hope,
by what I have already said: But yet were it fairly managed, it would not
however be intolerable: For it is certain, that the Cheats and Knaveries
committed on that account, are more to be feared than the Imposition it self.
This Tax robs a Man but of his Money; but the Managers of it can deprive him
both of his Reputation, Life, and Estate: For the Tools of Slavery and
Arbitrary Power being always, and everywhere alike, I mean Covetous, Base,
Unmerciful, and Treacherous, it happen, many times, that under color of
searching a Man's House upon pretense of Forbidden Salt, they will hide some
themselves in a Corner, where they are sure to find it again upon a second
Visit; and this is sufficient to fine a Man, perhaps, more than he is worth in
the World. But if a Man should have an Enemy, who is so base as to bribe the
Officers of the Salt into his Interests, and oblige them to serve that Trick
thrice upon him, which he can do for a little Sum of Money; that Man shall be
sent a Slave to the Galleys, which is a Punishment worse a thousand times than
Death it self. This Observation is not grounded only upon a bare Peradventure,
but there are many Examples of it; and were it not for fear of bringing a
Disgrace upon some Families that are now in England, I could produce very good
Authorities.

I have said, that the Province of Poictou, Xaintonge, Britanny, and Guienne,
are free from the Gabelle; and perhaps some will wonder at it; and should I
omit to say what I know upon that point, likely enough I should be blamed. That
distinction, in my Opinion, is grounded upon three Reasons: 1. Britanny being
united to the Crown of France but since Charles VIII. who married the Heiress
of that fine Duchy, it is no wonder that the Inhabitants of that Province have
greater Privileges than others. And so I may say the same thing as to Poictou
and Guienne, those Countries being formerly subjected to the Crown of England.
But as for Xaintonge, or Pays d'Aunix, truly there is another particular
Reason: For, First, Would it not be too severe, nay, and inconsistent too with
the French King's Interests, to impose the Gabelle in that very Place where the
Salt is made? Secondly, If we consider how common and general the Insurrections
were in Britanny and Guienne, in 1674. when the French King attempted to put
that burdensome Excise upon them, perhaps we shall find a reasonable Cause to
conclude, That if the Gabelle be not introduced in those Provinces, it is purely
because the Inhabitants are no ways disposed to suffer it. Their Insurrection
was so great, that they were forced to give over that Design; and had the
Confederates but made use of that favorable Opportunity, it might have proved
a fatal Consequence to the Grandeur of that Prince. Thirdly, Though these
Reasons seem very probable, and it is possible that they have in a great
measure contributed to the Ease of those Provinces; yet I take the French King
to be so great an Enemy to every thing that has but the Shadow of Liberty, and
so jealous of his Arbitrary Power, that I do verily believe he would have
crushed the pretended Privileges of those Provinces, and imposed upon them the
Gabelle, had he not been kept from it by other Considerations: What they were,
I cannot tell, except those great Sums of Money which those Counties have,
finance, from time to time presented to the King; at least I know this, That
they were given for that end, that so they might be free from that terrible
Tax: And I see no cause why I may not conclude, That this is the principal
Reason, why they have not yet undergone a Fate that is common to all the other
Provinces of France.

Now an Excise that is so heavy and burdensome, would bring into the King's
Coffers a world of Money, where he not forced to be at such vast Expenses;
first, In transporting of Salt from the Place where it is made, into the other
Provinces; and, secondly, in maintaining above Twenty thousand Men, that are
employed about raising the Gabelle, or for watching over the Faux Sauniers, and
others, who would cheat the King otherwise, in all probability.

ARTICLE III. Des AIDES. Of AIDS.
LEs Aides, are an Excise upon Wine, which is very considerable; but for the
better understanding of it, I must, in the first place, tell you something of
the Measures that are used in Paris. We had so great a Trade at Bourdeaux for
Wine, that, I believe, very few People are ignorant of what the Measure is the
French call there a Tonneau; but in Paris and the Environs of that City, they
speak only of Muyds, which is the Third part of a Tonneau, and contains about
280 Pints, Paris Measure, which is about as many London Quarts. And now after
this Explanation, I will proceed.

When the Proprietors of the Vineyards about Paris have sold their Wine, they
are obliged to declare it at a certain Office, which is appointed for that
purpose, in a convenient place, and to tell the Officers, or Clerks, at what
Price they sold it per Muyd, and to pay One Penny per The French ^^vre is 18.
d. sterling.
Livre, besides an additional Duty of Sixteen Pence Halfpenny per Muyd. The
Wine-Coopers, or whoever have bought that Wine to be carried into Paris, are
forced to make a like Declaration at the the Gates of the City, and to pay the
like Sum, viz. One Penny per Livre, and Sixteen pence Halfpenny per Muyd for
the Additional Duty. But here we must take notice, That this Second Office has
a greater Power than the First; for by their own Authority, they may
arbitrarily put what Price they please upon the Wine, which very much increases
the Duties upon it; and, God knows, they seldom, if ever, fail of this. But
over and above all these Impositions, they pay for the Duty of Entry 22 Livres
per Muyd to the King, besides some other Duties to the Townhouse. Wine being
thus brought into their Cellars, they then must pay yearly to the King 8 Livers
1 Sous, or Penny halfpenny, for having the liberty to sell it again: And when
they sell it, they must make again the like Declaration as before, and pay the
like Sums. As these Duties and Declarations were too frequent, the
Wine-Coopers used formerly to conceal the true Price of their Wine; but now
they dare not do it, for fear of being catched: For the Excise-men knowing the
general Price of Wine, as well as the Wine-Coopers themselves, and having Power
to take it, paying to the Coopers the Price he has put upon it in his
Declaration, they would run the risque of suffering great loss and damage.

We have hitherto seen what the Duties are that the Wine-Merchants pay; let us
see now what those are that are imposed upon the Vintners, I mean, those who
sell Wine by Retail. It Is not free for any Man in Paris to set up a Sign and
sell Wine, as it is in London; I mean, after he has served an Apprenticeship,
the time appointed by the Customs: This Liberty must be obtained from the
French King; and for it a Man must pay yearly 8 Livers 1 Sous, or Penny
halfpenny; this is called The Duty of Sign. Besides, they were formerly
obliged to give the Eight Part of the Money they received for the sale of their
Wine; but because this was too troublesome, as well to the King's Officers* as
to the Vintners themselves, they made an Agreement to pay 8 Livres 1 Sous
Halfpenny for every Muyd of Wine they Sell, let it be good or bad. This is
what the French call Le Huitieme, and in what Duties that great Excise upon
Wine does consist, called Les Aides, I think now not improper to re-capitulate,
all those Duties that we may see in one view, what they amount to.

And the better to illustrate the matter, I must put a Price upon the Muyd of
Wine, and see what Money comes to the King by the Sale of that Muyd, that is,
somewhat like our Hogshead, but a little larger, containing about 280 Quarts.
The common Price about Paris was, in time of Peace, 18 or 20 Livres per Muyd,
but now it is four times as dear again; supposing, however for our purpose,
that a Muyd of Wine be Sold in the Vineyards for 18 Livres, that is, near 27
Shillings of our Money, the Proprietor must pay, in the first place, Two
Shillings, and Ten Pence Halfpenny, for the first Duty of the Declaration; the
like Sum must be paid by the Wine-Merchant at the Gates of the City, supposing
the Officers to be honest; (but if they will put a higher Price upon it, for it
absolutely depends on their Roguery, or Caprichio, I cannot say nothing to that)
and 22 Livres, besides for the Duty of Entry; so that it is manifest, a
Hogshead of Wine, which was Sold for 27 Shillings Sterling, pays to the King,
besides some Duties to the Townhouse, 38 Shillings, and 9 Pence.

These are the Duties of the first Sale; now let us suppose that the same Muyd
be Sold to a Vintn^r: As the Wine-Merchant must get something to live, he
cannot Sell it for less than Sixty Livres, having laid out Forty three already,
besides the Expenses of the Carriage; upon which, he must pay again for the
Declaration One Penny per Livre, and the Additional Duty, which comes to Five
Shillings, and Ten Pence Halfpenny, and the Vintner besides, being obliged to
pay 8 Livres, One Penny Halfpenny; it follows, that the King receives from
this second Sale, 12 Livres, Seven Pence, that is, 19 Shillings, Six Pence, one
Farthing of our English Money, which being joined to 39 Shillings, and Nine
Pence of the first Sale; it appears, that a Muyd of Wine, Sold at first for
Twenty Seven Shillings, pays to the King Two Pounds, Nineteen Shillings, Three
Pence Farthing.

Now it is not only in Paris that these Aides are imposed, but all the Provinces
of this Kingdom, except Languedoc, Guienne, Limosin and Brittany, are liable to
this Excise. Indeed the Entries are not so considerable in the other Towns, as
they are in Paris; but they pay every where the Huitieme, that is, the Eighth
part of the Price of their Wine. And as to the Countries, because there can be
no Duty of Entry laid on them, they pay therefore, in lieu of it, another,
which, in my Opinion, is much worse. As soon as ever the Vintage is over, the
Rats de Cave, Cellar Rats, (so the People call the Officers for the Aides) go
into every Man's Cellar, be he of what Sort soever, and take an exact Account
of the Wine they have in them: And three Months after, they make a second
Search, to see what is become of that Wine; and if any has been Sold, they must
strait produce the Acquitances of the Office, which is appointed for the
Declaration of the Price, and of the Additional Duty which I have already
explained* And as for the Wine which has been drunk in the Family, they pay
another Duty, called Le trop beu, that is to say, Too much drunk; and this Tax
amounts to 8 Livres, or 12 Shillings, Sterling. Now this Visit coming
Quarterly, must needs be very roublesom; But is this not an undeniable Proof of
the Fatherly care the French King takes of his People? Perhaps they would
otherwise make an immoderate use of the Creature,; but this Duty indoctrinates
them to be sober, in pity to their Purses.

I had forgot, the Province of Normandy must also be excepted; though others
pay only the Eighth Part, but this pays the Fourth of all the Liquors that are
Sold in Public Houses; as Wine, Beer, Cider, Aqua vitae, and the like; so that
if a Quart of Wine should be Sold for Two Shillings, the King must have Six
Pence out of it, besides all other Duties of Entry, etc. which I have before
mentioned. These Duties of Entry, are different one from the other, almost in
every Town; but at Rouen, the Capital City of the Province, they amount to 15
Livres per Muyd, that is, 22 Shillings and 6 Pence Sterling. I cannot say
positively what it is they pay for Cider, or Beer, but as much as I can
remember of it, it is about the Fourth Part of what they pay for Wine. It is
likewise to be observed, that because Normandy produces no Wine, and there are
excessive Customs every where upon the Frontiers of that Province, as well as
at the Sea Ports; therefore instead of the Quatrieme, or Fourth Part, the King
receives above one Half.

When I said that the Duty of Entry for Wine, amounts, at Paris, but to 22
Livres, or 33 s. and 9 d. Sterling, it is to be understood, of the most Common
Wine; for the Best pay a great deal more. The Muscadine, for instance, pays 2
l. 10 s. and the Aqua vitae 3 l. 16 s. 6 d.: But I must observe to you, that
the Aqua vitae pays a double Duty, that is, the Fourth Part instead of the
Eighth.

Though Britanny be a Pays d'Etats, as the French call it, yet it has a
terrible Excise there upon Wine, Such are the Great and Little Duties of the
States, which come to a Hundred Livres, or 7 l. 13 s. 9 d. Sterling per
Tonneau, Bourdeaux Measure, that is, 4 Hogsheads of Wine, containing, in all,
about 840 of our London Quarts. And though this Excise is raised upon Wine,
Sold only in Public Houses, and no where else, yet about six Years ago was it
let to Farm for Three Millions of Livres, which amounts to 230769 l. 4 s. 6 d.
Sterling, whereof Two Million, Five Hundred Thousand Livres are paid to the
King, and the other Five Hundred Thousand are to bear the Charges of the States
of the said Province. Over and above these Duties, there is another called
Impost and Billot, belonging only to the King, which brings every Year into his
Coffers 500000 Livres. This Duty consists in 34 Shillings and 7 Pence, which
the King takes there upon every Tun of Wine. He has also a Custom of 3
Shillings 9 Pence upon every Tun of Wine, brought to Britanny by Sea: So that
all these Duties, when compared together, make it plainly manifest, that the
Excise upon every Tun of Wine, amounts to 9 l. 4 s. 6 d. which is more than the
Price of the Wine. This, I think, is sufficient to explain the Matter I was to
make out, viz. Wherein consisted the Excise upon Wines, which the French call
Les Aides; but to have it more clearly understood, I would again desire the
Reader, to read it with Care and Attention.

ARTICLE IV. Of the ENTRIES.
THIS is a General Excise upon every thing that comes to Paris; for nothing
there is free, but Air, besides the River which runs through the middle of the
City. I wish I could be as particular upon this Article, as I have been upon
the others, but it cannot reasonably be expected, that the Memory of a Man is
able to supply him, for such an Undertaking; however I Will do my Endeavor to
explain it, as well as I can.

In the Entries of Paris and Rouen, there is included a Duty which the French
call Pie-fourchie, that is, an Excise upon all Cloven-footed Beasts; as Oxen,
Sheep, Swine, and the like. They pay for every Ox, at this time, 9 Shillings
Sterling; for a Cow, 7 Shillings 6 Pence; 3 Shillings 4 Pence for a Calf, or a
Hog: half a Crown for a Sheep, and five Groats for a Lamb. I say, at this time,
for in times of Peace, this Duty was not so high by one half. There is a Duty
too upon Fowls, which is 4 Pence per Livre, let unto Farm, near 25 Thousand
Pounds.

The Imposition that is laid upon Timber, and other Wood fit for Work and
Service, is Let, or at least, was so some Years ago, for 15384 l. 12 s.
Sterling, per Annum.

That upon Firewood amounts to much more, but indeed I cannot now remember,
nor learn, how much the just Sum is: But this I can say, that they pay One
Shilling and Three Pence, for every Load of Firewood; and whosoever will
consider the largeness of the City of Paris, the Numbers of Families in it, and
that they burn no Sea-Coles, cannot but agree, that this Tax must bring in a
vast Sum of Money to the Exchequer. I must plead the like Excuse, as to the
Duties of Entry laid upon Charcoal, and Hay, and both Salt and Fresh Fish; but
the Reader may easily guess, that they are not in any disproportion to those I
have already mentioned.

Eggs, Butter, Cheese, and all manner of Herbs pay 4 Pence per Livre, that is,
4 Shillings per Pound.

If all the Money accreuing from those Impositions, were brought into the
King's Treasury, it would amount to a vast Sum; but it must be observed, that
from time to time the French King Creates (to use the French Phrase) many
Employments en Titre d'Office, that is, Hereditary-Imployments, to be Overseers
of the Sales of certain Commodities, with a Privilege, that no Body shall Sell
what they Sell themselves; and besides, they take for their own Use, one part
of the Duties that are laid upon some certain Commodities. Some Years ago,
there were 44 Jurez (so they call them) Created all at once, to Sell, or
Appraise Fowls, and each of them paid down above 3000 Pounds, and to repay
themselves, they took 3 Halfpence per Livre. A like number was Created for
Fish, with the same Salary. Those for Hay are far more numerous, but then they
are not altogether so dear, for they may be bought for 2307 l. 13 s. 6 d. Those
upon Charcoal cost above 3000 l. but they are not many, but those upon Wood are
innumerable; and I am very well informed, that the French King has received out
of those Offices for Wood, near Two Millions, Four Hundred Thousand Pounds
Sterling. Now to re-pay themselves, they are allowed, as I have said, some
Duties; but the King, very often, demands from them some ready Money, and this
increases their Duties so much the more, and is the Reason that all manner of
things are grown gradatim in Paris, to such an excessive Price; for there is a
General Excise upon all things in the World that come into that City, even to
the very Ashes, and Old Lees of Wine, and the Duty laid upon them was Let at
1223 l. 1 s. 6 d.

And this Duty of Entry is not particular only to Paris; for it is imposed upon
most parts of France, with this only Difference, That the Duties are not
exacted so high everywhere. One Example of this, I hope, will be sufficient:

At Caen in Normandy, a Place well known to our Englishmen, they pay for every
Pound of Butter a Halfpenny.

For a Load of Firewood, 10 Pence.

For a Load of Timber, 13 Shillings 4 Pence.

For a Load of Hay, 1 Shilling 8 Pence.

For a Horse-Load of Wood, as they use in that Country, 2 Pence Halfpenny.

For a Horse-Load of Fish, 3 Shillings and 5 Pence.

For the Load of a Man, or Woman, of Fish, 8 Pence. And

For a Horse-Load of Corn, 1 Shilling.

ARTICLE V. Of the King's DEMESNE and CUSTOMS.
I Have but very little to say upon these Heads; for I don't look on them to be
an Effect of Arbitrary Power: All Crowns in the World must have a sufficient
Revenue, either in Lands, or Customs, to support them; and so has the Crown of
France. But as the French Kings have, within this last Century, very much
enlarged their Primitive Power, it is no wonder if they have increased likewise
their ancient Patrimony. The Duty joined to the Demesne, which I take to be
Tyrannical, is that called Lods and Ventes; that is, a certain Sum of Money
which People are forced to pay, whenever they sell their Estates, or any part
of them. Indeed, this Duty is not in all Places alike; in the Country where the
Customary Law of Paris is received, the Buyer is obliged to pay the King the
Twelfth Penny; that is to say, Out of 12 Thousand Pound, One Thousand: But at
Troyes in Champaigne, they pay Three Shillings and four Pence out of every
Pound; and that Duty is paid, the one half by the Buyer, and the other half by
the Seller. This is very hard.

This Tax, for truly it deserves no better a Name, is not of the Creation of
this French King; but about Twelve Years ago, he created another very like it:
For he ordered, That all People should pay the same Duty, whenever they
Bartered their Lands, as if they had sold them for ready Money. This was harder
yet than the other; and never were the French King's Subjects so much harassed
and plagued upon account of any Tax, as they have been of this: For they have
been forced to pay the Arrears thereof, if I may so call it, having been called
to give an account for these Twenty Years last past.

The Traites Foraines, or Customs, are a Duty laid upon all Commodities that
are exported from France, or imported into it: But this in it self is not very
surprising, since some such Duty as this is generally over all the World, and
is, no doubt, the slightest of all Taxes; yet the French King has raised it to
such a vast degree, that it is become absolutely Tyrannical and Slavish. I Will
give you but one Instance, viz. upon Sugar, which pays Three Pence per Pound.
Another Observation I shall make upon these Customs, is, That the following
Provinces, to wit, Brittany, Poictou, Xaintonge, Guienne, Languedock, Provence,
Dauphine, Lorrain, and the New Conquests, being looked upon all of them as
Foreign States, there is another Custom upon all Commodities that are exported
or imported into these Provinces, which is so severe and rigorous, as if they
were exported into Holland. Why these Provinces should be accounted Foreign
States, I could never hear any other Reason given, but that formerly they were
subjected to some particular Princes, and not to the Crown of France; but pray,
Was not Normandy Ruled by her own Dukes, as well as Aquitaine.

ARTICLE VI. Of several TAXES, and Creations of OFFICES.
THE Office of Councellor in Parliament in France, are not Disposed of like
those in England, for The Paulette.
these are given Gratis, but the others are Sold by the French King. There is
also another considerable Difference between them, viz. That the Place of a
Judge here is, Quam diu been se gesserit; whereas the Employments of
Counselors in Parliament in France, are Hereditary: But this must be observed,
that to keep those Places to their Families, they are obliged to pay every Year
a Duty, which is called Paulette, from one Paulet, who was the first that
contrived this Tax. This Duty amounts to Fifty Pounds per Ann. for each
Councellor; and besides all this, they are forced likewise to make a Loan, or
rather, a Gift to the King, every Five Years, which is Nine times as much as
the Annual Duty; and should they fail performing these Conditions, they
presently lose their Right of Inheritance. When ever a Councellor dies, or by
any Resignation, his Son comes into his Place, he must pay another Duty, which
amounts to the Eighth Part of the Price of the Place, whatever it be, so that
if the Place be valued at Fifty Thousand Crowns, he must pay above Six
Thousand. There is an Office appointed for the receiving of this Money, and for
the Sale of vacant Places, called Le Bureau des Parties casuelles.

The Decimes, or Tenths of the Clergy, is a Tax which The Decimes of the Clergy.
all the Clergymen of the Kingdom pay to the King out of their Livings. This
Tax, at first, was granted the Kings of France, upon Pretense of a War against
the Infidels; and, if I am not mistaken, it began in 1189. It was very
inconsiderable at first, as appears by its very Name, and granted only for a
certain time; but succeeding Kings have found out a way to raise it, and not
only so, but to make it perpetual. This present King especially, the most
ingenious and exquisite Prince in the World for increasing his Revenues, has
raised it, as he has* done other Taxes, according to his own Pleasure; and
from the Tenth, he has brought it up now to the Fourth part, so that if a
Curate has a Living but of a Hundred Pounds per Annum, he must pay every Year
to the King 25 Pounds of it, besides what he is obliged to contribute toward
the Free-Gift, that the Clergy make every Five Years to the King. If the
Clergy, who are Favorites, be so much Oppressed, What must be the Condition of
the Laity. Paper and Parchment Marked.


The Paper and Parchment Marked was imposed in the Year 1672. And they are so
called from a Flower-de-Luce, wherewith they are stamped; all Indentures,
Bonds, Agreements, Leases; in a word, all manner of Writings, except private
Letters, and Bills of Exchange, must be written upon this Paper or Parchment
only, otherwise they are void in Law. The Paper is divided into Sheets, half
Sheets, and Quartes of a Sheet. The whole Sheet is sold for Three pence, the
Half for three Halfpence, and the Quarter for Three Fathings. The Parchment is
dearer, for you must give Twenty pence for a Skin. Now whosoever consider the
great Extent of France, must needs agree that this must bring in a mighty Sum
of Money. The Controlle.


At much about the same time that this Paper-Tax was imposed, there was another
Tax found out, called Controlle. Now to rightly understand what this is, I must
observe to you, that whereas Law Suits generally begins, here in England, by
Arrests, they begin in France by a Summons, to appear before the Judges. This
Summons must be Controlled, that is, viewed, and Signed by an Officercalled
Controller, whose Fee is Five pence.

All the Silver and Gold Plate that is made throughout The King's Mark upon
Gold and Silver Plate.
the Kingdom, must be also stamped with the King's Mark, and the Goldsmith pays
for that 3 Shillings and 4 pence for every Mark, that is, for every Eight
Ounces. This Duty was Yearly set to Farm for 25000 Pounds.

Pewter must be also stamped with the King's Mark, Upon Pewter.
which Costs one Penny per Pound.

The Stockings coming from Foreign Countries are also Upon Stockings.
Marked, and the King has for his Mark Two pence per Pair.

So are also all Hats, and the Duty upon them is 10 d. Upon Hats.
Pence a piece.

Iron, Steel, Copper and Leather must be also Marked; but indeed I cannot
positively say now, what the Duty is.

Every Hackney-horse in the Kingdom, pays Yearly to the King Two Crowns.

The new Tax upon Chocolate, Tea and Coffee, was let yearly at 30769 l. 4 s. 6
d.

In many Provinces of France, as in Normandy, etc. the Pidgeon-Houses are
Assessed in Ten Years; some of them pay 25 Crowns, others, more or less,
according to the bigness of them.

The French Nobility and Gentry, being obliged, or, at least, used to spend
more than their yearly Revenue, it often happens, that they Contract so many
Debts, as makes them forced to Sell their Estates. Now if their Noble Manors
are sold to any Merchant, or other, under the Quality of a Nobleman, they must
pay every Twentieth Year, a whole Year's Revenue to the King, and this is what
the French call Francfief.

There is another Duty all over the Kingdom, called Barrage, which is paid by
the Waggoners and Carriers, and this was employed for the repairing of Bridges
and Highways; now the King has appropriated it all to his own use, under the
Promise, That he himself would take care of Pavements, Bridges, etc. But he has
kept his Word herein as Religiously, as he has the Treaty of Nimeguen.

Every House in Paris was Assessed at a certain Sum for the Poor, and the
Scavengers, as they are here in London; but the King has obliged the
Proprietors of each House, to redeem that Tax, by paying a certain Sum into
his Coffers, and he has taken upon him the care of keeping the Poor, and of
Cleansing the Streets; but how he has performed what* he had promised, we may
learn from Public Intelligences, wherein we are told, That all the Inhabitants
of Paris have been now lately Assessed, upon the Account of the Poor.

Besides the Duties of the Custom-House, there is a kind of Tax upon Tobacco, I
say, a kind of Tax? because it is rather, in reality, an Engrossing of the
Trade of that Commodity. There are a Company of People, that pay to the King a
Sum of Money yearly, to have the Privilege of selling Tobacco, and that at
their own Word. This Sum amounts to about 60000 l. Sterling.

All People who let Lodgings Furnished in Paris, and all the Innkeepers upon
Highways, have been Taxed within these three Months.

Though the Counselors in Parliament be very numerous, yet the French King
has lately, I mean, since the beginning of this War, increased their-Number,
of Eighth in each Parliament, who have paid ready Money for their Places, each
of them 100000 Livres, that is 7692 l. 6 s. 1 d. 2 fart. Sterling: And over and
above this Sum, they pay the Annual Duty, as well as others, and each of them
have been Taxed, since that time, 12 Thousand Livres, or 976 Pounds, 18
Shillings Sterling.

The French King has Erected En Titre d'Office, the Mayors of all the Cities
of the Kingdom; and because this Place is Hereditary, and those in possession
of them, are free from Quartering of Soldiers, and other Public Charges,
besides the Honor, they have been Sold very dear. I will give but an Instance,
the Mayor of Caen in Normandy, which is not one of the most considerable Cities
in France, has paid about 4000 l. Sterling.

Those who sell any Brandy by Retail in their Shops, or in the Streets, at a
Halfpenny a Glass, (as they use in most part of France) have been Erected
also, since this War, En Titre de Office, and have paid 23 Pounds, 1 Shilling,
6 Pence.

A very poor Sort of People, called Criers of old Shoes, Hats and Rags, have
also been Erected En Titre d'Office, and each of them has paid 7 Pounds, 13
Shillings, 6 Pence.

The Barbers, who were Perriwig-makers, were Erected En Titre d'Office in 1672,
and then they paid 153 Pounds, 18 Shillings; and soon after, they were forced
to pay a like Sum, and since this War, they have been Taxed anew, each of
them at 38 Pounds, 7 Shillings, 6 Pence.

I will not however say, that in all the Cities of France, they have paid so
much, for I would have this be understood of Paris only, for in the other
Cities, they have paid proportionable to their Trade. Another Observation I
must make is, that the very Country-Village Barbers have been forced to take
Letters of License from the King; and, I suppose, no Body will think that they
are Granted gratis, when they are so forced upon them.

The French King begun by the Perriwig-makers, to Tax Tradesmen: For in a
little while after, all the other Tradesmen and Artificers throughout the
Kingdom were Assessed likewise. To be particular in this point, would require a
Volume, and so I must content my self, for brevity sake, with one Example,
which shall be of the Weavers of Paris, the most miserable Tradesmen in France,
who were Assessed at 7 Pounds, 13 Shillings, 6 Pence.

All Officers of Justice, as Judges, Attorneys, Registers, Bailiffs, Notaries,
etc. have also been Taxed, every one of them, according to the Fees of their
several respective Places.

The Packers have been also Erected En Titre d'Office, but I cannot yet tell
what they have paid.

Every Month produces some new found out Offices, and about a Year ago, the
Porters were Erected En Titre d'Office, under the Title of Bouteurs a Port,
that is, with the Privileges of unloading the Boats laden with Wine, and some
other Commodities. They paid each of them about 800 l. Sterling, and they are
allowed about Five pence per Tun. This will look somewhat Romantic, at least,
very surprising; but it must be considered, that these Places being Hereditary,
and of a great Revenue, a Man can make no better use of his Money, than in
purchasing of them.

Since the beginning of this War, the French King has Created some Officers for
Funerals, called Criers. When any Persons die, these Officers are appointed to
take care of their Funerals, which they make at what Expense they please, for
no Body can oppose them, under a very great Penalty. They are allowed for their
Trouble, a certain Sum of Money, and besides, they enjoy some Privileges and
Immunities, as from quartering of Soldiers, and other Parish Charges.

There is a World of other Duties, Taxes and Offices, which it would be too
tedious to relate, and, in a manner, impossible. But, I hope, what I have said,
is sufficient to convince any Man of Brains and Sense, that is not of a
Resolved and Obstinate Inflexibility, that this French King has carried his
Tyranny, as well as his Prerogative, to a Degree unknown unto all former Ages
I Will therefore leave this Subject, after this short Remark, That in the New
Conquests, People are no better Treated than in France. The Brewers in Mons
have been lately Erected En Titre d'Office, and have been forced to pay a
Hundred Crowns a piece; a Man cannot be admitted into Holy Orders, without
paying 4 Crowns, nor Contract Matrimony, without a License, which costs Ten
Shillings.

I had almost forgot mentioning one thing, which is even more intolerable, than
the heaviest Tax I have yet spoke of, I mean, the Raising or Lessening the
Current Coin. And to explain my meaning, I must observe to you, That when the
French King is at a pinch for Money, then he raises his Coin, as high as he
pleases; and afterward he Lesseneth it, when he has not such need. Thus
Lewis's d'or are risen at this time, from Eleven to Fourteen Livres, and his
Crowns in proportion; so that when ever this War shall be at an end, People
will lose Four Shillings Six pence in every Lewis d'Or, and sooner too, if this
War continues. For the King, by his Royal Edict, will, as he has already done
several times, set a lower Value upon the same pieces, and Command them all to
be brought into the Mint, by a certain stated Time, under severe Penalties, to
be new Stamped; and then afterward he will raise the Price as high as he
pleases, by which means, he will get a vast profit himself, to the Depression
and Ruin of his People. One Instance will serve to clear up this; the Lewis
d'Or, which are Current now at Fourteen Livres, will be Valued but at Twelve,
and they must be carried to the Mint, where the King will pay them in at that
Price, with his new Stamped Coin; and some time after, those very Lewis's d'Or
with the new Royal Stamp, shall be worth Fourteen and Fifteen Livres, or what
ever other higher Value the King is pleased to put them at.

I must not forget neither the Five Millions of Livres, that the City of Paris
is now, at this Day, obliged to pay to the King, as we may see in our Gazette.
This forced Payment, which amounts near to Four Hundred Thousand Pounds
Sterling, is a little hard, considering the other Taxes which that City is
Charged withal.

ARTICLE VII. Of the French King's yearly Revenues, and how it is Collected.
NOtwithstanding all the Taxes I have already mentioned, and the many others
which I have here omitted, yet the French King's yearly Revenue amounts not to
so great a Sum, one would be easily tempted, at first, to imagine. I have been
often told, that it came to above a Hundred and Fifty Millions of Livres; but
after a narrow Inquiry into it, I found, that at the death of Monsieur Colbert,
it came only to a Hundred Thirty Three Millions, Two Hundred Thousand Livres,
or Ten Millions, Two Hundred Forty Six Thousand, One Hundred and Fifty Three
Pounds, Sixteen Shillings and Six Pence of our English Money. Now when we
consider, that since this War, the French King has raised his Taxes higher
than ever they were, and Created many Offices and Employments, we shall be apt
to think, that his Revenues must needs be so much the more increased; but yet,
if at the same time, we do but reflect upon the lamentable Decay of his Trade
in that Kingdom, we shall find, upon a serious Examination, that the increasing
of his Taxes, can hardly make amends for the loss of his Customs, and
consequently that his Revenue is much about what it was at the time I speak of.

But perhaps some Body will say, How can the French King keep such great Armies
in Pay, if his yearly Revenue be no more? The Answer to this Objection is very
easy, to any one who knows that 20000 Horse, stands this Nation in more, than
a 100 Thousand costs the French King. Our single Troopers have near 2 s. 6d. a
Day, and the French have hardly 5 d. Our Foot Soldiers have 8 d. or, at least,
6 d. in the Field, and the French have only Six Farthings, and the
Munition-bread.

Here I could very well put an end to this Discourse, but that I think my self
obliged to remove one Objection more, which, I know, some People will be apt to
make against me, viz. That if the French pay yearly but Ten Millions, and
England Five, we lie under harder Circumstances than they do; since France is
Twice as big as England at least.

This, I confess, seems at first, to be a very specious and considerable
Objection, but in Answering of it, I would desire my Reader to make, with me,
these following Remarks; First, It Is a Truth beyond Contradiction, that the
Taxes laid in England, how heavy soever they may seem to be, are but for one
Year, and these too Laid on, as by our own Consent; but those in France have
been made perpetual, by the Grand Imposer on his Subject's Estates and
Liberties, for above these Twenty Years. This is a very notable Difference.
Secondly, It must be observed, that all Taxes in France, except the Taille, are
let to Farm, whereby it is manifest, that they must produce more than what the
King receives: For as a Farm in any Country, must not only produce enough to
make the Farmer able to pay his Landlord his Rent, but also to repay his
Expenses, and to maintain himself and his Family. And just so it, is, in
relation to the Taxes that are laid on the French. But with a far more
comfortable Difference to the Farmers of the French King's Revenues, I mean, to
those who have the least ^inger in them; for they, in a short time, become so
vastly rich, that the greatest Lords in France, as the Marshall de Lorges, and
several others, have thought themselves happy, in Marryrying their Daughters.

These Farmers advance Money to the King, and then they repay themselves our of
the People's Pockets, and God knows, with what Verations, and Tyrannical
Oppressions, for they are Empowered to do what ever they please. Those who have
computed, as near as possibly they could, how many Men are Employed in the
Levying the King's Revenues, do assure me, that they are above 80 Thousand, who
are kept at the People's Charges, the keeping of whom is dearer, by far, than
the barely maintaining of a Hundred Thousand Soldiers: But a Man must have seen
this, to believe it.

Now whosoever will seriously consider these things, will no doubt, agree with
me, that the French Nation Groans under a very Slavish, and worse than Egyptian
Bondage, and that they pay a great deal more, than what appears in the Books of
the Royal Treasury. I was one day, discoursing in France upon this Point with a
very learned Man, and one that very well understood this Business, and he told
me, That upon a very modest Computation, he had found that the Kingdom of
France, paid Yearly above 200 Thousand Millions, upon account of the King's
(...) that is, above 15384615 l. 7 s. 6 d. Sterling, though I will not absolutely
rely on my Friend's Account, yet this small Treatise, I hope, will be enough
to convince any unprejudiced Person, that it is not altogether improbable.

I will only now, desire my Readers to peruse this little Book with care, and
then to consider how much they are obliged to those who are indefatigable in
their Labor and Industry, to bring this Nation under the dreadful Tyranny of
France.

FINIS.

