portrait of Lady Warner THE TRUE PICTURE OF Ye LADY WARNER IN RELIGION CALLED
SISTER CLARE OF JESUS WHO DID AT GRAVELING IAN 26 1670 IN Ye 5th YEAR OF HER
ENTRANCE INTO RELIGION AND THE 33 OF HER AGE

N. de L'argillerre pin^^it

P. Van Scha^ppen fe. 1690.

The Graver tells what she was here below
Angels and Saints must tell what she is now


THE LIFE OF THE LADY WARNER. OF PARHAM in SUFFOLK.

In RELIGION Called Sister CLARE of JESUS.

Written by a Catholic Gentleman.

LONDON: Printed by Tho: Hales, in the Year. 1691.

TO THE QUEEN.
MADAM,
THE follovving Work being a just and faithful Relation of the most remarkable
occurrences in the Life of my Lady Warner; I hope for an easy Pardon of my
Presumption, in offering it to Your Majesty.

The Memoires of Heroical Persons, whose efforts have been to make the Science
of Saints their chiefest study, and their heighest ambition to excel in Virtue,
cannot but find a gracious acceptance under the Protection of Your Royal Name;
since Your Majesty not only by words, but by an unparalled examples, has so
openly declared in favor of Virtuous Actions before all other Titles, even to
Crowns and Scepters.

Amongst these Great Souls, this Lady, whose Life I Write, must be Registre'd,
whose Virtues so long concealed, by a signal Providence have taken air, and
are come to light.

The Monastry of Graveling, in which she lived, and Crovvn'd her Merits by a
happy Death, was always looked upon as a Nursery of eminent Sanctity; but
Humility seems to be their darling Virtue: For these Humble Virgins being hid
from the Eyes of Men, that they might be more conspicuous to those of God and
his Angels, were never vvilling to transmit to Posterity, what othervvays
might justly deserve the highest esteem and veneration; and consequently the
Orignals I have made use of in compiling the Actions of this holy persons Life,
have by the importunity and Authority of the Honorable Lady Anne Nevil of happy
Memory, late Abbess of Pontoise, been rather extorted from the Monastry of
Graveling than freely offered; so that I am beholden to my Ladies Zeal for the
greatest part of the Memoires which she had industriously got together, with
design to have put them into such a Method as might fit them for the Press; yet
all that either my Lady Abbess, whilst she lived, or I since her Death have
been able to procure, are so fevv, in comparison of those many Virtues my Lady
Warner practiced, that I can give my Reader but a faint Idea, and small
Scantling of them.

After all my endeavors, I know these small Essays will not escape hard
Censures, and no Precaution can secure me from severe Challenges upon this
Subject. The refined Policy of Worldlings will never be able to brook this
Hidden Treasure, nor look this Lady in the Face, who in the flovver of her
Youth, so generously slighted the Charms of a plentiful Fortune, of a loving
Husband, and of her dearest Children, to make her self an entire Sacrifice to
God. These proceedings, I say, especially in a Pretended Reformation, will be
traduced as the highest Folly and greatest piece of Bigotry; when indeed the
follovving Evangelical Counsels has always been one of the Discriminating
Tests, and Distinctive Signs of the true Religion.

For this reason, Madam, I make again my humble Addresses to beseech Your
Majesty to vouchsafe to receive this small Treatise under Your Royal
Protection. It Is true, Virtue is very powerful, but Obloquies are like to be
so great on the one side, and my endeavors to dravv her true Lineaments to the
Life, so vveak on the other, that Your supporting hand will be vvanting to
encounter the first and sustain the second.

The Picture of my Lady, in the Frontispiece of this Book, is without Flattery
very Lovely: But whoever Reads her Life, must confess the Features of her Soul
were incomparably more Amiable. For my part, I vvonder not that Virtue was
Hereditary to her; because if a good Tree must needs bear good Fruit, it is not
to be admired that a good Child should be Born of a good Mother? My Ladies
Mother had so svveet an Air, and so vvinning a Comportment, that she gained the
Hearts of all, with whom she converst. Nay, our late Queen of happy Memory,
Henrietta Maria Mother to Our Gracious Soverain, was so far taken with her,
that she chose her to be one of her Maids of Honor.

How far more advantageous is the Fortune or the Daughter, since Your Majesty
has been Graciously pleased to allow the best Actions of her Life to be
Addressed to Your Self? They must needs Live for ever by this Immortal Favor,
being reflected on by those Rays of Majesty which suffer no Eclipse, and which
by the opposition of a Malign Darkness give rather a greater Light: For a Queen
to be truly Great, is always to be the same, whether Fortune smiles, or
frovvns upon Her; neither Elevated in Prosperity, nor Dejected in Adversity,
but shevving the Greatness of Her Soul in despising all things beneath it. This
Golden Mean, this equal Temper, the Christian World has always admired in Your
Majesty; but never more, than in this present Conjuncture. Hence, Madam, I
humbly conceive Your Majesty's Name the most Proper under Heaven to Countenance
such a Work, as designs (by dravving the Picture of a Virtuous Lady) to
publish, and praise the Contempt of an unconstant World. For what can speak so
efficaciously as Your Example, the instability of all Human Felicity? For as
Your present State offers forcible Motives toward the disparaging of all
Worldly Greatness, so the consideration of Your Royal Patience and unshaken
Constancy, cannot but comfort the most afflicted, and heal the vvounds even of
the most desperate.

These Virtues, Madam, grounded on Christian Humility must necessarily at
length be Crovvn'd: 'Tvvas Prudence, in not wrestling with the merciless
Waves, and furious Tumults of an ungrateful People, which has saved us the
best of Kings, the best of Queens, and the most hopeful of Princes: The
humoring of a Storm is often the best way to Steer a Vessel securely into the
Haven. It Is not for me to search into the Mysteries and Decrees of the Highest;
I know as they are inscrutable in their Secret Courses, so they are to be
Adored and Reverenced in their surprising Effects: But when I reflect on such
a Series and uninterrupted Succession of Miraculous Deliverances, which both
before, and after the Subversion of the Government, have attended the Royal
Family; I cannot be persuaded, but that the speedy return of Your Majesty into
Your Kingdoms, is nigh at hand. I don't rely upon the Flight or Singing of
Birds, as the Heathen Augurs did, but take my Measures from better Omens: The
Justice of Your Cause, the Overruling Providence which never leaves the Just,
the Power of a Most Christian King, backed by the greater force of Heaven,
which his Zeal in supporting Religion and Justice cannot but obtain, foretell
the certain and speedy ruin of Usurpation and Rebellion. Methinks I hear the
Angel Guardian of our Island Whispering in Our Soverains Far, as heretofore the
Angel Guardian of Israel did in the Ear of St. Joseph, these joyful words;
Rise, and take the Child, and his Mother, and return into your Country, for
they are Dead, who sought the Life of the Child.

Pardon me, Madam, for enlarging the Preface by this Digression. The Zeal I
have for Your Majesty's happy Restoration will Apologize for the length. I
have no more to add, but to beg that Your Majesty would vouchsafe to Honor
these Memoires with Your Royal Approbation, and accept this Tribute of my poor
endeavors, which with all imaginable submission I lay down at Your Sacred
Feet. That the Great God of Justice may speedily restore Your Majesty, and Our
Gracious Soverain to Your Thrones; and that after a long and happy Reign upon
Earth, You may receive an everlasting Crown in Heaven, are the earnest vvishes
and daily Prayers of MADAM

Your Majesty's most Dutiful and most Devoted Subject and Servant, N. N.

THE LIFE OF THE LADY WARNER. In RELIGION, Sister CLARE of JESUS.
THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I.
Her Birth and Family; her Inclination, even from her tender Years to a
Religions Life, both in France and England.

ALTHOUGH Virtue stands in need of no additional Luster; yet commonly the
Ornaments of Nature are never wanting to accompany the high Prerogatives of
Grace, and for the most part Sanctity of Life has been attended by Nobility of
Birth and good Education. The Lady Warner had no small advantages in this kind.

She was Born on the 20th. of April the Year 1636. at Hanmer-hall in the Town
of Hanmer, in the County of Flint, the Ancient Seat of the Family, whose Name
it bears; and after a few days she there received her Christian Name of Trevor
in Baptism, from my Lord Baron Trevor her Godfather. Her Father was Sir Thomas
Hanmer Baronet, whose fidelity and loyalty recommended him to the Honorable
Employment of Cup Bearer to King Charles the first. Her Mother was Mrs.
Elizabeth Baker, of the Ancient Family of the Bakers of VVhittingham-hall in
the County of Suffolk, whose Birth, Natural Parts, Beauty and Education,
rendered her worthy to be chosen by the Queen Henrietta Maria, for one of her
Maids of Honor.

Soon after her Birth the Civil Wars of England began, in which her Father
employed the utmost of his Power for the Interest of the King his Master, but
finding after his Majesty's Imprisonment no possibility of rendering him any
farther service, rather then remain a sad and useless Spectator of His Misery,
he chose to leave the Kingdom, and to go for France, where he might be able to
express more evident Testimonies of his Duty, than he could in his own Country;
in which he was daily exposed to the danger of Imprisonment, and other
inconveniences incident to those times. Here it was she began first to discover
her inclinations to a Religious Life, and Pious desires to cast those seeds
which afterward growing up, came to that ripness and maturity. For Sir Thomas
carrying her with his Lady to Paris, happened to take up his Lodgings in a
Catholic House; she was then about Ten Years Old, and in a short time had gain
d so much upon the Son and Daughter of that Family (who were about her Age, and
had informed her how happy a Life the Religions of their Church lead, and had
given her such an Idea of it, as had inflamed her to embrace it) as to obtain
of them privately to accompany her to the Monastry of Mont-Martyr, a little out
of the Town, where her want of experience persuaded her she should be received
as soon as she presented her self: For this end she gathered together what
Clothes and other thing she had, which she did not so carfully put up, but that
she dropped them as she passed through the House whereby her Plot was discovered,
and her design blown up, and all the reward she received for her intended
Devotion, was a severe correction from my Lady her Mother, tho then detained in
bed by her last sickness; but tho this design was hindered, she went on in her
wonted innocent divertisments of making and adorning little Oratories whilst
others played.

The Death of my Lady gave Sir Thomas Hanmer more liberty of returning privately
to England to see how his private concerns went there, and whether he might be
any ways useful to his Master. Beginning his Journey he left his Daughter Trevor
in the care of an Ancient Burgher and his Wife, who were Hugenots, and had no
Children; where she might be out of danger of improving such designs as
formerly she attempted, which he and his Lady, who were both Protestants, could
not but disapprove.

Sir Thomas contriving, for his greater security, whilst he was in England, to
keep as far from his own home as he could; retired to Hengrave-hall, near Bury
in Suffolk, where Sir Thomas Harvey a Loyal Subject and sufferer for the King,
having Married my Lady Penelope Gage, whose Joynturhouse it was, lived with his
whole Family. Here Sir Thomas Hanmer moved by the beauty and excellent
endowments of Mrs. Susan Harvey, Daughter of Sir Thomas, makes his earnest Suit
to her, and at last having obtained her Father's and her consent, Married her.

Sir Thomas Hanmer's thoughts were either so taken up with his new Mistress, or
so distracted with the danger of those troublesome times, that he seemed almost
to have forgotten his Daughter, who had now been above a Year in Paris without
hearing from him, or of him; insomuch, that the People with whom she was,
believed him Dead, and looked upon it as a favorable effect of Providence, that
had this way found a means of giving them an Heiress, whom they esteemed and
loved as if she had been their own Child, and resolved to make her so, as much
as they were able: Such was her admirable sweet disposition as it won the
hearts and affections of all she conversed with. But whilst they pleased
themselves with this Treasure Providence they thought had sent them, Sir Thomas
Hanmer returned and dashed all their hopes, and as a Testimony of his affection,
came expressly himself to fetch her over into England.

Being, returned to England he gave her choice, either to go with him to her
Mother in-law in Suffolk, or to live with her Grandmother the Lady Hanmer at
Haughton in Flintshire, which last place she chose. Here the former thoughts
she had at Paris returned, and she desisted not to form new designs of
executing them; which her Grandmother discovering gave notice of them to her
Father; otherwise her want of ability to manage them, might have exposed her
to several inconveniences, which her want of experience could not foresee.

Her Father upon this Information sends for her to Hengrave, where she is
received with all imaginable kindness by my Lady her Mother-in-law, which she
returned with what dutiful respect and affection she was able: Here she begged
and obtained of her Father (knowing into what a narrow compass his plentiful
Estate was contracted, by reason of Sequestration, and other inconveniences he
lay under) that he would not put himself to the expenses of giving her a
Servant; designing hereby to inure her self to the exercise of such labors, as
she could not otherwise have the occasion of practicing; whereby she might be
the better able to prepare her self for the like labors in Religion, to which
she still found her self strongly inclined: And one day whilst she was busied
in rubing her Chamber, her Father suddenly came in upon her, and finding her
upon her Knees all in a sweat, took her up in his Arms and embraced her, with
Tears in his Eyes telling her, God would one day give her a particular
blessing, for conforming her self after so particular a manner to those
Circumstances, his Providence, and her kindness to himself had reduced her.

The troubles still rather increasing than diminishing, Sir Thomas (that his
Family might not be too troublesome to his Father-in-law) resolved to go and
live with his Mother at Haughton; but he stayed not long there, for Sir Thomas
Harvey urging his Daughters return to him again, Sir Thomas Hanmer accepted his
kind invitation, and left his Daughter behind him, where her former desires of
a Religious Life returned; and to fit her self the better for that State, she
hoped sooner or later to enjoy, she resolved to set upon the practice of those
Mortifications she was likely to undergo; and preluding as it were to those
Pious Austerities, she began to Fast once a week, abstaining from Meat and
Drink till night, she rise constantly at Midnight to her Prayers, and exercised
such labors and humble Offices, as were only fit for her Servant, upon pretext
she found them beneficial to her health. She had her time hourly regulated from
Morning till Night, a Method she began to practice whilst she was in France,
and never after omitted, still making Rule and Order the Standard of her
Actions. She was so industrious in whatever she undertook, that she never
failed to accomplish it, and by her ingenuity, not only learnt the French
Tongue whilst she was at Paris, but without the help of any Master, acquired
such a sufficient knowledge of the Italian and Spanish Tongues, as to
understand any Book.

Having lived some time in this manner here, her Father sent for her to London
with design to take her to live with him at Leusham not far distant from
thence, whether his Lady and he resolved privately to retire themselves in those
troublesome times. Finding him here alone, her Mother-in-law not being yet come
out of Suffolk, she thought this a good occasion given her of bringing about
her design; wherefore she earnestly entreated him, that since there was no
probability of better Times in England, ( Cromwell having banished the
Cavaliers, as well as Sequestrated their Estates) but rather that they would
grow worse, and he become less able to provide for her, than now he was; and if
it pleased God, that any misfortune should happen to him, she knew how much it
would be augmented by the thoughts of what she would be like to suffer, and
since her inclinations were wholly fixed upon it, desired him, that he would be
pleased to give her leave to go beyond sea, and also, wherewith to enter into a
Monastry, where she might both live securly, and die happily. Her Reasons were
so solid and convincing, that he knew not what other Answer to return, than a
grant to her request; and his Affection for her was such, that he thought the
giving her Liberty in this particular could in no kind be so prejudicial to
her, as those sufferings she might undergo if he denied her, and any misfortune
should happen to himself.

Having gained her Fathers consent, she makes her application to some of her
Catholic acquaintance, to beg their Assistance, to find a Priest that might
direct her to some Monastry. Providence so ordained, that the person to whom
upon this occasion she was recommended, was one of her own Family, viz. Father
Hanmer of the Society of Jesus, who took to Heart her concern, and advised her
to go to Paris to enter there into a Monastry of the Order of Saint Bennet,
that he should recommend her to; and giving her the Rules of Saint Bennet, told
her what Portion was required for her admittance, which Sir Thomas was
contented to give; and moreover, he undertook to be her Conducter thither, and
the very day was appointed, on which they were to begin their Journey.

CHAP. II.
Her Pious Designs are crossed by her Mother-in-law, and what happened to her
till the time of her Marriage.

GReat Resolutions are seldom undertaken (especially in the way of Virtue)
which meet not with great oppositions; the hopes the young Lady had conceived
of Consecrating her self to God in a Religious Family, were nipt in the very
bud: For the Night before she was to set out from London, my Lady Hanmer her
Mother-in-law came thither, and being informed, that Sir Thomas had given his
consent for his Daughters going beyond sea to be a Nun, used such moving
Arguments to persuade him to recall his consent, as had their effect. Telling
him all the World would look upon it as an Argument of her unkindness, that
having one only Daughter he should dispose of her no better, than to Imprison
her in the Enclosure of a Monastry: That it would give suspicion also to the
World, that he himself was a Papist, and consequently expose him to greater
difficulties than he lay under at present, They being Persecuted no less for
their Religion, than for their Loyalty. These Arguments caused Sir Thomas to
recall his consent, and reverse all his former promises. His Daughter, tho she
received his Commands of staying with submission, yet the sorrow to see herself
on a sudden deprived of that happiness she thought herself ready to possess,
was not ordinary. As cheerfully as she could, she accompanied her Father and my
Lady to Leusham, where for a Year she continued much the same kind of Life she
had lead at Haughton, at the end of which her Father leaving Leusham sent her
to live with Mrs. Ellis a Relation of his at Halrhey in Wales.

A fire which is smothered for a time, seldom fails of breaking forth afresh,
yea, rather seems by Imprisonment to get force and strength; so it hapen'd with
this young Lady, who being now more mature than formerly, she thought upon such
probable means as were likely to enable her to effect her desires, which were
these. Her Father having given her such a yearly allowance, as his present
circumstances would permit him, it being short of what the maintaining of her,
according to her Quality required, she took this pretense to beg leave she
might buy Barley, and get it made into Malt, and Sell it to his own Tenants, by
the profit of which she hoped to augment her allowance, to a competency for her
maintenance after such a manner as became his Daughter; showing hereby her
Humility to submit herself to so base and sordid a means, to compass so
glorious an end, as she aimed at. Sir Thomas not being able to allow her more,
upon condition she sold only to his own Tenants, gave his consent, which she
having obtained, pleased herself with the imagination of being again enabled to
compass her wishes, and in a short time by her good Huswifry to improve that
little stock allowed her, to such a Sum as Father Hammer had told her would be
sufficient, to obtain her Admittance into a Monastry. But whilst she was thus
in pursuit of so Pious an intention, it fell to the ground; her, Fathers
Tenants in those troublesome times grew so poor that they were not able to pay
for what they had bought of her.

This design also failing, instead of laying aside the thoughts of a Religious
Life, which seemed now an improbable thing to hope for; she still hoped even
against hope, and resolved at least never to Marry, that thereby she might not
incapacitate herself for that Happiness she so earnestly desired. Times growing
now a little better, her Father was offered several considerable Matches for
her, which he pressed her to hearken to, by the same Arguments she had used to
him, to persuade him to give his consent for her being Religious: Viz. That if
any misfortune should happen to him, the thoughts, that he had provided for
her, would be a comfort to him in it, and therefore earnestly desired her to
accept of any one of these offers, she liked best. She on the other side begged
of him to show the continuance of his Affection to her, by not pressing her to
embrace that course of Life to which she had a greater aversion than to any
thing in the World; and that no heavier cross could happen to her than that of
Marriage. Her Father at that time desisted from any farther importunity, but a
Baronet who was one of her earnest Suitors did not from his; to avoid which,
she begged leave of her Father to go out of the Country, and obtained his
consent for her going to live at Mr. Hawley's at Brainford near London. Hither
she came accompanied with a Cousin German of hers, Mrs. Catherin Kinnaston, who
had lived with her at Alrhey, where they had contracted a very particular
friendship. But here she was not freed as she hoped from her Suitors
importunity, who followed her, and had gained her Fathers Letter to her, to
persuade her to grant his request. Her Fathers Letter, joined with the Baronets
importunity, wrought much upon her; but he having received several denyals by
word of mouth, resolved to make his last attempt by Letter, in which he very
pathetically expressed his Passion for her, telling her amongst other things,
That whatever he suffered if she denied him now, it should be the last
solicitation he would ever give her the trouble of. This Letter, with her
Fathers persuasions in his, put her into a doubt what to do, and in this
perplexity she consulted her Cousin, who used all the Arguments she could to
prevail with her, not to give him any farther denial. Her powerful Counsel had
such an ascendency over her, that she Writ him a civil Answer, which she had no
sooner done, and given it her Maid to send away, but the thoughts of the former
happiness she had proposed, returned in so forcible a manner, and the
resolutions she had taken of not putting her self into any condition, that might
render her incapable of that happiness, came so lively to her thoughts; that
almost before her Maid was down Stairs, she called her back, took the Letter
from her, and immediately burnt it, giving her another, in which she desired
her Suitor, if he had the Affection he pretended for her, to show it by keeping
his promise, in never more troubling her in that nature.

It was no wonder, that this, as well as other Persons of Quality, expressed so
great an earnestness of gaining her; since both her Exterior and Interior were
such, as challenged the Affections and Admiration of all that knew her; and I
conceive, I cannot have a fitter place to give the Reader a satisfactory
description, and a short pourtraiture of both, than this. She was above the
Middle Stature of Women, excellently well shapt, her Complexion not
extraordinary fair, but comely and lasting, her Featurs were charming, her Eyes
brown as well as her hair; and her countenance had such a particular sweetness,
as several Painters who drew her Pictures admired, but owned their skill not
sufficient to express. This beautiful Symmetry of her Body, was accompanied
with no less lovely Qualities of her Mind. Her humor was grave and serious, yet
sweetn'd with such an affability, that rendered her conversation no ways
disagreeable or uneasy, but sought after and desired by All. This created a
freedom in those she conversed with, as the other kept them in a certain
becoming distance. She was an excellent friend, and where she once took a
kindness, 'twas impossible for any to alter it, and tho she chose very few, to
whom she expressed a particular friendship; yet the choice she made, evidenced
the goodness of her judgment, they being such, as deserved it. She was mild and
not easily moved to anger, yet her meekness did not hinder the expressing of
her resentments, when she had just cause: She was a lover of frugality and
industry, set a high value upon time, and had every hour of the day regulated;
took no Resolutions, but with mature consideration, and was as constant in the
execution of what she once resolved upon. She had a clear and peircing wit,
Masculine Judgment, a fruitful Memory, whereby she came to understand several
Languages besides her own, and a Prudence in business, above the ordinary
capacity of a Woman. She was so bigoted to the Protestant Religion she was
brought up in, that neither the entreaties, or promises of her Elder Brother
Sir John Hanmer, could persuade her to alter it, who at his return our of
Portugal (where he became a Catholic whilst he Studied in the English Seminary
at Lisbon) was so Zealous for his Religion, as often upon his Knees with Tears,
he begged her to embrace it: Yet all this could never move her, tho she
passionatly loved him, to a less Esteem, or Affection for her own Religion,
which nothing, but the hopes she had of being Religious, could ever make her
think of quiting; and she was very often used to say, That those Desires so
transported her, as often as they occurred, that the scarce thought them
inconsistent with her own Religion.

CHAP. III.
The first interview between her, and Sir John Warner, her Marriage, and
behavior in the World.

HAving given you the description of what she was, it is time to let you know
those secret, and hidden ways God makes use of to draw the Predestinate to his
service. It happened whilst she lived at Branford, that the Protector dyed,
whose Splendid and Magnificent Funeral invited all People to a sight of it, and
her amongst the rest, and Providence so ordered, that she should be a
Spectatress with some of her friends, in the same Balcony, which Sir John
Warner, and some of his Relations had taken up to behold the same Solemnity,
it being only separated in the middle to divide the two Companies. Here she was
informed of Sir John Warner, as well as he of her; to wit, that she was
likely, besides that plentiful Fortune her Father designed her, to be Heiress
to Three Thousand pound a Year, should her Brother die without Issue, who was
not yet Married, and was in Possession of Mr. Bakers Estate, his Uncle by his
Mother. But both Sir John, and she were so far from any thoughts of Marriage,
that what was told them of each other took, no Impression. But what Heaven had
so happily decreed came at length to be accomplished.

For Sir Thomas Hanmer resolving to leave Suffolk, and return to a House of his
own called Betisfield in Wales (where he might now be able to live at quiet)
intended to take his Daughter along with him, and for that end, sent to her to
meet him, and her Mother-in-law at London; where he stayed some time for the
Conclusion of a Match that was treating between his Son Sir John Hanmer, and
Mrs. Alston's Daughter, an Heiress to Seven Hundred Pound a Year, whose Mother
was Aunt to Sir John Warner by his Fathers side; who being lately dead, and
Sir John, now in the Possession of his Estate, had disposed all things to
Travel into France, and before this, had began his Journey, had he not by Mrs.
Alston's his Aunts entreaties, deferred it till after his Cousin's Marriage,
which within a Fortnight or Three Weeks, was to be Solemnized; whilst Sir John
stayed here with his Aunt, it happened, that one Day Sir John Hanmer came to
Visit his Mistress, and brought his Sister along with him. Tho the first sight
of her made no impression at all, as we have said, upon Sir John Warner, yet
this second did, and so forcibly too, as to make him immediately lay aside his
former designs, and resolve to make his Applications to her, which he should
never have had the confidence to have done, had he known how severe and averse
she had shown her self to her former Suitors: For these being the first
Addresses he had ever made to any Woman in that kind, he would not willingly
have exposed himself to a denial the first time he made them; having refused to
hearken to very considerable Matches, that were offered him, being unwilling to
Marry, whilst those unsetl'd Times lasted.

Providence, that often times makes use of contrary means, to bring about it is
own designs, appeared wonderfully in this, and gave her no less inclination to
receive, than it had given Sir John to make his Addresses. This was exteamly
wondered at by those who knew her disposition; nay, even by her self; when she
found such an inclination, to what before she had entertained so great an
Antipathy. Infine, she who had stood out several Years Courtships from others,
was gained in Three Weeks time by Sir John; who the Week after his Consin's
Espousals, was himself Married in London by Dr. John Warner Lord Bishop of
Rochester, upon the Seventh of June 1659.

Although she had now embraced a State of Life, wholly inconsistent with that of a
Religious Profession; yet she seemed still to have a special Affection, and
Inclination for those Virtues, which even adorn the most perfect Calling. And
not long after her Marriage, she had a singular trial given her, as well of
Humility, as of Patience; which was the more sensible, because given by one she
so passionatly loved. Sir John Warner having accepted of Sir John Hanmer's,
his Brother-in-laws invitation, to live with him at VVittingham-hall in
Suffolk, not far from his own Estate; was invited by him to take a little
Ramble about the Country, without acquainting his Lady whether he went. At his
return, my Lady Warner after an expression of her Joy to see Sir John come
home safe, made a kind Expostulation with him, Why he would be so unkind, as
to leave her so long in that solicitude, by going and staying such a while
abroad without telling her of i^. He, like other Young Men, often too Jealous
of loosing their Authority, by too kind a Condescension to their Wives, made an
ill interpretation of her kind demand; looking upon it as a sort of
Controulment; and told her, It belonged not to her to require an account of his
Actions; that he would have his liberty to go, and come when he pleased,
without informing any one why, and whether he went. This unexpected Answer
might well have created a disturbance in one, that was not endowed with that
Spirit of Obedience, and Humility, she was Mistress of; which she expressed, by
falling upon her Knees, and beging Pardon for so just an offense; and promised
never more to be guilty of the like; which promise she not only made, but
exactly kept all her life after: And this was the only misunderstanding that
ever happened between them, whilst they lived together.

My Lady Warner being now big with Child, and Sir John thinking it convenient
she should lie in at his own House at Parham, motion'd it to her: She joyfully
accepted the proposal, and declared how much more it would be to her
satisfaction to live there (notwithstanding the trouble she knew the care of
Housekeeping would inevitably give her) where she hoped to be free from such a
continual concourse of Company, which rendered her Life less pleasant where she
was; but yet she would never have complained of it, had not he kindly made this
offer to her: For tho nothing was more pleasing to her, than Quiet and
Retirement; yet since she thought the other more grateful to him, she would
willingly have Sacrificed her own satisfaction, to give him his.

Sir John's Eldest Sister, Mrs. Ann Warner, who lived with my Lady Pettus her
Mother-in-law, at Castor near Norwich, being dangerously ill, sent for him;
whether he went, and carried my Lady with him. His Sister dying, he carried her
Body to be buried at Parham, and took this occasion of remaining there; taking
his other Sister Mrs. Elizabeth Warner along with him. Whether she was no
sooner come, but she was presently Visited by all in the Neighborhood, and
among others, by Sir John VVarner's Nurse, who upon that account, taking a
little more Liberty than the other's did with my Lady (who in compliance to the
fashion wore Patches) told her, Madam, God Almighty has given you a very good
Face, why will you spoil it with those ugly black things? If he had put them
there, I am sure you could not have taken it well, and with reason too, for
your Face would not have been half so handsome. This Advice was so gratfully
accepted, that she immediately pulled them off, and never after wore any more.

Such passages as these are often Paradox'd, and Ridiculed as a piece of
bigottry, by those who do not willingly admit of any thing, which may abate
their Pride, or take of from their Vanity. How acceptable this innate goodness
of hers was to Heaven, even before her Conversion, may be gathered by two great
dangers she happily escaped.

She was naturally fearful in a Coach, and the bad ways, as well as her
condition (being now big with Child) so augmented this fear, that she would no
more make use of one, but would rather go to Church on foot, which tho a Mile
off the House, she never failed to do twice a Sunday, even in the Winter time.
Sir John finding this very troublesome, and knowing she loved to Ride single
(being an excellent Horse-Woman) bought a Horse for her; which, she was no
sooner got upon, than he threw her down; for (being by the carelessness of the
Groom Girted too backward) he never left kicking till he dismounted her, and
after she was down, continuing still to kick, came several times very near her
Head with his Feet. It pleased God to protect her and her Child she was big
withal, from any hurt by this Accident, as he had a little before from another;
Viz. Sir John to divert himself, coming out of his own Coach wherein she was,
to drive another Gentleman's in which the Servants were, he overturned it;
which she hearing of, and fearing some hurt might have come to him, leapt over
the Boot of the Coach, not staying to have it taken down as the fashon was
then, to go to him; without receiving any more hurt by this fright, and
dangerous leap it occasioned; than by the other accident before mentioned:
Almighty God preserving her, and her Child for his future service. Her time of
Lying-in drawing near, she gave notice or it to her Father; who (tho then at
Betisfield in Wales, near Two Hundred Miles distant from Parham) to show the
passionate affection he had for her, took a Journey on Horseback from thence, at
so unseasonable a time of the Year, to give her the comfort of his presence;
which that she might be sure not to want, he was with her a Month before she
was brought to bed, which was upon the 20th of March, 1659.

She was Three Days, and Three Nights in Labor; insomuch, that both hers and
the Child's Life were in great danger; and she suffered so great Pain, that she
was often tempted to hit her Head against the Bed-post with such violence, as
might put an end to it; but instead of giving way to such Temptations, she
endeavored to suffer all with what Patience she was able; looking upon it, as a
just Punishment of God, ha ing neglected those good purpose she had made, ok
Dedicating her self entirely to his service; and therefore, resolved, if God
spared hers and the Child's Life, to bring it up with the same sentiments, God
had given her of that State, she had now made her self incapable of; hoping it
might afterward embrace that happy Life, she her self had neglected. Her
Daughter (of whom she was at last happily Delivered) was Christened, and Named
Catherine (Mrs. Catherine Kinnaston my Lady's Kinswoman, and friend we spoke of
before, being God-mother,) and even before, she was capable of any impression,
my Lady Warner began to instill such Principles into her, as she hopt might one
day have no little prevalence over her Riper Age. This Child was the first
blessing that God bestowed upon her; and the care she took in Cultivating this
hopeful Plant, by Piously managing her first Years, (in which all things that
are tender and precious, are most of all in danger) was abundantly rewarded by
a second blessing of another Daughter, Born upon the 15th. of July, 1653. and
Christened the 20th. receiving in Baptism, the Name of Susan, from my Lady
Hanmer her Grandmother, and God-mother. These early Impressions of Devotion
she gave to both, were so pleasing to Heaven, as well as profitable to them;
that without doubt they conduced very much, to their embracing of that State,
they now both happily enjoy, in the English Monastry, of the Order of Saint
Bennet at Dunkirck.

She was not only thus diligent in her Duty to her Children, but held the same
Managery in her Household Affairs of less moment. First, as soon as she got up
in the Morning, having spent half an hour at her Devotions in her Closet,
(which she also did constantly before she went to Bed) she applied her self
wholly to her Domestic concerns; and cheerfully underwent the trouble of taking
an exact account of all things, that were brought in, or spent in the House
that Day: And tho there was a Steward, whose Employment it was to look into
such Affairs; yet she would needs ease him of this trouble, and take it upon
her self; that he might have more Time to mind other business of greater
moment. It Is true, she had no stint prescribed her, and might Command of the
Steward what Money she pleased, yet to dispatch all things in a more quiet and
orderly manner, she desired Sir John to give a particular allowance, to her
self, and Children; he offered her a Hundred Pound a Year; this condescension
was kindly received, yet her Answer was, that Fifty would be sufficient: Which
Sum she managed so well, as never to exceed it; and yet in the mean time by
her prudent conduct, maintained her self and Children, according to their
Quality. Neither did this charge or care, any ways hinder her from acquiecing
to whatsoever Sir John should say, or do; to whom she always paid a most
humble, and entire submission, as may be gathered from the following passage.

It happened that Sir John's Uncle, Mr. Robert Warner having an Annuity of
Fifty Pounds; had Written a Letter by the Post to this effect, that tho there
was but half a Year due, yet having particular occasions for Money, he desired
that he would advance another half Year, and return him Fifty Pound by the next
safe opportunity. This Letter was intercepted, and another counterfited so like
his own hand, that he himself, when it was first sent him; thought it had been
his own; till he had read it, and found the Contents different from what he
Writ: For instead of returning the Money, the Cheat had desired it should be
paid to the Bearer, a friend of his; that had furnished him with it; and that
he would give him a kind Entertainment for his sake. The Cheat coming very well
Horst, and very Gentiely Clad, pretending he had sent his Servant back to the
next Market Town, to enquire after a Silverhilted Sword, he had lost out of his
Belt upon the way, with order to expect his return thither the next Day: Sir
John doubted not in the least his Honesty, tho my Lady more quick sighted, so
far suspected him, as to desire Sir John not to give him the Money, without
Writing again to his Uncle. But the Hand being so well counterfited, and the
Seal of his Coat of Arms also; he told her he was sure 'twas his Unckles
Letter, and therefore order d the Steward to pay him the Money: And when
afterward the Cheat was discover d, she was so far from censuring Sir John's
Action, or from saying, If he had believed her, be had saved his Money; that she
never so much as took the least notice of it to him; which showed, that tho she
took great care of what Sir John committed to her, yet she did not in the least
intermedle, or concern her self in what belonged immediately to his managment;
but left it entirely to him, to act as he thought best: And as she performed
all things belonging to her charge, to his extraordinary satisfaction; so she
was no less submissive to all his Orders: And lest she might diminish that
satisfaction, she desired he should have in all things, she would even
disapprove her own Judgment, when in any thing it contradicted his. Neither did
her compliance with Sir John's desires, cause her any ways to neglect her
Domestic Affairs; amongst which, the care of her Servants was the first. Her
endeavors were restless in preventing those disorders, which are incident to
Families; She warned often, and cautioned those who were addicted to
unnecessary, and dangerous Conversations; if these admonitions prevailed
little, she used more efficacious means, of hindering such ill consequences as
might follow; by turning away one of them she thought the occasion, of the
others breaking her Commands. If she found any of her Servants overseen in
Drink, She admonished him the first time, to take care she saw him not guilty
of the same fault again; if this charitable advice took no effect, she was wont
to use her powerful intercession with Sir John (who refused her nothing she
desi'd) to discharge him immediately from his service. Moreover, to prevent that
common Topic, which Servants for the most part make use of for an excuse, that
their intemperance proceeds from their kind entertainment of other Gentlemen's
Servants; She declared, that should not serve their turn; for she desired that
others Servants should be treated, as she would have her own; Viz. That they
should want nothing, yet not have so much as to make them unfit to render due
service to their Masters.

This care was followed by a diligent forecast, that no part of that precious
time, She so much esteemed, might be cast away, or spent idely, but rather
improved. Ladies ordinarily challenge the time of Dressing and Adorning
themselves, as properly their own; and endeavor to make it the whole Employment
of their Servants. But on the contrary, She to redeem that, which others do not
account lost; was accustomed to Read constantly some Devout Book to them; not
only when they were busy in this Employment, but in the Afternoon also; causing
such, whose Circumstances would permit them, to Work in her presence; that she
might Read to them whilst they were there: And took care not only to give them
all, a constant Employment; but also, that whilst their Hands were at Work,
their Minds might be Piously taken up, with Attention to what they Heard.

This care in regulating, and framing her Family according to the Maxims of
Christian Duty; tho it was great and singular, yet it was too narrow a Sphere,
to bound or limit her Charity; which extended not only to Domestics, but
embraced the necessitous state of all, especially of those who were helpless
and laden with afflictions: Insomuch, as she could never look upon any in
misery or distress; but she considered their condition as her own, and gave
them speedy succor and assistance. And that she mighr do this the better; She
would never be enduc'd by any entreaties, to Play for Money; professing, She had
none to loose, but what belonged to the Poor. For what she could spare out of
that allowance Sir John had given her, She had assigned them; and was so
sparing and provident, as to give very considerable Alms out of it. She took
special care that the Poor, who came at Dinner Time should be duly served;
ordering that when any particular Object of Charity presented it self, they
should give her notice of it; and she never failed to relieve them
proportionably to their necessities. If any Neighbor fell sick, She was not
content to send them, Cordial Waters, Syrups, and such like helps, which she
had prepared for that end; but would be the Bearer of them her self; and by
that means, see if they wanted not more, than their Modesty permitted them to
ask. Nor was the greatest difficulty able to obstruct any Act of Charity
toward them: As may appear by her going once half a Mile on Foot, to assist a
Poor Neighbor in Childbed, and this even at Midnight, in the rigid season of
Winter; through the Snow, by which she saved the Woman's Life, who had not my Lady
come, had certainly died in Labor, as the person her self owned as long as she
lived. She had a very Compassionate Nature, which she used to blame as
Cowardice, because it would not permit her to dress the Wounds, and Sores of
those, for whom she was so tenderly concerned; yet she supplied this defect as
much as she was able, by giving them such Playsters, and Ointments, as she made
for all sorts of Aylements: Nor was she less curious in having at hand all
kinds of approv'l Remedies; that she might impart them to the most indigent;
and at the same time so careful, that she admitted none into her Receipt Book,
which had not produced the effect she earnestly wished.

But her Charity shined most of all, where now a days it is most wanting, Viz.
in her Conversation, which was so agreeable an Entertainment to those she
Converst with, that they rather feared, than desired it should be interrupted,
by any other; it being no less solid than recreative, and ever suitable to her
Calm and Sweet Temper. She knew Judiciously how to suit her self to those she
conversed with; without any offense, either to the present, or absent; joining
always ingenuity with instruction: For being well Read in History (that being
her chief delight) and having an extraordinary Memory, that made what she had
seen or Read her own; She never wanted excellent matter to entertain even long
Discourses; and was never driven, to seek it at others cost; either by
traducing their Actions, or relating any thing that might lessen their esteem;
but on the contrary, took every occasion she could, of speaking well of all,
and turning every thing, by a Pious Artifice, to the best sense: Excusing the
intention, if she could not approve of the action; and consequently never
employed her Wit in Rallying, or Aspersing others; bur on the contrary, if any
one lasht forth into less Charitable Insinuations, She was the first, that
showed a dislike by her silence; and thereby gave them a kind check to be more
wary hereafter: Joining as I said before, Severity and Affability in so
wonderful a manner; that love and fear seemed to go hand in hand; and as the
one made her Company desired, so the other rendered it not uneasy: All being
willing to quit any Subject, tho never so suitable to their own humors, rather
than loose the diversion of hers: And therefore, when any had been declaiming
against, or censuring others, or talking of any light and unprofitable thing;
which is the Theme commonly of Worldly Conversation: Her presence as well
before, as after her Marriage, was of sufficient Authority to silence them; and
Mrs. Trevor Hanmer, or my Lady Warner is coming, was a forcible Item to turn
the hotest Discourse, into such an one, as might not be displeasing to her.
Which evidenced how far they were from regretting the interruption of their own
Discourse, and how glad of the occasion of enjoying here is, which was ever
diverting and innocent.

CHAP. VI.
The first beginning and occasion of her Conversion.

ALmighty God, who disposes all things no less effectually than sweetly, would
no longer permit one, who had lived up so strictly to the light of Nature and
Education, to live without the light of Grace. The beginning of her Conversion
was after this manner. Her Father Sir Thomas Hanmer thought a diversion for her
very necessary; and therefore, invited Sir John and her, with their whole
Family, to Winter with him at Betisfield. Whether, as soon as she had recovered
her strength, after her Lying-in of her Youngest Daughter, they began their
Journey. Her diversion was Sir Thomas's design, in this Invitation; but her
Conversion was intended by Higher Powers; nor can this be reflected upon
without a special Adoration of the secret Councils of Divine Providence. In
this sejornment it was, she first began to doubt of her Religion; which is
commonly the first step, that God makes use of, to bring those that are not in
it, to the knowledge of the true one. Hitherto she thought her self in so
secure a way to Salvation, that her Brother's kind and earnest entreaties of
her, to leave it, could (as we have said,) work nothing upon her; and was so
constant in it, that nothing could make her think of a change, but the hopes
(as we have said) of a Religious Life; to which she often found so violent an
impulse, that even permited her not to reflect upon the Abjuration of
Protestancy, which it necessarily required: Otherwise the difference in so
Essential a Point, as the Real Presence in the Blessed Sacrament, would have
startled her, and put an end to her Design of being a Nun; as it did surprise
her when she heard this was the Belief the Church of England Professed: of
which she hitherto acknowledged her self a Member.

One Night after Supper it happened, that my Lady Hanmer in a Discourse about
Religion affirmed, That the Belief of the Real Presence, of our Savior in the
Blessed Sacrament, was acknowledged by the Public Liturgy of the Church of
England, which was Authorized and Commanded to be Read, in all Churches of the
Kingdom. My Lady Warner surpised at this Assertion, Modestly reply d; Then
Madam I have hitherto been very ignorant in the Religion I Profess, and have
been brought up in from a Child. My Lady persisted still in her Assertion, and
admit'd her ignorance in so considerable a Point of Faith; and Sir Thomas
Hanmer affirming my Lady to be in the right, and his Daughter to be in an
Error, She was extremely perplexed; to think She had been so long brought up, in
the Belief of that Tenet, which the Church, she Professed her self of,
disowned; fearing, that as she was ignorant in this so necessary a Point of
Faith, She might be so also, in others no less Essential. However, tho she
could not submit her Judgment even to her Father's, whose knowledge and
experience she knew to be far greater than her own; and that his kindness also
was too great, to lead her into an Error (so deep are the impressions of
Education, as not easily to be canceld) yet she prudently seemed to acquiesce
to their Opinion, rather than farther contradict them, and suspended her
Judgment, till she could better inform her self, in so important a Point; which
she intended to do at London. Which place (after S^x Months kind Entertainment)
Sir John and she with their whole Family, was to pass through, in their way
home.

She no sooner came to London, but Sir John Hanmer her Brother came to Visit
her; and told her, her Uncle Hanmer (a Title the Welsh give to such as are
Cousins only, when they much exceed them in Age) was in Town, and would be very
glad to see her. This was that Father of the Society of Jesus above mentioned,
with whom she had treated about being Religious. She was at first a little
concerned, about what he would think of her, for having embraced a State of
Life, so contrary to what she had proposed to him; but Civility overcoming this
apprehension, She appointed a time to receive his intended Visit; which he made
at the time prefixed, and was so far from taking notice of what she apprehended,
that he Congratulated with her, for her happy Marriage; but neglected not to
take this occasion of speaking to her of Religion; of the necessity of being in
the true Church; that there was but one that could be true; there being but one
Faith, as there was but one God, and one Baptism; and desired her no less for
her own, than for his sake, to take the pains only, of examining impartially
the Tenets of both Churches; and she would soon find which was the true one.
She could not, but make a Civil acknowledgment for his kind concern; which gave
him hopes, that a second Visit would not be unwelcome; whereby he thought he
might be able, to do good upon a Soul, he found so well disposed to hear
reason; perceiving her neither prepossessed, nor byas d with passion, or
prejudice: Two of the greatest impediments in the way to Truth.

The second time he went to Visit her, he took occasion to Discourse upon the
particular Tenets of the Roman Catholic Religion; having in the first only
touched them in general; and among other Points, he discourst most at large upon
the Real Presence: For which tho he brought more and better Arguments, than
ever she had heard; yet they only wrought upon her so far, as to quicken her in
the performance of the Resolution, she had before taken, of being better
informed, in a Point of such consequence; assented to by her own, as well as
the Roman Catholic Church; tho hitherto she had believed the contrary. She
received him with no less civility in this, than in the former Visit; which
gave Mrs. Joan Kinaston, a Relation, and particular friend of my Lady's, an
occasion to fear, that this good Father (whom she knew from my Lady to be a
Priest) had in those two Visits wrought very much upon her ^udgment, in order
to persuade her to his Opinions, she having been present at them both; and seen
with what civility my Lady Treated him. Whereupon, she discovered these her
Sentiments to my Lady, who assured her; That she had the same belief as ever,
of the Truth of her own Religion; and that her compliance with him, was purely
out of civility, which she could not but show him, whilst he expressed his, by
his kind Visits, and the Zeal he evidenced in them, for her Eternal Happiness.
But my Ladys Answer, gave the Young Gentlewoman no satisfaction; and therefore,
she never left importuning her, till she had promised to accompany her to a
Protestant Doctor, who (as she told my Lady) would convince her of the Falsity
of all, that this Priest had teld her. My Lady, the more willingly condescended
to her importunities, because she look d upon it, as an occasion that
Providence had given her, of being better satisfied, concerning the Real
Presence, which she still doubted of; yet complied with her upon condition,
that the Doctor should not know who she was; that she might with the more
Liberty propose her doubts to him; resolving, since she had this opportunity
given her, to try what Answer the Doctor would make to those Catholic Tenets,
which Father Hanmer had explicated: That since (as he said) there was but one
Religion, in which one could be saved, she might be the better able to
distinguish, which of the two it was, her own, or his. Mrs. Kinaston accepted
the condition, and brought her to Dr. Buck, Chaplin in Ordinary to King Charles
the Second; Telling him, This friend of hers, who had no mind to be known, came
to him to be satisfied in some doubts of Religion; the Doctor after a civil
welcome, desired my Lady to propose her difficulties. I shall set down the
Conference in her own words, which she gave Sir John in Writing, before he went
for his own satisfaction, to discourse with the same Doctor about the same
Subject, which Writing contains a Summary of the whole Discourse.

Being first acquainted with the end of our coming, the Doctor desired me to
propose my difficulties; I asked him, what was the Protestant opinion
concerning the Sacrament? He told me, that the Body of our Savior was really
there; and that it was Eaten by us, with our Teeth. I asked him about Praying
to Saints? He told me, 'twas a thing indifferent. I asked him about Purgatory?
He said, it was an Opinion grounded upon reason, and that he was not much
against it. I asked him about Confession? He told me 'twas a necessary, and
useful thing, and that it was ever practiced in the Protestant Church, and that
he himself had received Confessions, all along the troublesome Times. I asked
him about Merit? He told me 'twas as the Roman Catholic Church had Defined it;
but that Protestants durst not use the word, for fear of offending the Common
People, tho their meaning in that Point was the same with the Catholics. He
told me, he agreed to all that the Catholic Councils had Decreed, and that what
they had not determined, he meddled not with. He offered to bring me to the
Archbishop of Canturbury Dr. Sheldon, to be assured, that this was not his own
Opinion or particular Belief, but that the whole Protestant Church believed the
same. He said there was no difference between the Church of Rome and Church of
England, but what might easily be Reconciled, and that there was no Dispute
about Fundamental Points of Faith. Affirming, that he had lately Discoursed
with his Grace the Archbishop of Canturbury about these Points, with the same
freedom, he had done with me; and that the Bishop told him, Doctor I am of your
Opinion.

My Lady was surpised to hear these Opinions so frequently Railed at, by those
of her own Church, now in a manner owned by a Doctor of the same; and as Dr.
Buck affirmed, even by the Primat of it, the Archbishop of Canturbury himself.
And afterward declared, That this Discourse of his wrought more upon her, than
all she could have heard from Catholics could ever have done; and was above
measure troubled to see her self so ignorant at that Age, in Points of
Religion, of so great moment; and to find her self so unsetl'd in her Faith, as
to doubt whether her own, or the Roman Catholic Religion, were the best. Mrs.
Kinaston easily perceived my Lady's perplexity, and was no less troubled
herself; which she could not refrain from expssing, by these following words.
Madam, you were the occasion, that I heard a Priest, and I am so unfortunate,
as to have brought you to Discourse with a Jesuit, meaning the Doctor, who
notwithstanding lived and died a Professed Protestant of the Church of England.

This trouble and disquiet my Lady found in her mind after this Discourse,
forced her to send to Father Hanmer, to beg of him the favor of a Third Visit,
which he most readily granted; and when he came, she told him what had passed,
and the effects of the Conference with Dr. Buck; Viz. That her Belief, of which
was the True Religion, was wavering, and unsetl'd; and that she was so restless
and disquieted thereby, that she feared whether or no she was of any Religion
at all; and that if she died in this doubting condition, she knew not what
would become of her. And with all told him, That she was immediately going out
of Town, and by that means should not have the opportunity of confering with
him any more, about a matter of so great Importance as this was, upon which her
Eternal Happiness depended; wherefore, she begged of him to continue his
kindness for her, he had hitherto so much expressed both by his words and
actions, in sending some friend of his to her House at Parham, whether she was
going the next Day; to whom she might propose her difficulties, and by his
assistance regain that repose of mind she possessed before this accident
happened. The Father promised to send one to her; And desired her, not to
disturb her self in the mean time; told her that God had occasioned this
Tempest in her Soul for her advantage, who in a short time would Calm the Storm
he had raised, if she had recourse to him with a filial and unshaken
confidence; and that his Wisdom would help and direct her wavering judgment
into the right way; but desired her also to take great care lest Passion or
Interest should interpose, and hinder, or divert his Divine Operations in her
Soul.

A fortnight after her return to Parham, Father Hanmer failed not to perform
his promise; and sent one Father John Travers of the Society of Jesus, with a
Letter to my Lady, to signify, That the bearer of it was such a friend of his,
as she had desired him to send to her; who would give her all the satisfaction
she could possibly wish for. She received him, as Sir John did also, with all
respect and kindness imaginable; tho Sir John was all this while ignorant of
what had passed at London, but had taken notice and was much troubled to see my
Lady was more Melancholy since her return home than ordinary, which he supposed
proceeded from leaving her Father, whom she as passionatly loved, as he did
her; and only knew that this Gentleman was a friend and acquaintance of he
Uncle Hanmer, who he knew had Visited her several times whilst she was in
London.

My Lady had several Discourses with Father Travers, in which he gave her so
evident an assurance of the Truth of the Roman Catholic Religion, that she
resolved, forthwith to embrace it; and was in pain till she did so; but yet
would first acquaint Sir John with her desires. Wherefore one Night, they being
alone together, she told him, she had a request to beg of him, which for the
Passion of our Savior she desired him not to deny her; he was surpised at such
an earnest and unusal Petition, and told her, he wondered she should by so
earnest a Solicitation express a fear of his refusal, who had never yet denied
her any thing she had asked; and therefore, she needed not with that earnestness
demand any thing that was in his Power to grant, since she could not but know,
it was as great a satisfaction to him to grant her request, as it could be to
her to obtain what she asked. Upon this, she desired him to give her leave to
save her Soul; he told her, That he was now more struc at the request it self,
than before at the manner of asking it; because she could not think he would
deny her leave to save her Soul, it being as dear to him, as his own. He could
not yet conceive the drift or reason of this demand. Infine, she told him, That
she begged his leave to Reconcile her self to the Roman Catholic Church, without
which she was convinced she could never be saved. Adding, That tho she knew his
Condescension to her Request would be a prejudice to him, both in his Estate,
and Reputation; yet she could not but believe, that the Love she had ever
experienced from him, and the necessity of a grant of what she des^r'd, in
ord^r to her obtaining Heaven; would move him to Sacrifice both, for the
Salvation of her Soul. Sir John knowing her Zeal for the Protestant Religion,
and how far she was from sickleness, or unconstancy, in any thing; especially
in Religion; Could not conceive what should be the cause of so earnest and
unexpected a Request. Therefore, He desired her to tell him how she came now to
make this Petition after such an ea^nest manner as she had done. Hereupon, she
told him all that had past at London, both between herself and Father Hanmer;
and also between her and Dr. Buck; at which he was no less surpised than she
had been before; never having believed, that to be the Protestant Faith, which
Dr. Buck declared, to be so; she told him also, That this Gentleman whom her
Uncle Hanmer had sent, had given her such a clear knowl^dge of the Roman
Catholic Faith, and such convincing Reasons of the Truth of it, that she no
longer doubted there was any other way to Salvation, than by making her self a
Member of the Roman Catholic Church. Sir John desired her not to be too rash in
her Resolutions; telling her, That oftentimes a too precepitous Zeal, is apt to
outrun reason and discretion, and make Resolutions otherways good, to become
Abortive; that too great heat is an hinderance from bringing any thing to
prefection; and then added, How uncomfortable a thing it would be for them, to
be of different Religions; that he had a Soul to save as well as she, and that
no Temporal Interest, or loss of Reputation, should hinder him from doing, what
was necessary to obtain Salvation: That he was troubled no less than her self
was, upon what she had related, and assured her that he would not rest
satisfied, till he was thoroughly convinced, which of the two Religions was the
truest; and that perhaps after a diligent enquiry, he might be of the same mind
with her, and that 'twould be most comfortable to both, to embrace the same
Religion together. But he believed this Gentleman would not be able to Answer
such difficulties, as he would propose to him concerning the Roman Catholic
Faith; which if he could not, she would then have little reason to acquiesce in
those Arguments he had given her for it: And lastly, Desired her for some time
at least to defer, for his sake the change of her Religion; however, if she
thought these his Reasons insufficient to move her to do what he desired, he
left her intirly to her liberty, to do what she thought best. Hereupon, she
resolved to put off her Reconciliation, till another time.

The next Morning Sir John not doubting but that the difficulties he had to
propose were unanswerable; accosts the Gentleman, who handsomely Eluded all
Questions, that might occasion a Dispute in Religion. Which Sir John perceiving
told him, That he wondered he showed not the same Zeal for his Soul, that he
had expressed for his Wives, and did not give him the same satisfaction in his
doubts, that he found he had given her in hers. The Gentleman perceiving that
my Lady had informed Sir John of all that had past, desired him to propose his
difficulties; which he had no sooner done, but the Gentleman so easily and
clearly answered them, that Sir John was astonished, and had nothing to reply
to his Answers, they being so clear and convincing. Amongst other things Sir
John asking him, what rational grounds there could be for a Belief of
Purgatory? Hereupon, he solidly explicated them, showing the difference between
the guilt of Punishment, and guilt of Offense, by the Example of David, who
after the Pardon of his Transgression, had the Punishment of it inflicted upon
him, by the Death of his Child; and so ingeniously Moraliz'd upon God's
Infinite goodness and mercy, that would not permit him to Damn a Soul for one
small Offense, no more than his Justice would suffer any thing that was defiled
to enter into Heaven; and therefore, required either a Voluntary Penance or
Mortification to be undergone in this Life, or an involuntary Punishment to be
suffered in the next, to purify such a Soul; and thereby render it fit for
Heaven; and also clearly Explicated the difference between a Voluntary
satisfaction made for Sin in this Life, and a necessary undergoing the
Punishment inflicted for it in the next; and how much more acceptable the one
must needs be to God, than the other; and that therefore a small Penance
performed in this World, was able to satisfy more, than many Years great
sufferings could do in the next: The one being freely and willingly undertaken,
the other suffered by force.

Sir John at the end of this Discourse found himself so sensibly touched by it,
that he could not refrain from telling him, That were he convinced, there was a
Purgatory (as he should be, were he once a Roman Catholic) he would use the
best means he could to avoid it; and he thought none better than to betake
himself to a Religious course of Life; the Roman Catholic Church affording this
means of avoiding it, having many Religious Houses; whether such as perceived
the great danger the World exposed to, and the little satisfaction it gave,
might retire themselves, as to a secure Harbor; which happiness his own
Religion wanted. The Gentleman as at first he had been backward in engaging in
any Discourse concerning Religion, now seemed very active in discouraging Sir
John from such an undertaking; telling him, That this was not nec^ssary to
Salvation, as the becoming a Roman Catholic was, and that Marriage was a State
both pleasing to, and ordained by Almighty God, and that he could not enter
upon such a course of Life unless his Lady did so too, and therefore he ought
to lay aside those Thoughts, and set up n what was of greater moment. Viz. The
disposing himself to become Member of the Roman Caholic Church, out of which
there was no Salvation: And laying aside all Interest or Prejudice which his
Education, and long Practice of the Religion he professed, had given him; he
should earnestly beg of God to show him the secure way to Salvation, with a
confidence that God would hear his Prayers, if slighting the principles of
Interest, and the force of Education, he sincerely gave Ear to Reason, and such
Divine Truths, as God interiourly should inspire. Sir ohn told him, he would
follow his advice, but it being a business of so great weight, he would first
consult others of his own Religion; who probably might be able to return some
sa^isfactory Answer, to the doubt he had raised of the Truch of the Protest nt
Religion, although himself could not; and for this end he begged of him, to give
him briefly in VVriting, the Points of Religion, in which the Catholics
differed, from that he professed; and the principal Arguments upon which they
grounded this difference.

That which Sir John acknowledged himself most surpised at, was that he found
the chief things objected against Roman Catholics, and which he thought
impossible for the other to Answer, were either false, or falsely represented.
As that of Idolatry, of Merit, of forgiving Sins before hand, or giving leave
to Sin, and several such like Tenets laid to their charge. The Gentleman
promised in a short time, to bring him what he desired, and the very Day he
went from Parham Sir John resolved to set upon what he had advised him; Viz. by
entering into a serious Recollection, ponder, and thereby discover, of how great
Importance it was to be in the right way to Salvation; and how little it
signified to enjoy never so great happiness in this short Life, if after it one
lost an Eternal felicity, in the next. He therefore most earnestly begged of
Almighty God to direct him into that secure way, that leads to Bliss, and which
himself came into this World to Chalk out; that by the knowledge of it in this
Life, he might obtain the Fruits of his inestimable Redemption in the Life to
come. Whilst he proceeded in these Pious Exercises, it pleased God Almighty to
bring into his Mind some good thoughts he had entertained, not long before, in
a very dangerous Sickness, Viz. of the uncertainty he was then in, of his
future happiness, and what horror he selt from thence; what desires and
resolutions he then conceived in his Soul, of living a more Virtuous Life; if
God should vouchsafe to prolong it. A Dream also, which carried his
consideration still further, came fresh into his Memory, which he had had not
long before, of his being ready to receive the Sentence of Eternal Damnation,
before the Grand Tribunal; and how much he then wished, that he might return
again to the World, to make satisfaction by a new Life, for his past Offenses.
Also, how insignificant all the pleasures and satisfactions of this World then
appeared, and how willingly he would have Sacrificed them all, to have freed
himself from the Eternal Misery, in which he even seemed already to be involved.

These thoughts were so lively represented unto him, and were so urgent and
weighty, that they moved him no less now, than they had done before, gave him a
quicker and sharper sense of the danger of his present condition, and caused
him to make an entire Oblation of himself to Almighty God; begging of him by
his Sacred Passion, to Pardon his past Sins, and to teach him hereafter how to
Love and Please him. Another thing also came under his deliberation, which had
been to him a frequent occasion of great trouble; Viz. The fear and
apprehension lest his Lady should die before him: Which he could never think
of, without a more than an ordinary sorrow; judging, it would be impossible for
him to survive so great and sensible a loss. In this perplexity, the same
thought which represented it self, whilst Father Travers explicated the Doctrine
of Purgatory, returned with so much violence, yet was accompanied with so
comfortable a sweetness; that it seemed to dissipate all his former doubts and
troubles. A Religious Life offering it self to his serious considerations, as a
means to make Death and Judgment (the most terrible of all things) comfortable
and pleasant; and that nothing could so much dispose him for such a necessary
separation, as Death would one Day make, between him and his Lady; as a
Voluntary separating before hand, for the Love of God.

Sir John was carried away so violently with these thoughts, that they gave him
no liberty at all to reflect upon the change of his Religion; tho so necessary
a Qualification for that State of Life, he was so forceably moved to embrace;
nor could he be satisfied, till he had discover d them to his Lady; whom if he
found, not to have the like inclinations now, which he knew she had before her
Marriage, 'twould be in vain for him any longer, to entertain any such
thoughts. Therefore, he opens his Mind to her, in order to a Religious State;
who received this intimation with a Flood of Tears; seeing her thus moved at
this proposal, He begged of her for the Love of God, not to trouble her self
farther, about what he had proposed; for unless she were of the same Mind, he
neither could, nor would harbor these thoughts any longer. She on the other
side assured him, That her Tears were not Tears of sorrow, as he apprehended
them, but of joy, and that the same value she had before Marriage for a
Religious State, was not at all lessened by it, and that she still esteemed a
Monastical Life the happiest in this World; but endeavored to put such
thoughts as much out of her Mind, as she was able; because she had settled her
self in a Condition so opposite to that most happy Calling: And that she durst
never signify her Mind to him in this matter, fearing he might take it as
unkindly, as she imagined, he thought, she had taken his proposal. She added,
That she thought no Course of Life could be truly happy, in which the
Dispensations of Gods Providence were not equally acceptable. She told him
also, That as she was confident she should not, so she feared he would not
enjoy a long Life; and that this was not her Opinion alone, but also her
Fathers, who for that reason was concerned, that he so long deferred the
settelement of his Estate; according to the Articles agreed upon at their
Marriage.

Sir John was startled, that others should take notice of what he so little
thought on; and which he had more reason to apprehended, then they; and
esteemed this as a timely admonition from Heaven, to make a Spiritual Provision
for Eternity. A settlement far more worth thinking on, and of greater moment,
than any this World could afford. But my Lady went on arguing as Father Travers
before had done, That a Religious Life they aimed at, as happy as it was,
required such a Disposition as neither of them yet had; Viz. The being Members
of the Roman Catholic Church, none but that affording the happiness of such a
Retirement: And therefore, that they ought first to satisfy themselves, and
embrace this, before they could partake of the other he had proposed.

This Discourse being ended, Sir John retired himself again to his Closet,
where he was seized with so great trouble and anxiety, occasioned by the
uncertainty he felt, whether he was in the true way to Salvation or no; that
made him restless: Which disquiet of Mind was the principal occasion of
ripening his Conversion; and for the fear of what irreparable consequences
might follow; if he were not in the true way, ga^e him no time of respite or
breathing: And amidst these perplexities, he began to Model and consider with
himself how to make a serious and lasting provision against so great an evil.
Finding no help from any diversion, he took to ease his troubled Mind, thinking
the time long, tho but Ten Days since Father Travers departure; resolved to go
himself purposly to him to get the Paper he had promised him, from which he
hoped to receive some comfort and satisfaction; and found him in a readiness to
begin his Journey for Parham; with the Summary or Treatise, he had promised of
the Catholic Doctrine. He begged of him not to charge his kind design, but to
accompany him back to Parham, which request he condescended to. Where reading
the Articles over to Sir John his Lady and Sister, the two last were thoroughly
and effectually convinced, and resolved to take the opportunity of Father
Travers presence, to Reconcile themselves before his departure, and thereby
become Members of the Roman Catholic Church: Which they did upon the Eve of St.
John Baptists, and Received the Holy Sacrament the next Day. But Sir John
resolved to hear what those of his Church would say to the Reasons set down in
the foresaid Treatise, before he would make any change of Religion.

CHAP. V.
A Relation of Sir John Warner's Conversion, and how both he and his Lady,
resolve to enter upon a Religious course of Life.

I Must here beg leave of the Reader, to accept of a short Relation of Sir
John's Conversion, together with some Motives, which conduced not a little to
his change of Religon; because 'twill no less inform him, how my Lady by that
means was set at Liberty, to embrace a Religious State of Life; than disabuse
some persons, who by mistake, thought such a separation impossible, considering
their ample Fortune in the World; unless some disgust or dissatisfaction had
intervened, on the one side or the other; and by this short Narrative, the Rich
goodness of Almighty God's overruling Providence, in drawing Souls to his
Service, will also evidently appear.

Sir John, tho he could not refute those Reasons Father Travers had set down;
yet thought it prudence to suspend his judgment, and submission to a change of
Religion, till he found whether others of his own, could solve those Queries,
he had heard Read. Wherefore, he obtains leave of Father Travers, to show this
Treatise, to some Learned Men of the Protestant Church; and for this end,
resolved to make a Journey on purpose to London; and prevailed with the Father
to meet him there; that they might be able to confer about the Objections that
others should make, to what he had set down in his Treatise.

Sir John being in London, first of all applied himself to Dr. Buck; with whom
(tho he had been Chaplain to his Grandfather, and had Baptized Sir John;) he
had no Personal acquaintance; but found him so Civil, as freely to Discourse
with him, without asking him who he was. The Doctor Read over the whole
Treatise with Sir John. and made no Objection, either against the Real
Presence, Prayer to Saints, Purgatory, Confession, or Satisfaction for Sins.
But when he came to that Point; that there was no true Oridination, or
Priesthood in the Protestant Church; (for a proof whereof, was alleged, what
Dr. Thomdike in his Weights and Measures wished; That since there was a great
doubt in so Essential a Point, they would submit to a Reordination by the
Suftra; an Bishops of Rome) the Doctor was so moved, that he declared, the
Author of that Pamphlet deserved a severe Punishment. And when Sir John
endeavored to pacify the Doctor, telling him, His Citation was out of a
Protestant Author, and therefore, unless false was not so much to be blamed;
yet the Doctor could not be persuaded to Read any further; which when Sir John
perceived, he desired the Doctor, That he would voughsafe at least to inform
him, since there was a doubt in the Protestant Church, of a Point of so great
consequence, as that of True Ordination was: Whether there could be any danger
of his Salvation, if for this reason; as well as for the advantage of Religious
Houses, which the Protestant Church wanted, (finding himself most particularly
moved to a Religious State of Life,) he should quit the Protestant Religion, he
was Ered up in, to become a Member of the Roman Catholic Church? The Doctor
here expressed his concern, that there wanted such a convenience in the
Protestant Religion, which the Roman Catholic had, but would not own a want of
Ordination; but still invey'd against the Author of that Assertion, and
earnestly persuaded Sir John, to continue in the Church he was in, which was
very good, and had in it all things necessary to Salvation; assuring him, That
in a short time they would both be United. The chief difference betwixt them,
consisting in the Popes Usurping a Power, beyond what Christ had given him:
Their Church allowing him to be Question, he believed would soon be decided, by
a Condescension on both sides.

Sir John was not satisfied with this Answer, but resolved to go to the
Archbishop of Canturbury Dr. Sheldon, he being the Primat of the Protestant
Church; whom Dr. Buck had also cited, to be of his Opinion. And that he might
not be too troublesome to his Grace, he reduced what he intended to propose to
him, to Three Queries.

The First, Whether there were a Church Established by Christ, out of which
there was no Salvation?

The Second. Whether the Roman Catholic Church were a Member of this?

The Third. Whether there was Salvation in the Roman Catholic Church?

When Sir John came to Lambeth, and asked to speak with my Lord, he would not
give him Audience, before he sent in his Name, which he barely gave, concealing
his Quality. To the first of his Questions my Lord Answered Assirmitively; to
the second, he said it was a corrupted Member; whereupon Sir John asked him, if
it Erred in any Fundamental Point? He Answered, it did not, for then it would
be no Church; hence out of the premises granted by my Lord, Sir John drew this
Conclusion, in Answer to his Third Query; telling my Lord, That then it
evidently followed, there was Salvation in the Roman Catholic Church. But my
Lord told him, That for those who were Born and Bred up in the Roman Catholic
Religion, there might be Salvation; but for him who owned himself to be
Educated a Protestant, it was very doubtful; it being very dangerous to leave
apure Church, to enter into one defiled with Errors.

To which when Sir John out of his own words replied, That they not erring in
Fundamental Points, he humbly conceived it could not be so dangerous, as his
Gr^^e Asserted, to embrace the Roman Catholic Religion; my Lord replied, That
he was not so competent a Judge of this as himself; and therefore was to rely
upon his Opinion, rather than his own. Sir John humbly submitted his Judgment
to my Lords in this Point; but having understood from Dr. Buck, the esteem my
Lord had for a Religious State; from an expression, the Doctor told him, his
Grace had one Day let fall, as he was putting on his Canonical Robes in the
Lobby, to go into the Parlament-House: (Viz How happy it would be, did their
Church afford such a convenience, as the Church of Rome did; that Brothren
might dwell together in Unity; and what a comfort their Conversations would be,
to each other) resolved to propose the an^ Question to him, he had to Dr. Buck.
which give him occasion of Relating this passage concerning my Lord; to with,
whether the embracing a Religious State, might not be a sufficient VVarrant and
Motive, for a Protestant to become a Catholie? The Bishop instead of Answering
the Question, asked Sir John whether or no he were Married? Who telling him he
was; the Bishop replied, That such a Prophosition as h^ had made, was in vain,
because the State he was in, rendered the other incompatible. Sir John told
him, he humbly conceived, that a mutual consent, gave the same Privilege to
embrace that State, as a single Life did. My Lord again asked him, If he had
any Children? he told him Yes; whereupon any Lord said, You are then obliged in
Couscience to see them Educated. Sir John replied, That by leaving them to a
trusty friend, with security of a sufficient Maintenance, he thought he better
satisfied his obligation of their Education, that by Educating them himself,
with hazard of his own Salvation.

Here my Lord was interrupted by a Youth of about Ten Years of Age, his
Relation, who was going to VVestminster-School, with whom my Lord entertained
himself so considerable a time, in asking him, What Books he learnt? How this
and the other of his Friends did? And such like Questions; as gave Sir John,
who sat by, just Reason to think, that the danger of becoming Catholic, was not
so great as my Lord affirmed; otherwise he would have thought his time better
spent in satisfying him, in a business of so great consequence, than in
conversing with the other, about matters of less moment.

My Lord, either unwilling to give himself father trouble, or believing it
might disgust Sir John, to see him triflle away his time thus with this Youth,
instead of endeavoring to clear his doubts; and perhaps willing enough to break
of the Discourse, for fear he might not be able to give him entire
satisfaction; told him, That since his weighty affairs allowed him not, so much
time, as the answering his doubts required; he would recommend him to one, who
should make it his business to do it; and therefore called one of his
Gentlemen, and Commanded him, to go along with Sir John to Dr. Dolbin ( then
Dean of Westminster, and afterward Bishop of Rochester, and last of all of
York) and in his Name desire the Dean, to render him what service was in his
Power, in the business he came about.

As Sir John was going out of his Palace, he met Dr. Sancrost (now
Archbishops of Canturbury) a Neighbor and acquaintance of his, entering in;
who offered him his service, and probably afterwar is informed the Bishop of
his Quality: Forat the Weater-side, Sir John meeting Dr. Dolbin just landed at
Lambeth Stairs, desired my Lords Gentleman to say nothing to him; but return
back, and follow the Doctor to my Lord: When he found much more civil and
obliging than before; who after he had talked near a Quarter of an hour with
the Doctor, they both came to Sir John, and my Lord assar'd him, that h^ had
thoroughly informed the Doctor of his difficultes, and that he was ready when
ever he pleased, to give him satisfaction in them; which the Doctor also
affirmed, and at Sir John's request, promised to expect him at his House the
next Morning, for that end.

Sir John went according to his appointment, and was immediately introduced into
his Closet; where Sir John perceiving, both by the Doctors endeavors, to
prevent his proposing his doubts; as well, as by answering those he had
proposed to my Lord, much after the same manner as his Grace had done, that he
was not like to have the satisfaction he expected; made few or no Objections to
what he said; thinking it better to go away quietly, as in appearance
satisfied; than otherwise give occasion of dissatisfaction, both to the
Archbishop and the Doctor; and thereby cause them to divulge, what few knew
of; to wit, the disquiet and uneasiness he found in the Protestant Religion.
Nor was the Doctor much bent about asking his doubts, but took occasion to ask
many curious Questions; and amongst others, What his Ladies Nune was? Which
when he understood, he farther inquired, What Relation she was to Sir John
Hanmer, a particular acquaintance of his? And being informed she was his
Sister, made greater Professions and offers of service to Sir John than before:
For which he returned due thanks, and asked his Advice, whether he judged it
necessary that he should do the like to the Archbishop? The Doctor told him,
he would do it for him, and signify to my Lord, that he was the occasion he
did not do it himself. The Doctor offered Sir John a Book called the Whole
Duty of Man, which he civilly refused; telling him, that he had it already.
Whereupon the Doctor counseled him, diligently to peruse that Treatise, and
that he would engage Soul for Soul, provided he followed the advice he met with
there, that he should be as happy both in this World and the next, as he could
hope to be by his entering into a Religious State. He added also, as Dr. Buck
had done, That 'twas a mere Punctilio the Pope stood upon, that hindered the
Union of both Churches; which he hoped to live to see decided; and a^^ur'd him,
that whenever any other difficulties occurred, he should find him ready at all
times to Answer them; and to render him what farther service he was able. Which
Sir John humbly thanked him for, and took his leave, resolving now to embrace
(as the securest way) that Religion, in which both allowed Salvation; rather
than remain in one; where the contrary Church, (which the Archbishop had owned
to be a true one) denied that any could be saved.

As soon as he had made this Resolution, he began to find some Interior repose,
and quiet in his Soul: Which from his first suspicion or doubt of the truth of
the Religion he Professed, was continually upon the Rack; especially during the
time he was at London; and it had so influenced his Health, that he feared, by
the Indisposition he found himself in, that some violent Sickness would follow.
Which in a Letter he gave his Lady notice of; at which she was so concerned, as
to hasten immediately to London on Horseback, concluding he might be worse,
than he would express in his Letter, for fear of troubling her. But Providence
ordered this for their mutual satisfaction, that she might be present at his
Reception into the Roman Catholic Church, he having appointed the next Morning
after her arrival, to meet with Father Travers for that end. She though so
troublesome a Journey well recompensed, by becoming a Spectator of what she
chiefly wished, and Prayed for. And when he told her, that since his
Resolutions of Reconciling himself to the Roman Catholic Church, he began to
receive again that quiet and repose of M^nd, he had lost from the first time he
began to doubt of his own Religion: She replied, That she had experienced the
same; but that 'twas nothing in comparison of the comfortand satisfaction, she
enjoyed after her Reconciliation; which was accompanied with such an assurance,
of her being in a secure way to Eternal happiness; that should Father Travers
Renouce the Religion, she had embraced by his Instruction and advice; (who had
been so Instrumental in this her Conversion) yet this change in him would not
move, or trouble her in the lest; or give her the lest doubt or disesteem of
what she now Professed.

Sir John was Reconciled the Sixth of July 1664. and afterward experienced
such a Transport and Security in his Soul, as his Lady had given him hopes of;
and it is impossible for any one to imagine, what this is; but those that have
felt it. The doing of this was a necessary means for Sir John's executing his
other Design, of leaving the World; which the Devil (since he had no success in
hindering the former) resolved now to try to prevent; foreseeing that a
Religious State would be no less beneficial, to these happy Proselites in their
way to Heaven, than what they had already done: And therefore, endeavored what
he could, to represent and magnify to him the present happiness, he enjoyed in
the World, in so incomparable a Wife, so good an Estate, and so handsome and
convenient a House; which he had just finished and furnished at great expenses;
and as yet had not received the least satisfaction from it, for the pains he
had taken, and trouble and charges he had been at, in building it. Also, how
impossible it would be, to find any comfort or satisfaction, after the leaving
so good and kind a Consort, the separation from whom he would never be able to
survice; how difficult it would likewise be, to observe what was necessary in
that state he aimed at, Perpetual Continency, Poverty, and Obedience. But God's
Grace still assisted him with reasons to Answer these Objections. First, That
(as Mr. Travers took notice at his first coming to Parham) that tho indeed he
was as happy, as he could wish to be at present, yet what he added, If it would
last always; as it then struck him, so now the consideration, how transitory
this happiness was, helped him to overcome these Temptations; to which also
this seasonable consideration did not a little contribute. Viz. That if he
refused to follow God's Call, he might thereby provoke him, to deprive him of
what he chiefly took a pleasure in, as a just punishment for that Ingratitude,
and thereby make him as well miserable in this World, as in the next; for
refusing to restore to God, what he so liberally had bestowed upon him.

These thoughts renewed his good desires, and made him again purpose to return
to God whatever he had given, and what he valued above all his other Benefits
his LADY: To whom he thought he could not show a greater Mark of his kindness;
than to forgo the greatest comfort and satisfaction he had in this World, for
her greater happiness and contentment in the next. Nor did he think it a
sufficient compliance with God's Call, to leave the World (as the Devil would
have persuaded him was enough) if she chanced to die first; because then the
living in it, would have been a trouble to him, and would be nothing else but
to Consecrate that to God which he was weary of; and therefore, could not be so
acceptable a Sacrifice, as now it would. Besides, it was as probable she might
as well out live him, as he her; and then it would be out of his Power to show
any Correspondence at all to Gods Inspitation. Wherefore, he set a new, upon
bringing about the design of embracing a Religious State; and finding his
Ladies Inclinations intensly the same, proposed to her (as a trial of what they
were afterward to practice) that for the time they should live together in the
World, they should live as they must do when separated, not as Man and Wife,
but as Brother and Sister: Tho to avoid giving occasions of suspicion, and lest
these their resolutions should too soon take Air; they would continue to live
together, as to outward appearance, in the same manner as before.

Thus they lived from the 6th. of July, till the 27th. of October, and God as a
Testimony of the Truth of their Vocations, took away all the difficulty, that
is in a strict Observance of Continency; even amidst the continual occations to
the contrary. Which wounderful effects so confirmed Sir John, that these
desires were from God; that he resolved speedily to dispose things for his
going Beyond Sea, by a settlement of his Estate. In Order to which he sends for
his Brother Mr. Francis Warner who was then at London.

As soon as his Brother came to Parham, Sir John discovered his intention to
him, that having no Sons, he disign'd to make him Heir of his Estate, paying
Portions to each of his Daughters; and that he would make no conditions with
him, that might sway him to do, what he himself was not convinced was for the
best; but only desired in requital of this his kindness, that he would do what
he had done himself; Viz. Laying aside both Passion and Interest, examine the
Principles of both Religions; and upon solid Motives embrace that, which he
should find the most secure for his Eternal happiness: and daily beg of God by
his Sacred Passion, that he would direct him into the true way to Salvation, if
he were not already in it. Mr. Francis Warner kindly promised a grant to Sir
John's request, and for this end accompanied him to London; where in pursuit
after the Truth, being present at a Dispute between Father Travers and Dr.
Chamberline, then Chaplain to the Duke of Ormond, he was so convinced of the
danger of continuing in his own Religion, that he soon after Reconciled himself
to the Roman Catholic Church; which action being maturly performed, he
acknowledged to Sir John his Brother, that he was more obliged to him for the
manner of giving him the Estate; than for the Estate it self. For when first he
discovered his design to him, he was so possessed of the Truth of his own
Religion, that had he offered to give it him, upon condition to abandon the
Protestant Religion, which then he thought the best; he would sooner have
refused the Estate, than have forsaken his Religion; and consequently had never
enjoyed that happiness, he now experienced in his Soul; much beyond his Power
to express, and far exceeding, any he could hope for in the enjoyment of the
Estate he had given him.

My Lady Warner in the mean time, redoubled her Devotions, and Manifested her
Zeal, by endeavoring to draw as many as she was able of her Servants and
Neighbors, (over whom she had a suasive power) to make themselves as happy by
embracing the Roman Catholic Faith, as she was; and was the cause that several
of them became Catholics. Her fervor had so transported her, that she had even
worn off the skin of her Knees by Praying, and might have done her self a
considerable prejudice, had not Sir John persuaded her to put a stop to this
her great Zeal and fervor.

Whilst Sir John prepared for his going beyond sea, by making a settlement of
his Estate at London. She did the like in the Country, by disposing things in
such an order, that as soon as he returned, he might not be hindered from
beginning his Journey. She made an Inventory of all things in, and about the
House; that nothing might be embezl'd by Tenants, or out of the way when called
for by Mr. Francis Warner; and she had ordered and disposed all things so
carefully, that Sir John at his return, found nothing wanting for the beginning
of his Journey. Wherefore, he with his Lady, Children, and Sister, left Parham
the 20th. of October, and came to London the 23d. where she stayed till the
27th. upon which day my Lady with Sir John's Sister, Mrs. Elizabeth Warner,
and his Kinswoman Mrs. Frances Skeleton, his two Children Catherine and Susan, a
Servant, with Mrs. Fausset, a Woman who knew the Low Countries, and was
accustomed to conduct beyond sea, young Gentle-women, that went to Monastrys,
began their Journey toward Dover; but my Lady would no longer admit of the
Title of Madam, and changed her Name into that of Clare. As soon as they came
thither, they found the Pacquet-boat ready to go off, and immediately Embarked
themselves without any stay at all at Dover. The reason why Sir John did not
accompany them; was because he judged it best to stay privately in London, to
see what consequences might follow their departure, and to prevent such ill
ones as might ensue.

It was a particular Providence they took the first opportunity, for no sooner
had they left London, but Dr. Edward Warner one of the Kings Physicians, and
Uncle to Sir John, heard of it; and procured an Order to be sent to Dover from
King and Council, for the stoping of Sir John and his Lady. This came not to
the Mayor's Hand, till the Pacquet-boat was put off; so that all he could do,
was to return Answer, that they were gone; believing Mr. Gascoin a Gentleman,
who met them accidentally at Dover, and went over in the same Packet, to be
Sir John; wherefore the Mayor signified, that he was sorry the Order came not
time enough for him to stop them, as otherwise he would certainly have done.

Dr. Warner upon the supposition that Sir John with his whole Family was gone
beyond sea; endeavored to secure his Estate, since he could not him; and
therefore, Petitioned the King and Council, for a Grant of it, upon pretext to
keep it out of the Josuits hands; who as he pretended had persuaded him out of
his Estate, as well as Religion; and had been the Principal Authors of his rash
undertaking, so imprudent a course of Life. The King, who loved not
importunities of that kind, endeavored to put him off with a Jest, telling
him, If Sir John had a mind to make himself one of God Almighties Fools, he
must have patience; and that if he would let him alone a little, he himself
would soon be weary of the course he had undertaken. But he still persisting to
urge His Majesty, to prevent the ruin of a Family, that had always been
faithful to him; the King bid him go to the Atturny General, and Order him in
His Name, to do what the Law should direct, for the security of the Estate.

But to show how far the Jesuits were from such a Design, as Dr. Warner
pretended. It will not be amiss to reflect, how much Father Travers, as we have
said, diffwaded him from this undertaking, at his first proposal of it. And to
insert here, what Sir John Warner affirms; Viz. That having in his Noviship a
Scruple, that he complied not with our Saviors Counsel, Of giving all to the
Poor, and following him: Unless after the Provision for his Children, he gave
the Residue of his Estate to Pious Uses; especially that part of it, that
heretofore belonged to an Ancient Abbey, and therefore required a Restitution to
the Roman Catholic Church, to which it formerly belonged. Whereupon he
consulted his Superior, and proposing to him these doubts; he assured him,
that no obligation of Conscience lay upon him, to dispose of it any other way,
than he had already done, in giving it to his Brother; and that in the
Circumstances he was in, it was more prudence, for him to do so, than
otherways; whereby he would but give occasion to many Clamours and
disturbances, that would certainly follow, a different settlement. And besides
added, that he might as freely Entail that part of the Estate, that formerly
belonged to an Abbey, upon his Brother, as any other Land; it being his
Ancestors by purchase; and the Pope having also by his Dispensation (sent into
England by Cardinal Poole, in Time of Queen Mary's Reign) made the Possession
of such Revenues, lawful to all persons, even Catholics themselves; counselling
them only to a greater liberality in Almsgiving, to obtain Gods blessing, upon
their Estates they enjoyed by his Dispensation; and therefore he ought to have
no farther Scruple in this Point. This Answer of his Superior, freed him from
all the before mentioned doubts: And ought to clear the Jesuits, of that unjust
Censure they ly under of Covetuousness; when they refused such an offer, as was
here made them.

Sir John finding his Uncle still busy in an earnest pursuit after his
Estate; tho he was assured by his Counsel, that the settlement he had made,
could not be Annul'd by any thing, less than an Act of Parliament; yet thought
it better by appearing, to put a stop to his Unckles endeavors, than permit
him, and his Brother to engage in a Law Suit; and thereby spend what he
pretended to conserve, which would be prejudical to both. But Sir Thomas Hanner
being then in Town, he resolved first to go to him; and beforehand sent him a
Note, to know whether a Visit would not be ungratful. Sir Thomas who believed
him beyond sea, seemed overjoyed at the sight of his Letter, that brought him
the good news of his being still in England; and answered him, that he was
ready to receive him with open Arms, and to Embrace him with the same
tenderness as ever; as indeed he did: His Tears at their Meeting testifying,
how great and Paternal an Affection he still had for him. Sir Thomas after a
hearty expression of the continuance of his kindness, proposed to him all the
Arguments he could, to persuade him to lay aside his design, of parting with
his Daughter, and betaking himself to a Religious State of Life. But perceiving
Sir John so fixed in his Resolutions, as that he found no hopes of persuading
him to change them; he told him, He would soon have greater cause than himself,
to repent such an enterprise; and when 'twould be too late, find the
Inconveniences, unto which he exposed both himself, and his Wife. However, he
would give him no cause to suspect he wanted that kindness for him, he had ever
professed; and therefore, tho he could easily have crossed his design, he would
not do it; but when the Chancellor offered him a Decree to take Possession of
the Estate, so long as he and his Wife should continue beyond sea; he
absolutely refused it, rather than he would by accepting it, given him any cause
of disquiet, or unkind thoughts of him. Sir Thomas also, seeming much concerned
for having taken such measures, as forced him out of Town the next Morning;
told him, That he would not have left it so soon, had he known of his being in
it. Sir John begged leave to accompany him the first Days Journey; it being
probably the last time, he should have the opportunity of enjoying his Company;
which was granted with a great deal of satisfaction on both sides. The next Day
Sir Thomas was very pressing to have Sir John go with him home, and to stay so
long there, as he designed to remain in England. But he very gratfully refused
the invitation, resolving to follow his Lady, as soon as he had put a stop to
his Unckles pretensions, which required his Presence at London.

The same Night he returned from accompanying Sir Thomas, he went to the
nearest Tavern to his Unckles House in Covent Garden; and sent a Messenger to
let Dr. Warner know, that a friend of his desired to speak with him there.
When his Uncle came; he was so overjoyed at the unexpected sight of Sir John,
or so confounded at what he had done, as he was not able to speak: So that Sir
John out of compassion, was forced to make that Apology for him, which he ought
to have made himself; thanking him for the pains and trouble he had taken for
the security of the Estate (as he thought) tho there was no need of it; because
he had settled it, as firmly as was possible by Law, upon his Brother; who (if
he had consulted him) would have shown him the Deeds; wherefore, now he was
assured of this from his own Mouth, he hoped that he would desist from giving
himself or his Brother any farther trouble in this affair. He promised, he
would, and was as good as his word; using no other endeavors afterward, for
getting the Estate into his Hands; which he saw was already in the Possession
of Mr. Francis Warner his Nephew, the next Heir to it.

But to return to my Lady (from whom I have made this necessary digression to
satisfy the Reader why Sir John did not accompany her) she took Shiping the
29th. of October, and landed at Dunkirck, the 30th. where she no sooner
arrived, but she went immediately to the English Poor Clares, and was extremely
pleased with their Poor and Rigorous manner of living: She took the first
opportunity of passing from thence by Water to Bruges, where she went to the
English Monastry of the Order of St. Austin; and there met with one, whom God
Almighty had not long before inspired, with an extraordinary Call to the
Catholic Faith, as well as to a Religious course of Life; and who had given a
very great example of courage and zeal in embracing both. This person was Mrs.
Catherine Holland, Daughter to Sir John Holland and Suffolk, who by her own
Reading, and her Mothers Pious example, who was a Catholic, (Almighty God's
Grace also concurring) was so moved, to embrace the Catholic Religion, and a
Religious State; as that without her Fathers knowledge, she went to Flanders,
there to Consecrate her self wholly to Gods service; even before she was a
Catholic, or admitted into the Roman Catholic Church. But as soon as she came
to Bruges, she Reconciled her self, and took the Habit amongst the English
Religious of the Order of St. Austin in that Town; Providence so ordering it,
that the Duke of Norfolk should be there at the same time, who undertook, if
her Father did not give her the ordinary Portion, required by the Community at
her Profession; that he would pay it: But her Father thinking this might
reflect upon him, gave the Portion himself, and freely discharged the Dukes
engagement. After Mutual Congratulations with each other, not only for being
Members of the True Church of Christ, but also for being called to the highest
State of Perfection in it, the embracing his Counsels (which Mark of Sanctity
seemed wanting in the Protestant Church they had quitted) my Lady took leave to
pursue her Journey toward Liege, and went the same Day to Gaunt; where she was
very kindly received by the English Benedictine Dames: And there as well as at
other Monastrys she passed, was much Edified at their cheerful Conversation,
and Religious Modesty; the very Air of their Countenances, evidencing that
Interior Peace and comfort, which the World is not able to give; their Edifying
Discourses also rekindled afresh her desiers of a Religious State; so that she
hastened what she could to Liege, being in pain till she arrived at her Center;
where she hoped to meet those healing Joys, which the distracted and thoughtful
cares of a Secular Life could not afford. Thither she came on the 6th. of
September, promising her self that happiness, she had so long in vain sought
after.

The End of the First Book.
THE LIFE OF THE LADY WARNER. In RELIGION, Sister CLARE of JESUS. THE SECOND
BOOK.
CHAP. I.
She takes the Habit at Liege amongst the English Nun's called Sepulchrines, of
the Order of St. Austin.

THE Religious she designed to go to, were of the Order of St. Austin, commonly
called Sepulchrins, who Honor St. James the Apostle as their Founder; and by
their Regularity and Exact observance, had justly gained themselves so great a
Reputation, both at home and abroad; as hereby they had obtained a very ample
Foundation from the Prince of Liege, and so considerable assistance of others,
as to Build themselves a very fair and convenient Monastry.

But that which would have charmed others, even at her first coming and
entrance into the Monastry, gave little satisfaction to her; insomuch, that
the same Night she arrived, in return to all those Cordial expressions of
kindness, the Reverend Mother, and Religious showed her, and her Children; she
declared, that she thought that was not the place, Almighty God had called her
out of the World, to live in. So displeasing was it to her, to receive any
Worldly satisfaction, after she had made a Sacrifice of all those Earthly
Comforts which God Almighty had before bestowed upon her. However, out of
submission to her Ghostly Father, she took the Scholars Habit, on the 20th. of
September, the Feast of Our Lady's Presentation. And so great was her
deference, before she received it, to the Religious; that where ever she met
any of them, she used to prostrate her self, as a Mark of her profound respect
toward them.

The time of her Schollarship, was partly taken up with the solicitude, and
care she had for Sir John, who was still in England; partly with Pious thoughts
how to set out and Adorn the Church. Upon which account she sent to Sir John
for some Pictures, Hangings, and other Rich Ornaments, she had left behind her
in England; which she thought necessary for the beautifying the Church and
Altar. Upon the 10th. of March Sir John left London, and took with him all
those things she Writ for, excepting the Pictures she desired of St. John
Baptist, St. Austin, St. Mary Magdalen and St. Teresa: Saints to whom she was
particularly Devoted from the time of her Conversion; for which Reason I Name
them: He not being able to get them made time enough in England, for his
departure; but procured them for her from Antwerp. After a Prosperous Journey,
he arrived at VVatten in Flanders, the 20th. of March 1665. where he took the
Novices Habit, of the Society of Jesus, and the Name of Brother John Clare;
which as soon as he had acquainted her with, she resolved also to follow her
Ghostly Fathers Advice, in taking the Habit of her Order, upon St. Catherin's
Day, the 30th. of April following; together with Sir John's Sister, Mrs.
Elizabeth Warner, and his Kinswoman Mrs. Frances Skeleton, who accompanied her
from England. My Lady took at her Clothing the Name of Sister Teresa Clare;
she having had, even whilst a Protestant, a very particular esteem of St.
Teresa, upon the Reading her Life, which accidently fell into her hands.

Father Martha a Famous Preacher in the VValoon Province, of the Society of
Jesus; made her Clothing Sermon: And did it after such a manner, as proved one
of the greatest Mortifications, she had met with, since her leaving England. It
happened not long before, that a Carmelite-Fryer, having quited his Habit and
Religion also, to avoid just Punishment, had taken Refuge in Holland; whereby
he had given a great occasion of scandal at Liege: The Father to retrive that
Honor, which he thought Religion might have lost, by so foul an Action as this
was; extolled that which she had done (of quitting Heresy, and the World with
such an Heroical Resolution) to such a hight, as gave her so great a confusion,
that she was scarce able to continue in the Church: And most perceived the
Mortification she suffered, by the extraordinary Color, which his Encomiums,
and frequent Interrogation, whether what he said was true? brought into her
Face. But the happiness she felt at her Clothing, and the hopes she fed her
self with, of enjoying afterward a secure and perfect repose, in the State of
Life she had embraced; out-ballanc'd this present Mortification, and was too
great to continue long, without some interruption.

One would have thought at this distance from England, in a Catholic Country,
that there had been no fear of Persecution: Yet the Enemy found an opportunity
of giving her an Alarm, and cause of great disturbance, even in this place of
Repose; which happened as follows.

There came a Person of Quality to Town, extremely well attended; the first
Visit she made, tho she professed her self a Protestant, was to the Monastry;
where she desired to speak with my Lady Warner; pretending a Message to her,
from Sir Thomas Hanmer her Father: My Lady came to her her self, but (finding
she brought no Letters from Sir Thomas, and that she refused to make any other
declaration of her self or Quality; than that having told him of her coming
over, and that probably she should pass by Liege, he had desired her in his
Name to give a Visit to his Daughter and Grandchildren, whom she would find in
an English Monastry, in that Town) excused her Childrens coming to her; tho she
earnestly pressed to see them: Fearing there might be a greater design in this
Visit, than only kindness as the Lady pretended: Which that she might the more
easily prevent; and at the same time avoid the disturbance also, she found in
her Soul, by the distraction she received from her Childrens presence; she
resolved privately to remove them to the Vrsulin's: And the Queen Mother of
England having upon her Mothers account, (who as before related, had been Maid
of Honor to Her Majesty,) expressed a kindness to my Lady on all occasions; she
took the liberty of beseeching Her Majesty, that she would vouchsafe to take
her Children under her Royal Protection; who where otherwise in great danger,
either by suttlety or force, to be taken from her, and carried into England:
And at the same time, she humbly Petitioned Her Majesty, to signify to the
Superior of the Vrsulin's at Liege (where she had privately placed her
Children) her Gracious concern for them. Whereupon the Queen Wrote this
following Letter, Translated out of the Original in French, Dated from Colombe
July the 17th. 1666.

MOTHER,
I Have heard with a great deal of satisfaction, that the two Children of Sir
John Warner, are at present at the Ursulin's, under your Tuition: Tho I do not
doubt but you have all immaginable care of them; yet I cease not to recommend
them to you; and desire you not to permit, that they be taken from your House,
without Orders from their Father or Mother, who put them into your Hands; or
from those whom they shall order, to have care of them in their absence; and if
it should happen, that any other, by any means should endeavor, to take them
away from you, without consent of their Parents; not to permit it, without
advertising me first of it: And as I assure my self you will not fail to do
what I desire, as long as you shall be in that charge; so I make the same
request to those that shall succeed you: Wherefore I beseech God, to take you
into his Holy Protection.

HENRIETTA MARIA.


It Is supposed the News of this Letter, crossed and dassh'd the design of the
Person before mentioned; for soon after she rerurn'd into England; but would
never own, who she was; nor upon what account she came; more then is before
Related: Tho during her stay at Liege, she made several Visits to my Lady.

Having upon this occasion deprived her self of that Natural satisfaction, the
sight of her Children must necessarily give her; and at the same time freed her
self from that care and trouble, that accompanied their presence; she resolved
seriously to apply her self to Virtue, and to a Practice of the foundation of
all Virtues, Humility. Wherefore, having a low Idea of her self, and to stifle
all Motions of Pride, and Self-love; she desired to be equal, or even inferior
to the Lay-Sisters. Once openly declaring her Motive; saying, It was too great
an Honor, for her to be a Servant to the Spouses if Christ. It was usual for
her to be lost in time of Recreation, and the surest place to find her in, was
in the Scullery, or in some such like humble and abject Office. Thus she forgot
her Quality, submitting her self to the lowest Employments; taking more delight
to be an abject in the House of God, than others can do in all sorts of Worldly
Honors and Satisfactions: Nor was she only desirous by these Exterior Actions,
to Cloth her self with this Virtue of Humility; but endeavored to imprint the
same Interiorly in her Mind: For tho she was of a peircing Wit, and ripe
Judgment, yet she would desire the Lay-Sisters to Instruct her; whilst the
Fathers themselves, who had dealt with her, owned, that they found her to be
far above any of her Sex, that they had ever treated with. All these Actions
were accompanied with such a serenity of Mind, so sweet an affability, and with
such Conformity to the Will of God, together with such a Love for that Virtue
he practiced, who bid us learn of him to be Meek and Humble; that she seemed to
be without the least constraint in the performance, of even the Humblest
Offices; doing them, as if they had been natural to her; and as if she had all
her Life time been brought up in them.

CHAP. II.
How she came to be called to a more Rigorous State of Life, or to a stricter
Order.

IT happened upon occasions, that she was now and then called to the Grate;
many finding (especially a Canon of St. Lambert) great advantages by the Visits
they made her; which were always spent in Pious Discourses: That which others
would have looked upon, as no great hindrance to Recollection; she took so much
to heart, that she was resolved to break of all Commerce with Creatures; that
her Conversation might wholly be with her Creator; and tho she obeyed cheerfully
the Reverend Mother in going to the Grate; yet she failed not to complain to
her Ghostly Father, that she found by experience, that all Conversation which
was not with God, left behind it a certain bitterness, and heaviness of heart:
That she thought she was called to a more strict retreat and concealment, where
nothing might draw upon her the praises, or admiration of others; in which
solitude she did not Question, but to find a greater liberty, to give scope to
her fervor; and thereby, to taste more liberally the sweetness of Divine Union;
and to exercise with more freedom, the Mortifications of an Austere Life; which
her present State did neither require, or even permit. She was so Enamored
with these sentiments of Austerity and Solitude; and so great was her fervor,
that prostrating her self upon her Knees, she begged of him in the presence of
the Blessed Sacrament, that he would give her leave at least, to make a Vow
never more to go to the Grate, whilst she stayed there; and in the mean time
earnestly Prayed him to offer up some Devotions to Almighty God for her, to
know what was his Divine Will concerning her removal: She desiring nothing but
what she thought was most pleasing to him. He told her the inconveniences,
that would follow such a Vow, and promised her that he would particularly beg
of Almighty God, to give him light how to direct her; he bid her to have a
great confidence in God, and rest assured that he would assist her, to compass
what he inspired her to do, if it were his Will, that she should remove; or, if
it were not, would give her comfort, and satisfaction in the place, and
Practice of the Rule, where she was at present.

Some there were, who judging her Confessarious might too far comply, with her
inclination to Solitude and Mortification, and thereby also second her
intention of a change; did forbid him any more to Visit her; hoping if it were
so, that his absence might moderate these desires, which probably, he by too
great a condescension, might have augmented. But she extremely resented his
absence; and the more, because she found, he was blamed, for Counselling her to
do, what he had dissuaded her from; and therefore, suffered in the Opinions of
others, upon her account: This went nearer to her, than what she suffered her
self; and to take away this misunderstanding; she importuned the Reverend
Mother, that the Father might once more come to her; whose Counsel was wholly
necessary, before she could make a final determination what to do: In the mean
time, in the middle of these continual conflicts, and agitations of Mind, she
suffered a kind of Martyrdom. At his return, he so efficaciously answered all
her Objections, for her removal, and so clearly convinced her, that it was Gods
Will she should stay and settle there; that she began to think of continuing,
and making her Vows; but withal told him, that the chief Motive that made her
fix upon this Resolution, was, that she might be no hindrance to Sir John (now
Brother Clare) to make his; imagining, that if the same desires of removal,
remained after her Profession; the Church would give her liberty, of entering a
stricter Order; which she could as well do, two or three Years after, as then.
Whereupon he replied, that tho the Church could indeed give such a permission;
yet it would never grant it, upon account of several great, and general
inconveniences, that would accompany such a removal; which the good of a
particular person, tho very great, could never recompense. Wherefore, if she
ever resolved to quit the Order she was in, she must do it before she made her
Vows, or not at all: And therefore desired her, seriously to recommend the
matter to God in her Prayers, as he would also do in his.

Whilst she was thus making her fervent Petitions, before the Holy Sacrament of
the Altar, to beg light from Heaven, how she might serve her Spouse upon Earth;
on a sudden, she saw a Stream of fresh Glaring light, come from the Blessed
Sacrament toward her; from which she felt such an Interior joy in her Soul;
that the Mistress of the Novices, then kneeling by, perceived a change in her
countenance; and asked what might be the cause of so sensible an alteration, as
she perceived in her? She would gladly have concealed this, if Obedience would
have suffered her; but that prevailing, she told the reason of it. Whether this
favor was to confirm her in the Mystery of the Real Presence (the doubt of
which gave the first occasion of her Conversion) or to strengthen her in the
desire of solitude and suffering; none but God, who bestowed it, knows; but
after this she still persisted with more earnestness, than before, to gain her
Ghostly Father's consent, for her removal to a stricter Order; where she might
be unknown: She was more and more persuaded that her design was no illusion;
seeing she found, that the manner of her Conversion, and her resolution of
embracing a Religious State, having taking Air abroad; both Religious, as well
as Seculars showed upon that account, a great esteem and admiration of her:
Which she thought no small hinderance to her Perfection. And having heard, that
the Carthusianesses (besides the constant rigor they live in) are never
permitted after their entrance, either to receive a Visit, or Letter from any
friend; she earnestly begged of her Confessarius to use his endeavors, for her
Admission amongst them, without discovering her Quality or Condition; that then
she might enjoy that happiness, which she only desired in this World, Viz. A
constant Communication with God, without the interruption, or conversation of
friends. This retreat was still the joyful Object of her Mind, where
absconding, she might attend to the exercises of an Interior Life, and
Evangelical Perfection: And understanding, that those that were not Virgins,
could not enjoy amongst them, the Privilege of being Superior, or of bearing
any other Office; she hoped by becoming a Member of such a Community; to see
her self the least, and last of a Religious House: In expectation of which
happiness, she extremely comforted her self. These kind of thoughts had so
possessed her Soul, that she could never enjoy her self whilst she stayed at
Liege; and hence it was, that the respect and civility showed her by the
Religious, was so great a Mortification to her.

Her Ghostly Father Communicating her desires to the Prior of the Carthusians
at Liege, then going to a General Chapter of the Order, had gained a promise of
his best assistance, for the obtaining her wishes; and in the mean time, she
Wrote to Brother Clare, to desire him to give her leave to enter amongst the
Carthusianesses: And that she might not put any obstacle to his designs, nor
hinder his proceeding in them; she enclosed this following Act of Renunciation,
which she thought would have been sufficient to Legalize his Profession;
without her making of hers. The General of the Socity of Jesus, at the request
of his Superiors, unknown to him, having dispensed with the Second Year of his
Noviship; that her Year of Probation being ended; she might make her
Profession, and he at the same time, might be able also to make his.

I Do here in the Sacred Presence of Almighty God, offering my self entirely to
him, Renounce all Right whatever I have to you, and do here Solemnly Vow
perpetual Chastity to him: And do promise you before God and his Angels; that
with the assistance of his Holy Grace, I will Live and Die in Religion; and
will immediately, when I go from hence, put my self under the Obedience, of
another Monastry of Enclosure: This I again confirm, beging of his Divine
Majesty, to accept of me; and in Sign that I will never Revoke it, I subscribe
my Name,

TREVOR WARNER. In Religion. TERESA CLARE.


Brother Clare having received the Letter, with the Contents before mentioned,
and also with the foresaid Renunciation; with consent of his Superiors,
resolved to go to Liege: Finding it impossible to give her that satisfaction by
Letters, which he hoped his presence might do. He arrived the 4th. of June at
Tongers, four Leagues distant from that City; where, there being a Monastry of
the same Order, as well as a House of the Society, he thought they might meet,
with less noise, than they could do at Liege. But she instead of coming
thither, sent her Confessarius to excuse her not coming, and to persuade him to
return to VVatten: Telling him, That his coming to Liege would persuade all
People, that it was to invite her back to the World; especially, when shortly
after, they saw that she left the Monastry (which she defign'd to do, as soon
as she had obtained her admittance among the Carthusianesses) and begged of him,
not to hinder this her design. Yet* he notwithstanding (by the Advice of the
Superior of Tongers) resolved to go to Liege; the Rector of that place, having
before invited him; where also he might have his Advice, about what future
Measures he had best to take. The Rector Counseled him to Visit her in the
Monastry, whether he went; but she would not be seen, nor speak with him, even
at the Grate without a Companion with her: Alleging, that this precaution,
was to prevent such Discourses, as she had before intimated would otherwise be
raised, upon their meeting. Brother John Clare was very well satisfied
herewith; but at length told her, He could never give her his consent, to go to
the place she had pitched upon; because he could never be assured, whether she
was content, or satisfied in it; and without that assurance, he could neither
make his Profession, nor permit her to make hers; because she could neither
speak with any one, nor send to, nor receive from any one a Letter; nor
transmit her Mind to him, if any dissatisfaction should happen to her.

Tho this reason did not fully satisfy her; yet the absolute refusal, which
she received from the General Chapter (which declared, that none but Virgins
could be received into that Order; and that she was mis-inform'd, if she heard
that any other might be so, upon any account whatever) caused her to lay aside
all thoughts, at least of entering among the Carthusianesses; but took not away
her Resolution, of going to a stricter Order: And tho she could not resolve
whether to go; yet she had absolutely fixed her resolution, of leaving the
Monastry where she was; to give more scope to Mortification, to which she found
her self very effcaciously moved.

CHAP. III.
How she resolves to enter amongst the Poor Clares. Her departure and journey
from Liege, and her arrival at Graveling.

BRother Clare finding her fixed upon a removal, and having acquaintance at the
Poor Clares at Graveling; which was the first Order, that she had seen in these
Countries, and then seemed to like it very much; hoped the proposal of her
going thither, might take effect; if she would not stay where she was: He being
desirous, that she should rather be amongst those of her own Nation, than
Strangers; since frequent examples have showed, how easily the Enemy raises
jealousies, and disgusts, in those that enter among Externs. For this reason he
procured a Book of the Rules of St. Clare, which he gave her to Read; and
desired her, for his comfort and satisfaction (if she liked the Rules which she
would find rigorous enough) rather to make choice of that place to go to, than
any other. She promised to Read them, and was so taken with them, that she
resolved, if her Ghostly Father approved of it, immediately to betake her self
to that course of Life: Which was a great subject of joy to Brother Clare; tho
on the other side, it was a great trouble to him, to find that his Sister and
Kinswoman; who had entered with her, resolved to take the same course: For he
feared, that it might be a prejudice to the Monastry they left; which had been
extraordinary kind to them. Since the World, which is too apt to censure, might
think, that three Religious going away together, could not but have some Motive
of disgust, or dislike to the place; and did not purely leave it, out of a
desire to serve God, in a stricter and more austere Order.

He therefore, opposed his Sisters and Kinswomans going, and had just reason to
dissuade his Sister; because her Constitution was so weak, and her health so
impaired; that the Doctors would not permit her, even to comply with the
Church-precept, in keeping her fast in Lent: Whereas, in the place she designed
to go to, she must keep the Lenten Fast as long as she lived. He told her
therefore, That this desire of hers could not be good; it being too
presumptuous, and inconsiderate; to expect, that God should work a Miracle, for
the satisfying of her own humor: Especially, when in doing so, she went against
the Advice of those, whom he had substituted in his place, to direct her: That
it was an ordinary Artifice of the Malignant Spirit, under pretense of a
specious and plausible good, to draw several out of the way, God had placed
them in: This Discourse so sensibly afflicted her, that she fell a weeping;
saying, That she was sure, that God had called her to a stricter Order, and
that his Power and Grace, was always proportionable to his Call, The Reverend
Mother and the Religious, finding them so earnest to go, upon so good and solid
Motives; were so kind, as to second their Requests; and prevailed with Brother
Clare for their removal. This then being the good effect of Brother Clare's
Journey to Liege; he resolved to hasten back to VVatten; to dispatch all things
necessary for their Admittance at Graveling, that they might the sooner be able
to follow him.

Amongst other Discourses, which Brother Clare had with Sister Teresa Clare,
she thanked him extremely for the favor of a Letter, which he had procured her,
from Father Philip Marini; a Missioner that came from China to England, and
other parts of Europe; to gain Companions to Labor with him in that large
Vinyard: With whom Brother Clare coming acquainted (whilst after her departure
he stayed at London) obtained from him a Letter of encouragment to her; which
being from so Apostolical a Man (who had spent many Years in the hard and
dangerous Mission of China, not only exposing his Life, during those great
Persecutions, that happened, whilst he was there; but also, in taking so long
and dangerous a Journey for the procuring help for those many Souls, that he had
hopes to reduce by their assistance, to the true Faith) and as she also
professed, having given her so inexplicable a comfort in her undertaking, I
thought worth your purusal, as it is Translated out of Italian, in which
Language it was Writ.

MAy the Grace and Love of Jesus Christ, increase in our Souls to Gods greater
Glory. Writing to a person of your Merit, I ought to do it in such a manner, as
may give you an assurance of the reward of that Eternal happiness, which you
will certainly gain; not by running, but flying from the Liberty of the World,
to the narrow confinement of a Cloister: Thrice happy are you, that have so
great an assurance of Heaven, by so Noble and Generous a forsaking of all
pleasures upon Earth; the better to embrace, what the World flies from, the
Cross of Christ: Following hereby, St. Teresa's admirable Lesson, Either to
suffer, or die for Jesus. This is that Jewel, which the wise Merchant gave all
he had to purchase; and did not repent his bargain: And tho he became Poor in
the Eyes of the World; yet he recovered his loss, by purchasing a Good, which
was of greater value, than all other Goods: How happy then, is the Renunciation
of that Blessed Soul, which leaving all loses nothing; still finding all, in
the Poverty of Jesus? The Apostles Patrimony, after they had forsaken their
Parents, Friends, and all they had, was a pure nothing; which put into the
Hands of Jesus, as St. Gregory says excellently well, so multiplied, as to
become all things; Totum reliquit qui sibi nil retinuit; He left all, who
retained nothing to himself. Behold therefore, the nothing, which the Apostles
reserved, but this nothing put into the Hands of Jesus, grew to the hight of
that Glory, to which they were called. At this Day (so many Ages after their
departure out of the World) we proclaim their Dignity, and give them greater
Titles; than ever the Ambition of Monarch could Usurp. I would say more of
this subject, but time will not give me leave; therefore, to send you my
Opinion about leaving the World, my sentiment is; that it is not sufficient to
go out of it, to live in Religion; unless we bid adieu to, and renounce all
things, that are united to it. The difference between those who leave, and
renounce is this: He that leaves, can return to the thing he left, but he that
renounceth, loses the Dominion, over what he renounces; in the same manner,
as a Man does his Right, to what he has Sold. This was that which our Savior
said to the Young Man; Vade, vende omnia quae habes, veni, and sequere me; go,
Sell all you have, come, and follow me; which words agree with those others;
Nisi quis renunciaverit omnibus, quae possidet, non potest m^us esse
Discipulus; Unless one, renounce all things he Possesses, he cannot be my
Disciple. What therefore is it to be a Disciple of Christ? It Is to have Christ
for our Master, Father, Spouse, Lord, God, and All. But what need I Write after
this manner to you? Who I know practice better things than I can suggest.
Wherefore, I Write not, to give you instruction, but to praise your Generosity;
by which you have not only left the World, with your Body; but with your Soul
also, have renounced all it is Vanities; and every thing that relates to it.
Heaven preserve you by it is Holy Grace, in your good Resolutions till Death:
Pray for me your Poorest Servant, in our Lord.

PHILIP MARINI. Of the Society of Jesus.


She owned, that this Letter, and the Conversation which she sometimes had,
with two great Servants of God (one an Augustine Friar, who had received such
extraordinary and Celestial favors, that he was even forbidden to Celebrate in
public; having several times been Elevated in time of Mass, to the astonishment
of the beholders. The other was a Secular Gentleman, called Mr. Ruisson, whom
we shall afterward have an occasion to speak of) had been of very great
advantage to her, in her Spiritual progress in Virtue: And as the Contents of
this Letter were truly Pious; so were their Discourses, of nothing but of God.
They speaking of Heavenly things, so feelingly, that she was wholly transported
with their Conversation, and encouraged by their Discourse, to seek Retirement
and Mortification, as the best means to find God: Especially by the Augustine:
Who for many Years, with the leave of his Superior, had lived only upon Bread
and Water; together with such Raw Roots, and Herbs, as came out o their Garden.

Upon Brother Clare's going away, Sister Teresa Clare, desired him to send some
particular convenience for their Journey, together with a Priest, that might
accompany them; thereby to avoid the trouble of all sorts of People, which is
unavoidable in the common way of Traveling. Wherefore, as soon as he returned
to VVatten, he obtained of Father Richard Barton, then Rector of St. Omers,
leave for Mr. Edward Hall (then a Secular Priest, now of the Society of Jesus)
to conduct her, his Sister, and Kinswoman, from Liege: Where, as soon as Mr.
Hall arrived, she hastened to begin her Journey, and obtained leave of the
Reverend Mother, and Community, that she, and her two Companions, might keep
their Religious Habits; till they should change them for that of another Order:
Assuring them, that it was not for want of any Edification, or good Example in
their House, that they removed to another; but to comply with those impulses,
which they had received from God; to serve him in a stricter way of living; for
which those Principles and Rudiments of Religious observance, which they had
received there, had disposed them. They began their Journey the 24th. Of July,
leaving her Children at the Vrsulins, where she had before settled them.

Before her departure, give me leave to present you, with the Character Father
John Manners, of the Society of Jesus, her Ghostly Father, gave of her; to
whose Counsel she always gave a very great deference, and never failed heartily
to disclose unto him, her inward state and condition: Whereby you will see, how
much she improved in all sort of Virtues, the short time she staid at Liege:
Which I Transcribe out of a Letter he Writ to a friend of hers, after her Death.

THe sharpness of her Wit, and the Solidity of her Judgment, served her as most
fit Instruments, to Contemn the World and Contemplate God. Her Judgment taught
her to discry how vain a thing it is, and how much beneath those that are
called to Gods service, to attend or care for any thing; but the promotion of
his Honor. From hence Sprung in Sister Teresa Clare, an immense desire, to be
as entirely separated from the World in Body; as she was resolved to leave it
in Mind. Her Will served her only to promote Piety; she was never weary of
Spiritual Discourses; and fed her Soul with extraordinary contentment, whenever
matters of Devotion were handled: But out of pretense of being young in Faith,
she very humbly and earnestly desired to be Instructed; and her Queries were
commonly about the highest Points of Faith; although even her Speculative
Questions, tended still more to move affection, than satisfy curiosity: And
notwithstanding these were matter of her Prayer, yet they served as bare
proposals: For the Will had always the greatest share in them. By little, and
little, she grew so inflamed with the Love of God, that she cared to hear of
nothing, but what increased this fire. My chiefest labor was to moderate her
fervor, and assuage her heat, in all which I found her most Humble and
Obedient; she professing to me, that when she knew God's Will, she would spare
no labor to put it in Execution. It is hardly credible, how excessively great
her desire to suffer for God was, and with what Courage she encountered, even
the greatest difficulties. I was half terrified, to see her strugle with
Nature, for the Mastry; and comforted, to see how resolved she was, not to
yield an Inch; yet she did cheerfully let go her hold, when it was judged fit
for her to relax. I confess, that my insight in sublime matters is very dimm,
and was very unfit to manage her Soul, that was continually Mounting on High. I
bless the Divine Goodness, that did me the favor, to let me treat with a
Person, so truly Spiritual. Thus he. And her Mistress of Novices, added these
particulars to the same person, concerning her, That Sister Clare having lived
in that Community above a Year and an half, she was never known by any one to
fail in any Religious Duty, never heard to speak an unnecessary word, or found
guilty of the least imperfection.

It would be too tedious to set down a particular Diary of their Journey. I
shall therefore, only in short give you such an account, as Father Hall, a
Person of known Virtue and Prudence, gave of it; in his own words. Sister
Teresa all along her Journey, and the rest with her, tho it was extremely hot,
and their Religious Habits incommoded them very much; yet never failed to
perform their Duties, as if they had been in a Monastry. She and her Companions
for the most part Sung their Office all along the way; she rigorously abstained
from eating Flesh, and was resolved, as far as I would permit her, to live up
to the Rule of the Poor Clares. When she was worst treated, she was most
content, and the difficulties of her Journey seemed a pleasure to her; because
they gave her an occasion of Mortification. Coming to Sicham, a place of great
Devotion to our Lady, of which the Fathers of the Oratory have care; where
several considerable Miracles had been wrought by her Intercession; she,
notwithstanding so tedious a Journey, would go to the Church, even before she
took any refreshment. Where to my wonder and shame (not being able to follow
her Example) she kneeled two full hours, without any motion of her Body: She
Communicated at the same place the next Day, and spent most part of the Morning
upon her Knees: Every Day she came to Confession; and every other Day she
Communicated. An Oratorian Father, who casually joined himself to us in our
Journey, was so Edified with her Carriage and Discourse, that at parting, he
declared to me; That he was not only assured, she was a Person of Quality, but
a Saint also. Nor was her Discourse only Spiritual, whilst the Oratorian was
with us; but it lasted all along our Journey: Except only; when she Sung the
Divine Office, or Read a Spiritual Book; for she had an excellent French Book
with her, which she turned into so good English, for the benefit of her
Companions; that I verily thought, it had been in that Language, she Reading it
so currently, and without the least stop, or he sitation; till such time as
accidentally taking it up to Read, to my astonishment I found it French. Her
desire of Mortification and Austerity in her Journey was extraordinary; and if I
had permitted her to act according to her Inclination, she would certainly have
prejudiced her health. At length he concludes: Whatever I observed in any
Saints Life, that was great, and good; I think truly I faw it Coppy'd out
exactly in Sister Clare. Her patience and resignation to Gods Will, in all the
dissasters of the Journey (which were not a few) her Humility and Charity to her
Companions, and her Obedience to me, were admirable; and manifested the true
Spirit of God in her Soul. It was my good Fortune, tho unworthy of it, to be
her Confestor this little time; and I am obliged to thank God as long as I
live, for conferring such a favor upon me. Indeed, whilst I was in her Company,
I thought my self in a Religious House: She never omitting any of her
Conventual Observances, as before said, but constantly keeping the same
distribution of time for all her Actions, as if she had been in the strictest
Enclosure.

Being arrived at St. Omers, Father Michael Kinsman came thither from VVatten,
to meet and conduct her, from thence to Graveling; where he was then Director,
or extraordinary Confessor. Here she, together with her Sister and Kinswoman,
received the Bishop's Benediction, and his permission also to Enter at
Graveling. As they passed thither, they Dined at VVatten, where Brother Clare
was then a Novice; who on purpose absented himself, having beforehand agreed
with her to do so. From thence she arrived at Graveling, betwixt Eight and Nine
a Clock at Night, the Third of August: 'Twas designed that she should be
Clothed, at her first arrival at the Monastry; but coming so late, the
Ceremony was deferred till next Morning. Perhaps Providence so ordered it, to
give her an occasion of entering upon that course of Life, with a greater Act of
Mortification, the better to prepare her self for it, than otherwise she would
have had; which a Servant of the Monastry discovered. One may easily imagine
how weary she was, after the fatigues of so long and tiresome a Journey; and
without doubt her tender and delicate Body must necessarily have been much
weakened, and her strength almost exhausted, by the heat of the weather, the
heaviness of her Habit, and the practice of such Austerity, as she had obtained
leave for upon the way; yet she would not accept of those Poor preparations,
and conveniences, which were provided by the Poor Clares, for her repose: For
as soon as she thought all were retired, she forsook her Bed, and lay all Night
upon the bare Boards, denying that ease and solace to her wearied Limbs, which
they seemed indispensably to require; and which such a Lodging as she left
might have afforded. But not content with this, the Servant heard her take a
long and sharp Discipline, suitable to her fervor, and (as I suppose) to
dispose her self the better, for such a Life of Mortification, as the next Day
she was to undertake.

The next Morning, she and her two Companions were privately Clothed, changing
only one Religious Habit for another: For she would by no means admit of any
public Ceremony this time; because the confusion, which she had received at her
Clothing at Liege, was yet too fresh in her Memory. Providence at their
Clothing gave them such Names, as showed their united desires, and endeavors
to attain to the hight of Perfection. My Lady Warner had given her the Name of
Clare of Jesus, Mrs. Elizabeth Warner her Sister-in-law Mary Clare, and Mrs.
Frances Skelion her Kinswoman, that of Frances Joseph.

CHAP. IV.
Sister Clare of Jesus begins her Noviship, amongst the English Poor Clares at
Graveling; her Humility, Zeal, Courage, cheerfulness, and blind Obedience, in
this her new enterprise.

SIster Clare of Jesus enters upon her Second Noviship, with no less fervor,
than cheerfulness, and with far more contentment than she had done the first.
The Austerity and fervor of the Religious, together with their constant
alacrity, animated her with a new Spirit of Devotion; and their frequent
Spiritual Discourses, gave her Soul it is desired food. That neatness joined
with extreme Poverty, which they practiced, was an extraordinary comfort to
her; and gave her great encouragment in her new, tho hard enterprise. She now
resolved to lay a solid foundation of Virtue, and to acquire a perfect
knowledge of her self, by a self-denial. The Industry which she showed, in
seeking low and abject Offices, sufficiently declared her great Humility: And
lest that respect and kindness, which the good Religious at Liege paid her,
should be renewed here; she begged to be looked upon, and employed, as the last
in the House. And tho soon after her Clothing, the Plague broak out in
Graveling, yet it was no manner of discouragment to her; for she still
maintained the same evenness of temper, and all her actions were done with the
same vigor and diligence as before: And lest Brother Clare should be concerned
for that, which did not in the least trouble her, she desired leave to Write to
him; which she did as follows.

Dear Brother Clare.
It is by Obedience, that I now Write, to assure you of all our healths. I
beseech you join with us in thanking God Almighty, for his wonderful
preservation of us. I have not received by change of Habit, or any thing else
the least cold, or distemper, God can strengthen when, and where he pleases. I.
desire you for his sake not to let that Charitable concernment you have for me,
cause the least trouble; since I assure you, that as to health, I was never
better; and for contentment of Mind. I now enjoy that, by God's great Mercy,
which I never was acquainted with before, in my whole Life. The least fear of
the Sickness never yet seized me; however, Pray for me, that I may be well
prepared to receive it, and then it shall be most welcome to me: But here are
too many great Servants of God, to fear any danger among them, against which
they make so many good Prayers. I need not tell you, that I Pray for you, since
you have obliged me to do it by Obedience; and I engage you to do it for me by
Charity: By the practice of which two Virtues, I hope we shall one Day meet,
where we shall never any more part

From Graveling August 12. 1666. Your unworthy Sister in Christ, CLARE of JESUS.


One clause of the foresaid Letter (wherein Sister Clare says, That she had no
cause to fear any thing, against which so many Servants of God Prayed so much)
gives me an occasion to make a short digression; which I the more willingly
take, because I am sure it will be to the Readers satisfaction: Tho I fear
'twill be displeasing to the persons it relates to, to whom I know nothing is
so Mortifying as a Relation of what redounds to their praise; yet I hope they
will pardon me, since the passage it self, tends so much to God's Honor and
Glory. Whilst the Plague raged at Graveling, one of the Religious fell Sick,
with all the Symptoms of that dangerous distemper. A Sister whose Office it
was, to attend the Sick, came to Mother Abbess, and desired, that she might be
removed out of the Common Infirmary; for fear of infecting others. Mother
Abbess replied, That there was no need to remove her, and that she might stay
where she was, without any damage to the rest. But the Zeal which this good
Sister had in her Office, moved her to urge it the second time, which Mother
Abbess refused as before; yet so great were the Sisters importunities, as at
last to extort this extraordinary Reply from the Abbess; Good Sister be not
afraid, for if our Blessed Lady be in Heaven, none of my Religious shall take
any harm from this infection. She as well as all that heard it, received this
Answer with astonishment; and tho they found it afterward true, yet they could
never tell from whence their Abbess received such an assurance, as she here
expressed, till after her Death; when her Confessor told them, that when the
Plague began, our Blessed Lady appeared to her, with all her Religious under
her Mantle; assuring her, that she would protect and preserve them from the
Plague. The Reader would not wonder at the Relation of this Passage, had he
been acquainted with the extraordinary Sanctity of Mother Tailor, the foresaid
Abbess; but what I shall have hereafter an occasion to relate of her, will give
him such a knowledge of her Piety, and confidence in God, that he will not
think it strange he should reward it with so singular a favor.

But to return to take a view of the Example of the Novices Humility. She was
never heard to say any thing in her own defense, whereby she might extenuate,
or excuse any imperfection; but was still ready to own, and take any fault upon
her, even where there was none. Her Modesty would never suffer her to admit of
any commendation from others; nor her Humility from her self: Tho she was often
put upon such Discourses, as would inevitably have forced another to it. When
by Holy Obedience she was desired to speak of her Conversion, she was so far
from Attributing any thing of it to her self, that she would wave all her own
endeavors and attempts; and strive to persuade them, that it totally proceeded
from the good Counsel and Example of others: Nor would she ever speak of her
Family, of any passage in the World, of Brother Clare, or her Children, even
when a fit occasion was offered, unless she was Commanded; and then with so
much neglect and contempt of her self, as created an esteem, and wonder in
those that heard her. Her carriage was most submissive and respectful to her
Superiors, very affable and civil to her equals, and so obliging to inferiors,
as if they had been above her; and that she had owed a deference and obligation
to them. Many were her inventions to procure her own confusion. Her ingenious
Humility would make her find a fault in her self, when there was none, and be
glad of any occasion, that might give her a subject of Mortification.

When such kind of inventions failed her, she cast about to be put upon some
humble and abject Office, and would strive to have it no less laborious, than
humble; yet showed no less promptitude of Obedience in leaving the same
employment, when she was found in it, and desired to do so. She was a great
lover of those things, which carry repugnance to sense, never showing the least
appearance of aversion; but was as composed and recollected in doing them, as
if she had been at her Prayer, or any other Spiritual Duty. On all other
occasions she carried the same Spirit of Humility, and Gravity along with her,
beging that she might by no means be exempted, from any thing that was to be
done in the Community. She was very often used to say with great affection,
That nothing however inconsiderable it was, ought to be counted little, which
is capable of pleasing or displeasing God.

All these Humiliations were performed, with an entire submission to her
Superiors Orders: She always looked upon Obedience as a faithful Guide, that
could never mislead; or as an Oracle, which never deceived; and as the
distinctive Mark, and Character of solid Devotion. Wherefore she never
consulted her own thoughts, or followed the heat of her own fervor, without
consulting those, whom she reverenced as the Representatives, or Vicegerents
of God. Tho these Examples of her Humility were signal; yet, methinks, they
were transcended by the following instances of her Obedience.

Her chief endeavors were not only to execute what was Commanded, but wholly to
conform her Will, to the Will of her Superior. This was the Test by which she
tried all her actions: The Voice or least Sign of a Superior was sufficient to
make her break of the Letter just begun, to quit any employment, as if she
never had entered upon it. The least Rule or Ceremony, seemed great in her
Eyes, not considering so much what was Commanded, as by whom. This readiness in
obeying was attended with a wonderful simplicity, the more remarkable; because
as God had given her a ripe and solid Judgment, so she by a constant Sacrifice,
had so Captivated her own sense and opinion, that she arrived at the highest
degree of Obedience, called that of the Understanding. There are so many
singular passages of this kind in her Life, and so many undeniable proofs of
this Virtue, that it would be no little injury done to this Holy Person, not to
set down some of them.

It is a custom amongst the Religious, who are professed, to have their black
Vails new Dyed, once a Year; and all being ordered to give out their Vails for
that purpose, she with a Religious simplicity puts hers, tho White (as all
those of the Novices are) amongst the rest; such was her blind Obedience, and
so exact was her endeavor to interpret and execute her Superiors Commands,
according to the Letter. Another time Mother Abbess and she being in private
together, the former was on a sudden called away, upon some urgent business to
the Speakhouse; who designing to return presently, bid her stay there till she
came back: But the business she went about, so took up her thoughts, that she
forgot her Command to the Novice, and returned no more: This Obedient Soul
stayed here four Hours; and tho in the mean time the Bells Rung to several
Conventual Observances; yet she remained fixed to the place, where Obedience
left her; and had continued longer, if the Mistress of the Novices, at last
missing her, had not called her away. What follows is yet more surprising.
These Nuns lie constantly in their Habits, and are therefore in the beginning
not accustomed to the way of covering themselves, when they go to Bed; the
Mistress therefore, out of a desire to give her a particular assistance,
knowing how much her tender Complexion required it, bid her not cover her self,
till she came to do it; which she forgetting, they that called her in the
Morning, wondering to see her lie without a Coverlet in that cold Season, told
her Mistress of it; which put her in mind of her own forgetfulness, and gave
her a knowledge of the Novices blind Obedience.

There also happened another time, that a Sermon was Preached at a Clothing
upon this Text; Nigrasumsed formosa; I am black but comely; from which the
Preacher took occasion to exhort the Spouse, that was to take the Habit, to
Humility; expressing how they were to make themselves black to the Eyes of the
World, to become more fair in the sight of God: The Religious sometime after
speaking of this passage, Mother Abbess jestingly said to Sister Clare, You
also Sister Clare must black your self; she presently after, took occasion to
go out into the Kitching, where she black'd her Face and Hands all over, with
the Soot of the Chimney, and returned again to the place of Recreation, with
that Modesty and cheerful Gravity, as if nothing had happened. This sight,
instead of exciting Laughter in those that were present, moved them to Tears,
to see what an humble Sacrifice, she had made of her self to blind Obedience.

CHAP. V.
Her Interior and Exterior Mortification, her singular Devotion to the Blessed
Sacrament, her Modesty and Recollection.

It Is no wonder, she arrived to such a pitch of this simplicity, since even at
her first coming to Religion, among other practices of Virtue, which she
enjoined her self; this was one, she noted in her Book of good purposes: By the
assistance of God's Grace, I will endeavor at least Ten times a Day to
contradict my own Will and Judgment, and willingly take all occasions which
the Divine Providence shall give me of doing it. So that without doubt, she
took all those accidental occasions given her of contradicting her own
Judgment, as sent her by the Hand of Divine Providence.

Nor were her Mortifications less than her Obedience; there was care taken
least she should exceed in the Macerations of her tender and delicate Body,
which she would have treated with the greatest rigor, if leave had been granted
her. To see her at Meals, was enough to have moved one to Devotion; her
Modesty, and Composure of Body; her Attention to the Reader; her Moderation in
Eating and Drinking, drew all Eyes upon her; tho she seemed to have none of her
own; attending wholly to the Interior Presence of God; thereby making the most
ordinary Actions Meritorious. But this constant Self-denial, and search of her
greatest Mortification in all things; had by degrees so dried up her radical
moisture, that she suffered a continual Thirst; which out of Love to
Mortification she would not endeavor to quench even at Meals, and would never
Drink between them, tho with leave, the Rule, permits it. But we need not
wonder from whence such an exact compliance with all these foresaid Virtues
proceeded; since they had such an Origin, as she her self owned to a Sister;
who asking her, How she could be so exact in all things? She replied, How can
we be otherwise, when in all things we behold God? This celestial Answer moved
her to ask another Question; Viz. What she would do if she were told, that she
should Die within half an hour? She Answered, That she would neither change the
place, nor the action, that Holy Obedience had set her about; because she knew
that in doing it, she performed God's Will. The other to try the esteem which
she had of the present Action, carried the Question a little farther, and asked
her, Whether she would not procure in such a case; the Sacraments of the
Church? She smilingly Answered, That none had a greater Esteem and Veneration
for the Sacraments than she had; yet she preferred the doing of God's Will
before any advantage, she could receive by them.

If her Recollection were so great in indifferent Actions, we may gather that
'twas not less in those Religious Duties which immediately tend to God's
service. Her Devotion to the Divine Office, appeared sufficiently by the care
she had of a punctual performance of it, in her Journey from Liege before
mentioned. She never mist the exact time of coming to the Quire; and tho she
had leave of Mother Abbess to sit up an hour after Quire, to spend that time in
Mental Prayer; yet she left the Quire at the same time with the rest of the
Religious; choosing rather to perform that Devotion in her Cell, and deprive
her self of the advantage of doing it before the Blessed Sacrament; than appear
singular tho in so good an action. The Religious who lay next her, suspecting
that she retired to her Cell, rather to Pray than Repose, would now and then on
set purpose, mistake her Door for their own; and still found her prostrate on
the ground, exercising her self in Penance as well as Prayer; and Reverend
Mother Abbess Testifies, that she never entered her Cell upon any occasion, but
she found her i this humble posture, which she also constantly practiced in the
Quire; till such time as she was forbid to do so, lest it might impair her
Health.

But there was nothing, to which her fervor carried her more, than to make
frequent Visits of the Blessed Sacrament. Her Devotion to it, being without
doubt augmented by that favor, which Almighty God bestowed upon her at Liege.
This made the Religious look upon her as a true Child and Heiress, of her Holy
Mother St. Clare. She was so Devout to this Mystery, that fixed in a deep
Contemplation, she would kneel several hours together before it; without the
least outward motion of her Body: Where she was very often bathed in Tears,
that proceeded from those joyful Affections, which replenisht her inflamed
heart. What these were, we may gather from some of them, which I shall here set
down, as I have extracted them out of her Book: In which she used to Treasure
up those graces and favors, that Almighty God at such times replenisht her
with; lest for want of Registring them, she might become forgetful of his
benefits. Knowing very well that the best means to obtain new Graces from
Almighty God, is a grateful memory of those benefits he has already bestowed:
Gratitude no less obliging his Infinite Goodness, to a liberal distribution of
his Heavenly Treasures; than ingratitude forcing him to stop the current of his
boundless liberality.

Her Affections before the Blessed Sacrament.
My God my All, when will you drown this drop of Bliss, which you have given
me, in the boundless Ocean of your Goodness, from whence it flowed?

Lord give me your Love, it is the Life of my Soul. The Body cannot live without
breathing, and what is the Breath of my Soul, but your Love? The beams
disappear, when they are disunited from the Sun. O Sun of Justice, what is my
Soul, but a beam of light; and how is it united to you, but by your Love?

Ah when shall I see nothing but you? Tho in you all Creatures? When shall I
give my self all to you, and be nothing to my self? Grant Dear Lord, that when
I give my self to Exterior Affairs, I may remain undevided from you, and
unchanged by them; and after I have finished them to your Glory, I may return
to you, without any spot or wrinkle of Vanity in my Soul; since it is your
goodness that gives me, both to Will, and to Do.

Ah when will that happy hour come, that shall give me an entrance into
Eternity? Here Flesh and Blood hang heavy upon me, and Times and Seasons
interrupt my Union, with my Beloved. When will that happy moment present it
self, wherein I may cry out? I have found him, whom my Soul Loves. When my
Visits to you, shall be no more determined to Time nor Place; but be boundless
as Eternity. Where neither Heat nor Cold, Hunger nor Thirst, Pain nor Grief,
Night nor Sleep can interpose; to make a moments separation: But an Eternal
Day, an Everlasting Joy, an Endless Bappiness, shall attend this un-interrupted
Union. Such a felicity as neither human understanding, can fathom; nor the
Luxurious fancy, invent. O! when will that joyful Day appear in which I shall
behold your beautiful face? When shall I be dissolved, and be with you? For
ever to assist, before your Throne of Glory, in Bliss Everlasting.

These, and many other such like, were her daily entertainments before the
Blessed Sacrament. These were the effects of that pure refined Love of God,
which was rooted in her Soul. No Melancholy Humor, extravagant Devotions, o^
Scrupulous Reflections on her Life past, entered her Thoughts; or hindered her
constancy in Gods Service. The Considerations of his Benefits, made them Soar
far above the ordinary pitch of Creatures; and to take no rest in any thing,
but in the Love of her Creator. And it is no wonder, that those comfortable
Communications she received, in these Visits of her beloved; made her desirous
of a nearer and stricter Union with him, by a daily Communion. But because it
was not the Custom of the Convent, she contented her self with exercising the
highest Act of Conformity; which is, To leave God for God.

By these Devotions we may imagine, how well she spent her time before the
Blessed Sacrament; and by what follows, the means whereby she obtained these
comfortable Inspirations: For if we regard her comportment, whilst she was in
the Quire; we shall find that she was never taken notice of, to speak to any
one; no, not to the Superior her self. Her Modesty and Custody of her Eyes,
were no less Instrumental than her Silence; for the obtaining a perpetual
Communication with God. And tho the Community never perceived her Eyes off the
Book, in time of the Divine Office; yet what they extremely wondered at; was,
that if any thing were wanting in the Quire; none sooner perceived it than she,
nor could be more ready to fetch it; which made all believe, that she had a
particular Inspiration at those times, of what was wanting.

When any thing required her Presence, or Assistance out of the Quire, in time
of Divine Office; she was so faithful, in a Pious Recital of it afterward;
that nothing could make her hasten, or run it over, faster than ordinary: In
which she found such comfort; that not content with the daily Obligation, that
all Religious have to recite it; she bound her self by a particular Vow, to a
constant performance of this Religious Duty. And was so strongly touched in
Reading it, that once Mother Abbess taking notice, that in time of the Office
she wept extremely, asked her, If any thing troubled her? Whereupon, she
Answered, That her want of due compliance, with what she had promised God a
careful performance of, was that which afflicted her. This Answer filled
Reverend Mother Abbess with amazement, who had always been an Eye Witness of
her constant and exact performance of this obligation; having often observed,
that she seemed always to be, as it were rapt, in the Presence of God, whilst
she recited it. For as her Interior seemed to be totally fixed upon Heaven, so
her Exterior was so fortified against distractions, by a strict guard over her
Senses; that 'twas almost impossible, that she should be the least defective in
this her promise to Almighty God; Wherefore, these Tears were undoubtedly,
rather a Mark of the Purity of her Conscience, and an effect of those Spiritual
Gusts, with which his Divine Majesty had replenisht her Soul, as a reward of
her Fidelity; than a sign of any neglect of her Duty; as her Humility moved her
to apprehend.

One would think, that this rigorous silence, this exact custody of senses, and
this continual Recollection, would have rendered her Conversation, less
diverting at those times when Obedience gave liberty to speak, and made her
less disposed, to help toward the innocent Recreation of others. But they were
so far from it, that never any effects of dullness or melancholy were observed
in her. And 'twas at all times an affliction to her, to see any appearance of
what looked Morose or mis-becoming, in any of the Religious, and much more in
her self; and when she perceived by any ones looks, the least sign of
melancholy or discontent; she used her utmost endeavors to divert them, in
particular. God had been very liberal in giving her a sweet and obliging
Nature, and she was resolved never to hinder it is course; but dispense those
Talents as liberally, as she had received them. This made her Humor affable,
her Conversation attractive, and extremely welcome to all. And the Religious
were used to say of her, That she perfectly imitated St. Paul's example:
Omnibus omnia facta, becoming all to all. So cheerful, so pleasant, and so
condescending to every ones capacity and humor, was this good Novice.

This comportment of hers depended purely upon the good Judgment, which God had
bestowed upon her; which gave her a happy conduct in all her Actions; and such
an insight into the humors, and constitutions, of those she converst with; that
thereby, she qualified her self, for all forts of Tempers. She Knew when to be
free in Recreation, and yet never to abuse that freedom: She could presently
discern what sort of Spiritual Discourse (for they never used any other) was
most agreeable to the Genius of the Persons present; and this circumspection,
not only gave her an extraordinary command over her self; but also a great
Authority and Power, with those she kept company withal. It was a Prerogative
singular to her self, to be at once free and prudent, cheerful and circumspect,
graceful and enfie, to be esteemed and respected, and to be loved and
reverenced, by those who were most familiar with her.

Nor can I rest satisfied with this general Character I have given of her
Humor; but must descend to those particulars, which the Religious have given
me: Who took notice, that whatever difficulty or indisposition she suffered,
she ingeniously dissembled them in time of Recreation: Being always resolved,
to uphold and maintain the hour allotted to this innocent Pastime; by a
provision which she had made, of such pleasant Spiritual Stories; as served not
only to divert the hearers, but excite them to the Love of God: Yet was never
known to express even the least sign of impatience whilst others related
theirs; having no inclination to ingross the Discourse to her self, in which
she carefully waved whatever in the least related to her self or Family. Her
punctual observance of the Constitutions in speaking spiritually, was the more
wondered eat by the Community; because she having been a Person in the World,
whose Quality and Education, must necessarily have furnished her with many
extraordinary passages, the Relation of which would have been very diverting;
yet nothing was ever heard from her Mouth, which tended not either to the
Praise of Virtue, or to the Love of God. Neither did the energy, with which she
spoke of Heavenly things, give any trouble or Mortification at all, to those
that heard her; no more than their Discourses did ever give her; which appeared
by that constant and extraordinary serenity of countenance, she particularly
seemed to put on, in time of Recreation: Which was hereby no less promoted, and
animated by her, whilst others spoke, than when she spoke her self. But whilst
with a constant and un-interrupted Progress, she thus cheerfully advanced in
the pl asant path of Perfection; behold God (who knew her fidelity) permitted a
great and unexpected Storm, to be raised against her; so much the more
sensible, because it deprived her not only of a near Relation; but by his Death
occasioned a delay of that happiness, self so much thirsted after, and thought
her self, even ready to possess; Viz. that of her Profession, or Espousals with
Christ.

CHAP. VI.
The happy, though untimely Death of Mr. Francis Warner; and how this, and
several other cross and unexpected accidents, which happened to Sir John;
retarded her Profession: To which the Enemy endeavored, to make even her self
instrumental; and how she discovered, and generously overcame, his crafty
Temptations.

THat I may the better perform my promise, made in the Contents of this
Chapter, of giving the Reader an account, of the happy tho untimely Death of
Mr. Francis Warner; I hope 'twill not appear too great a digression, from what
I have undertaken to Write; if I relate a little at large such Circumstances;
as may conduce to a perfect knowledge of his Death: Especially since 'twas an
un-expected hindrance, of her happy Profession, she so earnestly desired to
make.

In the Month of January, 1667. Mr. Francis Warner came over to give his
Brother a Visit; thereby to express his Gratitude, no less for the Estate he
had given him, than for having been, under God, the chief occasion of his
Conversion; as also to be convinced, as well from his Mouth, as he had been
from his Pen, of the great satisfaction he experienced, in the Religious State
he had undertaken. In his way to Liege, as he passed through the Low Countries,
he Visited several Religious Houses; and amongst others, the English
Carthusians at Newport: Where the admirable order and cheerfulness, he beheld
amongst them, amidst so great Solitude and Austerity; had already, by the
influence of Gods Grace, so touched his Heart; that he resolved to follow his
Brothers example in quitting the World; as soon as he could compass it, by a
settlement of his Affairs in England: But said nothing of this his design, till
one Night at Liege, he and his Brother being alone together, he asked to borrow
his square Cap; which, pulling of his Periwig, he put on; asking his Brother,
If it became him: Who Answered, That it became him very well, and that he did
not doubt, but if God gave him inclinations to a Religious State, that he would
find the same happiness and satisfaction in it, as he himself had done. Mr.
Francis Warner hereupon, replied with Tears, That he was sorry he had not
profited by his Education at School, as he wished he had done; since by reason
of this neglect, he could not now be so happy, as to be his Brother also in
Religion: But added, That he had made a Resolution of becoming a Carthusian; in
which Order, Literature was not so absolutely necessary, as in the Society:
Where they tended, not only to their own Perfection; but also to the
Perfection of their Neighbor: And that he doubted not, but that he should meet
with the same content amongst the Carthusians; which he expressed, to have
already experienced in the Society: Wherefore he resolved to hasten back to
England; there to settle his Estate, and to take Graveling and Watten in his
way thither; and that at the last place, he designed to make the Spiritual
Exercise; to see whether this Vocation to be a Carthusian, were from God or no;
and if he found it were, that he might thereby be strengthened, to overcome all
obstacles, that should oppose or retard the execution, of what God had inspired
him to undertake.

You may well imagine how overjoyed Brother Clare was at this welcome, tho
un-exspected News; and with what seasonable Counsels, he seconded his Brothers
Pious intentions: Who resolving forthwith to leave Liege, Brother Clare desired
him, to take his two Daughters, who were still with the Vrsulins, along with
him; to conduct them to the English Monastry of Benedictine Dames at Gant:
Whether he carried them very safe. Hence he continued his Journey toward
Graveling; both to Visit his Sisters there, and to give them an account of the
welfare of his Neeces, and of their removal from Liege to Gant. You may imagine
how overjoyed they were to see him; but the joy his presence gave them, was
nothing in comparison of that which the welcome news, of his design of leaving
the World occasioned. From thence he went to VVatten, where he made Eight Days
Exercise: In which retirement, by the light and unction of the Holy Ghost, he
was thoroughly convinced, that his Vocation unto the Holy Order of Carthusians,
was an Inspiration from Heaven: Wherefore, having ended his retreat, he
hastened to Newport; as well once more to take a a view of that place, in which
he resolved to end his Life; as to Embark from thence for England.

He stayed here longer than he intended, in expectation of fair weather; but it
continued Stormy so very long, that his impatience, of compassing the happy
State he aimed at, caused him to urge the Master of the Packet-boat, to venture
out to Sea, in that Stormy weather. The Master, overcome by his earnest
entreaties and large promises, hoisted Sail; but instead of steering out of the
Harbor, fell foul on a Sand banck; where the Vessel stuck so fast, that the
flowing Tide quickly filled it with Water; and the boisterous Waves washed those
over Deck, who came up to save their Lives: Amongst these was Mr. Warner, who
as the Waves carried him into the Sea, cried out to those, who to save
themselves were got upon the Shrouds; conjuring them, if they escaped, to let
the Carthusians know the manner of his Death; and how earnestly he desired,
they would Pray for the Repose of his Soul. Some few that escaped, after the
Tide was fallen so low as to permit them, acquainted the good Fathers with his
earnest request; which they not only granted, by Praying for his Soul; but
expressed the greatness of their Charity, by an earnest search after his Body;
which that it might be the better found out, they gave a description of the
Rings, they had observed upon his fingers: Which being brought by a Seaman, to
a Goldsmith to be Sold; the Goldsmith found them to be the same, the
Carthusians had described to him; and told the Person that brought them, that
if he would discover where the Body was, he would procure him a reward, that
should not be inferior to the value of the Rings; which he undertaking to do,
the Goldsmith ordered him, to acquaint the Procurator of the Carthusians where
it was; who went with him to the Seashore, where he uncovered the Body, he had
buried in the Sand: Which they knew to be Mr. VVarner's, by it is wanting those
fingers the Seaman had cut off, not being able otherwise to get off his Rings.
The Carthusians presently took care, decently to Bury his Body amongst their
own Religious; he having plainly declared himself a Carthusian in desire; tho
Providence permitted not, his being one in effect: Whose innocent Life,
deserved as a reward, a Death; which tho sudden, should not be un-prepar'd. It
happened on the 3d. of April 1667.

But to return to the Discourse I have interrupted, with the Relation of this
passage; his sudden and unexpected Death was a double Mortification and
affliction to Sister Clare; first, for the loss of so near a Relation, for whom
she had a very particular esteem; secondly, because by his Death her Profession
would necessarily be deferred: She evidently foreseeing, that this unfortunate
accident; would cost Brother Clare a Journey into England, in order to make a
new settlement of his Estate, which could not possibly be dispatched, by the
Month of August; which was the time prefixed for the folemn making of their
Vows. But the same hand that sent these Afflictions, intended them as a trial
to improve their Merit; and for that end, largely distributed his Divine Grace,
to encourage them to a cheerful Resignation.

The necessity therefore of making another setlement, summoned Brother Clare to
England; and forced him with sorrow to reassume his Title, together with his
Estate; and with them those troublesome concerns, from which he had a little
before, so happily disengaged himself.

Being come to London, the Enemy resolved to give him as uneasy a welcome, as
he had had a Journey thither; for his Steward (to whom he had given notice of
his arrival) sent an express to inform him, that he himself was put in Prison;
that his House had been searched by Order of the Lord Lieutenant of the County;
that they had taken away all the Arms they found; and had set a Guard upon it.
This fell out about the same time that the Dutch designed to Land in England,
and appeared upon the Coasts of Suffolk; about Seven Miles distant from his
House: Whereupon some Malicious Persons gave out, that he was privately come
into England, and lay hid in his own House at Parham, with a great many more
Papists, he had brought along with him to join the Dutch. Sir John (whose
Family as well as himself, had always been Loyal Sufferers for the King) was
more concerned to be accused of such black Crimes, as Treason and Rebellion
were; than he would have been, for any other accusation, they could have laid
to his charge. Wherefore, he went immediately to a friend and Neighbor of his,
then in London, and Major of the Kings Guards; desiring him to acquaint his
Majesty, with what had past; but the Major thought it more proper to accompany
him to the Countess of Suffolk; to acquaint her with what had been done by her
Husbands, the Lord Lieutenants Order. They went together to my Lady, whom the
Major informed of all that had past; and moreover assured her Ladyship; the
King would not be well pleased should he hear of these proceedings, against a
Person of whose Fidelity and Loyalty he was convinced; and for which he himself
was ready to Answer. Upon the Majors Testimony, my Lady Writ a Letter to her
Husband the Earl of Suffolk, in which she acquainted him of what the Major had
informed her; desiring him to make Sir John what amends he could, for what, by
his Authority had been acted against him; which Letter she gave to Sir John;
who immediately took Post, and delivered it himself the next Morning to my Lord;
from whom he received as good effects of it, as could be expected; for my Lord
gave him presently an Order, for the taking his Steward out of Prison; for the
discharge of the Guards, that were set upon his House; and for the Restitution
of his Arms. My Lord moreover assured him, that the former Orders he had given,
were rather to secure his House from the Rabble, that threatened to pull it
down; than out of the least suspicion, or doubt of his Loyalty. Most of the
Informers and chief Actors in this business, living at Framlingham, a Mile
beyond his House, he chose first to go thither; lest the news of his return to
his House, might give a second alarm, and create new troubles. Upon his way,
he met several Gentlemen of his acquaintance, who accompanied him to the Town
aforesaid; where he was no sooner entered, but the chief Inhabitants came to
Congratulate his arrival: Expressing their sorrow, for what had happened in his
absence; and desiring him not to believe any of them the cause of it: And
moreover, manifested their joy for his return, by Ringing of the Bells.

This second Storm the Enemy had raised, being thus happily appeased; Sir John
returned to London; there to make a settlement of his Estate, upon his second,
and now only Brother, Mr. Edmund Warner, a Merchant in London. Here Sir John
met with hit Father-in-law, Sir Thomas Hanmer, to whom he gave an account, how
he designed to settle his Estate; telling him, he intended, instead of the Six
Thousand Pound, which according to the Articles of Marriage, he was obliged to
give his Daughters, to settle upon them the Manor of Boyton, worth Four
Hundred Pound a Year. Sir Thomas instead of taking kindly this great addition
to his Grand-childrens Portions, as Sir John expected he would have done,
declared; that he looked upon these Lands, he designed to give them, as next to
nothing; because they were Abbey Lands, which never thrive with the owners; but
like a Moth, by little and little insensiblely eat up the rest of their
Estates. Sir Thomas told him moreover, that he easily perceived what his design
was, in giving these Lands to his Daughters; Viz. That out of a Scruple of
Possessing them, they should be in a manner forced to make themselves Nuns;
that thereby they might restore them to the Roman Catholic Church, to which
they formerly belonged. Sir John wondered that a Protestant as Sir Thomas was,
should Scruple at the Possessing of such Lands, or have a doubt of the just
Title of their owners; which that he might free him from, Sir John gave him the
same Answer he had received, from his Master of Novices, in the like doubt;
Viz. That these Lands came not to his Ancestors by gift, but by Purchase; and
that the Pope had given Cardinal Pool, his Legate, in the Reign of Queen Mary,
Permission to dispense even with Catholics, to enjoy Abby-Lands. But these
Reasons not satisfying Sir Thomas, as they had himself; Sir John promised him
to engage other Lands for the Payment of his Daughters Portions, in ready Money;
and gave order to his Lawyer to make the settlement accordingly.

Whilst he was thus busied in getting the Writings ingrost, the Enemy still to
retard the execution of his design, to which the settelment was a necessary
means; raised another Storm, far different from the former, and far more
surprising and afflicting; by reason he made use of his Lady to do it; and
moved her also, by such pretenses, as were so much the more dangerous, by how
much they carried an appearance of Piety along with them: And consequently were
the more apt to deceive her, who sought no less Gods greater Glory, than her
own greater contempt in all things. Of all which Father Martin Green, then
Rector of VVatten, informed Sir John by a Letter, in which he also desired him
to desist from making any further settlement, till he had heard again from him;
because the Enemy being not a little busy in disquieting Sister Clare; he knew
not whether his Malice might not end, in persuading her to return again to the
World; having by crafty pretenses dissatisfied her with the place, where she
was. In the mean time Father Thomas VVorsley went to Graveling (who had been
for some time her Director) to try if he could dissipate such difficulties, as
the Enemy had raised and endeavored to foment; not much unlike those he had
suggested at Liege; Viz. That God called her still to a stricter Order, than
this was; that here she found too much esteem and respect; and therefore it
would be more grateful to God to go amongst Strangers; where she might be freed
from the too great civility, and kindness, she experienced amongst the English:
That there were Orders still stricter than this, where she could find no
impediment of entering, as she did among the Carthusianesses. Hereupon, she
Mortified her self above what the Rule allowed, thinking a Liberty in that kind
lawful, and upon this, gave what scope she was able to those Austerities, to
which this Rigorous, but false Spirit drew her, upon pretense to gain light
from Heaven. All which without doubt could not be from God, since the Austerity
of this Rule was as great, as her strength of Body was able to bear: And that
you may the better judge of this, I will give you here a short account of their
strict and severe manner of living.

The Convent is Commodiously and Neatly Built, but a true Emblem of Poverty:
Their Cells are not long enough, for one of an ordinary Stature to lie at full
length; and therefore, when they sleep they almost sit upright in their Beds;
which are not two foot and a half broad; and the Cell is no broader, besides
what the Bed takes up, than to give room, enough for a single person to go in
and out: All their furniture, is a little low Stool to sit upon, and a
Straw-bed and Bolster (or if Sick a Pillow of Chaff) upon which they lie in
their Habits, having a Blanket to cover them. They wear no Linen; go
barefoot, having only Sandals; rise at Midnight; abstain all their life time
from Flesh; and keep such a Fast all the Year, except Sundays, as we do in
Lent. Their Cells were then only separated with Bricks, without any Plaistring
upon them, but the present Bishop of St, Omers, in his last Visit, gave order
to have them Plastered. Their Tables in the Refectory are never covered, and
they Eat only in Earthen Dishes. Notwithstanding this extreme Poverty, the
Neatness that is observed in their Dormitory, Quire, Refectory and Cell; is
such, as Charms the Eyes of all, that by the Bishops leave, are permitted to
enter: And the cheerfulness of these Mortified Souls, their fresh color, the
healthful and youthful looks even of Ancient Persons, are such; as strike
admiration into those that behold, and converse with them. One would have
imagined, that Sister Clare needed not to have thought of any other Rigorous
Life, than what she found here; and that she could not think of greater
Austerity, than was here practiced. However, at length Father VVorsley,
convinced her, that this seeming Call to greater Mortification, was only a
deceit of the Enemy, to hinder her from the happiness of a Religious State, she
so much desired to embrace: Which he endeavored first to make her defer, that
he might have the more time to exercise his Malicious design upon her, of
making her quite lay aside, what she had so Piously undertaken. These Reasons
so successfully moved her, that howsoever cunningly the Train was laid by the
Enemy, it took no effect; for she, following the advice of her Confessor,
resolved for the future to regard such thoughts as Temptations; and that
nothing hereafter should ever hinder her from a speedy execution of what she
had before so earnestly desired; Viz. The making of her Profession in this
place. Whereupon, finding again that Peace of Mind return, she had lost, ever
since she had given way to these Temptations; she was moved to express her
submission to the Will of God, declared to her by her Confessor, in this
following, humble and submissive Act; which finding in her own hand amongst her
Papers, I thought it would not be ungrateful to the Reader, to set it down at
large, having a Scruple to shorten what I found so solid and moving.

Her Act of Submission.
O most merciful Lord God, the Refuge of all distressed Souls; when I consider
that Immense Ocean of your Prerogatives, and Divine Perfections, in Relation to
my own nothing, and demerits, I am wholly confounded, and utterly ashamed to
appear before your dreadful Majesty, or to lift up mine Eyes toward Heaven.
But your infinite Goodness and Mercy, gives me confidence to acknowledge my
Imperfections; for when my stubborn, and disobedient Will was in the full
Career of my misted Life, your powerful hand was pleased to put a stop to my
proceedings; and to infuse the light of your Divine Faith into my Soul: Thereby
dissipating the thick Clouds of Ignorance and Error* which cast a Vail over my
ceceived Understanding. You were not only pleased to do this my God, but to
call me likewise to Religion; and when, advising with those Directors you were
pleased to give me, I found I had made a wrong choice at Liege, and thereby
occasioned my own, and Brother Clares affliction; you kindly brought me thence,
and according to your sweet Providence, tho I was so miserable as not to know
and acquiesce in it, placed me in this Holy Community. Nor could I here be
content, but must still be wandering (tho my God you know I thought it was to
please you more) being so deluded and blinded, as to make my own choice, and
reverse the Doom, that you had fixed; till you put me again into the right way.
O! let me know my unworthiness, of such favors, that I may unfeignedly depress
my self, and exalt your greatness and goodness in my Soul: Let me have a true
desire to be contemned, and despised by all, and trod upon as an abject Worm.
Wean my Soul from all desires, that may contradict your Will; make me ready to
forsake my own Sense, trample self-love under my feet, and wholly transform my
Will into yours. Give me patience to suffer, any injuries, pain, poverty,
sickness, shame, or any thing else, that you shall think expedient for me, and
shall in mercy send me. I deserve worse than what I have named, and I desire to
suffer more; that I may have the more resemblance to my suffering Savior, whom
by my transgressions I have so often Crucified. O! my dearest Lord, I am
heartily sorry, and grieved to the very bottom of my heart; that I have
offended so good a God, and thereby deserved an Eternal Punishment: But your
Mercy has spared me hitherto, to the end I might be converted and live. Pardon
me therefore, O my compassionate Father, Pardon your now repenting and
returning Child: O! that I could live my life over again, and correct my former
Errors; I would assuredly square all my Actions to that most certain Rule, your
Holy Will. From henceforward, I fully purpose and resolve to make what return I
am able to your many favors. Your holy preventing Grace made me a Catholic, the
same assisting me, I resolve, firmly and constantly to adhear to this Church,
of which you have made me a Member, and out of which there is no Salvation;
I Will entirely embrace her saving Faith, and practice her wholesome Doctrine to
my dying Day. Your Holy Grace made me a Poor Clare, by the assistance of it, I
will live and die one. To the Throne of your Divine Majesty, I humbly present
these my Desires, Intentions and Resolutions, to be there Ratified and
Confirmed by the Merits of my Dear Redeemer Christ Jesus; and by the
Intercession of his ever Glorious Mother, the Virgin Mary. For the speedy and
exact execution hereof, I crave with all Submission and Humility, the
Assistance and Prayers both of the Church Militant and Triumphant.

CHAP. VII.
Her Letter, in Answer to one Sir John Writ upon the news of her desires to
leave Graveling. New hindrances of her Profession, by the delay of the
execution of a Commission out of Chancery; and Death of Mother Tailor, Abbess
of the Poor Clares.

SIr John Warner, knew nothing yet of this resolution, but upon the Letter
which he received from Father Green beforementioned; he Writ forthwith to
Sister Clare, and desired the Abbess to give his Letter Sealed into her own
hands; and that she might have the same Liberty of transmitting her Answer,
without showing it to any one. In his Letter, he signified his concern, for her
thoughts of leaving Graveling; that he feared it was a deceit of the Enemy, to
make her lay aside at last the happy enterprise she had undertaken of quitting
the World; telling her, that if these Trials she had made of a Religious State,
gave her an occasion to repent of her undertaking, it was better sooner than
later, to declare her Mind, before he made any farther settlement of his
Estate; and that he was confident she could not be so far ignorant of his
Affection, as to think, that to make himself happy, he would expose her to so
great a Misery, as the entering into that State against her Will, would
occasion; and therefore as he had left the World purely in obedience to what he
thought God's Call, and not out of any want of that reciprocal Affection, he
was obliged to have for her; so, unless she had the same content in this State,
as he had found; he should not look upon it as a real Call from God, but as a
trial only that Almighty God had given him, of his Obedience; seeing, that
promise he had made to her in Marriage, obliged him not to make that separation
they were about, without her free and full consent; and therefore, desired her
freely to discover her Mind to him, assuring her; whatever it was, it should
not in the least lessen that constant Affection, she had ever receiv d from him.

This Letter came not to her hands, till after she had taken a Resolution of
staying, and making her Profession at Graveling, and therefore, understanding
the trouble he was in (which was a great affliction to her) she immediately
Answers his Letter, to put him out of that pain, which the Letter he had
received from Father Green, concerning her desires to remove from Graveling,
had occasioned.

Dear Brother,
I Must confess your apprehensions have filled my heart with sadness; but
blessed be God (who gives strength to all) I doubt not, but all will conduce to
the making us more pleasing in his sight. I received your Letter, and Read it
with that liberty you desired, and now Answer you with the same freedom;
wherefore, I beseech you be assured, that all I shall say comes from my heart,
as speaking in the presence of God, and without consideration of any Creature.
And first as to my self, after beging upon my Knees, that you will forgive me
the infinite loss of time, and trouble I have caused you, both in Spiritual and
Temporal concerns; I do assure you by Gods great mercy, I desire nothing in
this World, but to make my Profession in this Blessed Order and House; and that
without the least motive arising from you, or any thing imaginable but God's
holy Will; who of his unspeakable Goodness has himself as it were (if I may
presume to say so) placed me here, where I may truly serve him. I hope since he
has given me this real desire, he will be pleased to move this Holy Community,
to accept of me, tho he knows how unworthy I am of it; but I have not as yet
begged that Voices. I cannot but think Gods Mercy, and your Industry will soon
compass an end of all Affairs; so that we may soon make our Profession. Now as
to Temporal business, I do not only from the bottom of my Soul resign all right
to what you of your Charity had given me, but to all the other Rights and
Titles whatever, (except the Portion for this House, agreed on at parting) and
I bless God a Million of times, who gives me Grace and leave to do it. If I had
as many Worlds it would be (as I hope) my first Act to leave them. I was not
worthy to have been favored by God with great things, to have given them back
again to him, but in giving you to my dear Savior (which I do with all my Soul,
and with all joy and thankfulness, to his Infinite Goodness, who gave me this
Grace) I must needs say, that I present him more, than Riches can comprehend:
And if I would have begged of God, to have given me one, of whom I might have
made a most perfect Sacrifice, and in whom I only, and purely lived by Ch^^st
and passionate Affection, it must have been your self. Therefore, all blessing
honor and praise be to his Divine Majesty, who is all, and does all, and from
whom all good proceeds: Whom I most humbly beseech, to give us his Holy Grace,
so to think on him now, that we may think it an injury to our Oblation, to have
any thought of one another hereafter; but in him, and in order to his Honor and
Glory. Now let me desire you dear Brother, to take courage, and to behold our
dear Savior, who is not only with you, but will sweetly and efficaciously bring
all your business to a happy issue. Methinks I ought to assure my self he would
not have given you these trials (which I know have been very great and severe)
but that out of his endless Love, he intended at the same time to show his
strength in you, and make you more his: Since you command me, I shall most
earnestly beg of him, that he will so unite you to himself, that you become
that, for which alone you were Created: And I beseech you to beg this for me,
that I may be dead to all Creatures, as well as to my self, and live only to,
and in him. O Blessed State! When shall we arrive to it?

Your most unworthy Sister in our dearest Savior, CLARE of JESUS.


As soon as Sir John received this welcome Letter, he renews his Orders for the
finishing with all speed the settelment of his Estate, upon his Brother Mr.
Edmund Warner, as before mentioned; in order to which, the Lawyers acquainted
him 'twas necessary, that a Fine and Recovery should be suffered, to cut off my
Ladies Jointure, and to put his Brother into so full a Possession of the
Estate, as might take away all Scruples from those, he might treat with,
concerning a Match: For the doing of this 'twas necessary to send over a
Commission out of the Chancery; as also, Commissioners along with it, that
might both examine her, and testify to the Court her free Renunciation to all,
or any part of the Estate she might in Law lay claim to. Hereupon Mr.
Parmentier, went with Orders to take one Monsieur Moulin, a Merchant of Callis,
along with him to Graveling, named also a Commissioner, by the Court, for what
concerned this business.

Sir John also, Writ by the Post, to give my Lady an account of the
Commissioners, that were sent to examine her, whether she were contented to have
a Fine and Recovery pass in Chancery, to cut off all her future claim to her
Jointure, but the Letter never came to her hands; which seemed rather a new
product of the Enemies Malice, to give another disappointment to their designs,
than an accident of pure chance. My Lady having no notice at all of their
coming, prudently judged it unfit to meddle in the matter, doubting whether
they came from Sir John; since they neither brought any Letter from him; nor
had she received any other way notice of their coming, or of the business they
came about, than from their own Mouths. Whereupon Mr. Parmentier returned to
London; from whence he was immediately sent back with such Letters, as caused a
speedy dispatch of this Affair.

All things being thus upon the Point of a full and happy conclusion; there was
another unforeseen difficulty, which could not so suddenly be removed. Behold
the Abbess of the Monastry dies, and till another was chosen no conclusion
could be made, about the payment of my Ladies, and Mrs. VVarner's Portion: For
Mr. Edmund Warner, finding it inconvenient to raise immediately so
considerable a sum, as Two Thousand pounds, without prejudicing the Estate;
desired they would be content to receive the one half at present, and take
security for the other; for which the new Abbesses consent was necessarily
required.

The new Abbess, Reverend Mother Beddingfield, being chosen, she together with
the Community gave freely their consents, to accept the one half down, and
security for the other; and Sister Clare, who took all occasions imaginable of
humbling her self, begged of Sir John, that the Thousand pound that was to be
paid down should be specified, that it was paid for his Sisters Portion, that
she her self might have the comfort and humiliation of being received with
nothing.

CHAP. VIII.
Her concern about her Childrens Education, her Letters to Sir John, and the
Abbess of Gant, about their removal to Graveling, Sir John's return fom
England, their preparation for their Profession, her Oblation of her self,
during the Exercise, and their taking their last leaves of each other, the
Night before they made their Vows.

ONe might perhaps think, that this Zeal, she expressed for her own settlement,
had so taken up her thoughts, as to make her less mindful of her Duty toward
her Children; but that moderation and liberty of Spirit, with which she always
acted, permitted her not to do this, but moved her to be no less concerned for
their happiness, than her own; which that the Reader may be the better
convinced of, I presume it will not prove tedious to him, to Read these
following Letters; which for this end, I thought fit to set down at large, the
one to Sir John Warner, the other to the Lady Abbess of Gant, where her
Children were.

Dear Brother,
HAving first begged of our Blessed Savior, to direct me concerning the
Children, I must tell you my thoughts en all sides, and crave yours,
concerning what I write; that we may jointly resolve upon what is to be done. I
have seriously considered our Obligation of bringing them up either for the
World, or Religion; and I find they cannot possibly learn any thing, that is
material, as to Worldly breeding, till they be Eleven or Twelve Years of Age;
and am therefore apt to think, they will be as well here if not better, for
Four or Five Years, than in any place else: I speak in regard of them, and not
of my self. I having many apprehensions, concerning what I propose: For if they
be here, and I should hear they were not well, or they should complain of any
thing that might happen to them, 'twould be a cause of disturbance, not only to
my own Soul, but might probably make me troublesome, both to my Superior, and
the Community; and this perhaps without the least redress to the poor Children.
Moreover, should they be here, and not speak privately to me (which truly if
they do, will be no small prejudice and distraction to the quiet and
advancement if my Soul) how should I come to know, if they were contented, or
if they wanted any thing fitting for them, or not. Whereas, if they are in
another place, some one whom God should inspire with that Charity, might take
the liberty at least to acquaint you or me with it. But yet on the other side,
when I consider the care that our most dear and Reverend Mother Abbess, as well
as the rest of this Holy Family, will undoubtedly have of them; I do not see
any cause of this fear: Therefore what I chiefly apprehend (and propose to you
as in the Presence of God) is my own disturbance, without any profit to them: I
conceive the best way to avoid this, if you think fit to let them come hither,
will be, to have them here, as if I were not here my self; and I shall
endeavor to imagine it so: For it is impossible I should have any thing to do
in their daily concerns, with any repose of mind; yet if any thing
extraordinary should happen to them, I may be consulted here, as I should be,
were they in another place. I think if they come hither, it is necessary, that
they should have a good careful Servant, and I am sure you will be very
circumspect in choosing such a one. I hope the Widow Draper, if you can
prevail with her to leave her Family, might prove a fit one for them. I have no
such design, nor never had, as your Letter mentions; that they should wear this
Habit, as heretofore Convictrisses in this place have done: For I desire they
should wear no Religious Habit, till God Clothes them with one. As to their
Portions, I need not recommend them to your Care. I hope I may have your Answer
so soon; as that they may be here before our Profession, if you approve of
their coming.

Your unworthy Sister in our Savior, CLARE of JESUS.


The Reasons proposed in this Letter were sufficient to move Sir John to give
his consent for his Childrens removal to Graveling, who immediately procured,
and sent over the same Servant she suggested, as the fittest for them.

Reverend Mother Abbess being acquainted with Sir John's consent, for the
Children's coming to Graveling, cast about to find a convenient means to convey
them safe thither, which was the harder to be effected, by reason there was
then a War betwixt France and Spain. Amongst others, Mother Abbess consulted
the Pastor of Graveling, about this business, who very obligingly offered her
his service, to go himself to fetch them; whose experience and knowledge, both
of the Country and Language, made her accept his offer; he being the fittest
person they could have pitched on: By whom Sister Clare Writ to the Lady Mary
Knatchbull, Abbess of Gant, in the following Terms.

Reverend Madam,
I Presumed very lately to trouble your Ladyship in this kind, to the end I
might acquaint you with my desire of having the Children here before my
Profession. The favors I have received from your Ladyship, and the many
assurances Brother Clare has given me of your own, as well as of all your Holy
Communities extraordinary Charity to them; and the great content he received in
seeing the tender care your goodness was pleased to have of them; has so justly
raised my sense and gratitude, above my expressions; that your Ladyship must
not wonder if I say no more; than that I shall ever esteem my self obliged to
Pray for you, and all your Community; and bless God who was pleased to give you
so Motherly a tenderness for them; for which I hope you will meet the reward of
Eternal embraces, in the Arms of your dear Spouse Christ Jesus. Dear Madam,
when I assure you, that my desires of s^ttling them here, proceed wholly from my
self, without any other inducement of our dear Reverend Mother, now with God,
or of this, we now enjoy; than a favorable condescension to my request; or of
Brother Clare (who has kindly left them wholly to me) than his assurance of his
being perfectly satisfied with their staying at Gant: I presume you may well
think, I retain too much of Nature: But tho I will not excuse my self in that;
yet I must needs say, the great Affliction I suffer out of an apprehension that
my friends should endeavor to force them to England; makes me cast about how to
secure my Children from such an attempt; and the reason I have to hope, that if
they be with me, they will be more out of this danger, than any where else,
moves me to desire, for their good; even what I apprehend may prove an occasion
of suffering to my self; for there is no cross I would not willingly undergo,
rather than they should be brought up in England amongst Protestants, with
evident danger of their Eternal Salvation. I have Writ my Father word, that
it is very hard he should desire to take them from me, to put them under the
Tuition of another: And now I humbly desire your Ladyship, to assist me in
making good this Argument, by sending the Children to me. I confess yen must
have a great deal of goodness, to pardon my boldness in being thus tedious; but
it proceeds from an earnest desire, that you should not think, I remove them
upon any apprehension, that they wanted any thing; or had not more of your
Ladiship's care and kindness, than any thing but pure Charity could move you
to. So that I may well think, if it were not your great Civility that hinders
you, you would presently thank me; for freeing you and your Virtuous Community,
from so great a trouble and distraction. The Gentleman, who has the Charity to
come for them, is our Pastor, a Man of great worth and esteem in this place;
whose acquaintance with the People, and way of the Country, will I hope with
God's blessing, bring them safe hither, to

Madam, Your Ladyships most humble and most obedient Servant in Christ, CLARE
of JESUS.


This Civil Letter was kindly received by the Lady Abbess of Gant, who made an
addition to her former favors by the kind entertainment she gave the Gentleman:
For being of so obliging a Nature, as that a removal of the Children from her
sight, could not remove them from her heart; she thought she could not give a
better demonstration of her Love, than by complying with what their Friends
thought best for them. This made her part with the Children, with so much
cheerfulness, and satisfaction, as put the good Pastor into admiration. The
prospect she had of their being Fortunes, and of the probability of their
entering amongst them, if they stayed there; could not so far enter into her
thoughts, as to cause a regret at their departure: Which is a great
confirmation of that worth, prudence, and generosity; which all that know her
Ladyship, not without reason, admire her for.

When they came away, the Confessor of the Monastry sent this Character along
with them, in a Letter to Sister Clare. That Mrs. Catherine (who was the Elder)
had so Edified the Religious with her singular Devotion, Piety, and sweet
behavior; that they were all enamored with her; and that he believed they
were both predestined not only to be Religious, but to be great Saints: For
he had never seen such early tokens of both, as they gave. Thus in succeeding
Years, was that part of the Gentleman's Letter, so far fulfilled, that they
became Religious: As to the other part, their Modesty will not permit me to
enlarge upon their Virtues, and so must be silent; since they are now actually
living, and Professed in that Honorable, and Flourishing Community, of English
Benedictine Dames at Dunkirk.

Upon the 28th. of September, the Children came safe to Graveling; and it was
now above a Year since they had seen Sister Clare; yet neither length of time,
nor the disguise of a poor and abject Habit, was able to steal away the Memory
of so dear a Mother; wherefore, they ran to her, and with all the little hasty
joy they were able to express, hung about her Neck, often kissing her, and
making a Thousand innocent expressions of fondness, and affection toward her.
She in the mean time, to the great amazement of all present; did not suffer her
self to be in the least carried away, with the pleasing violence of their
endearments; but on the contrary, remained unmoved, just as if Nature had been
as dead in her, as she desired to be to the World. Her constancy in the Love of
God was not to be shaken by the tender and redoubled expressions of her
Children; nor did she in the least show any symptom of fondness or tenderness
of passion toward them; thinking it a Sacrilege, after the Sacrifice she had
made of them to God, to give way to her former Affections, or feelings of
Nature. This made her receive all their innocent Caresses, without the least
return: Which, as some of the Religious confessed, was a strange check, to their
sensibility; which they could not help, whilst they beheld this more than human
comportment of Sister Clare toward her Children: Knowing she loved them as
much, as it was possible for any Mother to do; by some particular passage they
had observed in her; which passion she so strangely stifled in this moving
circumstance, that it struck them with the greater admiration. Love generally
speaks in others, from every part; but in Sister Clare of Jesus, this powerful
Orator became dumb; Love conquered Love, the Energy of that, silenc't this, and
the Mother gave place to the Saint.

As their arrival was a trial of her Love toward God, so it proved the Test of
her Obedience to her Superior, his Vicegerent; for they were no sooner come,
than she had that task put upon her, which she so much dreaded; Viz. the taking
care of them. To this she most submissively yielded, tho nothing could more
thwart her inclinations. She had obtained at Liege, that her Children should
not come to her; but at Graveling she must suffer this Mortification, of giving
more way to Nature, than she desired: But God saw her now more able to bear the
one, and to resist the other: Tho she, to prevent the exercise of this care of
her Children, frequently begged to be Scullion in the Kitchen, and such like
humble Offices; which Mother Abbess still put off, by telling her. When they
were able to take care of themselves, then she should be employed in such
Offices as these; but till then she must think that employment most pleasing to
God, which Obedience put upon her.

As soon as Sir John Warner received the news of his Daughters arrival at
Graveling, he made what have he could thither, to accomplish that, which above
all things in this World, he had so much longed for; Viz. his Profession: Where
being arrived, he was received with all expressions of joy and kindness on all
sides; and finding Father Thomas VVorsley still at Graveling (whither he went
for the comfort and assistance of Sister Clare) he Writ to Father Green the
Rector of VVatten, now his Superior, to know whether it would not be
convenient, that they should make their Professions together at Graveling; and
if so, whether he might not also make his Preparation here of Eight Days
Exercise; under the conduct of Father VVorsley. Father Green consented to both,
and accordingly they began it. In the time of her retirement she made this
following Oblation of her self to Christ Crucified: Which as I found amongst
her Papers, in her own hand, so I doubt not but you will find it well worth
your Reading; and therefore thought good to set it down at large: Since it
contains such admirable Acts, that the exercise of them, will undoubtedly
conduce to your comfort, and progress in Virtue, as they did to hers.

Her Oblation to Christ Crucified.
O immense Ocean of Goodness and Mercy! O unmeasurable Abyss of compassion, and
overflowing Fountain of Love and Charity! O the only source of my Being, and
well-being! O my Crucified Savior, the only price of my Redemption! How late do
I come to refresh my Thirsty Soul in those copious Streams, that flow from your
Sacred Wounds? How long has my blindness, and ignorance detained me from
tasting the sweets of these Heavenly delights? A taste of which, is only granted
to Religious Souls. I come at length drawn by the Cords of your Divine Love; I
come divested of all Creatures, that my whole affection may be placed upon you,
my Creator, and Redeemer. O do not suffer alone, but fix me with you to your
Cross; do not reject a heart inflamed with a desire of pleasing you, and only
you. Accept a heart melting away with your Love: For I come to embrace your
Cross, bare and naked, which alone for the future, shall be my Inheritance. O
let me never be separated from you: But if my Soul be not yet perfect enough,
for this Holy Conjunction, let me bury all my imperfections in your Sacred
Wounds. O Fire! O Flame! Burn and consume my old defiled Garment, let me be
purified in the Ocean of your precious Blood; cleanse my Soul thoroughly, and
prepare an habitation in it for your self. Frame it as you would have it, and
then take full possession of it; for I am close linkt to your Cross, by the
strong Chains, and Bonds of Charity. I am burnt in the fire of your Divine and
purest Love, my heart is wounded with the consideration of your Sufferings,
whereby you have purchased for me an infinite Treasure of happiness. But what
have I done for you O Merciful Redeemer, or what can I do? Behold with the most
intense affection of my Soul, I freely and entirely give you my self, my life,
and liberty, my Body and Soul, all that I am, have, or can hope for. I give you
my dearest Husband, Children and whatever is dearest to me; and make this
Oblation purely for love of you alone: For whose sake I renounce and abandon
all Right to them and all other Friends, Kindred, Riches, Honors, Esteem,
Health, and whatever Prosperity and Comfort, this World can afford me. I
bequeath all to your free disposal, for I am entirely yours. This is my final
Resolution, this my last Will and Testament. Come therefore, O beautiful
beloved of my Soul, nothing but your dear self shall hereafter have place in my
heart; come therefore, and enrich it with your gracious presence; enter into my
Soul, cleanse it thoroughly from all Terene Affections; mould it a new, make it
wholly addicted to your holy Service, that it may never cease to praise, and
love you. Amen.

Thus this Holy Novice entirely gave her self, and all she had to God, a most
happy fruit of her Eight Days retirement. When she had finished this Exercise,
she begged the Voices of the Community, and of each one of the Religious apart,
that she might be admitted to her Vows; to which she added another very earnest
and unusual Petition; Viz. that she might be so admitted to them, as neither to
have Active or Passive Voice in Chapter. Every one granted her first request,
but of the second, she could not obtain a grant from any one; which was a very
considerable allay to that joy, she received by their kind condescension to her
first Petition.

Brother Clare, who now with his Habit takes again that welcome Name, which he
was forced for some time to lay aside, thought it convenient to desire leave to
speak with her alone, before they made their Profession; that he might be
assured whether she were entirely satisfied in the State, to which she was
about to tie her self, by a perpetual obligation. Wherefore, he consulted
Father VVorsley and Reverend Mother Abbess; who both thought his proposition
not only reasonable, but necessary. Wherefore, the Night before their
Profession, they met at the Grate in the Quire; which was left open on purpose,
that they might be assured, that there were no Witnesses of what passed, but
God and themselves; and therefore take the greater liberty of freely declaring
their Minds, to one another.

He asked her, Whether her Resolutions, which she had acquaint'd him with, in
her last Letters still continued? Whether she was satisfied with that course
of Life, she had undertaken, and with the place she was in? Whether she still
enjoyed in every thing, that true, and solid peace of mind, that she expressed
in her last Letters? And assured her, that if she had any dislike to the Poor
Clare's, he would still as willingly stay another Year, as he had done the
last. Moreover told her, That if she repented her undertaking of this State of
Life, she was now in, that it was still in her Power to reassume her former
condition; and that he was no less ready to return with her to the World, if
she desired it, than he was to come out of it; knowing, that neither of them
could enter into a Religious State, without the full and free consent of the
other.

She was not long in making a generous return to these kind proposals; and
first thanking him most kindly for the offers he made, told him, She thought
none lived more happily, or contentedly in the World than he and she had done,
or could Love each other better; yet said she, what affliction must the
reflection upon this happiness occasion, when we consider how contrary a Life,
and how full of sorrow and affliction that was, which our dearest Savior led
here upon Earth for our sakes; and can we Love him, and not endeavor to
express our Loves, by being like him, in suffering for his sake, as he did for
ours? Alas, were we again in the World, how long could we promise our selves
the enjoyment of it? How soon might Death separate us, and how miserable would
the Surviver be? No Dear Brother Clare, let us never think more of the World;
let not one thought of those false and painted delights it yields, ever enter
into our hearts, or cause the least regret of that happy promise, which both of
us to Morrow, by God's assistance, design to make to his Infinite Goodness: I
must confess I have hindered you several times from making these comfortable
Vows, but I am resolved now to secure you, from any future suspense of this
happiness; the joyful hour of our Profession, is all I long for; it is that
alone which is able to make you satisfaction, for all the trouble I have given
you, by being the occasion you have so long deferred it. This is what I desire
above all things, and is that alone which is able to give us true peace and
happiness whilst we are here upon Earth; by placeing us in so pleasant and
secure a way to Heaven.

Brother Clare was extremely Edified, as well as overjoyed at the hearing these
her ferverous Resolutions; and took notice, that all the while they were
together, she never so much as cast up her Eyes, to look upon him: Nor did he
take any, notice of it to her; but afterward understood the reason why she did
not look up, was because that Mother Abbess, when she ordered her to go to the
Grate, said, Go to Brother Clare, and not, go see Brother Clare, which her
Superior never reflected upon, as judging that addition unnecessary; since the
giving her leave to speak at the open Grate, included also a leave of seeing
him she spoke to; but so great was her love to Obedience, that she was not
content unless it accompanied the very least of her actions, nor would she so
much as even cast an Eye (whatever natural inclinations she found in her self
to do it) without this secure, and unerring Guide, which she knew could not
deceive her.

Finding each other so well satisfied, in the State of Life they had
undertaken, they wished one another all comfort in their next Days Sacrifice,
and took their last leaves in this World, with hopes of a most joyful meeting
in the next, in the enjoyment of so constant a happiness, as could not be
allayed by parting, or any other accident: Where a continual joy, an
everlasting and un-interrupted peace, should Crown that Voluntary Sacrifice
they made of that satisfaction, they might have promised themselves in this
World; which tho it should have lasted far longer, than they could reasonably
have hoped for, would not have appeared a moment in respect of Eternity, which
would put them in full Possession of such a happiness, as so far exceeded what
they had left or were able to comprehend, as the Power of God, exceeds that of
Creatures; who was able to do more, nay, and will do more for those that love
and serve him, than human imagination is able to reach, or the thought of Man
is able to conceive, as St. Paul well expresses, when he says, Neither Eye has
seen, nor Ear has heard, nor has it entered into the Heart of Man to conceive,
what God has prepared for those that Love him.

The End of the Second Book.
THE LIFE OF THE LADY WARNER. In RELIGION, Sister CLARE of JESUS. THE THIRD
BOOK.
CHAP. I.
The Ceremony of their Profession at Graveling.

HAving disposed and prepared themselves by Eight Days Retirement, for this
last and solemn act of their Profession; they proceeded to the Ceremony: Which
being out of Practice in England, since it is unhappy fall from the Roman
Catholic Faith; I thought it would not prove tedious, or ungrateful, to the
curious and Devout Reader, to peruse that at least in English, he cannot see in
England. That such, as have heard of a Religious Profession, and scarce know
what it means, may hereby be informed, what it is.

Father Thomas VVorsley, being empowered by Reverend Father John Clarke,
Provincial of the Society of Jesus in England, to receive Brother Clare's
Profession; and having also received Command from the Bishop of St. Omers, to
assist in his place, whilst Sister Clare of Jesus made her Vows: He upon the
First Day of November, on which the Holy Catholic Church Celebrates the Feast
of All Saints, in the Year of Our Lord 1667, about Nine of the Clock in the
Morning, said Mass in the Church of the English Monastry, of the Poor Clares of
Graveling; which was thronged with all sorts of Persons: The Grate of the Quire
was left open, where Sister Clare kneeled in her Rank, amongst the rest of the
Nuns: And a Praying place was set within the Communion Rails, on the Gospel
side of the Altar, for Brother Clare to kneel upon, during the time of Mass.
When Father VVorsley had taken the Communion himself, he turned about; holding
in his hand the Sacred Body of our Savior; at which time Brother Clare ris'
from the Praying place, and kneeling down before the Father, in the middle of
the lowest Altar-step, with a loud and distinct Voice, he recited his Vows in
Latin, Englished as follows.

I John Clare, make Profession, and promise to Almighty God; in Presence of his
Virgin Mother, the whole Celestial Court, all here present, and to you Reverend
Father Thomas VVorsley, in lieu of Reverend Father General of the Society of
Jesus, and his Successors, holding the place of Christ; perpetual POVERTY,
CHASTITY, and OBEDIENCE; and according to it, a particular care of Teaching
Children, answerable to the form of living, contained in the Apostolical
Letters, and Constitutions of the Society of Jesus. At Graveling, in the Church
of the English Poor Clares, the First Day of November, 1667.

Which having ended, he Communicated from Father VVorsleys hands, and then
returned to the Praying place, finding an unspeakable comfort in his Soul.
Sister Clare, who kneeled in her usual place in the Quire; being observed by
Reverend Mother Abbess, not so much as to move an Eye toward the Grate: When
Brother Clare ris' to recite his Vows, was ordered by her to go close to the
Grate, that she might the better see, and hear him perform that Ceremony; she
went immediately to the Grate, as Mother Abbess had ordered her, but kept the
same custody of Eyes (as the Religious observed) which she had done before, not
casting the least glance toward the Altar.

Mass being ended, Father VVorsley went from the Altar up to the Doxal (which
is a large open Gallery, before the Quire Grate, made like a Balcony, with
Rails and Ballisters toward the Altar) whether, as many of the Company, as it
could contain, followed him, to see and hear Sister Clare of Jesus also make
her Vows. As soon as Father Worsley was come to the Quire, on the right side of
which Reverend Mother Abbess sat in an Armed Chair; Sister Clare with a smiling
and composed Countenance kneeled down before the Grate; having a Crucifix in
her right hand, and a lighted Wax Candle in her left. The Father asked her,
What she demanded? She Answered. Grace and Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ; and
of you Reverend Father; of you Reverend Mother Abbess; and of you my dearly
beloved Sisters; I humbly beg, out of my own free and deliberate Will, in
Honor of, and by the bitter Death and Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, by the
Merits of the most Glorious Virgin Mary, of our Holy Father St. Francis, our
Holy Mother St. Clare, and of all the Holy Saints; that you will vouchsafe to
receive me to Holy Profession: For if the whole World were mine, I have
chosen, and am ready to abandon it all, to be here one of your Poor Children,
tho most unworthy. Then Father VVorsley desired her, to consider well the
Obligation she was about to take upon her, of perpetual Poverty, Chastity,
Obedience, and Enclosure; to the observance of which, having once tide her self
by Vow, she was obliged during her whole Life, and could never be freed from
this obligation; and therefore asked her, Whether she still persever'd, in
asking what she before demanded? To which she Answered, That she still demanded
the same. Then he asked her, Whether she thought her self to have sufficient
strength of Body, to undertake that State? And whether she knew of any
impediment, that might hinder her from undergoing so rigorous a course of Life,
as she was about to undertake? She Answered him, That she knew of none; and did
not doubt, but that God, who had called her to this State, would give her his
Grace and Strength, to go through the rigors of it. Lastly, he asked her, How
Old she was? She told him, She was One and Thirty Years of Age. Then the Father
began the Veni Creator, or Hymn of the Holy Ghost, which the Quire went on
withal, to the Versicle, which the Father Read aloud; Send forth thy Spirit,
and they shall be Created; the Quire Answering: And thou shall renew the face
of the Earth. Then the Father recited the following Prayer of the Holy Ghost.

O God, who did instruct the Hearts of the Faithful, by the Illumination of
the Holy Ghost; Grant that by the same Spirit we may have a right understanding
in all things, and evermore rejoice in his Holy consolation: Through our Lord
Jesus Christ, etc.

Then the Father said, Pray for us O Mother of God. The Quire Answered, That we
may be made partakers of the Promises of Christ.

O Lord God, we beseech thee, grant us thy Servants to enjoy perpetual health,
of mind and body: And by the glorious Intercession of the ever Blessed Virgin
Mary, to be delivered from this present sorrow, and to enjoy gladness
everlasting. Through our Lord, etc. Amen.

Then the Father said, Pray for us Holy Father St. Francis; the Quire Answered,
That we may be made worthy of the pomises of Christ,

O God, who do increase thy Church, by the birth of the new Progeny of St.
Francis; grant us by his imitation to despise all Earthly things, and to
rejoice in the participation of thy Celestial gifts, through Christ our Lord,
Amen.

Father, Pray for us O Blessed Mother St. Clare.

Quire, That we may be made worthy of the pomises of Christ.

O Lord, we beseech thee to make us, who Honor the Memory of the Holy Virgin
St. Clare; by her Intercession partakers of Celestial joys, and Coheirs of thy
only begotten Son; who lives and Reigns, with thee World without end. Amen.

Then the Father Blessed the Veil as follows.

Father, May our help be in the Name of our Lord.


Quire, Who made Heaven and Earth.


Father, O Lord hear my Prayer.


Quire, And let my cry come unto thee.


Father, The Lord be with you.


Quire, And with your Spirit.


Let us Pray.

O Lord, we humbly beseech thee, that thy powerful blessing may descend upon
this Veil; wherewith the head of thy Handmaid is to be covered, that it may
become blessed and holy to her, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Mnipotent, and Everlasting God; we humbly beseech thy Sacred Majesty, to
Sanctify with thy right hand this Veil, which thy Servant is about to put on
her head; that thy Mercy assisting her, she may keep with an undefiled Body and
Mind that Vow of Chastity, Mistically represented by this Veil, by which out of
Love to thee, and thy Sacred Virgin Mother, she dedicates her self to thy Holy
Service; that prepared hereby, she may join her self to thy Train of Virgins,
and deserve to be led by thee to the Everlasting Nuptials of the Lamb; who
live and Reignest, World without end. Amen.

Then he blessed the Ring as follows.

LOrd Jesus Christ, the lover of true Chastity and perpetual Fidelity, we
humbly beseech thy Immense Clemency, that thou would bless this Ring, thy
Servant is about to put on, and grant that she being Espoused by this pledge,
may persever thy Loyal Spouse, by so unspotted a Chastity, that she may deserve
to be adorned with the gift of this Virtue, and enriched with it is Hundredfold
fruit, who live and reignest, etc.

These Prayers being ended, the Quire recited, the Litanies of the Saints,
Petitioning each of them to Pray for the Bride; and having ended the last Kirie
Eleison, or Lord have Mercy upon us. The Father began the two first words of
the Pater Noster, saying the rest to himself, till he came to the following
words, And lead us not into Temptation, which he said aloud, and the Quire
Answered, but deliver us from Evil, Amen.

Then the Father said, Lord save thy Servant.

Quire, Who my God places her trust in thee


Father, Send her help from thy Sanctuary.


Quire, And from Sion defend her.


Father, Be to her a Tower of strength.


Quire, To defend her from the face of her Enemies.


Father, Let not the Enemy prevail against her.


Quire, Nor the Son of Iniquity be able to hurt her.


Father, Lord hear my Prayer.


Quire, And let my cry come unto thee.


Father, The Lord be with you.


Quire, And with your Spirit.


Then the Father said the following Prayers.

LEt our humble Petitions O Lord appear in thy presence, and vouchsafe to bless
thy Servant, to whom in thy Holy Name we give the Veil of Religion; and by the
Intercession of the most blessed, and most glorious Virgin Mary, of the Blessed
Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul, St. Francis, St. Clare, and all the other
Saints, grant her a perfect Conversion from the World; and so ferverous an
observance of what she has undertaken; that in all her Tribulations, Streights
and Temptations, being encouraged by thy Divine Consolation; and by true
Humility and Obedience, being founded in fraternal Charity; she may justly,
piously and Chastely perform, what by thy assistance she does this Day promise;
and thereby deserve to enjoy with thee Everlasting Life. Who with the Father
and Holy Ghost, live and reignest, God World without end, Amen.

O Lord Jesus Christ, who art the way, out of which none can come to the
Father; we beseech thy most benign Clemency, that thou would lead this thy
Servant, whom thou have drawn from Terrene and carnal desires, into the secure
way of regular Discipline; and since thou vouchsafest to call Sinners to thee,
saying, Come unto me all ye, that labor, and I will refresh you; grant that the
Voice of this your Invitation, may have so much Power over her, as that laying
down the burden of her Sins, she may deserve to taste how great, and good you
are; and by this your Divine refection, be inabl'd to sustain your
Chastisements for them: And as thou have vouchsaft to attest, saying, I know my
Sheep, and my Sheep know me; acknowledge her for thine, and grant that she may
so know thee, and follow thee, and only thee; that she may never give Ear to,
or obey another Voice; who have promised, that whosoever obeys and serves thee
here, shall follow thee hereafter; who live and reignest, etc.

Then the Father bid the Bride repeat thrice the following words, out of the
118 Psalm. Receive me according to thy promises, and I shall live, and do not
disappoint me of my expectation; which she having done with a loud and distinct
Voice, and the Abbess having as often Answered, My dearest Daughter, let it be
done unto you, according to your words; the Quire Answered, Amen. Then the
Bride kneeled down before the Abbess, and joining her hands together, placed
them betwixt the Abbesses, and both their hands thus joined, were tied together
with such a Stole, as the Priest wears about his Neck at Mass; and is a
Representation of those Cords, wherewith our Savior, out of Love to us,
permitted himself to be bound in his Passion; and therefore, the Bride moved
with a Memory of this his Love, permits her hands to be thus bound, to
represent those Interior bands, by which she ties her self whilst she makes her
Sacred Vows; and her hands are also bound to Mother Abbesses, as a mark of that
tie of Obedience to her Will, which she undertook; and then with a loud and
distinct Voice she made her Profession, as follows.

In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

I Sister Clare of Jesus, do Vow unto Almighty God, the most Glorious Virgin
Mary, Our Holy Father St. Francis, Our Holy Mother St. Clare, unto all the Holy
Saints, and to you Reverend Mother Abbess, and all your Successors, that shall
hold your Place, to observe, all the Day's of my Life, the Rule and Form of
living of the Poor Sisters of St. Clare, given her by St. Francis, and
Confirmed by Our Holy Father Pope Innocent the IV. I Vow to live in OBEDIENCE,
without PROPRIETY in any thing, in CHASTITY also, and not to go out of
ENCLOSURE during my whole Life, according to the Constitutions of the same Rule.

Then the Abbess said, And I on the part of God, according to his Inviolable
Decree, do promise you Eternal Life; if you observe, what you have Vowed. To
which the Quire Answered, Amen. Then the Abbess saluted the Bride, and taking
off her White Veil, put on a Black one; saying, Take Daughter this Sacred Veil,
and wear it till you come before the Tribunal of the Eternal Judge, to whom all
Knees, both in Heaven and Earth, and Hell are bent; remember you have for ever
taken leave of the World, and given, and united your self wholly to Jesus
Christ, as to your beloved Spouse; may he defend and protect you from all
Evils, and receive you at length, into Eternal Life. Amen.

Then the Bride, with a loud Voice, recited the words of St. Agnes, He has put
a Mark and Veil ever my Face, that I may admit no other Lover but himself.

Then the Abbess put on the Brides head a Crown, saying, Take my dear Sister
this Temporal Crown, as a certain pledge of that Eternal one, which your Divine
Spouse has prepared for you, if you be faithful to him. After this, the Abbess
also put a Ring on her Finger, saying, at the same time, My beloved Daughter,
take this Ring, as a Mark of that love and fidelity, which you ought inviolably
to keep to your faithful Spouse Jesus Christ, as long as you love. To which the
Bride Answered, with a high Voice, My Lord Jesus Christ has engaged me to him
with his Ring, and adorned me as his Spouse, with a Crown. Then the Abbess put
into her hand a Crucifix, and said, Receive here, and embrace your Spouse; may
he receive, bless, and preserve both you and us, for ever, Amen. After she had
received the Crucifix, the Father recited the following Prayers.

LOrd Jesus Christ, who by the immense goodness of thy Purity, have vouchsafed
to Espouse our Souls with an indissoluble band of Love, grant we beseech thee,
that this thy Servant being firmly engaged by thy Ring of Faith, may become so
constant, faithful, and devout a Spouse in thy service, as that she may firmly
persever in it to the end; who live and reignest, etc.

O God who by thy love have inflamed this thy Servant, and drawn her from the
Vanity of the World, to the reward of so high a Calling; vouchsafe so to
purify her heart with thy presence, and the infusion of thy Divine Grace, that
she may persever in it; that being strengthened by thy assistance, she may be
able to perform, what by thy Divine inspirations she has promised, and by the
execution hereof, happily partake of the Eternal reward, thou have promised
those that persever in thy service; through Christ our Lord, Amen.

These Prayers being ended, the Quire began to Sing the following, Responsal,
The Kingdom of this World, and all it is Ornaments, I have contemned for the
Love of my Lord Jesus Christ: Which having ended, they began the Hymn, Te Deum
Laudamus; and whilst they were Singing it, the Bride went round the Quire, and
received the Embraces and Congratulations of all the Religious; then returning
to her place, she and the rest of the Religious kneeling in their order, the
Father recited that Verse of the 67 Psalm, Confirm O God, what thou have
wrought in us; and then made a very moving Sermon, upon the following Text, out
of the 9th. Psalm, Sperent in te Domine, qui noverunt nomen tuum: Let them hope
in thee, O Lord, who know thy Name. In this Exhortation he First, laid open
the nature of this Action or Ceremony, they had performed; by evidencing, that
a greater Act of hope could not be expressed, then by a Voluntary Contempt of
the present, but transitory Comforts of this World; in expectation of those
solid and inexplicable joys, whose durance was to be Eternal in the next.
Believe me (said he) the vain hopes of the Earth are too poor and
inconsiderable for so generous hearts, as yours are; the Kingdom of Heaven, as
you have made out to Day, is only worthy of them.

Secondly, He showed there could be no way more Compendious, to Honor and
Celebrate this great Feast of All Saints, then by striving to make themselves
conformable to those Great Originals; which in this present conjuncture they
had done, by so generously undervaluing all the transitory goods of this Life;
and so might justly hope to arrive at that pitch of Sanctity, this Contempt of
the World had raised the Saints unto; and also to share with them the Crown of
Glory, in the World to come.

Thirdly, Addressing himself to the Bride; he assured her, she had strictly
followed the direction of St. Austin, in Solemnising this Feast, by so closely
following the Example of Saints; nay, even the hardest example, which is that
of Martyrs: Whereby she had made a better, and a more moving Exhortation, by
her Example, then he was able to make by his words; she having verified those
of this great Doctor, Ser. 47. de Sactis. Ab ipsis, Martyrum Festivitatum
gaudia celebrantur; qui ipsorum Martyrum exempla sequuntur; Solemnitates enim
Martyrum, Exhortationes sunt Martyriorum, ut imitari non pigeat, quod celebrare
delectat. The joys of the Festivals of Saints, are best Celebrated by those,
who follow their Examples; for the Solemnities of Martyrs, are so many
Exhortatations to Martyrdom; that it may not be tedious to Practice, what is
delightful to Celebrate. Proving that the Bride had courageously entered upon
the hardest of Martyrdoms; by taking upon her so long and terrifying a one, as
was that dying Life, or living Death, she had so joyfully embraced for the love
of God.

CHAP. II.
What Effects this Ceremony wrought upon her self, and those that were present
at it. The great Victory she had obtained over her passions, manifested by her
unconcernedness in this, and two other very moving occasions.

Having ended the Ceremony of her Profession, I hope the taking notice of some
moving Circumstances in it, and of the effects it wrought, both upon the Bride,
and those that were present; will prove as grateful to the Reader, as I believe
the foregoing Relation has been.

The Ceremony was so moving, as that there was scarce a Religious or Secular
Person present, (who were as many as the Doxal could hold) that was able to
refrain from Tears; Nay, the Governor himself, the Marquess of Flavecoeur, a
Person not at all subject to this passion; declared that he could not refrain
from weeping, at the sight of it, no more then the rest; and that he had never
felt such a tenderness of heart in all his Life. She her self, who was the
Actor, was the only person that seemed unmoved in this action, appearing all
the while with a cheerful, yet so recollected a Countenance, as if she had been
totally absorpt in God, whose Sacrifice she fell that Day. Her little ones
stood by her, all the time she performed the Ceremony; which was enough to have
moved any heart but hers. For they being of an Age, not sensible of their loss,
seemed as little concerned as their Mother; and were very much pleased at what
they understood not; being very busy in assisting at the Ceremony: The one put
on her Veil, the other her Crown; at which Sister Clare smiling, told her, in a
low Voice, she wore that, for her Fathers sake.

The Solemnity being over, one asked her how it was possible, that beholding the
great Commotion, and Tears of so many about her; she could remain so cheerful
and unconcerned, as she seemed to be during the whole Ceremony? She Answered
with a Spirit, as full of Ingenuity as Humility, That this constancy and
cheerfulness took their rise from no other source, than the Divine Goodness;
which during the whole Ceremony had filled her heart with so great an Interior
peace and comfort, as she had never felt before in all her Life. Which was a
due reward for that generous oblation, she had that Day made of her self to
Almighty God. Had the Person who asked her this Question, proposed the same to
any one of the Religious, they would have given an Answer quite different from
hers, which her Humility would not permit her to give. The Religious had seen
with how much Industry, even from her first entrance into Religion, she had
made it her chief endeavor to suppress and overcome, the Sallies and Efforts
of Nature, and had beheld her comportment in several other occasions, and seen
with how great a Courage, she had behaved he self in other trials, which God
thought fit to send her during her Noviship, to dispose her to a due
performance of this great act of Love; and therefore, they were not so
surpised, as those were who had only seen that one action of hers, they having
been Eye Witnesses of diverse evidences she had given, of her perfect and entire
resignation to Gods Holy Will, even in the greatest afflictions, and most
sensible trials, that could have happened to her. Now the Reader that may the
better perceive how she carried her self in them, I will here set down a
Relation of her behavior and perfect Conformity to Gods Will, at the Death of
two of her dearest friends.

The first trial of her Conformity was given her by the Death of Reverend
Mother Luisa Tailor, Abbess of the Monastry. The History of whose Life deserves
a Volum, being a person of an absolute and consummated Virtue. This Holy Abbess
being suddenly seized, with violent symtoms of Death; was piously expecting her
last happy moment, and all the Religious were sent for, and came without the
least delay, except Sister Clare; who being advertised by one of the Religious,
that came in great have to her Cell, that Reverend Mother Abbess was a dying,
and that if she did not come quickly, she would never see her alive: Sister
Clare joining her hands, without the least surprise, made a bow to her,
expressing thereby her gratitude for the Message she brought her (it being
their Custom never to speak in their Cells) and without making any such have,
as might occasion the omission even of the least, or most inconsiderable
Ceremony of Religion; she first put on her great Veil, then kissed the ground,
and afterward with a modest and graceful gate, followed the Religious to the
Infirmary, where Mother Abbess lay a dying; as if this sad News had not at all
come unexpected, or given her the least affliction. She came into the Chamber,
where her dear Friend, and tender Mother lay ready to expire, and where she
found all the Religious bathed in Tears, like so many tender hearted Children,
bemoaning the loss of their dying Mother; yet she who was like to sustain as
great a loss as any (having had a great dependence upon her, and received great
comfort from her Counsels) beheld her ready to leave her, without shedding a
Tear, whilst all the rest seemed to be in a very great affliction, and general
consternation; and so concerned, as if all their happiness had depended on this
Abbesses Life. Sister Clare knew her great Virtues and worth; and had no less
respect and affection for her, than they, which the many Obligations she had
received from her, justly deserved; yet for all this she showed not the least
outward sign of grief. And when one of the Religious expressed hers, by her many
Tears for Reverend Mother Abbesses Death; she efficaciously stopped them by the
following words, VVeep not so much, Dear Sister, it is the Will of God, you
love so well. Her bearing this cross with so admirable a Conformity, moved
Almighty God to reward her, by sending another equally sensible; and at the
same time, to give her his Divine Grace to bear it with no less constancy. It
was the Death of her Mistress of Novices, Sister Mary Bonaventure Carleton; who
tho she had had a long experience in training up the Novices in perfection;
yet, used to say, She learnt more from this, than ever she had taught the rest;
finding her perfect, even before she entered into the way of perfection, which
made her have a very great esteem of her, confidence in her, and affection for
her; looking upon her as sent from Heaven, rather to perfect her, than be
perfected by her. Sister Clare being of a grateful nature, was no ways backward
in her returns; and looking upon her as the best of friends, and placed her
confidence in her as in a Mother: But God, by her surprising Death, almost as
soon snatched away this comfort, as he had given it; which cross, Sister Clare
supported with the like courage, as she did the former, even without the loss
of a Tear. Insomuch, that being asked by a Person of Quality (Madam Flavecoeur
the Governors Lady of Graveling) If she were not very much concerned for the
Death of her Mistress? She Answered, Yes Madam, I have a great feeling of it,
and indeed more than I can well express. These words, and the manner of
delivering them, struck the Lady with admiration, to see such a temper, as did
not shed a Tear, when she had thus renewed the sorrowful thoughts of the loss
of her Mistress; and moved her to urge the matter a little farther, and ask
her, How it was possible, she could forbear weeping, at the Remembrance of the
loss, of such a friend? The good Novice (for then she was not Professed) told
her, after her sweet and affable way; Madam, nothing but God deserves our
Tears, who is so good, as to hinder me from paying them, where they are not
due. Such as knew not of how excellent and sweet a disposition Sister Clare
was, might perhaps think so great an insensibility, as appeared in such moving
circumstances as I have related, effects of an ill, hard, and ungrateful
nature; which was insensible of kindness, and knew not either what friendship
was, how to value it, what gratitude it requires, or how much a Spiritual
friendship exceeds that of Nature, ordinarily grounded upon Sympathy, Natural
inclination or Interest; and therefore perhaps might not much wonder at her
comportment in the occasions I have related. But those who by Reading her Life,
are made better acquainted with her humor, and have seen how solidly she
grounded her friendship; how warily she engaged her affection, and with what
constancy and tenderness, upon all occasions she expressed it, to those she had
made choice of for her Friends; especially, two such choice Friends as these;
whose great Virtue moved her to a high esteem of them, their Station to a
confidence in them, and their extraordinary Zeal for her Perfection, to a
grateful affection for them; cannot but wonder to see her in so short a time,
to have gained so strange a command over her passions, as not to shed a Tear at
their Death, which is the more to be admired in her tender Sex; especially,
since, as her Answer to the Governors Lady declares, she so sensibly felt this
Trial. But God by her faithful cooperation with his Grace, had so strengthened
her to overcome these feelings of Nature, as not to give the least sign or
expression of sorrow; whereby, she manifested, that tho she loved them well,
yet she loved God better; whom also she loved in such a manner, as to desire
rather, that he should please himself than her; nay, that even he should please
himself in her affliction. Which showed, not only her sincere love to God, but
also her dis-interessed love to her friends, prefering their happiness before
her own; and therefore since their Death was a gain to them, she could not
regret her own loss by it, nor permit her sorrow, to overcome the joy she ought
to have, in thinking they were happy. The will of God was what she endeavored
most industriously to find out; and joyfully embraced in whatsoever terrifying
manner it appeared to her; as her words to that Pious Religious, who was
lamenting the Abbesses Death declares. And therefore, what trial soever of her
Love, God thought fit to send her, by depriving her of those friends she loved
best; she was resolved this trial should not deprive her of the chief object of
her Love, himself; who was the best of friends: And therefore was resolved to
express her love in the best manner she was able, by preferring his Will and
Pleasure, before her own in all things. Whereby she so surmounted all these
sensible trials, as to seem even insensible of them: And also disposed her self
for the making her Profession, and for the loss of two such friends, with such
a constancy and unconcernedness, as I have declared: And was also inabl'd quite
to overcome the tenderness of an affectionate Mother toward her Children; as
in the following Chapter I shall relate.

CHAP. III.
Her exact compliance with Mother Abbesses Orders, in taking care of her
Children, in which she expressed more of a careful Mistress, than a tender
Mother; and hereby manifested, that Pure Obedience, the inclination of Grace;
and not affection to her Children, the inclination of Nature; moved her to
accept this employment.

AFter she had made her Profession, as above declared; the first thing she set
upon, was strictly to perform, what she had so lately promised. Obedience was
her chief care, and tho nothing was more contrary to her inclination, than to
look after her Children; yet seeing this charge was imposed upon her, by her
Superior, she cheerfully undertook it. She knew by experience, what advantages,
order and method always brought with it; and therefore was sollicitous, that
every moment should be rightly spent by her Children. For this end, she made
them an exact Distribution, or Journal, for every hour of the Day, accommodated
to their Age and Years. She spared no labor to Cultivate these tender Plants,
and even from their Infancy, to prepare them for the Garden of Religion, if God
should make them so happy, as to call them to that blessed State. To set down
the whole Distribution of time she had made for them, would I fear seem too
tedious; yet I cannot but let the Reader see some part of it, and thereby give
him a knowledge of her own Devotions, she without doubt practicing her self,
what she endeavored to instill into them. She ordered them that the first thing
they did as soon as they awaked, should be to make the Sign of the Cross,
adding the following words, Blessed be the Holy and undivided Trinity, now and
for ever. Amen. And having done this, she bids them tell sweet Jesus, that they
would suffer the Mortification of rising in the cold, and of leaving the
comfort of their warm bed, for his sake, who left Heaven for theirs. Then, as
soon as they were up, she Counsels them to kiss the ground, in Memory of that
dust, out of which they came, and to which they were to return; and to make an
Act of Adoration, and Thanksgiving to the Divine Majesty, for having Created
them of nothing, capable of loving, serving and enjoying him for all Eternity;
and also for having preserved them the Night past from all dangers. Then that
they should make an Oblation of themselves to his Infinite goodness. Afterward
to say an Ave Mary to beg our Ladies blessing upon them for that Day; whom they
were to love and confide in, as in a Mother; having recourse to her in all
their necessities as such, and daily beg her Intercession, by saying their
Beads together, at the time she had appointed. Then she ordered them to say a
Gloria Patri, etc. in thanksgiving to God, for the glory given to their good
Angels, and for the honor given to themselves, by bestowing upon them such
Beautiful and Powerful Protectors; whose Protection that Day, they were humbly
to beg; and then to recommend themselves to their particular Patrons and Saints
of their Name, and Pray for their friends; especially; for their Grandfathers
and Uncles Conversion.

This done, she ordered them before they came to School to her, to go to their
Closset, and there offer up that, and all the other actions of that Day, with a
pure intention (for want of which many even of our best actions were frequently
lost, and the Merit also of our other actions, which are indifferent, and of no
Merit without such an intention) that as soon as they came thither they should
strive which of them should first kiss sweet Jesus's Feet in their Crucifix,
and remember they had chosen St. Mary Magdalen for one of their Patronesses,
whose place was at the foot of the Cross, when Christ died upon it; and wish to
Love him as she did, saying a Pater and Ave, and telling our dear Savior they
were going to School to please him, and that all their actions that Day shall
be for no other end.

When they came to School, to confirm them in the practice of that profitable
Devotion to their good Angel, she had recommended to them, she gave them an
example of it her self; and took out of her breast a little Paper Picture of
her good Angel, she always carried about her, and placeing it before her, and
them (to put them in mind of their good Angels who were present, tho invisible)
she recommended her self and Children to them. To these she added, also other
profitable Documents, and necessary Instructions; as of submission, of
obedience, but most particularly of that of Humility; a Virtue very necessary
to be acquired in young Years, where Nature still leads to the contrary. For
this end, she would have them always, call their Maid Sister, in which she
showed no little sign of Humility in her self, by commanding them to give the
same Title to their Servant, they gave to her self: And tho nothing could be
more taking, than the sweet and submissive humor or these Children toward her;
yet she forced the efforts of Nature, always to give place to those of Grace;
as may be gathered from the following passage.

The Governors Lady, being one Day within the Enclosure amongst the Religious,
desired to see Sister Clare, and her Children together; upon this, she was
ordered to come, and as she entered the Room, the Lady wisper'd one of them in
the Ear, from whom I had the Relation, saying, I see, it is not a poor and mean
Habit, that can hide true Mobility and VVorth; and beholding her very
attentively, she was so struck, that words were too scant to express the
sentiments of her mind; till some Tears had made way for them, and then
recovering her self, in a passionate and abrupt manner, she said; Here needs a
Powerful Hand, to sustain this great work; and being still in a kind of
confusion, she could not proceed farther, upon that subject, but looking
steadfastly upon the Children (who all this time, by moving Language Caressed
their Mother, and hung about her Neck) she broke out again into this
expression. O Madam, how is it possible, to leave such Children? This is a
touch of God, that strangely surprises me. Another Person of Quality that
accompanied the Governors Lady, seeing their Mother express so little kindness
and tenderness toward them, endeavored to Caress them, and show as much
fondness toward them as she was able. Telling them, They did mistake their
Mother, and that she her self was their Mother, and not Sister Clare; upon
which the Children ran from her to their Mother, hanging about her, and
speaking to her in such moving Language, as melted the Ladys heart; and moved
her with Tears, modestly to inveigh against the leaving such little Angels;
declaring, That her change of Condition, was an act above her Sex; nay, even
above Flesh and Blood, and was in her opinion, rather to be admired then
imitated. This Rhetoric of both these Ladies had no influence upon Sister
Clare; she seemed as if their words had not concerned her, or as if she had not
heard them; and by this her humble and modest comportment, much amazed the
standers by; who admired to see God Almighties Grace so strangely Triumphing
over the bent, and inclination, or Nature.

CHAP. IV.
Her Zeal for the Conversion of her Relations to the Catholic Faith, her Prayer
for them, and Ferverous Letters to her Father, expressing her passionate Love
toward him, by her fervent Zeal for his Conversion, notwithstanding his great
severity, and unkindnesses toward her.

BUt this Heroical abnegation, of whatsoever the tenderness of Nature was able
to suggest, tho very extraordinary, as we have seen in the foregoing Chapter,
did no ways hinder that restless Zeal, she always had for the Conversion of her
friends. Her own words, sufficiently prove that her Charity had no other
tendency; as the following Prayer she made for her nighest Relations will
evidence: Which I find in her own hand amongst the rest of her Papers.

O Most great God of Mercy, look with the Eyes of compassion upon my near
Relations, and Friends, who are yet detained in Schism and Heresy. And
remember I beseech you, that you did not bring them out of their Eternal
Nothing, and Stamp upon their Souls your own Sacred Image, in order to destroy,
and abandon those perfect products of your powerful hand, having been pleased
to send your only Son, to pay the ransom for them, as well as for my unworthy
self, with the price of your most precious Blood. Dart therefore, O most
merciful God, some beams of your light into their dark, and deceived
understandings: Have mercy upon them, and let the light of your Countenance
shine upon them, that they may see the Truth of your Sacred Mysteries: Give
them Grace to submit their Necks to the sweet and easy Yoke of your Precepts,
proposed, and delivered by your Holy Church. O my dear Redeemer, what have I
done for you? Or what have I deserved at your hands, that I should be called to
your saving Faith, and be made a member of your Holy Church. Impart I beseech
you, the like favor, by your bitter Death and Passion, to those your misled,
and unbelieving Creatures my Friends and Relations; that together with my self
they may faithfully acknowledge, adore, and love you, their glorious Creator
and Redeemer, here in this World, and in the World to come, praise and magnify
your goodness, and joyfully Celebrate your Mercies with Canticles of Eternal
Gratitude, and Thanksgiving. Amen.

If this Zeal was so particular for her friends, you may imagine how active it
was for the conversion of her Father; whom she so passionately loved, that no
want of Affection in him, was ever able to lessen it: Who, tho he Wrote several
Letters to her; yet he never gave her the Title of Child, or Subscribed
himself, her Father. But oftentimes in his Letters, he upbraids her, for
committing an unheard of ingratitude, in taking such a course as this was,
without asking his advice or consent: The news of which (as he said in one)
seemed to him incredible, because he never judged, that her Husband's or her
Affections to one another, had been so moderate (by any thing he had ever heard
or seen,) as that they could be persuaded upon pretense of Christianity, to
embrace such a strange and horrid undertaking, by breaking the Solemn Vow of
Matrimony. That hereby, she seemed to have sucked the Milk of a Tygress, rather
than of a Woman; and to have lost all good Nature, and even Humanity it self.
He added, that it was an injury done to Heaven, to call such follies, and
Insinuations as these Inspirations, and godly motions; assuring her upon his
Faith, that all the Catholics he had spoken with, condemned this rash and
inconsiderate Action of theirs; and therefore conjured her, either to return to
England, that he might have the comfort of visiting them there; or to live
together some where in France, or Flanders; whether he would come to see them:
Requiring her to obey this his advice, as the Counsel of a Father: Which if she
did not, he would never give her his blessing; and ends his Letter by a bare
subscription of his Name. These severe checks from a Father, she loved so
tenderly, must needs have wrought upon her, had not the Grace of Almighty God
in a particular manner assisted her, so piously to bear them; and that she did
so, is evident, from the Dutiful Answer she returned him, to his Letter couch't
in so hard and severe terms.

SIR,
THe great condescension of your Goodness to me, I did not receive till almost
two Months after it is date, else I had not deferred my acknowledgment of it a
Minute, and was not all that time without great perplexity, whether I might
(without an unpardonable presumption) attempt to beg your blessing; since my
Actions have unhappily appeared to you so Criminal, as rather to deserve the
contrary. Wherefore I most humbly beg you upon my Knees, to give me leave to
offer unto you, the sole Motives of our so much wondered at resolutions. You
know Sir, that the State of Life I am now in, is but what God Almighty has been
pleased to grant me, after a long and earnest pursuit of it; and which if it
had pleased him to move you to grant me sooner, as he was pleased to move my
dear Sir John Warner, not only to consent to, but even to propose, might have
prevented the unhappy disturbance, I have since given you. Those that consider
his Virtue, and that our Affections were wholly grounded on that, will not
wonder we should deprive our selves of those Temporal enjoyments, we had here,
to make one another a present of Eternal ones; and indeed Sir, I presume to
say, I believe you have that opinion of my kindness to him, (tho you were never
pleased to believe I had those due Respects and Affections I ought for you)
which might make you mitigate that severe Censure you are pleased to make of my
Actions toward you. Certainly Sir, less than a particular and strong
Impression, that the World was not safe for me, had not been sufficient to have
made me part with such an Husband; if you will give me leave to say nothing of
your self. But I must now acknowledge Sir, that every word of this without your
particular goodness, may be offensive: Therefore, I do not Write without
extraordinary pain. As to the Infinite blessing of a Fathers presence, that you
were pleased to mention; 'twas too great to be offered, till we were out of the
Power of enjoying it; and if you did not name it for a Torment to me, you would
find these Countries (considering the nearness of the Spaw) very convenient for
you; here being such entertainments, and so good Conversations, which, if I
were not here might perhaps be an invitation to you. Oh Sir, I wish since God
has thus disposed of me by his infinite mercy, that we had a Monastry near you
in Wales; for if I am to have any happiness in this World, I wish it might be
by your procurement: For then my heart would be at rest, that you had forgiven
me; but above all, that by so acceptable a work as this, you had gained those
blessings of Almighty God, which in my Prayers I shall never cease to ask;
knowing you would then find that true content, which the World has not yet been
able to give you. Which that you may, I beseech him of his mercy to move you to
pardon, whatever appears to you, as Criminal in me; since what contradicts not
the Duty I owe my Heavenly Father, I shall ever confess due to you. With all
Humility upon my Knees, I beg your blessing, for my self and Children,

Your most passionate and affectionate Poor Child, CLARE of JESUS.
To which Letter she adds this Postscript.
Sir, I thought fit to send you these, but I beseech you forget them, as soon,
you have read them, and forgive me, who am the cause of so much trouble to you.




Nor did her restless Zeal for her Father's Conversion terminate here, but she
still used new Methods of endeavoring it. And receiving no Answer to her last
Letter, she procured a Catholic Gentleman (who was extremely well verst in
Controversy, and a Neighbor to Sir Thomas Hanmer) to take the occasion of
giving him a Visit, and Discoursing with him, concerning Catholic Religion; and
withal, desired him to carry this second Letter, no less passionate then the
former, that by his Conversation, he might come to a better knowledge of the
truth of the Roman Catholic Religion.

SIR,
MY Obligations, and ardent affection for you, will not suffer me to be long
silent, nor to fear, or excuse my often troubling you; and I do now do it, in
hopes that the Conversation, and acquaintance of this Gentleman (who is the
bearer) will be so welcome to you; that you will esteem his Company a
divertisment At least Sir, grant me this only request and satisfaction, to hear
you have discoursed with him. I do really assure my self that if you were
convinced of the necessity, and had weighed the many reasons why you ought to
be other than what you are; your heart is too great and Noble, to be kept back
by any Worldly consideration. St. Austin had surely something extraordinary in
his Soul, before it me with it is right Object; and give me leave to say Sir, so
have you; and I hope you may live to teach many to Love as he did; if once all
hindrances were taken away betwixt you and that ravishing goodness of God. What
is it we seek after, but full contentment of mind? And who can give that, but
the plenitude of all goodness? In him there is nothing but love and joy, his
nature is to make all things happy in him, and whoever has once experienced,
the delights he gives proper for the Soul, will immediately abhor those of
Sense, and confess them to be real pains. Sir, what can you leave, or suffer,
but he can fortify you to undergo; and change into comfort, what by nature you
most of all fear? And infallibly his goodness will do so, if you will only hear
and Discourse impartially: Which on my Knees I humbly beg for Christ's sake, in
remembrance of all he suffered for you. Sir, do not deny me; behold me at your
Feet embracing them, with the affection of my whole heart, and be no longer
cruel to your self, who are so dear to me; since all the joys in this World can
be nothing to me, without your being happy. Pardon me this importunity: I could
Write, I confess, and never give over, but for fear of troubling you, being
truly, tho your unworthy, yet

Your most passionate and affectionate poor Child, CLARE of JESUS.


One would have thought, that these lines so full of respect and affection,
might have deserved an Answer, if the former had not; and have convinced him,
that the want of affection was not the cause of her pious undertaking, which he
taxt her with; but that this happy change of hers, had purified that love,
which she before had for him; in giving her so great a concern, as she
expresses in this, for his Conversion; on which depended his Eternal happiness.
And tho neither this, nor those daily Prayers and Tears she offered for him,
could gain the least upon him; yet still she continued her solicitations to
Heaven in his behalf, and that her Prayers might be the more efficacious, she
endeavored the more earnestly to obtain a more perfect and happy Union with
God.

CHAP. V.
Her generous Resolution of tending to Perfection. The Testimony of her Ghostly
Father and others, how diligently she puts these her Resolutions in Practice.

IT will not perchance, here be amiss, to give a short Idaea of that consummate
perfection, she at length arrived too, which cannot be better performed, then
by seting down those generous Resolutions, I find in her own hand amongst the
rest of her Papers.

O Most Sacred and undivided Trinity, Three Persons, and one Essence, cast a
glance of your All-seeing Eye, upon my unworthy, wretched and wounded Soul,
groaning under the burden of her own Abyss of misery; trembling at the
consideration of your secret judgments; confounded at the memory of her former
disloyalties, and ingratitude, all covered with shame, and pieret with sorrow:
Humbly prostrating her self before the Throne of your dreadful Majesty; and
tendering her Petition to your infinite Mercy. You have been pleased O benign
Lover of all Souls, to expect her hitherto most patiently. You have most
efficaciously terrifyed her with your threats; you have most earnestly invited
her, and powerfully drawn her with your promises; you have given her a strong
confidence in your goodness, and mercy. You have induced her to an absolute
expiation of her Crimes, and a perfect reconciliation by a sincere Contrition,
entire Sacramental Confession, and prompt satisfaction; you have given her
strong resolutions of an entire Reformation. This is the change of your
right hand, and the only effect of your goodness, to whom be ascribed all honor
and praise. And now my powerful Creator, my unfettered Soul, aspires to a high
flight, she covets a nearer conjunction with your infinite perfections, and
excellencies, the only Object of her Love, and repose of her desires. O! who
will give her the wings of a Dove, that she may Soar up to her beloved, and
spend the rest of this Pilgrimage, in the sweet Contemplation of Heavenly
Mysteries, by a perpetual retirement, and divorce from those many turbulent
distractions, she has been encumbered withal; and from all solicitude and care
of any thing below. Infuse therefore, O Divine attractor of Souls, your
efficacious Grace; strengthen her desires, and confirm her resolutions in so
high an interprize; for the Relics of sin have yet an overswaying Power, over
her feeble Will, her cruel Enemies lie in wait to obstruct her free passage
into this happy State of repose. The sensual propensions of Flesh and Blood,
are in a continual conflict to subdue reason, and the enticing allurements of
Worldly objects in her imagination, endeavor to blind the interior Eyes of her
Soul; and divert her from beholding the beauty of Virtue, from considering her
own misery and ingratitude, and from contemplating your infinite beauty, and
love toward her. Let therefore, your Powerful strength break afunder, all
these strong bonds of Iniquity, and let the same force that has so happily
dispossessed Satan, of the Empire he had in her, re-invest you in your just
inheritance and habitation. Embelish her with all solid Virtues and
Perfections; make her a Paradise of delights, by leting her behold you in all
things; and then reassume her to your self, who are her Creator, Preserver,
and Redeemer. Amen.

Having gathered out of her own Memoires, how far she was advanced in all the
ways of an interior Life, and to what a pitch of the Union of God, she was
arrived; it follows that we take notice of those steps by which she mounted up
to this so eminent degree of Perfection: Which her Ghostly Father, and several
of the Religious take notice of in the Characters, they by request gave of her
since her Death, from her first entrance into a Religious State of Life: Viz.
that she had so deep an apprehension of her own Nothingness, that of all Vices
she seemed to fear, that of vainglory the least. All the extraordinary favors
she received from Heaven, served only to increase the bad Opinion she had
conceived of her self. From this Humility, and profound acknowledgment of her
own unworthiness, sprung as from their source all those other Virtues so
singular in her. As to her Recollection, besides what I have already said of
this subject, she trod the paths of the most Illustrious Saints, always walking
in the sight of God; which holy exercise became so habitual to her, that she
once ingeniously acknowleged, That since her entrance amongst the Poor Clares,
she had but twice lost the Divine Presence, and that for about the space of an
Ave Maria, each time, being taken up with too great solicitude for her
Children. No wonder then, she had as many unquestionable Witnesses of a
Recollected Spirit, as there were persons who daily conversed with her. Her
looks, as they said, and that Heavenly Air which appeared in her Countenance,
was sufficient to strike Reverence and Devotion into the most wandering and
dissipated imagination. There was no need of studying her humor, or observing
her times; her temper was always equal, as was her mind; those Graces and
Excellencies of an even and pleasant humor, never failed her; so that no
accident, tho never so surprising prizing and strange, could make the least
visible impression upon her: Her Virtue was not of a faint or fading Nature,
like that of some tender Constitutions, which changes with every blast, but
strong and permanent; not to be altered by any vicissitudes, or various events
of this Life: The change of weather, the infirmity of sickness, the Death of
friends, had no influence upon her constancy; this golden vein of indifferency
that ran through the whole body of her actions, made her Superior to all
events, that are wont to move, and work upon others; nothing but what was in
God, from God, and for God, was any part of her care; in a word, not to run
this Topic out into a Volum; she had obtained by a Mastery over her natural
inclinations and passions, so perfect an union with Almighty God, that her
whole Life seemed to be one continued Act of love and Adoration. This
Communication with God, was attended with that high degree of Prayer, which
according to Divines consists in passively receiving the impressions of the
Divine Spirit; insomuch, that her first Abbess Reverend Mother Tailor, who had
spent several Years in that Holy practice, affirmed, That it was so
supernatural and sublime, that all she had either read or heard upon that
subject, came short of her Prayer, which tho she could never conceive or
understand the depth of; yet she was fully convinced it was from God; as having
so irrefragable a Testimony against Delusion, as was her humble Obedience and
submission to her Ghostly Fathers; in laying it aside as long as they judged
sit; tho in the mean time she felt so great desolation, dryness and darkness,
as she was better able to suffer then to express; which was a second proof and
no less convincing than the former, of the Truth and Goodness of her Prayer,
and of the Spirit that conducted her in it.

CHAP. VI.
The Excellency of her Prayer, gathered from it is fruits.

IF the Rule, the Eternal Wisdom gives us, how to make a right judgment of any
thing by it is fruits, be infallable, as certainly it is, we cannot miss the
making a right one of the solidity and excellency of her Prayer; if we take a
view of it is fruits. For let the Prayer be never so high, and never so hard to
be understood, the fruits thereof are visible, and easily perceived. Her Prayer
then, tho it was very high, did not consist in extravagant Raptures and
Transports, which sometimes draw to self esteem, stifness of judgment, a
neglect of Rule and Order; but in the practice of all solid Virtues: As she her
self has given us to understand by transmitting unto us those Divine lights,
and interior motions Almighty God infused into her Soul, which afford us so
many convincing arguments, of the sollidity of her fervor and Devotion. Take
then in her own words a short Summary of what she so long practiced.

Some of her Fruits of Prayer.
How long, O most pure Object of Divine Love, shall I be deprived of that
Sovereign good, which my Soul incessantly thirsts after? When will you put a
period to this my tedious banishment? When shall I be satiated with the
fruition of your glorious aspect? I am wholly transported with the love of your
unspeakable goodness, and my ardent affections surpass the bounds of
moderation: But the consideration of the Beatifical Vision, and my own
unworthiness gives me a severe check, and puts me in mind of my own aspiring
presumption; telling me, that if my wandering thoughts soar so high, as to
pretend to the favors of bosom friends; the heavy burden of my Inquities and
Transgressions, will bring me to an unseasonable fall. O dismal Consideration!
O horrid desolation! This is the Dart that deeply pierces my poor Soul. This is
that fierce and cruel Lion, which with open Jaws seems ready to devour me, and
rend in pieces my bleeding heart; whether then shall I turn my self, but to
you, O my God the fountain of mercy, and goodness? Succor this distressed Soul
of mine, which you have framed according to your own likeness. But how can I
hope for mercy from you, my Powerful Creator? Whose Divine Perfections I have
so often contemned; whose Sacred Law I have so frequently violated; whose Holy
Inspirations I have so much rejected; whose amiable Invitations I have most
ungratefully slighted, and wholly defaced the Sacred Image of your Divinity,
which you imprinted on my Soul; nor can I allege any Merits of my own, that
may make me worthy of your favor or mercy; but like a helpless wretch, my own
Conscience cries out guilty, and fills me with shame and confusion before the
Tribunal of your Sacred Majesty. What hopes then of redress? What Advocate to
plead my cause? Shall the Sins of my Life past separate me from what is so dear
to me? O Eternal Sun of Glory, let the peircing beams of your brightness
dissipate the dark Clouds of my Transgressions; and open the way for an
Interview, between me and you, the only comfort of my Soul. Let the ardent fire
of your Charity dissolve whatever is hard and frozen in me; inflame my heart
with an intense love for your Beauty and excellency; let not Heaven frown upon
me, for therein lies all the Treasure I hope for.

Have mercy therefore upon me, O most compassionate Redeemer! I am that
Prodigal Child, who have spent so many Years in Ignorance and Error, consuming
the precious substance of your Sovereign Graces, by my vain and licentious
living, and now finding my self destitute of all Spiritual helps, by your sweet
attracting Inspirations, I return full of sorrow and confusion, to you my
loving Father, my skilful Physician, my powerful Redeemer; I confess I have
sinned against Heaven and before you; but open, I beseech you, the Bowels of
compassion, and of your great mercy and bounty, receive me again into favor. I
am that lost Sheep who have so long gone astray, from your Flock. But since it
has pleased your never failing Providence, to bring me into the sweet Pastures
of your Holy Catholic Church; keep and preserve me in it, by your most powerful
hand; let not the deceitful allurements of the World, lay any farther infection
upon my Soul. Heal my sores by the infusion of those Spiritual Graces, which
your bitter Passion has Merited for me; bind up my wounds, cleanse me from my
Iniquities, speak but the word, and my Soul shall live.

O let not any thing remain within me that may make me ungrateful to your most
infinite Purity. Your All-seeing Eye does most clearly penetrate the most
secret corners of my Soul. Burn therefore, and consume with that Fire of pure
Charity, all the stubble and dross of my former transgressions; that I may have
a pure Soul, suitable to your pure love; for you know, that nothing can satiate
my ardent desires, but your self; in whom all good is contained: Give your self
therefore O Beauty of Angels, give your self to my Soul, and I shall be rich
enough. But alas, what reciprocal Oblation can I make, O source of goodness? I
can give nothing to you but what I have received from you, take therefore to
your self, my whole Being, take all the powers of my Soul, all the senses my
Body, my Heart, my Will, my Desires, and Affections; take all that I am, have,
or can hope for, and if I had more I would give more; if I may call any thing a
gift to your self, who are the Supreme Lord of all things; and therefore,
whatever I can give you, is already your own; take therefore what is yours, and
dispose of it, according to your most blessed Will and Pleasure: Make my Will
yours, and let all the faculties of my Soul never move, but to bless and praise
you; that so drawing nearer and nearer to you, who are my sole delight, I may
at length be wholly absorpt, in your Sacred Divinity, and Celebrate your praises
with an Eternal Alleluia.

Thus you see how by the purgative, and illuminative way, she attains to the
Unitive, after so high and wonderful a manner; that she seems to have traced
out the footsteps of that worthy Gentleman, and great Spiritualist, Mr.
Ruisson (with whom as I before mentioned she became acquainted at Liege) and to
have put in practice those admirable directions for Prayer, which at her
request he gave her, in a Letter not long before her Death. Which since there
appears in it an Idea of that Perfection, to which he had arrived, and she so
closely followed; tho it be somewhat long, yet I cannot believe it will seem
tedious, and therefore have set it down at large in the following Chapter.

CHAP. VII.
Mr. Ruisson's Letter to Sister Clare; containing admirable directions for
Prayer and Union with God, in which Perfection chiefly consists: Together with
her humble Answer.

DEar Sister in Jesus Christ, in the Country of darkness all is darkness. The
light is reser'd for Heaven, which God hides from us in this World under
Shadows, Visions and Figures, which St. Dennis of Alexandria admired. and
reverenced, without understanding them. Whilst Adam acted by the Principles of
Faith, he conserved himself in the State of Innocence, and Immortality, and in
a perfect Union with God; but from the moment he endeavored to raise himself
to the light of knowledge, he lost himself in it is darkness, and became
Criminal; because he desired a greater knowledge, than God had bestowed upon
him.

So commonly the greatest Scholars, and most piercing Wits, do not make the
humblest and greatest Saints. Learning is a Tyrant, that never fails to
persecute them that possess it. It perverts their Wills, casts them into Pride,
and presumption, and now and then into the Abyss of Heresy and Apostasy. Hence
it is, that God has founded the Maxims of Faith, upon his word; whose chief
Mysteries, and most necessary to Salvation, are incomprehensible; that he might
make the way to Heaven, equally easy to the Learned, and ignorant, to great
and small; and so hold our Judgments in a perfect Union, with all he should
propose by his Church. Moreover, in this blind Obedience, one may testify a
greater fidelity, and practice more Virtue; there being less of self love and
satisfaction, and more courage and generosity, in an humble acknowledgment of
our ignorance (such as St. Paul made when he said, He knew nothing but Christ
Crucified, and that he had no other knowledge, than what he had learnt at the
foot of the Cross) than by being Master of a greater knowledge, than the
greatest Doctors of the Church were inspired with. Wherefore Dear Sister, study
fidelity more than knowledge, value Faith more than Life, and Love, more than
curiosity; which Love operates in you the Union you desire, and has made you
like Abraham leave your House, your Country, and even those tender and Sacred
Friendships, which were permitted you to enjoy in the World: To the end that
this Union might be so much the stronger and more pure, and that God might have
an entire possession of your heart, which he before possessed but by halves.

Dear Sister, this absolute leaving all you possessed, by your Profession in the
face of the Church; this generous submitting your self, for time and Eternity,
to the disposal of the Divine Providence; this blind Obedience, to the Voice of
your Spouse, whom you have followed; does not only unite you to him, but
dispose you to a perfect annihilation of your self; by which one comes to a
kind of Deiformity, which is the Kingdom of God in a Soul; when abandoning her
own knowledge, lights, desires, and will; she plunges her self with all the
effects both of her natural and supernatural Being, into him; that henceforth
she may say with St. Paul, Vivo ego, jam non ego, vivit vero in me Christus; I
live, now it is not I that live, but Christ that lives in me; all her works,
being in a manner Gods operations.

It Is then (when a Soul is arrived to this place) that God is her Life, her
Being, her Light, and her Love; it is then that he works in her all things, she
neither knowing the end, nor cause of them. And this shows the possibility, of
not loosing God a moment, without a continual remembrance of him, or an
apprehension of his presence; he who has his heart and eyes continually upon
you, as if you were the Object of his happiness, cannot loose you for an
instant; you have therefore nothing to loose; because he is your All; and you
cannot loose any thing because you possess him, who is all things; and because
you have left off what you were in appearance, and in your own judgment; that
he alone might reign and triumph in you, and be All in All to you. Besides a
Soul in Grace, can neither forget, nor loose God for one single moment; as well
according to nature (her Memory and Will being an indivisible part of her self,
and without parts) as according to God who is her Treasure, the Memory of her
Memory, and the Will of her Will; which Powers being united to, and lost in
God, have no more any Being or Action of their own; all their operations,
Exterior and Interior being from God and in God; so that loss or gain,
forgetting or remembering, must be the same to you; for if the actual and
perceptible, remembering, which passes by the sense and imagination, were
profitable for you; he loves you too well, to substract it from you for a
moment. It is not therefore this exterior Image, represented to sense, that you
ought to stop at, but rather at that Interior and Eternal Memory, which resides
in the bottom of your Soul, and is continually in Action, because the Principle
of Life is in it, and that is even the Life which makes it live; for in the
State of it is Union with the Body, if cannot raise it self above what it sees
and knows, without the help of some Figure, or Corporal Character; or at least
some shadow of matter, which vanishes away by Faith, as all other material,
transitory, or corruptible things do. Your Perfection therefore dear Sister
consists in being what you are, and doing, what you do, and in nothing else; if
God looked for more be would more hearken after your desires, than his own;
Holy indifferency in a State of Life or Vocation, is that which makes up every
ones Perfection, and Sanctification; for to desire to be more than he has a
mind we should be; to gape after more, than he has a mind to give; not to be
content, with ones Portion; to be unwilling to loose him a moment, when he
retires and hides himself from us on purpose, to dis-unite us from all things
whatever, except from his Holy Will; is an effect of self-love, which instead
of uniting us more and more to him; does rather separate and divide us from him.

It is a lamentable blindness of the greatest part of Spiritual Persons, and
rather hinders, than augm^nts their Perfection; when they let themselves be
carried on with too great a heat, and zeal to obtain it; whereas, they rather
ought with patience, and sweetness, to expect it, from the pure goodness and
Grace of God. How many Prayers, Works of Charity, Communions, Watchings,
Labors, Mortifications and Fasts, will one Day crave Justice against us? For
having done them by the Spirit of nature, and to please our selves; and rather
followed our own fancy and opinion, than the Will of God: Which by the Prophet
Isaiah 58.3. he complains of: He only requires from us proportionably to what
he gives us, and is satisfied with our doing his Will with a Purity of
Intention, rather than our own; who Sanctifies even our defects, in that single
Relation, they bear to his Orders, and Eternal designs; it is this which made
St. Paul as well as St. Augustine say, He did the evil he would not, and did not
the good he would; at which he was not at all troubled, knowing well that God
does not impute to sin, the failings of nature, which are not free; since love
excuses them, covers them, blots them out, and even turns them to our good, and
glory. So that if you desire to profit by your own losses, to buy Heaven with
bad Money (and indeed we have no other) make a Divine Commerce, an Eternal
Bargain with God; whereby your Will, which is a free, Spiritual; and an
Immortal Power, Mistress of her self, and of all the other Powers, does from
this moment for ever destine, employ, and apply, all the parts and pieces of
your Being, to be (as the hand of a Dial that shows the hour) a perpetual
Remembrance, Congratulation, Thanksgiving and Iubilation for all the Praises,
Homages, Respects and Adorations, which all Creatures give, or shall eternally
give to God, for the love he bears to himself; to the end you may Adore, and
Glorify him in this Spirit; and love him with that eternal love, which alone
is worthy of him: And God will show you as much good will, and give you as
great a reward for it, as if you your self did give all the Offerings,
Sacrifices, and Blessings, which Men and Angels give him in Heaven and Earth.
Nay, the Will, that has an Infinity for it is Object, may make all the
Individuals, of Human, and Angelical Natures; all the motions of Soul, and
Body; Nay even all Created Beings, to an Atome or grain of Sand; concur to so
noble a work.

Good God how admirable, profitable, and Divine is this exercise! which costs
nothing at all, and may be completed in a moment? And what Treasures of Glory
does a Man loose, that is either ignorant of it, or neglects it? Whilst he is
busied in so many things, whilst he is sad or joyful, upon account of different
accidents; without referring them to God, as their Origin: Since in him they
are eternal, infinite, and most perfect, and out of him they are nothing but
vanity and lys; that is finite, corruptible, and subject to an infinity of
changes. Dear Sister, stop a while here, view this Spirit of Unity, which is
the Spirit of God himself, which gathers divided and dis-united things into
one, to draw us out of multiplicity and the imperfection of nature, into this
holy Union, with a Transformation into himself: Which makes one contrary to be
found in the other, the Creature in God, Perfection in Imperfection, Unity in
Multiplicity, Light in Darkness, Peace in War, Recollection in Distraction,
Sweetness in the Cross, Abundance in Poverty, Life in Death, Corporal in
Spiritual, God in All, and All in Him. Do not mistake me I beseech you, in
thinking that because God changes so often his manner of proceeding with you,
he is not still yours, and you his; dive by the light of Faith, into the
darkness where he hides himself penetrate the Veiles of Bodies and Spirits,
with which he covers himself; see him act in all his Creatures, giving them
their determinate motion, who is properly their Life and Being: Not a Hair
presents it self unto our Eyes, without his sight and permission; to the end,
that that lively and active Faith of yours, may see him in his Images, and
Characters; as we see a Saint in his Clothes, or a Friend in Imagination;
whilst we behold his Picture, that repairs the weakness of our Memory.

Dear Sister, make the last effort, imitate a King, who to Establish himself,
and to Reign peaceably in a Kingdom newly Conquered; fills every place with
horror and desolation: Puts to the Sword, not only such as oppose his designs,
but even rids himself of his suspected Friends, for fear of some Treasonable
surprise. In like manner do you kill and destroy all your Sworn Enemies,
Annihilate all your desires, and Passions, take leave even of what appears
Virtue and Perfection; because they make a noise and pudder, and cause more
Smoke and distracttion, than they augment the fire of Love: Bid Love enter into
it is source, cause Humility to keep love Company, or debase it self below
Lucifer; and desire your Friends to sleep and take their repose; since the Son
of Man goes to be abandoned, forsaken, and Crucified; to Establish God alone in
All, and through All. His Dominion and Empire in a Soul in Grace, is the
Creating Essence, or the very Essence of the Creator.

I have made an Epitome of the Nothing of all things, and of the All of God,
which Practice will better explain, than reason: I hope this at present is
sufficient to assure you, of the Affection of him who is, as much as any one in
the World, except your Brother Clare, Dear Sister

Your most humble, and most affectionate Servant in God, RUISSON.
Herke July 13. 1669.

To show with what Humility, and how briefly and solidly she replied to this
excellent Letter; I will here set down her Answer, Translated out of French,
which contains a great deal of substance in a few words.

SIR,
I Confess it is a good while since I received your welcome Letter, which my
indisposition hindered me till now from Answering: Please but to obtain for me
some of that true and pure love of God, which you so well discourse of, and so
faithfully practice, that animated thereby, I may be able to suffer sickness or
whatever God pleases to send me, with such a perfect submission, and Union to
his Divine Will, as that I may become entirely his; and then I shall be better
able to converse with you, for at present I am unworthy of such a Conve^sation;
but must own, that when it is God's Will to move you to Write to me, I both
receive and read your Letters, with a great deal of comfort; yet cannot desire
this, or any thing else; but that his Holy Will should be done in all things.
Amen.

SIR, Your most unworthy Servant, CLARE of JESUS. For the Love of God, and the
Blessed Virgin Pray for me.


CHAP. VIII.
A Short Account of some remarkable passages, in the Life and Death of Mr.
Ruisson.

SInce Mr. Ruisson's Letter, set down in the foregoing Chapter, as you have
seen, contains so much Spirit and Devotion, I think it will be no unpardonable
digression, if I add a word or two concerning himself, that the Reader may be
convinced, that this Servant of God practiced what he Taught; and thereby be
induced to set a high value and estimate, as well upon his Person, as upon his
Doctrine; and also conceive a higher esteem of Sister Clare; since a Person so
Illuminated and favored by God as he was, expressed so high an esteem of her, and
such a Zeal to serve her, in so earnestly promoting her advancement in
Perfection, and the service of God.

Take for a mark of his Humility, (a Virtue that is the foundation of all
Perfection) the humble Letter he Writ to Brother Clare, then Studying
Philosophy at Liege, in which he enclosed the foresaid Letter, unsealed; where
after all the pains he had taken in Writing it, and in obtaining light from
Heaven, without which, such a Letter could not be Writ; left the sending or
burning it entirely to him, confiding more in the Judgment of others, than his
own; a great mark of Humility, and of the true Spirit of God. His Letter
follows, Translated out of Latin in which it was Writ.

Dearest Brother in Christ,
I Received your Letter with the enclosed from Dearest Sister Clare, which I
here send you, to let you see her great Humility; 'twas to me a true Spur to
Virtue, perceiving thereby, she adhears only to God, this being her sole aim,
this her only desire: And to express her Humility the more, she asks of me,
altogether ignorant of this Union or Transformation, some directions to obtain
it, or rather a method of removing all impediments of that, she her self
possesses; but knows not she does so: And rather than not satisfy her great
Humility, I am most willing to discover my own ignorance; and have therefore
said what occurred, on this high, but profitable subject; easier learnt by
Practice, than taught by Rules: If you approve of them please to send them, and
that she may like them the better, and receive them rather from the hand of
God, than that of a Sinner (tho her Humility will not permit her to reject them
upon this account) please to show them to some experienced persons of your
College, that they may have their approbation, especially to some of those,
who have treated with her, and therefore can best judge whether they will be
profitable for her: If they disapprove them, burn them; for I had no other aim
in Writing them, than to show that there was nothing more grateful to me than
by serving her, to express my esteem and affection, for so great a Servant of
God, as I esteem her to be: For to serve her, is a greater happiness and
treasure to me, than any this World can afford me. I recommend my self and
Family to your Prayers, and am from the bottom of my heart,

Dearest Brother, Your most humble, and unworthy Servant, RUISSON.


His Son the chief hopes of his Family, being now grown up in Years, and having
had an Education suitable to his Birth and Quality, Mr. Ruisson designed
presently to Marry him, that he might see him happily settled in the World,
before he left it; and therefore made it his business to find out a Match that
was convenient for him. But whilst the good Father was thus contriving to
settle his Son in the World, his Heavenly Father called him out of it, not
immediately to himself, but to a Religious Life, the best and next way to him;
for his Son finding himself inspired by God, to enter among the Discalc't
Carmelites, was fearful of proposing it to his Father (knowing his designs
looked another way, and believing it impossible to gain his consent) and chose
rather first to enter into Religion, and then acquaint his Father with it:
Which he did presently after in a very Dutiful Letter, assuring him that the
too great affection he bore him, made him not discover his Inclinations to
Religion, apprehending on the one side least his compassion, in being a
Spectator of his Fathers afflictions, might be so great, as even to make him
stagger in his Vocation; and on the other, fearing he should be wanting in his
gratitude to God, for having given him so gracious a Call to the most happy
State of a Religious Life; if he did not first embrace the happiness God called
him to, before he acquainted his Father, with his design: Wherefore he begged
his pardon for so bold an attempt; for he hoped his prefering what he thought
Gods Will, before his, would not appear a Crime; and that it might not, he
desired him rather to Attribute his not asking his advice, to the diffidence he
had in his own strength, to resist his kind and powerful persuasions; than to a
want of due confidence in him; assuring him, that in all other things, he
should make it his utmost endeavor to contribute to his greater comfort and
satisfaction, and thereby express his due Obedience to his last breath.

Mr. Ruisson was indeed, as his Son expected, much surpised at this Letter,
but 'twas with a joyful, not sorrowful surprizal; for contrary to his Son's
apprehension, he congratulates with him for his happy choice, by which he had
raised his felicity above whatever he could have hoped to compass for him in
this World, should he have been able to have left him the Universe. And as for
what concerned his, and his Families advancement by the Match he had in
prospect for him; he looked upon it as unworthy of his thoughts, in comparison
of the comfort he took, in seeing him so: happy by the choice he had made:
Assuring him, he should be better pleased to have his Family end this way, than
to leave him Master of it: Because by his quitting these transitory goods, he
had put-himself into a secure way of gaining, not only a Hundredfold in this
life, according to our Saviors promise to those that quit Father or Mother,
House or Lands, etc. for his sake; but an Everlasting Inheritance, and an
Eternal felicity in the next. And therefore, he rather Congratulated, and
envied his Pious undertaking, than dis-approv'd or repined at it. And in a
Letter to Brother Clare not long after this had happened, he Writes as follows.
Whilst my thoughts were taken up about Marrying my Son, behold a wonderful
effect of Providence, a change wrought by the powerful hand of the highest,
more pleasing to me than the gaining an Empire: He without acquainting me, or
any of his friends with his design, is entered to be Religious amongst the
Carmelites: Expressing hereby such a contempt of the World, as it truly
deserves. Wherefore, pardon me if I have recourse to yours, as I have to the
rest of my friends Prayers; that the mercy of God would vouchsafe to cherish
that Seed of his Grace, he has cast into his Heart; and not permit my
unworthyness to be any impediment to the continuance of his mercy toward him.

Not long after, his House at Herke, near Mountague, was casually set on Fire,
and happening in the Night, 'twas so late discovered, that all endeavors they
could use, toward the quenching of it, proved in-effectual; nor were they able
to save any thing considerable of his Goods: He was all the time as busy as
any one, in his endeavors, both to suppress the Fire, and secure what he could
of his Goods; but when he found the Fire had got the upper hand, and all his
endeavors were in vain, he went and warmed himself (it being Winter time) with
as much unconcernedness, tranquillity, and cheerfulness of mind (which visibly
appeared in his Countenance) as if it had been a Bone-fire; which one of his
Neighbors took great notice of, and extremely wondering at this his
extraordinary comportment, asked him how it was possible to suffer so great a
Cross, with so much calmness and cheerfulness, as he expressed by his looks? To
which he Answered, That he looked upon what had happened to be the Will of
God, who had abundantly recompensed his loss, by giving him a greater comfort
and satisfaction, in seeing his blessed Will performed in this manner, than he
could have received, had he bestowed upon him an infinity of Earthly Treasures,
and Temporal Blessings.

Another very remarkable thing of this Gentleman is, that the day before his
Death, Brother Clare going to Montague, took his way by Herke, to have the
satisfaction of giving Mr. Ruisson a Visit (who had been so kind as to give him
many at Liege, upon the account of that Spiritual Friendship, which he had
contracted with Sister Clare) coming thither, he found him very sick; yet
perfectly in his Senses, and as cheerful as ever he had seen him; but was
concerned to see him laid after so poor a manner upon the ground, and asking
the reason of it; his Servants signified, that it was in Obedience to his own
Orders, they had made his Bed in that manner; and that he would scarce, tho in
so weak a condition, admit of any help from them; and had also desired his
Wife, for his, as well as for her own greater comfort (being he saw she
suffered very much to see him in that condition) that she would not come to
him; but leave him to make the best use he could, of those few moments he had
left. Brother Clare, tho pleased to see him, as Mr. Ruisson also seemed to be
with his Visit, yet was troubled to see him so ill accomadated; and therefore
begged of him, to accept at least of such helps and conveniences, as that
dangerous condition he was in required, that might conduce both to his ease in
his sickness, and contribute also to his recovery; for the manner he had
ordered himself to be treated, could not but much augment his distemper, which
of it self was already too great. To all which he replied, That could he be
without those conveniences he still had, he should be very glad; and if he did
but know what comfort he received by the want of those he had deprived himself
of, he would rather press him to quit those he had left, than desire him to
admit of others; and then asked Brother Clare, Whether he thought the
Inconveniences he suffered were comparable to those which our Savior had
suffered, for his sake? And farther aver'd, That the only trouble he now felt,
was, that he could not suffer more at his Death; to express his Love to him,
that dyed with so much pain for him upon the Cross. He expressed this with such
a cheerful and unconcerned Countenance, as made Brother Clare not think him to
be in that danger, that others thought he was in; otherwise he would have given
himself the comfort and advantage of being present at his Death: Which happened
the same Night he left him. He giving no less evidence of his Virtue at his
Death, than he had done in his Life; not only by a perfect: Resignation to Gods
Will in suffering it; but by earnestly desiring, as St. Paul did, To be
dissolved, and to be with Christ.

Perhaps the occasion of this great Friendship, he expressed both to Brother and
Sister Clare, proceeded from those Inclinations he found in himself, to do what
they had done; and in this without doubt Almighty God made him a kind of living
Martyr; even by the too great Affection of the Person, he loved most in the
World (I mean his Wife) who out of the tender Affection she had for him, never
would give her consent, for their retirement into Religion; tho he had
frequently desired it, with very great instance: And this kind cruelty of hers,
was doubtless so great a cross, as nothing but his Love to Gods Will could
sweeten, and render supportable: The truth of which he one Day confidently
discovered to Brother Clare; for discoursing with him about the happiness of a
Religious Vocation, he told him in Confidence, That it was a double favor, that
God had bestowed upon him, in giving him such a Vocation, in the State he was
in; and at the same time affording him, the means of putting it in execution,
by giving his Lady the same inclination. God indeed, says he, has been so good
as to grant me the first, by letting me see the happiness of a Religious State,
and giving me very earnest desires of entering into Religion; but as yet he has
vouchsafed to give me little hopes of putting these in execution; not
perceiving he gives the same to my Wife; and added, that he found it very hard
to receive such a Mortification, as a refusal was, to so advantageous a
request, from a person he so entirely loved, and who also refused it out of a
Motive of love to him; wherefore he thought this so great an affliction, as
'twas impossible for any one to conceive the greatness of it, that did not
actually feel it.

CHAP. IX.
A remarkable passage of her burning her Picture, a little before her Death.

IT IS a common Axiom in Philosophy, that motion (for example, in a Stone cast
down from a high place) the nearer it comes to the end, or Center to which it
tends, the more swift it is. Sister Clares example seems to prove, that the
same Axiom holds no less in Moral than in Natural Philosophy; for tho from her
first Conversion to the Catholic Faith, and her entrance into Religion, which
immediately followed the other, she never stopped; but still made a constant and
continual progress in Perfection; managing each precious moment of time to the
best advantage, to prepare her self for a happy Eternity; still advanceing
toward her end and Center of her affections, God himself: Yet there is one
instance of her Zeal, that happened a little before her Death, which manifestly
proves that the nearer she approacht her end, the swifter progress she made;
and tho perhaps what I am about to relate, may at the first fight appear to
some less considerable; yet whosoever shall rightly weigh it, cannot but be of
my opinion, that it far exceeded the other actions of her Life; expressing a
strange fund of Humility, Contempt of her self, and solid Piety; which also
evidences that the lower she hereby debast her self, in her own thoughts, the
higher she was raised in Gods esteem, and in a very short time mounted to such
a hight of Perfection, as deserved immediately to be Crowned.

Brother Clare, long before he, or she had any thoughts of Religion, had
procured her Picture to be drawn in Miniature, by that famous and renowned
Artist Mr. Cooper, which being extremely well done, and very like her, he
caused to be set in Gold, with a Cristal before it. This Picture he sent to her
with other things to Graveling, supposing she would bestow them upon the
Children: As soon as they came, she begged leave to dispofe of the Picture;
Mother Abbess thinking she desired this leave, that she might give it to one of
her Children, told her she might dispose of it as she pleased; she had no
sooner obtained Mother Abbesses consent, but she presently endeavored to get
the Picture out of the Case; and what a Workman could scarce have done with
Tools in a Quarter of an hours time, Providence, helped her with a Pin only, to
take out in a moment (even to her own admiration, as she afterward declared)
and lest her design should be discovered, before she could meet with a
convenience of burning it; she immediately scratcht the Face all over with the
same Pin, with which she had taken it out of the Case, and as soon as she came
to the Fire, so dexterously threw it in, that none perceived it. Not long after,
Reverend Mother Abbess asking for the Picture, Sister Clare ingenuously told
her what she had done with it, having had her leave, to dispose of it as she
pleased: And Brother Clare hearing also she had burnt it, and some time after
Expostulating with her, for having deprived the Children of so comfortable a
Treasure, as that would have been to them; she made him this Answer, That she
was sorry she had done what she found was displeasing to him, which he would
not have disapproved had he reflected how fit it was, that the Picture, of what
she had taken so much Pride in, should come to no better an end, than the
Original deserved; Ingeniously covering and excusing one act of Humility with
another. This seemed to be the last Action that God Almighty had reserved, for
the completing of her Crown; for the very Morning that the Copy thus
perished, the Original was seized on by her last Sickness, as if the Humility
she had expressed in burning her Picture, had obtained of God to perfect the
Original, and render it more like his own Image, by calling her to his
Beatifical Vision; St. John assuring us, We shall be like him when we shall
see him as he is; Providence also hereby manifesting, that the more earnestly
she desired to be forgot by Creatures, the more she was remembered and rewarded
by her Creator. So that whilst Sister Clare thus fervently endeavored in a
little time, to make up a great Crown, by a faithful practice of all Virtues;
especially, of a profound Humility, the foundation of them all; Almighty God,
as I before hinted, designed to put a Period to her Virtuous course; judging it
time to reward the labors of so Penitential a Life, as her love had caused her
both to undertake for his sake; and to make such wonderful progress in, as I
have recounted: Whereby she deserved the Encomium, which the Holy Ghost gives a
fervent Soul, Viz. that she had consummated or heapt together in a short time,
so great a stock or Treasure of Virtue and Merits, as others in a long time,
even in many Years were not able to obtain.

CHAP. X.
The Foresight God gave her of her Death, her concern for her Fathers
Conversion, and her Letters to him about it.

THE reward that God often bestows upon persons of an extraordinary Piety and
Virtuous Life, is a foresight and knowledge of their Death; both to animate
them to spend the short time that remains, to make up their Crown with greater
fervor; and the better to prepare themselves for this change, by a frequent
Resignation, and ardent desires of a happy disolution, that ends in the
beginning of an Eternal Union with himself. It Is probable, as we may gather
from that which follows, that God had bestowed this favor upon Sister Clare;
for whom Reverend Mother Abbess being much concen'd, by reason of the accident
which that Morning had happened to her, of falling into a sound in the Quire,
(she having no less kindness and tenderness for her, than her Predecessor had)
went to Visit her in the Infirmary, whether she had ordered her to retire her
self, to try if she could repose; thinking nothing better for her: Where
finding she had got two or three hours rest, Mother Abbess was much comforted
to see her so extraordinary cheerful, as she seemed to be; hereupon she told
her, she thought the worst was now past; and expressed how comforted she was to
see her so well. She smiling told Mother Abbess, That she thanked God she found
her self ready and most perfectly resigned to embrace his Holy Will in all
things, and therefore had no apprehensions at all of Death; nay, if she could
desire one thing more than another, it would be rather to die, than live: And
that which now comforted her, was the thought that this would be her last
Sickness. Reverend Mother Abbess earnestly desired her to lay aside these
thoughts, telling her there was not the least appearance of any danger of
Death; and that she hoped soon to see her as well again, as ever she was in her
Life: But she Answered with a smiling Countenance, full of comfort and
conformity. Dear Mother, God has now decided a Question (which I have often
thought of with no small trouble) Viz. Whether Brother Clare or I should die
first? For knowing how great an Affliction, the Death of either would be to the
surviver; and diffiding in my own strength and ability to bear such a cross;
and on the other side compassionating the affliction, which I am sure he would
suffer, I durst never beg the one, or the other. But now it is Gods Will that
I should go first, and this Sickess is to carry me to my Grave. I doubt not,
but his Infinite goodness, who designs to give Brother Clare this Cross, will
also give him strength to bear it. This passage alone is an undeniable
Argument, as I said before, of her being a Favorite of Heaven, and evidently
shows the great Union she had with God in Prayer, and is a signal token of her
great Conformity to the Will of her Heavenly Father.

After she had imparted this sad and Prophetical News to Reverend Mother
Abbess, her Feavor grew more violent, which finding a Body so exhausted and
broken, it soon got the Mastery over Nature, and rendered her unable to take
any farther care or charge of her Children; yet did not hinder her from
prosecuting her Pious endeavors for her Fathers Conversion; by making use of
that little strength she had left, to Write at different times the following
Letter.

SIR,
MY true and Passionate desires for your happiness, cannot be lessened by any
severity of yours, nor can your silence frighten me out of the concern, I ought
to have for your felicity to my last breath. The daily experience I have, of
the comfort and happiness that there is, in being in the true Catholic Church,
breaks my heart to think that you are out of it; and that I am yet so uncertain
of meeting you in an Eternity of Ioys. O let it not be so any longer, the ways
to God are sweet and easy, you will never find comfort, seek it as long as you
please, but in God. You would pardon me this presumption I allow my self; if
you saw my heart, and Tears which almost hinder me from Writing this Letter;
and I am sure they would move your goodness to a compliance with my request, in
vouchsafeing me an Answer; which I shall receive on my Knees with inexplicable
joy, if it please God that I live till it comes. I humbly beg your blessing,
and my Ladies, for the Children and

Your unworthy Child, CLARE of JESUS.


Not long after she had Writ this Letter, a good occasion offering it self by a
Gentleman's passing through Graveling, who going for England, undertook to
deliver a Letter to her Father, with his own hand; she took the pains to Write
again, being moved to it by the thoughts of her own approaching Death, as well
as by the news of the Death of several of her Fathers Neighbors and Relations,
which put her in mind of what might happen to him, and how unprepared he was
for it.

SIR,
WHilst I was making a strict iniquiry, how I might speedily, and securely send
you another Letter, in hopes that before I die, your goodness would move you to
vouchsafe me the comfort of such an Answer, as my heart most passionately longs
for; Providence was pleased to bring a Gentleman this way, who has kindly
offered me the safe conveyance of this Letter into your hands; wherefore, tho I
very lately troubled you with one, and tho Writing in the weak condition I am
in, gives me a great deal of pain; yet that of the Body is nothing in respect
of the pain my Soul suffers, as often as I reflest upon the danger yours is in;
and that the Eternal happiness of that, depends upon the uncertain moments of
this transitory Life. Wherefore Dear Sir, once more upon my Knees, I humbly beg
your Blessing, which perhaps will be the last time I shall ask it, and also beg
the comfort of hearing of your health, which I hope is good, tho I thank God
mine is at present in a very low condition; his Divine Will be done in me, who
does all things for the best. Alas Sir, when I consider that we are all Mortal,
and that there is an Eternity of Happiness or Misery that attends us; how can I
refrain from being thus troublesome? Since I know not how soon that change may
come to you, which I have reason to expect will soon happen to my self; and
which I lately heard, has arrived to several of your Neighbors; who tho young,
and (as I fear) far from the thoughts of it, are now but Dust. How then can the
pain that my Heart feels be concealed? Or indeed, how can I express what I
feel, till you are out of danger; and in such a condition, as Death may be
welcome to you, whenever it comes? For God's sake Sir think of it, surely such
a number of Martyrs, and Learned Confessors, have not despised the World, and
suffered, for nothing; Oh no, God speaks to us in every thing, and all the
Benefits that we receive, every moment proclaim his goodness; who requires
nothing but that we Believe, be Sorry, and be Saved. And when we do believe in,
and love Jesus Crucified, that we hate our selves for having offended so much
love: Having done this, what he requires for our Repentance, instead of seeming
hard, will prove sweet and easy. And so I doubt not but it will to you (Dear
Sir) if at my humble request you will do this; and that you will find such a
joy and comfort in the doing it, as all your past Life could never afford you.
Behold me now therefore prostrate (if I could) below the Feet of all Creatures,
and even the Earth it self, to beg of you for Christ's sake, not to deny my
request, of retiring your self two or three Days, to consider the Truth of
things; and to take to heart your Eternal concern. If I were dying you would
not deny me this, and I know not how far I am from it at present, being very
ill of a languishing distemper, which I fear will end in Death. And therefore I
beg it of you, as my last request; with all the tenderness and earnestness, my
Soul can express; assuring you, that your grant of it will be as dear to me, as
the Life you gave me. Pardon my too great boldness, I beseech you, for tho I
would not for the World willingly offend you, yet I cannot avoid making this
presumptuous request (as I fear you will think it) Dear Sir, my heart is too
full of Affection, Respect and Concern for you, to be silent where your Eternal
happiness is in so eminent a danger. I humbly beg my Ladies and your own
Blessing for

Your Poor Sick Child, CLARE of JESUS.


CHAP. XI.
Her interior sufferings, in time of her sickness, and the effects of her
Childrens Visit.

ONE would have thought that the infinite goodness of God, which permits him
not to be behind hand with his Creatures, seeing her in the interior affliction
she suffered, upon account of her Father, as the foresaid Letters sufficiently
express; as well as the exterior she felt from her Sickness, and a want of
those helps to bear it, which the Austerity of her Order permitted not the use
of, and which her love for him had therefore made her choose, loving suffering
above all things in this World, because it was the best expression she could
make of her love to him: I say, one would have thought that the goodness of God
would have moved him to temper, and sweeten these great afflictions, with some
interior Comforts; but it happened, that his Providence dealt quite otherwise
with her, not out of a want of Love, but out of an abundance of it; who seeing
the fidelity and courage, with which she served him, and her constant
Conformity to his Divine Will, even in the hardest things; and knowing also,
what an Eternal weight of Glory, these momentary sufferings gained for her, and
that the more pure her sufferings were, the greater also was her gain; seemed
to withdraw himself together with all interior comforts that accompany a
sensible feeling of his presence, so entirely from her, that she thought he had
totally abandoned, and forsaken her; tho still he resided in the secret of her
heart, and invisibly assisted her to bear this most sensible affliction.
Declaring one Day these her sufferings to a Sister that came to Visit her, who
was a great confident of hers, she desired her to Pray for her, that she might
entirely abandon her self to Gods Will; and signified to her how great an
addition it was to the Mortification her sickness brought with it, that it
deprived her of Religious observance; especially, that of the Divine Office.
Another time she expressed her self to those that Visited her in the following
manner. Happy are you dear Sisters, that can assist in the Quire amongst those
Seraphims (for so she called the Religious) in praising and loving God, and can
still be punctual in the performance of all other things, that Religious
Observance requires; alas, we never know a Benefit till we are deprived of it.
How happy was I when I had strength and abilities to perform, what our Rules
require; but not justly acqutting my self in the performance of them, God has
justly placed me here, and taken that happiness from me; to whom I humbly
submit; for I know his Infinite Wisdom thinks it best to have it so, his Holy
Will be done: Adding moreover, That it seemed to her, since she had left these
exercises, as if God also had abandoned her; and that she had nothing now to
comfort her self withal; but the thoughts that he treated her no worse then his
own Son, whom also he had abandoned for her sake; all therefore she was able
now to do, was to unite these her interior sufferings and derelictions, to
those he suffered upon the Cross, when he complained of his Eternal Fathers
forsaking him; and begged of them to assist her with their Prayers, that she
might bear this trial, as she ought; testifying, that the pain it occasioned
was so great, as that it had made her almost insensible of her exterior
sufferings, neither feeling the pain of her distemper, nor tasting what was
given her to Eat. One of the good Sisters thinking to give her ease in these
her sufferings, at least for some little time, desired she would admit of a
Visit from her Children; but she knowing, how much her indisposition had
changed her from what she had been formerly, was unwilling; for fear she should
not have strength enough to maintain that equality of mind, which she had till
then expressed in such like occasions; yet after much entreaty she gave her
consent, that they should be brought to her; no sooner were they come to the
Bedside, but she fell a weeping. This unexpected accident made them presently
be taken away from her, and after they were gone, the Sister asked her, the
cause of her Tears, she answered, 'twas my tenderness that made me VVeep, being
well I had often much a do to forbear the expressing the sentiments of a
Mother; but now being overcome by sickness, I cannot overcome my self. Then the
Sister asked her, How she had attained to that great Mortification, and
conquest over Nature? She replied, That from the moment she left Brother Clare,
all things, but God were displeasing to her, and that the Children putting her
in mind of that other Sacrifice, which she had made to God, caused her a new to
settle her Affections upon her Creator, which by the assistance of his Divine
Grace, could not be altered by any Creature. Perhaps the thoughts, that this
was the last time she should ever see them in this World, and that they were to
be left to the care of strangers, or else exposed to a dangerous Education by
their Protestant Relations, might occasion her tenderness in this Visit, which
she overcame in the next; in which the Children were also taken from her, upon
account of their own, arid not of their Mothers Tears. As soon as they were out
of the Room, Mother Abbess asked her, If she were not troubled for them, No,
said she, I bless God not in the least, for I have long since given them into
his hands and powerful protection, who I am sure can, and will take care of
them.

Without doubt (as the Religious took notice of before) she had as great a
Tenderness for her Children, as a Mother could have, and yet she was so much
Mistress over this passion, as she seemed to have none at all for them, which
made one of the Religious once tell her in Recreation, That she would be much
above her in Heaven by reason of the great Oblation she had made; To whom
Sister Clare Answered, It is you dear Sister, that will meet with the highest
place there, for having given your self to him, when you were Young, making him
your only Spouse; upon which the Sister replied, And do you count it a small
thing to leave Brother Clare, and your two Angelical Children? Here her
Humility would not let her own the greatness of the gift, yet her love to God
forced her to make this acknowledgment. In leaving Brother Clare and my
Children, I cannot say that I have left nothing, and then smiling said; God
deserves greater Sacrifices Dear Sister, than we can make him.

CHAP. XII.
Another trial God gave her to complete her Crown.

IT IS a strange and wonderful Paradox, that affliction should be a mark of
Love; yet the Divine Wisdom, Truth it self has declared, That God Chastises
those he Loves. If this therefore be true as certainly it is, his Love to Sister
Clare was very extraordinary, who gave her so many marks of it, by sending her
so many afflictions: But one comfort she expressed to have still left, was, that
she should die before Brother Clare; but God would not permit her long to enjoy
this neither; and would also give her this trial, even when she was in so very
weak a condition, as made her less able to bear it, Viz. the suspicion of
Brother Clares Death, which happened from his unwonted silence to several
Letters she had Writ to him, and in some of them about the Children's concerns,
which she knew he would not fail to Answer by the first opportunity; and
because she was disappointed in this, she imagined, that he was dead; and under
that conviction suffered as much, as if he had been truly so; yet she silently
underwent this hidden affliction for a long time with that courage, as not to
discover any outward sign of grief at all; till at last her want of strength,
forced her at least to a change of Countenance, caused by this following
accident. She giving some Letters which she had Writ to Brother Clare, to send
by a Father that was going to Liege; the Sister that was to carry them to the
Father, finding them open, desired her to Seal them, upon which proposal they
discerned a more then ordinary change in her Countenance; which proceeded, as
afterward she owned, from the Confirmation this action of the Sister gave to
the suspicion she before had of his Death; she believing that to hide it, such
care was taken that she should Seal her Letters. This certainly was one of the
greatest trials that could befall her, or that could call her constancy in the
love of God to a more than ordinary Test. If you desire to know the conflict
she felt, and how she behaved her self in it, take it in her own words, as I
find amongst her Papers, she gave account of it to her Ghostly Father. The
Combat I had, and how I wholly offered up Brother Clare to Almighty God, which I
beseech him, our Blessed Lady, and all my Patrons and Patronesses, to assit me
to keep: I by Almighty Gods Grace resolved to make this Sacrifice to his
greater Honor and Glory; and when I heard the Mass Bell Ring, my heart
trembled, and I was all in a Commotion; the first thing as I remember I did was
to fancy him dead, and so I presented him at our Blessed Ladies Feet, and
beseecht her to offer him up for me; I begged also the aid of St. Bruno and St.
Teresa, and then I resolved never to desire to see him, and if he should come,
never to look on him, to put him clearly out of my heart, to be no more
concerned in him than a stranger; then it came into my mind to behold him dead,
and to say to Almighty God I was glad of it, and would have it so, since he was
pleased to have it so, but this cut my heart into a thousand pieces: Then I
resolved I would never give my self any pleasure, in talking of him or suffer
my self to feel that contentment in heaving of him, or from him; then I
resigned my self, that he should persecute me, and that he should have no
concern in me, then I presumed to take our Savior for my Spouse, and resolved
to go to him and complain in all my troubles, as I used to do to Brother Clare,
to rejoice to hear him praised or well spoken of, and so perfectly turn the
stream of my affections entirely to our Savior; but then I thought how durst I
take our Savior for my Spouse, I was not pure enough for that; this kept me
back and dashed all my joy; but methought, howsoever, tho I did not feel that
quietness I hoped, yet he would accept of me; and so I presumed to do it. Then
again methougbt I must never speak of that affection we had for one another,
which I resolved never to do; then God enabled me to make an act of resignation
to his Death, for I am sure I could do nothing of my self; so that now I go
imagining him dead, and I will strive to think there was never such a Person.
After this I resolved to confirm all this by Vow, if my director approved it,
which he did; and said, if ou^ Savior would not take me for his Spouse, he
would be pleased to take me for his handmaid, and that was Honor enough.

All Glory, Praise and Honor, be to my good God.

In all this time I suffered what cannot be expressed, and these things came into
my mind without stoping, as if some one had presented them to my thoughts to
torment me. God be thankt for all.

The great kindness she here expresses for Brother Clare, gave her without
doubt the chief cause of that trouble, which the apprehension of his Death
occasioned; but that which extremely augmented this affliction, was the
confirmation that this apprehension gave her, of the truth of another suspicion
(which as I before mentioned had extremely afflicted her) that she was left and
abandoned by Almighty God; perceiving her self deluded, in two points she
thought God had revealed to her, Viz. her dying of that sickness, and that she
should dye before Brother Clare: She now perceiving Heaven had decided the
Question, contrary to what she had before communicated to Reverend Mother
Abbess. In these continual convulsions of doubts and fears, she remained for
about two Months, in a very languishing condition of health; and during all
that time, had an occasion of making as many Sacrifices of Brother Clare, as
she had thoughts of him. And it seemed to be a more than an ordinary effect of
Providence, that so many Letters should meet with so unfortunate mis-carriages
at this time; for tho Brother Clare received, and Answered every Letter she
Writ; yet not one of his Answers came to her hands; Almighty God foreseeing
what an addition would be made to her Crown by this interruption of
Correspondence; by reason of the infinite acts of resignation she daily made to
Gods Holy Will, in bearing his supposed Death, with so singular and invincible
a patience, even in that low and weak condition she was in, her forces seeming
to be quite exhausted; yet neither by sighing, or any other exterior Mark of
grief, did she ever give any sign of this interior sorrow she suffered; which
without doubt was the greater, the more it was suppressed. Perhaps we had never
come to a perfect and entire knowledge of this great and sensible affliction
she so courageously underwent (tho her Paper mentions part of it) had not
Mother Abbess, when one Day she came to Visit her, accidentally asked her,
whether any thing troubled her; bidding her tell her, if there did: When behold
the love she had for prompt Obedience, overcame that, which before she had
expressed for silent suffering; for without any more a do, and without the least
passion, she told her, Dear Mother I believe Brother Clare is Dead, which I
suppose out of too much kindness and Charity toward me, you endeavor to
conceal from me, knowing how unable I am to bear so great an affliction; but if
God please to have it so, his Holy Will be done, he who gave him to me, and
now gives me this cross by taking him from me, hows what is best for me; whose
goodness, as I conside, will assist me to suffer, whatever his Wisdom thinks
best to ordain. Mother Abbess used the best Arguments she could to convince
her, that her apprehension was without ground; but Sister Clare insisting upon
his silence as an infallible argument of his Death; Mother Abbess could not so
well Answer it, having received for a long time no Letters from him; but was
forced to leave her still in a doubt and apprehension, that what she suspected
might be true. But the next Day there came a Packet of Letters from Liege,
which Mother Abbess no sooner received, but she carried it with all speed to
Sister Clare; telling her with a great deal of joy, that she had brought such a
convincing Argument along with her, that Brother Clare was not dead, as she
could not give her the last time she was with her; Viz. a Letter she had just
received from him to her. She received this welcome news with a great deal of
joy, declaring it was a double comfort to her to find he was in good health,
and that the strong inspiration she had received of her dying before him, that
she had also informed her of, proved no illusion, as she feared it had been:
But added that the Letter came too late for her to be able to read it, or
indeed, to hear it Read at present, finding her Head so weak, as that she could
not attend to it; nor indeed was she afterward so well as either to desire any
one to Read it, or did any one think her in a condition to propose the Reading
of it to her: And it is most probable, her desire to the very last, of seeking
her greater Mortification in all things, as well as the memory of the Vow,
which with her Confessors permission she had made, of never giving her self any
satisfaction in hearing of him, or from him, made her take the pretense of her
weakness, to deny her self the satisfaction, which hearing the Letter would
have given her. Tho the truth is she was extremely weak, her strength daily
diminishing, tho the Doctor did not apprehend her so near her Death as in
reality she was; she never expressing to him, or to those that attended her,
any thing at all of what she felt or suffered; and therefore all that he could
frame a judgment from, were the guesses of others, as well of his own from her
pulse; which having been weak and low for a long time, he thought she might
still hold out a good while; tho he believed she would never recover from that
sickness. The only concern she had now left, was for her Fathers Conversion,
and what would become of the Children after her Death; which the thoughts of
Brother Clares Death, had for some time hindered her from thinking upon.

CHAP. XIII.
Her concern for her Father and Children. She seeks her greater Mortification,
even to the last. The Declaration of her satisfaction in her State of Life, a
little before her Death.

THe concern Sister Clare had been in, for the suspected Death of Brother
Clare, and fright of her own being deluded, had for some time made her forget
her concern for her Father; but no sooner were those apprehensions taken away,
but this returned, together with the apprehension, least after her Death, her
Father should endeavor to prosecute his design of geting the Children into
England; and there, perverting them from the Catholic Faith, bring their Souls
into as dangerous a condition as his own was in: But now not being able to
Write her self, she desired one of the Religious to Write, what she would
dictate to her, which she did in the following words.

SIR,
BEing at present, unable to Write my self, I am forced to make use of another
hand, to beg with my last breath, a continuation of your kindness to me, after
my Death, by giving your consent that my Children may be brought up in the
place where they now live; and that you would also please to reflect how unsafe
the Religion you are of, is to dye in; and think before it be too late cf your
Salvation. This I crave of you for the bloody Passions sake of our dear Savior.

Your poor Child, TREVOR HANMER.


At the beginning of her Letter, she seemed pleasant and cheerful, but before
she came to the end of it, the sadness of the subject, had made her Heart also
sad; this Letter tho short, is very expressive of her constant affection to her
Father, and concern for her Children; wherein she to move him the more to grant
what she asked, made use of the most powerful Motives of our Saviors Passion,
and his own Affection; which she endeavored to stir up, by subscribing it with
her Maiden Name.

Being in this weak condition we have mentioned, notwithstanding the interior
and exterior afflictions she suffered, she had not forgot, or lest off to
Mortify her self; for she still practiced it upon her dying Body, out of too
unreasonable a persuit (I know not how to term it) of self denial, and
suffering; refusing to ask that assistance which her condition required, but
would sometimes lie three or four hours, and very often for an hour, with that
stilness and quiet, that one could not discern whether she were living or dead,
unless by her breath. And all judged it to be no little pain, for one in a
Fever to live so long, without any manner of refreshment, or change of
posture, which the Religious were still ready to give her; but she never asked,
nay, would scarce accept of when offered, unless by Obedience. This rendered
the Religious rather sharers in her sufferings, than inabl'd them to give her
any comfort or solace in them. And from this, all that attended her were
assured, that she treated her Body in her sickness, with no less rigor, than
she did in her health; and that to her last breath, she kept inviolably that
purpose I find amongst others in her own hand.

For the love of God I will ever deny my self whatever is pleasing to me, tho
lawful for we; and endeavor as much as Holy Obedience will permit, to do all
such things for his sake, as shall be most contrary to my nature. Let all
Creatures love, praise, and honor, Jesus, Maria, Joseph; but let me be
confounded. A brave and Heroical resolution, in which she expressed the constancy
of her Love to God, and contempt of her self. A few days before her happy
Death, some of the Religious, in the presence of the Doctor, compassionated her
present weakness (for her Spirits were almost exhausted, and her strength quite
spent) but the Doctor Answered, That 'twas no wonder to see her in that
condition, by reason of the many Austerities and Mortifications she had
undergone, and chiefly the violent combat she had often had with Nature, of
which he found evident Symptoms in her Body. Sister Clare hearing this, and
thinking that some might infer from hence, that all her Life in Religion had
been troublesome and uneasy; to remove this suspicion, and to undeceive those
that were present, especially the Doctor; called God to Witness these following
words. I have so much content and satisfaction at present, and always had in
this State of Life, that I voluntarily took upon my self, as that were I again
as free to choose as ever, I would embrace This very condition and State of
Life and no other. Tho this was the last, yet 'twas not the only time she had
signified her satisfaction in Religion, and then also expressed a dislike to her
former condition; for being asked, what moved her so to Mortify her self? She
Answered, That the Love she owed to God, made her esteem all she did and
suffered as nothing, and rendered all the hardships of her present Rules most
easy and pleasant; adding, That what is suffered even in the strictest Orders,
is nothing to what many Worldlings often suffer, even when in outward
appearance they seem most happy.

A few hours before she dyed, she desired that several Candles might be
lighted, and put within her Curtains, which all wondered at; because she had
before expressed a difficulty and unwillingness to see any light. But it seems
that Almighty God moved her to desire this faint Representation, of that
Eternal Light she was going to possess: For she immediately after with a
smiling Countenance declining her Head in Mother Abbesses Breast, without the
least groan or sigh, gave up her pure Soul into the hands of her Creator, about
Seven a Clock at Night, upon the 26th. of January; and as she had lived in a
constant practice, so Providence would have her dye, in the bosom of
Obedience; wherefore we may truly say her Death Answered her Life, she lived a
Saint, and so she died.

The End of the Third Book.
THE LIFE OF THE LADY WARNER. In RELIGION, Sister CLARE of JESUS. THE FOVRTH
BOOK.
CHAP. I.
Marks whereby God gave evidence of her Virtuous Life, after her Death.

THE bounty and liberality of God to his Servants is such, that as they give
signs of their Love toward him in their Life, as well in Body, as Soul; so he
often expresses marks of his after their Death, not only to their Souls in
Heaven, making them partakers of his Beatifical Vision; but also extends such
marks of his Love to their Bodies, still in this World, as may signify to us,
the happiness of their Souls in in the other.

This he expressed to Sister Clare: Whose Countenance after her Death retained
so Angelical and Ravishing a sweetness, as made all the Community, which came
with sad hearts to Visit her Corpse, return with joy; it giving not a delight
only to the exterior Senses, but also an interior comfort to the heart; which
extraordinary effect could be Communicated only by God himself; and that it
might appear so, he gave such a very particular evidence as follows. Her
Children heard not of her Death till the Morning after she dyed; but they no
sooner had notice of this sad news, but they broak forth into such a passion of
crying, as there was no pacifying them, by all the Caresses and kindness they
could show to them; wherefore, Reverend Mother Abbess, experiencing in her self
what comfort she found, when she came to Sister Clares Body, tho before much
afflicted; and finding several of the Religious to express, that they had
experienced the like; sent for the Children into the Quire, where her Body lay
exposed, hoping they might find the same; and by this means become pacified,
which all other endeavors could not effect: Nor was she deceived; for behold
what an extraordinary effect of Gods Power appeared in this moving
circumstance; the Children coming into the Quire in a vehement passion of
crying, as soon as they beheld the Object of their grief, their dear and Dead
Mother, this sight which ordinarily increases passion, so moderated theirs,
that they were immediately pacified; and the sweetness that still remained in
her Countenance, moved them to run to her Body, and express the same Caresses,
by embracing and kissing her, as if she had been living; nor were they
surpised to see no return; since she in that respect had used them to it in
her Life time, as has been said: After this they kneeled by the Body, praying
for half an hour, without so much as sheding a Tear, and returned as pacified
as if nothing had happened; not only to the astonishment of the Religious, but
even of themselves too, as Young as they were: Wherefore they asked their Maid
the reason, why before they went in to see their Mother, they could not forbear
crying, and that now they could not cry for their Lives?

Reverend Mother Abbess, finding this Angelical Air, and sweetness continue in
Sister Clare of Iesus's Countenance, resolved to repair the loss that her
Humility had brought upon the Community, by burning her Picture. Wherefore, she
sends to Dunkirk for a Famous Painter, that then lived there, who looking upon
her, wondered to see no decay in her Features; but only that they were without
motion and breath: He said that he had been called to draw several Ladies,
after their Death; but that he never met with the like. Yet as great an Artist
as he was, his piece as the Religious testify, came far short of the Original,
and only gave cause of a continual resentment for the loss of that, which
Cooper had so admirably drawn to the Life; And that this Painter might not
pretend want of time for doing it, the Body lay exposed three days in the
Quire: Which in stead of sending forth any less pleasing smell, filled the
Quire, and Church also with such a perfume, as all wondered at. But 'twas not
strange, that her Virtuous Actions (which she endeavored to conceal in her
Life as much as she was able) should now begin to blossom, and send forth their
Odours after her Death.

CHAP. II.
The Points of her Funeral Sermon, in short, together with her Burial, and
Epitaph.

THE Fourth Day after her Death, Reverend Father Seraphim a French Capuchin,
and Excellent Preacher, as well as experienced Director of Souls. Who had been
earnestly desired, and had kindly undertaken to make her Funeral Sermon, came
to perform his promise; and to testify to others, what in several occasions,
in which he had treated with her, he had been Witness of himself; especially at
that time, when she had particularly desired to advise with some experienced
person, that was not of her own Nation, about her removal from Graveling;
fearing the English she had consulted, might be too much byast with a National
affection, and upon that account, might dissuade her from going amongst
Strangers; but he proved to be of the same sentiment with Reverend Father
VVorsley, and other English, she had advised with in this point; and assured
her, that it was a pure Temptation, tho the Enemy had cunningly Cloak't and
covered it with the specious pretense, that she should find more Mortification,
and less esteem among Strangers, than she received (...) kind Father, so good a
Husband, as she her self used to say, she could not have wished a better; such
fine and sweet Children, so plentiful a Fortune, and consequently all Earthly
blessings this World was capable of bestowing upon her; doing this also in the
Flower of her Age, in the hight of her prosperity. Wherefore says he, if the
Wise Man Ecclesiasticus Chap. 31. Verse. 9. declares, that he who sought not
after, nor hoped in Riches had done wonders, I may say her Courage was
wonderful; since she not only not sought, but forsook and quitted, not only
Riches, but Father, Husband, Children, and all other happinesses this World
could afford, to follow more exactly the Counsels of our Savior, thereby to be
the better able to take up and embrace his Cross, and follow him. Which brings
me to the third mark of her Courage I promised to explicate in my third Point.

In the Third Point he proved, how she expressed her Courage by the choice of so
rigorous an Order, discribing the Austerities of it, which she was not content
with, but animated with the lik Zeal Sc. Francis Xavarius was, when he cried
out, Lord let me still suffer more, he declared how earnestly she had expressed
to him her desire to go to a more rigorous Order amongst Strangers, where she
might suffer more, and be known or regarded less; all which he expressed after so
pathetical a manner, as amongst his numerous Auditory, there was scarce a dry
Eye to be found; who by this his Discourse were convinced, that tho they came
with a great Idea of her Sanctity, yet it was far short of what they found she
was endowed withal.

At the end of the Fathers Sermon, she was carried from the Quire, where she
lay exposed in her Habit, down to the Cloister to be Buried next to Mother
Tailor, her first Abbess, and great friend as has been before said. It happened
in the diging of her Grave, that they broke into Mother Tailors, out of which
there came a scent no less fragrant than that, which the Body of Sister Clare
sent forth: Their sweet Odors being thus united after Death, as their
Affections had been whilst they lived. Reverend Mother Abbess desirous that the
memory of her example should continue as long as the Monastry lasted, caused a
great Marble Gravestone to be laid over her Body, which Reverend Father
Francis Williams, then Rector of the Noviship of the Society of Jesus, of the
English Province at VVatten, adorned with this ensuing Epitaph, which I put in
the Language in which it is Writ upon the Gravestone, Viz. in Latin; and also in
English, that the meaning of it may be understood by all of our own Nation, for
whom this Life was chiefly Writ.

Siste, Lege, Mirare.
Sta, Viator, debitaque lachrymarum tributa,
Huic persolve Funeri.
Jacet hic Sepulta
CLARA de JESU.
Nomen illam haud vulgarem indicat,
Nobilis ac Illustris HANMERORUM Domus
Suam esse Progeniem jactat.
Latuit aliquantisper haec Stella
Errorum tenebris offuscata;
Sed ut postea Orbem,
Orb splendidiore, decoraret.
Nupsit perillustri Domino
JOANNI WARNERO Baronetto;
Sed cum nil nisi Caelum spiraret,
Caelestes affectavit Thalamos:
Sicque consentiente, atque approbante
Optimo Conjuge;
Toro Maritali,
Parentum, and Charissimorum pignorum
Amplexibus posthabitis,
De Mundo esse desijt, ut de JESU fieret.
Hoc Monasterium
Suae Virtutis Theatrum esse voluit;
Ubi suave Christi jugum
Ad finem usque vitae portans,
Omni perfectionis genere
Multisque Nominibus, CLARA
Vixit
and
Obijt
Anno Domini M DC LXX Ianuarij xxvi.
Stop, Read, Admire.
Stay Passenger, and pay a due Tribute of Tears
To this Funeral;
Here lies Buried
CLARE of JESUS.
Her Name speaks her no ordinary Person,
The Noble and Illustrious House of HANMERS
Boasts of her, as their Progeny.
This Star lay hid a little while,
Clouded with the darkness of Errors,
That afterward it might adorn the World,
With a more resplendent Orb.
She Married the Honorable
Sir JOHN WARNER Baronet.
But breathing after nothing but Heaven,
She Aspired to Celestial Nuptials;
And her desires being approved, and consented to
By her Excellent Husband;
Forsaking his Embraces, and those also
Of her Dearest Father, and Children;
She ceast to be of the World, to be of JESUS.
She chose this Monastry
For the Theater of her Virtue;
Where she carried the sweet Yoke
Of Christ to her very last breath,
By the Practice of all Perfection
Verifying her Name, GLORIOUS
She lived
And
Dyed
In the Year of our Lord
M DC LXX. the 26th. Day of January.
CHAP. III.
The Letter of Reverend Mother Abbess of Graveling, to Brother Clare concerning
Sister Clares happy Death, with an abridgment of her Virtuous Life.

THE Authority of Mother Abbess must needs gain no little credit to what she
Writes concerning Sister Clare, as having been very intimate to all her actions
and proceedings: For she always looked upon her as her Mother, and with a more
than filial confidence had recourse unto her upon all occasions; believing her
advice and direction, to be the infallible Rule of Gods Will, whose place she
bore; and consequently none can be more fit than she, to give the World her
Caracter.

Mother Abbess then after her Death, Writes in this manner to Brother Clare.

Honored Dear Brother,
THE Will of God be ever done, Life and Death are in his Hands, and all works
are perfected in mercy and goodness. I have taken my Pen in hand upon the
saddest subject, that could have happened to me, or this Community; and were I
not resolved never to let my Will jarre with the Will of God, I should want
resignation to this present visitation, which has deprived us of your, and our
ever dear Sister, Sister Clare of Jesus; whom Jesus her dear Spouse called to
his Eternal embraces, on the 26th. Instant; Having left us a greater
affliction, I am bold to say, than ever any conceived at the Death of their own
Natural Sisters. For in her we lost a great light of Virtue, more than I am
able to express, since her generous embracing of our Abjections, did encourage
us in our Vocations. I never heard her complain, nor repine at our Austerities,
but I have often heard her say, that they were too little, and that she did
nothing as she ought for the love of God. Her Humility engaged her to make use
of all means to cover her Virtue; yet I cannot frame to my self how any one
could have lived more perfectly, than she has done these few Years, that she
has been with us. Her perfection appeared so much in all she did, that it is
hard to say in what she was most perfect. I never could see how any one could
be more prompt, simple, or blindly Obedient, than she was; and yet she was
always accusing her self of her want of it. O how clear sighted are Saints!
This made her to say daily to me, when I came to Visit her in her Sickness,
that she scarce thought her self Religious, because she had never done any
action in her Life time like a Religious Woman. Dear Brother, what great
Humility was this? That did so wean her from all self-opinion, when the Life
she led was such, as I am sure none can surpass. In her Sickness she used to
express her Conformity in such like words as these, It has pleased God to send
me such, or such a trial, or to deprive me of such, or such a comfort. This
showed, that she took all from the immediate hand of God, and that her Sickness
did not (as her Humility made her believe) rob her, of her former near Union
with him, as far as I could perceive; but when he seemed to withdraw himself
from her, it was without doubt the greatest Affliction in her Sickness, and
consequently an effect of his Love to increase her Merit. Dear Brother, I wish
that you had seen her dying as we did, what profit would you have made of such
an example? That God did not think us fit to enjoy any longer. I wish I could
do by her, as our Blessed Lady did by her dear Son, lay up in my Heart all the
Words and Actions of her Life, as a Rule whereby to square my own. There has
been little other Discourse since her happy Death, but of her Virtuous Life;
and I wish that it may always continue amongst us, to excite us to a faithful
Imitation of her, as the best means of meeting her once more in Heaven. What
reason have we then but to confide in her present happiness? She knew that
Heaven suffered violence, and therefore resolved to be one of those that should
take it by force. Whilst she was well, her Life was a continued practice of
Religious Perfection, and her Sickness was nothing but an increase of her
Merit, because she suffered it with so much love and patience. She would often
sweetly invite Death, that is dreadful and ugly to most, to come and dispatch
and not linger about her.

We are now Writeing to all the Convents, as we use to do upon such occasions,
to procure Prayers for her; tho I believe we want her Prayers, more than she
does ours; I shall daily beg at her Grave, that she would obtain comfort for
you, and that you may bear this Cross with a resigned Patience. Our whole
Community is full of Affliction, and I hardly see what I Write, my Eyes are so
full of Tears, I wish they may Redeem yours. As for her two sweet Children, if
you please to entrust your dear Sister and me with them, by Gods Grace, they
shall never want a Mother, in what lies in my Power to serve them; and I shall
always look upon it as an obligation, and pledge of that Treasure their dear
Mother, whom God has been pleased to deprive us ^f. I must confess my weakness
in not well bearing so great a Cross, and our Community is in such a
melancholy temper, that we are incapable of giving them any comfort upon her
death. For this reason I sent for Reverend Father Rector of Watten, who has
acted the part of a Comforter, both to them, and us. I keep her Beads,
Reliquary, and Proffession Ring, which she so highly esteemed, for you to
dispose of; who I hope this Summer will give us a Visit, which will be the
greatest comfort, that your sweet Children, and this Community can receive,
especially my self, who am Dear Brother,

Graveling January 27th. 1670. Your obliged and humble Servant,


ANNE BONAVENTURE, Abbess.

CHAP. IV.
A Letter to Brother Clare, from Reverend Father Warren Confessor to the Poor
Clares of Graveling, concerning the Death of Sister Clare, in which he also
takes notice of some particular Virtues she excelled in.

THOUGH the foresaid Letter confirms what we have hitherto said concerning Sister
Clare; yet I hope the Addition of another from her Confessor, who had a more
intimate knowledge of her, than Mother Abbess could have (Sister Clare being
accustomed to disclose to him the most hidden secrets of her heart) will not
seem tedious; since it more efficaciously shows the Truth of what I have
already Writ, than any other Testimony that has been yet given; he being the
fittest Person to give us a knowledge of that eminent Perfection she had in a
short time arrived to; which joined with that of so Prudent, Virtuous, and
Experienc d a Superior, as I have related, must needs convince the Reader of
Sister Clares most eminent Virtue.

Honored Sir,
THE happiness I have had in being acquainted with Sister Clare (whose Name I
can scarce write or even think of without T^ars) is a reward sufficient for
what service I have been able to do her. She was indeed the Pattern, and Mirror
of a true Religious Soul; there could not possibly be any one more dis-engag'd
from all things here below, than she was; for, that short time that God was
pleased to lend her to us, nothing but God, nothing but Heaven was in her
Heart, and Month. All other Discourses and entertainments were tedious to her,
as I am confident you know very well; yet notwithstanding all these gusts and
comforts that her Soul tasted in thinking of her Heavenly Spouse, she seemed,
as she thought, to be perfectly forsaken by him in her last Sickness. wherefore
I cannot be persuaded but God used this means to purify her Soul, that it
might fly directly into his loving embraces, where it is at present absorpt in
Eternal delights. But because the Judgments of God are secret, I will never
cease to remember her daily in my Poor Devotions.

But I cannot end this sad subject without speaking a word or two of her
Perfections, for your comfort. First, her Humility and perfect Contempt of her
self, which is the foundation of all other Virtues, was such, as that the most
Ambitious Person could not more earnestly seek after Honor, than she sought in
all things, her greatest Abnegation and Humiliation; neither was she content to
have this low and mean esteem of her self, but earnestly desired to imprint the
same in the minds of all others; taking all occasions she was able of doing it,
and when she found her endeavors had not the desired effect; but according to
our Saviors promise (Qui se humiliat exaltabitur, He that humbles himself shall
be exalted) that the more pains she took to lessen, the more she gained esteem,
it cannot be imagined, what an affliction this was to her; which the Enemy took
an occasion to push on to such an excess, that had she not had that submission
to her Directors, which was admirable in her, and followed their advice, rather
than her own inclinations; this affliction had caused her to leave this place
to go amongst Strangers. The only fault she found with it, being the too much
esteem and respect she received from the Religious, which was to her humble
Spirit as great a Mortification, as the want of it can be, even to the proudest
heart. Her Love and Practice of Mortification and Abnegation was also very
extraordinary: Nor would permit her to rest satisfied with the ordinary
Austerities of the Rule (which were even too great for her delicate and tender
Complexion to suffer) unless she added others to them; and my refusing her
leave to practice the Pennances she so earnestly desired, I believe was a
greater Mortification, than they themselves could have been to her. I often
thought, whilst she as earnestly Petitioned for leave to practice extraordinary
Mortifications, as if she had begged for her Life, of the agreement of her
Spirit, with that of St. Teresa's, her great Paironess, who begged of God so
earnestly, Either to permit her to suffer or to die; and that which moved
Sister Clare chiefly to this ardent desire of suffering for God, was her
extraordinary Love of him, better expressed, as she thought, by suffering, than
any way else; and therefore, what she could not get leave to practice
exteriorly, she interiorly supplied, by violently contradicting and overcoming
her passions, and even lawful inclinations in such a manner, as to keep her
self constantly upon the rack; never giving the least way to Nature, but
curbing it upon all occasions; so that her daily Conversation with her
Children, which seemed to others a comfort, was to her without doubt a great
occasion of suffering, it giving nature an occasion of a continual conflict,
over which she constantly got the Mastery. Her Conformity to God's Will, and
Abnegation of her own, appeared no less admirable in her blind and prompt
Obedience, than in receiving from his hands, whatever his Providence vouchsaft
to send by others, and what was most contrary to Flesh and Blood, seemed always
most pleasing and welcome to her. By these steps of Humility, Mortification,
and Conformity, she had raised her self to such an Union with God, as was
wonderful; walking always in his presence, which no employment or accident
could deprive her off. And all the time she had free to her self, she spent in
a profound Contemplation or Communication with his Divine Majesty, who was not
wanting on his part in replenishing her Soul with such extraordinary Lights and
Graces, as still animated and strengthened her in the constant pursuit of the
highest Perfection. Nor was she so abs^rpt in the Love of God, as to permit
that to her Neighbor to be less fervent and active; her Love to his Image was
like that to himself, always in action; on all occasions assisting every one
with that Zeal, that Humility, that Cheerfulness and Comfort, as if what she
did to them, had been actually done to himself: And her compassion whilst she
assisted those who were either in exterior or interior affliction was such, as
if she had beheld our Savior, not them in affliction; so that I must own I
never met in a Soul a greater desire of suffering for God; a greater Union and
Conformity, nay, and satisfaction too, as to the Superior part, even in the
greatest of sufferings, than I did in her; especially in her last Sickness,
where it pitied my heart to see what she suffered, as I before mentioned; yet
was comforted at the same time to see with what Constancy, Courage and
Conformity she underwent this, even the greatest of trials; for as it is the
greatest act of Mortification, or Abnegation, to be content to loose or leave
God for God; so the same is also the greatest act of Love a Creature can
express to it is Creator. Wherefore I cannot but piously believe, that she
Reigns now with him in Heaven, whom he had prepared for this happiness by
adorning her with so many Celestial Verlues upon Earth. I have been longer than
I designed, but the subject I doubt not will plead my excuse, and obtain your
pardon, having no other design then your comfort by it, being glad of this as I
shall be of any other occasion of expressing how much I am,

Graveling March 4th. 1670. Honored Sir, Your most humble and faithful
Servant, WILLIAM WARREN.


This Testimony from so Virtuous, and experienced a person, in the Government
of Religious (in which he had spent many Years) especially such Zealous Souls
as he Governed, who make the Service of God, as every one ought to do, their
chief aim and end; and far more sollicitously endeavor the practice of this so
Noble and Generous enterprise, of leading such a Mortified Life, as the Eternal
Wisdom, who best knew what was most pleasing to his Eternal Father, gave them
and all the World an example of, than the most Zealous Worldling can be in
gaining Honor, heaping up Riches, or in pursuit of all those Earthly pleasures,
the World promises it is followers, but seldom keeps it is word, I say, having
had so many Years experience in dealing with such Souls as these, his Testimony
cannot but be of great force.

CHAP. V.
A Description in General of the Sanctity of her Life.

IT may seem strange, that after the Testimonies of Two such Persons, who had
an occasion of inspecting the whole Tenor of that inward and interior Life she
led, I should still proceed to give further evidences of her Sanctity. But the
Providence of Almighty God so ordained, that she should have as many Witnesses,
as there were Religious she conversed withal; that her Virtues proved by the
Attestation of so many Irrefragable and uncontestable Authorities, might never
hereafter be called in question. In General then, take that Original Draught of
her Sanctity, which they, as in so many lively Colors, have transmitted to me,
and I think my self obliged, to transmit to Posterity.

They all speak home to the same point, that Sister Clare began, when she came
to Religion, where Persons great Perfection left of. The chief thing she aimed
at, was to be the Meanest in the House of God, and upon that account, was
always seeking after the poorest Employments, the better to serve the
Community. These Humiliations covered the good Religious with confusion;
blushing, and at the same time wondering to see a Person of her Quality (who
had formerly so many to attend her) casting her self at their Feet, and
condescending to things so abject and contrary to sense. From this Humility as
from a source, sprung that reservedness in speaking any thing which might in
the least tend to her own praises, or those of her Relations; if any occasion
offered to touch upon that subject, she either kept a profound silence, or
declined the Discourse as ungrateful; or if Obedience put her upon it, the Mien
and Modesty with which she delivered her self, seemed rather to diminish, than
favor any ways the Reputation and esteem she had gained in the World. As she
inviolably observed the time of silence, so she was never heard to utter an
idle word: If Charity or Superiors ordered her to speak, the bent of her
Discourse was still of God, or what tended to his Divine Service; she never
made an end of enlarging her self upon his Divine Attributes, his Beauty, his
Power, his Wisdom, and Providence toward Creatures, but in particular upon his
Mercy in regard of Sinners, with reflection upon her self, as if her Sins had
deserved greater punishments than all others. Yet these Pious Entertainments
were so prudently managed, and insisted upon with that discretion, that there
was nothing forced or tedious in them. To this we may add, that whatsoever
related to the Divine Service, she thought could never sufficiently be
esteemed; and so high was the value she put upon every Minute Ceremony, and
Regular Observance, that even St. Clare (I have as many Authentic Vouchers for
this, as there are Religious at Graveling) could not more exactly keep the
Rules in their Primitive Vigor and Purity, than she did. But that which charmed
her the most, in the Monastry of Graveling, was the retirdness and solitude of
the Place, the rigor of the Habit, the poorness of the Diet; and in a word,
because all things seemed to inspire her with her beloved Spirit of Penance:
For by her good Will, she would have been always imitating those Ancient
Penitents (whose Lives she had Read) to expiate the disorders, as she called
them, of her Life past; hence she gave no truce or solace to her wearied and
exhausted Body, which she treated with Macerations of all sorts, nor would
afford any respite to Nature, being in effect a real Martyr every hour;
insomuch, that had not Obedience put a restraint upon her fervor, these
excesses would soon have ruined her health; yet still these Mortifications were
so tempered with an exterior sweetness, that no one could perceive that she
found the least difficulty in the whole course of this Penitential Life.

That which chiefly crowned and ripened, as it were, these Virtues into
Maturity and Perf^^tion, was the entire resignation she had to the Counsels of
her Ghostly Father; she punctually in every thing followed his directions, and
never failed to render him an exact account even of the Minutest circumstances,
and gave him a knowledge of her interior disposition to that degree, that being
demanded by one of the Religious what it was to Manifest her Conscience and the
whole State of her Soul to a Spiritual Director, she Answered, We must be very
sincere and candid with him, and tell him even our passing thoughts; upon this
some present desirous to understand the matter, after a more serious manner,
importuned her to instance some particulars, that might illustrate what she
said. Sister Clare full of her usual Affability, complied with their desires
and Answered. If I should casually look upon my hand and think it White with a
kind of complaisance, I must give an account of this as a proud thought to my
Confessor, and in the same manner of any other Imperfections or Temptations,
that come into my mind, tho I know not whether I have consented to them or not.
So much for her Virtues in General.

CHAP. VI.
A more exact Relation of her Virtues in particular.

THOUGH in the former Chapter the Religious, whom she conversed with, have given,
as you have Read; an ample Testimony of her Sanctity; yet they seem rather to
reduce what they affirm to General heads, than descend to particulars; upon a
stricter scrutiny, I find her Virtues more distinctly set down by several
informations I received from Graveling.

They begin first with that of her Prayer, in which she was so recollected, as
if God had been visibly present before her, or she had spoken to his Divine
Majesty. This Holy Spirit of Prayer and Recollection, whereby she expressed her
Love toward God, was strangely animated and increased by her Charity toward
her Neighbor, which God gives for a Mark of our Love toward himself. All her
Actions and designs were nothing else, but so many Acts of Charity, and her
chief employment, when she did not entertain her self with God, was to assist
the necessities of her Neighbor, and comfort the Afflicted. A whole Cloud of
Witnesses, and indeed as many as there were persons in that Holy Community, in
which she lived, unanimously Testify that Sister Clare of Jesus did so much
excel in Charity toward her Neighbor, that she scarce enjoyed her self, whilst
she perceived another to be in any trouble or affliction; so that their sorrow
proved hers, and made her even ready to part with her own content and happiness
to make them cheerful. There are a Hundred instances in this kind, of her
extraordinary Charity, in which she so abounded, that she made it properly her
business to do good to all, and like St. Paul become all to all; behold an act
of Charity one of the Religious recounts.

There were several of the Community, who did not understand French; wherefore
Sister Clare, who had several excellent French Books lent her for her own use,
was not content to enjoy that benefit alone, but most willingly imparted the
advantage she received by them, to those, who knew not how to make use of them.
For this end she obtained leave of the Superior to Read an hour in the
Workhouse every Sunday and Holy Day, to those who had a mind to hear her. They
who attended to her Reading, affirm that the bare explicating to them the sense
of the Book, was more moving than any Sermon; and that they found themselves
transported to see the Devotion, with which she relished every word; which she
expressed with such a Grace and Emphasis, as made a deep Impression in their
Souls: Nor was she contented with the Practice of this act of Charity whilst
she was well, but even when she was Sick of a Quartaine Ague, which had reduced
her to so very low and weak a condition, as forced her to keep the Infirmary,
understanding that one of the Lay-Sisters was troubled that she lost the
hearing of what was Read at Table out of a French Book, which was much
commended by the Religious that heard it, she being employed at that time;
Sister Clare earnestly desired leave of Reverend Mother Abbess, as weak as she
was, that the Sister might come to the Infirmary when her employments would
permit her, and that she might daily Read to her there, what had been Read at
Table.

The Touchstone of true Love and Charity to our Neighbor, is said to be the
Guard of the Tongue; how free she was from a censorious Spirit (the unhappy
Temper of too many of this Age) may be observed from hence, that she was never
heard to utter the least word, or to offer the least insinuation in dispraise
or dislike of another, a Habit she had got from a Child, and practiced not only
before her Conversion (as has been said) but ever after in such perfection,
that the good Name of every one seemed as tender to her, as the Aple of her
Eye, and more esteemed by her than herown; wherefore she set a strict guard,
not only upon her Lips, but even upon her very thoughts; knowing how the one
does influence the other; because according to the abundance of the Heart the
Mouth speaks; wherefore it made her endeavor not only to banish from her own
mind all rash surmises or censures, but to hinder as much as she was able, that
the like should not either enter into, or make any abode in the thoughts of
others; wherefore, if she heard any thing said less to another advantage, if
she could not excuse the fact that was recounted of them (which she endeavored
to do in the first place) she always excused their intention, and by these her
Charitable endeavors, either changed the Discourse, or turned it to the
advantage of the persons that were spoken of, by taking occasion of praising
them for some extraordinary Virtue she had taken notice of in them. To this
degree of Charity she arrived, by a certain agreeable sweetness in her Nature;
for 'twas observed that her word were always seasoned with terms of compassion
and love, so operative, that they healed the most secret infirmities of the
mind. Being at work with a Sister, whom she understood to be not only sick in
Body, but also in some Interior trouble of mind, which proceeded from a tedious
indisposition; she kindly embraced her and said, Dear Sister (calling her by
her Name) take Courage, God sees and will reward your sufferings. This
Charitable expression out of the time allotted for Recreation, uttered with so
much affection, and by her who was so exact an observer and lover of silence,
gave the Sister no less cause of wonder than of joy and comfort. The love of
God moved her to the love of silence, the better to attend to his Divine
inspirations, which nothing could make her break, but the love of her Neighbor,
with which he inspired her; and which she knew was no less pleasing to him,
when exercised for his sake toward his Image, than when performed toward
himself. All bounds were too narrow for that overflowing goodness and zeal she
had for the Conversion of Souls; her Tears were in a continual manner spent
upon this account; she never made an end of urging her Children to offer up
their Innocent Devotions for this end; nor was the unkind return of an angry
Father, able to diminish the Zeal she had for his Conversion, and concern for
his Eternal Happiness.

The End of the Fourth Book.
The Authors Protestation.
IN Obedience to the Dec^ee of Our Holy Father Pope Urban the VIII. of happy
Memory Dated the 13th. of March in the Year 1625. in which he Ordains that
whosoever Composes the Life of any Person of eminent Virtue, should make the
following Protestation.

I Protest that I understand all that I have Writ in the foregoing Life of the
Lady Warner, to have no other force and credit than what is grounded upon
human Authority, without the Churches Approbation: I do moreover declare, that
by the Title of Saint which upon occasion I have given her, or any other
Person, whose Virtues I have related, I intended only to signify thereby, that
they were endowed with a more than ordinary Virtue, and designed the word
should be taken in no other sense than what St. Paul meant it, when he applied
it to the more Virtuous amongst the Primitive Christians, and had no intention
to rank them amongst Beatified or Canonized Saints, which power only
appertains to the Holy See Apostolic.

Having nothing more to add to the foregoing Memoires I heartily wish the
Reader may find as much comfort in their perusal, as I did in Reading and
putting them together, and that whatever I have here Writ may redound to Gods
greater Honor and Glory. Amen.

The End of the Life.
THE CONTENTS OF EACH BOOK OF THE Life of the Lady WARNER.
The First BOOK. Contains her Life to her Entrance into Religion.
CHAP. I. HER Birth and Family; her inclination, even from her tender Years to
a Religious Life, both in France and England. Page 1. CHAP. II. Her Pious
designs are crossed by her Mother-in-law, and what happened to her till the
time of her Marriage. Page 9. CHAP. III. The first interview between her and
Sir John Warner, her Marriage and behavior in the World. Page 15. CHAP. IV.
The first beginning and occasion of her Conversion. Page 30. CHAP. V. A
Relation of Sir John Warners Conversion, and how both he and his Lady resolve
to enter upon a Religious course of Life. Page 49.
The Second BOOK. Contains her Life from her Entrance into Religion, till her
Profession.
CHAP. I. She takes the Habit at Liege amongst the English Nuns's called
Sepulchrines, of the Order of St. Austin. Page 71. CHAP. II. How she came to be
called to a more rigorous State of Life, or to a stricter Order. Page 78. CHAP.
III. How she resolves to enter amongst the Poor Clares, her departure and
journey from Liege, and her arrival at Graveling. Page 87. CHAP. IV. Sister
Clare of Jesus begins her Noviship amongst the English Poor Clares at
Graveling; her Humility, Zeal, Courage, Cheerfulness, and Blind-obedience, in
this her new Enterprise. Page 101. CHAP. V. Her Interior and Exterior
Mortification, her singular Devotion to the Blessed Sacrament her modesty and
recollection. Page 109. CHAP. VI. The happy tho untimely Death of Mr. Francis
Warner, and how this and several other cross and unexpected accidents, which
happened to Sir John; retarded her Profession, to which the Enemy endeavored
to make even her self instrumental; and how she discovered and generously
overcame his crafty Temptations. Page 120. CHAP. VII. Her Letter in Answer to
one Sir John, Writ upon the news of her desires to leave Graveling. new
hindrances of her Profession by the delay of the execution of a Commission out
of Chancery, and Death of Mother Tailor Abbess of the Poor Clares. Page 136.
CHAP. VIII. Her concern about her Children's Education, her Letters to Sir John
and the Abbess of Gant, about their removal to Graveling, Sir John's return
from England, their preparation for their Profession, her Oblation of her self
during the Exercise, and their taking their last leave of each other, the Night
before they made their Vows. Page 143.
The Third BOOK. Contains her Life from her Profession, or the making her Vows,
to her Death.
CHAP. I. The Ceremony of their Profession at Graveling. Page 161. CHAP. II.
What effects this Ceremony wrought upon her self, and those that were present
at it, the great Victory she obtained over her Passions, manifested by her
unconcernedness in this and on some other very moving occasions. Page 177.
CHAP. III. Her exact compliance with Mother Abbesses Orders, in taking care of
her Children, in which she expressed more of a careful Mistress than a tender
Mother; and hereby manifested, that pure Obedience, the inclination of Grace;
and not affection to her Children, the inclination of Nature, moved her to
accept this employment. Page 185. CHAP. IV. Her Zeal for the Conversion of her
Relations to the Catholic Faith, her Prayer for them, and ferverous Letters to
the Father, expressing her passionate love toward him, by her fervent Zeal for
his Conversion, notwithstanding his great severity and unkindnesses toward
her. Page 190. CHAP. V. Her generous resolution of tending to perfection, the
Testimony of her Ghostly Father and others, how diligently she puts these her
resolutions in practice. Page 199. CHAP. VI. The Excellency of her Prayer,
gathered from it is fruits. Page 204. CHAP. VII. Mr. Ruisson's Letter to Sist^r
Clare, containing admirable directions for Pray^r and Union with God, in which
perfection chi^fly consists: Together with her humble Answer. Page 210. CHAP.
VIII. A short account of some remarkable passages, in the Life and Death of Mr.
Ruisson. Page 222. CHAP. IX. A Remarkable passage of her burning her Picture, a
little before her Death. Page 230. CHAP. X. The foresiight God gave her of her
Death; her concern for her Fathers Conversion, and her Letters to him about it.
Page 234. CHAP. XI. Her Interior sufferings, in time of her Sickness, and the
effects of her Childrens Visit. Page 241. CHAP. XII. Another trial God gave her
to complete her Crown. Page 245. CHAP. XII. Her concern for her Father and
Children, she seeks her greater Mortification, even to the last, the
declaration of her satisfaction in her State of Life, a little before her
Death. Page 252.
The Fourth BOOK. Contains some passages that happened after her Death.
CHAP. I. Marks whereby God gave evidence of her Virtuous Life, after her
Death. Page 257 CHAP. II. The Points of her Funeral Sermon, in short, together
with her Burial and Epitaph. Page 261. CHAP. III. The Letter of Reverend Mother
Abbess of Graveling, to Brother Clare, concerning Sister Clares happy Death,
with an abrigment of her Virtuous Life. Page 208. CHAP. IV. A Letter to Brother
Clare, from Reverend Father Warren Confessor to the Poor Clares of Graveling,
concerning the Death of Sister Clare, in which he also takes notice of some
particular Virtues she excelled in. Page 273. CHAP. V. A Description in General
of the Sanctity of her Life. Page 280. CHAP. VI. A more exact Relation of her
Virtues in particular. Page 284.
FINIS.

