THE CONFESSION and EXECUTION OF THE Nine PRISONERS That Suffered at TYBVRN, On
Wednesday the 28th of April, 1680. VIZ.
Ralph Cook for Coining, William Harding for a Rape, Henry Weller for stealing
a Mare, Dorothy Soams for stealing a Silver Tankard, Anne White, For
several-Burglaries. Joseph Rumney, For several-Burglaries. Matthew. Smith, For
several-Burglaries. John Ralfs, For several-Burglaries. and Clement Snell, For
several-Burglaries.

With their Behavior in Prison, etc.
THough in every Month there be made such numerous Examples, and so many
justly Executed; yet so hardened are Offenders grown, that they will take no
warning, either by the Justice inflicted on others, or the Mercy formerly
vouchsafed to themselves, but run on in the same course of Impiety; and those
that were crowding Spectators at one Execution, come themselves to Suffer at
the nex. Which is credibly reported to have been several of these miserable,
Wretches Case, some of them being after last Sessions observed to be very
diligent to get places, to see the Prisoners go to Suffer, and others in the
mean time no less busy in Picking of Pockets amongst the Crowd. Yet we must do
the present Sufferers that right, as to say, That after Condemnation they
generally behaved themselves very penitently, and with a sober Deportment
lamenting their ill-spent Lives, aggravating and crying out of the multitude
and heinousness of their Sins, and imploring the Mercy and Pardon of Almighty
God through Jesus Christ.

Some of them ripp'd up and declared the series and tracks of wickedness, which
they had followed from their Youth, discovering such variety of particular
Offenses, that one would have thought it almost impossible, that persons of
their Age could have been such vast Proficients in Wickedness.

Several of them had been under Sentence of Death before, and now too late they
remembered those solemn Vows which they then made to Heaven, to forsake their
lewd Courses, if God and the King would but have Mercy upon them, and save
their Lives at that time: But when their Prayers were heard, no sooner were
they abroad, but they were far more wicked than ever before. These dreadful
Aggravations now lay heavy upon their Spirits, and they did desire all that
came to see them, to beware of the like horrible Impiety, that they would not
abuse Mercy, nor neglect their Vows made in the time of Distress; for God will
not be mocked.

On Sunday the twenty fifth instant, the Ordinary both forenoon and afternoon,
took great pains with these Condemned Malefactors, in two excellent Sermons, to
bring them to a sense of their sins; and it was observed, that the greatest
part of them gave their attention with much more seriousness, than some others
in their Circumstances heretofore were wont to do.

There were a great number of Clippers and Coyners Arraigned at this Sessions,
whereof several were Convicted, others Acquitted: of the former sort were Mrs
Richardson and her Son, a brisk bold young fellow, and pretending himself a
Dancing Master; another woman was Indicted with them, but Acquitted. Mrs.
Richardson had brought a Trunk locked to this other woman's house, and set it
obscurely under the Cellar-stairs; in this Trunk there were found the Tools for
Clipping; likewise at home when she was taken, there were some Clippings
discovered, and she cried out of a window, and said, she was undone; and the
Son endeavored to fly for it, so that they were found guilty.

One Underwood, and Elizabeth Cook a Wench he kept company with (a very
courteous Lady, for at the Bar she boasted, she never had been unkind to any
man in her life) were likewise Convicted of High Treason for the like offense,
much clipped Money and Clippings, and, the necessary Implements being found upon
them. Both these and two former lived near Pickadilly, and it is supposed, were
all of a gang, or had conversation together; they were first discovered by
means of an old Companion, to whom this Underwoods Mistress boasted, that she
could get a Guinney a day by this Mystery; and told him somemething of the way.
The Woman being supposed ^ the chief Inticer to this villainy, was sentenced to
be Burnt.

Another person who drove the same Trade alone by himself, was also found
guilty: the matter was proved so plainly on him, that there could be no doubt
or difficulty made of it. But His Majesty, who is wholly composed of Grace and
Clemency, was pleased to Reprieve several of these Offenders.

A person living in or near Grubstreet, and his Wife, were likewise charged
with the same Offense: The Evidence for the King made out several presumptions
against them, but there was a multitude of their Neighbors and others that
came in to testify as to their Credit, etc. And the Prisoners alleged, the
prosecution was upon an old grudge, and endeavored to recriminate upon one of
the chief Evidence; it did appear that four years ago, their House had been
searched on suspicion of this Crime of Clipping, and then nothing found that
could render them obnoxious to the Law, so that after a full and fair Trial
they were acquitted.

Several persons, as is usual every Sessions, were Convicted for stealing of
silver Tankards, and diverse for Shop-lifting, the particulars too tedious to
relate.

One Daniel Mackarty, an Irishman, was Tried and Convicted of Treason, as
being a Popish Priest: the manner of his Apprehension was thus. A woman in
Charles-street being very sick, this Father officiated with her, said Mass, and
Administered the Sacrament to her, of which the Nurse gave notice to some honest
Neighbors, who took out a Warrant and seized him in the said sick woman's
Chamber, who much interceded and begged that they would not take him away, and
furiously Crying out, O will ye rob me of my Salvation; but they advised her to
send for a Protestant Divine, and take instructions from him, and not to trust
such blind Popish guides, with their Idolatrous Masses, and foolish Ceremonies
of Extreme Unction and groundless Absolutions, where there is neither true
Faith or Repentance. The Nurse testified that she had heard the Prisoner say
Mass, and exercise other parts of the Priestly Function. Dr. Oats likewise was
a Witness against him, that he confessed to him that he was a Priest when he
was brought to his Chamber. In his Pocket when he was taken, there was found a
Petition to the Venetian Ambassador, expressed by the name of Daniel Mackarty
Priest, setting forth his being in want, and desiring relief; as likewise a
Letter in French directed to him, and signifying likewise, that he was a
Priest; which Papers were read in Court. He had little to say for himself, but
behaved himself impudently, calling the Witnesses scurrilous names, etc.
Nothing could be made more plain than his Priesthood, which in truth he scarce
denied, and so was found guilty, which he seemed not at all to regard, being a
person (as most of them are) of a wonderful confidence.

The Petition beforementioned was in French, and therein it was specified what
Order he was of; likewise there was another Paper in the same Language,
purporting to be directions how (if he were taken) he should behave himself,
what excuses and pretenses he should make, what he should say if confronted by
Doctor Oats, or any other of the Kings Evidence; whereby we may see they have
Lessons set them in every case. He thought to have baffled the woman that gave
Evidence against him, by asking her what clothes he had on when she heard him
officiate; who answered, the same he had now; whence he would infer that it
could not be, because in saying Mass, they use such and such Vestments; but
this was quickly contradicted, for though he had not all his Formalities, which
they cannot conveniently always, nor safely now especially, carry abo^^^^ith
them, yet to supply that defect, there was found about him, and now showed in
Court, a thing called in their holy Gibberish, A Stole, being a piece of Satin
or Taffata, of near two yards long, and three or four Inches broad, of a kind
of deep blew, or almost purple color, which they use to fling over their
shoulders, and that alone serves instead of all the rest of their gear. The
woman mentioning her hearing him say Mass, was asked how many were present, she
answered, she could not certainly tell, but was sure there was above
threescore; and being demanded if she knew any of them, replied, yes, there
were enough of them now about the Court, or in the yard, or words to that
effect.

There was a young Gentleman of good note, took a Trial on the Friday touching
a Rape charged to be committed on the Daughter of one Mrs. a Girl about ten
years of age. He was ordered by a Relation to demand Money of this Child's
Parents, who kept an Alehouse, and they contrived, as may be thought, this
Stratagem not only to satisfy that Debt, but screw more Money out of him. The
Girl told the story that he meddled with her in the Chamber at her Mothers; and
her Sister a wench about sixteen years of age confirmed it, by saying she came
up and saw it, and that he gave her two shillings to hold her tongue; and
Midwives swore the Child had had some Abuse. But the Gentleman proved by a
Servant-maid, that the eldest Daughter went abroad, picked up a man, brought him
home, who went to bed with both her and her Sister, and began with the least
first, so that then she cried out and might receive the prejudice. It Was also
proved, that they would fain have made a Composition for one hundred and sixty
pound, and then they would put it up, etc. So that upon the whole matter, the
Gentleman was fairly Acquitted.

But as to the rest of the 24 persons condemned this Sessions, they were all
(except the 9 named here before in the Title Page) Reprieved.

The Behavior of most of those in the prison after Sentence, was, as we said,
very penitent; especially Henry Weller, condemned for stealing a Mare, and
formerly Transported, was remarkable, spending his whole time in Reading,
Prayers, and Exhortations to his fellow prisoners. Early in the morning before
he suffered, he prayed with them above an hour very heartily, and with
expressions suitable to their condition: wherein they seemed affectionately to
join, and to receive much comfort thereby; they all immediately after singing
praises to God with a Psalm.

William Harding, for that detestable Violence and Rape committed on a poor
child, appeared the most hardened and refractory person amongst them all. No
persuasions or entreaties of Ministers or others that came to visit him, could
bring him to relent; but as he lived like a Brute, so to outward appearance he
seemed not so sensible of his condition and approaching end, as might have been
hoped for from the means that were used with him.

The women, White and Soams, were old offenders, had many times been in
Newgate, and often received Mercy: they now lamentably bewailed their
condition, and expressed much sorrow for their sins.

Ralph Cook was convicted of Treason, for counterfeiting the Kings Coin, making
Milled Half-Crowns out of Pewter-plate; part of which Pewter, and seven of the
Half Crowns, with diverse Tools for the purpose, were found in his Lodging. He
was first discovered by means of his wife, who gave some intimation thereof to
his Landlord. He confessed that he was drawn into this fatal practice by a
certain person in Staffordshire, who it is said is some time since dead. He
behaved himself soberly after Sentence, except only when transported with
passion at his wife, whom yet in words he did forgive, and prayed several times
that God would forgive him his sins, and put his heart into a frame of charity
toward her and all others.

At the place of Execution none of them made any set Speech, but in general
confessed their sins, and warned all the Spectators to take example by them, to
avoid Ill company, Drunkenness, Swearing, profanation of the Sabbath, etc.
Discourses common on such occasions, but it is a thousand pities they are no
more regarded: for if they were, we should not see so many daily come to such
an Ignominious End.

FINIS.

