A GUIDE TO THE True Religion: OR A DISCOURSE Directing to make a wise CHOICE
of that Religion Men venture their Salvation upon: Seasonable for these Times,
wherein there are such Diversities of Opinions and ways of Religion.

To inform the Ignorant, to resolve the Wavering, and to confirm the Weak.

By I. C. M. A. of T. C. C.

Josh. 24.15. And if it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord; Choose you this
day whom you will serve, whether the Gods -- But as for me, and my House, we
will serve the Lord.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Andrew Anderson, and are to be sold at his House, on the
North side of the Cross, Anno 1669.

A Premonition to the Reader, showing the occasion and intendment of the
Discourse.
Courteous Reader,
THere is no good Christian, but is ready upon all just occasions to express
his sad resentment of the woeful Divisions and dangerous Errors, wherewith the
Churches of Christ in these Kingdoms have been for many years past, and still
are so distracted; for notwithstanding that our civil Wars are through the
mercy of God endid, yet our Religious jars and rents are not healed. Indeed,
how can any pious Soul consider the great dishonor done thereby to the Holy
Name of God, the reproach to the Christian Religion, the great scandal to those
sometimes famous Churches (which are now, hereby become infamous through the
World) yea, the apparent ruin threatened by these things, and not break out
into sad lamentation for the same! Surely this (...) a Lamentaion, and shall be
for a Lamentation.

And although the serious consideration of those evils, in order to the
repairing and healing of them, and the preventing the public ruin threatened
to the Church and State thereby, belongs to the wisdom and zeal of those
that be in place of eminency, and are vested with power and authority requisite
thereunto; yet Private Christians in a lower station and capacity, cannot but
have their eyes upon the sad influence those ^^ings have upon their dearest
Friends and Neighbors with whom they converse, and in their behalf meditate
upon some remedy for the same. Certain it is, that the malignant influence
these things have on the common sort is very sad; whilst gazing on those sad
contesting matters of Religion, Some continue mere Scepticks, ever wavering,
and not knowing what way of Religion to choose, and so neglect to be of any;
Some are professed Atheists, or profane Wretches; Others be seduced into
dangerous Errors as Popery, Socinianism, Quakerism, etc. Many engage in
contentions they know not why, nor for what: And the greatest part of
Christians woefully stumbled in their Profession.

The intendment of these Papers, is to propose some help against those evils,
and to guide and direct those that are apt to miscarry through occasion of the
diversities of Opinions and ways found a among us. Wherein they are first
excited to make a wise Choice of that Religion they venture their Eternal
Salvation upon, and are informed how to do it. Endeavors are used to fix and
establish them in the truth of the Christian Religion, and to acquaint them
with the great and Fundamental Doctrines and Duties threrof necessary unto
Salvation, which have been owned by all Christians and Churches in all places
and ages; and to persuade to believe and obey them, as that whereupon their
eternal safety depends. Then our discourse descends to points of a secondary
and inferior Nature that are controverted amongst wise and godly Christians,
and directions are laid down how to find out the right and safe way for Faith
and practice in such things (especially when we are necessitated to hold forth
a profession of our selves therein) Wherewith is showed also what tenderness
and respect, is to be used toward those that differ from us in those things,
whilst, in the mean time, we carry it at a greater distance with those that err
fundementally, and subvert the Christian Faith, and Religion. All which
counsels being evidenced to be good and wholesome, will manifestly declare,
Those to be the most approved and judicious Christians, who (under all those
great changes and revolutions which have been amongst us of latter times) have
especially exercised their zeal for the maintaining of the Fundament all
Doctrines of the Gospel, and the practice and power of Godliness; as also for
the preserving the peace of the Church, and love and union amongst Christians:
whilst in the mean time they have showed greatest moderation and condescension,
toward those that differ in controverted Points of a lower Nature, even to a
degree of compliance also with the stream of the times in some things, which
seem in themselves less desirable and inconvenient (provided in their
Consciences they judge them not to be sinful) if conducing to the furtherance
of the Gospel, the peace of the Churches and Salvation of Souls.

Indeed this will be judged by some rash and censorious Spirits to be
Hypocrisy, Time-serving, er self-seeking, and such persons may be branded for
Temporizers, Turn-coats or Apostates, or what not; but when things shall be
considered in calmness and Sobriety, Such will be found the greatest friends of
Christ and the Christian Religion: and such actions most consonant to Scripture
commands, and to the examples of the Saints recorded therein; whereas such as
are found departing from any Fundamental and generally confessed points of
faith or Practice, These imputations may be more warrantably charged upon them.

Reader, Let these sad and woeful differences, errors, and debates, provoke
thee to examine the grounds thy profession is built upon; to study more the
verity and excellency of the Christian Religion, and be better established
therein; to understand, believe, love, and obey the great and necessary
Principles thereof; humbly to seek of God the discovery of his mind in things
more dark and controverted; and to exercise more Christian love and charity
those that are not of the same persuasion or practice with thee therein: And
then, thou will be secured from the danger of those evils; yea, they will prove
advantageous to thy greatest good, although intended by Satan for thy hurt. To
help thee herein, is the intendment and design of this discourse, in order
whereunto, the blessing of the Lord is humbly implored to go along with the
same.

THE CONTENTS. OF The several CHAPTERS.
CHAP. 1. REligion the grand concernment of Man in this World Great differences
about it. Necessity of a wise and deliberate choosing ones Religion. A
proposition laid down, which is the Subject matter of the following Discourse.
Page 1. CHAP. 2. Showing, wherein this wise Choosing ones Religion stands, and
what Acts concur thereunto. Page 5. CHAP. 3. Considerations evidencing it a
principal Point of wisdom for a Man to make a right Choice of that Religion he
professes in the World, and ventures his Eternal Salvation upon. Page 13 CHAP.
4. Wherein the Practice of this Duty is insisted upon, and Directions given,
how to choose the true Religion amongst so many as are in the World. All other
Religions being rejected, The Christian Religion is evidenced to be the only
true Religion. Page 23. CHAP. 5. Further directions how to choose the right and
safe way amongst such diversities of Sects and Opinions as be amongst
Christians. A Discovery of the Fundamental Doctrines of Faith and practical
duties of Godliness* generally embraced by all Christians in all times and
places, with advice in reference unto them. Page 30 CHAP. 6. Other directions
in Points of a Secundary Nature, that are not so clearly laid down in
Scripture, nor unanimously received by all Christians, but are Problemaical;
and yet there is a necessity to be of the one or other Persuasion, how to make
a right choice in such a Case. 4. Rules about this. Page 41 CHAP. 7. A closer
application of the foregoing discourse to the present State of the Church in
England, with particular advice in reference to the different Ways and
Professions found amongst us. Page 50. CHAP. 8. Wherein the great controversy
of Communion with, or Separation from the Church of England, is discussed. A
view of what is therein Praiseworthy; and of what is disallowable in the
Judgment of those that scruple Communion with her. Directions suited
thereunto. Page. 81 CHAP 9. Wherein are laid down some general Rules of Caution
to preserve Christians from rash and unjust Separation. The Conclusion of the
Discourse. Page 89.
CHAP. 1.
Religion the grand concernment of Man in this World, great differences about
the necessity of a wise and deliberate Choosing ones Religion. The counsel of
Joshua to the Israelites applied to us. A proposition laid down, which is the
Subject matter of the following Discourse.

THE business of Religion is the grand concernment that all of us are sent into
the World to mind, and therefore God has, in the very framing of man's nature,
laid so deep an impression thereof in us, that there is no Nation so barbarous
and inhumane, but does place this amongst the greatest matters, that they judge
themselves to be interressed in; insomuch as some observe, Religion is more
proper to man then reason. All men, and only men have a smatch of Religion;
whereas some show of reason is found in many Beasts. Lactant. de ira Dei, Solus
home sapientia instructus est, ut Religionem solus intelligat, and hac est
hominis atque bruterum vel pracipua vel sola distantia.

But as it is a thing all do profess themselves interessed in; so there is
nothing in all the world, men are at greater differences about; some taking up
one Religion, and some another, as pleases themselves best; yea each Nation
almost have chosen a peculiar Deity, as we find in Scripture, one serving Baal,
another Dagon others Moloch or Ashtaroth, etc Some worshipping the Sun, others
the Moon or Stars, and almost every Creature whence they received any
benefit: and some have not been wanting that have adored the Devil himself.
How greatly then does it behove every one to make a wise choice of that God he
intends to serve, and of that Religion he means to profess in the World and to
live and die in? That he may first choose the true Religion and true God, and
then cleave to him with full purpose of heart, as Barnabas exhorts, Acts 11.23.
And the rather because of the great importance thereof; Man's eternal
happiness or misery depends on the right knowing and; acknowledging God, and
serving him; or his mistake about it: according to the witness of Christ
himself John 17.3. This is life eternal to know (so as to acknowledge unto
godliness) Thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

We read in the story of the Israelites the vanity of man's nature in matters of
Religion; though no Nation under the whole Heavens had greater discoveries of
the true God then they had; both by his Word and Oracles, instructing them from
Heaven, and giving them his Law on Mount Sinai, and teaching them by his
Prophets, the infallible interpreters of that Law: as also by his mighty works,
bringing them out of Egypt by his outstretched Arm, working signs and wonders,
dividing the Red Sea, giving them water out of the Rock and bread and Flesh
from Heaven in a Wilderness, and guiding them by a Cloud of smoke, and a
Pillar of Fire: yet how apt were they to turn away from God, and to worship
other Gods, even of the Egyptians and Canaanites, whom God cast out before
them? A pregnant instance whereof we have in the business of the Golden Calf,
though but forty days before, they heard the Law proclaimed in the greatest
solemnity that ever was, even by the Ministry of Angels with Thunder, Lightning
and Earthquake, which wrought such plyableness in their Spirit, that they
professed, whatever the Lord should speak to them* That that they would do
Deuteronomy. 5.27. Yet when Moses was but a while withdrawn from them upon the Mount,
they quickly turned and made them a Calf to worship, after the manner of Egypt.
This being observed by Joshua his Successor, he became jealous over them with
a godly jealousy; and being fearful that when he was gone from them, they
should do the like, He endeavors to establish them in the true Religion, and
to bind them to the Lord in the strongest bonds, Josh. 24. He bids them, verse
15. Choose deliberatly what God they would serve, directing them by his own
example; and then when they had deliberately chosen Jehovah for their God, he
binds them unto him by a solemn covenant, verse 25. And sets up a lasting
remembrance of it.

These things are written for our instruction, and do show what a Spirit there
is in us, even an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God, as
well as in them formerly (as the Apostle shows, Heb. 3.12.) Though we have as
full discoveries of God as they had, and greater means of knowledge by
Gospel Light, to know God and Jesus Christ: Yet our hearts are equally fickle
and ready to forsake God, and the true Religion, and (as the Apostle taxes the
Galathians) to turn to another Gospel and another Christ then we have received,
yea to another God, the World, our Lusts, or Satan, to serve them more then the
true God. Therefore this counsel of Joshua may be as seasonable to us now as to
them formerly, viz. To choose deliberately and seriously what God we will serve;
and then to resolve to cleave unto him for ever: or wisely to choose that
Religion, we will profess in the World and venture our salvation upon; and
then to labor to be established and fixed therein, so as by no storms of
temptation we be removed.

The urging of this Counsel upon unsettled and wavering Souls, being the
intendment and design of this discourse, suited to these fluctuating and
shaking times, It may be contracted into this ensuing proposition, which shall
be more fully dilated on in the following Chapters, viz:

That it is a great point of wisdom for a Man to make a right Choice of that
Religion he means to take up and profess in the World, that he intends to live
and die in, and to venture his eternal Salvation upon.

CHAP. II.
Showing wherein this wise Choosing our Religion stands, and what acts concur
thereunto.

HAving laid down the proposition which is the ground of our Discourse in the
former chapter, we come now to inquire concerning the nature of that choice
wherein it stands, and what things necessarly must concur to make a wise
choice of that Religion, we intend to profess in the World.

Election or choosing (in a general sense) is an act of the will, proceeding
from the previous knowledge and judgment of the understanding, whereby amongst
diverse ways or means propounded for the attainment of some End, it does
resolve upon some one above the rest, that it will ad here unto, and make use
of for that purpose.

In particular, Choosing ones Religion, is also an act of the will arising from
the previous knowledge and judgment of the understanding (discerning the
nature of the thing) whereby amongst the many different Religions (or ways of
serving and pleasing God, and of attaining unto happiness with him) that are
found in the World, a man does pitch and resolve upon one above all the rest
(and with rejection of all others) with full purpose to adhere unto it, to live
and die in it, and even venture a man's salvation and happiness on it.

Here are 3 Acts wherein this right choosing ones Religion does stand, to be
explained in order.

1. An act of the understanding, judging and discerning the nature of the thing
that the will chooses; and its excellency above al things that come in
competition with it; for to a right choice of the will the understanding and
judgment must proceed it: must know the nature of it, and discern it; good, or
else its but a blind choice, not becoming a reasonable creature, and a man may
else embrace evil as well as good. The will when is acts regularly follows the
Dictate of the understanding; this tells what is good, and then what chooses, as
the Palate judges of what it tastes, and then the stomach or appetite craves it;
so must the understanding go before her, and discern the nature, verity and
goodness of that Religion, as also the falsnesse, vanity and dangerousnesse of
other Religions before the will can make a right choice of it. Man being a
religious creature, by the common instinct of his natural conscience, is moved
strongly to worship and serve a Deity (as we see in all Nations of the Earth)
much more when he is further stirred up by a divine instinct. Now we should
consider as men (as the prophets phrase is) and not exert actions of highest
importance without understanding and reason, worshipping we know not what (as
Christ taxes the Samaritans, John 4.) but give God a reasonable service,
knowing what God we serve, and what Religion we take up; and not taking up the
next at hand, at adventure, (as most men do) that Religion professed where they
live, and commended to them by Education, example, etc. but understanding what
we do therein, And therefore men that act according to reason, will look into
the Religions in the World, and judge which is best among them; or rather into
the Word and Oracles of God himself, for they best discover what God is, and
how he will be worshipped. Therefore if there be any such thing, as Divine
Oracles in the world, wherein God has revealed his will concerning matters of
Faith and worship, we should have special recourse unto them. Now that the holy
Scriptures (commonly called the Bible) are such, that is, the Oracles of the
God of Heaven, wherein he directs us in the knowledge and worship of himself,
and in the way of Religion; This may appear even to those that have not yet
taken upon them any profession of Religion by such Infallible demonstrations,
as reason cannot contradict, viz. From these characters imprinted on them which
show them to be of God, from the miracles wrought to confirm them, from that
spirit of holiness seen in such as seriously believe them, from the
accomplishment of a great part of those things revealed therein, even such
things as were utterly invisible and improbable to created understandings, etc.
And therefore there should be an exact consideration in the judgment and
understanding of a man of that Religion revealed in the Scriptures. He should
1. Take a particular view of the principal Doctrines, the great mysteries of
faith and duties of godliness taught therein, not taking all in the lump
together, but having a distinct knowledge of them. He whose Religion is in the
gross only, and has no distinct apprehensions of the particular doctrines of
faith and duties of godliness, which that Religion teaches, he has no
Religion at all; for how can these Doctrines influence his heart and life to
make him fear, and love God truly, and lead him to the power and practice of
godliness, if not distinctly known and discerned by him? Then 2. He must
discern the verity and certainty of these Doctrines, that he may venture his
soul upon them, knowing him in whom he has believed; for which and it is
exceeding necessary to be conversant in those Treatises which prove the verity
of the Christian Religion, and of the Scriptures (wherein it is set down) of
which many be extant in our own Language. Without this a man shall never hold
fast his Religion, especially in trying times. 3. He should know the excellency
thereof, that its such a Religion as tends most to the magnifying of God, and
giving glory unto him, to the advancement of man to true happiness in the love
and favor of his God, and nearest communion with him, and fullest conformity
unto him. He should often look upon the sublimity of the mysteries, the purity
of the precepts, excellency of the rewards, and dreadfulness of the
punishments. And thus the understanding preceding in discerning and judging
the Religion which is to be chosen, is one Act in this Election.

2. Act, After the understanding does thus present the true Religion before us
in the certainty, glory and excellency of it; Then the next Act is for the Will
to elect, choose, and embrace it, solemnly to espouse this Religion, and say, It
shall be mine; It Is that I am resolved to profess, and to venture my eternal
salvation upon, what ever inconveniences I may meet with in the profession
thereof; what ever disgraces, reproaches, losses, Persecutions, etc. yet this
Religion I will be of, and this God I will serve. We must sit down and consider
what it will cost us to be Christians, and then espouse the Christian Religion,
and take it for better, for worse, embrace the cross it threatens, as well as
the Crown it promises; For so our Lord warned his Disciples, telling them, He
that will come after me, and will be my Disciple, must deny himself, (in his
dearest lusts and sins, nay, in his estate and life sometime) and take up his
Cross (of afflictions and persecution) and follow him, (in a way of holiness
and purity in the straight way.) And then he will give him a Crown of life, he
shall have an hundred fold in this life, with persecution (that is, the comfort
of an hundred fold, if he miss of such increase in the same kind) and
eternal glory in the World to come. Now we must sit down and consider what we
do, as ( Luke 14.28.31) Christ teaches by the parable of him that builds a
Tower, and of the King that goes to warfare. Now thus to choose our Religion, to
espouse the Christian Faith for better, for worse, to take the sweat with the
bitter, the Cross with the Crown: This is another Act, wherein this choice
stands.

3. Act is a settled purpose, and full resolution to live and dye therein, to
adhere and cleave thereto, even to the end, to be faithful to the Death; to
cleave to the Lord with full purpose of heart; as we read Joshua his
resolution, I and my house will serve the Lord; we are resolved (who ever
depart from Jehovah) we will cleave unto him. And as the Disciples, John 6.
when many forsook Christ and the Christian Religion; their Lord says unto
them, and will ye also go away? Peter answers in the name of the rest, whether
shall we go, for thou have the words of Eternal life. Alack, if we draw back
from the Lord, his soul shall have no pleasure in us, we draw back unto
perdition; but if we continue in the faith, we shall then have the Crown of
life. Life and Death are before us herein, as Moses told the Israelites, if we
serve the Lord and fear him and cleave unto him, then life; but if we turn from
him, and his truth and ways, then Death; all a man's righteousness shall be
forgotten, he shall dye in his sins.

Thus in these three Acts stands the right choosing of a man's religion.

CHAP. III.
Considerations evidencing it a principal point of wisdom for a man to make a
right choice of that Religion he professes in the World, and ventures his
Eternal Salvation upon.

HAving showed, wherein this wise choosing ones Religion stands, and what Acts
must concur thereto, We come next to demonstrate it to be such a principal
point of wisdom for a man to make a right choice of his Religion he professes
in the world, and ventures his Salvation upon. This may be evinced from the
ensuing Considerations.

1. The Necessity for a man to be of some Religion; and if so, wisdom should
direct to make choice of the best. Now it is necessary to be of some Religion;
We cannot live without God ( Acts 17.28. In him we live, move, and have our
being*) And is it not fit then we should acknowledge God and worship him? in
the very framing of the nature of man, there are such principles of Religion
engraven in him, that cannot be razed out, that have taught the very Heathens
to worship a Deity; so that we should be worse then Heathens, yea, become very
beasts, and below men, if we should not be of some Religion: Besides it is the
express command of God, by his written Laws given to the Sons of Men, that
they adore, worship and serve him; he expects it as an homage from them, and
will not loose his glory; Such Atheists are accursed by him, as cast off all
Religion, and live without God in the World: And though some such Atheists have
been found who in their prosperity forget God, whilst they can better shift
without him: yet in their miseries and dangers, they have been forced to
acknowledge God, and call upon him, as the Mariners in the Ship with Jonah,
etc. Now if it be so, Is it not fit to choose the true God, and the true
Religion?

2. There are many false Religions in the World, and we may soon be imposed on
and deluded, if we make not a wise choice of our Religion; There be many Lords
and many gods so called, (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8.5.) though to us, there
is but one living and true God; there is many ways of Religion, Heathenism.
Mahometanism, Judaism, and Christianity; and amongst Christians, how many
different ways this day? scarce to be numbered, and therefore we had need to
make a good choice. The greatest part of the World were deceived in former
times of old, the whole World almost followed false gods, except Israel. At
this day, some observe, if the World be divided into thirty parts, nineteen of
them are Heathen Idolaters, six be Mahometans; some (though inconsiderable)
Jews; and only the other five parts of the thirty be Christians: and how many
different ways be amongst them? Protestants, Papists, Muscovites, Greeks in
Europe, (besides multitudes in other parts of the World,) And these admitting
many subdivisions amongst themselves; Therefore we had need to make a wise
choice.

3. It Is that whereupon our greatest interest depends; on the right choosing
ones Religion, or our mistakes about it, eternal happiness or misery, life or
death depend. Deuteronomy. 32.46, 47. in things of great importance men use much
deliberation, and make the wisest choice they can, how necessary is it here?
That opinion or dream that every man may be saved by his own Religion, if he be
true to it, is more becoming Turks then Christians. They say there are three
Banners whereby men are conducted to Heaven, Moses's, Christ's, and Mahomets;
but we Christians know no other way to Salvation but one, viz. by faith in
Jesus Christ; for there is no other name under Heaven to be saved by, but by the
name of Jesus Christ, Acts 4.12. Indeed many lesser differences may be amongst
them that hold that one Faith: They may hold the head Christ, and yet differ in
small things with safety to their Souls; if they build on the foundation and
cornerstone Jesus Christ, (heartily believing the principles of the Christian
Faith, and living according to them, though they add thereto the Hay, Stubble,
and wood of smaller errors, they may be saved notwithstanding these. 1 Cor.
3.15. Salvation may be had amongst several forts of Christians, that all agree
in the great Articles of the Christian Faith, and live piously and charitably,
whether Lutherans, Calvinists, Arminians, Anabaptists, Episcopal, Presbyterian,
Independent, etc. These are not different Religions, but different forms of the
same Religion, wherein the children of the same Father, are dressed up in
different habits. But where any differ in fundamentals, and even turn to
another Religion, to another Gospel, or Christ (as the Apostle speaks to the
Galatians,) as too many Sects amongst us, are found to do, viz, Papists,
Socinians, Quakers, etc. Those I mean who are thoroughly such, not all that
ignorantly adhere to them,) it would be foolish charity to flatter them with
hopes of Salvation, in such ways, (if living and dying according to those
corrupt principles,) because they are in the number of those Damnable Heresies
the Scripture speaks of. Now this being clear, that Salvation depends upon
espousing the right Religion; What wisdom is it to make a good choice?

4. Because else if one should happen on the true Religion, he would never be
True unto it, unless he take it up on such a right choice, as before was spoken
of; we cannot be Serious Christians, nor through Christians, but by halves
only; nor Constant, holding out to the End, without this right choice.

(1.) Not serious Christians. Such as take up a Religion they know not what,
and on grounds they know not why, will be but sleighty and formal in it; a
little of outside profession they may have, but the power of it will be
wanting. Thus the common sort of Christians, that take not up Religion on a
wise choice, understanding what it is, and discerning the verity and excellency
of it, but because it is professed in the country where they live, enjoined by
the Laws of the Land, and commended by the example of Others, whom they esteem
wise and holy, alack, how formal and sleighty are they therein; not considering
the glory of the great God that made them and redeemed them, is concerned
therein, and that the Salvation of their own souls depends on it: Whereas such
as make a wise choice out of knowledge and discerning, serve God with all their
heart and strength and soul, they rest not in the former, but labor in the
power of godliness. Religion is their main business in the World.

(2.) Nor thorough Christians, but only by the halves, (as Agrippa, almost
persuaded to be Christians.) They will follow Christ a little way, and perform
some of the outside and easy parts of Religion: but when they hear some hard
sayings, (as the Capernaits) or some difficult duties pressed on them that
cross flesh and blood and worldly interest, they will except them, and say, in
this thing the Lord be merciful to me, etc. These are like the Scribe, not
far from the Kingdom of Heaven, but never shall come there; like Herod, that
reform many things, but not at all, will pick and choose where they please. Oh
that this were not the case of many called Christians! And this because they
understand not aright what the Christian Religion is, and take it not upon good
grounds, therefore they fall short: whereas he that understands what an holy
Religion it is, and what great duties it requires, and casts up before hand the
inconveniences, losses andl sufferings he may meet with, comparing them with
the recompense of reward, the far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory,
he will go through-stitch, will follow God fully, and will be altogether a
Christian.

3. Not Constant, but turning away from it upon every Temptation. Such are ever
wavering and halting betwixt two, as the Israelites of old betwixt Jehovah and
Baal. If heresy, seducement, and the power of delusions come amongst such, how
do they turn away from that Religion they have embraced by companies, and turn
Runnagados, or if the heat of persecution scorch them, they wither away because
they have no Root. Mat, 13. We have had too sad experience of this amongst the
giddy unstable sort of Christians in our times, when God had let loose errors
and heresies amongst us, (to try who were sound and sincere, and who not) how
many were carried away as with a flood? And if Popery should prevail again, or
Mahometanism, through the conquering Sword of the Turks, one may tremble to
think whither such ungrounded Christians may be carried: Whereas on the other
hand the Christian that takes up his Religion on good grounds through a wise
choice, knowing what, and in whom he has believed, will through grace stand
strongly as the House built upon the Rock, Mat. 7. When the Winds blew and the
Waves beat, he stands; The gates of Hell shall not prevail against such.
Therefore we see what a great point of wisdom it is, for a man to make a wise
choice of that Religion he takes up; else he will not be true unto it; he will
not be a serious Christian, nor a thorough, nor a constant Christian, and then
as good be none at all. It will nothing avail them unto Salvation to embrace
the true Religion, no more then it did profit the Israelites of old, to have
the Temple of the Lord amongst them; or the Philistims to have the Ark of the
Covenant with them, it will but increase their condemnation.

These considerations are sufficient (without insisting upon any other) to
evidence the truth of our proposition, and to commend to us this great duty
viz. The wise choosing of that Religion we profess in the World, that we mean
to live and dye in, and to venture our Eternal Salvation upon.

CHAP. IIII.
Wherein the Practice of this Duty is insisted on, and Directions given how to
choose the true Religion amongst so many as are in the World. All other
Religions being rejected, The Christian Religion is evidenced to be the only
true Religion.

WE are now come to the practical part of our discourse to show how this may
be reduced into action, that we have been treating on, but in words hitherto;
let every one that God has given the understanding of a man unto, be induced
to make a wise choice of that Religion he ventures his eternal Salvation upon.

This discourse is intended only for such as be resolved to be of some
Religion, and will not live as Atheists. As for them that will not be of any
Religion at all, but live without God in the World, only live to eat and drink,
and work and sleap, and mind their sensual pleasures, they degenerate from the
Nature of Men, and are even turned unto Beasts; foolish are they and ignorant
(to use the Psalmists words, Psalm. 73.) and even in this point as Beasts, as
far below men as Nebuchadnezzar was when he did eat grass as the Oxen, and
couched amongst the Beasts, for such violate the very Law of Nature, which has
taught all Nations, however rude and barbarous, to take up some profession of
Religion. They transgress also the written Law of God, which he has given in
his Word, and will judge men by, at the last day, which requires solemn worship
and service from the Sons of men. They bring themselves directly under the
curse or imprecation, Jer. 10.25. Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen, and upon
the Families that call not on thy Name. The wicked shall be turned into Hell,
with all the Nations that forget God, Psalm 9.17. As they say to God now,
depart from us, we will not know thy ways: so they shall hear God say to them
shortly, Depart from me ye cursed, etc. Nor do I speak to such base and low
Spirits, as take up their Religion on trust from others, and pin their Faith
upon the sleeves of those, to whom they have subjected their judgments and
consciences, upon account of any worldly, or corrupt interest: But to such
noble Spirits, as with the Bereans will take pains to fearch the Scriptures,
and use all Gods appointed means to inform themselves; that they may venture
their souls on a sure bottom. Consider as men, and make a wise choice of that
Religion you venture your Salvation upon. Its not sufficient that it be
delivered to you by Tradition from your Ancestors; that you yave learned it by
education from Godly Parents; that it is commanded by the Laws of the Land
wherein you live, and commended by the practice of wise and pious persons, whom
you reverence: but make a wise choice for your selves; Labor to understand
distinctly the several Doctrines, and mysteries of Faith, and duties of
Godliness contained therein: and to know the verity and excellency of it; and
so take it up upon deliberation, weighing both the conveniences and
inconveniences so it, Comparing the sufferings, losses, reproaches,
persecutions you meet withal: with the reward and Crown promised; and so make
a wise choice of your Religion, resolving to live and dye therein, to adhere to
it to the end, and be faithful even to Death.

This is a duty necessary and seasonable to be pressed, some have not yet
chosen their Religion. It Is to be feared there is too many, not only of the
younger sort, but of the more ancient, who (according to the proverb) have
their Religion to choose. Some have made some kind of choice, but need to be
confirmed and established therein upon good grounds, and to be stirred up to be
true to the true Religion they profess, even to be serious, thorough and
constant Christians.

Make this choice then speedily, for this is the business you come into the
World about, to know and acknowledge, to worship and glorify God; and your
Salvation depends upon it. Live not without God any longer, but acknowledge him
that made and redeemed you, that feeds and preserves you, and learn how to
serve him acceptably. Do it wisely, lest you be deluded, there being such
diversities of Religions, and so many false ways in the World, you had need to
have your eyes about you; erring herein will not stand with the safety of your
souls, your external happiness or misery depends upon it. And then be True to
that Religion you choose, play not fast and loose with it. It Is a business of
highest concernment to be serious in Religion, what ever you trifle in, be not
false herein, what ever you be faulty in. Let the Doctrines and mysteries of
Faith you receive, influence your hearts and lives, sanctify and change them;
rest not in the form of godliness without the power of it. Men may as well
miscary in the true Religion as in a false, if they be false unto it.

Quest. But here a question must be resolved in order to the practice of this
duty, which is this. Some may say, Seeing there are such diversities of Religion
in the World, How shall we be able to make a right choice, amongst so many, of
the true Religion, especially such of us as be weak and ignorant, when great
and learned men differ so much about it amongst themselves.

Answer. This is a question of very great importance, and indeed deserves a
serious Answer, I shall speak to it in two particulars.

1. It is a mistake to think, because of the differences of opinions amongst
men, that there is such a multitude of Religions in the World; for every
different opinion is not a different Religion. There are (to speak properly)
but four Religions in the World, although there be different Sects and parties
amongst each of these, viz. Heathenism, Mahometanism, Judaism and Christianity.
Indeed these four disagree much amongst themselves. In Heathenism some worship
one God, some another, some multitudes jointly, as may beseen in Scripture and
in all Histories. In Mahometanism, all follow that Impostor Mahomet, but yet
there are great differences amongst themselves, so that they are at deadly Feud
often one with another for their Religion sake, as is storied of the Turkish
and Persian Mahometans. In Judaism all worship the true God, the maker of
Heaven and Earth, and receive the Law from Moses, serving God according to the
Ordinances thereof; yet have they different Sects amongst themselves, as the
Pharisees, Sadducees, Essens, etc. In Christianity all worship God in Christ,
although there be diversities of Sects and Heresies amongst them; So that
indeed there are but four Religions in the world.

2. There Is a great difficulty to discern which of these four we should choose
for our Religion, even the weakest understanding that indifferently weighs
them, may be convinced.

(1.) For Heathenism, Its evident to reason their Religion is not true, to
worship so many Gods, and them also creatures, as the Sun and Moon, yea, mortal
men that are dead, such as Jupiter, Juno, Saturn, etc. Yea, the worst of Men,
Their own Poets have branded them with black notes of infamy for Adultery,
Theft, Murder, etc. It was Gods just judgment (as the Apostle observes, Romans
1. To give them up to such delusions to worship such gods, because when they
knew the true God they did not glorify him as God. Many of their own Religion
were convinced, they were not in the right, and therefore Cicero in his Book De
natura Deorum, says, I would I could as well find out the true Religion, as
convince others to be false.

(2.) For Mahometanism, though it has spread far over the World, (yea, further
then Christianity is spread at this day) yet its most easy to prove that to be
a false Religion; Their Prophet was a deceiver and a very flagitious person,
and wrought no miracles; their Alcaron is most barbarous and without sense;
their Doctrine impure as well as their Lives; their Religion promises a carnal
Paradise in the world to come, full of sensual pleasures, not spiritual, and
suitable to rational immortal souls. It was propagated in the World by the
Sword, and maintained by ignorance, and suppressing all humane learning.

(3.) For Judaism, the third Religion in the World, That was indeed of God,
confirmed in the Old Testament; But it was to continue for a time, till Christ
came, of whom Moses and the Prophets witness abundantly; then at the time of
Reformation it was to be abolished, Heb 9.10. Their whole worship and
Ceremonies had respect to him on whom, because they would not believe, but
rej^cted and crucified him, the wrath of God is come upon them to the
uttermost, They and their Temple was destroyed and the worship of it abrogated,
and to this day so continues.

(4) It remains therefore that the Christian Religion is the true Religion, or
else there is none in the World. And it indeed is witnessed to, both in Mahomets
Alcoran, and in the Jewish Old Testament, which speaks fully of Jesus Christ,
his birth and parentage, with the circumstances of time and place, his death,
resurrection* etc. This was confirmed by many signs and wonders, and real
miracles wroght by the first planters of this Religion: Heb. 2.4 By the means
and ways of propagation of it* by weak and unlearned men, by whose preaching
it soon overspread the World and took such rooting, that the power, craft, and
malice of men and Devils cannot root it out. Its evidenced by the purity and
spirituality of its Doctrine; By the sublimity of the Mysteries revealed in it,
wherein the highest wisdom of God shines forth; By the greatness and
excellency of the rewards and punishments; By the holy Spirit appearing in the
serious professors of it (such a Spirit of holiness as is no where else to be
found in the world) And by the design it has to glorify God and to humble
Man, etc. By these and the like evidences the weakest, may easily be convinced,
That the Christian Religion is the only true Religion of all others in the
World, and so be directed to make choice thereof.

CHAP. V.
Further Directions how to choose the right and safe way amongst such
diversities of Sects and opinions, as be amongst Christians. A discovery of the
fundamental Doctrines of Faith and practical duties of Godliness, generally
embraced by all Christians in all times and places, with advice in reference unto
them.

HAving inquired into the several Religions this day professed in the world*
and found upon good evidence the Christian Religion to be the only true
Religion, men may venture their Salvation upon. We meet next with no small
difficulty whereby weak and ignorant persons are perplexed (occasioned by the
diversity of Sects and opinions which are found amongst Christians) viz.

Quest. To know, (after they once be resolved to be Christians) how to choose
the right and safe way amongst such various Sects and different persuasions of
those called Christians, (unless a man might be saved in any of these Sects and
ways) What directions are there for the safe conduct of such as are at a loss
herein?

Answer. Because this is a grand case wherein very many (in these sad times of
Division) greatly need Direction, I shall guide them to a safe way, wherein
they may securely walk, and venture their Souls without fear of miscarrying.
And it is this; Let them labor to understand clearly and to embrace heartily
those Fundamental and Catholic verities of the Christian Religion, which are
more clearly laid down in the holy Scriptures, and have been owned by the
Churches of Christ, generally in all ages and places, ever since the Apostles
times to our days, and transmitted to us in their Creeds, and Confessions of
Faith, and are now owned by all (worthy the name of the Christians) without
dispute, through all the Christian World; let them so believe them, that they
influence their Hearts and Lives thoroughly: And also all those Confessed duties
of godliness that all Christians are agreed in, and walk up to the practice of
them, and their Souls shall certainly be secured.

Know, that notwithstanding these diversities of Sects, and varieties of
opinions which are found amongst Christians, from which they are not privileged
(as neither are those other three Religions, Heathenisme, Mahometanism, and
Judaism, as before was showed) nor shall be fully whilst we be imperfect, and
know but in part, and are in part carnal as well as Spiritual, whilst the
envious one shall fow Tares in the field of the Church, and it shall be the
pleasure of God to suffer these things to be, that they which are approved may
be made manifest: Yet know, That there are some fundamental and Catholic
verities of the Christian Religion, which are (...), points generally believed
of all, having antiquity, universality, and consent concurring with them; which
the Scriptures call the foundation, 1 Cor. 3.10* 11. The principles of the
Doctrine of Christ, Heb. 6.1. The form of sound words, 2 Timothy 1.13. Romans 6.17.
The proportion or Analogy of Faith. Romans (...) 6. Which have been conveyed down
from the Apostles, even to us in this last age of the World, nor could the
gates of Hell ever prevail, so far as to extirpate them. And these are such
Confessed duties of godliness, as none that have pretended to be Christians
have dared openly and directly to gainsay. Now these are the points that have
greatest influence on our hearts and lives, to sanctify and change them, and
to promote the life and power of godliness, (and rarely those questions and
matters of dispute that are so hotly contested about) and these avail to the
saving our Souls; upon our hearty embracing and receiving these, or our
renouncing of them, either in heart or life, depends our Salvation or
Damnation. We had need therefore to set our hearts on these things, that we
cordially believe these Doctrines, and practice those Duties, and so doing we
shall secure our eternal Salvation.

Now for further improvement of this advice we shall more particularly inquire
into these great and necessary Doctrines of faith and duties of godliness, and
lay down some brief account of them in order to our belief and practice, and so
consequently to Salvation.

1. For the Fundamental Doctrines of the Christian Religion. Not that I
undertake to give an exact account hereof; for to determine this (says a
learned man) is the masterpiece of all the Divines in Christendom; but only do
declare those truths, which being more clearly laid down in Scripture, have
been generally embraced by all Churches worthy the Name of Christians, (setting
aside controverted points) wherein so much truth is contained, as being joined
with holy obedience, may be sufficient to bring a man to everlasting Salvation.
This being premised they may be reduced to these four Articles.

(1) Concerning God, That there is one God of an infinite, perfect, and
spiritual nature, Subsisting in three most glorious persons, the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, who is the maker, preserver and Governor of all
things, and intends his own glory in all his Works. That the greatest
concernment of reasonable creatures is to know and acknowledge this God, to
fear, love, adore and glorify him, and their chief felicity stands in his love
and favor, in fullest conformity to his Image, and nearest communion with him,
and in no earthly good separate from him. This is one Article of Religion
necessary unto Salvation to be known and believed, and not controverted amongst
Christians. Believe this thoroughly, and let it influence your hearts and lives,
so as you study to know this God, and to get acquaintance with him, to fear,
love, and serve him, to own him for your Sovereign Lord and chief good.

(2) Concerning man, That God made man at the first in a very holy and happy
estate from which he soon fell through Satan's Temptation, and all mankind
became plunged into sin and misery. That we are all heinous offenders against
the God of Heaven, under his dreadful wrath and the curse of the Law, barred
out of Heaven and happiness, and liable to eternal torments, if not speedily
reconciled to God and pardoned, and by renewing grace sanctified and converted;
which neither we, nor any mere creature is able to do for us.

This is another Fundamental Article of Faith, so clearly laid down in
Scripture as it is beyond all controversy. Entertain it not in the notion only,
but let it be so digested, that you feel your sin and misery at your heart, and
dare not to continue a day longer without reconciling and pardoning mercy, and
renewing and sanctifying grace, lest you perish; that you despair of any
creatures help, and feel your selves eternally undone, if the God of Heaven
help not.

(3) Concerning Jesus Christ our Redeemer. That the Lord Jesus Christ the only
begotten Son of God, coessential and coeternal with his Father upon the
appointment and designation of his Father, voluntarily undertook the office of
a Savior and Redeemer to Mankind, and being made Man, took on him our sins,
and the curse of the Law, and giving himself up a Sacrifice and an offering to
God for us, purchased by his death all things conducing to grace and glory: and
having by his own power arisen from the dead and ascended into heaven, he is
become an alsufficient Savior, and will effectually confer pardon, grace and
Salvation, on all those who shall truly believe in him; And that there is no
other name under Heaven to be saved by, but by the name of Jesus Christ.

This is a great and necessary Doctrine of Salvation, so clearly held forth in
Scripture, that it is beyond controversy, 1 Timothy 3.16. Let this Catholic
verity be received not in the Nation only, but dwell in your hearts, that you
may see the infinite worth and excellency of Jesus Christ prize him as the only
Savior, close with him on all those glorious accounts and end she was sent upon
by the Father, and yield up your selves to be saved by him in his own way, and
upon his own Terms.

(4) Concerning the application of Redemption. That our Redeemer the Lord Josus
Christ having all power in Heaven and Earth given to him, has made a new Law
or Covenant of grace and caused it to be proclaimed to the world, wherein he
promises pardon and Salvation to all that shall sincerely accept and own him for
their Savior and Lord Redeemer, and t^uly repenting of their sins, shall rest
on his death and merits alone for life, and love him above all things, and
sincerely obey his Gospel. Laws and Commundments, and shall persevere in these
duties to the end: And after he shall have sent his holy Spirit to work Faith
and conversion in his Elect, He will certainly come again from Heaven in the
glory of his Father with his mighty Angels, and by his mighty power shall raise
the dead, and convene all both Quick and dead before his Judgment Seat; and
then such as did truly repent them of their sins, and sincerely believed in his
Name and obeyed his Gospel, he will adjudge to Eternal glory and happiness
with himself and his Father and the holy Angels: but unbelievers and impenitent
persons to eternal torments in Hell with the Devil and his Angels. This is an
unquestionable Article of the Christian Faith, expressly delivered in the holy
Scriptures, and embraced by the Catholic Church. Let this truth be received,
not notionally but heartily; Let it influence your hearts and lives so as you
sincerely obey the Gospel, and live in the daily expectation of the coming of
the Lord, and give deligence to be found of him in peace without spot, and
blameless. I shall add no other Doctrinal verities besides these fundamental
Articles; They are the very substance of the Christian Creed embraced by the
Church in all ages and places

2. For those Practical Duties in which all true Christians are agreed (for as
there are in points of Faith fundamental Articles, so there are in the point of
practice fundamental Duties.) Now these are either.

(1) Those Moral duties of the Law or Ten Commandments promulgated on Mount
Sinai, and written by the finger of God in two Tables of stone, which
Christians are obliged to observe as well as the Jews (though the Ceremonial
Law, which was altogether typical and shadowed good things to come, be
abolished) Yea, we are bound to keep it in a more strict and spiritual manner
then the Jews did interpret it formerly, as appears by Christ's Sermon, Mat 5.
This contains all duties of piety toward God, immediately required in the first
Table, viz. to take and accept the God of Heaven that made us and gave us Life
and breath, and being for our God alone; to know and acknowledge him, to fear,
love, and trust in him, and seek his glory; to give him that external worship
he requires in his Word, public, private, and secret, as invocation of his
Holy Name by prayers and praises, hearing and reading, meditating and
conferring on his Word, receiving his Sacraments, sanctifying his Sabbaths:
Doing all this in an Holy reverent manner, so as Gods name may be sanctified by
us in his ordinances, as also in our ordinary communications and conversations.
It likewise contains all Duties of righteousness and charity toward Man,
required in the second Table, viz. The preserving, as well as not injuring, of
the honor and authority, of the life and chastity of our neighbor, in
thought, word and deed; as also his estate, good name, etc. And loving him even
as we love our selves, doing good unto all, etc. These are general Duties, all
Christians are agreed in, Make Conscience to practice these.

(2) Those Evangelical Duties, or Commandments of the Gospel. For besides
these Moral Duties of the Law which the Gospel does enforce also by renewed and
more indearing arguments, there are peculiar duties required by the Gospel, as
True repentance for every sin and transgression of Gods righteous and holy
commands (for the Law gives no place to Repentance, but threatens death for
every offense.) Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, for pardon through his blood,
and Salvation through his merits: Fervent love to God and the Redeemer, who
loved us and gave himself for us; who has washed us in his blood, and made us
Kings and Priests to God and his Father; Sincere endeavors to promote his
glory, upon the new obligation of Redemption; and living to him as his peculiar
People, being not our own but his, bought with a price; Love to all the Saints
and Members of Christ, and communion with them as we have opportunity, on
account of that near union in Christ; which should make us bear with smaller
differences that do not violat the bond of union, whilst they hold of Christ
the head, and are of the same body, etc.

These are confessed duties all Christians are agreed in, Practice them
Conscionably. The Apostle gives us the sum of all these together, Tit. 2.11,
12. The grace of God that brings Salvation, has appeared to all men,
teaching us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts; and to live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world.

This then is the Counsel I would give to such as are resolved to be
Christians, but are stumbled at the variety of opinions and persuasions amongst
the professors of Christianity, that they know not what to believe or what to
practis: That they would believe those fundamental and Catholic truths of the
Christian Religion, about which there is no dispute amongst us, and let them be
so believed, that they influence their hearts and lives, and sanctify them: And
also that they would conscionably practice those known and confessed duties,
that all are agreed in, and then there will be no cause to question their
salvation and eternal happiness. But it is unseasonable to be contending
violently about disputable points of Faith, and external forms and modes of
worship and discipline, and such like questions about things not so clearly
revealed in Scripture, no^ embraced so generally by all true Christians and
Churches, nor indeed easy to be comprehended by the weaker sort of Professors;
whilst those weighty things before named, are neglected and disregarded. Such
will hardly evade the imputation of Hypocrysie, being so like the Pharisees,
that Tithed Mint. Annise and Cummin, and neglected the weighty things of the
Law.

CHAP. VI.
Other Directions in points of a Secondary nature, that are not so clearly laid
down in Scripture, nor unanimously received by all Christians; but are
Problematical, and yet there is a necessity to be of the one or other
persuasion. How to make a right choice in such a Case. Four Rules about this.

But what, Are not the least truths of Religion worth contending for, and the
smallest circumstantials of Faith or worship? Does not God stand upon small
matters in his service? Yes verily, in their due place, and after a Christian
manner, we may and ought to inquire after them. When we have yielded that Faith
and obedience that is due to the great and more necessary points of Salvation,
We are then to study the mind of God in other things of a secondary and more
inferior Nature; nor is the most minute truth to be despised or neglected by
us. That therefore we may make a wise choice of the true and right way in such
circumstantial and less necessary points, as truly pious and wife Christians
differ in, which are marters non fidei sed questionum, Aug de peccat. orig.
chap. 23.
(as St. Augustine speaks) not properly points of the Catholic Faith, but
problematical and disputable in the Church; and yet are necessitated to be of
the one or other persuasion: I come in the next place to give some directions
about them; for which end, observe these few Rules which will be useful to us
herein.

1. Humhly seek God by daily and fervent prayers and supplications to make his
mind and will known to you herein; Lean not to your own understanding and
wisdom, but confess how weak you are, and full of error and darkness;
Beseech him to take away the vail from before your eyes, to give you
understanding, and teach you good judgment and knowledge; that what you see
not, he would teach you, and wherein you are otherwise minded, he would reveal
the truth unto you; Plead his promises of leading you into all truth, that you
shall be all taught of God; that he will reveal his secrets to such as fear
him, and guide the meek in the way, and lead you by his Spirit. Hang upon the
Lord daily for his guidance in such difficult cases as you are at a loss in.

2. Search the Scriptures, John 5.39. and look well to them, they are your
chard and compass to steer your course by, try all things by them, to the Law
and to the testimony. Take nothing on trust from men, for the best of men may
err. I think there is hardly any error in Doctrine, or corruption in Worship,
but has been brought into the Church by following the opinions and practices
of some reputed godly men, more then the Scriptures: when a Peter shall Judaize
and not walk uprightly, he may not only seduce by his example many ordinary
Christians, but a Barnabas also may be carried away from the truth by his
dissimulation, Gal. 2. Hold close therefore to the Scriptures, those infallible
Oracles, the word of truth, and inquire daily into them.

(3) If yet after prayer and searching the Scriptures, we find not the mind of
God insome opinion or practice, (because it is but darkly laid down in
Scripture, or at least through the darkness of mind in godly men, who cannot
so well discern it) Then observe this further Rule. There are some general
criteria, or marks whereby we may discern any Doctrine or practice whether it
be of God or no; We shall find them laid down in the Scriptures, and may
thereby try any Doctrine or practice, when we can not so clearly see them in
the particulars, viz. (1) Such Doctrines and practices as are not repugnant to,
but agree and correspond with the fundamental Articles of the Christian
Religion, or the first principles, that be according to the proportion or
Analogy of faith, Romans 12.6. They be of God, receive and embrace them; but if
they be not consonant thereunto, then reject them. (2) Such Doctrines and
practices as tend to holiness, Tit. 1.2. Doctrines according to godliness, they
are of God, for he is a God of holiness, follow them: But such as tend to
looseness and profaness are to be shunned as not of God. This mark discovers
the evil of such opinions as teach men to cast off Sabbaths, Ordinances,
Scriptures, family and closet devotions, and other libertine principles; yet
here beware on the contrary of a pretended holiness above what is written, of
being righteous over much, above and beyond the rule of the word, this was the
occasion of Monkish or solitary living amongst the Papists, of their pretended
holy Orders, Vows, etc. And amongst others it has caused Separation,
Superstition and many other irregular Actings.

(3) Such Doctrines and ways as tend not to division and faction, but to
peace, love, and union amongst such as fear God, those are of God, and to be
followed by us, 1 Cor. 1.10. Phil. 2.1, 2. Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5, 6. But the contrary
to be shunned and avoided, Romans 16.17.

(4) Such things as tend to edification, and to further the Salvation of our
souls, are to be received as of God, 1 Cor. 14.26. Romans 14.19. But those things
that Minister Questions and cause strife and contention, rather then godly
edifying, are to be avoided, 1 Timothy 1.4, 5.

(5) Such Opinions and practices as tend to the glory of God and of Jesus
Christ, and to the setting up his righteousness and grace, and to the humbling
and debasing of man, and casting him down from all high thoughts of his own
excellency and abilities, they are to be received as from God; for this is the
great design of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1. a fin, but the contrary is to be rejected.

These general Criteria or Marks may be some guide to find out the right and
safe way in some Doctrines and Practices that you are at a loss in, because you
cannot read them so plainly in the word of God.

Rule 4, After you have thus done the utmost you are able, to find out the mind
of God in these controverted matters, which yet are disputable amongst the wise
and godly, and you shall be necessitated to be of the one or the other
persuasion or way; Then let every one do that which he is fully persuaded in
his own mind to be best and most pleasing to God; nor daring to go against the
dictates of his own Conscience, See Ames Cas. l. 1. c. 5 q. 1. Sanders. Lect 3.
de juram. Sect. 10.
which God has set up as his Vicegerent in the Soul, nor subjecting himself to
the judgment or Authority of any other, as Lord of his Faith; I say Believe and
embrace that opinion, and walk in that practice; But yet to this. (1) Humbly
with a due sense of your own weakness and ignorance, not proudly censuring and
contemning such as differ from your persuasion, but ever ready to hear what
shall be offered for your conviction, especially if it be from the wise and
learned, and those which by Gods providence are in place of eminency in the
Church; being rather matter of Affliction to you, then of exalting your self
that you should differ from them.

(2) Peaceably and without all Faction and Schism, not making parties for you,
and renting from the Communion of those with whom you agree in the most weighty
and necessary Doctrines of Salvation, and so disturbing the peace of the Church
where you live: The evil of which can never be repaired by a violent contention
for any truth or practice not fundamental and necessary unto Salvation. Here
the counsel of the Apostle is seasonable, Romans 14 If thou have faith, have it
to thy self, and Phil. 3. Whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the
same rule, let us mind the same thing, and if in any thing any be otherwise
minded, God will reveal even this unto them. In all those principal points of
faith and practice, wherein is such perfect harmony, it is a manifest duty to
hold communion, only forbearing the same in these lesser matters, wherein
according to the present apprehension the sin and error lies.

(3) Cheerfully and confidently, not troubling and perplexing your selves about
such a persuasion and practice, with fears arising from a scrupulous
Conscience, (which are like Stones in the shoe, troubling the Feet of him that
walks;) But with a comfortable persuasion that God is well pleased with you,
seeing you do the utmost you are able, to find out the mind of God in such a
particular; and therefore, if you be in the right, he will accept it; or if
through weakness there be a mistake, yet he will graciously pardon it, and in
his good time reveal even this unto you. For if even earthly Parents or
Masters, when their Servants or Children do their utmost to know their minds,
and to do their business, so as to please them, will accept their endeavors,
and take all in good part, though in every punctilio they have not done what
was expected: much more will the gracious God accept of his Children and
Servants, that desire to please him, and pardon what is amiss in them. And
indeed if not, no flesh living could be saved: for who is there of the highest
form of Christians, that are ascertained, that in every particular Doctrine and
Practice (in those things controverted amongst the godly and wise) that they be
in the right? seeing the best of men are imperfect, and may, and do err and
offend. Therefore go on cheerfully with full assurance that the Lord accepts
you, This Rule the Apostle fully lays down, Romans 14 upon occasion of
controversies about points not necessary to Salvation, viz. Meats and Drinks
and Days. He bids, let every one be fully persuaded in his own mind, and act
accordingly; not judging and condemning others, nor breaking the peace* and
then he should be accepted of God, and approved of men. Thus have we a safe
Conduct to lead us in the right way in matters circumstantial, controverted
amongst pious and wise Christians, in points less necessary unto Salvation; as
well as in matters of Fundamental, and of absolute necessity thereunto.

CHAP. VII.
A closer Application of the foregoing Discourse, to the present State of the
Church in England; with particular Advice in reference to the different Ways
and professions found amongst us.

HAving given a more general advice suitable to all times and conditions of the
Church in all places: It will be expedient next (in behalf ^f those for whose
benefit this discourse is principally intended) to apply the former
directions, to the present state of the Church here in England, and those many
different Persuasions and ways that are amongst us.

We are a people that generally do profess the Christian Religion, which has
been of long time transmitted down to us from our Ancestors: wherein we are
deeply engaged by Education, the Laws of the Land, and manifold Obligations*
But it is much to be desired that the Common sort of Christians, were better
instructed in the grounds and Reasons of the entertainment of this Religion
(rather then of the other three before mentioned, Heathenism, Mahometanism, and
Judaism,) and that they might gain a clear and distinct knowledge of the great
and fundamental Articles thereof, and be thoroughly grounded in the certainty
and excellency of it; A thing which is much wanting in the vulgar sort through
their too great negligence and carelessness about things spiritual: but of
exceeding dangerous consequence to their Souls, as exposing them to profaneness
and Error, if not to total Apostasy. And therefore this duty (though before
hinted) deserves to be reinforced with the strongest persuasions.

But although we all be Christians in profession, We are sadly crumbled into
such Diversities of Sects and persuasions, occasioned much through the
licentiousness of War, and relaxation of Government amongst us of which
occasion Satan and our corrupt natures have made too great improvement; That is
it most difficult for weak and ignorant persons to find out the right and safe
way amongst them, and to join themselves unto; This temptation having led very
many into errors by-ways and pernicious, and others into Atheism. We shall
therefore attempt to give some directions what course to steer herein; what
opinions and Sects to shun and avoid: and what people and principales we should
close withal. For it would greatly conduce to the peace and welfare of the
Church, and to the safety of men's souls, to be duly informed, What Christians
(or Societyes of Christians) they be, with whom communion may be held, and how
far; as also who they be that are utterly to be avoided: it being usual with
the vulgar sort of Christians, who sometimes abound in zeal, but are much
wanting in knowledge, to close with the most pernicious Principales and Ways,
where any stronger temptations insinnate themselves; then with those that are
far more sound and Orthodox, if they have taken up a prejudice against them,
and so have the faith of Christ with respect of persons. We shall therefore
take a Survey of the different persuasions and ways amongst us which may be
branched into these two. 1. The Way and profession which is publicly owned by
Authority, and has the Law of the Land for its Sanction. 2. Those Persuasions,
or Ways, that are taken up by private persons con^^ary to the Law of the
Nation.

For these latter (beginning there first) They are, as exceeding many, so of a
very different nature; some retaining the Fundamental Principles and Duties of
Christianity, necessary unto Salvation, and differing only in lesser matters,
controverted in the Church of Christ: others that overthrow the very Foundation
it self.

Those that overthrow the Foundations of Christianity, and differ about points
necessary unto Salvation, are too many.

In which rank we shall place the Papists first of all, because most
considerable, and above all others most formidable. Its true indeed, There has
been in the Popish Church, all a long to this day, continued such a System of
saving Truths (which God has of his great mercy preserved in the greatest Anti
Christian Apostasy) as being truly believed and obeyed (other Soul-destroying
errors in the mean time, either not known or not cordially embraced,) might be
effectual to the Salvation of many that lived and dyed within that Church: But
yet Popery it self, understanding thereby that Religion which consists of so
many new Articles of Faith (utterly unknown to the old Church of Rome in its
purity, but now ratifyed in the Council of Trent, and required to be recieved
of all men upon pain of Anathema) which plainly overthrow many of the great
Articles of the Catholic Faith; as also of such gross Idolatries and
Superstitious Fopperies etc. This, I say, is such a Religion, that none that
love their Salvation should close with. This Babylon we should have no communion
with, lest we communicate in her Plagues. As says the voice from Heaven,
Revel. 18 4. Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins,
and that ye receive not of her plagues. The grounds of our withdrawing from
that Religion, are 1. Their many dangerous errors in matters of Faith,
overthrowing directly the very Foundations of Christiantie. To instance in some
Their Doctrine of Transubstantiation, over-throweth the truth of Christ's humane
Nature; Their proper Sacrifice, his only Sacrifice for sin offered once for
all; Their Doctrine of merits plainly destroys the merins of Jesus Christ:
The multitude of Mediators amongst them, deny That only Mediator betwixt God
and man, the man Jesus Christ; 1 Timothy 2.5. Their Sacrificing Priests overthrow
Christ's Priestly office. Their vilifying the Scriptures, and setting up their
unwritten Traditions to be received with equal reverance with them, etc.
Overthrows Christ's Prophetical Offices. The Kingly Office of Christ, is
overthrown by the Popes usurpations, dispensing with the Laws of God, and
setting up other Laws of his own devising, and Lording it over the Consciences
of Men. The great Article of Remission of sins, and free Justification, through
the grace of God in Jesus Christ, is overthrown by their Pardons, Indulgences
and Doctrine of merit, and humane Satisfactions. 2. Their abominable Idolatries
in point of Worship, as Angel-worship, Saint-worship, Relique-worship,
Image Worship, etc. 3. Their profane Sacrilege, robbing the people of the
bread of life, the holy Scriptures: the Cup in the* Lords Supper; Nay almost,
of the whole Worship of God, causing it to be performed in a Language the
Vulgar understand not. 4. Their cruelty and blood shed, wherein Rome Papal
exceeds Rome Ethuicall. 5. Their Spiritual Tyranny in exacting blind obedience
in matters of Faith, as the Philistims pulled out the eyes of Sampson, and led
him whither they would: In burdening Christians with innumerable Ceremonies and
Superstitions, destroying the substance of Religion, 6. Their proud usurpations
over Kings and Princes. 7. The Notorious Schism they are guilty of, (worse then
that of the Novations and Donatists of old) whereby they not only cast off the
Reformed Churches; but the Muscovites and Grecians in Europe, The Egyptian and
Ethiopian Churches in Afric, and all these great companies of Christians
scattered all over Asia even from Constantinople to the East Indies; Because
they are not the Popes subjects, they will not account them Christ's; for they
declare, determine and pronounce, its of absolute necessity unto Salvation, for
every humane Creature to be subject to the Pope of Rome. 8. Add hereunto, their
unsufferable wickedness, overspreading that Church, and their allowance
thereof by giving Licenses to uncleanness, Sodomy, prostituting pardons for
money, dispensations with Gods Laws, etc. In all which the Romish Church is
incorrigible, pretending unerring Infallibility, and the Pope himself will be
supreme Judge alone in all these Cases. For these and the like grounds (which
cannot all be here enumerated) Its necessary for all good Christians to beware
of Popery, and have no Peace with Rome, till she return to her ancient
Primitive purity.

Others there are also that err in Fundamental points and necessary unto
salvation, as Anti-trinitarians, Anti-Scripturists, Arians, Socinians, etc. The
last of which Sects is esteemed by the learned, the very Sink into which all
Heresies of former and latter times have emptied themselves, and directly
leads men to Mahometanism, Judaism, or Atheism. These deny the Doctrine of the
Trinity (a fundamental Point, and necessary to Salvation) and the Deity of
Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Ghost, Reject the Satisfaction of Christ, and
maintain Justification by works; Refuse such Articles of the Faith, as they
cannot comprehend with their Reason, etc. These Sects as almost all Churches
(former and latter) and Divines in their Syncretisms, have banished out of the
Lines of Christian Communication: so it becomes all persons to avoid them as
pests, and enemies of Christianity, and to have no followship with them. I shall
instance only in one Sect more* of such as err in Fundamental points; who in
respect of their want of learning and outward accomplishments, are
contemptible; yet in respect of their number and their singular obstinancy in
their way, whereby they amuse the Vulgar, are not to be passed by viz. The
Quakers, although Quakerism cannot properly be called a Sect of Christians, but
rather it is a total Apostasy from Christianity; for excepting it be they have
the name of Christ in their Mouths, they scarce retain any Article of the
Christian Faith. The light in all men they extol, as the only sufficient rule
to walk by, to the apparent slighting of the Scriptures and Preaching; so that
if the Question be asked, what advantage has the Christian above the naked
Indian? We cannot answer as the Apostle, Romans 3.2. Much every way? chiefly,
because unto them is committed the Oracles of God. The Doctrine of the Trinity
they openly deny; The Person of Jesus Christ, as to his humane Nature, with all
his Offices assigned to him by his Father, they utterly reject, (though this is
an Arcanum that is kept hid from their Novices.) They call not upon God in the
Name and Mediation of Jesus Christ; They trust not in his death for pardon and
Salvation, but in a pretended sinless perfection; they deny any necessiy of the
Special grace of the Spirit to Conversion and Sanctification, saying, I charge
not every particular quaker with all these Errors (for many understand not
what they hold) But mention what I find asserted in their printed Pamphlets.
the Light within them is sufficient hereunto, and scoff at them that pray for
more; bidding them heed that only, and it will lead them from sin to God.
Sabbath and Sacraments, and all instituted Worship they cast off; the great
Doctrines of the Resurrection, Last Judgment, Heaven and Hell they turn into
Allegories, etc. These, and other things considered, it appears that they
plainly overthrow the foundations of Christianity, and therefore Christians can
have no Communion with that way.

Thus where differences are in Points destructive to the Foundations of
Religion, and against the Essentials of Faith, worship and obedience: There can
be no closure and agreement, but a total withdrawing, is necessary so far as
civil Relations and Offices will permit.

We come next to consider these other Persuasions and Parties among us, that
(agreeing in all the necessary points of Salvation, yet) differ in things that
be less necessary; though some be of greater, and some of less moment then
others These differences be either in Points of Doctrine, or ^n matters of
Worship and Discipline. In Poi^ts o^ Doctrine we have Arminians, Antinomians,
etc. In matters of Worship and Discipline, we have Anabaptists (I mean such as
be sound in the main Doctrines of faith, but err only in the point of Baptism)
Independents, Presbyterians. etc. Now about these differing ways, Take these
brief Directions suitable to those general Rules before laid down.

1. Account them all as Christians, if they be serious in the matters of
Religion, and their lives answerable; let not any evil representations of their
opinions or waves, or odious and invidious consequences drawn from their
Principles, but disowned by them, so far alienate your hearts from them, as not
to account them Christians and Brethren; seeing they retain the Fundamentals of
Christianity and hold the head Christ, though they build on the precious
Foundation, Wood, Hay, Stubble. Who is in all things free from Error? What
Church or person upon Earth?

2. Have the greatest respect, and the most intimate friendship for those in
whose Principles is greatest purity, that come nighest the rule, and who most
follow after peace and holiness, and lay out themselves more to promote the
greatest truths of the Gospel, and the power of Godliness, then their private
persuasions: But as for them who with the Wild fire of their Zeal, will set
the Church on a flame, and are more for making Proselytes for their own way,
then for seeking the welfare of the Church, and the edification and Salvation
of souls, avoid them.

3. If God cast your lot into these places or Countries, where those
Professions or Ways are set up; and you cannot enjoy that way of serving God,
that you approve as most pure; its an unque^^inable duty to hold Communion
there, in France and Holland with the Presbyterians, in Germany with the
Lutherans; and in other Countries with those other perswasio^s before named;
provided the condition of thy communion be not to give thy allowance to any
thing that is evil, but in that particular thou may be forborne* Communion
with such Churches where many corruptions and abuses are, (if the foundations
of faith, and essentials of worship be preserved) ought to be maintained, with
a due care to keep our selves only from the sins of such a Church, else the
Apostle would have enjoined separation from the Church of Corinth, for the
corruptions found there; and the Novatians, Donatists* and others in the
ancient Church were unjustly taxed, for withdrawing from her Communion for
laxness of Discipline, or other corruptions which they apprehended to be
therein. This duty our Church of England has taught by her own practice, who
has ever owned the reformed churches beyond Sea for Sister-Churches, and given
them the right hand of Fellowship; though differing from her in some matters of
an inferior nature.

CHAP. VIII.
Wherein the great controversies of Communion with, or Separation from the
Church of England is discussed. A view of what is therein praiseworthy, and
what is disallowable in the judgment of those that scruple Communion.
Directions suited thereunto.

WE have spoken of those different ways and persuasions found amongst private
persons without, and against the owning and approbation of Authority, and given
advice in reference to them: We are next to consider of that pro^ession
publicly set up by Authority, and that has the civil Sanction of the Laws of
^his Land.

No sober person can gainsay, But this deserves a most serious and impartial
consideration; partly in respect of that Duty we owe to those in Authority, to
whom God has committed the care of Religion, and the settling of it in their
Dominions, in such a way as they think most agreeable to the Rule of the Word,
and has enjoined us obedience to them in the Lord; partly in respect of our
own welfare, who may else suffer the penalty of the Laws, and had need to see
to it, if we obey, that we do it with a good Conscience, and if we suffer, that
we suffer for the Truth, and not as evil doers; And partly in respect of the
peace and welfare of the Church, that we do not groundlesly make a Rent
therein, and thereby (as much as in us lies) to procure the ruin thereof, for
all Division tends to Destruction,

It would therefore seriously be inquired, Whether it be a duty for Christians
to hold Communion with the Church of England according to its present state and
administrations? or, Whether Separation from it, is warrantable and necessary,
and how far?

For the Resolving of which Question, we shall take an Account of those things
that are commendable in the said Church in the judgment of those that scruple
Communion with her; and also of what things they disallow and dislike in her:
And then cast up, Whether it will warrant separation, or how far, according to
the same Rules of Concord we have proceeded upon, with those of the other
Professions before named

And first, it will not be denied by all Dissenters (that have understanding
and sobriety in them) But that here is to be found (1.) A clear profession of
all those Fundamental points of Faith, which are accounted amongst Christians
necessary unto Salvation; yea such a poor Confession of other points of a
Secondary, and more inferior Nature, as that there is scarce any other Church
in the World, that God has blessed with a greater purity in point of Doctrine
then the Church of England.

(2.) Here also is the Christian Sabbath embraced with much greater honor then
in many other Reformed Churches; Homily of time and place of Prayer. Part 2.
the public Ordinances of preaching Prayer, Sacraments, administered and all
the Substantials of Worship owned viz. That God only is to be Worshipped and no
Creatures, Saints, or Angels; That he is to be Worshipped only in and through
Christ as our only Mediator and Advocate; that he is to be Worshipped in Spirit
and truth, and to be Sanctified of them that come near unto him

(3) As for Fundamental Duties and Points of Practice, here is a Profession of
Faith in Jesus Christ alone, for Salvation; of Repentance from dead works, and
love to Jesus Christ, and to all that are his; and obedience to the Moral Law
of the Yen Commandments. Here is a professed Renuntiation of the Devil, the
World, and the flesh, with all their sinful works and Lusts. All these call for
an ingenuous and candid acknowledgment. How would our Forefathers that lived
in former times of Popery, have rejoiced to have seen such things in England?
We should bresse God that has vouchased such a mercy to us; Honor our
Defender of the Faith, under whose protection this Profession is made; and show
more Reverence to the Church then many do, who will pettishly slight all this,
because they have not all they would have.

Secondly, we are next to consider those things that are disliked by such as
scruple Communion; which are especially reducible to three Heads. (1.)
Government and Discipline, which though it be various in the Reformed Churches,
yet notwithstanding they hold mutual Communion with each other, as
Sister-Churches; and many particular wise and godly Members of those Churches
hold Communion in the Ordinances of God administered in the Churches of
different ways, occasionally when they reside amongst them.

(2.) Forms of Prayers and Ceremonies, concerning which some disallow all set
and imposed forms whatsoever; others only dislike the form by law established,
accounting it inconvenient, disorderly and defective, and rejecting the
Ceremonies: yet wise and sober persons generally (Non-Conformists as well as
Conformists) reckon external forms and modes of Divine Service, not of the
Essentials of Worship; but adjuncts thereunto belonging, Ames Cas l. 4. c. 14
etc. 17. Prestons daity Exercise.
E. G. The Essence of Prayer lies in lifting up true desires to God in the name
of Christ, for things agreeable to his will, in the elevation of the heart or
mind to God, etc. Words are but the outward clothing of these desires and holy
affections, or the Chariot wherein they mount up to Heaven. And for the
Ceremonies used in England, they are utterly denied to be any parts of Worship,
and declares only circumstantial appendants thereunto (see the Preface to the
Common Prayer, and Canons, etc.

(3.) Corruption in manners, and that both in People and in Ministers, which
when found in the latter, makes the offense far greater, as when the Sons of
Eli were wicked, they made the offerings of the Lord to be abhorred. These
things premised, We shall now offer our advice in this great Controversy, and
annex such Reasons thereto, as shall evidence it both safe and profitable; We
lay it down in three particulars.

1. To beware of a Total withdrawing from the public Assemblies in the Church
of England, and the worship of God therein (whilst the Fundamentals of Faith,
and essentials of Worship are therein maintained) because you apprehend therein
some corruptions, defects, additions, or errors which are circumstantial.

This advice though it might be urged with manifold arguments, yet the Brevity
I intend in this Discourse, requires me to give but a few.

(1.) If you will make the Scripture your Rule herein, you may see so clear a
Beam of Light (all along through the same) witnessing hereunto, That it is a
wonder any should be found to Question this duty. Consider the Prophets and
people of God in the time of the Old Testament, did they separate from the true
Worship of God in the Jewish Church (or teach any to do it) when there were
very great defects and corruptions therein? There was at some times a defect of
some Solemn Ordinances for a long time together, as Circumcision, the
Passover, etc. Some Monuments of Idolatry remaining amongst them, and the
People (many of them) defiled therewith; Very great corruptions of manners, not
only in the People, but in the Priests, as in Eli's Sons, etc. Yet whilst the
true Worship of God was continued amongst them, there is neither precept or
practice to be found of total withdrawing therefrom. Indeed the godly Levites
and People did withdraw from the Idolatrous Worship of Jereboams Calves,
leaving their dwellings and going to Jerusalem, 2 Chro. 11.14, 16. but no
mention is made of withdrawing from the true Worship of God for such causes as
were before named.

About the time of our Savior Christ, and his Apostles, the State of that
Church was greatly corrupted (by many degrees more then any sober person can
judge the present Church in this Nation now to be) The Interpreters of the Law
had taken away the Key of knowledge, and that little knowledge that remained,
was miserably corrupted, not only with the Leaven of the Pharisees, but with
the damnable Heresy of the Sadducees; The Worship of God much profaned and
the Temple polluted and made a Den of Thieves; A multitude of Superstitious
Ceremonies introduced that were a burden too heavy to bear; The power of
godliness subverted, whilst small things were exactly minded, the weighty
things of the Law as Judgment and the love of God were neglected; a general
over spreading of sin, not only amongst the Vulgar, but the Priests themselves,
and that in their Ministration and calling, as well as in their Lives, etc. Yet
did not the Godly withdraw from the Communion of that Church for the same. We
read that Simeon, Anna, and Others continued in the Temple Worshipping God
daily; Holy Zachary forsook not his Priestly Office, but Ministered in his
course in the Temple; And Christ himself was circumcised, and presented to the
Lord in the Temple with the accustomed Sacrifices offered for him, according to
the Law of Moses; he kept the Passover, and other Feasts of that Church, was
frequently in the Temple, and in the Synagogues with his Disciples, allowed of
the hearing of those that sat in Moses's Chair (only gives caution against
their Errors and bad lives) sent diverse to the Priests to Offer their
accustomed Off^rings, required in the Law; Nor did he in the days of his flesh
wholly forsake the Communion of that Church; nor his Disciples after him,
until the Jews did contradict and blaspheme the Truth, obstinately refuse to
own the Lord Jesus for the Christ, and persecute to death the Professors of
the Name of Christ.

In the Churches of Corinth, Galatia, etc. We read of great and dangerous
Errors in Faith, grievous pollutions in Worship, and sad miscarriages in
Manners: yet concerning withdrawing from these Churches, we find not a word;
but many reprehensions of their Schisms and Divisions. In the Churches of Asia
there were several things they were blamed for, as well as some things
commended in them: But no hints of Separation from those Churches, for those
evils found in them. So that the Scriptures give no countenance to total
withdrawing from such Churches, where many corruptions are, whilst the
essentials of Religion are preserved.

Some Scriptures i^deed are very impertinently alleged for this practice
(which may be cleared from the undeceiving of the weak in a few words) such as
2 Cor. 6 14, 15, 16, 17. Which speaks of separation from Infidels and Idolaters
in their Idolatries, and ungodly fellowships, not of withdrawing from Christian
Assemblies, in the true Worship of God. So also 1 Cor. 5.11. and 2 Thessalonians. 3.6,
14. Which Scriptures show it a duty to withdraw from private persons living in
notorious, scandalous sins, for shaming the offenders, and preserving the
Churches; but speak not a word of withdrawing from the true Worship of God in
the public Assemblies of the Church, because of controversal practices (yea,
for some real evils therein) for this will tend to the destruction of the
Church* which is contrary to the end of all Church Censures being for
Edification, not for destruction, 2 Cor 10.8.

As for that Scripture, Revel 18.3. Come out of Babylon etc. It may warrant a
withdrawing from the Idolatrous Worship of Rome, and the Abominations of
Popery; from which (we before showed) it is the duty of every good Christian,
that loves his Salvation, to depart: but it is grossly abused when it is made to
plead for Separation from any of the reformed Churches, where (through the
mercy of God) the Fundamentals of Faith, and essentials of Worship are
maintained; so that we see the scriptures will not warrant such Separation.

(2.) Or if you will Reverence the general suffrage of the Christian Church,
and of the most eminent Saints and Martyrs living therein, ever since Christ's
time to us (which surely however some slight, yet there is no small weight in it,
else the Apostle would not plead, 1 Cor. 11.16. We have no such custom nor the
Churches of Christ) The most eminent Servants of Christ in in all Ages have
constantly held and practiced Communion with those Churches where they lived,
although very often, there were far greater corruptions therein, then can be
found this day amongst us, (as those that are acquainted with Antiquity know
well) and have ever blamed those that have left the Churches Communion for such
causes as were above named; witness the Censures past against the Novatians,
Donatists, Audaeans, etc.

As for our Separation from Rome, our Protestant Divines plead the Fundamental
errr found therein, and gross Idolatries (which they must necessarily
communicate in, if they withdraw not) persecution, etc. and not lesser matters.
Did not those hinder? they profess a readiness to communicate with her; and
that they depart from her no further, then she departs from Christ.

(3.) Will you regard the judgment of the most eminent Divines (of almost all
persuasions amongst Protestants) that have lived in this and the former Age,
[speaking expressly concerning Communion with the Church of England.] Then know,
1. That all foreign Divines of other Reformed Churches have approved of
Communion with her, and been ready on all occasions to give their fullest
Testimony of their dislike of rigid Separation from her. 2. All former
Non-Conformists (who did dissent in some smaller matters of Ceremonies, etc.
desiring a forbearance as to their practice in those things, yet) have fully
declared against Separation from the Church of England, witness the writings of
very many of them (worthy a serious perusal at this day,) viz. Cartwright,
Hildersham, Bradshaw Bayne Ball, many Others, and witness their practice
formerly, and at this day. 3. Independents, See Apol Narration of the five
dissenting Brethren. page 5.6. Who fully testify against the practice of the
Brownists, or rigid Separatists, whose fatal miscarriages and Shipwreck, they
call Landmarks to forewarn of those Rocks and Shelves they ran upon. And
declare their sincere profession to God and the World that all that
consciousness of the defilements they conceived to cleave to the true Worship
of God in the Congregations of England, or of the unwarranted power in
Church Governors exercised therein, did never work in them any other thought,
much less opinion, but that Multitudes of the Parochial Congregations were the
true Churches of Christ, and the Ministry thereof a true Ministry, much less
did it ever enter into their hearts, to judge them Antichristian, for so (they
say) they could not but see they should also condemn the Churches of Scotland,
Holland, etc. as no Churches, which to imagine was an horror to their
thoughts, Yea, that they always professed, and in those times when the Churches
of England were the most, either actually overspread with defilements, or in
the greatest danger thereof, and when themselves had no hopes of ever visiting
this Land in peace; that they would hold a Communion with them as the Churches
of Christ. And yet they add further. Besides this profession, as a real
Testimony, some of them, after they were actually in the Congregational way did
Baptize their Children in the Parishional Congregations; and occasionally
admitted to the Lords Supper in their Churches, some visiting them in their
Exile, upon that relation fellowship and Commembership they held in the Parish
Churches in England.

It may be some will say, they have more light now, then those eminent Divines
had in former times: But they bewray herein too great ignorance and arrogance;
this point having been far more dissensed in former, then in these present
times; in which the prejudice of most is such, they have scarce considered what
has been said against their opinions.

(4.) If you withdraw totally upon this Account, you should then separate from
all the Churches, that now are or ever have been in the World; for what
Churches are so pure but they have some defects, errors or corruptions? For the
Primitive Church, even 1260 years agone and upwards, there were as great
corruptions in it, as any you can find here, and greater also. For the
Churches of your own persuasion, do you think them altogether perfect? Wise and
understanding men are able to find some things amiss; yea some of your selves
have acknowledged all things are not according to their desire: so as if you
will bear with nothing but reject all parts of Communion, because you cannot
close in some things, you must separate from them too, and so turn Seekers, or
become Hermites or Anchorites, and live alone; and at length separate from your
selves also, because some things will appear blameworthy in you also; whither
will this lead you?

(5.) Have you no more love to, and care of the public solemn Worship of God,
then to cast off all public Ordinances, because you dislike some things in the
Churches, where they are administered? It Is the greatest glory God has in all
the World to be solemnly Worshipped in the public assemblies: But if all
should withdraw from them for such offense, what public worship should God
have in this Nation? seeing other persuasions are not permitted to meet; nay,
where would it be found in the whole World? seeing there is no Church on Earth,
but has some corruptions.

(6.) Let it be considered how unchristian it is, to depart from the solemn
Ordinances of Gods worship in those Churches where the presence of Christ is
yet continued in them; have you any warrant to leave them, before Christ leave
them? when God was greatly provoked by the Jewish Church, so as he was about to
remove from his Sanctuary, and stood at the Threshold ready to leave them, we
find many godly ones mourning for the abominations of the times, but none
hastening to depart from that Church before the Lord departed. Now can you deny
the presence of the Lord in the Assemblies of the Church of England, wherein
(as before was showed) the essentials of Faith and Worship be preserved? if God
should be as unmerciful as man is uncharitable, then woe to all the Churches of
Christ through the World, nay, woe to your selves. But I question not but there
are thousands can sea^ to the presence of Christ in the Congregations of
England at this day, as well as in former times, wherein the same Corruptions
(at which so much offense is taken now) were urged to plead for a separation
then. Let such as cry out so much of Popery in others, beware of that miserable
Popish error, they restrain the Church and the privileges thereof (the
presence of Christ and Salvation, etc.) to their own Sect and Party; and in the
mean time casting off the far greater part of the Catholic Church that
maintain all the Essentials of Faith and Worship.

(7.) I might enumerate the many great mischiefs that follow upon such
unwarrantable Separation. It plainly tends to the dishonor of Christ, and the
reproach of the Christian Religion; so the hinderance of the success of the
Gospel and the Salvation of Souls; so overthrow the Worship of God, and to open
a Gap to Atheism and profaneness, to Heresy and Popery, etc, yea, to the utter
ruin of the Christian Church, Mat. 12.25.

But it may seem needless to spend more words in so clear a case: nor should I
have said thus much, had not I been compelled thereto by the uncatholick (nay,
I confidently call it unchristian) practice of many well meaning people,
through their too great prejudice in other Temptations, who do totally withdraw
themselves from the public Congregations in England and the true Worship of
God therein.

2. Having given my advice to hold Communion with the Churches of England in
the True Worship of God, notwithstanding the corruptions supposed to be
therein. I do next advise, on the other hand, not to communicate with her (nor
with any Church in the World) in any evil, but if any thing professed or
practiced therein, be found really sinful (which may be supposed of any Church
upon Earth) in that thing to withdraw and have no fellowship in it, to keep
your selves pure from the same; yea, I shall add further, if there be any thing
that shall but appear sinful to thee, (thy Conscience, after humble and
diligent searching of the Word, telling thee, this is sin) then to suspend thy
consent or practice, in that particular, till it appear otherwise to thee. I
would be here so far from urging any to do that act, that a truly tender
Conscience upon probable grounds may scruple as sinful; that I would rather
persuade such to suspend their acting therein, till they be better convinced of
the lawfulness of it; Sanders. de Juram p. 84. The dictate of Conscience
whether right or erroneous, ever binds not to act against it.
and (supposing it be a thing not in its own nature necessary, but among things
disputable and tolerable) I would rather become an humble Suitor to Authority
(could my intercession any whit avail herein) for Indulgence in such a case;
then to be a violent inforcer of any, by Terrors or Punishments of the Law, to
go against their Consciences to please men.

3. Yet because Conscience may be deluded, and my call that sinful, which is
lawful, and a duty; and so induce men to withdraw in such Acts of Communion, as
neither the Law of God, nor men will allow them to withdraw from: for possibly
the Devil may get into the Consciences of men, and delude them; And the
Conscience may tell one, he must separate from Baptism, because Infant Baptism
is Antichristian; Another he must withdraw from the Lords Supper, because of
mixed Communion therein; A third from the hearing of the Word, because the call
of Ministers is Antichristian; A fourth, he must cast off Sabbaths, yea
Scriptures and all Gospel Ordinances, because abolished* (All this we have too
sad experience of in our times) Let therefore every good C^^istian labor for a
due information of his Conscience in such points as he Scruples Communion in,
and not think his bare plea of Conscience will warrant his total neglect of any
duty. Though his suspending his own actings (till he may satisfy Conscience
about them) may be granted: yet possibly a total neglect in some things, will
not be granted Impune, by the Law of God or man.

An erring Conscience cannot discharge any from a duty, being not a Lawmakers,
but subject to the Law. Parisiens.
Now here it may be expected I should offer my help toward the satisfying
Conscience in such Scruples, as commonly do occurr (this day) to those that
withdraw in whole or in part from the Communion of the Church of England in its
present State and Administrations. But to do this fully, would too much
disproportion this part of my discourse, to the other parts aforegoing; I
rather choose to send them to those Treatises of such eminent Non-Conformists,
as have written fully on this subject-especially to Mr. W* Bradshaw's Book of
the unreasonableness of separation prefaced to, and published by Dr. Ames; and
to Mr. Jo. Ball his trial of the grounds tending to separation, * only
recommending a few general Rules, which being observed, may be useful in order
thereunto, and so conclude my Discourse,

* The Reader is Advertised, that there is Published in Print, an Aswer to that
part of Mr. Ball's Book, which is a Discourse of the lawfulness of a stinted
Liturgy and set forms of Prayer, under the name of Mr. Jo. Cotton. The Answer
is highly valued by some, but by comparing the Discourse and the Answer
together, it may be seen, that great injury is done to Mr. Ball and to Mr.
Cotton both, and also that the Reader is grossly abused by it; for it is not
that Discourse Printed at Cambridge, 1640. which is therein answered; (but
probably some imperfect Notes, before that was published) which is evident, not
only because the number and order of the Arguments answered do differ from
those laid down in that Discourse; But especially because the principal things
given in answer by Mr. Cotton, are so fully spoken to by Mr. Ball herein, (by
way of reply to Johnson, Greenwood and others, that formerly objected the same
things;) that there seems nothing more requisite to be said by way of reply
thereunto. Thus much was needful to be certifyed, because some have slighted
Mr. Balls Book, not deeming it worth reading; because sufficiently answered by
Mr. Cotton, whereas indeed this Book may serve for a sufficient reply to his
Answer.

CHAP. IX.
Wherein are laid down some general Rules of Caution to preserve Christians
from rash and unjust separation. The Conclusion of the Discourse.

ALthough the answering all objections, and satisfying every scruple that may
occurr about this point of Communion with the Congregations in England, is a
work too large to be undertaken in these Papers; and indeed needless in respect
of that abundant pains taken therein by those Writers before referred to; yet
because I may not leave the sober and humble Christian, altogether without
help, that is desirous to find something here, that may satisfy his Conscience
about the premises; I shall lay down some general Rules of caution, which being
duly considered and improved, may through the blessing of the Lord much conduce
to prevent or heal rash and unjust separation, which are these that follow.

1. Do not rashly separate for such things as have been found in almost all the
Churches of Christ upon Earth, both in former and latter times: the reason is,
because (though we say not, the Church is so absolutely Infallible, that it
cannot err in the least particular; yet we may easily defend That) the
Universal Church in all places and ages cannot err so dangerously, so as good
Christians ought not to keep communion with her, but are bound to make
separation from her; for this would infer that she has wholly fallen from
Christ and her bond of Union with him is dissolved, and he is no longer present
with her (for till then Christians are not wholly to separate from her) yea,
that Christ has no Church in the World, etc. And if so, what will become of
the promises of Christ, that Hell gates shall not prevail against her, that he
will be with her to the end of the World; that he will send his Spirit to lead
her into all Truth, and it shall abide with her for ever; which promises though
directly and primarily they were made to the Apostles, who had the special
presence of Christ and the guidance of his holy Spirit in the most eminent
manner, yet were made to them for the behoof of the Church Universal, and shall
be verified to it.

This duly considered, would much prevent the scandal taken at Bishops, at
forms of Prayer, etc. For who is there (if acquainted with the State of the
Church) that knows not that Bishops (even in a superiority of power and
jurisdiction over other Ministers) have been in the Church of Christ almost
universally from the Apostles times to our days; and that set Forms of
Prayers, have been of exceeding long continuance in the Christian Curches,
through the World. Therefore such as separate for these things now, must have
been led by the same principle to have separated from almost all the Churches
of Christ upon Earth; which thing how dangerous it is, needs not much to be
spoken to her, to manifest the same.

2. Let not inconveniences, defects, additions, or errors Circumstantial, cause
you to withdraw Communion wholly from the Churches of Christ in the substantial
duties of Gods Worship, where the essentials are preserved; though some lesser
evils may be found, do not utterly refuse Communion there. The Lord Jesus will
not reject such Churches, therefore do not you. Ames. eas. Lib 4. Cap 24.
This has passed for good Divinity generally amongst Non-Conformists who
acknowledge Communion may be maintained, where some divine institutions are
wanting, and some humane additaments merely extrinsical are joined to Divine
Worship. Commis. papers. p. 3.12.
They say that where the substantials of Worship are preserved, Bayne on Ephesians
2.15
though the external forms and modes be more inconvenient, disorderly and
defective; Hilders. on Ps. 51. Lect. 35.
yet its lawful, yea a duty to offer such Worship to God rather then none at
all. That what ever is not in our power to reform, it shall be our zeal and
piety to tolerate, and with patience to bear, and in such Churches there may be
more cause to rejoice then to grieve. Indeed the contrary practice would lead
to separation from all the Churches of Christ upon Earth, for which of them all
is perfect?

3. As Christians should fly from what is really Idolatry, Will Worship,
Antichristianism, Popery, etc. So let them not be affrighted with those names,
when imposed on things, without good grounds, lest they be scared from
necessary duty and Worship; for these terrifying names have been abusively
applied to deterr weak people from the true Worship of God. E. G. Idolatry,
Will Worship, imagery, has been charged upon set forms of Prayer, and they
have been censured to be forbidden in the second Commandment. But what
Christian (not prepossessed beforehand with prejudice against them) can find
them therein condemned, or in any of the Commentaries of the Prophets or
Apostles, or in any Exposition of ancient or modern Writers till some few of
latter times? May not any simple plain hearted Christian (to whose
apprehensions the Scriptures are suited, in all necessary duties, Psalm 19.7.)
profess, he is not able to see any such thing, but on the contrary he finds
set forms, not only used and prescribed in the Old Testament, but also in the
New; he finds Jesus Christ giving a form to his Disciples, as John did to his;
and how can he then resent those charges of Imagery, Idolatry, Superstition,
but as mere Scare-crows? The like may be said of the charge of Popery, drawn up
by some against the present forms of Prayer by Law established; that they are
taken out of the Mass Book, are Popish Prayers, etc. which affrights some poor
weak Christians, they are afraid to come near them. When as it cannot be
denied, that (1.) they were compiled by sundry godly men of the Reformed
Religion, some of them afterward Martyrs in Queen Marys days, and were ever
highly valued by them. (2.) The Papists have ever had them in detestation.
Queen Mary is reported to have razed them out of the Parliament Records, so as
it could not (till some has late Acts passed) be well known which was the
authorized Book; and Harding their great Champion says of it, in his dispute
with Bishop Jewel on Art. 3. That it is such a service as their good Catholics
cannot join with us in; not only because it is in the vulgar Tongue: but
because (says he) many necessary things are wanting in it, and many things
repugnant to the Faith and custom of the Catholic Church. (3.) Popery cannot
return upon us, whilst the said Common Prayer Book is kept unaltered, how can
their proper Sacrifice, Communion in one kind, Prayers to Saints etc. come in,
whilst this is kept up and observed; and as for the taking these Prayers out of
the Mass Book, the truth is this; there are several Prayers of Ancient Fathers
(used before Popery was in the World) which the Papists corrupting and abusing
in their Mass, our first Reformers purged out what corruptions the Papists had
brought in, and did retain those ancient Prayers according to their Primitive
Institution. All this will be readily acknowledged by them, that judging this
book unnecessary and inconvenient, do desire a Reformation therein; and is
there any thing in all this that shall so affright good Christians out of the
Church? Concerning the charge of Antichristianism, it is so common a word in
the mouths of all that list to rail, that its no scandal to any, till the
thing be fully proved; if Bishops, and Ministers, etc. be judged by any to be
Antichristian, I shall send them to that most excellent piece of Dr. Moore, his
Mystery of Iniquity, where they may see the Idea of Anti-Christianism opened,
and thence be informed, whom this censure best befits

IV. Take heed of pretending to greater purity and strictness about Church
Communion and Administrations, then the Word of God commends, or the examples
of Christ and the Apostles and the Primitive Church do commend; nor be so
extremely rigid as not to bear with things that they have Tolerated. It is an
observable rule laid down by wise and eminent Divines, that too much
strictness and severity often does injury the Church more then profit it; its
the way to overturn Churches not to reform them, especially this severity is
unbecoming private Christians, who having no Authority, yet complain, such
persons, and such things are defilements, they must separate from them, they
must not touch the unclean thing: such should take heed that they be not
righteous over much, and not dare to be wise above what is written, lest their
too much affected purity and misguided zeal hurt more the Church of Christ, and
their own Souls then the corruptions they so much complain of. Calvin adv.
Anab. Art. 2. Cum sub specie studii perfectionis imperfectionem nulam tollerare
possumus; tune Diabolum nos tumefacere superbia, et hypocrisi seducere moneamur.

V. Have public Spirits, and look not so much on such things as are most
desirable in your eyes, and conduce to your interest: as on what tends to the
furtherance of the Gospel, and the good of the Church in general. There have
been very few in our unhappie days, but have been so eagerly contending for
their private opinions and ways, that the public interest of the Christian
Religion, and of the Churches peace and welfare has been almost forgotten by
them, from whence have come in such an inundation of Errors, Heresies,
Profaneness and Atheism, that the Church has been almost ruined thereby. In
vain do we contend about the greater purity and perfection of the Christian
Religion, when the very being and life of it by our contentions and divisions
is endangered, what will become of our contests for greater reformation in
Discipline, Worship, etc. If the Christian Religion it self be lost? They are
the best and wisest Christians that have most endeavored, that the main
Fundamental Doctrines and duties of Religion may be preserved, though in the
mean time they yield in small matters that concern the beauty and perfection
thereof, waiting in a wise and peaceable manner til the Lord will grant them
their desires therein also, in his own way and time.

VI. Take heed of running into manifest sin and evil upon fears of what is only
supposed to be so. viz. Of casting off Ordinances, neglecting of the public
Worship of God, breach of the peace of the Church, etc. Upon pretense of
supposed evils in Communion. The commands of God for his Worship and Ordinances
and the Church peace, are clear and cogent; the matters excepted against, are
dark and disputable points of controversy, and the far greater part of the
Churches of Christ on earth have approved of them; therefore be afraid while
you would shun an evil supposed, you run not into another that is a real and
far greater evil. A truly tender conscience should fear evil on either hand,
and on this side rather then that.

VII. Charge not on your selves other men's sins, but look to your own ways and
duties. If you judge Superiors to sin in their impositions, or Bishops in any
Command, or Ministers in their Conformity; if you find sin in laxnesse of
Discipline, in loose admissions to the Ordinances etc. It Is not your sin who
still Communicate in the Ordinances of Christ, provided you do your parts and
Office. It were sad living in any Church in the World, if the sins of others
should be charged on such as have neither calling not power to reform them;
fitter it is by far to mourn and pray for Redressing of such evils, then to run
out of the Church for them.

VIII. Take heed of that great and common mistake, that nothing is to be
admitted in and about the government and administration of the Church of
Christ, in the least Circumstantials thereof, but what is particularly and
clearly held forth in the Scriptures. This mistake has occasioned many
needless scruples in the minds of weak Christians, and much promoted
groundless separation. It is a Rule laid down by a whole Assembly of Divines,
Assem. Conf. of Faith. c 1.
many of them not much affected to the present establishment, [That there are
some circumstances concerning the Worship of God and Government of the Church,
common to humane actions and Societies which are to be ordered by the light of
nature and Christian prudence according to the general Rules of the Word] And
the same is practiced among all those that are most averse to the communion of
the Church of England, who retain amongst themselves many things, that they can
produce little true-Scripture-proofs for, but only practice them prudentially
as best conducing to the welfare of their Churches, and (as they judge) to the
Order of Gods Worship therein, and some have ingeniously acknowledged as much.
If you search the Scriptures impartiallie concerning Church Government you will
find therein little besides, the main Essentials of it, as that the Church is
to be Governed; and that by its proper Officers, and directions how they should
be qualified and set apart for their Office, what the several duties belonging
to their Office are, and some general directions about the management thereof;
All which may suit with the several forms of Government that have been
competitors amongst us wherein the power of Christ's Officers is further
extended or more restrained, Stillingf iren. pt 2. c 4. etc 8.
wherein some act in a superior, others ina coordinate way) and therefore very
many learned and godly men have judged, that no one form of government was
prescribed as necessary in the Church; but it is left to be suited to the
condition of those Kingdoms and Nations where the Church shall be planted. The
like may be said concerning Gospel Worship; The main duties and Ordinances of
it are prescribed, and those things wherein the Essence of them stands, are
more fully and clearly expressed; but their circumstances and manner of
performance are only couched under general Rules. This may be showed abundantly
by instances in the several parts of Worship as Prayer, Preaching, Sacraments,
etc, but it is done by others sully and must be omitted here, because of the
brevity of these Rules.

Nor does this derogate from the sufficiency of the Scriptures, nor argue want
of wisdom and faithfulness in Christ (as some plead) if he should not
prescribe every Particular, as Moses did even to the Pinns of the Tabernacle;
for the Scriptures are sufficient for that end God gave them, to make wise to
Salvation, and in order thereunto to instruct us in all necessary points of
Faith and Practice: and for Church Government and Worship, there is enough in
these Essentials laid down in Scripture for the preserving the welfare of the
Church in the World, and securing of the true and pure Worship of God among men
(those being duly observed) And wherein then are the Scriptures to be argued of
insufficiency, if they leave some particular circumstances undetermined? And
for the charge of unfaithfulness in Jesus Christ, if he should not
particularize those things, it is strangely presumptuous. Such should rather
show where Christ has particularly determined all those circumstances, then
impute unfaithfulness unto him, if he do not what they would have to be done.
There is not the like Reason to determine all circumstances in the Christian
Churches, as was in the Jewish Church, the one being in its Minority, the other
grown up to a state of greater liberty and perfection, Gal. 4, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
10. A Boy that goes to School has his Lesson set him, and in every particular
he is stinted to his work; but when he goes to the Universitie, he only hears
Lectures, has general Rules for his study, and is left to his own disposition,
for order and manner of his studies. Besides the Jewish Church was confined to
one Nation, that had its civil government and Laws from God as well as its
Church instiutions: but the Christian Church, being to spread throughout the
World under different civil governments, different circumstances, might best
suit with the state and condition of different People.

IX. Take heed of Resisting the ordinances of God, whilst you profess to oppose
the institutions of Men. My meaning is, whilst you withstand humane inventions
(as you suppose them) in the Worship of God, beware you oppose not lawful
Authority (which is the Ordinance of God) in what they injoin in and about the
Worship of God according to the power given them of the Lord. That Magistrates
have the care of the Churches in their Dominions, committed to them, and should
see to the due administration of the Worship and Ordinances of God therein (as
well as to the outward peace and prosperity of the civil State) may be
manifest to all that are willing to see it, by the laudable examples of godly
Kings in former times, such as David, Solomon, Asa, Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, etc.
Whose chiefest care was about Religion, and the Worship of God in their
Dominions. Indeed they are not to make any new institutions of Worship nor
alter any thing that is particularly enjoined in the Word of God; But they are
to see that all things be administered according to the same. And in the
particular circumstances undetermined by God, they have a power to order and
settle things according to the general Rules laid down in the Word; and
(however you plead, you are not to be the Servants of Men) you must be therein
subject to them in the Lord.

It has been a Notion taken up by some, That as in former times, the Saints
have suffered in giving Testimony to the priestly Office of Jesus Christ; so
they must bear witness to his Kingly Office, what ever they suffer, and not
yield to any Commandments of men in and about the Worship of God; But let such
take heed that they oppose not his Kingly Office, when they seem to stand up
for it. For if Magistrates and Rulers be his Vicegerents (as certainly they
are) and there is a care of his Worship delegated unto them, and some power for
ordering affairs in his Church in matters of outward convenience and order,
where he has not expressly determined, in withstanding them in such things,
they may resist Jesus Christ himself. Indeed it may be a further Scruple in
case Magistrates injoyning things inexpedient and inconvenient, and so swerve
from those general Rules, that they are to go by, whether they are to yield to
them in such things or no? But if the judgment of Non-Conformists may be taken
herein, Baxt. five Disp. p. 460, etc.
they determine in such cases it is better to obey then to withstand, they may
sin in commanding such things, and yet subjects not sin in obeying them when
commanded; they are Judges in such particular cases to determine what is
expedient, as the Word of God determines what is necessary; and herein they
follow the judgment of Calvin, Ep. 379, which have been ever approved by them,
who speaking of things of this Nature, Says, some things neither right nor
profitable, but scandalous and drawing evil Consequences with them; yet not
being repugnant to the word (in any express determination of it) must be borne
of the godly Brethren, when they cannot help it, and the Churches of Christ not
forsaken. And indeed if this should not be admitted, but so often as any shall
judge such or such matters inexpedient, they might withstand: the Axe seems to
be laid at the roots of all government, and there would be little order in the
Churches of Christ. There is no society in the World but a yielding in some
things is necessary, for the peace and welfare of that Society.

X. Let not any principles or practices that you have inconsideratly taken up,
so far engage you, as to make you loath to teturn to ways of Truth and
soberness. Some have (it may be unwillingly and with reluctance only, through
the violence of some of their own party) been led into the ways of rigid
separation, to condemn all other Churches, but their own (however sound in all
the main Fundamental and necessary Doctrines and duties of Christianity) and to
refuse any Communion with them (though this has been condemned by the most
wise and knowing ^o their own profession,. T. G. Mr. Cotton
styled by some the bitter root of separation, the way God nere blessed with
peace and holiness, etc.) And now to return to ways of sobriety, and own such
as they have formerly so hotly contended against, they know not how to do it.
There is naturally in man a tenaciousnesse of those ways and opinions they
have once professed, that they are loath to recede from them, especially if
they have contended for them, this is a great piece of denial. Men would rather
yield in their patrimony (says Bucer) then in their opinion. Besides, they may
undergo the heavy charge of Apostasy, Ep. to Jo* a Lasco
and deserting the Truth, and changing their Religion, etc. and this deterrs
many from ways of truth and Sobriety. But it would be considered, it is no
discharge for the wisest, holiest, and most learned Men to retract in some
controversal opinions or practices; Augustine who was esteemed the most learned
of the Fathers, Writes several Books of Retractations; and Jerome to Ruffinus,
says, never blush Man to change thy opinion, for neither you nor I, nor any
Person living are of so great Authority, as to be ashamed to confess that they
have Erred. And as for the charge of Apostasy and changing your Religion in
such a case as this is, it is a great mistake to affirm this; for if you search
the Scriptures, Apostasy is a falling away from the main Fundamental confessed
Doctrines of the Gospel and duties of godlyness, into manifest heresy or
wickedness, not the changing a man's judgment or practice in some points
disputable amongst the godly and Orthodox, says Mr. Baxter in his Catholic
Unity. Be it known to all the Papists in the World, that our Religion is not
changed at all, our Worship is the same, whether within Book or without: our
Prayers are the same for matter with those in the Common Prayer Book; and if I
should one day use the Common Prayer Book, and another day forbear it, I should
not change the Worship of God, to pray is part of his Worship but whether it be
in a Book or out of it, is no part at all, but a mode or circumstance which may
be altered as occasion serves. Elsewhere the same learned and pious person
shows what yielding in things lawful the Scripture recommendeth to us, from
the example of St. Paul, Five Disp. p. 488.
when he circumcised Timothy, Act 16.3. And when he took the men and purified
himself with them in the Temple, to signify the accomplishment of the days of
Purification, etc. Act. 21.26, 27. So also from what he says, 1 Cor. 9.19, 20.
I am made all things to all men, that I might by all means save some, and this
I do for the Gospels sake.

XI. I add but one Rule of Caution more against a very common but dangerous
mistake, which is an occasion to many of running in to Error and Heresy, as
well as into Schism and Separation, viz. Take heed of setting up your own
apprehensions, and conceits of the sense of Scriptures about controverted
points, as infallible Oracles, that you trust so confidently to, that you will
endanger the Churches peace and your own safety for the maintaining of them,
where you have not all those necessary helps and means that are requisite to
the finding out the mind of God therein. Some that have their minds
fore-stalled with an opinion or persuasion, getting a Bible into their hands,
presently conceive what ever they meet withal to make for their opinion* and
begin to be more confident then an hundred wiser and more discerning persons
dare to be, who know their own darkness and ignorance, and the mysteriousness
of the things controverted, though they have far greater evidence of Scripture,
and reason for them. This carries men into such wild fancies and strange
delusions sometimes, as bring them under the just censure of Fanaticism, (a
name which is too unjustly applied to others, more sober and pious Christians:)
Though the Fundamental and necessary Doctrines, and duties of Christianity, are
so plainly laid down in Scripture, that the weakest Christians may understand
them; and therefore have much profit by holy and humble Meditation in the Word
of God day and night: yet Points controverted are oftentimes hidden from
ordinary understandings, that know not the Languages and proper Idioms of
Scripture and customs of the Church, and other advantages of learning; that its
ordinarily impossible, they should find out the mind of God therein. It Is a
vain delusion to think, that the Spirit (that some pretend to, more confidently
then they have cause) should discover all deep mysteries and obscure points of
controversy to those that have but ordinary understandings, and are wholly
destitute of outward necessary means and hopes for the gaining knowledge
thereby: the Spirit of God teaches not by such immediate Enthusiasmes, but by
irradiating the mind and elevating the reason that is exercised in searching
the Truth in all Gods appointed means; and does also help the weak to
understand savourily all those plain and necessary Truths that tend to
godliness, and to conform their hearts and lives to the love and obedience of
them. It were more becoming weak Christians in matters disputable to consult
with the Writings of able and learned Expositors that have al those advantages
which themselves want, and not to presume too much on their own understandings
in such things which would be accounted unsufferable presumption in other Arts
and Sciences, and cannot be less in Divinity, wherein the greatest mysteries
are contained. Other Rules of Caution might here be laid down which (to avoid
prolixity) I forbear to enumerate, recommending the serious consideration of
these things to the sober and humble Christian, as greatly conducing to keep
him from the bypath of unjust separation; and here conclude with my hearty
Prayer to God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he would grant to
the Professors of Christianity in all Nations (both Rulers and People) to mind
more, and to be more zealous for the great and Fundamental points of Faith and
Worship necessary to Salvation: and to contend less about things not in their
own nature necessary; that high impositions might not occasion violent
oppositions: nor these again produce further impositions. But we may love one
another unfainedly for the great things we are united in, and bear with one
another m^re in things wherein difference is tolerable, and all may seek the
unity, peace, and welfare of the Church, and the good of one another, etc. Then
should Religion flourish the Gospel be advanced, the fame of God be honored,
the Souls of men edified, and all may walk in the fear of God, and comfort of
the Holy Ghost: unto which let every good Christian say, Amen.

FINIS.

