A CONFERENCE BETWEEN A BENSALIAN Bishop and an ENGLISH Doctor, CONCERNING
Church Government. Showing the difference betwixt that of BENSALIA, AND THE
Church of England.

Together with a LETTER FROM THE Bishop of Bensalia to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, in order to the healing of our Church-differences.

Being part of the History of a Terra Incognita lately discovered in a Voyage
by the North-East to China.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst and Joseph Collier, and are to be Sold at
the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside, and at the Bible on London. Bridge, M.
DC. LXXXI.

The Conference between a Bensalian Bishop, and an English Doctor concerning
Church Government, etc.
I Was cast upon that happy Country of Bensalia; amongst other Discourses I had
with several persons of note and eminency in their respective faculties and
functions, as I was one day in Conference with an ingenious and worthy
Physician, whose acquaintance I had contracted, comes a Messenger with a Letter
from the Bishop of Bensalia to the Doctor; the main scope of which was, That
whereas he perceived that those English strangers were so highly favored as to
have that Indulgence granted by the King and Council, to inquire into and make
their remarks upon the Laws, Government, Customs, etc. of their happy Country,
more than ever was yet permitted to any strangers before: Therefore was
desirous to discourse us; so urged him to bring us along, and particularly the
English Physician on the day following to dine with him. At which news I was
not a little glad, that I might have such an opportunity (unsought for, yet
desired by me) of conversing with one of those wise, grave Seniors.

I asked the Doctor if the Bishop of that great place (being the Metropolis of
the Country) was a Lord? he answered, No: For they looked upon Christ's Kingdom
not to be of this world, or at least that that Kingdom of his which is to be
attended with grandeur, is not yet come. I queried further, with what state he
was attended? Not (says he) as the Lord Bishops are in England; yet has a
plentiful allowance and servants sufficient to attend, but in no great pomp or
splendor. For (says he) they judge in themselves, that they are here to
partake of the Humiliation of Christ, that so they may the better be fitted for
their Exaltation with him in his glorious Kingdom, when it shall come. But
(adds he further) I suppose the Bishop may take liberty himself further to
discourse these things to you. Only take notice (which he perhaps may not
acquaint you with, lest he be thought guilty of ostentation) that he and other
Bishops of this happy Country are very hospitable and charitable, (I was going
to say to strangers, but that we have so few, that as to that matter not worth
naming; however) to the poor; I mean not to beggars, for we have none (in all
our Country) come to any of our doors; but to the poorer sort of Families who
live about them, and to the binding poor men's children Apprentice, and putting
others of them to School, (although care is most-what taken of them by public
stocks to maintain public Schools, Workhouses, or Manufactories, which are
constantly supplied at the charge of the King and his Sophy.) However in every
respect, wherein they are in a capacity of showing charitable acts, they are
not at all wanting. Yea, it is part of their study, how they may find out
occasions for charitable offices; and for their piety and exemplary lives, are
had in great estimation, and reverenced by all men.

The next day the Doctor called of us (according to his kind offer) and took us
in his Coach to the Bishops house; who expecting us, was in readiness for our
reception; where being (by one of his servants) brought into the Hall, the
Bishop came, and with a comely grave countenance (yet somewhat smiling) saluted
us, and told us we were kindly welcome, as should be shown with all
cheerfulness, according to his ability. After some previous discourse, the
Dinner came up. I observed the Bishop had no Chaplain, for he in person with a
great deal of seriousness craved a blessing before meat. At Dinner the Bishop
was pretty pleasant with us, asked us about many of our Customs in England, and
concerning our King, what age he was? I told him as far as I knew, that he was
about 46 or 47 years. I began (taking an occasion from the Bishops naming him)
to magnify and extol our King for the greatest Prince in the world. You mean
(quoth the Bishop) in Europe. But take heed of Bensalia, as you will better
know, when you come to see our King, and the grandeur of his State, which with
that of Solomon's house and the Sophy (in relation to whom he is styled Preses
Sophora) is the most magnificent in the world, not excepting the world Europe.
He asked with a cheerful countenance, what children our King had? I replied
very modestly, I was not so well versed in our Court-affairs as to be able to
give him any account thereof, only I have heard some say he had none; so begged
his excuse in answering to that or other questions of that kind; whereupon
smilingly he began some other matter of discourse.

And (amongst the rest) asked me if many of our Clergymen were not Goodfellows
(as you in your own Dialect (says he) improperly enough call such.) I told
him, if any, surely they were more than should be, and more than became the
gravity of that worthy function. Come (says the Bishop) you are very modest, I
commend you for your cautiousness in speaking any thing against your own
Countrymen. I thankt him for so good an opinion he had of me. Come (says he)
you may speak out here, drollingly telling me, we were out of their hearing.
For we know (says he) the state of your affairs, both as to what relates to
your Court, Clergy, as other grand affairs, as well as you can tell us; only I
am willing (for discourse sake) to ask questions, and to be a little further
satisfied in the truth of what we already have received. I told him, seeing it
was so, I could neither add nor diminish to, or from the virtue or viciousness
of our own people. As to the latter, I could not but confess, that the more I
conversed with the Bensalians, and became acquainted with their Laws, Customs,
Demeanors, justness in Traffic, civility in behavior, and other worthy
Endowments, the more I disliked, yea blushed at our own. It Is (quoth the Bishop)
the part of every honest, virtuous, good man, to own honesty and virtue, and
goodness, where ever he finds it; and that without respect, or any byas to
Countries or persons, but where its nakedly apparent.

Although there was plenty of dishes of meat well ordered, yet the Bishop eats
generally but of two or three at the most. You see (says the Bishop) I have a
good stomach (I thank God) to my meat, I can eat heartily once a day, at
evening some small repast, no Breakfast at all, take no Tobacco, nor drink I
between meals, unless very thirsty; whereby I enjoy my health (I bless God)
very well. And although our Physicions be (without doubt) the best in the
world, as having the best Medicines that nature and art can afford, what of
their own preparation in their Laboratory, and what is handed down to them from
the Sophy (those Adepti and Masters of the greatest Hermetick Secrets) yet for
my own part I had much rather enjoy my health, wherein I can by an orderly diet
and temperance preserve it, than be sick to make trial of their skill. I
commended the Bishops prudence in that matter, and wished his president was
exemplary to our European Countries. Why (says he) you have excellent good
Physicians amongst you. Yes, Sir, said I, but for all that we are somewhat of
your mind, have no great stomach to be sick if we can help it. At which the
Bishop smiled. -- When Dinner was over, the Bishop rose up, and returned thanks
himself.

A while after Dinner the Bishop betook himself into a withdrawing-room, and
ordered one of his servants to whisper in my ear, his desire of my leaving the
company to discourse a while in private with him, mean while had taken care the
company should be entertained with discourse by the Doctor and some other
persons. Come, Sir, (says he) you may perhaps think somewhat strange of me for
my pleasantness and cheerfulness at Dinner, I am usually so, to help the
digestion of my meat, for I think it quickens and invigorates the ferment, (if
I may borrow a word or two with you in your noble faculty) the ferment of the
stomach oils the wheels of the digestion, procures the most laudable nutritive
juices, helps forward the circulation of the blood, and all this the better in
order to health.

But now I am willing to be very serious with you, for I have some weighty
things to acquaint you with, which when you return into your own Country, may
perhaps (if our King and his Sophi do permit you the liberty of publishing
thereof) be of great use to your people; who (as we are informed) are so much
divided in their judgments and opinions about matters of Religion; we have the
state of your Church Affairs (we think) truly represented to us, and wherein I
shall err through any mistake, shall beg the favor at your hands to set me
right.

My method shall be, first to show you the rectitude and uniformity of ours,
and the genuine consequences thereof, viz. peace, unity, Christian charity, and
the exercises of other heavenly Graces. Next, how much yours comes short and
deviates from ours; then shall show you the reasons; and last (if we have time)
shall propose some expedients in order to the healing your clashing
differences, toward the ratifying a Christian union amongst you.

First as to ours, it is Episcopal, which rightly understood we have great
reason to conclude from Scripture, and other Testimonies, to be truly
Apostolical, and according to Divine institution; which with the Presbytery and
other Substitutes, together with their modes of connection to the people, are
sufficient to the constitution of our Church. We have no universal Bishop or
Pope, but only own Christ Jesus to be the supreme Head of our Church. Our
Council of Bishops with some of the Elders or Presbytery, do determine all our
differences, both as to Doctrine and Discipline.

2. And for the continuation and promotion of our unity and peace, we avoid all
Scholastic disputations, and verbal janglings, as much as possible; as seeing
it, by the doleful effects thereof throughout Europe, to be the bane of
Christianity, the mother of dissension, animosities, contention and discord;
yea, the very parent of all the enmity, and war found amongst those whom
charity would enforce us to call Christians, whose lives and well-meanings more
than the similarness of their opinions, must speak them Christians, or they
will difficultly be found, having by such contentions even rent the seamless
coat of Christ, the very badg of their Christianity, viz. Love, Peace, and
Unity. We by a Law prohibit all disputes and controversies about
Predestination, viz. Election and Reprobation, and other disputable Doctrines;
as observing them to be the mother of many animosities and contentions amongst
brethren; yea, and well remarking that no History can give us any instance of
persons converted to the true Christian faith thereby; or of any (already
converted) whose lives have thence been rended better. But many Histories are
filled with instances to the contrary. I call to mind we had once a learned
Philosopher happened to be cast ashore on our coasts, who disputing with some
of our Bishops, they notwithstanding all their learned arguments, although they
might convince him (which yet was hard to make him or any (who stand out for
victory) confess) yet they did not convert him, till a zealous ^ishop (less
learned than the rest) in great power and demonstration of the Spirit, repeated
to him the Creed, and (as I remember) the Lords-prayer; which done, queries the
man, saying, Philosopher, do thou now believe? who by such power being
conquered, answered (according to Naked Truth) Yes, I do believe; and so became
a Proselyte.

3ly. And because we would not offend our weak brethren, we dispense with many
Ceremonies, which you of the Church of England (as we are well informed) are so
stiff in defending, as rather than you will abate any thing therein, you will
adventure the loss of hundreds, yea perhaps thousands of the weaker brethren,
suffering them for the sake of some dispensible Ceremonies to depart from you
by whole sholes, to the great rending of the unity of your Church, which by all
means possible should have been preserved in the bonds of love and unity by
your condescending to them in some things allowable both by Scripture and
reason, as well as from the different Genius of people both as to time and
place. As if the union of your brethren, and consequently peace of your whole
Church was not of more value to you, than the stiff adhering to many
indifferent and (in cases aforesaid) unnecessary Ceremonies.

If any amongst us be upon any occasion offended or dissatisfied, we make it
our business presently to pour in oil and wine (the Samaritan Balsom) to heal
up the wound, using all the suppleing and soft means we can, by friendly
visits, prayer, and all tender demeanor, to satisfy their scruples of
Conscience, and like good Physicians never leave them till they be made whole.
We beseech, exhort, admonish, and rebuke according as necessity requires; being
instant with them in season and out of season. And as Fathers (for so in a
spiritual sense we look upon our selves) we are tender and affectionate to
them, using all fatherly admonition. We by our tender bowels of compassion melt
them down, if they have the least grain of the Spirit of God in them; and they
know right well, we make no prey of them, but as Ministers and servants of
Jesus Christ, serve them in all we can. For we no sooner understand that any
one is offended, dissatisfied, or has done any thing amiss contrary to the
Doctrine of our Church, if it be in such matters as renders them offenders of
our Civil Law, we leave them to that Law (only take care (by friendly
admonition for their souls.) But if in matters which relates to spiritual
things, we ( viz.) one of our Bishops or Elders, presently go to the
dissatisfied person, whom we treat with tender bowels of compassion, and
endeavor by fatherly admonition to reduce and reclaim them.

But if that will not do, (which seldom happens but our private, tender, and
affectionate addresses to them, becomes effectual) then we admonish them
publicly, which is several times performed. If it be about some new opinion
that he would broach, and that he is very pertinacious in, we consult some of
our eminent Physicians, or (if the case be high) some of our Sophi, to know
whether indeed somewhat of Hypochondraism has not infected or tainted the man's
fancy; which if they conclude in the affirmative, they take him under cure, and
by rectifying the Humors, new moduling the spirits, and inverting, or
reverting or expunging the dement and Irregular Idea's, (which they perform
with a great deal of curiosity, (treating them variously according to the
nature and different manner of Hypochondraism) return them well and sound to us
again.

If any person has a new opinion, and keeps it to himself, and questions of
that nature being asked him, he answers according to that opinion, only
endeavors not to publish it abroad, we concern not our selves in that matter,
but let him alone to enjoy his own fancy; yet we endeavor as occasion offers,
to put him upon more right and orthodox notions; as being well satisfied, that
as long as there is any variety to be found in nature, it will be discernable
in the difference of thoughts and opinions of men; it being as congeneal to men
many times to think variously concerning the same thing, as it is natural for
them to differ in Physiognomy. We no more can always think or opine alike, than
we can look alike. Faces and thoughts plead variety as their great and
indispensible prerogative. Scarce two faces in the world are in every lineament
and feature alike. Nor are there two men throughout the world, who have the
same Identical notions about all things; and indeed variety and disputableness
of the objects of our thoughts, and understanding, does truly solve the chief
reason of our great variety in opinions.

But if the man designedly for ostentation sake, and to make himself popular,
not only affects, but blazons abroad new opinions that are destructionable to
the fundamental Principles of Christianity, if after private and public
admonition he be not reclaimed, we pronounce the sentence of Excommunication
against him, all other persons are forbidden any manner of Traffic with him,
after a time (if still he persist) he is apprehended by a Bailiff of the Civil
Law (which is our Jus Gentium) and at their Quarterly Sessions tried, where (if
he yet prove obstinate) he is ordered to the Staffee, and thence at the next
Shipping is transported to some of the Eastern Islands of America. But if he
show any token of recantation and penitence, he is received again (upon the
reality thereof) into the Church.

4ly. We have no vexatious Courts for Citations, Capias's, or Pleadings by
Proctors, as your Church (to it is great disparagement) has. Nor is any person
upon any misdemeanor to pay a penny of money, no charges placed to his account.
We have a natural aversness to all money-mulcts, for we think it the bane of
any Church to be entailed with such Courts and Officers as (like Rome's
sin-scourgers) grieve the people either with imprisonment, or punish them with
fines. For with us if a man be Excommunicated, as he is not owned in common
societies, so neither can he with all the moneys he has, buy off the
Excommunication; no, nothing will do it but a penitency, and humble submission,
and then he is most affectionately received into the arms of the Church,
without being put to one farthing of charge. If we should have such a Court, as
that you call (how improperly let others judge) your Spiritual-Court, our people
would fall off from us in spite of all our force and compulsion, and each
competent number would make themselves Churches, to which our people would
flock as fast as they do to your dissenting brethrens Churches, which we
foreseeing, shall we hope, never be mindful to run our selves and Church upon
such rocks.

5ly. Our Visitations are performed twice every year, where we go in person to
every particular Church under our care. Where our great work is (next to our
earnest and serious admonition of them to love unity and peace (the main scope
of all our Doctrine) to examine whether any particular Church be dissatisfied
with the Pastor and Teachers we have placed over them; and to know what such
Pastors, etc. have against their people; that so we may by all means possible
reconcile their differences; that if the people can justly accuse their
Teachers of any debauchery or bad example in their conversation, upon
sufficient proof and testimony thereof, the Pastor or Teacher is displaced,
sent to the Staffee, and another more pious, sober, good man, of sufficient
abilities, is put in by the Bishop, or proposed from amongst themselves to the
Bishop, which if approved of, is admitted and placed over them.

So that hereby we take care to remove all scandalous Ministers, lest they
should offend, and by their bad example lead our people astray into bad
practices, and lest others being dissatify'd thereat, should thence endeavor a
separation, schism, or rent in our Church, which we study as much as possible
to prevent; and if any of the people are refractory and of dissolute disorderly
lives, we take care to admonish them, and if tender bowels will not do (which
we by all means attempt) to chastise them with the threats of Excommunication
and the Staffee. But we impose no fines or money-mulcts upon them at all, have
no sorts of sin swindgers. Thus we endeavor to keep up the unity of love in
the bond of peace amongst our people, the great and main scope of every
Visitation, all true and faithful Bishops should aim at.

6ly. We (the Bishops) our selves always preach, sometimes in one, otherwhile
in another place within our Jurisdiction. We are never idle, but desire to show
our selves true Overseers, Bishops indeed over our flocks. We in our preaching
and reading of Divine Service, which we have as it springs purely (without any
adulteration) from the Gospel of Jesus Christ, always omit the Ceremony of the
Surplice, as knowing that it grates against the natural Genius of our people,
and therefore we wave it. And because many of our people are dissatisfied with
the sign of the Cross in Baptism, we omit that also; and many are offended at
kneeling at the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, as thinking from our Lord and
his Disciples example, that it was not of Divine institution; which therefore
we for their satisfaction forbear. We impose no bowing at the Name of Jesus;
but bowing at the Altar we wholly prohibit, lest we should in any measure admit
of, or connive at the Idolatry of Popery (against whom we generally have a
natural and inbred aversness.) Yea, in all dispensible Ceremonies, we set the
doors of our Church so wide open, that all (who otherwise would be dissenters,
and in fine would (in spite of us have Churches and Congregations of their own)
willingly come in, and once in, most willingly would go forth.

7ly. We compel or force none in matters of Religion, as judging it to be a
voluntary free action of the Soul in the exercise of things that relate to
Heaven and happiness; as well knowing that if we should constrain people to
acts of Worship, we could at the best (unless it was from a free act of their
souls) but make hypocrites of them; as to which we think the profane person
(who has nothing of religious actions) more acceptable in the sight of God than
such deceitful hypocrites, who only make Religion a stoking-horse for their
worldly advantages.

8ly. We (the Bishops) study to avoid all height of honors; for our King would
have made us Lords, but we begged of him that favor as not to confer such high
dignities upon us; and that because we being men of like frailty and passions
with others, were afraid lest that height of honor should ensnare us, make us
forget God, turn dronish and careless shepherds; which we declare our selves to
have so great zeal for the honor and glory of God, and good of the souls of
our dear children or people, as we would not have any thing of that nature
happen for the gaining all the world or worldly honors; lest neglecting our
flock, we should impose on them other dronish, lewd, scandalous teachers,
whereby the flock would be scattered, and they seek or make other shepherds of
their own, so quite break off and relinquish our Church; which breaches we
dread; as also judging such high honors not suitable to the poor humble
Ministers of Christ, in this our Pilgrimage through the wilderness to the land
of peace, who are here to partake with him in the state of Humiliation, as we
expect and hope to share with him in his state of Exaltation at the coming of
his Kingdom; which very Kingdom we have always before us, as near approaching,
the glory of which so dazles our eyes, as that it darkens these transient
scenes of temporal honors, eclipses the beauty thereof, and makes them only
seem to us like a finer sort of Pageantry; which makes us careless of them, as
also lest we should be in danger of Lording it over Gods heritage, and thereby
should give cause of dividing and rending the seamless coat of our beloved Lord
and Master.

And now (my Son) I must acquaint you with one thing, which strikes not so
universally with the Genius of your people of England, as with ours of
Bensalia, and that is concerning Music in Churches. First therefore (as a
foundation to what I have to say, and to make it less strange to you) I must
tell youthat harmony, whether vocal or instrumenal, strikes in so naturally
with the Genius of our people, as what through their education and custom (and
perhaps a private instinct peculiar to Countries, of which we can give no
account) Music or Musical harmony seems to be so congeneal to them, as nothing
more: every boy and girl in one sort or other, is trained up with it; even
Mechanics are not ignorant of the grounds of Music. Vulcans at their Forges,
Glassmen at their Furnaces, Shepherds and Shepherdesses in their Tents, etc.
upon frequent occasions strike up into Musical consort, and smite your ears
with pleasant harmony. In the very Groves, and shady places, we have
instruments of Music almost like Organs or Pedats, which are set into motion
by the air, or wind, and so contrived, that without any hands guiding them,
they strike into pleasant tunes; the very birds are so sorted as they make
vocal consort: Wisd. 17. 18. So that the whistling winds, the melodious noise
of birds among the spreading branches, the pleasing fall of waters, and the
rebounding Echo from the hollowing mountains, etc. (too tedious now to relate)
all sound aloud, yea echo forth, and that sweetly too, the natural bent of our
peoples Genius to Musical harmony.

Which considered, (and what was wonderfully done to the destruction of that
terrible army of the Moabites and Ammonites which came against Jehoshaphat King
of Judah, even by singing and praising God, we have upon record in the Sacred
Chronicles, Book 2. Chap. 20. v. 22.) We were willing (for their further
satisfaction, and to make Religion in its acts of Devotion not burdensome, and
offensive, but to be performed with alacrity and cheerfulness) to appoint some
choice music in our Churches. Which music is not performed by a company of
lewd, vain Quiristers, Boys and Singing-men, (who sing for money as your
Ballad-singers do) such as you foster up to the great discredit of your
Church-musick in England, and other places of Europe, which are indeed a great
disgracc to so heavenly an ornament in the Church: But most of our people, even
children from a dozen years of age, are able not only to set in, but also to go
along in harmony with the Music. Which they do (my Son) with such seriousness
and gravity, as that it seems to be the most sweet and harmonious thing in the
world. They are so ravished with that harmony as they seem to be wrapped up in it,
even beyond all outward things, who thus in Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs,
praise and magnify God with such sweetness and wholeness of heart, and such
praises to God are sounded forth in so great innocence of spirit, and sweetness
of voice, as surely nothing is more delectable, next to the Beatisick Quire of
Angels, and heavenly spirits in the full Celestial Chorus --

Whose greatest work in height above,
Is only with joy to sing and love.
Then he paused a little, as if upon the uttering thereof he had been wrap up
into a heavenly sweet ecstasy.

His Spirit for a while seemed to retire,
And he was gone to the Heavenly Quire.
At his return, I was afraid (Reverend Father said I) by any question to
interrupt you at the first so serious, and at the last so sweet discourse, but
that your pause and heavenly rapture gave me an opportunity to take you up as
you were falling or retiring to the pledge (your body) left behind, and to
acquaint you that your wholesome and sweet Doctrine, together with the harmony
of your Discipline, has begot an ardent affection in my soul toward your so
happy and concording Church, so assimilating and symphonizing with the Divine
Angelical Chorus.

Ah (quoth the Bishop) my soul was wrapped among
That heavenly host, who sweetly sing the Song
Of Moses and the Lamb.
And indeed our mental people, as we call them, viz. such as are spiritually
minded, and given up to high contemplation of the mercies, wisdom, and wonders
of the most high God, are sometimes in such sweet concording harmony, even
wrapped up well nigh into ecstasies, and have much ado to contain their divinely
symbolizing souls within the narrow confines of their bodies. But to return:

We suffer no Jesuits or other Papist-Priests whatsoever to come amongst us, as
well knowing, how spreading and contagious their leven is and has been to those
Kingdoms and Countries where it has been admitted. Yea, it cannot easily slip
out of our memories, what danger we had like to have been in both as to our
Church and State, upon admission of an unknown Jesuit, who being in a Merchants
Ship driven upon our Coasts, was suffered to dwell amongst us, and in a very
little time he had so poisoned near a score of our people with his venomous
leaven, which like a contagious ferment had got footing among us; and if that
joint of our body-Politick had not been seasonably cut off, the Gangreen would
in no great time have endangered the whole body. But by the prudence of our
King and Sophi (we the Bishops not a little contributing) the grand Jesuit was
apprehended and all his proselytes, who upon good proof being found to be such,
were sentenced to the Staffee, and thence for Islands near America. Only this
liberty was granted to those of our own inhabitants, that as many of them as
would return to their own Mother Church, and reclaim that of Rome, was to be
received again, which most of them accepted. The rest, with the Jesuit, was
speedily ordered for the Staffee. And because it happened at a time that Ships
were not shortly to go off, therefore to prevent further delay, a Ship on
purpose was appointed to go away with them; and because they would not have
other places (which are much peopled) hazarded by them, gave command to set
them upon some Island remote from America. For although (quoth the Bishop) your
Laws are so severe in England as to punish with death Jesuits that are so
proved to be (which yet how duly executed you know best) yet ours does not
sentence any man whatsoever to death for his opinion in Religion. We think that
Law of death to persons of different Religions not to be agreeable to the
judgment, custom, or president of the Primitive Church of God; therefore we
avoid it.

Thus (my Son) I have in short showed you the state of our thrice happy Church
and Government thereof: only before I conclude this head, it will not be
impertinent to touch a little further upon the nature or manner of our Church.
For the Church I have been speaking of, is made up of living stones, well knit
and cemented together, in every of which Christ by his Spirit dwells, and is
thereby rendered a true Church. Our people which convene and are linkt together
in Church Fellowship, are the Church, not the place of Convention. Which places
of Convention or meeting-places, we do not call Churches, left we should lose
the Primitive and true sense of that name; but for distinction sake call them
Convents, or in short Covents; which are built very conveniently for meeting,
but are no stately Fabrics; nor is our Worship attended with any gaudry or any
spiritual sort of pageantry, wherefore we wave all Surplices, Copes, Tippets,
Caps, etc. lest our people being amused with the external, should lose the
internal acts of devotion; lest too much busied in their heads, their hearts
should let go the main object: Give me thy heart, says God, (not thy head or
thy eye), and lest they should let themselves too much forth into the outward,
they should leave nothing for God in the inward. Yea in short, lest our people
(whom we always watch over with a jealous eye) by such spiritual shows in the
external pageantry of Worship, should be drawn aside only to an outside
Religion, and so should commit spiritual fornication, which we dread to think
on; and therefore rather abate in Ceremonies, than to have them supernumerary.

And as our Pastors, Teachers, etc. avoid all pomp in the performance of all
Religious duties, so likewise our people come not together in such gaudy dress
as we hear yours do, who come rather as if they were to act their parts in a
Play, than to such solemn Worship; in such pageantry of dress, as would more
become their appearance in either of the two Parks, or a Masquerade, than their
prostrate approaches to the footstool of Grace; more likely to beautify a
Comical scene, than such a solemn Convention. As to which, even many of your
professors (who as more strict, should see and forsake the folly of the former)
to their great shame are guilty herein. Is it not so (says he) to me? I cannot
(answer I) but confess (Reverend Father) to the truth hereof, and am much
ashamed of it. Ah (says the Bishop) how becoming and suitable to the
profession of the Gospel is a modest garb; our people accounting the Graces of
the Spirit in a virtuous mind the chief ornaments.

And now (my Son) to acquaint you with the result and genuine effects of our so
happy Church, it is no less than love, unity and peace, and what can be
expected more in any Church in the world? The glory of God, and good of Souls,
being the main aim, and end of the Bishops, Presbyters, Pastors and Teachers
set over the flock of Christ. What love we have to each other, and in what
unity of heart and mind we are established, you may in part read in every
family you come, and in every public meeting and Congregation, whether upon
matters Civil or Divine: For it is a great part of the work of our Teachers we
set over them, at seasonable times to visit their people, and in Christian love
to quiet and compose the differences, quarrels, or private animosities amongst
them, by removing the causes, and bringing them to a right understanding of
each other, studying by all mild and prudential means their reconciliation,
nipping their feuds and quarrels in their first bud, so prevent their becoming
public.

As to the public peace we enjoy, no people, Country, nor Kingdom whatsoever
can vye with us, having now enjoyed great peace without any division, fraction,
or schism, either in Church or State, for so many hundred years. Tell me, I
challenge you, what Country, Nation, Kingdom or States can glory of the like?
It Is true that of the States of Venice come the nearest to us of any known
parts of the World, having had their Government unvaried for about 1400 years,
which no Princes or Kingdoms in Europe can boast of. But yet they maintain
their peace and unity at home by their Wars abroad; which very thing renders
their peace the less peaceable; whilst we have no enemies at home or abroad to
annoy or disturb our peace.

And thus (my Son) as I have in the first place showed you the happy and florid
state of our Church, with the amiable effects and fruits thereof; which like a
wholesome and fruitful tree, whose leaves and fruits are for the healing of our
whole Nation; So my next work (according to my proposed method) is to show you
how your Church of England (as you call it) comes short of, and deviates from
ours.

First, Therefore (my Son) although yours be Episcopal (which so far is well)
yet you differ from us in your Head; and you see what little alterations made
in Heads, whether Ecclesiastical, Civil, or Natural, begets great changes and
alterations in all Bodies appertaining thereto. To instance first in
Ecclesiastic Bodies: do not you observe that in the Romish Church, the Head
thereof, viz. the Pope, does, by his pretended Succession in Peter's Chair, to
be Christ's Vicar upon Earth, and as such assumes to himself that title
(competible to no man but to our Lord Jesus Christ, who as God and Man is the
true Head of his Church) of Infallibility; which Headship and Infallibility
thereof, what influence has it not, I pray, upon the whole? and how much (I
would ask) does that make their Church to differ not only from the Primitive
Church of God, but also from all others in the world? We shall say nothing by
reflection upon your Church, as it stands related to its head, leaving the
suitableness of such a Head to such a Body, and the symmetry of the proportions
thereof to your own consideration. And as to Civil, do not you observe what
alterations, Tyrants (those monstrous heads) make in their body Politic. And
lastly, as to the body Natural, what influence Cephalic diseases have upon the
whole Body, is evident in Paralytick, Apoplectick and Convulsive maladies; what
these slight touches upon things may hint to you, I shall leave to your
further, and more leisure consideration.

2ly. How much your Church of England differs from ours of Bensalia, by
admitting Scholastic Disputations, and verbal janglings, your Universities,
and many books of Controversy put forth by them and their dissenting Brethren,
does testify with what effects they have had, your late intestine broils,
Civil Wars, yea and present animosities does too much declare, and we fear (if
not seasonably prevented) may eat out the very marrow and pith of Christianity
(even love, unity, and peace) from amongst you.

3ly. So much differs your Church from ours, wherein yours are guilty of
offending their weak brethren, by strictly imposing upon them many indifferent
Ceremonies, neither agreeable to Scripture, Reason, nor the natural Genius of
your people, and thereby of making them sin by forcing to a separation and
splitting of themselves into Parties, Churches, or Congregations of their own,
is too evident in the sophisms and factions of Presbyterians, Independents,
Anabaptists, Quakers, etc. of all which divisions, how much your Episcopal
Church (what through your stiff adhering to some dispensible Ceremonies, and
through some other causes yet to be touched upon) has been and is the Patron,
let your speedy pouring in of oil into the wounds of your offended and
dissatisfied brethren, be (by the effects) the Judge. Do your Bishops and their
Substitutes by friendly visits, prayer, and tender demeanor, endeavor the
satisfying the scruples of Conscience in their dissenting Brethren? Do they by
abating or cutting off their bill of Ceremonies at halves (which they may well
enough afford to do) and by opening wide their Church doors, make way to take
in those they have formerly so peevishly thrust out? And lastly, do they by
their good lives, pious example, and other requisite suitable means, study the
reclaiming of their dissatisfied Brethren?

4ly. So much does your Church differ and deviate from ours, by how much you
endulge and keep up those Courts of vexation, called by you (improperly enough)
Spiritual Courts. Your Citations, Excommunications, Capias's, Absolutions, all
to get money with, we (except what we hear of you) know nothing of. An
Excommunicated person of your Church may (so biased are you by gain) buy it
off with money; which in our Church without repentance, is impossible to be
done, and when done, it is without charge to the offender. Can your Bishops and
their Vicegerents through a sound judgment in Spiritual things that differ,
distinguish aright between these three sorts of persons, viz. 1. Those who are
Hypochondriack, and thereby fall into different notions. 2. Those who for
ostentation sake, and to make themselves popular, designedly blazon their new
and lately coined opinions diametrically opposite to the fundamental Principles
of Christianity or Gospel of Christ. And 3ly, such as truly out of a
Conscientious zeal establish and confirm some Doctrines and Disciplines
different from the received ones. Do they not only know (I say) how rightly to
distinguish these, but also by proper expedients, how to reduce them to their
proper Classis, and bring them to rights again? Do they not only know (of which
they cannot well be ignorant) but do they likewise study to make it practical?
and are they solicitous to satisfy your peoples scruples without putting them
to a penny charge?

5ly. Yours differ from ours in your Visitations; and that, first, your Bishops
rarely visit in person as we do: 2ly, Your Bishops Deputies search more into
the faults and lapses of the people, than into the errors, debaucheries, and
bad exemplary lives of their Pastors and Teachers; which is quite the contrary
to what we do. And how much care should be taken for the purging and expunging
all scandalous Ministers in order to the health, peace, unity, and welfare of
the several Churches we preside, the difference betwixt our Church State (where
such care is taken) and yours (by the due consideration of matters now under
discourse) will easily determine.

6ly. Ours differ from yours, particularly in relation to the dignity and
function of the highest Ministers of the Church; and that first as to dignity,
yours are Lords, ours not; yours make sure of a Kingdom here, ours are as sure
as they, but with this difference, ours is to come and only foresee it by
faith; yours have it present, which requires not much faith, for that which is
of faith is not seen. Therefore perhaps yours may think themselves on the surer
side of the bush; however as to that Kingdom of Christ, we are willing to live
by faith in view of it; and do not envy yours, their present temporal Kingdom.
2ly. As to the function, we the Bishops of Bensalia always preach in our own
persons, which few of yours do, but by proxy, as we have the state of your
Church represented to us; (contradict me in matters of fact if you can) being
willing in every respect by our care, to show our selves Episcopi, Overseers,
Bishops indeed, and Pastors over our belpved flocks; one sheep in which flock
we value more than a thousand (if there were so many) dispensible Ceremonies.

7ly. Compulsion in matters of Religion makes yours to differ from ours; for
you compel and drive by force as much as you well can. But we compel not at
all; and yet our flock by such soft tender means as we treat them with, is much
larger, yea more secured and fixed to us than yours by your severer method, is,
or in probability ever can be. For we chain them to us by our friendliness,
Christian charity, and tender affection, shown to them upon all occasions, by
which we purchase more love from them than yours can ever do by all threats of
Citations, Excommunications, Capias's, and other vexatious browbea^ing modes of
treating them; all which sets them more aloof off you, and confirms them more
in their several Classis of Separation.

Thus our Bishops (good old and reverend Fathers are they) are not only afraid
lest the pomp of the world should steal away their hearts from God, and they
thereby should become dronish Shepherds, who thence should (not only) not feed
the flock of Christ, but perhaps through idleness and the heaping up of worldly
wealth, might give way to that error as to endeavor to hinder others from
feeding the flock, whom God had fitted with endowments and gifts for that
purpose; but also are afraid lest by too stiff maintaining arbitrary and
disputable Ceremonies, they should give cause to the beginning of divisions in
our happy and peaceable Church.

Now (my Son) what remains to be spoken according to my proposed method, is
next to show you the reasons hereof; and lastly, to propose some expedients in
order to the healing your long contracted differences in your Churches: As to
the first of which you may (if you observe) take notice, that I have mostwhat
interwoven the reasons with the differences I have been acquainting you with.
And that in the main the reasons of your differences and divisions amongst your
selves, chiefly, if not solely, springs from the deviation of your Church of
England from ours of Bensalia, as you may easily and with much perspicuity see
in the lately quoted seven Heads, to which we have reduced the most remarkable
differences and deviations of your Church from ours, which is obvious to any
one who reads them. Which I shall here only in short recount, viz.

1. In your Head. 2. In your permission and indulgence of dubious Controversies
and jangling Disputations. 3. In your strict imposition of dispensible
Ceremonies upon your weak and dissatisfied Brethren. 4. By your upholding those
vexatious Courts called Spiritual Courts, that newly furbished Inquisition, or
Religious-house of Correction, where your sinswindgers from money-mulcts got by
Citations, Excommunications, etc. raise their fortunes out of the ruins of your
weak and distressed Brethren, whom you should rather pity, commiserate, and
receive into tender bowels of compassion. 5. In your Visitations, by your
scourging the people rather than removing bad exemplary, and therefore
scandalous Ministers, the great eyesore of your people. 6. In that your
Bishops, as to dignity, are Lords; and as to function rarely preach.
Lastly, By your compulsion in matter of Religion. In all which I say you
differ and deviate from us and our Church Discipline. And therefore no wonder
that you have not enjoyed those expected fruits (which we constantly possess)
of love, unity and peace, but rather have been imbroiled in Domestic
dissentions, animosities, and intestine Wars, the bane and reproach of
Christianity.

For can you expect to gain the credit of being endowed with Christian charity,
while you show so much of a spirit of enmity, as to impose burdens upon weak
Consciences, and not condescend (in matters dubious, and therefore indifferent)
to the weaknesses of your dissatisfied Brethren? And can you think to procure a
happy unity amongst your selves (which we always enjoy) while in the forenamed
Heads you take away the very basis and foundation thereof? Lastly, can you upon
serious consideration persuade your selves, that ever you shall possess peace,
while you vex, disquiet, and sit upon the skirts of your Brethren in matters
indifferent, wherein they ought in all Christian tenderness, not only to be
received, but to be as well satisfied as your selves?

But I have, lest your company will wonder what is become of us; therefore as
to the last thing I proposed to discourse, viz. to propound some happy
Expedient in order to the healing your clashing differences, and toward the
begetting a Christian charity and firm union amongst your discording Churches*
which because it would be too tedious now to insist upon, as also would (I
fear) too much entrench upon your Companies patience, I shall therefore refer
to its due place in a Letter, which I intend (if it shall be permitted by our
King and Sophi) to write to one of your Archbishops in England.

To conclude, at present take notice (my Son) that I have not discoursed these
matters to you without both the knowledge, yea and advice of our King and his
Sophi, whose leave and consent we desire, before we discourse any thing of this
nature to strangers. But in as much as you are (my Son) highly favored by them
(more than any stranger that ever yet came upon our happy Island) I was (I say)
not only permitted, but indeed advised to make this relation of the state of
our Church, and to compare it with yours, that thereby you may legibly view the
difference.

Whether at your return from us you may have leave to publish this relation in
your own Country, in order to their good, I know not; as to which you are to
wait our King with his Sophy's pleasure therein. Only this (on the by) I may
take leave to acquaint you with, that none of your Countrymen (that we call to
mind) was ever before cast upon our coasts, except one, which was my Lord
Verulam, whose stay in the Country was so short, as he took but a transient
view, and therefore gave but a slight and imperfect account thereof to the
world. Now in order to your more through information, I have performed my
charge (and hope others according to their several incumbent tasks will do the
like) and if it shall be permitted to come abroad, I pray God what I have said
of ours, may become exemplary to your distracted Churches in Europe, especially
to England (that happy Country, if they knew their own good), to which place we
seem with a joint consent (I had almost said harmonically) to wish well, and to
write the first copy after our original pattern; which (with a great deal of
seriousness concluding) the great God of Heaven for his beloved Sons sake bless
unto you, Amen.

Which done, I made my Obeisance to the Bishop, and humbly thanked the Reverend
Father for his great condescension, love, and familiarity, in his late
admirable discourse. As I was coming forth of the withdrawing-room, the Bishop
thrust a heavy paper, well lined with red, into my hand: What mean you,
Reverend Father, said I, the fee is rather due to you, for you have given the
advice, while I have been your Auditor, and our Church your Patient. Come,
come, says the Bishop, this is only a small pledge of the kindness and bounty
you are likely to partake of in this Country, and to show you we are kind to
strangers, and that we not only talk, but do. I returned my humble thanks and
acknowledgment of double obligation to the Bishop. Now (says he) before we
return to your company, I would only add, that if you shall have the honor of
being admitted to discourse with any of the Sophy, those Fathers of Solomon's
house, and Knights of the Noble Order of the Golden Fleece, I doubt not but
they will give you an account of the greatest secrets and rarities, attainable
in nature by art; which will doubtless strike in you no small admiration, to
view those wonders, and grand Arcana of nature and art, they are possessors of;
they being Adepti of the choicest secrets within the orb of Visibles.

Now (says he) we will return to your Company. To whom he was pleased to make
a short Apology for his absence; having (says he) had somewhat of great import
to relate to your friend the English Doctor; at which I hope you are not
offended. Then we all acknowledging the Bishops free, kind and noble Treat,
took our solemn leave and departed.

A LETTER from the Bishop of Bensalia to the Archbishop of Canterbury, in order
to the healing our Church differences.
My LORD,
HAving by the advice and consent of our King of Bensalia and his Sophi, had
lately a Conference with your beloved friend, and your Countryman an English
Doctor, (providentially cast upon our hitherto unknown Coasts) about matters
relating to ours and your Church, etc. who since that discourse, has been so
highly favored by the King and Council, as to be indulged the liberty of
looking into, and taking cognizance of the Government, Laws, Customs, and other
grand affairs of our thrice happy Country, yea, has been thought worthy of
taking a prospect of Solomon's house, that glorious fabric of the world, and
there to view the admirable improvements of Art and Nature to their utmost
perfection they are capable of: And to whom the Sophi has been free to impart
some of their grand Hermetick Arcana, (otherwise by Writers upon that subject,
wrapped up in Hieroglyphics, and other dark Enigmatical Characters) also has had
conference with some of our Physicians, who doubtless for their high knowledge
in the Theory, and great skill in the curing of Diseases, may without any
affected Hyperbole, be reputed the best in the world. As to which, what
advantage he may thereby reap in the influencing his practice at his return,
will be afterward known. What was then left imperfect in my late discourse
with him, showing the difference betwixt our happy Church of Bensalia and yours
of England, in the late thing there proposed, viz. the propounding some happy
Expedient in order to the healing your clashing differences, and what might
most tend toward the begetting a Christian charity* and love union among you,
is now I say the main scope of these lines. And indeed our King, his Sophi, and
our Bishops, (men doubtless gifted with high and noble endowments from God) do
all unanimously consent and concur in the matter of advice I am by their
appointment now to propound to you, which is in the particulars following.

First, That you will set your Church-doors not only achar, but wide open, by
cuting off at halves, or rather indeed the whole (...)ll of dispensible
Ceremonies in your Church* discipline and Worship, no way essential to the
Apostolical Doctrine of Christ Jesus.

2ly. That you will expunge or eject all idle, dronish, drunken, lend,
ignorant, scandalous Ministers, who in public only serve to read over a
Transcript, scarce daring to cast their eye off it, and whose evil examples, as
they are bad presidents to the vulgar, and more loose, wickedly inclined, so
they are also offensive and scandalous to the sober, good* and well inclined
people* and thence become a great block of offense.

3ly. That in lieu of the aforesaid debaucht or otherwise scandalous Ministers,
you would admit of as many honest* conscientious, sober, judicious, vigilant
and able Ministers (now as the present state of affairs are, secluded) such
whose Doctrine is sound, agreeable to Scripture, and the known Truth thereof,
and whose lives for piety, are exemplary in all good Christian conversation.

4ly. In order thereto, that in all your Visitations you have a stricter eye to
the Doctrine and Morals of the Preachers, than to the demeanor of the people.

5ly. That all manner of force or compulsion be forbidden, whereby no other
than soft, gentle, tender, bowel-like means may be used.

6ly. That you impose no heavy burdens in matters of Religion, upon the
consciences of your people; but that that may be kept free, whose singular
prerogative it is to be subject to God alone, as being his Kingdom and
jurisdiction, and in the main solely accountable to him.

7ly. That the path to Ecclesiastical preferments may never be way laid by
interest, Symony, or other indirect courses; but that every man according to
the demerit of his conversation, learning, gifts, and qualifications, may
himself (and not by proxy, interest, etc.) gradually ascend those steps of
preferment.

8ly. That no one person have two Livings, nor no one able Preacher to be
without one.

9ly. That you forbid all manner of disputes and scholastic janglings in
controversial points of Religion; keeping a middle road betwixt the extremes of
the severest Galvinism, and extravagant Arminianism, in matters of Election,
Reprobation, and Free*will; rather acquainting the people with, and pressing
them to the great necessity of their obedience to the requirings of the Gospel
than too much prying into the secrets of Gods council, preaching the Doctrine
of Christ in the evidence of the Spirit, with demonstration and power.

And by this wide manner of opening the Church-doors, and the milder treats,
you will surely find by a wise (but honest) stratagem, managed by a gentle and
genuine method, the most of other sorts of persuasions (who at present are at a
remote distance from them) brought over to be one with you. Those who will not
hereby yet come in, will in probability be scarce more than two sorts, who
still are to be treated with all gentle means imaginable. And because those who
remain, are generally such as are much tutored and led by their Teachers, whose
example and Doctrine does strangely influence their proselytes; therefore your
vein of policy must chiefly tend toward them; and that first in lieu of
Citations, Excommunications, Capias's* Gaols, etc. by studying all manner of
interweavings of interest and traffic with them, by making use of them in
their imploys (if they have any) or by kind invitations, inter-marryings of
yours with their Sons and Daughters, therehy and other familiar treats to
remove all bars or lets in communication (want of which is the very gate to
prejudice, and private feuds) whence from a free intercourse, all strangeness,
private heats, and animosities, (from not rightly understanding each other)
will quite be removed and they consequently reduced to a mutual firm unity, and
Christian charity with you, the great end of all Christian conversation. Add to
all which, if a score or two of the eminentest heads be taken off (not by an ax
but) by preferring them to places of trust and repute, viz. either by
conferring places of trust at Court, or making them Noble-mens Stewards,
Subtreasurers, etc. will mightily win upon them, and put a stop to the current
of the present animosities, the bane of Christianity.

Thus by your innocent and Christian* like policy, you may without a
peradventure gain such a conquest over all your separated Brethren, as all the
ruder and more severe methods in the world could (if complicated) never effect;
and would thereby alter the whole series of affairs, make a new, but lovely
scene of friendship, amity, and unity to appear; of the truth of all which by
matter of fact upon trial, you would be abundantly satisfied.

Thus, my Lord, I have with great humility and sincerity performed my charge:
And whit other conference your English Doctor has had with Masters of the Arts
and Sciences, whom he has converst with; and what discourse has past between
him and some of our Doctors and Apothecaries, relating to the great
improvements of the practice of Physic: As also what mutual intercourse he has
had with some of our Sophi (those masters in wisdom) relating to the highest
Hermetick Arcana, attainable by Nature and Art; he has liberty from our King
and Council at due seasons to divulge; and what improvements may thence redound
to your people, we leave to the future issue of time. If any scruples should
arise wherein you would be further satisfied, concerning what I have said in
the behalf of our so happy Church, the difference betwixt ours and yours, and
expedients here proposed; your Lordship may write it down, and send it to your
English Doctors, who knows ways of sending to us, and you shall as speedily as
may be receive further satisfaction. Mean while desiring that your people may
be the first who shall write after our original Copy, I take leave and remain,

My Lord, Your most affectionate and humble Servant in all Christian Charity,
Theophilus Do-well.

FINIS.

