The Conformists Reasons for hearing and joining with the Nonconformists.
1. THE same Reasons which oblige Persons to hear and join with us, oblige us
also to take all Opportunities of hearing and joining with the Nonconformists,
they being Ministers of Christ, having due Call and Authority from him to
preach the Gospel. The Church has real need of their Labors, their Ministry
is hated by Satan and Saint-hating Men; they are duly subject to the higher
Powers, and are protected by the Law of the Land in the course of their
Ministry, and are a considerable part of that same Church of England, which
their present Majesty's under God are Supreme Governors of, according to the
old Oath of Supremacy, and the 37th Article of the Church of England.

2. Those Words of our Savior's take place here; He that is not against us, is
on our part, Mark 9. 40. The Nonconformists really are not against us,
therefore they are on our part. The Scope and Drift of their Ministry is to win
Souls not to this or that Sect, but to Christ, to teach them their Duty to God,
and to their present Majesty's, as sole Supreme under God, and the common
Center of Catholic Unity in these Nations. They are truly tender of our
Ministry, rejoice in our Labors, and in the Gifts and Graces of able and
faithful Conformists, rebuke Backbiters and Vilifyers of our Ministry; and as
they have opportunity, hear and join with us and our Churches.

3. In the time of the late King James the Church of England did confess its
Error in being severe to the Nonconformists. This is plain from a certain
Pamphlet published in the late King's Reign, entitled, A Letter to a
Dissenter, upon occasion of his Majesty's late gracious Declaration of
Indulgence. The Words thereof, page 8. are these following; The Church of
England convinced of its Error in being severe to you; the Parliament, whenever
it meets, will sure be gentle to you: the next Heir bred in the Country,
which you have so often quoted for a Pattern of Indulgence: A general Agreement
of all thinking Men, that we must no more cut our selves off from the
Protestants abroad, but rather enlarge the Foundations upon which we are to
build our Defenses against the common Enemy; so that in truth all things seem
to conspire to give you Ease and Satisfaction, etc. This is to be looked upon
as the general sense of the conforming Nobility, Gentry, Commonalty, and Clergy
in the time of the late King's Reign: for so really it was, as is well known.
Now here the Church of England does confess its Error toward the Dissenters,
and to have erred not in some slight and trivial Matters, but in Matters
touching the Foundation; and sees a necessity of enlarging its Foundations, and
consequently of taking in the Nonconformists, and making them constituent Parts
of the Church with her self. Either then the Nonconformists are upon one and
the same Foundation with our selves, or they deserve to be, and it is through
no fault of theirs that they are not: being upon the same Foundation, we cannot
be against their Ministry and Meetings; but we must needs be against our own;
and overthrow the Common Protestant Cause, Religion, and Interest in this
Nation, and consequently in all other Nations and Countries, what in us lies;
and in being for their Ministry, we are for our own.

4. These Scriptures set together, prove it a Duty, viz. Hear, and your Soul
shall live, Isa. 55. 3. Where two or three are gathered together in my Name,
there am I in the midst of them, Mat. 18. 20. I charge thee before God and the
Lord Jesus Christ, preach the Word, be instant in season, out of season, 2 Timothy
4. 1, 2. Though I be free from all Men, yet have I made my self Servant unto
all, that I might gain the more: And unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I
might gain the Jews; to them that are under the Law as under the Law, that I
might gain them that are under the Law; to them that are without Law, (being
not without Law to God, but under the Law to Christ) that I might gain them
that are without Law: To the Weak became I as weak, that I might gain the Weak.
I am made all things to all Men, that I might by all means save some: And this
I do for the Gospel's Sake, 1 Cor. 9. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.

5. The Communion of Saints is a principal Part of the Catechism, and of the
common Creed of Christendom; it is a Fundamental in true Religion, most
frequently repeated in all Conforming Congregations. Now we do not duly believe
and practice this Fundamental, unless we hear and join with the Nonconforming
Brethren in the Word, and Prayer, and Sacraments, as we have Call and
Opportunity, they being visible Saints, and there being nothing in their way of
Worship, but what is either laudable or tolerable: God does own and approve
their Ministry and Meetings, and is graciously present with them.

Objections Answered.
Obj. 1. The Presbyterian Ministers refuse Subjection to the Governors of the
Church of England, and therefore it cannot be safe for us to hear and join with
them. Answ. This is plainly not true: for under God their present Majesty's are
sole Supreme Governors of the Church of England, ruling all Estates according
to Laws enacted by common Consent in Parliament; witness the old Oath of
Supremacy, and the 37th Article of the Church of England, in these words; The
King's Majesty has the chief Power in this Realm of England, and other his
Dominions. Unto whom the chief Government of all Estates of this Realm, whether
they be Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all Causes does appertain, and is not, nor
ought to be subject to any foreign Jurisdiction. The Presbyterians generally
subscribe this Article, and it is notorious that they are duly subject to their
present Majesty's, pray heartily for them, pay Taxes bear all legal Charges,
keep the stated monthly Fasts strictly and solemnly, and are more upright and
cordial to the present Government than many of the Conformists are. If you deny
their present Majesty's to be chief Governors of the Church of England, you
then bring in the Papacy, and unhinge the Government.

Obj. 2. Though the King be supreme Governor by the Sword, yet Bishops are
supreme Governors of the Church of England by the Word. Answ. Bishops have no
Authority but what is ministerial and subordinate, and therefore they cannot be
supreme Governors: they are under Law to God, and they are under Law to the
King as God's Vicegerent. If you suppose them supreme Governors of the Church
of England, you suppose them Popes, that is, Antichristian Prelates, exalting
themselves above God, and above the King his Vicegerent. Abiathar the
High Priest was not superior to, nor coordinate with King Solomon, but his
Subject, and therefore for his Crime was justly deposed by him, and Zadok put
in his room.

Obj. 3. The Presbyterian Ministers have not just and valid Ordination, as
being ordained by mere Presbyters without a Bishop. Answ. God has no where
declared that there cannot be just and valid Ordination without a Bishop, and
therefore the contrary Doctrine must needs be erroneous. Accordingly all true
Protestants own and approve Ordination by Presbyters without a Bishop, (as is
used in the Dutch, Helvetian, French, and New-England-Churches) to be just and
valid, and not defective in any thing absolutely necessary. The Church of
England does not allow the Ordination of Presbyters by a Bishop only, without
the presence and concurrence of co-assistant Presbyters, who do equally impose
Hands with the Bishop: And the Presbyterians do not allow Ordination by all
Presbyters promiscuously, but only by senior Presbyters, such as for their Age,
Experience, Gravity, Wisdom, ministerial Ability and Fidelity, and exemplary
Virtues, are Heads and chief Men among them, and a kind of Fathers to the
younger Sort. The principal thing in a Minister of Christ is not external
Ordination, but ministerial Ability and Fidelity; external Ordination is not
principal but subservient: And where is ministerial Ability and Fidelity, with
the consent and liking of the People, and the protection and countenance or
permission of the Magistrate, with Imposition of Hands, and Fasting and Prayer
by senior Presbyters of known Wisdom, Gravity, Piety, and exemplary Virtue and
Ability; either this is just and valid Ordination, or there is no such thing as
Ordination, neither can it be declared what it is. Now this is the Ordination
in use among the Presbyterians. And indeed able and faithful Presbyters are,
according to Scripture Phrase, Bishops; Acts 20. 17. 28. Phil. 1. 1. 1 Pet. 5.
1.

Obj. 4. We who are conforming Ministers cannot hear and join with the
Nonconformists without breach of our Oath of Canonical Obedience to the
Ordinary. Answ. That Oath binds us but to obey the Ordinary in things lawful
and honest: And to hear and join with the Nonconformists as we have
opportunity, is neither against Law nor Honesty, but rather laudable, pleasing
to God, profitable to the Soul, and the true way of Peace. The Ordinary is not
supreme; but an Officer appointed by the King and State touching
Church Matters, he is under God, and to the King and State: If he enjoin or
forbid us any thing contrary to Law, we owe him no Obedience. Our Oath to him
binds us to no new Duty, but only binds us more strictly to do what we had been
bound by the Law to do, in case we had not taken that Oath. The same supreme
Authority which makes the Ordinary, and gives him limited Power over us, does
declare in the Preamble of the late Act for Toleration, that the Liberty now
enjoyed by the Nonconformists, may be an effectual means to unite their
Majesty's Protestant Subjects in Interest and Affection. Now our hearing and
joining with the Nonconformists, is a countenancing of them, and of their
present Liberty, and consequently it tends to the union of Protestants in
Interest and Affection, in the Judgment of the King and Queen, and of both
Houses of Parliament, and consequently of the Ordinary himself; for by the
Ordinary is meant the Bishop of the Diocese, who is one of the House of Lords,
and so has a hand in making the Law. How can we disobey the Bishop by hearing
and joining with those Men, unto whom the Bishop himself, as a Member of the
House of Lords, does by his consent to the Act of Parliament, give free
Liberty, as an effectual means of uniting Protestants in Interest and
Affection, and exempteth them from all Penalties, and from being prosecuted in
any Ecclesistical Court, for or by reason of nonconforming to the Church of
England?

Obj. 5. The Nonconformists are against all Church Government by Bishops, and
there can be no Church without a Bishop. Answ. The Nonconformists are not
against all Church Government by Bishops, for they have long desired that
famous Archbishop Usher's Model of Church Government by Bishops and Presbyters
might be established among us. But hitherto they could not obtain it, for there
are a party of Men in the Nation, some Clergy and some Laity, by Profession
Protestants, whom the Piety and moderation of such Bishops as Bishop Usher and
Bishop Hall, does greatly offend, and can by no means please. A limited
Episcopacy the Nonconformists generally are not against; try and see if they
will not accept and willingly conform to Archbishop Usher's Model. That there
may be a Church without a Bishop is plain from the Dutch, Helvetian, Protestant
French Churches, and those in New England. There is also the universal Church
on Earth, and yet no one universal Pastor and Bishop on Earth. The Pope indeed
claims to be so, but for that he is by Protestants justly charged with
Antichristian Pride and Ambition. There is also the Church of England, as
comprizing all the Christian People in England; but no one Man is universal
Bishop to all the Christian People in England, nor are all the Bishops put
together Governors of the Church of England, but they are subject to the King
and Queen, and governed by Laws, made by the King and Parliament, as has been
declared: and therefore it is not true, that there can be no Church without a
Bishop. The Church consists by Christian Faith, Hope, and Love, not as
exclusive of Pastors and Ministers, but as supposing and including them as
God's Instruments for begetting and finishing these heavenly Graces: and
nothing hinders but that able and faithful Presbyters may be instrumental in
God's Hands for begetting and finishing these heavenly Graces in thousands of
Souls, yea and much better than some Bishops, such as either cannot or will not
labor in the Word and Doctrine, Popish Bishops, who are Idolaters, and such
other as seek themselves and not the things of God.

Obj. 6. The Nonconformists have no Ceremonies in their way of Worship. Answ.
Yes, but they have two Ceremonies of God's own ordaining, Baptism, and the
Institution of Bread and Wine; and if God had not thought these two enough, he
could easily have ordained more; but he thought good to ordain no more, and it
must needs be a wise and safe way to keep to God's Ordinance.

Obj. 7. The Nonconformists have no public Liturgy, that is, no stinted form
of public Prayer and Administration of Sacraments. Answ. You will give the
Minister leave to choose his Text, and compose and methodize his Sermon; why can
you not also leave him to perform the other part of ministerial Office,
respecting Prayer, Thanksgiving, and the Sacraments, by a stinted form or not,
as he himself is best able and thinks most meet? If his Words be grave, sound,
scriptural, pious, suited to common Edification, though not to each ones Fancy,
your Duty is to mind your Heart, to purify that from Pride and carnal
Prejudice, and evil Thoughts, and affectionately to concur and join in all the
Service, and be thankful. It is very desirable that all Ministers were of such
Abilities, and at all times so prompt and full, as to need no stinted Form in
public; let those who are so able, not be abridged of their Liberty beyond
their own choice and Christian Prudence. The Nonconformists keep to Christ's
own Words in the Act of Baptism, and they recite the Words of Christ touching
the Lord's Supper, and they keep to a stinted Form in Singing Psalms, and they
read God's own Word in their Assemblies; and if they be able to preach they are
able to pray, and to suit their Prayer to the Edification of that People over
whom they are set, and to whom they minister. And therefore this can be no just
Exception; they think they have much more reason to except against our way as
being too much in stinted Forms.

Obj. 8. We who are Conformists cannot hear and join with the Nonconformists
without condemning our own way. Answ. It does not follow that because our Way
is good, therefore their Way is not good; for as to external Modes and Forms
and Things circumstantial Sister-Churches, and Neighbour-Congregations may
differ, and yet both be good and lawful. Twenty Ministers at the same time in
distant Congregations may hit upon the same Text, and deliver the same
substantial Doctrine, and yet their Words and Method and Composure may
wonderfully vary, and all may be good and useful, and God more glorified by
such Variety than otherwise. Most conforming Congregations have no Organs, some
have; must therefore one of the two necessarily be bad and damnable? The
Churches in Holland, the Churches in Helvetia, the Churches in Geneva, the
Churches in Denmark, the Churches in England, the Protestant French Churches
have different ways, and modes, and forms, as to external Worship. If one be
good, must we therefore condemn all the rest as sinful? What is sinful and
forbidden by God, we may in no wise conform to; but what is neither precisely
commanded nor precisely forbidden by God, may be done or not done, according as
Christian Prudence shall dictate to be most convenient: in such Cases and
Matters we are after the Example of Paul, to be all things to all Men; and if
we come to an Episcopal Church, do as they do; if we come to a Presbyterian
Church, do as they do, according as Ambrose advised Augustine; Ad quamcunque
ecclesiam veneris, ejus morem serva, si, etc. To what Church soever thou shall
come, observe its way and manner, if thou would neither offend others, nor
have others to offend thee.

Obj. 9. If the Nonconformists will preach in the Church, I will readily hear
them; but to hear them in Barns and private Houses, and the like places, I like
not, I am against it. Answ. We cannot follow a better Pattern than Christ: Now
he preached not only in the Temple and Synagogue, but in private Houses, and
sometimes upon a Mountain, and by the Seaside out of a Ship, the People
standing upon the Shore; and he never declined Preaching to more or fewer in
any convenient place suitable to the Occasion. The places in which the
Nonconformists preach, some of them are goodly Edifices, some of them are
public Chapels, the meanest of them are not naturally indecent, they best
suit with their Circumstances; and God being graciously present with them, the
places where they assemble must needs be the House of God, and the Gate of
Heaven, Genesis 28. 10, to 18. Get them free leave to exercise their Ministry in
the Churches, and they will willingly quit their Barns and other places; but if
you exclude them from the Churches, you necessitate them to preach in other
places; and by valuing the Word for the sake of the Place, rather than the
Place for the sake of the Word, you declare that indeed you do not truly value
God's Word. As it was no shame to Christ to be born in a Stable, nor to his
Virgin Mother, because it was not their Sin but their Calamity, but all the
Shame was to those that thrust them into the Stable: so it is no Shame for
God's Ministers and People to worship him in a Barn, when they have no fitter
Place to worship him in; but the Shame is to those that might allow them better
Places to worship God in, and will not, but thrust them into a Barn, and then
make that a Cloak for their not hearing and joining with them.

Obj. 10. There is no need of the Nonconformists Preaching, it does more hurt
than good, it may better be spared, the Conformist Ministers are full enough for
the People of this Land. Answ. I confess that if all Places throughout the
Nation were supplied by able and faithful Conforming Ministers, as some are,
there would not be such need of the Nonconformists Preaching as now there is;
but it is manifest to all discerning and impartial Christians, that though
there is no want of Ministers, yet there is great need of able, holy, powerful,
painful and exemplary Ministers in all the Diocesses of England; and pious
Conformists and Nonconformists Ministers have need of each others Labors, and
the more humble and faithful they are, the more sensible of it. Never to this
day did the Church over-abound with able and faithful Preachers, nor will to
the end of the World, while the Followers of Cain and Abel remain in the World,
and many are called but few chosen. Good Bishop Hall would use to say, You may
as well complain of too many Stars in the Firmament, as of too many good
Preachers in a County.

Obj. 11. The late Act for Toleration does only tolerate the Nonconformist
Meetings, it does not approve them. Answ. It is plain from the Preamble of the
Act, that it permits them as an effectual means to unit their Majesty's
Protestant Subjects in Interest and Affection; and therefore it must needs
approve them. For nothing that is not good and laudable, and worthy to be
approved, can be an effectual means of uniting Protestants in Interest and
Affection; so that the Nonconformists have as true Right to their places by the
Law of the Land, as the Conformists have to theirs, they are both alike under
their Majesty's Protection, and do alike stand or fall with them and their
Government; their Religion is one, they have the same common Enemy, and are
like to be happy or miserable, strong or weak, according as they unite in God
and their present Majesty's, or do not unite.

Obj. 12. The Presbyterian Meetings are not true visible Churches of Christ.
Answ. The 19th Article of the Church of England declares, the visible Church of
Christ to be a Congregation of faithful Men, in the which the pure Word of God
is preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered according to Christ's
Ordinance, in all those things that of necessity are requisite to the same. Now
the Presbyterian Meetings are visibly such Congregations, and therefore it is
impossible that they should be heretical, schismatical, and lacking in any
thing necessary to the being of true visible Churches of Christ. If we deny
them to be true visible Churches of Christ, we shall not be able to prove the
Conformist Churches, true visible Churches of Christ; for my part I am not
able, and I despair to see it solidly and scripturally proved by any other.

Obj. 13. Conforming and Nonconforming Churches are contradictorily opposite,
as Light and Darkness, Christ and Belial, Heaven and Hell, and therefore both
cannot be true Churches. Answ. Such as conform to God's Word, and such as do
not conform to God's Word in the Substance and Foundation of Religion, are
contradictorily opposite, as Heaven and Hell, the Church of God and the
Synagogue of Satan; but they who equally conform to God's Law in the Substance
and Foundation of Religion, and differ but about circumstantial things injoined
by Man's Law, though really and for the main they be both Conformists, yet
verbally and secundum quid they differ as Conformists and Nonconformists;
therefore the grand difference is not between Conforming and Nonconforming
Protestants, but between godly and ungodly Protestants, whether Conformists or
Nonconformists. As for godly Men Conformists and Nonconformists, they can bear
with one another, and rejoice in each others Labors, and sincerely though not
perfectly deny themselves, and mind and seek the things of Christ, and advance
his Kingdom; but it is unregenerate, ungodly, Self-seeking, Saint-hating,
sensual and worldly Men, whether Conformists or Nonconformists, that are the
Plague of the Church, and Satan's chief Agents.

Obj. 14. It is fitter that the Nonconformists come over to us than we to them,
we by yielding to them shall harden them in their sinful Nonconformity, and
shall displease our own side, and not gain our Enemy. Answ. Be it supposed that
Nonconformity is a Sin, will it therefore follow that we are not to do our Duty
to God and them, and all that in us lies seek the Peace of the Church and the
Public Good? Rigid Conformists confess the Points scrupled by Nonconformists,
to be in their own nature indifferent, neither commanded nor forbidden by God,
and that the Church may well be without them: Moderate Conformists confess the
Church might better be without them, if all both Rulers and People could be so
content: but Nonconformists judge some of the things to be flatly sinful. Now on
whom does it lie to yield? They retaining their own Principles, cannot yield
and come over to us; we retaining our own Principles, may come over to them,
and join with them in the Word, and Prayer, and Sacraments, as we have Call and
Opportunity; and in so doing, we gain them so far as it lies in us to gain
them, we please God, which is Motive sufficient, and cannot but have a good end
and effect. If they make an ill use of our Condescension, that is their Sin,
for which they must answer to God, who will not fail to accept and reward our
good Deed: and if Conformists be displeased with us for doing our duty, shall
we therefore desist from it? The question is not, whether they sin in not
conforming? but allowing to each other their different Thoughts and Opinions
about Conformity, what is the duty of both sides as to mutual Peace and
Concord? They are so prudent as in the course of their Ministry to insist upon
those Points in which both sides agree, as being sufficient for Edification;
and therefore we may safely join with them in public Church-duties as we have
occasion, without receding from our own Principles, without breaking any Law
divine or humane: and therefore it will lie at our door if we do not; we sin
against one Article of Faith, The Communion of Saints.

Obj. 15. Can you give an instance and example of what you press and exhort to?
Answ. Yes, a famous one recorded in the Harmony of Confessions of three Parties
of Protestants in Poland, some following the Augustan Confession, some
following the Helvetian Confession, and some following the Bohemian Confession;
and being sensible of the evil and sad effects of their Divisions, the leading
Men of each Party came to an Agreement as to Doctrine and Points of Faith, and
permitted to one another diversity in Rites and external Modes, and so became
one, and did preach, and pray, and communicate with one another, and did
greatly flourish in the midst of Popish Adversaries and Arian Heretics; and
Enemies of all sorts. See for this Corpus Confess. par. 1. page 163. par. 2.
page 215. Paraei Irenic. cap. 17.

Let us remember the Day of Judgment, lovingly converse with our Protestant
Brethren, not be strange to them, serve them in Love; rejoice that Christ is
preached, Souls saved and edified, and Satan confounded by the Ministry of
Protestant Conformists and Nonconformists. Long for the good Day when all
Sect-names shall be abolished, and till that can be, let us really and indeed
be one in Love; embrace the Nonconformists as dear Brethren in Christ, make
them freely welcome to preach in our Pulpits, encourage our People to hear
them, and hear and join with them selves as we have Opportunity, and thank them
for their Labors, and wish them all good Success, and extend our Charity to
such of them as need, and in all things conform our selves to the Example of
Christ. To him be Glory for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

