Concubinage and Poligamy DISPROVED: OR, THE Divine Institution of Marriage
BETWIXT ONE MAN, AND One Woman only, ASSERTED.

In Answer to a Book, writ by John Butler, B. D. for which he was presented as
follows:

We the Grand Jury, sworn to Enquire for the Body of the City of London, on
Wednesday, the First Day of December, 1697. Present one John Butler, for
Writing and Publishing a Wicked Pamphlet; wherein he maintains Concubinage to
be Lawful, and which may prove very destructive to diverse Families, if not
timely Suppressed.

Eum qui duas habet Vxores comitatur Infamia, Legi Imperial. Lib. 9. Tit. 9.
Leg. 18. Jer. 23. 14. I have seen also in the Prophets of Jerusalem an horrible
thing; they commit Adultery, and walk in Lies; they strengthen also the Hands
of the Evil Doers, that none does r^^^rn from his Wickedness. Ver. 15. From the
Prophets of Jerusalem is Profaneness gone forth into all the Land. LONDON:
Printed for R. Baldwin, in Warwick Lane, School. Price 1 s.

THE Epistle Dedicatory. TO John Butler, B. D. Asserter of the Lawfuluess of
Concubinage.
IT is now become usual for Authors to set off their Performances, by
dedicating them to Extraordinary Patrons; and therefore I hope you will not
blame me for Dedicating the following Sheets to your felf. Your Book, for any
thing I know, considering the Scope of it, and the Function of the Author, is
unpresidented. You have been at a great deal of Pains, to write an Apology for
the Modish Practice of keeping a Miss. The prevalency of the Custom had already
abated much of it is Odium; so that there wanted nothing but your finishing
Stroke, to commend it to us from the Pulpit as Sacred and Holy, which you have
Generously done in your 34th Page, etc. But, good Sir, to which of the Saints
will you turn, or whom shall we follow as a Patron of your Reformed
Concubinage? Adam neither had, nor was allowed any Concubinc; and the first
that we find upon Divine Record to have been Guilty of Poligamy, was Lamech,
one of Cain's Posterity. I am afraid that the Holiness of the first
Practitioner will scarcely be able to Hallow the Practice. If we come to
Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, we don't find that he made use of any
Concubine till his Wife advised him to it; and that she did not neither, till
she her self was past Childbearing, by the Ordinary Course of Nature. So that
if we must be resiricted to the same Conditions, the Gallants will scarcely
thank you for your Kindness.

In the next place, you leave us mightily in the Da^k, not only as to the time
when, but likewise as to the Number of Concubines we may Lawfully (...). We
don't find that Abraham had above one at a time, yet his Grandson Jacob had two
or three: Now, pray, Sir, which of the two must be our Standard? Or what is to
be the Rule of the Reformed Concubinage you propose? Abraham and Jacob had the
Consent of their Wives, and the first of them sent away his Miss, and kept his
Wife. But; for you, Sir, if we may believe Martha Perkins, you have sent away
your Wife, and kept your Miss. Pardon me, Sir, if I take Miss and Concubine to
be Synommous Terms; for I am not Master of Logic enough to distinguish betwixt
them, according to your Description of the latter.

But the Liberty of Poligamy, or Concubinage, is not the only thing wherein you
have vindicated the Original Right of Mankind; You have put a Greater
Obligation upon the Age still, by making every man a Judge in his own Cause;
nay, and an Executioner too; for you have not only adjudg'd Martha Perkins to
be an unjust Desertrice, but have disposed of her Property at your own hand, by
taking Mary Tomkins into her Bed, without Application either to Church or
State, or receiving any Approbation from them. So that it is no Fault of yours,
if all Mankind don't, according to your Laudable Example, shake off all
Subjection to them, and reassume their Primitive Liberty.

But at the same time, Sir, how such Practices can agree with the Laws of God,
and the Laws of the Land, to which you ought to conform your self as a
Christian, and a Subject, you would do well to inform us. You must not think to
satisfy the Curiosity of this Age, by referring us to the disputed Practices
of the Patriarchs, which were not founded on any Positive Command, nor yet to
some Instances of Concubinage found among Christians in Constantine's time, or
before; nor to the advancement of the Issue of Concubines now and then to the
Chief Seats of Civil Government; Nay, nor to God's making use of the Children
of Concubinage sometimes to be Instruments of his Glory. None of these are
sufficient to satisfy our Reason, and much less our Conscience, which in
matters of this Importance, expects to be assured by Revelation.

God allowed but one Wife to Adam when the World was to be Peopled at first;
nor any more but one Wife a piece to Noah and his Sons, when it was to be
Peopled a second time. And the reason of this was as we are informed by
Malachi, Because he would have a Holy Seed, which insinuates strongly, That
Concubinage is unholy. Solomon, tho Guiltiest of all Mankind yet durst not
venture to teach the Lawfulness of Concubinage according to your Practice; but
tho he had been polluted thereby himself, gives precepts full of purity to
others, advising Them to rejoice with the Wife of their Youth, and to let her
Breasts satisfy them at all times, Prove. 5. 15. Nor is there throughout the
whole Scripture more Emphatical and Passionate Exhortations to beware of
Strange Women, and more Lively Descriptions of Whoredom, and the danger of it,
then is to be found in the Book of the Proverbs. The Penman having suffered
Shipwreck on those Shelves himself, was therefore the more fit to paint out the
danger of them to others, which he has accordingly done; so far was he from
recommending his own Practice to others, as you do,

It is also certain that our Savior and his Apostles have commanded, that
every Man should have his own Wife, and every Woman her own Husband. Nor is
there the least Vestige of Concubinage to be found allowed in the New
Testament. So that it is exceeding strange that you should stretch your
Commission, and wrest Texts to teach us Concubinage, especially when the Age
has more need of a Curb than a Spur as to that matter.

But above all things in your Book, those Blasphemous Reflections upon the
Conception and Birth of our blessed Savior choke me most. Had you no other way
to defend your own practice but by such profane Allusions? Don't the Scriptures
teach you, That there is no such thing as Marrying and giving in Marriage in
the Kingdom of Heaven? Can there be any Analogy betwixt the blessed Virgins
Immaculate and Wonderful Coneeption, and the Pregnancy of others before
Marriage? Is there any similitude betwixt that which is done by the Omnipotence
of God, without any possible Concurrence of humane Corruption, and the practice
of Concubinage? Really, Sir, this Notion appears to me so very foul and horrid,
that I think there can be no better Advice given to you than that which the
Apostle gave to Simon Magus, Acts 8. 22. Repent therefore of this thy
Wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thy Heart may be forgiven
thee. Had you taken heed unto your self, and to your Doctrine, according to the
Apostle's Advice to Timothy, you would never have been guilty of such a
Practice, nor have advanced any such Principles.

In the next place, Sir, let me ask you, What was it you saw in Concubinage, or
what mighty Profit have you reaped thereby your self, that you do with so much
Zeal recommend it to others? Had you but looked into History, either Sacred or
Profane, you would have found that the Natural Effects of it were, the breach
of the Peace of Families, Quarrels, Murders, and all manner of Uncleanness. It
had its rise from Cains Family, and you know that he was of that wicked one;
Murder and Whoredom had both of ^^em their Original from the same vile Parent,
and Uncleanness and Hatred of true Religion, have always since gone hand in
hand, as you may see abundantly proved in the Book called, Gods Judgment
against Whoring.

As to your own Family, You own that the Children of your first Marriage are
Rebellious and Disobedient, that they have offered Violence to your own Person,
and continue to oppress and slander you, that your first Wife has deserted
you, [as you say] because you disinherited her Eldest Son a Papist, and [as she
says] because you had got your Maid with child beforehand, and you add that
she and her Sons have unjustly possessed themselves of your Inheritance. These,
and such as these, are the Blessed effects of your own Concubinage, and yet you
are so good Natured as to recommend it to others. Let Us suppose now your
children by Mary Tomkins, come also to years of Maturity, will not they have
the same Rancour against Martha Perkins and her Children, as she and hers have
against them? Will not both Broods be enraged to find their respective Mothers
treated as an Harlot, and is not this the Natural Result of your Concubinage.

Then as to the Opinion that the World entertains of you, It cannot be supposed
to be very favorable. The worst of Men, abominate a Lewd Clergyman, and you
own your self that you are Accounted such an one, and let me tell you that your
Defense will be far from healing your Reputation, there is no way left you for
that, but to confess and forsake. You will not find that Men of Sense and
Probity will take your Arguments as unanswerable; and tho some of your Brethren
you say, have given no reply to what you returned as an Answer to their
Reproof, all others will not therefore think themselves obliged to keep silent.
The Cause concerns the welfare of our Souls and Bodies, Posterities and Families
too much, to let you pass without a Public Answer, tho hitherto you have
escaped any Public Censure more than the Presentment of the Grand Jury; The
Author of this Reply, has no Personal Acquaintance with you, nor pick against
you, and if in some Places, you find that he has treated you sharply, it is no
more than what he thought the Cause required. It seemed indeed a sort of a
Paradox to him, that a Man should pretend to so much Conscience of keeping an
Oath to a Temporal Prince, from which his Abdication and the Causes of it,
absolved him in the Opinion both of Church and State, and yet make no scruple
of breaking his Marriage Vow to God and his Wife, by taking another into he^
Bed before his Cause was heard and much less determined. That he himself should
take upon him to be Judge in his own Cause, and yet not allow the Supreme Power
of the Nation to be Judge in theirs against a Prince, whom he owns to have
Acted Tyrannically, by erecting an High Commission Court to supersede the
Proceedings of all others, and to Act in favor of Persons Popishly Inclined.
That Mr. Butler should allow Desertion in his own Wife, to be a sufficient
Cause of Divorce, and of Marrying another, and yet scruple to own that Tyranny
and Desertion, are not sufficient to dissolve the Contract betwixt King and
People, and to justify their setting another upon the Throne; Says, that he is
a very partial Casuist, and gives the Reader very much cause to suspect his
sincerity.

In the next place let me ask you, what mighty blessings they are which the
Turks reap from their Poligamy? You cannot pretend that it has increased their
Offspring, and made them Populous. For daily experience teaches us, that*
their Numbers are now very much exhausted; which is the Natural consequence of
Poligamy at last, tho it may prove otherwise for an Age or two at first. The
reasons of this are obvious. For,

1. Too much Venery consumes a Man's Bones and Flesh, and the Issue of such
Consumptive and Incontinent Parents, will in time enfeeble the whole Nation.

2. A Man's making use of more Wives than one at a time, occasions the Women to
think that they ought to have the same Liberty; How many unhappy Instances does
our own Nation afford of this, that the Man's going astray, has made the Woman
take that same Course, which all Men own to be destructive to Propagation, and
must in time diminish the Number of People?

3. When a Man has such a Numerous Family as he cannot sufficiently provide
for; then all of them come to be neglected, and to want the necessary
conveniences of Life, which shortens their Days, and Breeds Nasty and
Contagious Distempers amongst them, as is evident from the frequent Plagues
amongst the Turks, whereof this is assigned as one Principal Cause, and its
apparent enough amongst the children of common Beggars, and the Poorest Sort,
many of whom Perish by Nasty Diseases, which renders them Loathsome to the Eyes
and Noses of those that walk the Streets.

And if Poligamy were allowed in this Nation according to your Proposal, we
should quickly find that our greatest Estates would be much too small to
maintain the numerous Offspring of Persons of Quality, according to their
Birth; so that they must quickly be reduced to Misery, and the Original
Families suddenly perish. For the Children of one Wife would think they had as
good right to be provided for out of their Father's Estates, as those of
another; Which if they were, it would speedily dismember the largest
Patrimonies that any of our Nobility enjoy and if they were not, it would
occasion endless Quarrels and Murders betwixt Brethren and Sisters. If you had
but looked into our ancient History, and considered what a Miserable, Brutish,
and Defenseless People our Ancestors were, at the time of the Roman Invasion,
when Poligamy was allowed amongst them, you would quickly find what I say to be
true.

You must also know, that the Imperial Laws condemn Poligamy, Lib. 9. Tit. 9.
Leg. 18. Eum qui habet duas Uxores comitatur Infamia, i. e. He is counted
infamous that has two Wives. Dioclesian made a Law likewise against having of
two Wives: Cod. Lib. 5. Tit. 5. Leg. 2 And the Christian Emperors, Theodosius,
Arcadius, and Honorius, would not suffer the Jews that lived in the Roman
Empire, to have many Wives, as may be seen by their Laws, Cod. de judaei. Leg.
So unjustly have you appealed to the Practice of the Ancient Christians, either
Magistrates or Ministers, as Patrons of Concubinage. You know likewise that St.
Hierome condemns Lamech as the first, Qui unam costam distraxit in duas, who
made two Ribs of one.

Nor can it be unknown to you, that Clergymen committing Adultery, were for
ever removed from their Ministry, Distinct. 81. C. 11, 12. That the Ancyran
Synod imposed Seven Years Penance upon the Adulterer; and that the Council of
Neocaesarea Decreed, that if a Minister's Wife fell into Adultery, he should
dismiss her, or else leave his Ministry, and by the Eliberine Council he was
denied for ever the Communion of the Church, if he did not dismiss her, and
that it was likewise Decreed, that the Adulterer should not be suffered to
Marry with the Adultress; yet you own that you had just Cause to suspect your
Wife, and can prove several suspicious Tokens of her Unfaithfulness, p. 18. and
yet never offered to put her away: And she accuses you of committing Adultery
with her Maid before she left you, and yet you took your Maid into her Bed,
without any Application either to Church or State, notwithstanding the
depending Controversies betwixt you and your Wife. These are suspicious Tokens
of an Inordinate Love; for which, had you but made use of the first and second
Remedies prescribed by the Heathens, viz. (...) and (...) Abstinence and Time,
you had been in no danger of the third Remedy (...) an Halter, though it had
been better you should have had a Millstone hanged about your Neck, and been
thrown into the middle of the Sea, than to have given such Offense as you have
done to the Church of God.

Nor can you be ignorant neither, that many satisfying Answers have been given
to your Arguments, from the Polygamy of the Patriarchs and Jews: As 1. That if
there had been any Relaxation of the Law of Monogamy, instituted by God in
Paradise, it would have been by a written Law and Express Scripture. 2. That if
this had been allowed for Procreation, it had been most Necessary to be granted
unto Adam in the beginning of the World, and to Noah in reviving and
re-peopling the World. And 3. That Polygamy, or marrying of many Wives,
rendered Solomon unfit for Procreation, as is evident by his small Posterity.
And, 4. That the Law of Monogamy being revived by Christ and his Apostles, and
brought back to the first Institution, was to take place, not for the Time
past, but for the Time to come, as all other positive Laws of Natione do: So
that though Polygamy might be then tolerated as an Infirmily, for a time, in
those which were newly converted; yet it cannot be so now.

I shall add that if the first institution of Marriage, between one Man an^ one
Woman at a time be once broken, there is no other Limitation to be found in the
Scriptures; whence it follows, that if more be allowed then one, a Man may have
as many as he pleases, So that it will be hard to bring it to a Medium. Some
perhaps will plead for King Charles II's. Number as a Standard, and others it
may be, will be satisfied with no fewer than Solomon, and so our Nobility and
Gentry (if your Project take place) should have Kennels of Concubines, as now
they have of Hounds. And what Inconveniences this might occasion, you may know
by your own Incontinence, those Poor Women must loose their Youth, and Teeming
time, without any hopes of having Nature satisfied; For being another Man's
Property, no body else must meddle with them, and so they must either burn and
languish, or commit Whoredom, nay, perhaps bestiality. Their own Stallion (for
Husband he is not) must speedily be either enfeebled, or neglect some or all of
them, as we find in Ahasuerus, who did not call for his Beautiful and Beloved
Esther in Thirty Days together. And the rest of his Concubines were never
brought to him except he delighted in any of them, and called her by Name, yet
they were shut up and kept close by the Keeper of the Women. So that here was a
Great Number of Females rendered useless for Propagation, besides the Tentations
they were exposed to, of being base with Eunuchs and their own nearest
Relations.

Now, Sir, pray consider whether these and the other Reasons that you will meet
with in this Book, be not much more solid against Concubinage, than any that
you have advanced for it. And if your Conscience be convinced, be not ashamed
to Retract what you have so unadvisedly writ upon this Head. St. Augustine, who
was much a Learneder Divine, and better Man than you can pretend to be, did not
think it unbecoming him to Recant his Errors, and to take shame to himself for
his Youthful Lusts; but Yours can scarcely pass under that denomination, who
went into your Maids Bed, after having Lived Forty Years with a Wife.

Your Loose Book has done a World of Mischief in the Nation; and therefore it
concerns you, as you would have the pardon of God, and his Church for the same,
to make your Confession and Recantation as public as your Crime; Which that
you may do, is the worst that the Author of this Book wishes you.

Concubinage Disproved, etc.
HAD a Pamphlet of this Nature been writ by an avowed Debauchee, or a
Playhouse Beau, it had been no matter of Surprise: But to have any thing
Printed in Defense of Concubinage by a Bachelor of Divinity, and a Minister of
the Church of England, may Justly astonish us. Such a thing might be accounted
Natural, in a Priest of the Church of Rome, the Mother of Harlots, and of the
Abominations of the Earth; but for a Minister of the Reformed Church to do so
gross a thing, is altogether unsufferable.

Time was when the Reverend Mr. Johnson was degraded by those that called
themselves the Church of England, because he maintained the Doctrine of
Self-defence against Tyrants, or others; which is the Instinct of pure Nature:
There Is much more reason for the Governors of the Church to show themselves as
zealous now in censuring Mr. Butler for writing in defense of Concubinage;
which is one of the Effects of depraved Nature: And this I think they are the
more concerned to do, because in his Title Page he endeavors to make way for
his Doctrine by the Authority of his Character.

It is certain this Author can find nothing either in the Articles, Homilies,
or Canons of the Church of England, to defend his Principles or Practice; So
that he cannot plead any Authority from her, whatever he may do from his being
in Orders. Nor is that Venerable Society any thing obliged to him for the
Character which he assumes to himself of being a Minister of the True Church of
England; The Natural Consequence of which Expression is, That somewhere or
other there is a False one. By some Hints in his Pamphlet, as, That he has been
accused of being an Enemy to the Government; and that he is such an one as has
kept his Oaths to his hurt, etc. I presume he may be a Non-Juror; and if that
be the Case, we know what he means by his True Church; and to say the Truth of
them, such Parson, such People, was never more fitly applied. It has been
observed all along since the Revolution, that most of the Whores are in King
James's Interest, nor will it be any great Loss to King William, if this
Advocate of Whoring be thrown into the Scale.

It Is none of my business to enter upon the Merits of the Cause betwixt him and
his Quondam Wife. It Is probable enough, nay, certainly true, if we may believe
his own word, that he and she both are guilty of such Iniquity as ought to be
punished by the Judges; and in recommending his Book to the Care and Enquiry of
the Bench, I Join cordially with the Grand Jury of London, who in this, and
other Presentiments, have behaved themselves as became good Men and Christians.

Before I come to touch upon his Arguments in Defense of Concubinage, I find it
necessary to make some previous Remarks.

The first is, That our Author is not to be taken as an Indifferent Person or
Judge in this Case, because it is his own Practice he defends; and the
Depravation of Mankind is now so very great, that we shall have the most horrid
Crimes, as Murder, Assassination, and what not, defended by the Criminals who
commit them.

The next is, That our Author, according to what is said of other Evil Men and
Seducers, waxes worse and worse; for in the beginning of his Book he seems only
to vindicate his own particular Case, as having a deserting Wife, and being
under an Impossibility of having Justice done him; and therefore he thought it
lawful for him to go in to his Maid; But in the latter end of his Pamphlet he
sets up for a General Concubinage, even during the Life and Co-habitation of
Lawful Wives.

These things being laid down as necessary to give the Reader a precaution as
to what sort of an Author we have to deal with, I come now to consider his
Arguments.

The First he offers is page 9. Viz. That he was guilty of no other, nor
greater Fornication with his Maid, than Abraham, the Father of the Faithful,
was guilty of, when purely for Issues sake, and not of any Lustful
Concupiscence, he went in to Hagar, his Wifes Maid, or in to Keturah, his
Concubine, in the Lifetime of Sarah, his Wife. Now Abraham was not charged
with any thing of Fornication in that Case, but rather was acquitted by God
Almighty, as purely and truly Innocent; but the Case of this Respondent is much
easier than that of Abraham; forasmuch as at the time aforesaid Abraham had a
Wife then in his Bed with him, but this Respondent had no Wise.

ANSWER.

1. Our Author owns that Abraham did not go in to Hagar out of any Lustful
Concupiscence, but purely for Issues sake; but page 9. he says of himself, That
he is one of those of whom our Savior has declared, All men cannot receive
this saying, Matthew. 19. 10. and of whom St. Paul has deelared, 1 Cor. 8. 9. It
is better to marry than to burn; and that he was not Naturally endowed with the
Gift of Continency from Heaven. Whence it follows, That our Author by his own
confession, went in to his Maid out of a Principle of Incontinence, and burning
Lust.

2. This appears yet more plain: Whereas he owns, that Abraham went in to Hagar
purely for Issues sake, he having none at that time; which was not our Author's
Case; for he confesses, page 4. that he had Lawful Issue living by his Wife;
which demonstrates, Mr. Butler himself being Judge, that his Case and Abraham's
were not the same.

3. Abraham took Hagar to Wife by Sarah's Consent; and tho not with the usual
Solemnity of Marriage, yet 'twas undoubtedly in a Public manner; but Mr.
Butler owns, page 18. that his Wife was so far from consenting to his taking of
his Maid Mary Tomkins, that she gives it out as one cause of her deserting him.

4. It does not appear by any thing our Author says, that his Marriage with
Mary Tomkins was any other than Congressus Furtivus, a Westminster Wedding: or
Nuptiae Caninae, as St. Jerome calls it somewhere.

5. Mr. Butler's Instance of Abraham's going in to Keturah, during Sarahs Life,
is false; for it appears that Sarah was then dead, Genesis 25. 1. and Hagar and
her Son Ishmael were sent away before that by God's own appointment, Genesis 21.
So that this Instance makes nothing at all for his purpose. But it looks very
ill in a Divine, as Mr. Butler pretends to be, thus to mis-quote Scripture: It
argues that he is glad of any covering, tho it were but of Fig Leaves to cover
his Nakedness.

6. Mr. Butler cannot but know that P. Martyr, and other Commentators upon the
Place, are of Opinion, that the Occasion of Sarah's giving this Advice, and of
Abraham's accepting of it, was her own Barrenness, the advanced Age of 'em
both, and fear that they should no otherwise have the Promised Seed, to which I
hope our Author will not pretend there is any thing parallel in his Case.

7. Whereas he says that Abraham was not charged with any thing of Fornication
in that Case, but rather was acquitted by God Almighty as truly and purely
Innocent. It were to be wished he would produce some Scripture for his
Assertion; In my Opinion the Displeasure of God against this Practice of the
Patriarch appears very plain, as has been observed by the Author of that useful
Book, newly published, entitled, God's Judgments against Whoring; being an
Essay toward a general History of it for above Five Thousand Years, Viz. That
the Peace of Abraham' s Family was immediately broke, by Hagar' s despising her
Mistress, as soon as she found her self pregnant with the Pro^ised Seed, as she
vainly believed. Upon which Sarah upbraids Abraham, with the (...) she ^er self
was the occasion; (...) also punished for her unlawful Consent; first, by being
severely dealt with by Sarah, and then by being thrust out of the Family, and
exposed to the World, and the cruel Necessity of seeing her Son die of Thirst
as she apprehended; and instead of his being the Promised Seed, she and he were
both Ignominously thrust out from being Partakers of the Inheritance with Isaac.

8. Polygamy was at that time common in the World, so that Abraham's Practice
administered no occasion of Scandal, whereas our Author well knew that his
Concubinage with Mary Tomkins would unavoidably give Offense, upon which
Consideration alone, he ought to have forborne it, if he had designed to walk
according to the Apostolical Rule, who had rather never eat Flesh while he
lived, tho a thing lawful in it self, than offend a weak Brother.

9. His Argument to prove the Lawfulness of Abraham's Practice, because God did
not charge him with any thing of Fornication, is altogether inconcludent; for
in the first place it is not a sufficient Ground for us positively to say that
God did not reprove him for it, because there is nothing of any such Reproof
mentioned in the Scripture. Moses, the inspired Penman, is here giving us an
Historical Account of Matter of Fact, and does not enter upon the Debate of the
Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of the thing. In the next place Mr. Butler may as
well argue from the Practice of Jacob, which we find no where reproved by God
that it is lawful for a Man to marry two Sisters at one time, whereas all
Divines allow, that this is forbidden, both by the Light of Nature and
Revelation.

10. To answer once for all, Mr. Butler's Arguments from the Old Testament for
Poligamy or Concubinage. He cannot but know,

1. That Marriage was instituted at first by God, betwixt one Man and one
Woman; so that to plead for a Necessity of more Husbands or Wives than one at a
time, is in effect to arraign the Wisdom of the first Institutor, the All-wise
God.

2. That when the old World was destroyed, and chiefly for Uncleanness amongst
other Sins as appears by Genesis 6. 2. God appointed Noah and his three Sons, to
take only one Wife each into the Ark with them, so that here God commanded the
peopling of the World a second time by Marriage betwixt one Man and one Woman,
without allowing Polygamy or Concubinage.

3. That the Text, Leviticus 18. 18. Neither shall thou take a Wife to her
Sister to vex her, to uncover her Nakedness, besides the other in her Life
time. The best Divines do generally understand it to be meant of having two
Wives together, first, because the Phrase is so used elsewhere, as Ezekiel. 1. 9.
the Wings of the Beasts are said to touch a Woman to her Sister that is meet
together, or touch one another; and so Exodus 26. 3. the five Curtains shall be
coupled, the Woman to her Sister, that is, together. In the next place, because
the Marriage of the Sister is by Analogy forbidden before v. 16. Thou shall not
uncover the Nakedness of thy Brothers Wife, it is thy Brothers Nakedness.
Whence by Parity of Reason it was equally unlawful to uncover the Sisters
Nakedness; so that this being provided for before, there was no need of
repeating it here; thirdly, the Reason subjoined, viz. to vex her, makes
against the Joint Marriage of any other, as well as of the Sister; for the
common Experience of all Ages teaches, that there was always Jealousy and
Contention betwixt Cowives, as in the Instance of Sarah and Hagar, just now
mentioned; and Annah and Penninah, the Wives of Elkanah, 1 Samuel 1. tho they
were not Sisters: And Mr. Butler can prove it from his own Experience, that
Martha Perkins and Mary Tomkins, his two Wives, do vex one another, tho they be
not Sisters.

4. As to his Instances of David and Solomon, and other Kings, who abounded in
Wives and Concubines, they acted therein expressly contrary to the Law in that
case, Deuteronomy. 17. 16. where it is said of the King, Neither shall he multiply
Wives to himself. The Holy Ghost foreseeing that they who abound in Riches and
Power, and especially Princes are more apt to exceed that way than others.

5. Mr. Butler has no doubt read, that Lorinus and others are of Opinion, That
the Polygamy of the Fathers was dispensed with per inspirationem internam by a
secret Dispensation, which cannot, if it were true, justify Concubinage under
the New Testament, from which nothing can be pleaded by any such Dispensation.

6. He must needs also know that it is the common Opinion of Protestant
Divines, that it was not probable that God would dispense with a Public Law by
a Private Dispensation, and therefore, tho he winked at those times of
Ignorance, he gave no Allowance to any such Practice, as is plain from Malachi
2. 14. 15, 16. Where the Prophet tells the Children of Israel, That the Lord
regarded not their Offering, because he had been Witness between thee and the
Wife of thy youth, against whom thou have dealt treacherously, yet is she thy
Companion, and the Wife of thy Covenant: And v. 15. he expostulates with them
from the first Institution of Marriage thus: And did he make one? yet had he
the residue of the Spirit, and wherefore one? because he sought a Godly Seed;
therefore take heed to your Spirit, and let none deal treacherously against the
Wife of his Youth; -- and verse 16. he adds, For the Lord God of Israel says
that he hates putting away. This Prophet lived as some think in the time of
Artaxerxes, or Darius Longimanus; but however that is, this is plain, that as
in the beginning of the Old Testament, we have an Account that God at first
instituted Marriage betwixt one Man and one Woman; so by this Prophet, who
shuts up the Canon of the Old Testament, he expostulates with his People, for
receding from the Primary Institution, which enervates all the Arguments that
Mr. Butler has brought from thence, in Defense of Concubinage:

But this is not the only Case, wherein our Author shows himself to be a loose
Casuist; for Page 9. he tells us, That Incontinency in it self is no Sin,
unless it be expressed in unlawful uses; whereas the Apostie, 2 Timothy 3. 3.
reckons Incontinent Men amongst Trucebreakers, False Accusers, Despisers of
those that are Good, and such others as contribute to make up the Perilous
Times, that are to come in the last days. Mr. Pool, in his Critics on 1 Cor.
7. 5. quotes Tremellius, Piscator, Hammond, and Zegerus, as translating the
word, rendered Incontinence (by our Translators) Concupiscence of the Flesh, and
others of 'em render it Intemperance, which last Word is never taken but in an
ill Sense. Tremellius from the Syriak translates it Impotentia, which signifies
an unruly raging Lust which is certainly sinful; and such Mr. Butler's
Incontinence appears to have been, when he could not be without a Woman above a
Year; one would have thought that a Divine, who enjoins Fasting and Prayer to
others, should rather have tried that Experiment upon himself, than have run
the hazard of such Inconveniences, as the Titillation of the Flesh, has already
brought upon him. The Apostle tells us, They that are Christ's, crucify the
Flesh with its Lusts and Affections, Gal. 5. 24. and in 1 Cor. 9. 17. that he
kept his Body under, and brought it into Subjection, lest when he preached to
others, he himself should be a Castaway; but it seems Mr. Butler chose rather
to make provision for the Flesh to fullsil the Lusts thereof. If he could not
have his Wife he would have his Maid; and is not satisfied to break the
Commandments himself, but teaches others also to do so; and therefore deserves
to be called the Least in the Kingdom of Heaven, according to our Savior's
threatening, Matthew. 5. 19. and I doubt not but he knows what is meant thereby;
viz. That he shall be accounted unworthy to be reckoned among the Saints here
or hereafter, if he don't break off from his sins by Repentance. Our Savior,
Matthew. 5. 28. tells us, That they who Look on a Woman so as to Lust after her,
are guilty of Adultery. And the Apostle Peter tells us of those that have Eyes
full of Adultery, 2 Pet. 2. 14. Which demonstrate clearly enough, that
Incontinency, the Fountain whence Lustful Looks proceed, is sinful in it self.
Indeed the Natural Appetite of Generation, and multiplying our Species
according to the Command of God, is not sinful in it self, so long as it is
contained within due bounds; but when once it breaks over that, then it becomes
Incontinence, and by consequence sinful. The Original Word, (...), translated
Incontinent, denotes such, qui nec in bono nec in malo sibi constant, they can
keep no bounds, but will either be overmuch Righteous or overmuch Wicked: So
that it is plain, Incontinence, which Mr. Butler will have to be no sin, implies
the Height of Passion.

But it seems he thought himself concerned, in point of Reputation, to
maintain, that Incontinence was no sin, because he owns himself to be guilty of
it, page 9. Yet if he had but adverted to the saying of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.
9. which he quotes in the same place, viz, They who cannot contain, let them
marry; for it is better to marry than to burn; he might easily have perceived
that Incontinence and burning are Synonymous Terms; for there burning is
opposed to Continency; the Holy Ghost telling us plainly, that they who cannot
contain must burn, if they do not marry, and therefore provides Marriage as a
proper Remedy against Incontinency; which if it were not a Distemper, why
should there be any Remedy provided against it.

Here also I think fit to take notice of our Author's distorted Notion of
Fornication, whereof he says, page 8. A man may be guilty by Excess of Carnal
Usage with his own Wife. That this Notion of Fornication is very gross and
absurd, will appear from this one thing, that if a Man may be guilty of
Fornication with his own Wife. then he may divorce her when he pleases for his
own Crime; for our Savior allows a man to put away his Wife in case of
Fornication, without any Exception, whether it be with her Husband, or any
other man, Matthew. 5. 32. So that instead of a man's being guilty of Fornication
with his own Wife, our Author should have said, of Excess in the use of the
Marriage Bed; for tho Fornication is sometimes used in Scripture to denote
Uncleanness in general: yet according to the common acceptance of the word, it
denotes Uncleanness betwixt persons, that are not married to one another, as
was usually practiced in those Fornices, or Vaults under ground, at Rome and
else where; whence the word Fornication was derived. Of those Vaults Socrates,
Lib. 5. cap. 18. gives us a particular account; viz. That they were
Victualling-houses under ground, wherein the Romans prostituted Whores, until
the Emperor Theodosius ordered them to be pulled down.

I come next to Mr. Butler's Case, as represented by himself, page 9, etc. Viz.
That his Wife denied him the use of her Marriage bed obstinately (tho she was
often entreated to the contrary) for above a Twelvemonth; and therefore he went
in to his Maid. The Necessity he pretends he lay under was this, In the first
place, he had not the Gift of Continency; then it was not convenient for him to
marry another without a Lawful License from a Lawful Authority, because of a
Statute Law in force: That in the time of this desertion, Popery had the
Supreme Seat: That there were high Commissioners superceeding all other Courts
in Power, and Acting in favor of Persons Popishly inclined, and that his Wife
having deserted him, because of his disinheriting his Eldest Son for turning
Papist; No sentence could be expected from them, according to the Justice of
Holy writ, because Papists hold Marriage indissolvable, as being one of their
seven Sacraments without a dispensation from the Pope. Thus Mr. Butler States
his own Case.

In the next place, I shall give you hi^ Wifes State of the Case, as
represented in her Libel before the Honorable Court of Arches, and quoted by
himself, p. 6. Viz. That about Ten Years since, John Butler being unmindful of
his Conjugal Vow committed, the foul Crime of Adultery, with his Servant Maid
Mary Tomkins; and it being taken Notice of, that she was with Child by him, he
and she went into Holland, where they lived Incontinently for about two Years,
and there she brought forth a Bastard called Mary to the said John Butler, and
p. 35. That they returned to England, and Live together in an Incontinent
manner at Hammersmith, and the said Mary has had four other base born
Children, begotten by the said John Butler, who has Lately turned his Wife
Mary Butler out of Doors, and left her destitute of necessaries, etc.

Now any Man may see that there is a vast difference in the Cases, as they are
Stated by Mr. Butler and his Wife.

It is also proper to observe here, that his Incontinence with Mary Tomkins is
not the only Uncleanness which our Author stands charged with; for page 8. he
owns, That his said Wife, and his two ungracious Sons, have filled the Country
with many slanders and suspicious Reports, of matters said or done by him,
above Twenty or Thirty Years since; and Answers thus, Concerning what
kindnesses this Respondent might have showed to particular Persons more then
Ordinary, he does solemnly protest, that he never had Carnal Knowledge of any
such Woman, for whose sake he was aspersed.

Having thus laid down their mutual Accusations against one another, I shall
first make some Remarks upon 'em, and then proceed to consider Mr. Butlers
defense.

It Is plain, that Mr. Butler owns himself to be Incontinent, and I think it
will appear that he was so, to a scandalous excess from the Matter of Fact, as
laid down by himself. For 1. He says, that he was deserted by a Wife, whom p.
3. he owns, That he did heartily Love, which one would think should have been
sufficient of it self, to have restrained his Concupiscence for above one year
at least, seeing most modest Men do in ordinary Cases, think themselves obliged
in Decency to stay so long unmarried after the Death of a Wife whom they Loved.
Much more should an honest Man abstain for the sake of a beloved Wife still
alive.

2. He owns that he had two ungracious Sons, the Eldest of whom he disinherited
because of his turning Papist; this methinks to a Minister of the Gospel,
should have been a Cause of Fasting and Prayer, and Mortifying of the Flesh. To
be abandoned by a Loving Wife, afflicted by two ungracious Sons at the same
time, and one of them turned Idolater, and running headlong to Damnation too:
Any thing of a Christian would have seen the Hand of God, in all this, humbled
themselves before him, afflicted their Souls by secret Fasting and Prayer, and
have desired the Prayers of the Church, and their particular Christian Friends,
in such a pungent Affliction.

If in such a Case the Devil had begun to tempt Mr. Butler, for his
Incontinency, Why did he not bring his Body under Subjection by Fasting,
Watching and Prayer, according to the Practice of the Apostle; who thereby got
rid of that Thorn in the Flesh mentioned, 2 Cor. 1^. 7. Which Mr. Butler knows
many Commentators, and those, none of the least, Note, understand to have been
Pruritus Carnis, the Tickling of the Flesh, as Tremellius renders it from the
Syriack. But it seems, our Author was in this Respect like the Pharisees of
Old, who would bind heavy burdens upon other Men's backs but would not touch
them themselves with one of their Fingers. Mr. Butler could not but forsee that
this Practice of going in to his Maid, which is unpresidented in this Nation,
would administer cause of Scandal; and this it became one of his Character to
avoid above all Men; If his Maids Beauty tempted him, it was in his Power to
have rid himself of that Tentation: But to be plain with him, his Case has all
the suspicious Circumstances Imaginable, to make the World believe that he was
Acted by Downright Lust in this matter, and being once engaged, now he would
defend it, Answerable to the Practice of that Infamous German Enthusiast, John
of Leyden, who being observed to go into his Maids bed, did thereupon maintain
the Doctrine of Poligamy; and the like unclean Practice engaged the false
Prophet Mahomet, in the Defense of the like unclean Doctrine.

3. Mr. Butler owns, That his Wife and Sons accuse him of former Incontinency;
and the Truth on it is, his Practice and Principles, both being considered,
there is no great Reason to doubt, but their Accusation might be true. If he
owns his Incontinency now when Aged, It Is probable he was more so Twenty Years
ago: If the desertion of a beloved Wife, the Rebellion and Apostasy of his
Sons, the Common danger which all Men at that time thought impending over the
Church, whereof he was a Minister, the Dignity of his Function, and the Scandal
of the World could not keep him from his Maids Bed Ten Years ago, What can be
thought sufficient to have restrained him from such like Practices Twenty Years
ago?

4. If there was no such unlawful Dalliance betwixt Mr. Butler and his Maid,
while his Wife Cohabited with him, It Is much that his Maid was so soon brought
over to receive another Woman's Husband into her Bed, and indeed one would think
that Mr. Butler at that time, should have had so much trouble upon him on the
Account of his Wife and Children, etc. As above, that he should have had little
Inclination or leisure for a New Courtship, if the Familiarity had not been
Contracted before. So much for the Causes to suspect, that Mr. Butler was
guilty of Scandalous Incontinence in this matter.

I come now to consider the pretended Necessity he says he lay under. Durum
telum Necessitas, Necessity is indeed an Irresistible Weapon, but many times we
make a Necessity to our selves when God makes none, and such, I am afraid Mr.
Butlers Necessity will be found.

His Necessity proceeded merely from his Incontinence as he owns himself, but
we hear nothing either of Spiritual or Temporal means used by him to remove
this Incontinence; Had he fasted, watched, prayed, removed his Maid out of his
sight, taken the advice of Physicians, opened a Vein frequently, Bathed in cold
Water often, and been assiduous in the Work of his Calling as a Minister, and
yet found his Incontinence too hard for him after all, there would have been
some justifiable Pretense for his Necessity, but we find nothing of this done,
and therefore the Necessity is of his own making.

If Mr. Butler had found his Pruritus Carnis or Incontinence unconquerable,
after the use of these, or such like Means as abovementioned, had it not been
better for him to have reconciled his Wife to him, by restoring his Popish Son
to the Right of Inheritance, which he pretends to be the cause of her deserting
him, then to take his Maid into his Bed; The former he knows, no Body would
have blamed as Criminal, whereas he could not but know, that the latter would
be accounted Scandalous.

Or if this had not been Practicable, why did not he sue for a Divorce from his
Wife upon those just suspicions of Incontinence, he charges her with by turns,
p. 4. of his Epistle to the Reader? etc. And likewise upon the Account of her
Desertion which he so much insists upon? Had he done this in a Legal manner,
and found all the Doors of ordinary Justice shut against him, then he might
have had recourse to extraordinary Methods; But we don't find that he did any
thing like it, so that his excuse of Poperies being possessed of the Supreme
Seat, and that the High Commissioners superseded all other Courts, and Acted in
favor of Persons Popishly inclined, is a mere Subterfuge, to cheat his own
Conscience, and gull the World. This I am sure he will find a Dilemma, that had
he endeavored to reconcile his Wife, by restoring his Popish Son to his Right
of Inheritance, he would have herein been favored by the Court, as he owns
himself, and that he was willing to have retained his Wife, if she had been
willing to have staid with him; he has declared it, when he says that he
solicited her to his Bed for above a Twelvemonth. But we don't so much as find
that he made any Application to the Ordinary Courts in that Case, so that he
Arraigns their Justice without having made Trial of it. It Is well enough known
to the World that the then Archbishop of Canterbury, and several other Bishops,
did then oppose the Proceedings of the Court in Ecclesiastical Matters, such as
the publishing of the Proclamation for Liberty of Conscience to Dissenters, and
turning out the Fellows of Colleges: So that Mr. Butler had no Reason to
decline Application to the Court of Arches for Remedy in his Case; nor is there
any Reason to think but the High Commission Court, wherein there were three
Bishops of the Church of England, might have done him Justice, if he had
applied to them in a Case so plain, as he alleges his to have been.

But supposing that both those Courts had been overruled by the Influence of
Father Peter's, and others, who then governed at Whitehall, what hindered Mr.
Butler from taking some of his Brethren of the Clergy, or other Credible
Witnesses with him, Finally, to exhort his Wife, and to declare to her, that if
she did not return to her Duty, he would look upon their Marriage as Dissolved,
and provide for himself accordingly. If she had, after all this, continued
Obstinate, why might not Mr. Butler have taken his Maid with him, and before
his Brethren of the Ministry, or some Justices of the Peace, declared, that his
Wife had deserted him, without any Lawful Cause, and would not return to her
Duty; that he had applied to all the Ordinary Courts of Justice, but could have
no Remedy; and therefore being under a Necessity, either of burning, or taking
another Woman into his Bed, he was resolved to live with his Maid, as Man and
Wife? Had Mr. Butler done so, and made it appear to the World, that his Wife
had no just Cause to desert him, there are few Casuists so Rigid, as to have
condemned him, either as a Concubinary or Adulterer; every Body would have
excused the want of due Formalities in such a Case, and his Practice would have
given no just Scandal to others, no more than did that of the Marquis of Vicum,
which we shall have occasion to touch upon by and by. Mr. Butler owns that his
Marriage with his Wife was not altogether formal, and yet he made no Scruple to
take her to his Bed; and therefore we have no Reason to think that he should
have scrupled the doing of this as abovesaid, had all things been fair and
honest; and if he had dreaded the anger of the Government, he might have
retired to Holland as he did afterward. But instead of this, if we may believe
his Wife, as quoted by himself, p: 18. she accuses him of saying, That he had
another Woman with Child, for which she relinquished him, and offers to prove
his having said so.

These Circumstances are so scandalous, that it plainly appears the Matter
ought to have been Examined by Judges Competent: but it would seem Mr. Butler,
and his Maid were in too much haste for that, or indeed to stay in the Kingdom,
seeing they went over to Holland, where she brought him forth a Daughter, as he
owns himself.

I come next to consider Mr. Butler's Arguments for Defense of his Practice: 1.
He quotes 1 Cor. 7. 15. where the Apostle says, But if the unbelieving depart,
let him depart: A brother or a sister is not in bondage in such Cases. In this
Case therefore, says Mr. Butler, a man's own Conscience was a good Judge, at
least until contrary matters could be proved before ae Competent Judge, and the
Testimony of Holy Writ was a sufficient Law for Conscience to be guided by, and
this without the assistance of being backed by Authority in a Case where an
Authoritative sentence could not be had, as it was in St. Paul's time: Wherein
the Magistracy being altogether Paganish, no such sentence was required as
needful; and as in the Marquess of Vicums Case, wherein the supreme Authority
being Popish, he married again without such a sentence. It Is true indeed, he
had a Sentence by Authority from the Syndick of Geneva, but that was as much as
just nothing, for first, that Syndick had no Authority to summon his Wife to
appear at their Court, she being not under their Jurisdiction, and secondly,
being a lay Power set up of their own accord without Power from God, or his
Word, had not so much Power as the Conscience of the Marquess himself.

To this I Answer. 1. That Mr. Butlers Case and that put by the Apostle are not
alike; the Apostle speaks of an Unbelievers deserting a Believer out of an
hatred to Religion; but Mr. Butlers Wife was of the same Religion with himself,
so that he ought to have been backed with the Authority of the Church, whereof
they were both Members before he had gone into his Maids Bed. This is the
Opinion of Calvin and Sclaterus upon the place who say, Lex Christi de
Christianae disciplinae Consortibus agit, quos propius Vinculum connectit, and
apud quos si quod aberratum est, facilis est sanatio per Ecclesiae
Authoritatem, i. e. The Law of Christ speaks of those who are partakers of the
Christian Discipline, and owned by a nearer Tie, and who if they commit any
Error, the cure is easy by the Authority of the Church; but we don't find that
Mr. Butler sought any such Remedy, but supinely neglected it under a pretense
it could not be had. (2.) Mr. Butlers Case differs also in this, That we had
Christian Magistrates, to whom he might have appealed in this Case, which it
does not appear he did. Nor will it follow, that because the Apostle says the
Believer was at Liberty in Case of the unbelievers deserting, that therefore
they were at liberty to take another into their Bed, without acquainting both
the Church and the Magistrate with it; It was a General Rule to all Christians,
to give no Offense neither to Jew nor Gentile, nor to the Church of God, and
therefore it is not supposeable, that Christians were referred to the dictates
of their own Private Conscience in the Case of Marriage after desertion, tho
they might rest secure, and without any further trouble upon the Testimony of a
good Conscience, as to the cause of desertion, viz. That it was from an hatred
to their Religion, but Mr. Butler knows that his Wife accuses him of another
Cause, Viz. The defiling of her Bed.

Then as to the Marquis of Vicums Case, it is also quite different; every one
that knows the Story of the Famous Galeacius Caracciolus, knows that he fled
out of Italy upon the Account of his Religion; that his Lady would neither
follow him, nor admit him to her Bed, when by the Intercession of his Great
Friends he procured leave to return for a time, her Priests having prevailed
with her to the contrary, so that he was forced to return without her, and
lived several Years unmarried and unblameable at Geneva, without getting into
any Woman's Bed in little more than a Years time, and at last by the consent,
not only of the Church of Geneva, but of other Protestant Churches, and the
approbation of the Supreme Government where he lived, he married a Godly Woman
not in a private manner, but in the View of the World; for it is only the deeds
of darkness that are afraid of the Light. As to Mr. Butlers falling foul upon
the Government of Geneva, as having no Power from God and his Word, he only
discovers that he is as bad a Politician as a Divine, and a Casuist of no
Value. That little Commonwealth had always, since any thing was known of the
History of those Parts, a Supreme Government of her own, sometimes by a Count,
and sometimes under the Protection of the Emperor, and when the Empire was
Distracted by Intestine Wars, she had Recourse to her own Bishops who were at
that time Powerful, and their Bishops being embroiled afterward with the
Counts of Savoy, she was forced to struggle with the succeeding Dukes of Savoy
for her liberty, and by Allying her self with some of the Swiss Cantons,
brought the said Dukes to Renounce their Pretensions and at last by the
Reformation got Rid of the Yoke of her Bishops who opposed it; since which time
the Sovereign Authority remains in her Magistrates and Senate, so that Mr.
Butlers Reflection upon that Government, as wanting Power to Authorize the
Marriage of the Marquis of Vicum, then their Subject, savours as much of the
exploded Doctrine of Nonresistance, as his getting into his Maid's Bed savours
of Incontinence; and therefore what the Marquis of Vicum did in a Public
Manner, with the Consent of all the Protestant Churches in those Parts, and by
the Authority of that which was, and is the Supreme Government, where he lived,
is no Defense for Mr. Butler's Practice without the Knowledge or Consent of
Church or State, or taking the Advice of his Brethren, the Clergy of his
Diocese. It is also to be observed, that Mr. Butler discovers a very low
Opinion of the Church, whereof he pretends to be a Minister, when he thought
they would not have done him Justice, or at least declared that he had Justice
on his side, had his Case appeared so clear to them, as he alleges it is; but
it is rather to be supposed that he distrusted his Cause, and therefore durst
not Appeal to them.

I come next to consider his Quotations from Divines, etc. which may serve to
amuse one at first View, but can never justify him in the Thoughts of a
Judicious Reader, they being all of them wrested, or nothing to his Purpose, or
else directly against him.

The first he quotes is Diodati on 1 Cor. 7. 15. but that Author is against
him, sor he speaks of a convenient time allowed, and all possible and
reasonable Remedies used to reduce the Unbelieving Deserter, before the
Marriage can be dissolved; but Mrs. Butler was no Unbeliever, nor did Mr.
Butler use all possible and reasonable Remedies to reduce her; neither is the
Case of her Desertion uncontrovertible; she alleges that she has Divorced her
self, because of Mr. Butler's Adultery.

The next is Wollebius, Compend. Theolog. Cap. 11. Fol. 245. who only, Says
that Adultery and malicious Desertion make a Divorce; but not one word of the
Deserted Persons taking another Woman, without proving the Desertion, or asking
the Consent of Church and State.

The third is Amandus Polanus, de Divortio, for which he assigns only two
Causes, Viz. Adultery, and Unjust Desertion; but Mrs. Butler says she had just
Cause. The last part of this Quotation is directly against Mr. Butler, viz. Sed
si persona accusans honest vixit and petit ferri sententiam pronuncietur hoc
modo cum persona quae deliquit suo Scelere, dissolverit Conjugium, Jude^
Authoritate Evangelii personam Innocentem Pronunciat esse Liberam. i. e. But if
the Complainant or Accuser have lived honestly, and demands Jugdment, let it be
pronounced in this manner; seeing the offending Person has dissolved the
Marriage by her own Crime, the Judge, by the Authority of the Gospel,
pronounces the Innocent Person to be free, and expressly grants him Liberty,
piously to Contract another Marriage, according to his own Conscience. Now it is
plain that Mr. Butler is accused by his Wife of living dishonestly; so that
this Matter ought to have been cleared, before the Judge could pronounce any
such Sentence.

In the next place it is plain, that Amandus Polanus is of Opinion, That such a
thing ought to be Judicially done, and in open Court, whereas there was no such
Judgment demanded, nor Process made by Mr. Butler; so that here is his own
Evidence turned upon him.

His Quotations from Musculus upon the 5th. of Matthew, where he assigns
Adultery and Desertion, as the Causes of Divorce, are nothing to his Purpose;
he does not say that the Matter ought not to be legally determined, or that the
deserted Person may Marry again without such Determination.

The passage of Ambrose on 1 Cor. 7. 5. is to the same purpose, and favors him
not one whit.

The like, that of Bucanus, Institut. Theologiae. Nor is he any thing more
favored by that Author, Locus 13. Sect. 29. where he says in answer to the
Question, Quid si Magistratus officium Negligat. What if the Magistrate neglect
his Duty? Valeat preceptum Apostolicum ad Titum 3. 10. Hereticum hominem, Ergo
and Atheum, Apostatum and Blasphemum, post una^ and Alteram correctionem
devita:] That is, let the Apostles command to Titus take place, Cap. 5. 10. A
Man that is an Heretic, Apostate, or Atheist, after the first and second
Admonition, reject or avoid; which Mr. Butler wickedly and falsely translates,
That if the Magistrate neglect his Office, the Innocent Party is free to Marry
an Innocent Woman, without his Sentence, whereas Bucanus says only, That the
Believer may as freely reject the deserting Unbeliever in such a Case, as a
Chrian ought to do an Heretic; but suppose it were otherwise, he is still
against Mr. Butler, in that he supposes Application ought to be made to the
Magistrate, who cannot properly be said to neglect what is never brought before
him, as it is evident Mr. Butler never did; for his Wife, and not he, is the
Complainant.

His other Quotations are all to the same Purpose, not one of them speaks one
word of allowing the Deserted Person to marry again, without Application made
to a Competent Judge, which were, indeed, to subvert all Order and Government;
for tho the Case be plain by the Law of God and Man, that a Murderer ought to
be put to Death, and That an Adulterer may be divorced, and the Innocent Party
lawfully marry again; yet no Man in his right Wit did ever allow, that a
private Man, on his own Authority, should put a Murderer to Death, or Divorce
his Wife, and marry another; for all the Laws of God and Men, tho never so
positive require a Legal and Public Execution and due Enquiry into the Matter
of Fact, so that what Mr. Butler advances, p. 17. That because the Text says,
If she will depart let her go, there needs no sentence of the Magistrate in the
Case, will conclude as much against the need of the Magistrates sentence in
Case of Murder, because the Text says, Whosoever sheds Man's blood, by Man shall
his blood be shed; And the like in all other Crimes. Otherwise according to
this Principle, every Man may be Judge, Jury, and Executioner in his own Case,
which would immediately destroy all Humane Society; such are the profound
Politics of our Concubinary Casuist, being directly contrary to the procedure
of the Almighty himself, who tho our first Parents were convicted by his
Omniscience and their our Conscience, yet He did not proceed to sentence
against them, till the Matter was proved by their own Confession.

I come next to consider what our Author offers in defense of that he calls, A
Lawful Concubinage in a Case of a necessity, wherein Lawful Marriage
conveniently or possibly cannot be obtained.

If I had time to examine his Proposition Narrowly, it were no hard matter to
prove it a Rhapsody of Contradictions or downright Bulls; for there can be no
such thing as a Lawful Concubinage, nor any case almost wherein Lawful arriage
is not possible to be obtained; but I pass that at present, and come to his
instance, by which he endeavors to make Good this Monstrous Doctrine. The
first is, that of himself, and his first Wife, Martha Perkins, who, p. 21. he
says, lived almost Forty Years together in Concubinage. Now to Live in
Concubinage with a Wife is at best but an Irish sort of English; but we shall
let that alone and come to his Reason, which is, because they were not Married
directly according to the Custom of the Church of England, the Minister having
made some blunders and mistakes; And yet p. 4. he owned that she was his Lawful
Wife, so that here she is both a Lawful Wife, and a Concubine at the same time:
Then a little lower, because he would be sure to have Company enough, he says,
That all those Thousands of Marriages that were made from the Rupture betwixt
King Charles I. and his Parliament, to the time of Charles II's. Restoration,
by Justices, Quakers, etc. Were all of them but mere Concubinage, and that
those Marriages were as much illegal as those, without any Ceremony at all,
till they were all made good by the Act of Indemnity of the 12th Car. 2. But
then at the Foot of the Page he spoils all again, by saying, That according to
the Holy Writ, there is no more Ceremony required, but consent on both Parts,
before Witness sufficient, and bedding together, according to Exodus 12. 26. I
suppose he would have said, Deuteronomy: 22. 16.) Without any presence necessarily
required of either Magistrate or Priest. And so now he deals alike, both with
his Brethren the Priests and the Justices of Peace, for there was neither to
one nor to other present to see our Author go to Bed with his Maid, after Forty
Years Concubinage with his Wife; So that he has spent a great deal of pains to
prove that which no body ever doubted, that these Marriages may be good in the
sight of God, that are not such according to the Laws of some Kings and
Countries. But the mystery lies in the Application and Consequence, Viz. That
his Marriage, or rather Concubinage with his Maid, is Lawful in the sight of
God, tho not according to the Laws of the Land. But now I must beg his leave to
show him the difference of the Case. At that time there was a Law, or at least
a Power enjoining Marriages by Justices, etc. And forbidding Marriage according
to the Book of Common Prayer, on pain of Forty Shillings for each offense, as
he says, p. 2. and Mr. Butler is so good a Minister of the True Church of
England, that he asserts those Marriages by Justices may be good, setting aside
the Statutes and Laws of this Realm. But there was no Power nor Law allowing
Mr. Butler, or any Man to go to his Maids Bed and live with her as his Wife;
(his other Wife being still alive) without application either to Magistracy or
Ministry, or the Presence of any Witnesses for ought that appears. And because
I perceive he is much for Clandestine Marriages, I must refer him to his dearly
beloved Old Testament, where he will find Ruth, Chap. 4. Ver. 9. That Boaz's
Marriage with Ruth was solemnized in the Presence of the Elders; who, together
with the People, prayed for a Blessing upon 'em; and Deuteronomy. 22. 16. he will also
find that the Trial of the Brides Virginity was to be made, by producing the
Tokens of it before the Elders, which shows, that the Old Testament Marriages
were Public, and that the Solemnization and Dissolution of them depended on
the Authority of the Magistrate, whereas Mr. Butler consulted them in neither
Case.

Our Author in the next place, p. 22. alleges that God did plainly allow of a
Lawful Concubinage, or Additional Wives for the Bed, for Issues sake; the Issue
whereof are no where termed Bastards, either in Old or New Testament, but upon
all Occasions in case of Heirs Male, wanting by the proper Wife, the Sons of
Concubinage became Heirs; thus Ishmael, Son of Abraham, by his Maidservant,
should have been Heir, if Isaac had not been born of Sarah, Genesis 17. 18. And
thus Rehoboam, Son of Solomon, by Naamah, a mere Concubine, was his Heir unto
his Throne, for that he had no Son by hi^ proper Wife; yea, tho Daughters he
had several. And thus Jepthah, Son of Gilead, by a Stranger, or a mere
Concubine, became the Prince of the People before any of his Brethren, born of
the lawful Wife, because of his Abilities above any of 'em; Judges 11. 2. 11.
which had he been a Bastard, could not have been; For a Bastard might not enter
into any Office in the Church, to become so much as a Constable or Church
warden, much less a King or a Judge, Deuteronomy. 23. 2. but was to remain a Slave,
equal to the Gibeonites, a Hewer of Wood, and a Drawer of Water: And at this
rate none were esteemed Bastards, but Children, begotten in Adultery or
Whoredom, of another Man's Wife, or of a Common Whore, and such could not
inherit. Incest was a foul Sin, and yet the Children, born of Incest, did
inherit, and were not reputed Bastards; as Pharez, Son of Judah, by his Son's
Widow, and Janna, Son of Joseph Arses, by his Niece; Both which were Heirs in
the Genealogy of our Savior, and therefore no Bastards: But the Pope made
Bastards of such, which by God's Laws are reputed well-born; and from the Pope
our Statute-Laws still keep up the Practice, declaring all Children to be
Bastards which are born out of Marriage; so as Children begot out of Marriage,
was a Sin against the King's Laws and Statutes, and yet no Sin against God's
Law. These are our Author's own Words, because I would give him fair Play, and
let his Arguments appear in their native Beauty and Strength.

I answer, Had God allowed of Additional Wives for Issue sake, we should have
it somewhere mentioned in Holy Writ, and let our Author produce a Text for it
if he can. If God allowed Additional Wives, how came it that he made but one
for Adam, and that one too, we have God's own Word for it was a Meet-help, Genesis
18. 29. which could not be true, if more Wives than one were necessary for one
Man. The Prophet Malachi, c. 2. 15. when he Expostulates with the People of
Israel, for dealing treacherously with the Wife of their Youth, and reproves
them for their Divorces, argues in the same manner, viz. Did he not make one,
yet had he the Residue of the Spirit, and wherefore one? That he might seek a
Godly Seed, therefore take heed to your Spirit, and let none deal treacherously
against the Wife of his Youth; which the Critics Paraphrase or Interpret thus:
Annon unam duntaxat Conjugem Adamo fecit, non plures uxores uni viro. Revocat
hic Judaeos ad Puram conjugii Naturam and primam Institutionem: And again,
Quamvis plures animas creare possit quas inderet pluribus Mulieribus Adamo
jungendis neque enim defecit eum in una Muliere Spiritus, id autem quum non
fecerit Argumento hoc certe est, quod nolit uni viro plures uxores jungi.
Quorsum autem unum, nempe unum illum hominem constantem ex viro and Muliere,
hoc unice Scilicet agebat, ut haberet Legitimam Sobolem; Ostendit enim spurios
fore qui ex Polygamia Naseentur, quia non Gignuntur Secundum Dei Institutionem.
Attenti sitis igitur ad Cavendum ne perside agatis, vel Spiritu (hoc est animo)
vestro, ne datam fidem primae uxori violetis alia superinducta, i. e. Did he
not make one Wife for Adam, and not diverse Wives for one Man? Here he Recalls
them to the pure Nature of Wedlock, and first Institution of Marriage. Although he
could have created more Souls, to put into more Women, to be joined to Adam;
for the Life that he breathed into Eve, he could have breathed into more; but
whereas he did not do so; It is certainly an Argument, that he would not have
one Man to have more Wives than one. And why did he make one, that is to say,
one Man, consisting of Male and Female? Only for this end, that there might be
a Lawful Offspring; by which he shows, that the Children, born of Polygamy,
should be spurious, because not begot according to the Institution of God.
Therefore take heed, watch over your Spirits, that you don't so much, as in
your Mind, violate the Troth, which you have plighted to your first Wife, by
bringing in another upon her. The Authors of this Exposition are Capellus,
Calvin, Piscator, Ludovicus de Dieu, Menochius, Tarnovius, etc. as may be seen
in Pool's Synopsis. So that here is the Prophet Malachi, and many Divines of
great Note of an Opinion, contrary to Mr. Butler, viz. that God never allowed
Additional Wives, and always accounted the Children of Polygamy Spurious, or
Bastards. And as for our Author's Distinction, p. 21. That every Man was to
Marry but one Woman, who was to be Lady, or Dame of the Family; I have already
showed him from Lev. 18. 18. That no Man was to take a Wife to her Sister (the
Hebrew Phrase, for two Wives together) to vex her, to uncover her Nrkedness,
besides the other in her Life time. Now the Reason of the Wifes being vexed, is
plainly said to be the Uncovering of the others Nakedness; and Mr. Butler knows
by Experience, that the Uncovering of a Concubines Nakedness vexes his Wife;
and therefore the Reason is as strong against Concubines, as if they were
Ladies, or Dames of the Family, as well as she he calls the one Wife.

As to his Argument from Ishmael's being to succeed Abraham, as his Heir, if
Isaac had not been born: It Is no Argument that God approved Concubinage, nor
does our Author find any where that God had commanded that Ishmael should
succeed in that Case; but it is plain that he was sent awa^ by God's Order; that
he should not partake of the Inheritance with Isaac, Genesis 21. 10 and 12. ver.
compared, because he was the Son of a Bondwoman, so that this Instance makes
against Mr. Butler.

Then as to Rehoboam, Mr. Butler owns that Solomon had no other Son; Besides,
the Succession's being continued upon him, was by a special Decree, as appears,
1 Kin. 11. 35. To his Son will I give one Tribe, that David, my Servant, may
have always a Light before me in Jerusalem: So that this is nothing to his
Purpose. The Kindness was to David, and not to Rehoboam, as the Son of a
Concubine; And here it is fit to take Notice that the Instance, of passing by
Solomon's Daughters by his proper Wife, as Mr. Butler calls her, makes against
his beloved Doctrine of the Divine Right of a Lineal Succession.

Then, as to Jepthah's being a Judge, if our Author had but looked to the
second Verse of the 11th. Chapter of the Judges, he would find that his
Brethren would allow him no Part of the Inheritance, for that very Reason,
because he was the Son of a strange Woman; which is plainly against Mr. Butler,
and shows that the Sons of Concubines were not judged to have any Right of
Inheritance. But that does not hinder, but the People might choose such an one
for a Judge, Commander or General, in time of Distress, and Disorder, as the
times of the Judges were; when every Man did what was Right in his own Eyes,
there being at that time no King in Israel, Judge. 21. 25. Besides, our Author
owns that Jepthah was chosen Judge for his Abilities, and not because of his
Birthright.

As to the Law mentioned, Deuteronomy. 23. 2. a Bastard shall not enter into the
Congregation of the Lord; Commentators understand that to be meant by Children
of a Common Whore. Whereas in these times of Ignorance, that God winked at,
Concubines, were solemnly Married, and were accounted a sort of Wives, and the
Man's Property, to whom they were so Married; and that Jepthah's Mother was a
privare Concubine, any Man, who will consult the Critics, may find to have
been the Opinion of Munsterus and Cornelius a Lapide. But suppose it had been
otherwise, tho God imposes a Law upon us, he imposes none upon himself, so that
he may dispense with it when he pleases. And if he did so in this Case, and
others of the like Nature, to let those unhappy Children see that he extended
Mercy to them, notwithstanding the Sins of their Parents, that all such might
not be driven to Despair of his Goodness; what says that in Excuse of Polygamy?
-- Our Author may as well defend Incest from this Topic, (which yet he owns to
be a foul Crime) because, as he observes himself, Pharez, the Incestuous Son of
Judah, by his Daughter-in-Law Tamar, succeeded as Heir to his Father, and is
mentioned in our Savior's Genealogy. Who dare or can limit the Holy One of
Israel, who has said, he will have Mercy, on whom he will have Mercy. Of this
Opinion our Author may also find Peter Martyr, and Cornelius a Lapide; And as
to Pharez and Janna, mentioned in our Savior's Genealogy, Matthew. 1. and Luke
2. It may be solved the same way. God of his Sovereign Grace chooses and
purifies whom he pleases; nor is it any Imputation upon our Savior, that he
was related unto, as well as came to save the chief of Sinners. Non dedignatur
Christus ex peccatricibus and Gentilibus nasci, say Lucas Brugensis Maldonatus
and Cajetan, quia venit ut utrasque salvaret, Christ did not disdain to derive
his Pedigree from sinful Women and Gentiles, because he came into the World to
save both of 'em. So that this makes nothing at all for our Author's Purpose,
for the same Argument will conclude as strongly, that God approves Murder,
Adultery, Incest, Common-Whores, and Heathenism; because Bathsheba, Thamar,
Rachel, and Ruth, are mentioned in our Savior's Genealogy, Whereas it only
shows the exceeding Riches of God's Grace, in extending so much Compassion to
the worst of Sinners. For, that Bathsheba was an Adultress, and became David's
Wife, by Murder, is plain; that Thamar was an Incestuous Adultress, and her
Children, Pharez and Zara, Bastards cannot be denied, and that Judah begot
those Children upon her, as a Common Harlot, is obvious to any one that Reads
the Story; that Rahab was a Common Prostitute is no less known, and no Body can
dispute that Ruth was a Moabitess; But of all these we may say with the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. 9. Such they were once, but at last were washed, sanctified,
and justified, in the Name of the Lord Jesus.

As to his unmannerly Reflection upon our Statute Laws, that declare all
Children born out of Marriage to be Bastards, As if they were derived from the
Pope, Let the Government look to it; but this looks indeed like Mr. Butler's
Politics and Divinity. He might know that the Holy Scripture calls such
Bastards, Deuteronomy. 23. 2. Quivis extra Legitimum, conjugium natus says,
Gerundensis, any one born out of Lawful Marriage: And if it do not call the
Children of Concubines by that Name, because of the Respect due to Marriage,
tho unlawfully Contracted; It does not follow, but that in effect they really
were such. And therefore our Law which admits of no Concubinage, has reason to
call all Children begot out of Marriage Bastards, Whether ever the Pope had
done so or not. Our Author knows, that the Scripture does not call Pharez and
Zara Bastards, tho they really were so, as being not only Begot out of Lawful
Wedlock, but in horrid Incest, whereas Judah thought he had to do with a
Common-Harlot. And therefore his Argument from the Scriptures, not calling
every one in particular, Begot in Concubinage, or other unlawful Manner
Bastards, has no weight at all, especially seeing it is plain, that it calls
all those Begot out of Wedlock in General, by that Name.

I come next to our Authors Historical Instances, p. 23. and 24. The first is
the Parliament of Scotland' s Legitimation of the Sons of Robert Stuart, King
of Scots, by Elizabeth Moor, his Concubine; and his being succeeded by John,
the Eldest of those Sons by Concubinage, notwithstanding he had Two Sons by his
Lawful Wife Eupham, Daughter to the Earl of Rosse, then living.

I answer, 1. The Practice of Scotland, or any other Nation in this Case,
suppose it were true as our Author lays it down, Viz. That the Reasons moving
them so to do, Were that she had been a true Wife to him, before God in all
things, excepting the deficiency of the Rites and Ceremonies of Marriage, Is no
Rule to us, nor cannot warrant out Conscienees. But our Author may please to
know that there have been discoveries made since, which make it highly
probable, that Robert Stuart was Married to Elizabeth Moor, whilst he was a
private Man, tho he thought fit for Reasons of State to conceal it when he came
to the Crown, and this is urged by Sir Geo. Mackenzie, and others, in Defense
of the Royal Line of Scotland. But supposing it were not so, his Sons by
Elizabeth Moor, were Legitimated by the Parliament of that Kingdom, which
formerly was the Supreme Power of that Nation; and if we may believe their
Histories, gave Laws to their Kings but received none from them: So that they
set up, Dethroned, and Punished their Kings, as they thought fit. A plain
instance of this, is that Letter to the Pope from the States of Scotland, in
the time of Edw. I. as is to be seen in Dr. Burnets History of the Reformation,
Wherein they tell him that they had Dethroned John Baliol, for such and such
Causes, and chosen Robert Bruce, whom they would also Dethrone if he committed
the like Misdemeanors. They afterward settled the Succession upon the said
Bruces Brother and his Issue, failing the Kings own Male Issue, tho he had a
Daughter then living, who was Mother to this very Robert Stuart; So that in
those days they believed nothing of the Divine Right of Hereditary Lineal
Succession. They afterward made an Act in Robert Bruces time, that in Case of
any dispute about the Succession, it should be decided by the Parliament, and
the King of France by his League was obliged to assist him with Arms, to whom
they adjudg'd the Crown. After King James the Third was slain in Battle near
Sterlin, the first Parliament held by his Son, enacted, That such as fell on
the King's side, were Lawfully slain, as Enemies to the Public, not so much as
excepting himself: And that those who fought against him, were no way Culpable.
Nay, this present Parliament of Scotland declared, that the Late King James had
forfeited their Crown, and did not trouble themselves to debate whether he had
abdicated or not. So that to argue from an Act of Parliament in Scotland,
relating to their Government, to a particular Case, like that of our Authors,
is to argue, de Genere in Genus, quite Foreign to his purpose; and shows him
to be as Ignorant of the Laws of Argument, as undeserving of the Character of a
true Church of England-Man, to take Presidents from a Country who always had a
Mortal hatred to passive obedience: But besides in admitting the Scottish Race
to this Crown; our Ancestors did not trouble themselves with the Question,
whether they were Lawfully begot or not? But whether King James I. was
descended in the Eye of the Law from our Hen. VIIth? For if we may believe some
of the Scotch Historians, there was Reason enough to question that Princes
Birth, without going any further back. But it seems our Ancestors were as much
refolv'd to have him for their King as the Protestant Scots were, of whom the
Earl of Glencarn, then one of the chief, is quoted by some of their Writers for
saying to his Mother, when she to avoid being Dethroned, her self, gave plain
enough hints that he was none of the most Lawful Issue, They knew that if his
Stone Horse had begot him he should be King of Scots: They considered him as
born in Lawful Wedlock, without troubling themselves to enquire whether he was
Lawfully begot, and tho they knew, they had no great reason to admire her
Chastity, they knew also that she had too much Interest to say, that he was
spurious to be believed. The same Answer is enough to his other Instances of
William the Conqueror and Henry VIIth. Their Claims were Authorized by
Parliaments, who in Extraordinary Cases must consult the Public welfare (for
Salus Populi suprema lex, is a Maxim that will hold Eternally true) and are not
to be Governed by the Notions of Clergymen, no more then our Late Parliaments
were by their false Notions of Passive obedience, when they settled the Crown
upon King William and Queen Mary, etc. Moreover, seeing this Law about the
Employing of Bastards in places of Authority was not given to us, and also
dispensed with by the Jews, to whom it was given, there is no Reason that any
Christian Nation should look upon themselves as obliged by it, when the welfare
of the State does indispensibly require the setting up of such an one, so that
all our Authors Arguments from hence to prove Concubinage Lawful, vanish into
smoke. Besides Bonfrerius and Oleaster are of Opinion, that it was Foreign
Bastards, and not those of their own People that were here prohibited, because
Pharez tho a Bastard was admitted into the Congregation, and Jepthah, etc. Made
a Judge, and the Reason of the prohibition, Commentators think to be, that
Bastards were Generally accounted Vile in the Eyes of their own People,
neglected in their Education, and so unfit for Government.

Our Authors next Argument, Of Priests Marriage being formerly cried down, but
now accounted Lawful is nothing to the purpose; The Lawfulness of that was
always clearly demonstrable from the Scriptures, but so was not that of
Concubinage.

Mr. Butler, P. 27. Says, I am of Opinion we may find some other matters still
spoken against that, may upon serious consideration be found as Innocent and
Holy as that (meaning Priests Marriage) is at this day, and among other things,
I propose a Lawful Concubinage as in some Cases it may be required, and to this
purpose it is Written in the New Testament, Heb. 13. 4. That Marriage is
Honorable in all, and the Bed undefiled, but Whoremongers and Adulterers God
will Judge. Then he argues, that by Bed undefiled is meant some other Bed
different from the Marriage Bed, because the Word (...) is a Copulative, which
Couples sentences of a distinct signification, for that which is the same thing
in sense with that which went before needs no Bond of Copulation, for if the
Author had intended one and the same thing, by these words he would have said
Marriage (being) or which is a Bed undefiled. I Answer, This Poor Man is put to
miserable shifts, to lull his own Conscience asleep, and to gull those of
others, 'twill grant him that (...) Couples sentences of different
significations here, and that Marriage and Bed undefiled are different things,
but how will that prove, that there is any other Bed betwixt a Man and a Woman
undefiled except the Marriage Bed? Is it not plain, that the Bed may be defiled
by Married Persons? Mrs. Butler says our Author defiled her Bed while she was
Married to him. So that tho Marriage be Honorable, that does not say, but
Married Persons may Dishonor themselves by defiling the Marriage Bed, which by
God and Man is always accounted more Dishonorable then Fornication betwixt
Persons unmarried, and therefore the Apostles sense is plain, Marriage is
Honorable, and to keep the Marriage Bed undefiled is Honorable, but those
that commit Fornication, and those that Defile the Marriage bed by Adultery,
God will Judge, That this is the plain meaning of the Text, may be evinced
thus, the Apostle proposes Marriage as Honorable in opposition to Fornication,
which is Leudness betwixt unmarried Persons; therefore says the Apostle
Marriage is Honorable, but God will Judge Fornicators. (...), that is says
Grotius, Venere utentes extra Conjugium, unmarried Persons who lie together,
and the Bed undefiled is Honorable, continues the Apostle, but God will Judge
Adulterers; (...) That is, such as Defile the Marriage Bed, unmarried Persons
have none to Defile. Besides, there may be a Defiling of the Marriage Bed, even
betwixt Married Persons, by Incontinence, and the Immoderate Use of it.

Mr. Butler owns P. 8. that he himself was guilty of Incontinence, with the
Complainant Martha, whilst his Wife, which certainly was a Defiling of the
Marriage Bed. Calvin says upon the place, Cubile Impollutum additur ut Sciant
conjugati non quidvis sibi Liceri, sed usum thori Legitimi debere esse
Moderatum ne quid alienum a Conjugij pudore and Castimonia admittant. i. e. The
Bed Undefiled is added, that married Persons may know that their Liberty is not
boundless, but that the Use of the Lawful Bed ought to be moderate, lest they
should commit something unbecoming the Modesty of Wedlock, or Chastity; and so
if Mr. Butler went to Bed with his Wife, during his Incontinence, when he ought
to have been at Prayers in the Church, or Visiting the Sick, etc. it was a
thing unbecoming Wedlock and Chastity; so that here he sees that Marriage and
the Bed Undefiled are things as much different, as Mr. Butler, the Husband of
Martha Perkins, and Mr. Butler, not a Concubinary afterward with Mary Tomkins,
or any other Woman; or Mr. Butler in Bed with his Wife at Lawful Seasons, and
Mr. Butler not in Bed with his Wife when he should be Visiting the Sick.
Junius, Piscator, Gerundensis, Gataker, Menochius, Tirinus, and others, do all
understand this Word Undefiled to be meant of the Marriage Bed tho some of 'em
will have it to be Periphrastical, and others Preceptive; and Mr. Butler
himself instances a Case, wherein he owns the Word Kai to be Exegetical, or
Explanatory of the thing preceding, viz. Ephesians 1 3. Blessed be God, and the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; which the same Apostle writes, 2 Cor. 1. 3.
Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, in which the
Particle, and is Exegetical.

But says Mr. Butler, p. 28. That if we read the Words thus; Marriage, even the
Bed undefiled, is honorable: There will be a Riddle in the Case; for why did
he make account that Marriage could not be honorable, unless it were a Bed
undefiled? No, that could not be, for Marriage of it self is an honorable
State, in all Cases and Persons. And again it would follow, that all Marriages
are, even a Bed undefiled, which is not so; for there are very many Profane and
Unclean Marriages; and therefore the Holy Author treats of a Bed undefiled,
plainly distinct and different from a Marriage Bed, that may truly be styled a
Lawful and Undefiled Bed, etc.

This is a very odd way of arguing. I have showed that there is no necessity of
reading the Words so, and that most Commentators take them to be spoke of the
Marriage Bed, but under different Considerations, viz. as Defiled and
Undefiled. Our Author also runs into Contradictions; for in one Line he says,
Marriage is honorable in all Cases, even, tho the Bed be not Undefiled; and in
a few Lines after says, There are very many Profane and Unclean Marriages. Let
him reconcile this if he can: As to his Q. if the Apostle did not account
Marriage Honorable, unless it were a Bed Undefiled; it is downright
Impertinent; Marriage is appointed as a Remedy for keeping the Bed Undefiled:
The Apostle's Meaning is plain enough, that Marriage was Honorable, but it was
very Dishonorable in married Persons to Defile the Marriage Bed, either by the
Immoderate Use of it betwixt themselves, or by taking others into it. Calvin
and others, I have quoted for the former, and for the latter, Gataker and
others comment upon it thus: It is as much as if he should say, Thorus
Maritalis, nulla contaminetur Macula, Adulterii aut ullius peccati contra fidem
conjugalem. i. e. Let not the Marriage Bed be Defiled by any Spot, either of
Adultery, or any other Crime against the Conjugal Vow. As to what our Author
alleges, that there are many Profane and Unclean Marriages, those are none of
God's Appointment, and the Apostle treats here only of such: I do believe that
his Marriage with Mary Tomkins is Profane and Unclean, if it can be accounted
any Marriage at all; but to be plainer with him, there can be no such thing
properly speaking, as an Unclean Marriage, tho some Unclean Persons may perhaps
marry only for Unclean Ends. Marriage is an Holy Ordinance of God, and can
never be Unclean, tho many Unclean Practices may be covered under that Name;
for every one that marries, does not marry in the Lord.

Having thus made it plain, that the Apostle speaks of the Marriage Bed only,
our Author's Inference, that he speaks of a Lawful and Undefiled Bed, distinct
from a Marriage Bed, falls to the Ground of Course.

Mr. Butler, P. 19. has Recourse to the Practice of the Hebrews, to whom this
Epistle was writ, to prove this forced Commentary he puts upon the Text, for
which he neither does nor can quote one Expositor; and therefore alleges, that
because the Hebrews always held a Bed of Concubinage to be Undefiled and
Honorable; that the Apostle must needs therefore mean Concubinage by a Bed
Undefiled. I answer, 1. That I have already proved Concubinage among the
Hebrews to have been contrary to the Divine Command, tho Connived at in those
times of Ignorance: 2. That Concubinage could not be the Apostle's Meaning; for
our Author himself will own that Marriage does also imply a Bed Undefiled,
otherwise it could not be Honorable; so that it would be Nonsense for the
Apostle to distinguish Concubinage from Marriage by the Words Bed Undefiled, as
if it were more properly so, than Marriage it self, which was of Divine
Institution. 3. That the Apostle must not be supposed to Contradict his Master
Jesus Christ, who recalled Marriage to its first Institution betwixt one Man
and one Woman at a time, Matthew. 19. 4, 5, 6. where he says, They twain (not
they three, four, or five) shall be one Flesh; and instead of our Author's
Assertion, that the Apostle approves Concubinage, because he wrote to the Jews,
it is more probable that he reproves it, as our Savior did their Divorces, in
the 19th. of Matthew, which Moses, because of the Hardness of their Hearts, had
suffered, and they thereupon thought Lawful. But our Savior tells them that
from the beginning it was not so; and it is as plain, that Polygamy or
Concubinage was not from the beginning, so that our Saviours' Argument
concludes as strongly against those, as against the Divorces then in Use
amongst the Jews.

Grotius says, That the Apostle here opposes himself to that Opinion, which
many of the Jewish Rabbis maintained, viz. That it was no Crime to Lie with
any Woman, tho not married to her, if she was not a Jewess, because they
thought Moses's Law only restrained them as to such. -- Therefore he advises
them to take heed, lest there be any Fornicator amongst them, Heb. 12. 16. And
in this Text proposes Marriage as a Remedy against Fornication, as has been
said already.

This Answer of our Savior, that Moses suffered such things, because of the
Hardness of their Hearts, is sufficient to put an end to all those Cavils from
the Old Testament Instances. The Jews were a stiff necked People, which is
given them in many Places as their Character; and therefore Moses, by Divine
Permission, suffered those things, tho he did not command them; He suffered
them, to prevent greater Evils; lest they should have murdered their Wives, or
treated them harshly: 2. They were suffered, as common Laws of Nations do
allow, more than is allowed by the Laws of Religion, as is clear from this
Instance; that in all Christian Kingdoms there are Judges, constituted for
deciding Differences betwixt Man and Man, of what Nature soever they may be,
for preventing Oppression and Injustice; so that the Bench is open to trivial
and frivolous Suits, as well as to those that are weighty and material; yet the
Practice of such as go to Law upon every Occasion, is contrary to the Apostle's
Command, and Christian Charity, as appears by 1 Cor. 1. 6. 3. They were
suffered as a proper Punishment for their Wickedness; for it both exhausted
their Bodies and Estates, and broke the Peace of their own Families, and
engaged them in Discord with others. 4. This People were given over to a
Temporal Fornication, as the Papists are to a Spiritual Fornication: But our
Savior, the Second Adam, when he came to Redeem the World, restored Marriage
again to its first Institution, as it was in the First Adam's time.

Mr. Butler P. 20. alleges, that God attested the Legitimacy of Ishmael' s
Birth by the Blessing he gave him. Our Author, sure, knows it is a Maxim in
Divinity, that we must measure God's Will by his Word, and not by his
Providence. The Wise Man tells us, that Outward Things happen alike to the
Good, and to the Bad. The Text tells us that it was for Abraham's sake that God
gave Ishmael Temporal Blessings, and so he blessed Esau for Isaac's sake;
whence our Author may as well conclude, that God approved of that Profane
Person. Besides, it is plain from the Text that Ishmael was an Accursed
Persecutor, had his Hand against every Man, and every Man's Hand against him;
his Posterity we find complained of Psalm 83. amongst other Enemies of the
People of God. And as the Author of the Book, called God's Judgments against
Whoring, observes, so they have continued under several Denominations to this
day; as Ishmaelites, Hagarens, etc. of which latter Name being ashamed, as
denoting their spurious Original, they assumed to themselves the Title of
Saracens, as if they were Sarah's Offspring; under which they were formidable
to the Christian World for some Ages, and continue irreconcilable Enemies to
the Christian Religion to this day, under the name of Arabians, Turks, etc. and
are so addicted unto Uncleanness, that they place their chief Happiness here
and hereafter in the Enjoyment of their Sensual Pleasures. So far was Ishmael
or his Posterity from being truly blessed; To that Book I refer our Author,
where he will find an Elaborate Account of the Punishments, inflicted upon the
Patriarchs and others, for their Poligamy and Concubinage, which he will needs
have to be a Bed Undefiled.

Page 30. he says, God allowed of David's Concubinage, because 2 Samuel 12. 8.
God expostulating with David, because of his Adultery with Bathsheba, and the
Murder of her Husband, says. And I gave thee thy Masters House, and thy Masters
Wives into thy bosom.

I answer, God gave David the Possession of of all that was Readiness, to use
Lawfully, but not to use Unlawfully, otherwise he must approve of Incest, for
it was not Lawful for any Man to have his Father-in-Law's Wise, nor does it
appear that David made use of them as Wives. So God is said to give David's
Concubines to Absalom, which will make him the Author of Incest, if giving do
always signify approving; but the meaning is no more then this, that he
suffered Absalom to fall into that Tentation, and took his Restraining Grace
from him, that so David's Sin might be punished by that of his Son. So God gave
Saul into David's Hand, yet he himself owned it was not Lawful for him to kill
him. The word in the Original signifies any Women; as Junius, and Cornelius a
Lapide observe; so that it may be meant of Readiness Daughters that were David's
Wives: Besides, its plain, if he had added Readiness Wives to those that he had
before, he had transgressed the Law, Deuteronomy. 17. 17. against Kings multiplying
Wives; which God would never have approved of. So that the meaning of that
place seems to be no more, than that God amongst other things that were Readiness,
gave him also his Wife's. But seeing it is doubtful our Author will find but
little Stability in it for his Conscience to build upon. His Instance from
Reh^boam's Succession in that same Page is answered already, and for that from
the Prophet Hosea's being ordered to take another Woman, his own being yet
alive. Our Author cannot but know that Rivet, and other Interpreters,
understand it to be Parabolical to represent God's Love to an Adulterous an^
Treacherous People: Or if otherwise, h^ answers himself, when he says, it was
by special Command from God, who may dispense with his own Law when he pleases.

His Instance of the Conception of our Savior, p. 32. is Villainous and
Blasphemous. God formed Adam out of the Dust by his Omnipotence, and forms us
in the Womb Mediante Generatione; and can his forming of our Savior's Humane
Nature there, without any such Medium, any way import a Violation of Virginity?
Does not the immodest Man know, that this was altogether Miraculous, and
Prophesied of before as such? Isaiah 7. 14. Can any Man not wholly bereft of
Sense, or hardened in Impiety, compare this any way to a Bed out of Marriage?
but this Man's Impetuous Lust makes him fly on the Face of God himself.

Page 32. He will have our Savior to approve of a Bed out of Marriage as
Undefiled, John 4. 10. because he blessed the Woman of Samaria and her Husband
or Man, with whom she lived in Concubinage, without so much as reproving her
for it, or ordering her to discontinue her Course of Life; as our Savior used
to do in Sinful Cases; as John 8. 11. and 5. 14.

Answer. That Christ reproved her is apparent enough, when he told her, that he
whom she then had was not her Husband; and it is plain from her own Words to her
Neighbors, that she was touched with his Reproof, when she said to them, that
he had told her all that ever she did in her Life, tho we hear of nothing else
but this one matter. All Commentators agree that Christ's telling her, that he
whom she had now was not her Husband, was a severe Reproof and a Check to her,
for mocking him in asking for Water to quench her Thirst, when he was speaking
to her of Water from the Wells of Salvation, and also by endeavoring to
deceive him when she told him, that she had no Husband. By her Answer it is also
plain that she confessed her Crime; I perceive says she, that thou art a
Prophet, which was a direct owning of the Truth of what he said. Now her Crime
according to Grotius and Lightfoot in Hora was, that she had Five Husbands,
from whom she had divorced her self contrary to the Law of Moses, or had been
Five times divorced for Adultery, and that she was truly touched with a sense
of her sin appears, In that she was straight way Sollicitous to know, whether
she Worshipped God in a Right manner or not. If our Author consult Bucer,
Calvin, and Melancton upon the place, he will find they were fully of this
Opinion, that Christ by discoursing her, sought an opportunity to reprove her,
and that it was not in sharper Terms, only argues, that he was unwilling to
break the bruised Reed. That the Woman was sufficiently sensible of her Faults,
appears in this, that she took shame to her self by owning them before all her
fellow Citizens, that she was a sincere believer, appears from her Zealous
desire to have them made Partakers of the Grace of God, as well as her self,
and that she broke off her impure Course of Life, is not to be questioned
seeing it is certain she had Faith, which is an Heart purifying Grace, but as
to Her Husbands coming with her, receiving part of the Blessing, and having his
Concubinage approved: It is only the Comment of our Concubinary Author, Our
Savior would never Contradict himself by Preaching another Doctrine to her,
than he did in Mat. 19. And a^low her six Husbands at once when he recalled
Marriage there, to its first Institution betwixt one and one.

I come next to consider our Authors description of a Whoremonger, p. 33. He is
says he, such a wretch who tho allowed to Marry, or to keep his Concubine, that
is a Woman proper to himself provided he do not multiply Concubines, nor keep
any Woman unlawfully Compassed unto any man's wrong, or to that Woman's wrong,
and uses her not merely for his Lust, but out of a pure desire of an Holy Seed
by her, yet not contented with that Lawful Liberty, chooses rather to spend the
Holy Seed of mankind upon Common Women, and thus exposes his Seed to be
murdered in the Body.

Answ. I observe, our Author distinguishes betwixt Marrying and Keeping a
Concubine as different things, which plainly overthrows what he asserts, for
our Savior, Mat. 19. Speaks not one word of allowing a Concubine, but that
they that cannot contain should Marry, v. 11. 12. The Apostle answerable to
this, 1 Cor. 7. 2, 9. Proposes Marriage as a Remedy against Fornication and
Incontinence, but speaks not one word of a Concubine, and from thence also it
is plain, that by Whoremongers the Apostle means such Persons as are not
Married, and yet make use of Women, else Marriage were no proper remedy for
them, which perfectly destroys Mr. Butlers Concubinage, seeing the Apostle does
thereby Condemn all use of Women out of a Married State: As to what our Author
says is allowed at Rome, and in some Reformed States (tho there be none of the
latter charged with any such thing but Holland) it is no warrant for any Man's
Conscience

For the Sixty Sixth of those called the Apostolical Canons, Ordering that any
Person who destour'd a Virgin, should either Marry her, or have no other Wife
during her Life: It is nothing to his purpose, but rather against Poligamy and
Concubinage.

As to his Instances of Constantinus Chlorus, and Constantine the Greats having
Concubines, and being received by the Christians into places of Authority
notwithstanding, It Is Foreign to his purpose, the Christians were Subject to
former Emperors who were the worst and lendest of Men, it not being i^ their
Power to hinder or advance them at that time, and whatever was the Practice of
the Christians then: If they either committed Fornication themselves, or
Countenanced it in others; they did thereby Act contrary to the truly
Apostolical Canons, Act. 15. Commanding them to abstain from Fornication, and
the repeated Injunctions of the Apostles to flee Fornication, which properly
signifies, as has been already proved, uncleanness used by unmarried Persons;
and as for Adultery, or defiling the Marriage Bed, which the said Princes must
have been guilty of, by their Concubinage, it is every where Condemned by God
and Man, tho the Christians in those times might perhaps neither have Power,
nor think it prudent to quarrel with those Emperors that were but just then
beginning to see the Dawn of the Gospel Light, which utterly Condemns all such
things. Nor can our Author make it appear, but they reproved them as well as
one of our Bishops did Henry VIII. and yet the Protestants did not think fit,
neither to quarrel with his own Title to the Crown, nor those of his
Successors; tho perhaps there might have been good Reason to Question Queen
Marys Legittimacy, and yet our Author knows that the Church of England neither
approves of Concubinage, Incest, nor Adultery; So false and inconcludent is his
Argument. Besides, our Author Conceals, that Constantius Chlorus was no
declared Christian, tho a Great Favourer of 'em, and that he was forced to
abandon Helena and Marry Theodora; Step Daughter to the Emperor Maximianus
Hercules, who thereupon made him Caesar. Nor does he take any notice of
Constantine the Greats being Married very young to Minervina, when it is not
certain that he made profession of the Christian Religion, nor yet when he
Married Fausta Daughter to the Emperor Maximian, one of the Greatest haters of
the Christians that ever was. Neither does he take notice of the Plague that
this wretch'd Woman Fausta was to him, for being enamoured on his Son Crispus
by Minervina and not obtaining her end, she accused him of a design to Debauch
her, for which his Father put him to Death, but understanding the Falsehood of
the Accusation afterward, he put her to Death too so disastrous were the
effects of his Poligamy.

As to Valentinian, the Emperor he was passionate in anger even to Madness, and
probably as Extravagant in his Amors, the Story is very well known, that his
passion to see the Empire Insulted by such an ugly deformed Barbarous People,
as the Quadi made him fall into such a fit of anger as that it killed him, so
that he is no very commendable Pattern to be followed. Neither does Mr. Butler
take any notice that God did not bless the Marriage of Valentinian, with
Justina his Wifes Maid, for she became a Cursed Arrian and his Grandson
Valentinian by Galla, her Daughter became a cruel Persecutor of the Orthodox.
Valentinian did also make a Law in Imitation of his own Practice, as Mr. Butler
Writes in Defense of his, that any Man might Marry two Wives, but succeeding
Emperors would not allow it, the Honor of being put into the Code. Nor do I
believe the Universities will Honor Mr. Butlers Pamphlet, with a place in any
of their Libraries.

As to his false pretense of Concubinage, or Poligamies being allowed by the
Primitive Church, it is so gross it needs no Confutation. Any Man that has read
the Apologies of Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin against Celsus, or
any thing of Ecclesiastical History will find the contrary, and for such as
cannot have the opportunity of perusing those Authors themselves, I refer them
to the Account of what they said on that Head given by the Author of Gods
Judgments against Whoring at the End of that Book.

Our Authors last effort is, p. 34. Where he proposes, a Reformed Concubinage
to these Realms, for preventing the Ruin of Royal Noble and Generous Families,
and as an honest help to destroy those foul and crying Sins of Whoredom and
Adultery, which Ruin Kingdoms as well as Families. His Arguments to back this
Proposal are, that had it not been for Concubinage, King Solomon had utterly
failed of that Royal Raco, whence Jesus Christ Lineally descended. That if
Alexander the Scot had used a Concubin, an Heir of his Body might have
prevented those dreadful Wars betwixt Bruce and Baliol for that Crown. That if
Richard the II. had been allowed an Heir by a Concubine, the War betwixt the
Houses of Lancaster and York had been prevented; which at last was not ended
but by a Son, sprung from a Bed of Concubinage. He concludes thus; Happy was
that Concubinage of Robert the II. of Scotland, which advised to by a
Parliament of that Nation, gave Birth to that Family of the Stuarts, which have
made both England and Scotland exceeding happy; and being grafted into the
Family of the Welsh Teudors of the Royal Blood of England, another Family
sprang from a Bed of Concubinage, are to this day reigning over both Kingdoms:
Which, if so, let no Man by Corrupt and Unlawful Customs, go about to stain the
Legitimacy of such a Race of Princes, as both England and Scotland have Reason
to remember with Praise and Thanksgiving to God; especially for Charles the I.
of Blessed and Neverdying Memory, the Gracious Gift of God, for whose blessed
sake Good Things may justly be expected in time, both unto his Royal Race, and
these his Kingdoms. And thus much may serve, in Vindication of this Respondent
for Bedding with Mary Tomkins.

Our Author here, as every where else, has discovered himself to be a
Physician of no Value; for if they may be called so, who prescribe a Remedy
worse than the Disease, then certainly he deserves that Title. Suffering is
always preferable to Sin; and it is better that Ten Thousand Families should be
Extinguished, than that any one Man should run the risk of his Soul, to keep
them up. Mr. Butler's Passion for Concubinage does so effectually blind him,
that he cannot see an Inch before his Nose; for had he but looked into that very
Instance of Robert Stuart's Concubinage, he might havd seen what Buchanan, the
Scotch Historian, says concerning it, viz. Quae res postea tam numerosam
familiam prope Extinxit, i. e. Which Affair had well-nigh extinguished that
numerous Family afterward. And because our Author reckons this one of the
happiest Instances that can be, to advance Concubinage. I shall trespass upon
the Reader's Patience a little, to demonstrate the contrary.

In the first place, our Author asserts falsely, that this Concubinage was
advised by the Parliament, whereas it is plain, that if she was his Concubine
at all, it was when a private Man: For Buchanan says he married her after Queen
Eupham's Death; so that then she was no Concubine. In the next place he falsely
belies the Family of the Stuarts, in saying that this Concubinage gave Birth to
them; for both Cambden and Buchanan derive their Original from Bancho Thane of
Loqhuaber, of the Blood Royal of Scotland; who being murdered by Mackbeth, the
Tyrant, about the Year of our Lord, 1050. his Son Fleanchus fled into
North Wales, where he married the Daughter of Griffith Lewellin, Prince of the
Country, and by her had a Son, called Walter; who being a Valiant Man, and
Favorite to King Malcolm III. that killed Mackbeth, he was (for defeating the
Galloway. Rebels, and killing their General,) created Lord Steward of Scotland,
whence the Family took Surname; and Robert, whom we now treat of, being Son to
another Walter Stuart, by King Robert Bruce's Daughter, was the first of 'em,
who enjoyed the Crown: So that Mr. Butler wrongs the Royal Family, both as to
the Honor of their Original, which was Lawful, and not Spurious; and also as
to their Antiquity, by 320 Years, for so long had they been called by the Name
of Stuart, before they came to the Crown.

But then, as to the Effects of this Concubinage, they were the most direful
that almost any History gives an Account of: For John, the Eldest Son, by
Elizabeth Moor; who, when he came to the Crown, was called Robert the III.
because of the Hatred the Scots had to the Name of John, on the Account of John
Baliol, who betrayed their Liberty to our Edward I. and the ill Fate of King
John of France, and King John of England. This Robert, I say, had nothing of
the Spirit of Government, so that he was tyrannized over by his Brother Robert,
the second Son of Elizabeth Moor, who starved his eldest ^on, Prince David, to
Death, in the Castle of Falkland, and forced the younger, called James,
(afterward James the I. of Scotland) to flee the Kingdom, and he was taken by
the English, as bound to France. Alexander the youngest of Elizabeth Moor's
Sons, was a bloody cruel Man; and besides other Inhumane Acts, burnt the famous
Cathedral of Elgin, the finest in all Scotland, because he could not find the
Bishop of Murray, whom he designed to have murdered. And his Son Alexander was
as barbarous as the Father; and Plundered and Murdered his Neighbors. The
Misfortune of Prince James afflicted his Father, King Robert, so sensibly, that
he refused to be comforted, and starved himself to Death. After which, his
Brother, the Inhumane Robert, Reigned under the Title of Governor; and not
only kept his Nephew, James, from the Crown, during his Life, but left the
Government to his own Son Murdo, who also kept it in his own Hands; till being
disobliged by the Rebellious Temper of his own Sons, he summoned a Parliament,
and by their Advice called home King James I. from England; who, after his
Return, made a terrible Havoc among the other Princes of the Blood; cut off
Murdo Stuart, Duke of Albany, and his two Sons, and banished others of the
Name. Upon which, James, Duke Murdo's youngest Son, surpised and killed the
King's Uncle, and fled into Ireland. The Historian observes, that all this
Disorder and Discord in the Royal Family, was fomented by Walter, Earl of
Athol, eldest Son to King Robert Stuart, by Queen Euphaim, his Lawful Wife, his
Design being to have all the Posterity of Elizabeth Moor, the Concubine,
extinguished, that so the Crown might devolve upon himself: which he thought
might be easily effected, if he could but have got King James the I. taken off;
which he likewise compassed, having procured him to be murdered in his Bed
Chamber, as he lodged in the Dominicans Cloister near Perth, on a Journey. Upon
which, the Nobility assembling from all parts of the Kingdom, they pursued the
Murderers with so much Vigor, that all the Conspirators were put to Death in 40
Days: And Walter, Earl of Athol, who was the Author of the Conspiracy, and
Robert Graham, who actually murdered the King, were put to death in such a
cruel manner, that the Reader will not think his time lost to peruse the
Account of it, as follows. Walter's Execution took up three Days; on the first
he was put into a Cart, to which there was an Engine fastened, that hoisted him
up by Ropes and Pullies, and let him down again to the Ground, which racked and
loosened all his Joints, and put him to incredible Pain; then he was set on a
Pillory, with a Red-hot Iron Crown on his Head, and this Motto; The King of all
Traitors, which was reckoned the Accomplishment of what had been foretold him
by Witches, whom he had Consulted to know whether he should come to the Crown
or not, viz. That he should be crowned in a great Concourse of People. The
second Day he was bound upon a Hurdle, and dragged at a Horses Tail through
Edinburgh. On the third he was bound to a Plank, ripped up alive, and had his
Bowels first, and afterward his Heart thrown into the Fire; his Head was fixed
on a Pole, and his Quarters distributed into the chief Towns of the Kingdom.
Robert Graham, his Kinsman, was carried through the City in a Cart, with his
Hand nailed to a Gallows, the Executioner in the mean time running burning
Irons into all the fleshy Parts of his Body, and then he was quartered as the
former, says Buchanan. All this was the effect of that Concubinage, which Mr.
Butler tells us was so happy; so that instead of Concubinages preventing the
Ruin of Royal Families, I have his own Instance upon him, to prove, that it
well nigh endangered the Ruin of our own Royal Family, which is the most
ancient in the Western World; or perhaps for what is known in the whole
Universe. And so far is our Author's Assertion from being true, that all
Histories, Sacred and Profane, abound with Instances of Families and Nations
being ruined by Concubinage, and other sorts of Whoredom. For the Proof of
which, I must again refer the Reader to that Book called, God's Judgments upon
Whoring, where the Instances are none of 'em taken from Romances, as those in
the Book, called, God's Revenge against Adultery and Murder; but from approved
Histories; and may be of very good use to be read by the Youth of this
Debauched Age.

His Proposal of Concubinage, as a Remedy against Whoredom and Adultery, is
wholly ridiculous, and contrary to the Experience of all Eyes. The Jews were as
guilty of those Crimes as any People in the World, notwithstanding their Use of
Concubines. Nay, David himself, a Man according to God's own Heart, did not
find this a sufficient Remedy. The Prophets are full of Complaints against the
Jews, for assembling by Troops in the Harlot's Houses, and Neighing every one
after his Neighbors Wife, Jer. Chapters 3. and 5. In his 23d. he complains,
that the Land is full of Adultery; and it seems they had such Priests and
Prophets too as Mr. Butler; for in the 14th. Verse he says, I have seen also in
the Prophets of Jerusalem an horrible thing; they commit Adultery, and walk in
Lies; they strengthen also the Hands of the Evil Doers, that none of them does
return from his Wickedness: Exactly Mr. Butler's Practice. Solomon in the 7th.
of the Proverbs, gives us a Parabolical Representation of the Nightwalkers, and
stroling Whoremongers and Whores of his time, tho there is no doubt but his
Subject^ indulged themselves in Herds of Concubines, according to his Example;
yet he tells us, That at the Window of his House he looked through his
Casement, and beheld among the simple ones (Cause enough to make our witty
Debauchees fall out with the Bible, to call them Simpletons) a young Man, void
of Understanding, passing through the Street, near her Corner; and he went the
way to her House in the twilight in the Evening, in the black and dark Night,
and behold there met him a Woman, with the Attire of an Harlot, and subtle of
Heart, so she caught him, and kissed him, and with an impudent Face said unto
him, This day have I paid my Vows, (or I have just been at Church, and come
from Prayers) therefore came I forth to meet thee diligently to seek thy Face,
and I have found thee, etc. He goes after her straightway, as an Ox goes to
the Slaughter, or as a Fool to the Correction of the Stocks, till a Dart strike
through his Liver, etc.

So that Mr. Butler might as well have proposed the breaking down of Dikes and
Banks, to prevent Inundations, as Concubinage to prevent Whoredom. The practice
of all Nations where it is allowed is sufficient to convince him of his
Mistake. Who are more abominably Lustful than the Turks, and yet they allow
Poligamy? and indeed the Reason is plain, why it should be so. There Is too much
Truth in our English Proverb, Once a Whore, and always a Whore, and it will
hold as well of the other Sex. Let once a Man prove unfaithful to the Wife of
his Youth, whom he married in the Vigor and Strength of Affection, it will be
found that it is not one or two Concubines that shall serve him. We find by
Divine Record, that it was so among the Israelites; and History and Experience
shows, that it has always been so amongst other Nations.

Our Author's Proposal is much like Lycurgus's Laws, that he proposed to the
Spartans for a Community of Women; which so long as they were observed, says
Plutarch in his Life, the Women were far from that Scandalous Liberty, that
they were afterward accused of, and yet one of these Ordinances was, That
their Children should not be begot by the first Comers (that is their
Husbands) but the best Men that could be found, as if there could be any thing
more Scandalous: So that Mr. Butler's Proposal, if put in practice, would just
save us from Whoredom and Adultery, as much as Lycurgus's Laws saved the
Lacedaemonians, of whom Geradas said, That it was as impossible to find an
Adulterer in Sparta, as to find a Bull with a Neck so long, that he could stand
on one side of a Mountain, and drink of a River on the other side, which could
have no other Meaning, if Lycurgus's Laws were observed, than that Adultery was
so common among the Spartans, that it had lost its Name; and so they knew not
what was called so.

There Is no thinking Man but will easily be convinced, that the Natural Result
of Concubinage must needs be Whoredom. All those who observe the Course of
Nature in the Generation and Production of Mankind, allow that the number of
Males and Females born, is upon the Matter equal; and the same may be observed
in our Weekly Bills. I shall only instance the General Bill for the Year 1697.
wherein we find 8062 Males baptized, and but 7767 Females, so that the Majority
on the side of the Males, is 255, to which we shall add 293 Women dead in
Childbed, which is a Distemper Women are only obnoxious to, and being Natural
and Constant, will go far toward a Balance for the Numbers of Men slain now
and then by War, especially if we consider that the Widows and Female Infants
chiefly, of such as are slain in Battle, have their Lives many times shortened
for want of one to take care of 'em; and by being exposed to hard Labor, and
shifts for a Livelihood. So that if Concubinage should be allowed, it follows
of Necessity that all Men could not be supplied, which would certainly occasion
their breaking in upon one another Properties, and abundance of Confusion and
Bloodshed.

In the next place it infalliby hinders Propagation; for seeing the Numbers of
Men and Women are upon the matter equal by the Course of Nativity, it is an
Evidence that the God of Nature designed no more but one Woman for one Man at a
time, that there were nothing to be said for it from the Scriptures. And that
Concubinaries hinder Propagation; not only by Engrossing two, three, or more
Women to themselves, by which they deprive other Men of having any, but also by
being unable to perform Conjugal Duties to so many at a time, so that they lose
their Teeming Season, is demonstrable thus; and we may appeal to common
Experience for the Truth of it, viz. That when two Persons are married together
of equal Years, and proportionable Strength, it is found that they are
sufficient to satisfy one another, if Sickness or some other Accident don't
prevent it; and they are generally most prolifick, and their Children most
robust and healthful; and therefore it were to be wished that Christian
Magistrates and Nations concerned themselves more to have good Laws made for
encouraging Marriage, and preventing Matches of unsuitable Years; and finding
some Expedient to obviate those Obstructions of Marriages, which are many times
occasioned by waiting for Matches of equal Quality and Fortune. If such a
Method were taken, abundance of Uncleanness might be prevented, more People
would be propagated, and the Dishonor of Families of Quality provided against;
which happens but too too often, sometimes by Fornication, and sometimes by
their Daughters throwing themselves away upon unworthy Fellows. Therefore it
were Requisite there should be Laws made for bestowing young People in Marriage
as soon as they come to be Marriageable, and likewise to provide against the
general Uncleanness that reigns amongst Seamen.

But to return from this Digression, seeing Nature and Experience teaches us,
that one Woman of proportionable Years is sufficient to satisfy a Man, it is
impossible that one Man can ordinarily satisfy two or more Women, and by
consequence lays them under Tentations to satisfy themselves some other way,
which it is evident they generally do, Nature it self teaches Men to abhor a
Rival in the Marriage Bed; and Solomon tells us, that Jealousy is the Rage of
a Man, why then should we not think that it is the same with Women? Scripture
and History inform us that Co-wives, or Wives and Concubines, could never
agree. Sarah and Hagar, Rachel and Leah, Annah and Penninah, are Instances of
it in Families, where the Fear of God prevailed, and was carefully taught.
Besides, it is impossible that a Man can love them equally, and the Party
neglected will always be uneasy, which must unavoidably occasion continual
Jars and Discords, both betwixt the different Wives, and the Offspring of
those Wives. Thus Leah complains that her Sister had bereft her of her Husband,
and was forced to purchase his due Benevolence, with her Son's Mandrakes. And
thus Joseph's Brethren could not endure him, because he was one of the Beloved
Sons of the Beloved Wife. It Is needless to instance in any more; we have just
now seen a Contexture of Tragical Murders, etc: occasioned by Concubinage in
the Family of the Stuarts, and it is not many Years, since a Son of Concubinage
of that same Family, cost this Kingdom abundance of Lives. Then certainly God
nor Nature can never be the Authors or Institutors of Concubinage, which always
was, and for ever must be attended, with such dismal Consequences.

It is also worth our Observation that Histories are full of Instances of
Concubines, becoming enamour'don, or being defiled by the Sons of their own
Husbands. Thus Bilhah by Judah, David's Concubines by Absalom, Fausta on
Constantine the Great's Son, etc: the Reason of which is plain, that it being
impossible for one Man to satisfy the Desires of many Women; they must
necessarily burn, and lay hold of every Opportunity, to quench their Flame, and
many times commit Crimes against Nature, rather than not have it effected.

It deserves likewise to be considered, that tho it obstructs Propagation in
general, yet it many times increases particular Families to that degree, that
it is impossible for the Father to provide for them. And therefore if he be
worse than an Infidel in the Apostle's Sense, who does not provide for his own
Family, he must be doubly worse, who takes such a Course, as renders it
impossible for him to provide for them. And I suppose Mr. Butler is sensible
enough of his Impoverishment, by his Poligamy, (which is the usual Reward of
Whoredom) and needs not go out of his own Family, for Instances of Jarring
Wives, and quarrelling Children, whom he has made himself incapable to provide
for Yet so Kind and Good-natured a Man he is, that he proposes Concubinage, to
prevent the Ruin of other Families, which has actually ruined his own. This is
right Devillike, who tempted our first Parents to do that which had ruined
himself; and I must needs tell Mr. Butler, that in this he acts more like a
Preacher of Sodo^, than a Preacher of Righteousness.

Let us suppose that the Pious and Learned Statesmen of these Realms should
follow his Advice, and get a Law enacted for Concubinage. We should quickly see
such Pious Effects of his Pious Advice, as those I have already mentioned, and
many more; as Grave Matrons, who brought Estates to their Husbands, and have
blessed them with a hopeful Offspring, turned out of their Husband's Beds, and
young sprightly Girls supplying their place; and so the good old Woman and her
Offspring must be neglected, and the young Concubine and her Bantlings
dandled. O! what a wonderful Pious Harmony this would make in the Ears of the
Nation! And I suppose that Mr. Butler would, in this Case, quickly have such
another Peal rung in his Ears by Mary Tomkins, as now he has by Martha Perkins,
and then he would think it a complete Rejoinder to tell her, that he might as
well hugg a young Wench, as old David hugged young Abishag. But I would have
him to remember the Saying of his old Brother Lecher Ovid, Turpe Senilis Amor.
I must beg the Reader's Pardon, for writing such Stuff, and desire them to
consider what an Effronted Author I have to deal with, that dares to preach up
Concubinage to three Nations, almost drowned already by a Deluge of
Uncleanness, let out upon them in the late Reigns.

I dare venture to say, that such Fathers as have given good Estates with their
Daughters, would take it very unkindly to have them turned out of their Beds,
and their Grandchildren exposed to the World, to make room for their Maids, or
any other Misses, and their Brats. I dare also presume that Pious Fathers would
be very sorry to see their hopeful Sons, and Heirs to their Estates, betake
themselves to Kennels of Concubines, and squander their Ancient Paternal
Estates among a Spurious Offspring. It Is not to be doubted but Pious Matrons
would grieve at the Heart, to have their beloved Daughters exposed to the
Inconvenience of having but an Husband by halves, and liable to be turned out
by the next handsome Face. There Is no question to be made but our Pious
Statesmen would think it the greatest Calamity that could befall the Nation, to
have its ancient Honor so much debased, as it must necessarily be by a
Spurious Brood, and therefore none of 'em, I hope, will blame me for treating
Mr. Butler thus, seeing all these are the Natural Consequences of his Beastly
Proposal.

And I am very well satisfied, that no Man, who has any Regard to the Christian
Religion, will think that such an Author ought to be treated softly, who throws
so much Dirt upon our Blessed Savior's Conception and Birth, as to compare it
with any thing Humane, and to ask such Blasphemous Questions as those, P. 32.
Whether God Almighty ever does any thing Ordinarily or Extraordinarily which he
forbids us to do? or whether our Savior's Conception and Birth were stained
with Fornication or Incontinency, because performed out of Marriage? Such
Questions from a Jew or a Turk might be expected; but out of the Mouth of a
Preacher of the Gospel are unpardonable. Did not the Impudent Man know that our
Savior's Body was formed by the Power of the Holy Ghost, in a Supernatural
Manner, without any stain of Humane Corruption? Was there any thing in that
which looked like the Breach of Divine or Humane Law, as there is in the Case
now in Question. I pray God that this Blasphemy may be forgiven him; but the
thought is so Extravagant and Impious; that it looks as if he were Judicially
given up of God to the Lusts of his own Heart.

His Instance, that Solomon had failed of that Royal Race, whence our Blessed
Savior descended, had it not been for Concubinage, is much of the same Nature;
does not our Author know, that he who was able of the Stones to raise up
Children to Abraham, could have raised up a Seed to David without Concubinage?
And that does not at all import any thing of God's allowing of Concubinage,
more than he does of Adultery and Incest, which he has expressly forbid, as I
have showed already. But, besides, I shall turn his Instance against himself
thus; That had not Solomon exhausted his Strength by Concubinage, he might have
left Lawful Issue enough behind him, and therefore it was his Concubinage that
endangered the failure of the Royal Line; And thus Saul had four Sons by
Ahinoam one Wife, when Solomon of a Thousand Wives and Concubines had but one
Son.

His Instance of Alexander, King of Scotland, is false; for he left a
Grandchild behind him, who was Heiress to his Crown; but she dying before
Marriage, the Competition betwixt the next Heirs happened, who would never have
yielded to the Son of a Concubine. And the Parliament of Scotland afterward
found out a better and more honorable Expedient than Mr Butler's, viz. that
any future Controversy about the Succession should be determined by
themselves, as may be seen in Buchanan's History; and it is not very long since
the Parliaments of both Nations had a blessed Opportunity of settling a
disputed Succession, without Mr. Butler's Expedient.

Then as to his Instance of Richard the II. any Body that has read that History
knows, that the War began in his own time; not because he wanted Issue, but
because he unjustly seized the Duke of Lancaster's Estate, and designed to
banish his Son for ever; who landed in England when Richard was in Ireland, and
left the Duke of York, his Uncle, to govern in his Absence.

But the Nation was so much displeased with Richard, that the Duke of York was
not able to resist the Duke of Lancaster, so that the Nation in Parliament
charged Richard with the Breach of his Coronation Oath in 32 Articles, obliged
him to resign the Crown to the Duke of Lancaster, who came to the Possession of
the Throne that way, before Richard was murdered. So that it was not his want
of Issue which began that War, nor the want of Lineal Heirs, the Posterity of
Lionel, Duke of Clarence, having a Right precedent to that of the Duke of
Lancaster. But the Parliament laid their Claim aside, as in all probability
they would have done that of his Son's, if he had left any, considering the
prevailing Interest and Victorious Arms of the Duke of Lancaster; but Mr.
Butler is much such another Historian as he is a Divine. And now let him see to
it whether he has sufficiently vindicated his Bedding with Mary Tomkins or
Concubinage in general, by those or any other Instances.

But because Mr. Butler shall have all the fair Dealing imaginable, I shall
take Notice of a Text, quoted by those of his Opinion, to prove their Point,
which it is like he has forgot, viz. Deuteronomy. 21. 15. If a Man have two Wives, one
beloved, and another hated, and they have born him Children, both the beloved,
and the hated, and if the firstborn Son be hers that was hated; He may not
make the Son of the beloved firstborn, before the Son of the hated, which is
indeed first born. This I quote now, lest it should be applied by him or others
afterward against what I have already said; and the Answer is as follows.

1. Moses here acts the part of a Political Lawgiver, but not of a Spiritual
Doctor; And Poligamy being connived at in the Jews at that time, He lays down
Rules, to prevent Injustice to the Children of the least-beloved Wife.

2. It Is plain from hence, that Poligamy distracts the Affections of the
Husband, and naturally occasions Injustice to some of his Offspring, which must
needs cause Hatred, Contention, and all manner of Confusion in a Family, else
Moses would not have here provided against it.

3. That the Words, the Son of her that was hated, would seem to imply, that
both the Wives were not alive together; and then it makes nothing for Poligamy.

4. This cannot be supposed to be any thing at most but a mere Permission of
the thing, because it is contrary to the Law against taking two Wives, Levit.
18. 18. which the Karaei or Jews that adhere to the Scriptures, understand to
be clearly prohibited by that Text.

5. Our Savior and his Apostles, Mat. 19. and 15 and 1 Cor. 6. 16. and 7. 2.
which I have taken Notice of already, say, that Poligamy was forbidden; and
seeing they say, Let every Man have his own Wife, and every Woman her own
Husband, all that Liberty which was granted to, or assumed by the Patriarchs,
is taken away.

6. The Chaldee Paraphrast understands that Text, Levit. 18. 18. to be against
Poligamy, and says that was the Reason why Ruth's Kinsman, Ruth. 4. 6. refused
to marry Ruth, because he had a Wife before; and that to marry another would
break the Peace of his Family, divide his Estate, and occasion Discords amongst
the Children of the two Wives.

7. It is not like, that God would allow two Wives to the Israelites, by a Law,
which some of the better Heathens disapproved, as may be seen in Phocylides and
Euripides; and Dioclesian made a Law against it, as may be seen, Cod. Lib. 5.
Tit. 5. Leg. 2.

8. Poligamy or Concubinage is against the Apostle's Prohibition of Married
Persons defrauding one another, it being impossible for one Man ordinarily to
satisfy more than one Woman; so that to marry more than one, exposes them to
the Danger of Satan's Tentation for their Incontinence; of which, Bilhah and
David's Concubines, etc. are sad Instances.

9. The Apostle could not say, Let every Woman have her own or proper Husband
(...) if he allowed. Concubinage, for then he should be common to two or more.

10. That which is made one Flesh with the Body, cannot be made a Member of
another Body; therefore a Man who is one Flesh with his Wife, cannot be one
Flesh also with another in a Lawful Sense; for there can be no Union where
there is a Division, as in this Case there must be.

11. If Concubinage were allowed, Marriage could be no proper Resemblance of
the Union betwixt Christ and his Church; for Christ has but one Church, whereas
in that Case a Man should have more than one Wife.

Some again object, that seeing the Apostle prescribes, that he who was to be
chosen Bishop, should be the Husband of one Wife, 1 Timothy 3. 2. Poligamy was
allowed in others. To which it is answered that many of the Jews and Gentiles in
those times had two Wives. And therefore it is supposed they were tolerated to
keep them during Life, or at least till they were confirmed in the Faith; but
it would have been scandalous to have had such for Ministers or Bishops.

2, The Law of Monogamy being revived by Christ, and Preached up by this same
Apostle elsewhere, he cannot be imagined to allow it here.

3. Another Reason of this Injunction is supposed to be, that it would have
been accounted scandalous in Christian Bishops, to come short of the Heathen
Priests in Continency, who were forbid to have two Wives, as may be seen in
Plutarch, and other Authors.

4. It cannot be thought that any such thing was allowed in the ancient Church,
when to marry twice was by them so much scrupled, that some think the Apostle
forbids such Persons here to be ^hosen Bishops.

5. Beza on the Place tells us, that not only. Bigamy and Poligamy were forbid
by the Ancient Canons, but likewise the Marriage of such Persons as had rashly
divorced their Wives. And Dr. Hammond on the Place quotes Theophilact and
Athenagoras for it; That Marriage after Divorce was forbidden to the Ancient
Christians. So falsely has Mr. Butler alleged the Customs of the Primitive
Church, to defend his Practice.

I shall conclude with what Willet says on 1 Samuel 25. that if it seems strange
that the Patriarchs should so long continue in an Error unreform'd; The like
Instance is given, Nehem. 8. 17. where the People of Israel are said not to
have kept the Feast of Tabernacles, from Joshua's time till then, by the space
almost of 1000 Years. But tho God winked at those times of Ignorance, he now
calls all Men to repent; and the worst I wish Mr. Butler is, that he would
glorify God, by confessing his Sin, and taking Shame upon himself, and not add
Fuel to those Flames of Uncleanness, which have well-nigh ruined the Nation
already, and will bring down the Flames of Divine Vengeance upon us, if we
don't Repent and Reform.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
1. GOD's Judgments against Whoring. Being an Essay to a General History of it,
from the Creation of the World to the Reign of Augustulus, (which, according to
common Computation, is 5190 Years) and from thence down to the present Year
1697. Being a Collection of the most Remarkable Instances of Uncleanness, that
are to be found in Sacred or Profane History, during that time; with
Observations thereon. Pr. 3s. 6d.

2. The Secrer History of White Hall, from the Restoration of King Charles II.
down to the Abdication of the late King James Writ at the Request of a Noble
Lord, and Conveyed to him in Letters, by -- late Secretary, Interpreter to the
Marquis of Louvois; who, by that Means, had the Perusal of all the Private
Minutes between England and France for many Years. The whole consisting of
Secret Memoirs, which have hitherto lain concealed, as not being discoverable
by any other Hand. Published from the Original Papers, by D. Jones, Gent. Price
5s.

3. By the same Author, A Continuation of the Secret History of White Hall,
from the Abdication of the late King James, in 1688. to the year 1696. Together
with the Tragical History of the Stuarts, from the first Rise of that Family,
in the Year 1068. down to the Death of her Late Majesty, Queen Mary, of Blessed
Memory. Price 5s.

All Sold by R. Baldwin, in Warwick Lane.


