THE CONDEMNATION, BEHAVIOR, Last Dying Words AND EXECUTION OF Algernon Sidny,
Esquire; Who was Beheaded the 7th of this Instant December, 1683. on a Scaffold on
Tower Hill for High Treason, in Conspiring the Death of His Majesty, and to
Subvert the Government, as by Law Established, etc.
ALgernon Sedny Esquire; having been Impeached, Apprehended and Committed to the
Tower of London for High Treason, in Conspiring the Death of the King, and to
Subvert the Government, etc. was on the 7th of November, 1683. Arraigned upon
an Indictment for the same at the Kings Bench Bar at Westminster, and after
diverse Objections, Pleaded Not Guilty, whereupon on the 21st of the said Month,
he was brought to that Bar in Order to his Trial, when as a Jury being
Summoned, and he for diverse Causes, to himself best known, having accepted
against 34, 12 being Sworn, Mr. John Anger Foreman, his Indictment was Read,
Importing that he, as a false Traitor of our Sovereign Lord the King, had on
the 30th of June last, and at diverse other times, together with diverse other
false Traitors in the Parish of St. Giles in the Fields, Conspired the Death of
our said Sovereign Lord the King, to Raise Rebellion, Leavy War, a Miserable
Slaughter amongst his Subjects to make, and to Subvert the Ancient Government
of this Kingdom, to which Intent he had sent one Aron Smith into Scotland, and
Written, or caused to be Written, a Traitorous and Seditious Libel, Containing
diverse Treasons, etc. upon which, the Indictment by the Kings Council being
Opened, and the Plot to the Purpose aforesaid Proved in General by Mr. West,
Colonel Rumsey and Mr. Keeling, the Lord Howard Sworn, Deposed that the
Prisoner, viz. Algernon Sidney was at diverse Consults where it was debated to
Levy War, to raise Rebellion, and the Ancient Government of this Kingdom to
Subvert, and that at one of them he did Declare for a Commonwealth, saying,
all Private Intorests ought to be Subjected to the Public, and the People
thereof satisfied, that they might know the better what they Fought for, and be
the more Resolute, for if it should be again Settled in a Monarchy, it would
come to Fighting over again in Six or Seven Year, or to this Effect.

That he sent one Aron Smith into Scotland to stir up Diverse Ilminded and
Disaffected Persons of that Kingdom to Insurrection and Rebellion, and that he
had declared he gave the said Smith 60 Guineas to bear his Charges, etc.

And by Sir P^^lip (...) it was Proved, That a Treasonable (...) Specified in
the Indictment, tending to the overthrow of Mo^^r^^^y, and Establishing the
Power in the People, etc.) was upon Search, found in ^^s (...) or Room, and the
said Libel Proved in Court by diverse, to be his Hand, he was, notwithstanding
several Allegations, upon the Suming up of the Evidence, and the Charge given,
found Guilty of the said High Treason, and R^(...) to the Tower: From whence,
on the 20th of November, he was again brought to the Bar of the Court of
King's Bench, in order to receive Sentance of (...) as the Law in case of
High Treason requires, at which time he Ob^^cted against the Legality of the
Jurors, for that some of them* were not Freeholders in the County, and that,
as he had been informed, they were not Inpa^^led as they ought, but being by
the Court informed of the Legality of both, he desired, that he might have a
Copy of his Indictment, and time to consider of it, that he had Points of Law
to offer, and the like, but being Overruled in what he said, as to the stay of
Judgment, he received this following Sentance, viz. That he should be Conveyed
to the place from whence he came, from thence to the place of Execution, there
to be Hanged by the Neck, Cut down alive, his Privy Members Cut off, Bowels
taken out and burnt in his sight, his Head to be Severed from his Body, his
Body divided into Four Parts, and they to be disposed of at the pleasure ^f the
King. After which he was Remanded to the Tower, where he continued, in order to
his preparation for Death, and after some time, Petitioned for diverse things,
but his Petition was not Answered according to his Expectation. Yet during the
Intervene, His Majesty was pleased, in consideration of his Noble Descent, to
change the Sentance aforesaid, into a Beheading only; whereupon, after a long
continued Contrition for his many Inormities, the Warrant was Signed for his
Execution, and directed to the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, who according
to the Date specified for the Execution, went, attended by their Officers, and
demanded the Prisoner; at which time, they received Answer, he should be
presently delivered, when about Nine in the Morning the Sheriffs came upon the
Scaffold, which was surrounded by Four Companies of His Majesty's Foot Guards,
and the Hamlet-Warders, and soon after, the Lieutenant of the Tower sent to
acquaint the Sheriffs, the Prisoner was ready, whereupon they went and received
him at the Turn-Pikes, and Conveyed him to the Scaffold on Tower Hill, where
the late Lord Stafford was Beheaded, on which being Mounted, he Bowed Twice to
the People; and then having Liberty to declare his Mind, he turned to the
Sheriffs, and told them, That he intended not to make any Speech, and thereupon
delivering a Paper to them, he told them, What he thought fit to leave behind
him, was contained therein, delivering at the same time another Paper to a
Gentleman, supposed to be the same with the former, whereupon he turned to the
Executioner, and gave him Money, then Traversing the Scaffold, he Kneeled on
the South Side, and Prayed to himself, when Rising, he took off his Coat, Hat
and Wig, and gave them to his Servants, of whom, and of his Friends present,
having taken leave, and Ordered the Executioner to take his own time, without
expecting any Sign, he laid down his Head, and had it struck off at One Blow,
all but a small matter of Flesh, which the Executioner sundred with his Knise,
and held it up, as is usual in such Cases, the Body at the time of the Stroke
scarcely moving. Execution done, the Sheriffs told his Servants, That his Body
was given them by His Majesty's Bounty, to dispose of as they thought fit.
Whereupon they put it into a Mourning-Coffin, brought thither for that purpose,
and conveyed it thence, in order to its Interment.

Entered according to Order.



FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for L. (...). 1683.


