THE CONFESSION AND EXECUTION Of the Two Prisoners that suffered at TYBURN On
Monday the 16th of December. 1678.

VIZ. Nathaniel Russel, a Bayley's Follower, for Murdering a young man in
Whites-Alley.

AND Steven Arrowsmith, for a Rape committed on a Girl between Eight and Nine
years of age.

GIVING A true Account of their Behavior after Condemnation; the substance of
the Discourses that past between them and Mr. Ordinary in Newgate that morning
before they went into the Cart; and their Speeches at the place of Execution.

LICENSED, 1678.

LONDON: Printed for R. G. 1678.

The Confession and Execution of the Two Prisoners that suffered at Tyburn.
ON Thursday the 12th of this instant December, Six persons in all received
sentence of Death: One for Murder, one for a Rape, one for Treason, one for
Clipping of Money, one for stealing a Mare, and a woman and a man (old
Offenders) for several Felonies. Of these, Four obtained his Majesty's gracious
Reprieve: The other Two, viz. Nathaniel Russel, for Murdering of a young man;
and Steeven Arrowsmith, for abusing and Ravishing a Girl between Eight and Nine
years of age, were ordered for Execution on Monday the 16th of this instant
December.

Their Crimes were thus: A Bayley and his Follower in White's-Alley, by Virtue
of a Marshals Writ; went up into a Chamber, having the Door opened to them, to
Arrest a young Gentlewoman; her Brother, a lad about Seventeen or Eighteen
years of age, being with her, stood before her with a piece of a Curtain-rod in
his hand; the Barley coming up to him, should him down in a Chair, and
presently the Follower, having his Sword drawn before he came into the Room,
run him into the Body; so that he cried out, he was killed, as indeed it
proved: for on the Thursday-night following he died, being run through the
Liver and Midrif. It was proved by three Witnesses that the young man neither
struck nor thrust at the Baylies, nor gave any provocation; and that the Wound
was given before any Arrest made: nor did they take away the young woman as
Prisoner, but returned a Rescue upon the person dead. The Bailey alleged his
Warrant, justifying his coming there; but disowned that he any way contributed
to the Fact, and was acquitted. The Follower had little material to say for
himself, only alleged, that the young man made at him with a Spit, which he
took for a Sword, and threatened to kill him; contrary to Witnesses called even
by themselves: And so was found guilty of Wilful Murder, as aforesaid.

The other being a Prentice to Victualler in Barking-parish, was indicted on
the Statute, for having the carnal knowledge and abusing his Masters Daughter,
a Child between eight and nine of age. It appeared he had seduced her with
Money, and abused her several Sundays as having then most opportunity, for many
weeks together, till at last the Child being much hurt, was scarce able to go,
and then with much ado she discovered it. The several Circumstances, though
they were necessary there to be proved, are too foul and unseemly here to be
related. The Child her self testified it fully, and another Girl about ten
years old, gave Evidence what posture she once saw them in; and four or five
women proved the wrong done to the Child upon their view of her body, and what
a sad Disease was thereby contracted: so that the Evidence seemed as home as
could possibly be expected in a Crime of this kind; yet the Jury at first
appeared dissatisfied, but on better advice, and more mature consideration,
justly brought him in Guilty: for which he now suffered. A fit Warning for all
lascivious persons to deter them from the horrid practices of debauching and
ruining poor Children of such tender years; it being Death by the Law to have
Carnal knowledge of any Female child under Ten years of age, even although
with her Consent: which from those so young is reasonably presumed to proceed
from an innocent Indiscretion and Ignorance of what they are tempted to.

During the short space between Sentence and Execution Mr. Ordinary took great
pains with them, both in private Exhortations, and in his Sermons on the Lords
day, and God was pleased to bless his good endeavors with such success, that
they both at last, in the judgment of Charity appeared very penitent and fit to
dye. On Monday morning about nine a clock, the said two Prisoners, and another
young Man Condemned for Clipping, were brought into the Hall of Newgate, where
Mr. Ordinary applied himself to them in a very pertinent and pressing
discourse, suitable to their condition, and in the process thereof, speaking
particularly to Russel, he asked him, what hopes he had of Salvation, and upon
what grounds? to which, lifting up his hands and eyes, he answered, that though
he were a vile sinner, and his sins innumerable (repeating that word two or
three times) yet he hoped and trusted to be saved by the infinite mercies of
God in Christ Jesus, and that he had prayed earnestly for pardon, and had hopes
that God would grant it him, and then of his own accord fell into Prayer with
much affection, and words as apt as could be expected from a person of his
Education. After that, Mr. Ordinary instructed him more fully in the nature of
the terms on which pardon from God was to be obtained, that he must pray not
only for a pardon, but to have his heart changed and sanctified by
Regeneration; and then proceeded to inquire concerning the Fact for which he
died, laying open the hainousness of the sin, to which the Prisoner replied,
that he did believe the Man dyed by his Sword, but affirmed, he had no
intention either to kill or wound him; and that he himself could not certainly
tell how it happened, being in the Evening, and done suddenly in an hurry, but
denied that the person deceased was pushed or held down by any body in a Chair.
Mr. Ordinary told him, sure he formerly had been guilty of many grievous sins,
that God should so give him up to such a Fact without any provocation,
prividence oft-times punishing great sins with greater; to this he ansered, by
confessing, that all his life he had run on in a course of wickedness and
rebellion against God, and particularly bewailled with tears, his continual
breach and neglect of the Sabbath and Religious Duties.

Then Mr Ordinary spoke particularly to Stephen Arrowsmith, who with many tears
deplored his condition, yet blessed God that he had generally led a very civil
life; never was guilty of Theft, nor a frequenter of idle naughty houses, but
used to hear very good Ministers, and rarely neglected his duty on the Sabbath,
save only to visit his Parents, till Satan seduced him to this abominable
wickedness, which he now very freely confessed himself guilty of, and that he
deserved to suffer for the same, which was great satisfaction to some present,
to whom he before refused to acknowledge it. They both declared, that they were
willing to dye, and dyed in the Protestant Religion, and expected Salvation not
by any Righteousness or Works of their own, which were nothing but sin and
vileness, but only and merely by the passion and merits of the Lord Jesus.
Russel had before expressed something to one of the other persons Condemned, as
he informed against him, as if he did not believe, or doubted whether there
were any Local Hell. But Mr Ordinary inquired of him his belief in that point,
whereupon, he replied, that he was well satisfied that there was a real place
of Hell, and did trust God would deliver his Soul from it, and admit him into
the Kingdom of Glory.

Then Mr. Ordinary prayed with, and for them, a considerable time very
affectionately, and with great enlargement toward their particular
Circumstances; they attending very reverently on their Knees. After which
another Minister came in, and gave them some Exhortation, and likewise prayed
with them; then declaring to them, that the only service they could now do
Godward, would be to warn others at the place of Execution to avoid Passion,
Uncleanness, and all other sins themselves had possibly been guilty of, and
which has brought them to this untimely end: And desiring them to compose
themselves, and keep their Hearts close to God, the Ministers for the present
recommended them to God, and they were carried down to the Cart, desiring most
heartily, as they went, all people to pray for them. When they were putting on
the Halters in the Lodge, he that did it, after it was on, asked Russel if it
hurt him? -- It Is, says he, somewhat straight; but (with a low voice, as to
himself) nothing can hurt me but sin.

At the place of Execution, the Ordinary exhorted and prayed for them, as
likewise they for themselves. Then they did freely of themselves warn all
Spectators to take heed by their fatal Example of all Sin in general, and that
they would get and maintain the Fear of God in their Hearts. Russel in
particular desired them to beware of the great sin of Sabbathprofanation, as
also of lewd Company, rash Passion, and Drunkenness. Arrowsmith acknowledged
his Crime there again, and that he had often desired to resort to the public
Assemblies of God's people, but was detained from them by a person who should
rather have encouraged him to it. He also said, that though he never took to
any vicious course, yet as to his Crime of Brutish Lust, for which he suffered
the penalty of the Law, he was surprised by the violent temptation of Satan,
for which he could never sufficiently repent.

Upon consideration of the whole, and more that might be said, it is charitably
believed that they both died very penitent, and with greater hope of their
happy state than most that suffer death at that ignominious place.

FINIS.

