A Confession of Faith OF THE ROMAN CATHOLICS in IRELAND. For the refusing of
which, Many Protestants are Persecuted, others who cannot swallow their
damnable Principles which are imposed on them, fly into England, and are kindly
relieved by His Majesty's Subjects.
I. WE Acknowledge and Confess, that by the singular Care of our supreme
Magistrates, Spiritual and Temporal, and by them and the diligence of the Lord
of the Country, J. T. we are only deduced from the Heretical way and faith, to
the true Roman Catholic and saving way; and that we embrace the same freely
and voluntarily without any force or compulsion, and we would have all the
World to take notice hereof.

II. We Confess the Pope of Rome to be the Head of the Church, and that he
cannot Err.

III. We Confess, and are sure that the Pope of Rome is Vicar of Christ, and
that he has full power at his pleasure over all Men, of Forgiving and
Retaining Sin, and of Excommunicating and Casting into Hell.

IV. We Confess, that whatsoever the Pope shall Institute anew, whether within
or without the Scripture, and also whatsoever he shall Command, to be Divine
and Saving; and therefore to be more esteemed than the Precepts of the Living
God by all Lay People.

V. We Confess the most holy Pope ought by all Men to be honored with honor,
with greater bowing of the Knee than is due to Christ himself.

VI. We Confess and Assert, that the Pope ought to be heard by all Men in all
things, as the most Holy Father, without exception, according to the Direction
of his Institutions, and whosoever shall do on the contrary; such Heretics,
without pity, are not only to be Burnt, but both Body and Soul to be Cast into
Hell.

VII. We Confess that the Reading of the sacred Scripture is the rise of
Heresy and Sects, and the original of Blasphemies.

VIII. We Confess that it is good, profitable, holy, and saving, to pray to
Saints, whether Men or Women, that are Dead, to honor their Images, to bow the
Knee before them, to go on Pilgrimage to them, to cloth them, and burn lights
to them.

IX. We Confess that every Priest is much greater than the Virgin Mary the
Mother of God, which only once brought forth Christ and no more* but the Roman
Priest, not only while he will, but when he will, offers and makes Christ, and
also being Created consumes him.

X. We Confess that it is profitable and saving to Celebrate Masses, to give
Alms, and to pray for the Dead.

XI. We Confess the Roman Pope to have power at his pleasure to change the
Scripture, or to add to it or diminish from it.

XII. We Confess that Souls after Death are purged in Purgatory, and the Masses
of Priests are helpful for their Deliverance.

XIII. We Confess that it is good and saving to partake of the Eucharist under
one kind, but to partake in both kinds is Heretical and Damnable.

XIV. We Confess and Assert, that those who use to partake in one kind, do use
and partake of whole Christ with his Flesh and Blood, and with his Deity and
Bones, but those who partake under both kinds, only feed upon and enjoy the
bread.

XV. We Confess that there are Seven Real and true Sacraments.

XVI. We Confess that God is honored in Images, and by them is owned of Men.

XVII. We Confess that the blessed Virgin Mary is worthy of more honor from
Men and Angels than Christ the Son of God.

XVIII. We Confess that the blessed Virgin Mary is the Queen of Heaven; and
that she reigns, together with her Son, according to whose pleasure the Son
ought to do all things.

XIX. We Confess that the Bones of the Saints have great virtue, wherefore they
should be honored by Men, and have Chapels built to them.

XX. We Confess the Roman Doctrine to be Catholic and Pure, Divine, Saving,
Ancient and True; but the Evangelical Doctrine (from which we freely recede) to
be false, erroneous, blasphemous, cursed, heretical, damnable, seditious, and
wicked, devised and feigned; wherefore, seeing the Roman Religion under one
kind is wholly and sully saving and good, therefore we Curse all those who
instructed us in that Heresy, as perverse and wicked under both kinds; we
pronounce our Parents accursed, which Educated us in that Heretical Faith, and
we Curse them which caused us to doubt of the Roman Catholic Faith; likewise
those too which administered to us of that cursed Cup: Yea, we Curse our own
selves, and do pronounce our selves accursed, because we did partake of that
Cursed and Heretical Cup of which we ought not to have done.

XXI. We Confess that the Holy Scripture is imperfect and a dead Letter, so far
as it is not explained by the Pope, and granted by him to be read by the Lay
people.

XXII. We Confess that one Mass of the Roman Priest is more profitable than a
hundred and more Sermons of the Evangelical Ministers, and therefore we Curse
those Books which we have read, which contain that Heretical and Blasphemous
Doctrine, and we bring a Curse upon all those Works committed while we abode in
that Heretical Faith, lest they should procure any thing to us before God in
the last Day.

XXIII. We do all these things out of a pure heart, asserting that the Roman
Church, in these and the like Articles, is most true, with a solemn
renunciation of that Heretical Doctrine, before you, Reverend Lord* and
Fathers, before you, honorable Men, honorable Matrons, young Men and Virgins
present; and moreover, we swear we will not, as long as we live, though it
might be lawful for us, turn again to that Heretical Doctrine under both kinds,
and we do also swear that so long as a drop of blood remains in our Bodies, we
will* persecute that cursed Evangelical Doctrine, every way both openly and
secretly, violently and frequenly, by Word and Deed, and by the Sword also.

Last of all, we Swear (on supposition that a change happen, either in the
Temporal or Spiritual State abroad) before God, Angels, and you present, that
we will never for fear or favor, depart from this saving Roman Catholic Faith
and Holy Church, nor ever return to embrace that cursed Evangelical Heresy.

London Printed, and are to be sold by Richard Janeway, 1689


