A Confutation of sundry Errors in Dr. Sherlock's Book concerning Allegiance.
Error 1. THE Scripture has given us no Directions in this Case, but to
submit, and pay all the Obedience of Subjects to the present Powers. It makes
no distinction, that ever I could find, between rightful Kings and Usurpers,
page 18.] Confut. Why then did you stand off so long from swearing Allegiance
to their present Majesty's, out of scruple of Conscience? And why do you
condemn Oliver Cromwell, and the Rump-Parliament, and the late Inter-regnum as
a Rebellion? And why do you approve the Peoples Combination against, and
killing Athaliah as an Usurper, and setting young Joash, the right Heir, in the
Throne? To say that there is no difference as to our Duty and Allegiance
between a manifest Usurper, and a manifest rightful Owner of the Crown, is in
effect to say, that a manifest Usurper is not an Usurper; which is a
Contradiction. The Scripture largely taken, does comprize the Principles of
Natural Religion, and all the Rules and Maxims of Order, Government, and Civil
Society common to Christians and Heathens, who all agree in this, That there
are two sorts of Kings, a manifest Usurper, and a manifest rightful Owner of
the Crown; and accordingly there are two kinds of Subjection, one due to an
Usurper, and another due to a rightful Owner of the Crown; for as these two
Kings differ in specie, in kind, so the Subjection due to the one does differ
in specie, in kind, from what is due to the other. If you abandon this
Distinction, you justify the Cause of traitorous Absalom, and his Adherents,
against Innocent David and his Adherents; and there can be no such thing as
Usurpation of Crowns and Kingdoms.

Error 2. Joash was first anointed and proclaimed, before any one stirred a
Finger against Athaliah: Now this is a very different Case from raising
Rebellions against a Prince, who is in the possession of the Throne, to restore
an ejected Prince, p. 34.] Confut. Though Joash was first anointed and
proclaimed King, before Athaliah was killed, yet it is plain, that the
preparations to kill her, and the full purpose of their Mind so to do, were
long before. And were these not so much as the stirring of a Finger against
Athaliah's Person, Crown and Government? If the same kind of Subjection was due
to Athaliah, a notorious Usurper, which was due to Joash the rightful Owner,
(as you all along assert) then Jehoiada, and all the Godly and true Loyalists
in Judah, were guilty of traitorous and wicked Conspiracy. If not, then the
grand Principle of your Book falls, and you show your self a Betrayer, rather
than a Defender of true Loyalty and Allegiance.

Error 3. This of Athaliah was a peculiar Case; for God himself had entailed
the Kingdom of Judah on the Posterity of David, and therefore nothing could
justify their Submission to an Usurper, when the King's Son was found, to whom
the Kingdom did belong by a Divine Entail. -- But, etc. p. 35.] Confut. It is
plain from the Story, that the Nobles, Commons, and Clergy of Judah, did, out
of conscientious Prudence and Respect to the Common Quiet, submit to the
Government of Athaliah, after they knew she was an Usurper, and that Joash the
right Heir was in being, and preparation for the Crown, until they had by
innocent Policy made themselves strong, and were sufficiently prepared to
depose and kill her; this their Submission was just and laudable. And this Case
does strongly prove, that a notorious Usurper is to be submitted to by all the
People, when he cannot be deposed and cut off without endangering the Common
Quiet and Safety of the Realm; but when it can, with general Safety and Quiet
to the Realm be effected, it is lawful and laudable to effect and accomplish
it. For though the Kingdom of Judah was a Theocracy, yet other Nations and
Kingdoms are not without Order and Government, agreeable to the general Rules
of God's Word, and in that respect are a kind of Theocracy, though not in the
strict sense: And it was upon Grounds and Reasons common to other Nations and
Kingdoms, that Athaliah was deposed and killed, viz. because she was a
notorious Usurper, and it was against the Common Quiet and Interest of the
Realm, to bear with and submit to her any longer. Vbi eadem ratio ibi eadem
lex. It was never God's intention to continue the Crown in the Posterity of
David, let them live as they list; but on supposition of their walking in God's
Ways as David did: Which because they did not, therefore God made Jeroboam King
over ten Tribes, and afterward did alienate the Crown of Judah from the House
of David, to the Babylonians, Persians, Grecians, and Romans.

Error 4. If the Choice and Consent of the People makes a Prince, then no Man
is a Subject, but he who consents to be so; for the major Vote cannot include
my Consent, unless I please; that is the Effect of Law, and Compact, or Force,
not of Nature, page 24. Confut. It was the Choice and Consent of the greater
part of the People, according to God's Word, Deuteronomy. 17.14, 15. which made Saul
the first King of Israel. Whose Election not being consented to by some,
therefore the Scripture brands them for Sons of Belial, 1 Samuel 10.27. Here the
major Vote did conclude the rest. You cannot be a good Subject without your own
Consent; but a Subject you may be against your Will, tho the King be made by
consent of the People, according to the general Rules of God's Word; because it
is pro bono Publico, for the common good, and absolutely necessary for the
uphold of Order, Unity, and Government among Men, that in such Cases the major
Vote concludes all the rest, the Light of Nature does so dictate, and common
Sense allows it.

Error 5. If Subjects give their Prince Authority, they may take it away again
if they please; there can be no irresistible Authority derived from the People:
for if the Authority be wholly derived from them, who shall hinder them from
taking it away when they see fit? Upon these Principles there can be no
Hereditary Monarchy; one Generation can only choose for themselves, their
Posterity having as much right to choose as they had, page 24.] Confut. If
indeed the People be the sole principal Cause of conferring Authority upon the
King, then they may take it away when they please, even as God himself does.
But this they are not, they are only Causes instrumental and subservient, yet
so necessary to the Being of just and legal Monarchy, that without their
Consent, Tacit, or Express, no just Monarchy can begin and be sounded. Yet will
it not hence follow that the People may, at their pleasure, recall the Authority
which they have given; for being only Causes instrumental and subordinate, they
can act nothing without the Concurence of God, the supreme Cause and Governor
of the World. But God does oblige them to stick to, and abide by their King
whom they have chosen, it is not in their Power to undo what they have done;
they have bound themselves by Oath and Covenant, Explicit or Implicit, to their
King, to be his Liege-men and Loyal Subjects, and a necessity lies upon them of
keeping it; if they do not, they are persidious. The Wife, by her own Act and
free Consent, gives Power to the Husband over her own Body, and to be her Head;
and yet she cannot unmarry her self, and recall what she has done. Bishops, as
Causes instrumental under Christ, ordain Presbyters, and give them Ministerial
Authority; yet can they not therefore take it away at their pleasure. The
French Kingdom is Hereditary, and not Elective, and yet the Constitution
thereof is such, that Daughters cannot succeed to the Throne: if the French
King should go about to alter this Constitution, without Consent of the People,
Would they think it any Injustice or Rebellion to resist the invasion of this
their Fundamental Constitution? While the King upholds the Government,
according to the Original Contract and Covenant between Him and the Nation, he
may in no wise be resisted, tho he have his Authority from the People as God's
Instruments; but if he go about to enslave and ruin the Nation, contrary to the
original Contract and Covenant, it is no unlawful Resistance for the Nation, by
Force of Arms, to save it self, and to withstand the Invader and Destroyer of
its Liberty, Rights, and Interest: For this is no resisting of Authority, but a
just vindication of National Rights against an Illegal Monarch, who pretends
Authority, but really has none, neither from God nor Man: For neither God nor
Man gave him Authority to be perfidious, and to enslave and ruin the Nation,
contrary to the Fundamental Oath and Covenant between Him and the People. It is
this which is the Measure of his Authority; and this being extinguished, by his
own perfidious violation of it, his Authority, as the necessary Consequent
thereof, must needs die and be extinct with it. Tho an Hereditary and
Successive Kingdom be not Elective, yet it is not a new Monarchy, but a
continuation of the Old, which began by mutual Covenant, Tacit, or Express,
between Prince and People; and when this Foundation falls, the Government is
dissolved, and is no longer a just and legal Monarchy, but an Usurpation and
illegal Invasion.

Error 6. An Usurper, by long continuance, may outlive those who formerly wore
the Crown; but does it give Right to him who has none, that he out-lives those
who had the Right? For though no Body else has any Right to the Crown, how does
this make him a rightful King who has no Right? p. 24.] Confut. It is allowed
by all as a sure Maxim, In aequali jure melior est conditio possident is, He
who is in possession of the Crown, has sufficient Right to it, when no one
living has better Right to it than he. If I find a Thing, and no one claims
it, nor can the right Owner be found, it becomes mine by right of Occupation.
He that was an Usurper, ceases to be so by the decease of the right owner. He
is to repent in his own Breast and Bosom privately of his wrongful Intrusion:
but the right Owner being dead, and all that claim under or by him, he is no
longer an Usurper, but rightful Proprietor.

Error 7. The Revolutions of Government are not the Subjects Duty, but God's
Prerogative, p. 43.] Confut. There is no inconsistency between God's
Prerogative and Subjects Duty in all Revolutions and Changes of Government, but
Harmony and Concurrence. There was a great Revolution of Government in Israel,
when they ceased to be governed by Judges, and the Order of Kings began: and
yet in this famous Change, God as Principal, and the People as Instrumental,
did concur in the Institution of Saul for their first King. After his Death
there was another great Revolution, though David by Divine Designation was
immediately to have been King over all the Twelve Tribes, yet for seven Years
the far greater part adhered to the House of Saul, until God moved the Hearts
of all the People unanimously to choose and submit to David as their King. When
the Lady Jane (who had the weaker Title) was proclaimed Queen of England, after
the Death of King Edward, and was in possession of the Throne, the Protestants
in Suffock, out of conscientious Loyalty, adhered to the Lady Mary, tho a
Papist, and by their Means, as God's Instruments, she acquired the Throne, and
her Title prevailed as being most rightful. After the Death of Henry the Third
the French King, there was a concurrence of God's Providence, and the Subjects
Duty, in setting the King of Navarr in the Throne, though the greatest part of
the Nation had been against him, and had proclaimed another King, and bound
themselves in a solemn League not to admit the King of Navarr, yet it being his
Right, at last it prevailed.

Error 8. There are but three Ways whereby God gives Kingly Power and Authority
to any Persons: Either by Nature, or by an express Nomination, or by the
Disposals of Providence, p. 11.] Confut. Nature by it self, without Morality to
rule and guide it, is a Beast or Machine, and therefore it can have no hand at
all in the Institution of Just and Law full Kings. Nature and Morality differ,
as the Horse and the Rider, as the Pen and the Writer. Nature indeed, led,
guided, and instructed by Morality, does subserve God the Governor of the
World in the Institution, uphold, and continuation of every Just and Legal
Monarchy: but without it, Nature is blind and brutish in Things concerning
Order and Government, both Divine and Humane, and therefore there never was nor
can be a Lawful King by mere Nature distinct from Morality. Now all Morality is
founded in Free Will and Rational Election, Choice and Consent: And
consequently every Just Monarchy, is founded in mutual Covenant, Tacit, or
Express, between the Prince on one part, and the People or Community on the
other part, agreeably to the general Rules of God's Word, for the mutual Good
of Prince and People, Ruler and Ruled. God's express nomination of this or that
Man to be King, obliges all the People to own and submit to him as their King,
and him to consent to be King over them; but till there be a mutual Consent,
the Kingdom is not founded, it is but in preparation, if the major part
consent, all the rest are concluded, and are to be esteemed Subjects of the
Kingdom; and though the major part dissent, yet having God's Word and express
nomination on his side, all the rest owe Consent, and may be compelled to it.

Error 9. Whether their present Majesty's have Legal Right to the Throne, is
certainly needless in this Cause to dispute, and serves only to confound it, by
carrying Men into such dark Labyrinths of Law and History, etc. as very few
know how to find their way out again, p. 2.] Confut. It is certainly necessary
for justifying our swearing Allegiance to them, that they have legal Right to
the Throne; for unless they have legal Right to it, they have no Right at all;
and having no Right, they must needs be Usurpers; and being so, it is only an
equivocal Allegiance that can be due to them. But equivocal Allegiance will not
suffice. Analogum per se positum stat pro famosiori significato. The Law
enjoining us to swear Allegiance to them, cannot in reason be thought to mean
equivocal Allegiance, such for kind as is due and payable to an Usurper, but it
must needs mean that kind of Allegiance which is naturally due from Subjects to
one that is rightful Prince before God and Men, and no Usurper. And if there
should be any Ambiguity, or color for scruple touching the Sense of the Oath,
it is abundantly cleared by this one thing, that the Law makers, by enjoining
the Oath, must needs mean that kind of Allegiance which fully agrees with the
Public Prayers in the Liturgy, constantly used by the Lawmakers, and imposed
upon all Conforming Ministers, which is not equivocal Allegiance, but the same
that was due and p^id to Q. Elizabeth. K. James I, K. Charles I, and his Son
successively, viz. full and complete Allegiance, without all Equivocation: For
no one can use, say amen to, and heartily join in these Prayers for their
present Majesty's, without All Hypocrisy and Deceit, who thinks them to have no
legal Right to the Throne, that they are but Usurpers. And therefore the
Non-swearers, consistently to their own Principle, refuse to use the prescribed
Forms in the Liturgy for their present Majesty's, tho tantum non, they admire
the Liturgy. The Doctor by supposing it neeedless to dispute whether their
present Majesty's have legal Right to the Throne; and undertaking to prove that
they have Right, tho no legal Right; that they have God's Authority, and yet no
legal Right, does greatly err: For there are but two kinds of Right, Legal or
Evangelical. Evangelical Right does not come into question, for that is founded
in Regeneration and Heavenly Adoption, and is wholly supernatural and
invisible. Either they have legal Right, or they have none: And it is plain
they have, for it lies upon the Non-swearers to prove that they are manifest
Usurpers, which they can never do, but by carrying us into the dark Labyrinths
of Law and History, which can only confound, and serve to make plain things
obscure, but can prove nothing against their Majesty's Right.

Error 10. We have no Example in Scripture, that any People were ever blamed
for submitting to the present Powers, whatever the Usurpation were, p. 21.]
Confut. We read of good King Hezekiah, that the Lord was with him, and he
prospered whithersoever he went forth: and he rebelled against the King of
Assyria, and served him not, 2 King. 18.7. Now either this his Rebellion
against the King of Assyria, was sinful before God, or it was not: If yea, then
I see not how this Scripture can agree with it self; for it does manifestly
imply, that God was with Hezekiah, and did prosper him in this his Rebellion
against, and refusal to serve the King of Assyria, and so is the Opinion of the
generality of Interpreters, who acquit Hezekiah from all Sin in this Matter,
there being no Divine Obligation upon Hezekiah to serve and be tributary to the
King of Assyria. If it was not sinful, then here is an Instance of an honest
and justifiable Rebellion against an Usurping Power; and consequently, had
Hezekiah submitted to the Usurpation of the King of Assyria, he had been
blameworthy. Curse ye Meroz, (said the Angel of the Lord) curse ye bitterly
the Inhabitants thereof: because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the
help of the Lord against the Mighty. Judge. 5.23. It is plain from the Context,
that King Jabin for twenty Years did mightily oppress Israel, and usurp
Dominion over them; and here the Inhabitants of Meroz, a City or Town in
Israel, are cursed by the Angel of the Lord, for not concurring with Deborah
and Barak, and their Brethren the Israelites, in warlike resistance and
opposition against the usurping Tyrant and Oppressor Jabin. After Jeroboam had
set up false Worship in Israel, and cast off the Lord's Priests from executing
their Office unto the Lord, they, and after them, out of all the Tribes of
Israel, such as set their Hearts to seek God, came to Jerusalem, to sacrifice
unto the Lord God of their Fathers. So they strengthened the Kingdom of Judah,
and made Rehoboam the Son of Solomon strong three Years. 2 Chronicles. 11. Here the
Subjects of King Jeroboam are praised by the Spirit of God for leaving him, and
going over to King Rehoboam, and taking part with him against Jeroboam; and
consequently they had been blameable if they had done otherwise.

Error 11. Our Savior's Argument relies wholly on the possession of Power,
Whose Image and Superscription has it? p. 21.] Confut. That our Savior's
Argument relies wholly on Possession, be it right or wrong, so as to oblige Men
to pay the very same kind of Allegiance to a manisest Usurper, which is due to
a most rightful King, (which is the principal point aimed at, and contended for
by you) is not true. Our Savior did not bring in any new Doctrine touching
Sovereignty and Subjection, but by his Doctrine and Example taught every Soul
to be subject to the Higher Powers, according as his Apostle Paul does. But it
was never the Apostle's meaning to confound the distinction between a notorious
Usurper, and one that is notoriously no Usurper, but rightful King before God
and all the World, as to Subjection and Allegiance. But though the present King
should be a manifest Usurper, yet may nothing be attempted against his Person,
Crown, and Government, which is against the Common Good and Quiet, when the
Remedy will be worse than the Disease; but where the Common Good and Quiet of
the Realm cannot be upheld without removing the Usurper, there it is lawful and
laudable to remove him, and to set the right Owner in the Throne; but it can
never be lawful to do so by the right Owner; for Evil is not to be done that
Good may come.

Error 12. Why should we think the Apostle here intends a Distinction unknown
to Scripture? -- And let any Man judge in what Perplexities this Sense of the
Apostle's Precept would involve the Consciences of Men? For these are great
Disputes among Learned Men, and how then should Unlearned Men understand them?
And I cannot think that the Resolution of Conscience, in such Matters as all
Mankind are concerned in, should depend upon such Niceties as Learned Men
themselves cannot agree in, p. 19. Confut. Learning is an excellent Gift of
God, and greatly serviceable to his Kingdom and Glory; but when destitute of
Heavenly Wisdom and Grace rightly to use it, it becomes the Devil's great
Engine, whereby he upholds Atheism, Infidelity, Heresy, Schism, Idolatry,
Superstition, and false Religion in the World; and if Cases of Conscience
concerning all Mankind must remain undecided, till all Learned Men be agreed
about them, then there can be nothing certain in Religion; and Faith in Christ
is no longer Faith in Christ, but the same with Skepticism and ungodly
Dubitation, about Spiritual, Invisible, and Eternal Things, which no Christian
can endure to hear. As in Divinity, though there be a thousand Criticisms
respecting the Hebrew and Greek Text, Chronology, Genealogies, and Prophetic
Expositions, wherein the Learned may safely differ, and yet Points of Faith,
necessary to Salvation and holy walking with God, be all plain to such as have
the Spirit of Christ, even the most illiterate Men and Women: So though there
be abundance of lesser Things in the Common and Statute-Laws of England, about
which Judges, Lawyers, and Statesmen themselves may differ, yet still there are
some Master-Principles, and Foundation-Points of the English Government known
to all; which being on all hands admitted not repugnant to God's Word, and to
the Being of Civil Government and Humane Society in general, they are a
sufficient direction for the Consciences of all in the Nation, ordinarily
touching Subjection and Allegiance to the Higher Powers among us, and putting
difference between a manifest Usurper, and a manifest right Owner; and for
extraordinary Cases, the Nation is left to act pro re nata, suitably to the
Occasion; and for extraordinary Evils, to provide extraordinary Cures; and in
doubtful Cases, to choose the safer Side: And therefore there is no necessity,
that either we be all Slaves, according to your old Doctrine of Non-resistance;
or that all notorious Usurpers be no Usurpers, but rightful Kings before God,
because he permits Sin and Satan to set them in the Throne, according to your
New Doctrine of Allegiance; which may serve for a job, and take with self
seeking Men, who guide themselves by worldly Policy: but it can never sink with
honest and true Loyalists.

Error 13. The Titles of the Roman Emperors, for so many Ages together, were
either all of them stark naught, or the very best of them very doubtful, p. 20.

Error 14. The four Monarchies were all as manifest Usurpations as ever were in
the World, and yet set up by the Decree and Counsel of God, p. 20.] Confut. It
is manifest as to Alexander the Founder of the Grecian Monarchy, that he was no
Usurper, but a lawful Monarch: For he was (as all confess) lawful Monarch of
Macedonia, before the enlargement of his Dominions by Conquest. Now admit the
worst that mere Ambition, and sinful desire of Empire, put him upon invading
other Nations and Kingdoms; yet having won them by the Sword, upon their
submission to him, and coming under his Protection he became their lawful
Monarch, and no Usurper. Suppose also that the War of Julius Caesar, against the
Roman State and Senate, was unlawful, yet becoming Conqueror, and obtaining
Consent from the Senate and People of Rome, and being by Common Consent created
perpetual Dictator, from thenceforth he was no Usurper, but lawful supreme
Governor; and if his Successor, Augustus Caesar, was not lawful Emperor, and no
Usurper, it cannot be told what lawful Empire is. The same may be said of the
other two great Monarchies, Assyrian and Persian, for ought that can be proved
to the contrary.

Error 15. If Conquest gives a Right, then Force, the most unjust and violent
Force, is right. -- Submission is only a forced and after-consent, not to make
a King, but to own him who has made himself King, and whom very often we would
disown and reject, were it safe to do so; and what Right can that give more
than Force? p. 24.] Confut. The Sword without Submission makes no Man legal
King, but Submission to the Conqueror upon legal Terms, is by the Law of
Nations a just Foundation of legal Monarchy: For it puts an end to War, and so
introduces Peace, Order, and settled Government: It is an act of rational
Choice and Free Will; of two Evils set before us we choose the less, and either
explicitly or implicitly covenant with the Conqueror to be his Subjects, and he
does equally covenant with us to be our King and Protector.

Error 16. What Right had my Ancestors, three or four hundred Years ago, to
choose a King for me? p. 24.] Confut. They had just and true Right, by the Law
of Nations, to lay the Foundation of an Hereditary Monarchy; otherwise there
can be no such thing as an Hereditary Monarchy, which no sober Man will affirm.

Error 17. It is very absurd to say, that the Right of Government is not
derived from God, without the Consent of the People, p. 25.] Confut. It is very
absurd to make the People equal and coordinate with God in the institution of
Kingly Government; but no Absurdity at all to make them subordinate Causes,
without whose Consent there can be no such thing as Just Monarchy; no more than
it is to say, that God cannot make lawful Husband and Wife, without their own
foregoing mutual Consent. For though the Cases widely differ in many things,
yet in this they agree, that both are founded in Consent, and are not like the
Relation between Parents and Children, which is founded in Nature, and natural
Generation, and not in Consent. If the People in consenting, or dissenting,
transgress God's Law, that is their Sin, which God knows how to overruled for
his own Glory; and certainly he will so work in, dispose, govern, incline, and
change the Hearts, Minds, Wills, and Spirits of Men, that in spite of all
Opposition there shall be a Church on Earth, and some degree of Civil Order and
Government among those who are not of the Church. Now not only
Church-Societies, but also Civil Order and Political Government among Heathens,
is necessarily sounded in rational Choice and Consent, and not in brutish
Motion, nor in natural Necessity, nor in extrinsecal Force and Violence. What
harm can there be in this Position, that no Man can be rightful King without
the Peoples just Consent? Can God, who is infinitely Just, make a just and
rightful King against the Peoples just Consent? Then he is not himself, but
contrary to himself.

Error 18. In propriety of speaking, there is no natural Prince but a Father,
p. 11.] Confut. Every King supposed rightful, is naturally a Sovereign Prince,
and Allegiance is naturally due to him from all his Subjects; he is no Usurper,
but has full Right to the Throne, according to the Principles of natural
Light, common to Us and Heathens. Though he that is a Father, may be a Prince;
yet no Father as such can be a Prince, and therefore no Father as such can be a
natural Prince: For if a Father as such be a Prince, then every Father must
needs be a King, and every Mother a Queen. But every rightful King is, in
proper speaking, naturally Prince and Sovereign over the People, and their
Liege-Lord, whether he be a Father or not.

Error 19. Hobbism is holding that Power holy gives Right: But my Doctrine is,
That Power does not give Right, but is a certain sign to us, that where God has
placed and settled the Power, he has given the Authority; therefore my
Doctrine is not the same with Hobbism, p. 15.] Confut. Your Doctrine is the
very same with Hobbism, because you plainly confound Right and Wrong, most
rightful and most wrongful Monarchs, and make them to be equally the Effects of
God's Omnipotent Power and Providence; which is perfect Hobbism, and
destructive of True Religion and Morality. If God's permission of Might and
Power to this or that Man, be a certain sign to us, that God has given him
Authority and Right, then it unavoidably follows that Might and Right are
inseparable, and then all Murders, Treasons, Robberies, Rapes, Sacriledges,
Injuries, Oppressions, and unjust Violences, are for ever justified and
legitimated, and there can be no such thing as Good and Evil, Right and Wrong,
Lawful and Unlawful.

Error 20. The Outrages of Thieves and Pirates are very impertinently alleged
in this Cause. They have Force and Violence, which every Man must submit to,
when he cannot help it; but Sovereign Power is God's Authority, though Princes
may be advanced to it by no honester Means, than Thieves take a Purse, or break
open my House, and take my Money or Goods, p. 34.] Confut. Though the Case of an
Usurper does in many things greatly differ from that of Thieves and Pirates, yet
in this they both agree, that neither has true Right; the Divine Providence,
by permitting the Usurper to be in the Throne, gives him no more Right to it,
than his permitting a common Cutpurse to steal my Money, gives him Right to it.
As we submit to an Highway Robber, because he is too strong for us, and we
cannot help it, so do we to an Usurper. For I do not think you can name one M^n
truly Loyal, that would submit to a manifest Usurper if he could help it. And
if you suppose the Regnant Prince not to be manifestly an Usurper, of necessity
he is lawful and rightful Prince before God and all the World. For de non
apparentibus and non existentibus eadem est ratio; things not plainly evident
are to be esteemed as not at all. And this does principally sway with me as to
the present Government. The great Law and Rule of Conscience touching
Allegiance, I take to be this, that whoever is in possession of the Crown,
complete Allegiance is due to him, unless it be plain and evident to each Man's
Conscience, sincerely studious of his Duty to God and the King, that he is an
Usurper. But that their present Majesty's are so, is impossible to be proved.
That an Hereditary Kingdom be governed by a Monarch, is from God as Principal,
and from the People as Instrumental: but that it be governed by a notorious
Usurper, is from Satan, and not from God, though God does innocently permit it
as he does all other Sin.

Error 21. All Kings are equally rightful with respect to God, p. 14.

Error 22. Nor does it make any difference in this Case, to distinguish between
what God permits, and what he does, p. 12.] Confut. That all Kings are not
equally rightful, with respect to God, is plain from God's own words; They have
set up Kings, but not by me: they have made Princes, and I knew it not, Hos.
8.4. And from this undeniable Truth, that God is Author of Just Monarchy, but
he is not Author of Usurped Monarchy, it is contrary to his Holy Nature, and to
his Holy Law; For thou art not a God that has pleasure in Wickedness, Psalm.
5.4. True it is, that God does innocently permit Usurpation, and his Permission
is not idle, but unsearchably operative: but still he is no way Author of it;
for Usurpation is Sin, and God cannot be Author of Sin; to think it is Impiety,
and to speak it is Blasphemy. So that all usurping Kings are made by Satan, and
not by God; and every time we say the Lord's Prayer in Faith, we do
inclusively, and by implication, pray against usurping Kings.

Error 23. The distinction then between a King de jure, and a King de facto,
relates only to Humane Laws, which bind Subjects, but are not the necessary
Rules and Measures of Divine Providence, p. 14.] Confut. It relates to Divine
Laws as Principal and Supreme, and to Humane Laws as Subordinate and
Instrumental: and all such Humane Laws as are manifestly good, just, necessary
and convenient for the Common Safety and Quiet, are in a large sense rather
Divine than Humane, though in a strict sense they are not Divine. The Divine
Laws are the necessary Rules and Measures of our Duty, but not of God's
Providence. For he permits all the Sins of Angels and Men contrary to his Holy
Laws, and yet is no way Author of Sin.

Error 24. The Doctrine of the Church of England is, That usurping Kings, after
they are once thoroughly settled in the Throne, are to be submitted to as God's
Ordinance, and complete Allegiance is to be paid them as invested with God's
Authority, whatever their Legal Right be. For the proof of which I appeal to Bp
Overal's Convocation-Book, p, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.] Confut. Not to dispute
whether Bp Overal's Convocation. Book is to be admitted as an authentic and
adequate Proof of the Doctrine of the Church of England, that Book does not
prove your Point: For it proves only this, That usurping Kings, when once
thoroughly settled in the Throne, cease to be Usurpers, and become lawful Kings,
and invested with God's Authority. This I grant; But does this Convocation-Book
say, that there can be a through settlement of Kings in the Throne without
Legal Right? This it says not; and therefore you greatly err in replying upon
that as a Proof, which really is none, but your own Mistake and Miscollection.
You your self confess page 9. That the foresaid Convocation has not determined
when a Government gotten by Usurpation may be said to be thoroughly settled. Now
I affirm, in contradiction to the Scope and Tenor of your Book, that no
Government can be thoroughly settled without Legal Right. It is very probable
that Convocation had in their Eye the two recent Cases of Holland and Scotland.
1. As to Holland, while the King of Spain denied them to be a free independent
and Sovereign State, and claimed them as his Right, and maintained his Claim by
the Sword, and refused to treat with them as a Sovereign State; the Convocation
might probably think, that the revolution in Holland was not thoroughly settled.
But after King Philip, by his Agents, condescended to treat with them as a
Sovereign State, and did so own and admit them, it is manifest, that from this
time they began to be thoroughly settled; and though the beginning should be
supposed to be by Usurpation, yet now it ceased to be so, and became a Just
Government by the Law of Nations. 2. As to Scotland, while Mary Queen of Scots
was alive, though Prisoner in England, the Convocation might perhaps doubt
whether the Crown of Scotland might be said to be thoroughly settled: but after
she was dead, there was no question to be made of King James his right: for if
it should be supposed that he was an Usuper before, yet after her Detth he had
unquestionable Right, and began to be fully and thoroughly settled in the
Throne, by the Law of Nations and the municipal Laws of Scotland.

Error 25. To fight against a King, and not to fight for him, I think are two
very different things; and when Kings make it impossible to fight for them,
without fighting against the Religion and Liberties of our Country, they may
thank themselves, if their Subjects cannot defend them, p. 49.] Confut. Either
the King is rightful King, or he is not. If yea, then he is God's Ordinance;
and how can we, in fighting for God's Ordinance, be said to fight against it
and true Religion? If not, then he is not God's Ordinance, and why then may we
not fight against him, as Jehoiada and the good People of Judah did against
Athaliah? You and your Fellows think it your Virtue and Praise, that you had no
hand in the late Revolution. Now, either the late King James, when the Prince
landed, was rightful King, or he was not: If yea, then why did not you preach
and press the Doctrine of Non-resistance and Passive Obedience? Why did you not
convince the People, that he who is not for his rightful King and Sovereign is
against him, and that to fight for him, is to fight for God's Ordinance? Why
did you basely and treacherously, both Clergy and Laity forsake him in his
Distress, and stood looking on his Misery, and afford him no help at all? Was
this Loyalty to your King: Is it true Loyalty to be Neuter between God's
Ordinance and Satan's Ordinance? But if the late King James when the Prince
landed, was not rightful King, but an Invader and Subverter of the Legal
Monarcy, and of True Religion, and National Rights and Liberties; and if the
Prince came to save the Legal Monarchy, and to rescue the National Rights and
Liberties, and to preserve and uphold True Religion, why should it be your
Virtue and Praise to have no hand in the Revolution?

Error 26. To judge truly of the legality of the late Revolution, requires such
perfect skill in Law and History, and the Constitution of the English
Government, that few Men are capable of making so plain and certain a Judgment
of it, as to be a clear and safe Rule of Conscience, p. 2.] Confut. Certainly
either the Prince of Orange's Undertaking, Landing, and Progress in his Affairs
to the time of his being set in the Throne by Common Consent of the Nation, and
the two Princesses, was Lawful, or we have done ill in giving such solemn
Thanks to God for it as we have; and not only we in this Nation, but Scotland,
also and Ireland, as to the Protestant part, and all the Reformed Churches
beyond Sea: and v^^y (...), of the Popish Party, even Princes and
Sovereign-States have appro^^^ it. But too much Light puts out some Men's Eyes.
It is sufficient as to you, that nothing at all in the late Revolution came to
pass without the Providence of God: for this with you is all in all in pulling
down and setting up of Kings, whether they have legal Right or not. As to the
Non-swearer^ the chief of them had a principal Hand in the late Revolution, and
did eminently and publicly, by Word and Deed, and published Declaration,
concur to it; and the thing it self was so manifestly just, that it did
overpower Men's Minds with its Evidence, and could not be gainsaid. Indeed
there was for some time dispute about the Point of Abdication. But all the
while it was indisputably plain, that the Throne was empty, and the Government
of the Nation for a time was unhinged, and the late King, by hearkening to
Popish Counsels, and obstinately relying upon them, had brought all this upon
himself. The late Revolution needs not our Arguments to make it good, there is
no necessity of turning over Volumes of Law and History for decision hereof, it
commends it self to every Man's Conscience, in the sight of God, to be no
prosperous Wickedness, but God's great Goodness and Mercy to three Protestant
Nations, if we had but Grace to be thankful for it, and rightly to use and walk
worthy of so great a Blessing; So great, that I greatly fear, what between the
Non-swearers, and the deceitful and equivocal Swearers, and the malicious
haters of Godliness and Holy unity among us, and the self-seeking Spirit which
so sadly prevails, we shall yet have cause of renewing days of Fasting and
Prayer, and happy we if we can so prevail with our God.

Error 27. If Princes receive their Authority from Men and Humane Laws, I
cannot imagine, that their Power is any more than a Trust, of which they must
give an account to those who have entrusted them with it, p. 36.] Confut. The
Prince receives his Authority from God as Principal, and from the People as
Instrumental; yet is he not strictly accountable to us, but to God, as being
God's Trustee over us, and neither our Servant, nor our Equal, but Superior to
us all. Yet is he inviolably bound to perform Covenant with us, no less than we
are bound to perform Covenant to him. If he shall, contrary to the fundamental
Oath and Covenant between Him and the Nation, go about to enslave us, to
subvert the Legal Monarchy, and those Laws by which the mutual Rights of Prince
and People do consist, he ceases to be our lawful King, and becomes the same
with an Usurper. We in so judging do not exercise any superiority over him, nor
call him to account, but as Men endued with common Sense and Reason, we judge
righteous Judgment. God himself permits us to judge between him and us: And now,
O Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and Men of Judah, judge, I pray you, betwixt me and
my Vineyard, Isa. 5.3. Does this make us superior to God? Do we, in discerning
between Right and Wrong, and judging according to Truth, exercise Authority
over God, and call him to account? Sure, Kings are not above God! while they
have legal Right to the Throne, they may not be resisted: but if they have no
legal Right to it, they may be resisted, as was Athaliah, when it can be done
with Common Safety.

Many more Errors might be set down out of your Book, according to the old and
true Maxim, Vno absurdo dato, sequuntur mill, grant one Absurdity, and a
thousand follow: But I have neither leisure nor list to meddle with more, and
had rather see their Majesty's unsubdued Enemies effectually reduced, and
clothed with shame, and these three Nations freed from every Adversary and evil
Occurrent, and an end put to War, than read Books stuffed with cold Arguments and
dead Syllogisms, to prove their present Majesty's now no Usurpers, though
lately they were, their Throne being now thoroughly settled. If really they were
Usurpers from the beginning, I doubt they are so still. God has indeed blessed
his Majesty with great Success; but we are great Sinners against God, and
engaged in a very expensive War, against an Enemy not to be despised; and as we
have ground to hope, so we have great reason not to be high-minded, but fear;
for if we have not Success, I doubt all Paper-Arguments, and artificial
Syllogisms, and Books of Dispute, will prove too weak to convince Men's Minds
that their present Majesty's are thoroughly settled in the Throne.

FINIS.

