THE MORALS OF CONFVCIVS A Chinese Philosopher, Who flourished above Five
Hundred Years before the coming of our Lord and Savio^r Jesus Christ. Being one
of the most choicest Pieces of Learning remaining of that Nation.

LICENSED, Feb. 25. 1691. I. FRASER.

LONDON: Printed for Randal Tailor near Stationers Hall. MDCXCI.

Advertisement.
THE Work here Publ^sh'd, and wherein, as in Epitome, is cont^ined all the
Morals of Confucius the Chinese Philosopher, is very small, if we respect the
number of Pages which compose it; but it is doubtless very Great, if
Consideration be had to the importance of the Things therein contained.

We may say that the Morals of this Philosopher are infinitely Sublime, but
(...) the same time, pure, sensible, and drawn from the purest Fountains of
Natural Reason. Certainly, a Reason destitute of the Lights of Divine
Revelation, has never appeared with so much ^^umination and Power. And as there
(...) not any Duty omitted by Confucius, so th^re is not any besides those here
m^ntioned. He greatly extends his Morals, ^ut not farther than needs must; his
^udgment ever telling him ho^ far he must go, and where he must stop.

In which he has a very considerable Advantage, not only over a great number of
Pagan Writers, that have Treated o^ Things of this Nature, but likewise ove^
several Christian Authors, who aboun^ with so many false, or over-subtil^
Thoughts; who almost every where surpass the Bounds of their Duty, and who give
themselves up to their own Fancy, or ill Humor; who almost always digress from
that just Mean, wh^re Virtue ought to be placed; who, by their false
Portraitures do render it impossible to our Practice, and who consequently make
few Virtuous Men.

The Author de la maniere de bien p^^ser dans les Ouvrages d'Espri^, who to a
style extremely Polite and Exact, always adds an exquisite Judgment very well
remarks the weakness and falsity of these Words of a late Writer, Every one
endeavors to possess the most Room he can in his own Imagination, and promotes
and aggrandises himself in the World, only to Augment the Idea which every one
has of himself. Behold the end of all the Ambitious Designs of Men. Alexander,
etc. Caesar had no other Prospect in all their Battles than this.

Indeed, Alexander and Caesar might in their Battles, not only have meditated
o^ their interior Image, and although the Thought then had, might prove true in
some Occurrence, yet it could not be so in the Extent that was given it. There
is therefore nothing worse Thought than what he Vtters, who has Composed the
first Treatise of the Moral Essays, and whose Words we have just mentioned.

What the Author of these Essays lays down at first, and which he who Composes
the Excell^nt Dial^gues already mentioned, would not take the Pains to revive,
is al^ost of this Stamp; It Is even somewhat worse, to which very little
Attention is required. I conceive, says he, that he who at first styled
himself, High and Mighty Lord, looked upon himself as Born upon the Head of his
Vassals, and that it is this that he means by this Epithet high, so little
suitable to the vileness of Men.

What signifi^s all this? or rather, How dares one from a serious and grave Air
to ^dvance Things of this Nature? Wha^ i^ m^ant by these Words, I imagine, tha^
he who at the first Styled himself, Hig^ and Mighty Lord, looked upon himse^^
as advanced over the Head of his Va^^sals. These Words can have but T^^ Senses;
the one Proper, the other Figu^rative. The Prop^r and Natural Sens^ is, That
this Lord imagined that his F^^^ were rested on the Head of his Vassal^ and
that he walked upon their Heads (...) Higher; and that to See and Comman^ them,
he was forced to look down. The Figurative Sense is, That this Lord thought
himself advanced in Authori^^ over his Vassals, and that his Rank an^ P^w^r
were much more considerable than th^irs. It is ^vident, that unless this Lord
had lost his Wits, he could not imagine what the first Sense signifies; and a^
for the second, which is Figurative, it is very true: This Lord had Reason to
consider himself as advanced above his Subjects, it was his Right to assume
Titles which denoted his Power and Authority, and he did no more than what
those, whom God has ordained to Command others, have always done. God himself,
in his Scriptures, calls them G^d's, which is much more than High and Mighty
Lords. So these other Words, This Epithete of High is so unsuitable to the
lowness of Men, are no more intelligible than the f^rmer.

These Places, which we have obs^rv'd, are not the only ones of this Nature,
which are found in the Moral Essays. There are infinite other such like. And
not to go from the first Treatise, can these possibly be Solid.

Although Men should have made great Progress therein, (the Author Speaks of the
Knowledge of Things) they would hardly be the more estimable; seeing that these
Barren Sciences are so incapable of bringing any Fruit, and solid Contentment
to them, that one is as Happy in rejecting them at first, as in carrying them
by long Study, to the highest Pitch they can be carried.

We are only capable of knowing one single object, and one single Truth at
once. The rest remains buried in our Memory, as if it was not. Behold therefore
our Knowledge reduced to a single Object.

Who is he that is not Convinced, that it is a baseness to think himself
valuable because he is well Clad, well Horsed, that he has justly directed a
Ball, and walks with a good Grace?

What! Do not the Scien^es and Excellent Discoveries render a Man more Happy,
Content, and Complaisant, when he ^nd^rstands the right Use thereof? Is it not
well k^own, that there are many Divines, who are of Opinion, That one of the
Things which will comple^t the Happin^s^ of the Saints in Heaven, will be a
great Knowledge of an infinite number of Truth^ which are unknown to us upon
Earth? Is it because our Spirit can at the same time Meditate only upon one
^ingle Obje^^, that it thence follows, that all the Knowledge of an Experienced
M^n is limited to this single Object, that he knows no other.

Behold therefore our Knowledge reduced to a single Object. In fine, Is it a
Basenes^ for a Knight, or Co^rtier, to think he shall be the more ^steem'd, if
he does what is suitable to his Rank; if among ^ther Things, he is properly
Habited, well Horsed, and Walk^ with a good (...)? And wo^ld ^e not be truly
worthy ^f Conte^^t wo^^d he not discover a m^anness of Mind, if he had unproper
Habilliments, if he should take no Care and Pains to be well Horsed, if he
should Ride without any Art, or Walk like a Paisant.

We can aver, that in this Abridgement of Confucius's Morals, nothing will be
found like what we have Remarkt. We shall here see Moral Essays, which are
Masterpieces. Ev^ry Thing herein is Solid; because that right Reason, that
inward Verity, which is implanted in the Soul of al^ M^n, and which our
Philosopher incessantly Consulted without Prejudice, guided all his Words. Thus
the R^les which he Prescrib^s, and the D^ties to ^h^ch he Exhorts, are such,
that there is no Person which does not immedi^tely give his Approbation
thereunto. There is nothing of Falsity in his Reasonings, nothing Extreme, none
of those frightful Subtilties, which are observed in the Moral Treatises of
most Modern Metaphysitians Voyez le Traitte de Morale de l'Autheur de la
Reche^che de la Verite.
, that is to say, in Discourses where Simpl^city, Clearness, and P^rspicuity
ought to prevail thro^ghout, and make it self Sensible to Minds ^f the low^st
Rank.

We shall perhaps find this Maxim a little Relaxed, where Confucius says, That
there are certain Persons whom it is Lawful to Hate. Nevertheless, if the Thing
be closely Considered, we shall find the Thought to be Just and Reasonable.
Virtue, indeed, Commands us to do Good to all Men, as Confucius states it; but
it requires not that we should effectually have Friendship for all sorts of
Persons. There are some so Odious, that it is absolutely impossible to Love
them: For after all, w^ only can Love Good; we Naturally have an Aversion for
what appears extremely Wicked and Defective. All that Charity obliges us to do
on this Account, is, to show kindness to a Person, when it is in our Power, as
if w^ Loved him, notwith^tanding the Vices, Malic^, and great D^fects, which
are discovered in him.

Seeing that opportunity o^^ers, we shall take Notice, That the Duty of Loving
our Enemies, which Jesus Christ so much Recommends in his Gospel, is generally
too much stretched. This Duty is v^ry diffi^ult to perform in its just Extent,
without our render^ng it yet harder, or rather impossible to Practice, and
capable of casting us into Despair, and of making us fall into an entire
Relaxation. The generality of those that explain this Duty, do speak as if we
were obliged to retain in our Hearts a tender Amity for all our Enemies, how
Wicked and Abominable so^v^r they be. Yet, this is not precisely that which the
Son of God requires at our Hands, because he demands not Things absolutely
impossible. His aim is to excite us to ^ehave o^r selves toward our Enemies,
whoever they be, as we do to them that we Love. Indeed, the Scriptures does, in
several places, by to Love signifies to do Good, almost in the same manner as
we do to those for whom we have a great A^^ection. If this were a sit occasion,
we might Verify this with ^everal Passages. We shall satisfy our selves only
with alleging the Example of God himself, which our Savior proposes ^or our
Imitation. For, after having said, Matthew. 5.44.45. Love your Enemies; Bless
them that Curse you; do Good to them that Hate you; and Pray for them which
Despitefully use you, and persecute you; (for these are all as so many
Synonymous Terms,) he adds, That ye may be the Children of your Father which is
in Heaven: For he makes his Sun to Rise upon the Evil and on the Good, and
sends his Rain on the Just and on the un-Just. Now, it is certain, That God
Loves not the Wicked and Unjust, although he may do them Good: He has had an
extreme Aversion for a Caligula, for a Nero, and other such like Monsters;
although he has caused his Sun to Shine, and sent his Rain upon them. But he has
dealt with them as if he Loved them; and it is after this manner also that we
ought to Deport our selves toward our Enemies. It Is not that we are not bound
sincerely to endeavor, what in us lies, to retain in our Hearts some
Sentiments of Friendship for them; but there are certain Persons so Lewd, so
Pros^igate, and so Abominable, for whom it is impossible to have these
Sentiments. And it is upon this Account that the Charity is yet greater, more
generous, and Praise W^rthy, when notwithstanding that Aversion which we cannot
hinder our selves from bearing to ^ertain Persons, we cease not to do them Good
upon Occasion, with the Prospect of yielding Obedience unto God.

As for the rest, by what we have hithirto said it may be judged how
exceedingly the Public is behold^n to the R. F. Incorcetta and Couplet, who
have Translated, out of Chinese into Latin, the Three Books of Confucius, from
which we have Extracted this Piece of Morality^ which is now divulged. We have
Selected the most important Things, and have let slip several, which, although
good in themselves, and particularly agreeable to the Genius of the Persons for
whom they have been Said and Writ, would have seemed, perhaps, too common and
inconsiderable in our Europe. And forasmuch, as in the Work of the R. F.
Incorcetta and Couplet, a Discourse is made concerning the Origin of the
Chinese Nation, and of the Ancient^st Books which this Nation enjoys, and which
were Extant, several Ages before that of Confucius, we have therefore
Translated what on ^h^s account is most necessary to be known.

It is here requisite, for the Reader's Satisfaction, to declare, That the
Chinese, from the beginning of their Origin to the times of Confucius, have
not been Idolaters; that they have not had neither false Gods nor Images; that
they have paid Adoration only to the Creator of the Universe, whom they have
al^ays called Xam-ti, and to whom their third Emperor named Hoam-ti, erected a
Temple, which was probable the first that was Built to God. The Name of Xam-ti,
which they attribute to God, signifies Sovereign Master, or Emperor. It is
observable, that there have been a great many of the Chinese Emperors that have
very frequently assumed the Surname of Ti, which imports Master, Emperor, or
that of Vam, which signifies King^ that there was one Prince of the Fourth
Race, who was called Xi Hoam Ti, The Great, or August Emperor; but there is not
found any that has dared to assume the Title of Xam, that is to say, Sovereign,
and that they have always respectfully left it to the absolute Judge of the
Universe.

It is true, that in China, Sacrifices have ever been offered to diverse
Tutelary Angels: But in the times which preceeded Confucius, 'twas in Respect
of Honoring them infinitely less than Xam-ti, the Souveraign Lord of the World.

The Chinese served God with Extraordinary Pomp and Magnificence, but at the
same time, with a very modest and very humble Behavior; and said, That all
this external Worship was in no wise agreeable to the Divinity, if the Soul was
not inwardly Adorned with Piety and Virtue. They highly Honor their Fathers
and Mothers, and Persons advanced in Age. The Women were very Virtuous; and in
their Habits and all their Fashions great Modesty was observed. The Men and
Women, Nobles and Peasants, Kings and Subjects, did greatly esteem Sobriety,
Frugality, Moderation, Justice, and Virtue.

The Religion and Piety of the Chinese continued almost in this State unto the
Time of the Philosopher Li Lao Kiun, who was Contemporary with Confucius, and
who first declared there were several Gods. Confucius put a stop to the Torrent
of Superstition and Idolat^y, which b^gan to overflow. But in fine, when Fohi's
Idol was brought from the Indies, that is to say, Sixty five Years after Jesus
Christ, this Torrent so strongly overflowed, that it made an Irruption, the sad
Effects whereof are still seen.

'Twere to be wished that there had from time to time been raised of these
Confucius's. Things would not be in the posture wherein they are at China. This
great M^n instructed, as well by his Manners and Example, as by his Precepts:
And his Precepts are so just, so necessary, and proposed with so much Gravity,
and at the same time with so much Me^kness and Ingenuity, that they must needs
easily insinuate into their Hearts, and produce great Eff^cts therein. Read
only this little Treatise which is sufficient to give you a very great and
plenary Satisfaction.

THE MORALS OF CONFVCIVS THE Chinese Philosopher.
The FIRST PART. Of the Antiquity and Philosophy of the Chinese.
ALthough in this little Work our Design is only to relate what is most
Remarkable in Confucius's Books, yet we are obliged to speak of some Books
which have appeared in China before this Philosopher. But this being not to be
done without reflecting a little backward, we will discourse one word
concerning the Origin and Antiquity of the Chinese.

The Chinese Chronologers do almost all agree, that Fohi, who began to reign
2952 Years before the Birth of Jesus Christ, was the Founder of this Monarchy.
The Chinese that have interpreted these Annals, make no difficulty to avow,
that whatever is writ concerning China, before the Reign of this Emperor, is
fabulous and suspicious: and one of their most renowned Historians, named
Taisucum, frankly confesses, that he is ignorant of what passed before the
Reign of Xinum, the Successor of Fohi. There are only certain Annals which the
Chinese call the Great Annals, wherein the thing is otherwise read. The Author
of this Prodigious Chronology, which contains almost an Hundred and fifty
Volumes, reports that after the Creation of the World, there were three
Emperors: The one of Heaven, the other of the Earth, and the third of Men; That
the Progeny of this last succeeded one another for the space of above Forty
nine thousand Years; after which, Thirty five Imperial Families do successively
Reign for several Ages without Interruption. This Author likewise adds, That he
justifies not what he says, and at last agrees, that it is more certain to
begin with Fohi, and herein to follow the most famous and best reputed
Historians.

It Is not that in Fohi's Life they have not inserted an infinite Number of
Fables, which might cause us to question whether this Emperor ever was; For
besides that in the Great Annals it is read, that Fohi's Mother accidentally
stepping into a Place where a Giant had passed, she was suddenly encompassed
with a Rainbow, and that 'twas at this very moment, that she perceived her self
with Child of the Founder of the Chinese Monarchy: where it is also related
that this Founder had the Head of a Man, and Body of a Serpent. It Is true, that
these Fables being very gross, the Generality of the Chinese derides them.
They report, that the Ground of this Ridiculous Tradition was the Color of
Fohi's Body, which was marked with several spots; or rather, that it was an
Hieroglyphick, whereby they intended to represent this Prince, as a Prince of
extraordinary Prudence. But although we had not this Consideration and
Prospect, the Genealogy of this King is so exact, so circumstantial, and so
well prosecuted in the Chronological Tables of the Chinese, that it is not
possible to imagine it only a Fancy; so that there is certainly as little
reason to deny, or even to question that Fohi ever was, as to maintain that
Saturn, Jupiter, Hercules and Romulus are only Names, under pretense that the
Poets and gravest Historians have intermixed the History of their Birth with a
Thousand impertinent Fables.

Nevertheless, these very Annals, which contain so many Fables upon the Account
of Fohi's Birth, do say nothing of his Predecessor's, and do speak very
imperfectly concerning his Country; which makes us suspect that he was not Born
in China, and that he came thither from some other place. They only intimate,
that he was Born in a Province called Kensi, where he indeed must necessarily
arrive, supposing that he came from some other Part into China: For after the
Confusion of Tongu^s, and Dispersion of the People, he must come from
Mesopotamia, or from the Territory of Sennaar, to Land at Kensi, and afterward
arrive in the heart of the Country, viz. in the Province of Honan, where it is
writ that he kept his Co^rt.

Although we cannot exactly know at what time Fohi laid the first Foundations
of his Empire, yet it is very probable that it was not long after the Deluge:
For indeed, if we vigorously follow the Computations of the Chinese, and
Chronology of the Septuagint, 'twas not till about 200 Years after, in a time
when Noah was yet living; so that we may readily believe that he is descended
from this Patriarch by Sem, who according to the Sentiment of the whole World,
had Asia for his Inheritance. And that which more confirms us in our Opinion,
is, that in the Chinese Language, Sem, which signifies to engender and produce,
imports also Life and Sacrifice. Indeed, it is from Noah's Children, that all
Men since the Deluge are descended, and have received Life, and have learned to
offer Sacrifice unto God. Whereunto it might be added, that Fohi is by the
Chinese called Pa^hi, which signif^es also a Victim, because that he was the
first of Sem's Posterity that introduced the Service of God and Use of
Sacrifices amongst them.

But if we refuse to adhere to the Computations before^ention'd, let us
retrench, with their leave, the first six Emperors, whose History cannot in
every thing be true, and let us begin to compute only from the seventh, viz.
from the Emperor Yao. For from this Emperor's Reign, so many Persons have, by
Cycles computed and writ, whatever has passed in this Kingdom, and have done it
with so much exactness, and such a general Uniformity, that we can no more
doubt of the Truth of their Calculation, than of that of the Greek Olympiads.
For we shall also find, according to that Computation, that the Origin of the
Chinese Nation was not long after the Flood; for from the time of Yao, to the
Year of this Age 1688. it is Four thousand forty and eight Years.

This being so, it must n^c^ssarily follow that the first I^habitants of China
had likewise the true Knowledge of God, and of the Creation of the World; For
the Idea of the true God, and the Remembrance of the World's Creation continued
a long time after the Deluge, in the Minds of Men, and even of those that were
most corrupted, as the Posterity of Cham for example. Indeed, besides that in
the Annals of the Chinese, a Discourse is there made concerning the Creation
o^ the World, although after a different Method from Moses's History, yet it
was not possible that these Idea's of the true God, which the Creation of the
World, and after that the Deluge had deeply ingrav'd in their Hearts, could be
so suddenly effaced in such a manner, as that they should fall into Idolatry,
and follow after other Gods than he that had created them. But the more
thoroughly to convince us of what we have been discoursing, it is needful only
to consider the Doctrine, Sen^iments and Manners of the Ancient Chinese, the
Books of their Philosophers, and especially those of Confucius. Certainly we
shall throughout observe the excellentest Morality that ever was taught, a
Morality which might be said to proceed from the School of Jesus Christ.

The Books which the Ancient Chinese have writ, are exceeding numerous, but
the chief are those which are called Vkim; that is to say, The five Volumes,
and those entitled Su Xu, that is to say, The four Books.

The first and chiefest of these five Volumes is called Xu Kin. It is not
necessary very amply to discourse of the Antiquity of this Work; It Is
sufficient to say, that in perusing it we find, that the Author wrote a long
time before Moses. At first there is seen the History of three great Kings,
viz. Yao, Xun, and Vu, the last of which was the first and chief of the Family
Hia, the most considerable of all the Imperial Families; and the two others
have been famous Lawgivers, and, as it were, the Solon's of China. Therein is
afterward found the most important Constitutions that were made during the
Reign of the second Family, or Imperial House called Xam and Vu, especially by
Chimtam, who was the Founder thereof, and who arrived at the Empire 1776 Years
before the coming of Jesus Christ. In fine, a Discourse is there made of the
third Family, wherein is chiefly related what was said or done most remarkable
under the Government of the five first Princes, and of the twelfth. There is
represented the History of Vuvam, who was the chief of this third Family, and
the Lucubrations and Instructions of the Illustrious Cheucum, the Brother of
this Emperor, who was a Prince highly esteemed, both for his Virtue and
extraordinary Prudence. This whole Volume, not to multiply words, is only an
Historical Relation, and Collection of Moral Maxims, of Harangues spoken by
Princes, of Sentences uttered by the Mouths of Kings, and particular Persons,
and of Precepts and Councils given to Princes, wherein so much Prudence,
Policy, Wisdom and Religion is ^et ^orth, that they might be given to all
Christian Princes.

The second Volume, which is properly a Recital of the Customs and Ordinances
of almost twelve Kings, is entitled Xi Ki^. It Is a Collection of Odes, and
several other little Poems of this Nature: For Music being greatly esteemed,
and much used in China, and whatever is published in this Volume having respect
only to the Purity of Manners, and Practice of Virtue, those that wrote it
composed it in Verse, to the end that every one being enabled to sing the
things therein contained, they might be in every one's Mouth. Virtue is there
magnified and extolled to the highest degree, and there are so many things
expressed after a method so grave and wise, that it is impossible not to admire
them. It is very true, that therein is contained things very ridiculous,
extravagant Hyperboles in ^avour of certain Princes, and Murmurings and
Repinings against God and Heaven: But the most Judicious Interpreters are of
Opinion, that all this is suspicious; that those to whom they are attributed
are not the Authors; that they are not to be credited, as being since added.
Indeed the other Ancient Odes, they say, contain nothing ridiculous,
extravagant, or criminal, as appears by these words of C^nfucius; The whole
Doctrine of the three hundred Poems is reduced to these few Words, Su Vu Si^,
which import, That we ought not to think any thing that is wicked or impure.

The third Volume is called Ye Kim. In this Volume, which is the Ancientest, if
it may be called a Volume, nothing but Obscurity and Darkness is observed. Fohi
had no sooner founded his Empire, than he gave Instructions to the Chinese;
but the use of Characters and Writing being unknown, this Prince, who could not
teach them all with his Voice, and who was moreover employed in the Advancement
of his growing Monarchy, after a long and serious Consideration, thought at
last upon making a Tabl^, composed of some little Lines which it is not
necessary to describe. The Chinese being as yet dull and rustic, it is
probable that this Prince labored in vain; and if it is true, that he
accomplished his Design, by the clear and easy Explications which he himself
gave for the understanding of these Lines, it happened, at least insensibly,
that this Table became useless. For it is certain, that after his Death nothing
could make use thereof. Two thousand Years from the Foundation of the Monarchy
were near elapsed, no one being able any way to decypher this Mysterious Table,
when at last an O^depus was seen to appear: 'Twas a Prince named Venvam. This
Prince endeavored to penetrate the sense of these Lines by a great number of
others, which he disposed after different ways; they were new Aenigma's. His
Son, viz. Cheucum, attempted the same thing; But had not the good fortune
better to succeed. In brief, five hundred Years after appeared Confucius, who
endeavored to untie this Gordius's Knot. He explained, according to his
Understanding, the little Lines of the Founder, with the Interpretations that
had been made before him, and refers all to the Nature of Beings and Elements;
to the Manners and Discipline of Men. It is true, that Confucius being arrived
at a more advanced Age, acknowledged his Mistake, and designed to make new
Commentaries on this Aenigmatical Work: But Death hindered him from ful^illing
his Resolution.

To the fourth Volume Confuciu^ has given the Title of Chun Cie^; words which
signify the Spring and Autumn. He composed it in his Old Age. He discourses
like an Historian of the Expeditions of diverse Princes; of their Virtues and
Vices; of the Fatigues they underwent, with the Recompenses they received.
Confucius designed to this fourth Volume the Title of Spring and Autumn, which
is an Emblematical Title, because that States flourish when their Princes are
endowed with Virtue and Wisdom^ which is represented by the Spring; and that on
the contrary they fall like the Leaves, and are utterly destroyed, when their
Princes are dispirited, o^ are wicked, which is represented by the Autumn.

The Fifth Volume entitled Li Ki, or Memoires of Ri^es and Duties, is composed
of two Books, the Matter of which is extracted by Confucius out of several
other Books, and of various Monuments of Antiquity. But about Three hundred
years after, all the Copies of this Work being Burnt, by the Command of a cruel
Emperor, called Xihoamti, and this Loss being impossible to be repaired any
other way, than by consulting the most Aged Persons that might have preserved
any Idea's thereof, it is not to be questioned that the Work is at present
exceedingly defective, even as the Interpr^ters themselves acknowledge; There
are indeed several things herein wanting, and a great many others added, which
never were in Confucius's Copies. However, in this whole Volume, such as it now
is, he Treats of the Rites as well Sacred as Profane, of all sorts of Duties,
such as were practiced in the time of the three Families of the Princes Hia,
Xa^, and Che^, but especially of that which Reigned in Confucius's time. These
Duties are those of Parents to their Children; those of Children to their
Parents; the Duties of Husband and Wife; those of Friends, those which respect
Hospitality, and those which are necessary to be performed at home, or abroad,
or at Feasts. He there discourses likewise of the Vessels of the Sacrifices, of
the Victims that were to be offered up unto Heaven, o^ the Temples to be chosen
for that end, of the respect we ought to have for the Dead, and of their
Obsequies or Funeral Rites. In a word, he therein Treats of the Liberal Arts,
especially of Music, of the Military Art, of the way of lancing a Javelin, and
guiding a Chariot. Behold in brief what the five Volumes contain.

The four Books, the three first o^ which are Confucius's Books, whereof we
design to speak, do comprehend the whole Philosophy of the Chinese, at least,
whatever this Philosophy has most curious and considerable. They explain and
more clearly illustrate what is writ in the five Volumes: and although the
Authority of the five Volumes be infinitely greater, by reason of their
Antiquity, than that of the ^our Volumes, yet the four Volumes exceed it, for
the Advantage that may be received therefrom. Indeed, besides that the Chinese
do thence derive their Principal Oracles, and what they believe to be eternal
Verities; The L^terati, which are Philosophers that follow Confucius's
Doctrine, and which have in their own hands all the Employments of the Nation,
cannot arrive at the degree of a Philosopher, and consequently to be Mandorims
or Magistrates, without a great Knowledge of these four Books. They are, in
truth, under an Obligation, to know one of the five Volumes, which they please
to choose, according to their Fancy and Inclination: But as for the ^our Books,
they are indispensably obliged to know them all four by heart, and thoroughly to
understand them; The principal Reasons of which are as follow: The first is,
That Confucius and Memcius, who writ the fourth Book, have Collected what is
best and most exquisite in the Works of the Ancients. The second is, That they
have added several good things to the Discoveries and Thoughts of their
Ancestors. The third, That Confucius and Memcius propose their Doctrine after a
clearer and politer Method than was formerly done. In fine, it is because that
Confucius and Memcius have, in the four Books, avoided the dull and harsh style
of the Ancients, and that by a smooth style, although without Pride and
Arrogance, they have added Ornaments to the naked Simplicity of the Golden Age.

We have nothing to say concerning the Fourth Book, because that this Work of
Memcius has not as yet appeared in Europe: but before we proceed to speak of
Confucius, it is necessary to publish the Merit of this Philosopher, together
with the most remarkable Passages of his Life.

Confucius was Born 551 Years before the coming of Jesus Christ. He was of a
most Noble Extraction; for, not to mention his Mother, who was of an
Illustrious Birth, his Father, who had been advanced to the first and chiefest
Offices of the Empire, was descended from the last Emperor of the second Family.

Dispositions to Virtue appearing sometimes in the tenderest Years, Confucius,
at six Years old discovered nothing of a Child: All his ways were Manly.

At the Age of Fifteen Years, he applied himself to the Reading of the
Ancients, and having selected those which were most esteemed, and which himself
judged the best, he thence extracted the most excellent Instructions, with a
design first to profit himself, thereby to make them the Rules of his own
Conduct, and afterward to propose them to others. At Twenty Years old he
Married, and had a Son named Peyu, who died at Fifty. He was the only Child he
had, but his Race extinguished not, he had a Grandson called Cusu, that was an
Honor to his Ancestors. Cusu applied himself to Philosophy, he made
Commentaries on his Grandfather's Books, was advanced to the highest Dignities,
and his House is so well supported, and his Posterity have always been so
considerable both for their Promotions and Opulency, that this Family is at
present one of the most Illustrious in China.

Confucius exercised the Magistracy at diverse places with very good Success,
and with a great Reputation; His greatest Aim being the Public Good, and the
Propagation of his Doctrine, he ambiciously sought not after Vainglory in
these sorts of Employs. Insomuch, that when he accomplished not his end, when
he saw himself frustrated in the hopes he had of being enabled more easily to
diffuse his Lights, from an high Place, he descended and renounced the Office
of a Magistrate.

This Philosopher had Three thousand Disciples, among which, there were Five
hundred that managed the most Eminent Charges in several Kingdoms, and Seventy
two whose Virtue and Knowledge was so extraordinary, that the Annals have
preserved their Names, Sirnames, and the Names of their Country to Posterity.
He divided his Doctrine into four Parts; so that Confucius's School was
composed of four Orders of Disciples. Those of the first Order applied
themselves to cultivate Virtue, and thereby to impress strong Dispositions in
their Heart and Mind. Those of the second Order addicted themselves to the Art
of Ratiocination and Rhetoric. The third studied Politics. And the Business
and Employment of the fourth Order, was to write in a smooth and neat style,
what concerned Morality. Amongst these Seventy two Disciples, there were Ten
that signalized themselves, and whose Names and Wri^ings are in great
Veneration.

Confucius, throughout his Doctrine, had no other intent than to dissipate the
Mists of the Mind, to extirpate Vice, and re-establish that Integrity which he
affirmed to have been a Present from Heaven. And the more easily to attain this
end, he exhorted all those that heard his Instructions, to obey Heaven, to fear
and serve it, to love his Neighbor as himself, to conquer and submit his
Passions unto Reason, to do nothing, say nothing, nor think nothing contrary to
it. And what was more remarkable, he recommended nothing to others, either in
Writing or by word of Mouth, which he did not first practice himself. His
Disciples also had for him a Veneration so extraordinary, that they sometimes
made no scruple to pay him those Honors, which were used to be rendered to
those only that sat upon the Throne: An Example of which we will give you.
'Twas an Ancient Custom amongst the Chinese, to place Sick Persons Beds on the
North-side: but because that this situation was the situation of the King's
Beds; when a King visited a Sick Person, the Bed was removed to the South Side,
and 'twas a Crime not to do it. Confucius had some Disciples, that, in their
Sicknesses, rendered him such an Homage. We must not here forget one very
remarkable Thing which the Chinese relate. They report that Confucius was used
continually to say, That the Holy Man was in the West. Whatever his Thoughts
were, it is certain that Sixty and five Years after Christ's Birth, the Emperor
Mimti, excited by the Philosopher's words, and much more, as it is said, by the
Image of the Holy Hero that appeared to him in a Dream, sent two Ambassadors
into the West, there to find out the Saint and Holy Law. But these Ambassadors
Landing at a certain Island not far from the Red Sea, and not daring to venture
farther, they advised about taking a certain Idol they found there, which was
the Statue of a Philosopher called Foe Kiao, that had appeared in the Indies,
about Five hundred Years before Confucius, and brought into China Fohi's Idol
with the Doctrine which he had Taught. Happy had been their Embassy, if instead
of this Doctrine they had returned into their own Country with the saving
Doctrine of Jesus Christ, which St. Thomas then Preached in the Indi^s; but
this Divine Light had not as yet reached thither. From this unhappy time, the
Generality of the Chinese have followed after Idols; and Superstition and
Idolatry, daily, making new Progress, they by little and little forsook the
Doctrine of their Master, have neglected the excellent Instructions of the
Ancients, and in fine, being grown Contemners of all sorts of Religion, they
are fallen headlong into Atheism. They could not indeed do otherwise, in
following ^he Execrable Doctrine of that Impostor Fohi, who taught, That the
Principle and End of all things was Nothing.

To return to Con^ucius, whose Doctrine was so repugnant to that of Fohi and
his Followers; This Illustrious Philosopher, who was so necessary and helpful
to his Country, died in the 73 Year of his Age; a little before the Sickness
which snatched him from the C^ineses, he with great Bitterness of Spirit,
lamented the Disorders of his Time; and expressed his Thoughts and Grief, by a
Verse which may be thus transl^ted, O great Mountain! he meant his Doctrine, O
great Mountain, what art thou become! This Important Machine is subverted!
Alas! There are no more Wis^men, no more Saints! This Reflection so grievously
af^licted him, that he presently languish'd; and seven days before his Death,
turning toward his Disciples, after having testified his regret and trouble to
see that Kings, whose good Conduct was so necessary, and of such great
Importance, would not observe his Maxims and Instructions, he dolourously
subjoyns, seeing that things go thus, nothing more remains than to die. He had
no soon^r uttered these words, but he fell into a Lethargy, which ended with
his Death.

Confucius was Buried in his own Country, in the Kingdom of Lu, whither he was
retired with his dearest Disciples. For his Sepulcher they chose a place near
the City of K^oseu, on the Bank of the River Su, in that very Academy where he
used to teach, and which is at present seen environed with Walls, like a
considerable City.

It is not possible to express the Af^liction which the Death of this
Philosopher caused to his Disciples. They bitterly bewailed him; they put on
Mourning Weeds, and were under such great anguish, that they neglected the care
of their Nourishment and their Life. Never was a good Father more regretted by
dutiful and well-bred Children, than Confucius was by his Disciples. They were
all in Mourning and Tears a whole Year, some three Years: and there was one who
being more truly sensible, than the rest, of the loss they had underwent,
stirred not, for six Years, from the place where his Master had been Buried.

In all the Cities, there are seen Magnificent Colleges which were built in
honor of Confucius, with these and other such like Inscriptions, written in
Characters of Gold. To the great Master. To the Illustrious King of the
Learned. To the Saint. Or, which is the same thing amongst the Chinese. To him
that was endowed with an extraordinary Wisdom. And although it be Two thousand
Years since this Philosopher's decease, they have so great a Veneration for his
Memory, that the Magistrates never pass by these Colleges, without stopping
their stately Palankins wherein they are carried for distinction sake. They
alight, and after some few Moments Prostration, do march a little way on foot.
There are even Emperors and Kings who disdain not sometimes to visit these
Edifices where the Titles of this Philosopher are Engraved, and to perform it
after a glorious manner. Behold, the exceedingly remarkable words of the
Emperor Yumlo, who was the third Emperor of the preceding Family called Mim. He
pronounced them on^ day when he was disposed to go to one of these Colleges
already mentioned. I adore the Mast^r of Kings and Emperors. Emperors and Kings
are Lords and Masters of their People; but Confucius has proposed the true
M^thods of governing these very People, and of instructing the Ages to come. It
is therefore convenient that I go to the great College, and there offer some
Presents to this great Master who is no more, to the end that I may show how
much I honor the Learned, and how greatly I esteem their Doctrine. These
extraordinary marks of Veneration do intimate that the Virtue and Merit of this
Philosopher have been extraordinary. And certainly this excellent Man was also
endowed with admirable Qualifications. He had an Aspect both grave and modest;
he was faithful, ^ust, cheerful, civil, courteous, affable: and a certain
serenity, which appeared in his Countenance, gained him the hearts and respect
of all those that beheld him. He spoke little, and meditated much. He eagerly
pursued his S^udy, without tiring his Spirit. He contemned Riches and Honors
when they were Obstacles to his Designs. His whole Delight was in teaching and
making his Doctrine savoury to many. He was severer to himself than others. He
had a continual Circumspection over himself, and was a rigid Censurer of his
own Conduct. He blamed himself for not being assiduous enough in Instructing;
for not showing vigilance enough in correcting his own Faults, and for not
exercising himself, as he ought, in the practice of Virtue. In fine, he had one
Virtue rarely found in great Men, viz. Humility: for he not only spoke with an
extreme Modesty of himself, and what concerned him, but he with a singular
sincerity declared to the whole World, that he ceased not to learn, and that
the Doctrine he taught was not his own, but the Doctrine of the Ancients But
his Books are his true Pourtraicture, which in this place we proceed to expose
to view.

The Second Part. A COLLECTION Out of Confucius's Works.
The FIRST BOOK.
THe First Book of Confucius was published by one of his most famous Disciples
named Cemcu; and this Learned Disciple writ very excellent Commentaries
thereon. This Book is, as it were, the Gate through which it is necessary to
pass to arrive at the sublimest Wisdom, and most perfect Virtue. The
Philosopher here treats of three considerable Things.

1. Of what we ought to do to cultivate our Mind, and regulate our Manners. 2.
Of the Method by which it is necessary to instruct and guide others. And, 3. Of
the Care that every one ought to have to tend to the Sovereign Good, to adhere
thereunto, and as I may so say, to repose himself therein.
Because the Author chiefly designed to address his Instructions to the Princes
and Magistrates that might be called to the Regality, this Book is entitled,
Ta-Hio, or, The Great Science.

The great Secret, says Confuci^s, to acquire true Knowledge, the Knowledge,
consequently, worthy of Princes, and the most Illustrious Personages, is to
cultivate and polish the Reason, which is a Present that we have received from
Heaven. Our Concupiscence has disordered it, and intermixed several Impurities
therewith. Ta^e away therefore, and remove from it these Impurities, to the end
that it may reassume its former Luster, and enjoy its utmost Perfection^ This
here is the Sovereign Good. This is not sufficient. It Is moreover requisite,
that a Prince by his Exhortations, and by his own Example, make of his People,
as it were, a new People. In fine, after being, by great Pains, arrived at this
Sovereign Perfection, at this chief Good, you must not relax; It Is here that
Perseverance is absolutely necessary. Whereas Men generally pursue not the
Methods that lead to the Possession of the Sovereign Good, and to a constant
and eternal Possession, Confucius has thought it highly important to give some
Instructions th^rein.

He says, That after we know the end to which we must attain, it is necessary
to determine, and incessantly to make toward this End, by walking in the ways
which lead thereunto; by daily confirming in his Mind the Resolution fixed on
for the attaining it, and by establishing it so well, that nothing may in the
least shake it.

When you shall have thus fixed your Mind in this great Design, give up your
self, adds he, to Meditation: Reason upon all things within your self:
Endeavor to have some clear Idea's thereof: Consider distinctly what
presents it self to you: Pass, without prejudice, solid Judgments thereon^
Examine every thing, and weigh every thing with care. After Examinations and
Reasonings of this nature, you may easily arrive at the End where you must fix,
at the End where you ought resolutely to stand, viz^ at a perfect Conformity of
all your Actions with what Reason suggests.

As to the Means which a Prince ought to use, to purifi^ and polish his Reason,
to the end that it being thus disposed, he may govern his States, and redress
and beautify the Reason of his People, the Philosopher proposes after what
manner the Ancient Kings governed themselves.

That they might at last govern their Empire wisely, they endeavored, says
he, prudently to sway a particular Kingdom, and to excite its Members to
improve their Reason, and to act like Creatures endowed with Understanding. To
produce this Reformation in this particular Kingdom, they labored to regulat^
their Family, to the end that it might serve as a Model to all the Subjects of
this Kingdom. To reform their Family, they took an extraordinary care to polish
their own Person, and so well to compose their Words and Actions, that they
might neither say, nor do any thing that might ever so little offend
Complaicence, and which was not edifying, to the end that they themselves might
be a Pattern and Example continually exposed to the Eyes of their Domestics,
and all their Courtiers. To obtain this exterior Perfection^ they strove to
rectify their Mind^ by governing and subduing their Passions^ because that the
Passions do, for the most part, remove the Mind from its natural Rectitude, do
abase and incline it to all sorts of Vice. To rectify their Mind, to rule and
subdue their Passions, they so acted that their Will was always bent to Good,
and never turned toward Evil. In fine, thus to dispose their Will, they
studied to illuminate their Understanding, and so well to enlighten it, that,
if it was possible, they might ignore nothing: for to Will, Desire, Love and
Hate, it is necessary to know; This is the Philosophy of right Reason.

This is what Confucius proposed to the Princes, to instruct them how to
rectify and polish first their own Reason, and a^terwards the Reason and Person
of all their Subjects. But to make the greater Impression, after having
gradually descended from the wise Conduct of the whole Empire, to the
Perfect^on of the Understanding, he reascends, by the same Degrees, from the
illuminated Understanding to the happy State of the whole Empire. If, says he,
the understanding of a Prince is well enlightened, his Will will incline only
to Good: his Will inclining only to Good, his Soul will be entirely rectified,
there will not be any Passion that can make him destroy his Rectitude: The Soul
being thus rectified, he will be composed in his exterior, nothing will be
observed in his Person that can offend Complaisance. His Person being thus
perfected, his Family forming it self according to this Model, will be reformed
and amended. His Family being arrived at this Perfection, 'twill serve as an
Example to all the Subjects of the particular Kingdom, and the Members of the
particular Kingdom, to all those that compose the Body of the Empire. Thus the
whole Empire will be well governed; Order and Justice will Reign there; we
shall there enjoy a profound Peace, 'twill be an happy and flourishing Empire.
Confucius afterward certifies, that these Admonitions do not less regard the
Subjects than the Princes; and a^te^ having addressed himself to Kings, he
tells them, that they ought particularly to apply themselves rightly to govern
their Family, to take care thereof, and reform it: For, he adds, it is
impossible that he that knows not how to govern and reform his own Family, can
rightly govern and reform a People.

Behold what is most important in Confucius's Doctrine contained in the first
Book, and which is the Text, as I may say, whereon his Commentator Cemcu has
taken pains.

This famous Disciple, to explain and enlarge his Masters Instructions,
alleges Authorities and Examples which he draws from three very ancient Books,
highly esteemed by the Chinese.

The first Book he mentions, which is of a later date than the rest, is
entitled Camcao, and makes up a part of the Chronicles of the Empire of Cheu.
This Book was composed by a Prince called Vuvam, the Son of King Venvam. Vuvam
does therein highly extol his Father; but his Principal Design, in magnifying
the Virtues, and admirable Qualities of this Prince, is to form according to
this Model one of his Brethren^ whom he would perfect in Virtue: And it is
observable, that he ordinarily tells him that their Father had the Art of being
Virtuous. Venv^m, said he to him, had the Art of polishing his Reason and his
Person.

The second Book from whence Cemcu cites his Authorities and Examples, is
called Tar-Kia. This Book, which is a great deal ancienter than the first, was
writ by a famous Emperor of Xam, named Y-Yin; It Is therein read, that this
Y-Yin, seeing Tar-Kia the Grandson of the Emperor Chim-Tam degenerate from the
Virtue of his illustrious Ancestors, and carry himself after a manner wholly
different from theirs; He commanded him to live three Years in a Garden, where
was his Grandfathers Tomb; That this made so great an Impression upon his
Spirit, that he changed his course: And that the same Y-Yin who had done him so
kind an Office, having afterward advanced him to the Empire, Tar-Kia governed
it a long time in great Prosperity. King Tam, said Y-Yin to Tar-Kia, King Tam
always had his Mind disposed to cultivate that precious Reason which h^^ been
given us from Heaven.

In fine, the third Book, which is much ancienter than the two former, is
called Ti-Tien; and upon the occasion of King Ya^ it is there read, That this
Prince could cultivate this sublime Virtue, this great and sublime gift which
he had received from Heaven, viz. Natural Reason.

It is evident, that Confucius's Disciple, by these Authorities, designed to
show, or rather supposes that the whole World believes that we have all
received from Heaven, those Lights which most Men suffer to extinguish by their
Negligence, a Reason which most Men voluntarily slight and suffer to corrupt:
And seeing that there were Princes which have perfected these Lights, which
have bettered and improved their Reason, we ought to imitate them, and that we
as well as they by their Endeavors, may attain to such a Perfection.

We must not here forget a remarkable thing which Cemcu relates, touching a
Basin wherein King Tam used to bathe and wash himself. He says, that these
excellent words were there engraved; Wash thy self, renew thy self co^^^nually,
renew thy self every day; R^new thy self from day to day: And that it was to
intimate to the King, that if ^ Prince which governs others has contracted
Vices and Impurities, he ought to labor to cleanse himself therefrom, and to
reduce his Heart into its first state of Purity. As for the rest, it has been
an ancient Custom amongst the Chinese to grave or paint on their Domestic
Vessels some Moral Sentences, and strong Exhortations to Virtue: So that when
they bathed themselves, or took their Repasts there, they had these Sentences
and Exhortations continually before their Eyes. This ancient Custom is still
preserved. There is only this di^ference, says he, that publishes Confucius's
Works, that whereas heretofore the Characters were engraved or painted on the
inside of the Vessel, in the middle of the interior Face, at present the
Chinese do most frequently grave or paint them on the outside, satisfy^ng
themselves in this Age with the outward appearance of Virtue.

After Cemcu has spoken of the two first parts of his Masters Doctrine, the one
of which respects what a Prince should do for his own Perfection, and the other
what he is obliged to do for the Perfection and Prosperity of others, he
proceeds to the third and last part, wherein he discourses of the last end that
every one ought to propose as the Sovereign Good, and whereat he ought to fix.
We must remember that by the last End and Sovereign Good, Confucius
understands, as we have already observed, an entire Conformity of our Action^
with Right Reason.

After this, he alleges the Example of that Venvam, already spoken of: And
certainly this Prince's Conduct was so wise and regular, that we cannot without
Admiration understand, how by the sole Lights of Nature, he could have such
Idea's as he had, and could arrive at so sublime a Virtue as that whereunto he
attained. It will not be unpleasing to see something of it here.

Venvam, says the Commentator, acknowl^dged that the love which Princes bear
to their Subjects, cannot but greatly contribute rightly to Govern and make
them happy: And upon this Consideration, he made this love his principal
business, which he incessantly endeavored to perfect. Behold the Method he
took! Because that the principal Virtue of a Subject is to honor and respect
his King, Venvam being as yet a Subject, fixed himself to render this Honor
and Respect; and took so great a pleasure in these sorts of Obligations, that
he always fulfilled them with great Fidelity. As the first and most important
Virtue of Children to their Parents, is Obedience, Venvam, in the Relation of a
Son, adhered to this Obedience; and incessantly acquitted himself of this Duty
with an extraordinary Piety. The principal Virtue of a Father, adds Confucius's
Disciple, is a tender love for his Children: Thus Venvam, like a Father, stuck
close to this Love, whereof he conti^nally gave very signal Proofs, not by a
weak and criminal Indulgence, but by the continual Cares he took to reform and
instruct them. In fine, Fidelity is a Virtue absolutely necessary to thos^ that
live in a Society: Thus Venv^m, in speaking and acting with the Subjects of his
Kingdom, kept close to this Duty, and so strongly adhered to it, that he never
promised any thing which he effected not with an unspeakable Promtitude and
Exactness.

This Prince, says Cemcu, was Born of very Virtuous Parents, who had taken
great Care of his Education, especially his Mother Taicin, who had been a
pattern of Virtue; but he himself had so well improved this Education, that he
rendered himself an accomplished Prince, and acquitted himself with so much
Reputation, and such a general Esteem, even amongst Foreign Nations, that Forty
four Kingdoms voluntarily submitted to his Empire. Nevertheless, adds he, this
great Honor wherewith he was environed, was never capable of Eclipsing him: He
was Endowed with an inexpressible and unparalled Modesty and Humility: He
very severely accused himself of not being Virtuous enough; for one Day when he
was Sick, the Earth being shook with prodigious Earthquakes, he sought the
Cause of this Calamity, and of the Wrath of Heaven, only in his own Sins,
although he was of a Consummate Virtue.

That which most appeared in Venvam's Actions, was an extraordinary Charity; a
Proof whereof we will here allege. In the Annals of China it is Recorded, That
this Prince having found in the Fields the Bones of a Man, to whom the Honors
of Burying were refused, he immediately commanded them to be Interred; and some
of the bystanders saying, That the Master of the Deceased was unknown, and
that for this Reason he might not concern himself, it being Founded perhaps on
some Custom of the Country. What, replies the King, He that holds the Reins of
the Empire, Is not he the Master of it? He that Reigns, Is not he the Master of
the Kingdom? I am therefore the Lord and Master of the Dead, wherefore then
should I refuse him these last Offices of Piety? But this is not all; he had no
sooner uttered these Words, but unstripping himself of his Royal Vestment, he
commanded it to be used instead of a Winding Sheet, to wrap up these Bones, and
Bury them according to the Manners and Custom of the Country; which his
Courtiers observing with Admiration, they thus cried out, If the Piety of our
Prince is so great toward dry Bones, how great will it not be toward Men that
enjoy Life. They made some other Reflections of this Nature.

Venvam's Charity had properly for its object, all sorts of Persons, but
particularly ancient Persons, Widows, Orphans and the Poor, whom he protected
and nourished as if they had been his own Children. It is believed, that these
Charitable Actions were the principal Cause of the Re-establishment of a Pious
Custom of the first Emperors, and of a Law which is still observed throughout
China. This Law enacts, That in every City, even in the least, an Hundred poor
Aged Persons shall be maintained at the Public Charge.

But Venvam not satisfied with having given, in his Lifetime, Instructions and
Examples of Virtue; when he felt himself near Death, not sufficiently relying
on the force of his preceding Instructions and Examples, and knowing that the
last Words of dying Persons do make a great Impression, he likewise gave his
Son Vuvam these three Admonitions.

1. When you see any Virtuous Action done, be not slack to practice it. 2. When
the Opportunity of doing a reasonable thing shall offer, make use of it without
hesitating. 3. Cease not thy Endeavors to extirpate and suppress Vice. These
three Admonitions which I give you, my Son, adds he, do comprehend whatever may
produce an exact Probity, and excellent Conduct.
Behold doubtless an Example which shows, that in this Kings Lifetime, the
Chinese had very Rational Sentiments, and that Virtue, as I may say, was their
Passion: For in a word, the People generally conform themselves to the
Sentiments and Manners of their Kings.

Regis ad Exemplum, totus componitu^ Orbis.
There is nothing that gives a greater Idea of the Virtue of the ancient
Chinese, than what they have Writ and Practiced, in respect of their Law
Suits. They Teach, That Actions ought not to be commenced against one; That
Frauds, Severities, and Enmities, which are the general Attendants and
Consequences of Law Suits, were unbecoming Men; That the whole World ought to
live in Unity and Concord, and that to this end it behoved every one to use
their utmost Endeavors, either to prevent ^aw Suits from arising, or to stifle
them in their Birth, by reconciling the Parties, or inspiring them with the
Love of Peace; that is to say, by engaging them to renew and improve their
Reasons: These are Cemcu's own Words.

But that which is most remarkable on this Subject, is, the extraordinary
Precautions which the Judges took before any Cause was brought before their
Tribunals. They, with the utmost Vigilance and Attention, Examined the outside
of the Plaintiff, or him that began the Suit; to the end, that by this means
they might know whether this Man was thereunto excited by good Motives; whether
he believed his Cause good, or whether he acted Sincerely: And for this purpose
there were Five Rules. By the First Rule, They Examined the placing of his
Words, and manner of Speaking; and this was called Cutim, that is to say, The
Obs^rvation of the Words. By the Second, They considered the Air of his
Countenance, and the Motion of his Lips, and this was called Setim, that is to
say, The Observation of the Face. By the Third, They observed his manner of
Breathing, when he proposed his Cause; this Rule was called Kitim, that is to
say, The Observation of the Respiration. By the Fourth, They remarked whether
his Reply was quick; whether he gave not intricate, ill-grounded, uncertain
Answers, or whether he spoke of any other thing than that in question; or
whether his Words were not ambiguous; and this was called Vlht^m, that is to
say, The Observation of the Answers. Lastly, By the Fifth, The Judges were
carefully to weigh the Considerations and Respect, to see whether there was no
Trouble, Digression, or Confusion; if there appeared not any sign of a Lie and
Fraud; and this last Rule was called Motim, that is to say, The Observation of
the Eyes.

'Twas by these exterior Marks that this Ancient Ar^opagite discovered the
most hidden Thoughts of the Heart, rendered an exact Justice, diverted a great
many Persons from Lawsuits and Frauds, and inspired in them the love of Equity
and Concord. But a^ present these Rules are ignor'd in China, or at least
wholly neglected.

To retur^ to Con^ucius's Doctrine illustrated with the Commentaries of Cemcu.
This Disciple set a high value upon a Maxim which he had frequently heard his
Master repeat, and which himself also very strongly inculcated. '^was this;
Always behave thy self with the same Precaution and Discretion as you would do,
if you were observed by T^n Eyes, and pointed at by so many Hands.

To render Virtue yet more commendable, and more easily to inspire the
Sentiments thereof, the same Disciple demonstrates, That, whatever is honest
and advantageous, being amiable, we are obliged to love Virtue, because it
includes both these Qualities; that moreover Virtue is an Ornament which
embellishes, as I may say, the whole Person of him that possesses it, his
Interior and Exterior; that to the Mind it communicates inexpressible
Beauties and Perfections; that as to the Body, it there produces very sensible
Delights; that it affords a certain Physiognomy, certain Transports, certain
ways which infinitely please; and as it is the Property of Virtue to becalm the
Heart, and keep Peace there, so this inward Tranquillity and secret Joy do
produce a certain Serenity in the Countenance, a certain Joy, and Air of
Goodness, Kindness and Reason, which attracts the Heart and Esteem of the whole
World. After which he concludes, that the principal Business of a Man is to
rectify his Mind, and so well to rule his Heart, that his Passions might
always be calm; and if it happen that they be excited, he ought to be moved no
farther than is necessary; in a word, that he may regulate them according to
right Reason. For, as for instance, adds he, if we suffer our selves to be
transported with excessive Anger, that is to say, if we fall into a Rage
without any cause, or more than we ought when we have reason, we may thence
conclude, that our Mind has not the Rectitude it ought to have. If we contemn
and mortally hate a Person, by reason of certain Defects that we observe in
him, and render not Justice to his good and excellent Qualities, if endowed
therewith; if we permit our selves to be troubled by a too great ^ear; if we
abandon our selves to an immoderate Joy, or to an excessive Sorrow, it cannot
be said that our Mind is in the state wherein it ought to be, that it has its
Rectitude and Uprightness.

Cemcu carries this Moral a great way further, and gives it a Per^ection which,
in my Opinion, could never be expected from those that have not been honored
with Divine Revelation. He says, That it is not only necessary to observe
Moderation in general, as often as our Passions are stirred, but that also in
respect of those which are the most lawful, innocent and laudable, we ought not
blindly to yield up our selves thereunto, and always to follow their Motions;
it is necessary to consult Reason. As for Example, Parents are obliged to Love
one another. Nevertheless, as their Amity may be too weak, so it may be also
too strong; and as to the on^ and the other Respect, there is doubtless an
Irregularity. It is Just ^or a Child to Love his Father; but if a Father has
any considerable Defect, if he has committed any great Fault, it is the Duty of
a Son to acquaint him with it, and tell him what may be for his Good, always
keeping a due Respect, from which he ought not to depart. Likewise, If a Son is
fallen into any Sin, it is the Duty of a Father to Reprove him, and give him his
Advice thereon. But if their Love is Blind; if their Love is a mere Passion; if
it is Flesh and Blood which make them to Act, this Affection is an Irregular
Affection. Why? Because it dig^esseth from the Rule of right Reason.

We should injure the Reader if we should omit Speaking of the Emperor Yao,
whose Elogy is Recorded in the Work that affords the matter of ours. Never Man
has more exactly practiced all these Duties, which have been proposed by
Confucius's Disciple than he. It may be said, if his Portraiture is not
Flattered, that he had a Disposition made for Virtue. He had a tender, but
magnanimous and well-disposed Heart. He Loved those that he was obliged to
Love, but 'twas without the least weakness. He, in a Word, regulated his Love,
and all his Passions, according to right Reason.

This Prince arrived at the Empire 2357 years before Jesus Christ, he Reigned
an Hundred Years: But he Ruled with so much Prudence, Wisdom, and so many
Demonstrations of Clemency and Kindness to his Subjects, that they we e the
happiest People of the Earth.

Yao had all the Excellent Qualities desirable in a Prince: his Riches made
him not Proud; his Extraction, which was so Noble and Illustrious, puffed him
not up with Arrogance. He was Virtucus, Sincere, and Kind without Affec^ation.
His Palace, Table, Apparel and Furniture discovered the greatest Moderation
that ever was seen. He delighted in Music, but it was a Grave, Modest, and
Pious Music: He detested nothing so much as Songs wherein Modesty and Civility
were blemish^. 'Twas not a Capricious Humor that made him dislike these sorts
of Songs, 'twas the desire he had of rendering himself in all Things pleasing
unto Heaven. 'Twas not Avarice that produced in him that Moderation which he
observed in his Table, Apparel, Furniture, and every thing else; it was only
the Love he bare to those that were in want, for he only designed to relieve
them. 'Twas also his great Piety, and that ardent Charity wherewith he burned,
which made him frequently to utter these admirable Words. The Famine of my
People is my own Famine. My P^oples Sin is my own Sin.

In the Seventy Second Year of his Reign ^e Elected Xun as a Colleague, who
Governed the Empire Twenty Eight Years with him: But what is most remarkable,
and which deserves the Praise and Applause of all Ages, is, That although he
had a Son, he declared, that he appointed Xun, in whom he had seen a great deal
of Virtue, an exact Probity, and judicious Conduct, for his Successor. And it
being told him, that his Son complained of his Excluding him from the
Succeession to the Empire, he made this answer, which alone may be the Subject
of an Excellent Panegyric, and render his Memory Immortal. I had rather my
only Son should be Wicked, and all my People Good, than if my Son alone was
Good, and all my People Wicked.

Confucius's chief aim, as we have declared, being to propose his Doctrine to
Kings, and persuade them to it, because he thought, that if he could inspire
them with the Sentiments of Virtue, their Subjects would become Virtuous after
their Example; Cemcu explaining this Doctrine expatiates largely on the Duty of
Kings.

He Principally applies himself to Three Things.

1. To show that it is very important that Kings behave themselves well in
their Court and Family, because that their Ways and Actions are certainly
imitated. 2. To persuade them of the necessity there is in general of acquiring
the Habit of Virtue, and of per^orming the Duties thereof in all places and
upon all Accounts. 3. To engage them not to impoverish the People, but to do
all ^or their Good and Ease.
As to the First Article, he makes use of several Cogitations, which the Book
of Odes affords him. But behold, in two Words, the most considerable part of
his Discourse. If, says he, a King as a Father, testifies Love to his
Children; if as a Son, he is Obedient to his Father; if in quality of the
Eldest Son, he is cour^eous to his youn^er Brethren, and lives peaceably with
them. If, as the youngest, he has a respect and esteem for the eldest; if he
kindly uses those that are in his Service; if he is charitable, especially to
Widows and Orphans: If, I say, a King exactly acquits himself of all this, his
People will imitate him, and every one will be seen to practice Virtue
throughout his Kingdom. Parents will tenderly love their Children, and give
them a good Education. Children will honor their Parents, and render them due
Obedience, The Elder will show Kindness to their Younger Brother, and the
Younger will have a respect and esteem for their Elder, or for other Persons
for whom Good Manners requires that they should have respect; as, for example,
for Persons advanced in Age. In fine, those that have Estates, will maintain
some Widows, Orphans, and some sick Persons: ^or there is nothing that makes a
greater Impression on the Minds of People, than the Examples of their Kings.

As to the second Article, where Cemcu exhorts in general to the practice of
Virtue, he alleges for a Principle this Maxim, to which Christ himself seems
to refer all his Morality, Do to another what you would they should do unto
you; and do not unto another what you would not should be done unto you.

Amongst those in the midst of whom you live, says Confucius's Disciple, there
are some above you, others inferior to you, and others that are your equals:
There are some that preceded you, others that are to be your Successors; you
have them on your Right Hand, and on your Left. Consider, that all these Men
have the same Passions with you, and that what you desire they should do, or
not do, unto you, they desire that you should do, or not do, unto them. What
you therefore hate in your Superiors, what you blame in them, be sure not to
practice toward your Inferiors: And what you hate and blame in your
Inferiors, practice not to your Superiors. What displeases you in your
Predecessors, eschew, to give an Example to those that shall come after. And as
in case that you should happen to give them such an Example, you would desire
they should not follow it; so you should not follow the bad Examples of those
that have preceded you. In fine, what you blame in those which are on your
Right Hand, practice not to those which are on your Left; and what you
reprehend in those on your Left Hand, be sure not to practice it to those that
are on your Right. Behold, concludes Cemcu, after what manner we ought to
measure and regulate all our Actions! And if a Prince thus exercises himself,
it will happen that all his Subjects will be of one Heart and one Mind, and
that he will rather be called their Father, than their Lord and Master. This
will be the Means to draw down the Blessings and Favors of Heaven, not to fear
any thing, and to lead a quiet and peaceable Life: For in fine, Virtue is the
Basis and Foundation of an Empire, and the Source from whence flows whatever
may render it flourishing. 'Twas upon this Consideration that an Ambassador of
the Kingdom of Cu returned this excellent Answer to a Nobleman of the Kingdom
of Cin, who asked him, Whether in his Masters Kingdom there were great Riches
and Precious Stones; Nothing i^ est^emed Precious in the Kingdom of Cu^ut
Virtue. A King of Ci returned almost the same Answer. This Prince treating of
an Alliance with the King of Guei, and the King of Guei demanding of him, If in
his Kingdom there were Precious Stones; he answered, That there were none. How^
replied this King all in amaze, Is it possible that though my Kingdom be lesser
than yours, yet there is found a Carbuncle whose brightness is so great, that
it can enlighten sp^ce enough for twelve Palanquins; and that in your Kingdom,
which is vaster than mine, there are none of these Preci^us Stones! I have four
Ministers, rejoins the King of Ci, who with great Prudence Govern the Provinces
I have committed to them; Behold my Precious Stones, they can enlighten a
thousand Stadia.

These are not the Men alone in China that have esteemed Virtue; there were
Women that have considered it as a Jewel of infinite Value, and preferable to
all Treasures. An Illustrious Queen named Kiam, who Reigned Two Hundred Years
before Confucius, reclaimed her Husband from Sensuality and Debauchery, by an
Action which deserves to be Immortalized. She seeing that this Prince
continually resorted to the Pastimes of Debauchery, and abandoned himself to
all sorts of Pleasures, she one day plucked her Pendants from her Ears, and laid
aside all her Jewels, and in his Condition went to the King, and spoke to him
these Words with a sensible Emotion. Sir, is it possible that Luxury^ and
Debauchery are so very pleasing to you. You contemn Virtue; but I esteem it
infinitely more than the m^st precious Stones. She afterward enlarged upon
this Subject, and the Action and Discourse of this Princess touched him so
strongly, that he renounced his Extravagancies, and gave himself up entirely to
Virtue, and the care of his Kingdom, which he Governed Thirteen Years with
great Applause.

In fine, as to the last Article, Cemcu represents to Kings, that they ought
not to oppress their People, either by Impositions, or otherwise; that to avoid
being forced thereto, it is necessary to choose Wise, Faithful, and Virtuous
Ministers, and consequently not to admit into the management of Affairs, those
that are Unworthy, and who by their Cruelties, Ambition and Avarice, can only
bring a vast prej^dice to the State. He shows them, that the^ ought to lessen,
as much as is possible the number of their Ministers, and of all those that
live at the public Expense; to endeavor to excite all to Work, and so to
Order it, that those who manage and disburse the Treasure, may do it with all
the Moderation imaginable. Princes, adds he, ought never to seek private
Interest; they ought only to look after the Interests of their People: To be
Loved and Faithfully Served, they ought to convince their Subjects, by their
Conduct, that they design only to make them Happ^; which they will never do, if
they heartily follow their particular Interests, if they oppress and impoverish
them.

A COLLECTION Out of Confucius's Works. The SECOND BOOK.
THIS Second Book of Confucius was Published by his GrandSon Cusu. It Treats of
diverse Things, but especially of that excellent Mediocrity, which must be
constantly observed in all Things, between the too much, and too little. Thus
this Book is Entitled, Chumyum, that is to say, The Perpetual Mean, a mean
constantly observed.

Confucius. Teaches at First, That all Men ought to love this Mediocrity, which
they ought to search after with an extreme Care. He says, that the perfect Man
always k^eps a just Mean, what^v^r ^e undertakes; but that the Wicked always
swerves therefrom, that he does too much, or not enough. When the right Reason
sent from Heaven, adds ^e, has once showed a Wiseman the Mean he ought to keep,
he afterward conforms all his Actions thereunto^ at all times, as well in
Adver^^ty as Prosperity; he ^ontinually watches over himself, over his
Thoughts, over the most secret Mo^io^^ of hi^ Heart, alw^y^ ^o square h^mself
a^^ordi^g to t^is just Mean, w^i^h h^ will never lose sight of^ but ^he wi^ked
b^ing not restrained, neither by Fear, Modesty, nor the love o^ Virtu^, their
extrav^gant Passion^ do always carry them into Extremes.

This Philosopher cannot sufficien^ly admir^ this happy Mediocrity, he look^ on
it as the sublimest thing in the W^^ld, as a thing ^ost worthy of the Lov^ and
Employment of the highest Minds, as the sole Path of Virtue. H^ ^^mplains, that
there always have been so f^w Persons that have kept it; he ^^lig^ntly enquires
after the cause ^her^of. He says, that as for the wis^ Men of the Age, they
slight and con^emn it, because they imagine it below their great Designs, below
their Ambitious Projects; and that as for dull Persons they very hardly attain
it, ^^th^r by Reason they understand it not, or because the difficulty in
at^aining it astonish^s and discourages them: And all this, adds Confucius,
happens for want of Examination; ^or if we diligently examined what is good in
it self, we should find that all ^xtreams are prejudicial, and that the Mean
alone is always Good and Gainful.

He herein particularly alleges the Example of Xun the Emperor; H^ cries out,
How great was the Prudence of the Emperor X^n? He was not satisfied in the
Administration o^ Stat^-Af^airs, with his single Examination, with his own
particular Judgment and Prudence; He likewise consulted the meanest of his
Subjects. He asked Advice upon the least Things; and he made it a Duty and
Delight to weigh the Answers that were given him, how common so ever they
appear^d. When any thing was proposed to him, which, after a strict
Examination, he was convinced was repugnant to right Reason, he acquiesced not,
but with an open Heart represented what was amiss in the Counsel that was given
him. By this means he made his Subjects to place a Confidence in him, and
accustom themselves ^reely to give him Advertisements, from time to time. As
for the good and judicious Counsels, he followed, magnified, and extold them;
and thereby every one was encouraged, joy^ully to declare his Opinion. But if,
amongst the Counsels that were given him, he found that some plainly
contradicted others, he attentively considered them, and after having examined
them, he always took ^ Mean, especially when it concerned ^he Public Interest^,

Confucius here deplores the false Prudence of the Men of his Time. It had,
indeed, very much degenerated from the Prudence of the Ancient Kings. There is
not, says he, any Person at present, who declares not, I have Prudence, I know
what is necessary to be done, and what is not. But because that now, Profit and
particular Advantage are the only Objects delighted in, it happens that we
think not on the Evils which may thence ensue, on the Perils to which this Gain
and Profit expose us; and that the Precipice is not perceived by us. There are
some that perfectly understand the Nature and Value of Mediocrity, who ch^s^ it
for their Rule, and square their Actions thereby, but who afterward suffering
themselves to be overcome by Sloth, have not the power to persist. To what
end, in these sorts of Persons, does the Knowledge and Resolutions they have
formed tend to? Alas! it was not thus with my Disciple H^ri; He had an
exquisite discerning Faculty; He remarkt all the Di^ferences that occurred in
things; He always chose a Mean, and never forsook it.

As for the rest, adds Confucius, it is not a very easy thing to acquire, that
Medium which I so much commend. Alas! there is nothing so difficult; it is an
Affair which requires great Pains and Industry. You will find Men capable of
Governing happily the Kingdoms of the Earth. You will see some that will have
Magnanimity enough to refuse the most considerable Dignities and Advantages:
There will be some also that will have Courage enough to walk on Naked Swords:
But you will find few, that are capable of keeping a just Mean; That to arrive
hereat, Art, Labor, Courage and Virtue are required.

'Twas upon the Account of this Mo^al, that one of his Disciples, who was of a
Warlike and Ambitious Temper, asked him, Wherein Valor consisted, and what it
was necessary to do to obtain the Name of Valiant? Have you ^e^rd, says
Confucius, of the Valor of those in the South, or those that dwell in the
North, or rather of the Valor of my Disciples, who apply themselves to the
study of Wisdom? To act mildly in the Education of Children and Disciples, to
be indulgent to them; patiently to bear their Disobediences and Defects, is
that wherein the Valor of the Southern People consists. By this Valor they
conquer their violent Temper, and submit their Passions, which are generally
violent, to Right Reason. To lie down courageously in a Camp, to repose
quietly, in the midst of a terrible Army; to see a thousand Deaths before his
Eyes, without daunting; not to be disquieted, but make a pleasure of this sort
of life: Behold what I call the Valor of the Northern Men! But as generally
ther^ is a great deal of rashness in all this, and that oftentimes Men regulate
not themselves according to that Mean which every one ought to seek after, it is
not this sort of Valor which I require of my Disciples. Behold what his
Character ought to be!

A perfect Man (for in short, the perfect Men only can have a true Valor)
ought always to be busied, in conquering himself. He must suit himself to the
Manners and Tempers of others; but he ought always to be Master of his own
Heart, and Actions; He must not suffer himself to be corrupted by the
Conversation, or Examples of loose and effeminate Persons; he must never obey,
till he has first examined what is commanded him; He must never imitate others,
without Judgment. In the midst of so many mad and blind Persons, which go at
random, he must walk aright, and not incline to any party: This is the true
Valor. Moreover, if this very Person is called to the Magistracy, in a Kingdom
where Virtue is considered, and he changes not his Morals, how great soever the
Honors be, to which he is advanced; if he there preserves all the good Habits,
which he had when only a private Man; if he permit not himself to be lead away
with Pride and Vanity, this Man is truly Valiant: Ah! how great is this Valor?
But if on the contrary, he is in a Kingdom, where Virtue and Laws are
con^emn'd, and that in the Confusion and Disorder which there prevail, he
himself is depressed with Poverty, afflicted, reduced even to the loss of Life;
but yet, in the midst of so many Miseries, he remains constant, preserves all
the Innocence of his Manners, and never changes his Opinion: Ah! how Great and
Illustrious is this Valor? Instead therefore of the Valor of the Southern or
Nor^hern Countries, I require, and expect from you, my dear Disciples, a Valor
of the Nature abovementioned.

Behold something which Confucius speaks, which is not less remarkable. There
are some Men, says he, which surpass the bounds of Mediocrity, by affecting to
have extraordinary Virtues: They covet always to have something mavelous in
their Actions, to the end that Posterity may praise and extol them. Certainly,
as for my self, I shall never be enamoured with the^e glittering Actions, where
Vanity and Self-love have ever a greater sha^e than Virtue. I would only know
and practice what it is necessary to know and practice every where.

There are four Rules, according to which the perfect Man ought to square
himself.

1. He himself ought to practice in respect of his Father, what he requires
from his Son. 2. In the Service of his Prince he is obliged to show the ^ame
Fidelity which he demands of those that are under him. 3 He must act in respect
of his eldest Brother, after the same manner that he wou^d that his younger
Brother should act toward him. 4. And lastly, He ought to behave himself
toward his Friends, as he desires that his Friends should carry themselves to
him. The perfect Man continually acquits himself of these Duties, how common
soever they may appear. If he happen to perceive that he has done amiss in any
thing, he is not at rest till he has repaired his Fault: If he finds that he
has omitted any ^onsiderable Duty, there is not any Violence which he does not
to himself perfectly to accomplish it. He is moderate and reserved in his
Discourses; he speaks with Circumspection: If ^o him occurs a great affluence
of Words, he ^resumes not to expose it, he restr^ins himself. In a word, he is
^o rigorous a Censurer of himself, that he is not a^ rest when his Words
correspond not to his Actions^ and his Actions to his Words. Now the way, cries
he, by which a Man arrives at this Per^ection, is a solid and constant Virtue.
To this his Masters Doctrine, Cus^ here adds a Moral worthy of their
Meditation, who have a desire to perfect themselves. The perfect Man, says this
worthy Disciple of so great a Philosopher, the perfect Man governs himself
according to his present State, and cove^s not^ing beyond it. If he find
himself in the midst of Riches, he acts like a Rich Man, but addicts not
himself to unlawful Pleasures; he avoid^ Lu^ury, detests Pride, offends no
Body. If he is in a poor and contemptible State, he acts as a poor and mean Man
ought to Act; but he does nothing unworthy of a Grave and Worthy Man^ If he be
remo^e from his own Country, he behaves himself as a Stranger ought to do; but
he is always like himself. If he is in Affliction and Adversity, he does not
insolently affront his Destiny, but has Courage and Resolution; nothing can
shake his Constancy. If he is advanc'd^ to the Dignities of State, he keeps his
Rank, but never treats his Inferiors with Severity; and if he sees himself
below others, ^e is humble, he never departs from the Respect he owes to his
Superiors; but he never purchases their Favor with Flattery. He uses his
utmost Endeavors to perfect himself, and exacts nothing of others with
Severity: It Is upon this account that he expresses no Discontent or Anger to
any Person. If he li^ts up his Eyes toward Heaven, it is not to complain, for
that it has not sent him Prosperity, or to murmur, for that it Afflicts him: If
he looks down toward the Ground, it is not to reproach Men, and attribute the
Cause of his Miseries and Necessities unto them; it is to testify his Humility,
that is to say, that he is always contended with his Condition, that he desires
nothing beyond, and that with Submission, and an even Spirit, he expects
whatever Heaven shall Ordain concerning him. Thus he rejoices in a certain
Tranquillity, which may well be compared to the top of those Mountains, which
are higher than the Region where the Thunder and Tempests are formed.

In the Sequel of this Book, he Discourses of the profound Respect which the
ancient Chinese, and especially the Kings and Emperors, had for their Parents,
and of the exact Obedience which they paid them. If a King, said they, Honors
and Obeys his Father and Mother, certainly he will endeavor to excite his
Subjects to follow his Example; for brie^ly, a Man that loves Virtue, desires
that all others should likewise esteem it, especially if it is his Interest
that they should be Virtuous: Now it is of great importance to a King, that his
Subjects do love Virtue and practice it. Indeed, how can he hope to be obeyed
by his Subjects, if himself refuses to Obey those that gave him Life. After
all, if a Prince desires to bring his Subjects to be Obedient to their Parents,
he must show Kindness toward them, and treat them with that tenderness which
Fathers have for their Children; for we willingly imitate those whom we Love,
and of whom we think we are Beloved. But if this Prince, by his Conduct,
excites his Subjects to give Obedience to their Parents, and afterward Obey
him, as their common Father, most certainly they will Obey Heaven, from whence
Crowns and Empires do come: Heaven, which is the Sovereign Father of all. And
what will be the effect of this Obedience? It will happen that Heaven will
diffuse its Blessings on those that shall thus well acquit themselves. It will
abundantly recompense so admirable a Virtue, it will make Peace and Concord
every where to Reign; so that the King and his Subjects will seem as one single
Family, where the Subjects Obeying their King, as their Father, and the King
Loving his Subjects as his Children, they will all lead, as in a single, but
rich, magnificent, regular, and convenient House, the happiest and most
peaceable Life imaginable.

To return to Confucius, as he knew that the Examples of Kings made a great
impression on Men's Minds, so he proposes that of the Emperor Xun, in respect of
the Obedience which Children owe to their Parents. Oh, how great has the
Obedience of this Emperor been! cries Confucius. Thus, continues he, if he has
obtained from Heaven the Imperial Crown, it is the Recompense of this Virtue.
It Is this Virtue that procured him so many Revenues, those immense Riches, and
vast Kingdoms, which are only limited by the Ocean. It Is this Virtue that has
rendered his Name so Famous throughout the World. In fine, I doubt not but that
long and peaceable Life, which he enjoyed, ought to be considered as a
Recompense of this Virtue. To hear this Philosopher speak, would it not be
said, that he had read the Decalogue, and understood the Promise which God has
there made to those that Honor their Father and Mother. But if, by what
Confucius declares, it seems, that the Decalogue was not unknown to him, it
will rather seem that he knew the Maxims of the Gospel, when we shall see what
he Teaches concerning Charity, which he says it is necessary to have for all
Men.

That Love, says he, which it is requisite for all Men to have, is not a
Stranger to Man, it is Man himself; or, if you will, it is a Natural Property of
Man, which dictates unto him, that he ought generally to love all Men.
Nevertheless, above all Men to love his Father and Mother, is his main and
principal Duty, from the practice of which he afterward proceeds, as by
degrees, to the practice of that Universal Love, whose object is all Mankind.
It Is from this Universal Love that distributive Justice comes, that Justice,
which makes us to render to every one his Due, and more especially to cherish
and honor Wise and upright Men, and to advance them to the Dignities and
Offices of State. That difference, which is between the Love we have for our
Parents, and that we have for others, between the Love we bear to Virtuous and
Learned Men, and that we bear to those which have not so much Virtue or
Ability; that difference, I say, is as it were a Harmony, a Symmetry of Duties,
which the Reason of Heaven has protected, and in which nothing must be Changed.

For the Conduct of Life Confucius proposes Five Rules, which he calls
Universal.

The First Regards the Justice that ought to be practiced between a King and
his Subjects. The Second Respects the Love that ought to be between a Father
and his Children. The Third Recommends Conjugal Fidelity to Husbands and Wives.
The Fourth concerns the Subordination that ought to appear between Elder and
Younger Brothers. The Fifth obliges Friends to live in Concord, in great Unity,
and mutual Kindness.
Behold, adds he, the Five General Rules, which every one ought to observe;
behold, as it were the Five Public Roads, by which Men ought to pass. But
after all we cannot observe these Rules, if these Three Virtues are wanting,
Prudence, which makes us discern Good from Evil, Universal Love, which makes us
love all Men, and that Resolution which makes us constantly to persevere in the
Adhesion to Good, and Aversion to Evil. But for fear least some fearful Persons
not well verst in Morality should imagine, that it is impossible for them to
acquire these Three Virtues, he affirms, that there is no Person incapable of
acquiring them; that the impotence of the Man is volu^tary. How dull soever a
Man is, should he, says he, be without any Experience, yet if he desires to
learn, and grows not weary in the Study of Virtue, he is not very far from
Prudence. If a Man, although full of Self-love, endeavors to perform good
Actions, behold him already very near that Universal Love, which engages him to
do Good to all. In fine, if a Man feels a secret Shame, when he hears impure
and unchaste Discourses; if he cannot forbear Blushing thereat, he is not far
from that Resolution of Spirit, which makes him constantly to seek after Good,
and to have an Aversion for Evil.

After that, the Chinese Philosopher has Treated of these Five Universal Rules,
he proposes Nine particular ones for Kings, because that he considers their
Conduct, as a public Source of Happiness or Misery. They are these.

1. A King ought incessantly to labor to adorn his Person with all sorts of
Virtues. 2. He ought to Honor and Cherish the Wise and Virtuous. 3. He ought
to Respect and Love those that gave him Birth. 4. He ought to Honor and Esteem
those Ministers that distinguish themselves by their Ability, and those which
Exercise the principal Offices of the Magistracy. 5. He ought to accommodate
himself, as much as it is possible, to the Sentiments and Mind of other
Ministers, and as for those that have less considerable Employs, he ought to
consider them as his Members. 6. He ought to Love his People, even the meanest
as his own Children, and to share in the various Subjects of Joy or Sorrow,
which they may have. 7. He ought to use his utmost to bring into his Kingdom
several able Artificers in all sorts of Arts, for the advantage and convenience
of his Subjects. 8. He ought kindly and courteously to receive Strangers and
Travelers, and fully to protect them. 9. Lastly, he ought tenderly to love the
Princes, and great Men of his Empire, and so heartily to Study their Interests,
that they may Love him, and be ever Faithful to him.
Rightly to understand the Morals of Confucius, it is here necessary to speak
one Word concerning the distinction which he makes between the Saint and Wise.
To the one and the other he attributes certain things in common: But to the
Saint he gives some Qualities and advantages, which he says, that the Wise has
not. He says, That Reason and Innocence have been equally communicated to the
Wise, and to the Saint, and likewise to all other Men; but that the Saint has
never in the least declined from right Reason, and has constantly preserved his
Integrity; whereas the Wise has not always preserved it, having not always
followed the Light of Reason, because of several Obstacles he has met with in
the practice of Virtue, and especially, by Reason of his Passions, whereunto he
is a Slave. So that it is necessary, that he does his utmost, that he use great
Pains and Endeavors, to put his Heart in a good posture, and to govern himself
according ^o the Lights of Right Reason, and the Rules of Virtue.

Cusu Reasoning hereon, the better to illustrate his Masters Doctrine, compares
those that have lost their first Integrity, and desires to regain it, to those
withered and almost dead Trees, that notwithstanding have in the Trunk and
Roots, a certain Juice, a certain Principle of Life, which makes them cast
forth shoots. If, says he, we take care of these Trees, if we Cultivate them,
Water them, and Prune off the dead Branches, it will happen that this Tree will
reassume its former State. After the same manner, although one has lost his
first Integrity and Innocence, he need only ^xcite the Good that remains, use
Pains and Industry, and he will Infallibly arrive at the highest Virtue. This
last State, says Cusu, this State of the Wise is called Giantao, that is to
say, The Road and the Reason of Man, or rather, the way which leads to the
Origin of the first Perfection. And the State of the Saint is called Tientao,
that is to say, The Reason of Heaven, or the First Rule which Heaven has
equally distributed to all Men, and which the Saints have always observed,
without turning either on the Right Hand, or on the Left.

As Rules do in brief contain the principal Duties, and that we may easily
retain them, Confucius gives Five to those that desire to choose the Good and
adhere thereto.

1. It is necessary, after an exact and extensive manner, to know the Causes,
Properties, and Differences of all Things. 2. Because that amongst the Things
which are known, there may be some which are not perfectly known, it is
necessary carefully to examine them, to weigh them Minutely and in every
Circumstance, and thereon to consult Wise, Intelligent and Experienced Men. 3.
Although it seems that we clearly apprehend certain Things, yet because it is
easy to transgress, through Precipitancy, in the too much, or too little, it
is necessary to Meditate afterward in particular, on the things we believe we
know, and to weigh every thing by the weight of Reason, with all the
attentiveness of Spirit, and with the utmost exactness, whereof we are capable.
4. It is necessary to endeavor, not to apprehend Things, after a confused
manner, it is requisite to have some clear Ideas thereof, so that we may truly
discern the Good from the Bad, the True from the False. 5. Lastly, after that
we shall have observed all these Things, we must reduce to Action, sincerely
and constantly perform and execute, to the utmost of our Power, the good
Resolutions which we have taken.
We cannot better conclude this Book, than with these Excellent Words of Cu^u:
Take heed, says he, how you Act, when you are alone. Although you should be
retired into the most Solitary, and most private place of thine House, you
ought to do nothing, whereof you would be ashamed if you were in Company or in
Public. Have you a desire, continues he, that I should show you after what
manner he that has acquired some Perfection governs himself. Why, he keeps a
continual watch upon himself; he undertakes nothing, begins nothing, pronounces
no Word, whereon he has not Meditated. Before he raises any Motion in his
Heart, he carefully observes himself, he reflects on every thing, he examines
every thing, he is in a continual Vigilance. Before he Speaks he is satisfied,
that what he is about to utter is True and Rational, and he thinks that he
cannot reap a more pleasant Fruit from his Vigilance and Examination, than to
accustom himself Circumspectly and Wisely to govern himself in the Things which
are neither seen nor known by any.

A COLLECTION Out of Confucius's Works. The THIRD BOOK.
COnfucius's third Book is quite of another Character than the two former, as
to the Method and Expressions; but in the ground it contains the same Morality.
It Is a Contexture of several Sentences pronounced at diverse times, and at
several places, by Confucius and his Disciples. Therefore it is entitled Lun
You, that is to say, Discourses of several Persons that Reason and Philosophize
together.

In the first place there is represented a Disciple of this famous Philosopher,
who declares, that he spent not a Day wherein he rendered not an account to
himself of these three things.

1. Whether he had not undertaken some Affair for another, and whether he
managed and followed it with the same Eagerness and Fidelity as if it had been
his own Concern. 2. If when he has been with his Friends, he has discoursed
them sincerely, if he has not satisfied himself with showing them some slight
appearance of Kindness and Esteem. 3. Whether he has meditated on his Masters
Doctrine; and whether after having meditated on it, he has used his utmost
Endeavors to reduce it to practice.
Afterward appears Confucius, giving Lessons to his Disciples. He tells them,
that the Wise ought to be so occupied with his Virtue, that when he is in his
House, he ought not to seek his Convenience and Delight; That when he
undertakes any Affair, he ought to be diligent and exact, prudent and
considerate in his Words, and that though he have all these Qualities, yet he
ought to be the Person on whom he ought least to confide; he whom he ought
least to please: That in a word, the Wiseman always distrus^ing himself, ought
always to consult those, whose Virtue and Wisdom are known unto him, and to
regul^te his Conduct and Actions according to their Counsels and Examples.

What think you of a Poor Man, says one of his Disciples to him, who being able
to extenuate and diminish his Poverty through Flattery, refuses to accept this
Offer, and courageously maintains, that none but Cowards and low-spirited Men
do flatter? What think you of a Rich Man, who notwithstanding his Riches, is
not proud? I say, replies Confucius, that they are both praiseworthy, but that
they are not to be considered, as if they were arrived at the highest degree of
Virtue. He that is poor, ought to be cheerful, and content in the midst of his
Indigence: Behold wherein the Virtue of the Poor Man consists; and he that is
Rich, ought to do good to all: He that is of a poor and abject Spirit, does
good only to certain Persons; certain Passions, certain particular Friendships
cause him to act, his Friendship is interested: He disperses his Wealth only
with a prospect of reaping more than he sows; he seeks only his own Interest:
But the love o^ the Perfect Man is an universal love, a love whose Object is
all Mankind. A Soldier of the Kingdom of Ci, said they unto him, lost his
Buckler, and having a long time sought after it in vain, he at last comforts
himself, upon the loss he had sustained, with this Reflection; A Soldier has
lost his Buckler, but a Soldier of our Camp has found it, he will use it. It
had been much better spoken, replies Confucius, if he had said, A Man has lost
his Buckler, but a Man will find it; thereby intimating, that we ought to have
an Affection for all the Men of the World.

Confucius had a tender Spirit, as may be judged by what we have said, but ^t
was great and sublime. The Ancient Chinese Taught, that there were Two Gods
which presided in their Houses, the one called Noao, and the other Cao. The
First was respected as the Tutelar God of the whole Family, and the Last was
only the God of the Fire-Hearth. Nevertheless, although the last of these
Genius's was very much inferior to the first; yet to him were rendered greater
Honors than to him that had all the Domestic Affairs under his Protection:
And there was a Proverb which implied, That it was better to seek the
Protection of Cao, than of Noao. As this Preference had something very
Singular, and seemed, in some measure, even to encounter those which were
promoted to Grandeurs in Princes Courts. Confucius being in the Kingdom of
Guez, and meeting one day with a Prefect, which had great Authority in this
Kingdom, this Minister puffed up with the greatness of his Fortune, supposing
that the Philosopher designed to procure some Favor from the King, demanded of
him by way of Merriment, the meaning o^ this Proverb, so frequent in every ones
Mouth, It is better to seek the Protection of Cao, than of Noao. Confucius, who
presently perceived, that the Prefect gave him to understand, by this
Question, that he ought to address himself to him, if he would obtain his
Request from the King his Master, and who at the same instant, made this
Reflection, that to gain the good Will of a Princes Favorite, it is necessary
to offer Incense even to his D^fects, and to forc^ ones self to Compliances,
unworthy of a Philosopher, plainly told him, That he was wholly differing from
the Maxims of the Age; that he would not address himself to him, with any
address he wanted, to show him that he ought to do it; and at the same time to
Advertise him, that though he should Answer his Question, according to his
Desire, he could reap no benefit thereby, he told him, That he that had Sinned
against Heaven, should Address himself only to Heaven. For he adds, to whom can
he Address himself to obtain the Pardon of his Crime, seeing that there is not
any Deity above Heaven.

Confucius Recommends nothing so much to his Disciples as Clemency and
Courtesy; always grounded upon this Maxim, That we ought to Love all Men. And
to make them better to apprehend the Truth of what he said, he made an Instance
of Two Illustrious Princes, that were distinguished for this very thing in the
Kingdom of Cucho. These Princes, says he, were so mild and courteous, that
they easily forgot the most heinous Injuries, and horrible Crimes, when the
Offenders showed any sign of Repentance. They beheld these Criminals, though
worthy of the severest Punishments, as if they had been Innocent; they not only
forgot their Faults, but by their Carriage, made even those that had committed
them, in some measure to forget them, and loose one part of the Disgrace, which
remains after great Lapses, and which can only discourage in the way of Virtue.

One of this Philosophers great designs being to form Princes to Virtue, and to
teach the Art of Reigning happily, he made no difficulty to Addressing himself
directly to them, and of giving them Counsel. A Prince, said he, one day to a
King of Lu, called Timcum, A Prince ought to be moderate, he ought not to
contemn any of his Subjects, he ought to Recompense those that deserve it.
There are some Subjects that he ought to treat with Mildness, and others with
Severity; there are some on whose Fidelity he ought to Rely, but there are some
also whom he cannot sufficiently Distrust.

Confucius would have Princes desire nothing that other Men wish for, although
they are sometimes good Things, which it seems they might desire without
Offense; he would have them to Trample, as I may say, upon whatever may make
the Felicity of Mortals upon Ear^h; and especially to look upon Riches,
Children, and Life it self, as transient Advantages, and which consequently
cannot make the Felicity of a Prince. The Emperor Yao, says this Philosopher,
governed himself by these Maxims, and under the conduct of so good a Guide, he
arrived at a Perfection, whereunto few Mortals can attain; for it may be said,
that he saw nothing above him but Heaven, to which he was entirely conformable.
This incomparable Prince, adds he, from time to time visited the Provinces of
his Empire; and as he was the delight of his People, being met one day by a
Troop of his Subjects; these Subjects, after having called him their Emperor
and Father, and after having testified their exceeding Joy at the sight of so
great a Prince, cried out with a loud Voice, to join their Wishes with their
Acclamations, Let Heaven heap Riches upon thee! Let it grant thee a numerous
Family! And let it not snatch thee from thy People, till thou art satisfied
with Days! No, replys the Emperor, send up other Petitions to Heaven. Great
Riches produce great Cares, and great Inquietudes; A numerous Progeny produces
great Fears! And a long Life is generally a Series of Misfortunes. There are
found few Emperors like to Yao, cries Confucius after this.

That which generally occasions trouble to Kings, that, which in some measure,
redoubles the weight of the Burden annexed to their Crown, is either the few
Subjects over which they Reign, or the little Wealth which they possess. For in
Brief, all Kings are not great, all Kings have not vast Dominions, and
excessive Rich^s. But Confucius is of Opinion, That a King is too Ingenious to
Torment himself, when these Reflections are capable of causing the least
trouble in him. He says, That a King has Subjects enough, when his Subjects are
Contented; and that his Kingdom is Rich enough, when Peace and Concord Flourish
there. Peace and Concord, says this Philosopher, Are the Mothers of Plenty.

In fine, Confucius, in Speaking of the Duties of Princes, teaches, That it is
so necessary for a Prince to be Virtuous, that when he is otherwise, a Subject
is obliged by the Laws of Heaven, voluntarily to banish himself, and to seek
another Country.

He sometimes complains of the disorders of Princes; but the great Subject of
his Complaints, is, The Extravagancies of private Men. He bewails the Morals of
his Age; he says, That he sees almost no Body that distinguishes himself,
either by Piety, or some extraordinary Quality; that every One is corrupted,
that every One is depraved, and that it is amongst the Magistrates and
Courtiers, chiefly, that Virtue is neglected. It is true, that Confucius seems
to extend Things beyond Reason. Indeed, 'twas not much for this Philosopher,
when in a Princes Court he found but Ten or Twelve Persons of an extraordinary
Wisdom, to cry out, O Tempora, O Mores. Under Vuvam's Reigns, there were Ten
Men of a Consummate Virtue and Sufficiency, on whom this Emperor might repose
all the Affairs of the Empire: Yet Confucius exclaims against so small a
number, saying, That great Endowments, Virtue, and the Qualities of the Spirit,
are Things very rare in his Age. He had made the same Complaints in respect of
the Emperor Zun, the First of the Family of Cheu, although this Prince had then
Five Praefects, of whose Merit some Judgment may be made by the History of one
of these Ministers, whose Name was You.

This Wise Minister had rendered his Memory immortal amongst the Chinese, not
only because it was he that invented the Secret of stopping or diverting the
Waters that overflowed the whole Kingdom, and which made it almost
uninhabitable, but because that being an Emperor, he always lived like a
Philosopher. He was of an Illustrious Family; for he could Name some Emperors
of his Ancestors: But if by the Decadency of his House, he was fallen from the
Pretensions he might have to the Empire, his Wisdom and Virtue acquired him
what Fortune had refused to the Nobility of his Extraction. The Emperor Zun so
thoroughly understood his Desert, that he associated him to the Empire: And
Seventeen Years after, he declared him his Lawful Successor, even to the
Exclusion of his own Son. You refused this Honor, but as he vainly denied it,
and that his Generosity might not suffer, in the pressing Solicitations that
were made him on all hands, he withdrew from the Court, and went to seek a
Retreat in a Cell: But not being able so well to conceal himself, as not to
remain undiscovered in the Rocks of his Solitude, he was forceably advanced to
the Throne of his Ancestors. Never Throne was more easy of Access than this
Princes, never Prince was more Affable. It is reported, that he one day left
his Dinner Ten times, to peruse the Petitions that were presented him, or to
hear the Complaints of the Distressed: And that he ordinarily quitted his Bath,
when Audience was demanded of him. He Reigned Ten Years with so much Success,
with so much Tranquillity, and in such great abundance of all Things, that of
this Age it may be truly said, That it was a Golden Age. You was an 100 Years
old when he Died; and he Died as he had Lived: For prefering the Interest of
the Empire before that of his Family, he would not let his Son succeed him, he
gave the Crown to one of his Subjects, whose Virtue was known unto him. A
Prince, doubtless, is happy, when he can some time discharge himself of the
Cares which throw and press him on such a Minister; and Zun only could be so,
seeing that he at one time had Five, all worthy of being Seated on the Throne,
but this Number was not great enough for Confucius, it is what made him to
grieve.

Confucius says, That a Prince ought never to accept the Crown to the Prejudice
of his Father, how unworthy soever his Father might be thereof; That it is one
of the greatest Crimes whereof a Prince can be Guilty; and this occasioned him
to relate two little Histories, which Suit admirably to his Subject.

Limcum, says this Philosopher, was a King of Guei, who was twic^ Married. As
Chastity is not always the Portion of Princesses, the Queen had unlawful
Familiarities with one of the Nobles of his Court; and this not being so
privately managed, but one of Limcum's Sons by his first Wife came to the
Knowledge of it, this young Prince, jealous of his Fathers Honor, so highly
resented it, that he designed to kill the Queen, which he concealed not. The
cunning and guilty Princess, who saw her self detected, and who had a great
Influence over her ancient Spouse, alleged such plausible Reasons, to make him
believe her Innocence, that this poor Prince, shutting his Eyes against the
Truth, banished his Son: But as Children are not culpable for their Fathers
Crimes, he kept Che with him: He was the Son of this disgraced Prince. Limcum
died soon after. The People recalled the Prince whom the Queens Debaucheries
had banished; and he went to receive the Crown, but his vicious Son opposed him,
alleging that his Father was a Parricide: He raised Armies against him, and
was proclaimed King by the People.

The Sons of a King of Cucho, continues he, followed not this way: Behold a
memorable Example. This King, whose History we shall relate in two Words, had
three Sons: And as Fathers have sometimes more tenderness for their youngest
Children, than for the rest, he had so much for the last which Heaven had given
him, that some days before his Death, he appointed him for his Successor, to
the Exclusion of his other Brothers. This Procedure was so much the more
extraordinary, as it was contrary to the Laws of the Land. The People thought
after the King's Death, that they might endeavor, without any crime, to
advance the eldest of the Royal Family on the Throne. This was executed as the
People had projected it; and this Action was generally approved. There wa^ none
but the new King, who remembering his Fathers dying Words, refused to consent.
This Generous Prince took the Crow^ that was presented him, put it on his
younger Brothers Head, and nobly declared that he renounced it, and thought
himself unworthy of it, seeing that he had been excluded by his Fathers Will,
and tha^ his Father could not retract what h^ had done. The Brother, touched
with such an Heroic Action, conjured him the same moment, not to oppose the
Inclination of all the People, who desired him to Reign over them. He alleged
that it was he alone, that was the lawful Successor to the Crown, which he
contemned; That their Father could not violate the Laws of the State; That this
Prince was overtaken with a too great Fondness, and that in a word, it in some
measure belonged to the People to redress the Laws of their Kings, when they
were not just. But nothing could persuade him to act contrary to his Fathers
Will. Between these two Princes, there was a laudable Contestation; neither
would accept the Crown: And they seeing, that this Contest would continue a
long time, withdrew from the Court; and Vanquished and Victorious together,
they went to end their Days in the repose of a Solitude, and left the Kingdom
to their Brother. These Princes, adds he, sought after Virtue; but they sought
i^ not in vain, for they found it.

He frequently relates short Histories of this Nature, wherein an Heroic
Gen^rosity is every where seen to discover it self. The Women amongst the
People, and even great Princesses, are therein observed rather to ch^s^ Death,
and that with their own Hands, than to be exposed to the Violences of their
Ravishers. The Magistrates are there seen to quit the greatest Employs, to
avoid the Disorders of the Court; Philosophers to censure Kings upon their
Throne, and Princes who mak^ no difficulty to die, to appease the Anger of
Heaven, and procure Peac^ to their People.

After this Confucius shows how the D^ad ought to be buried; and as this was
performed in his time with a great deal of Magnificence, so in Funeral Pomps he
blames whatever seems like Ostentation, and reproves it after a severe manner.
Indeed, one of his Disciples being dead, and this Disciple being buried with
the usual Magnificence, he cried out when he knew it, When my Disciple was
alive, he respected me as his Father, and I looked upon him as my Son: But can
I now behold him as my Son, since he has been buried like other Men?

He prohibits the bewailing the Dead with excess; and if, constrained by his
own Grief, he shed Tears for this very Disciple, he conf^ssed he ^orgot
himself; That in truth, great Griefs have no Bounds, but that the Wiseman ought
not to be overcome with Grief; That it is a Weakness, it is a Crime in him.

He gives great Praises to some of his Disciples, who, in the midst of the
greatest Poverty, were content with their Condition; and accounted as great
Riches the Natural Virtues they had received from Heaven.

He declaims against Pride, Self-Love, Indiscretion, and against the ridiculous
Vanity of those that affect to be Masters every where, against those
Self-Conceited Men, who momentarily cite their own Actions, and against great
Talkers, and drawing afterward the Portraiture of the Wiseman, in opposition
to what he has discoursed, he says, that Humility, Modesty, Gravity, and
Neighbourly Affection, are Virtues which he cannot one moment neglect, without
departing from his Character.

He says, That a good Man never afflicts himself, and fears nothing; that he
contemns Injuries, credits not Reproaches, and refuses even to ^ear Reports.

He maintains, that Punishments ar^ too common; that if the Magistrates were
good Men, the wicked would Conform their Life to theirs, and that if Princes
would only advance to Dignities, Persons distinguished by their Honesty, and
exemplary Life, every one would apply himself unto Virtue, because that
Gra^deur being that which all Men Naturally Desire, every one willing to
possess it, would endeavor to render himself worthy thereof.

He would have us avoid Idleness; to be serious, and not precipitate in our
Answers; and that setting our selves above every thing, we should never be
troubled, either that we are contemned, or not known in the World.

He compares Hypocrites to those lewd Villains, who the better to conceal their
Designs from the Eyes of Men, do appear Wise and Modest in the Day tim^, and
who by the favor of the Night, do Rob Houses, and commit the most Infamous
Robberies.

He says, That those that make their Belly their God, never do any thing worthy
of a Man; that they are rather Brutes than Rational Creatures^ And r^turning to
the Conduct of the great Ones, he very well Remarks, That their Crimes are
always greater than the Crimes of other Men. Zam, the last Emperor of the
Family of Cheu, says, Confucius on this occasion, had a very irregular Conduct.
But how irregular soever his Conduct was, the Disorder^ of this Emperor were
only the Disorders of his Age. Nevertheless, when any Debauched, Crimi^al, and
Infamous Action is mentioned, they say it is, The Crime of Zam. The Reason
whereof is this, Zam was Wicked and an Emperor.

Confucius relates an infinite number of other Things of this Nature, which
concern the Conduct of all sorts of Men; but most of the Things that he says,
or which his Disciples do say, are Sentences and Maxims, as we have already
declared, the most considerable of which are these that follow.

Maxims.
I.
Endeavor to imitate the Wise, and never discourage thy self, how Laborious
soever it may be: If thou can arrive at thine end, the Pleasure you will
Enjoy will Recompense all thy Pains.

II.
When thou Labourest for others, do it with the same Zeal as if it were for thy
self.

III.
Virtue which is not supported with Gravity, gains no repute amongst Men.

IV.
Always remember thou art a Man, that human Nature is Frail, and that thou
may easily fall, and thou shall never fall. But, if happening to forget what
thou art, thou chancest to fall, be not discouraged; remember that thou may
rise again; that it is in thy Power to break the Bands which join thee to thine
Offense, and to subdue the Obstacles which hinder thee from walking in the
Paths of Virtue.

V.
Take heed that thy Promises be Just, for having once promised, it is not
lawful to Retract; we ought always to keep our Promise.

IV.
When thou do Homage to any one, see that thy Submissions be proportioned to
the Homage thou owe him: There is Stupidity and Pride in doing too little;
but in over acting it there is Abjection and Hypocrisy.

VII.
Eat not for the Pleasure thou may find therein. Eat to Increase thy
Strength; Eat to preserve the Life which thou have received from Heaven.

VIII.
Labor to purify thy Thoughts: If thy Thoughts are not ill, neither will thy
Actions be so.

IX.
The Wiseman has an Infinity of Pleasures; for Virtue has its Delights in the
midst of the Severities that attend it.

X.
He that in his Studies wholly applies himself to Labor and Exercise, and
neglects Meditation, loses his time: And he that only applies himself to
Meditation, and neglects Labor and Exercise, does only wander and lose
himself. The first can never know any thing exactly, his Lights will be always
intermixed with Doubts and Obscurities; and the last will only pursue Shadows;
his Knowledge will never be certain, it will never be solid. Labor, but slight
not Meditation: Meditate, but slight not Labor.

XI.
A Prince ought to punish Vice, for fear lest he seem to maintain ^t: But yet
he ought to keep his People in their Duty, rather by the Effects of Clemency,
than by Menaces and Punishments.

XII.
Never slacken Fidelity to thy Prince; conceal nothing from him which it is his
Interest to know; and think nothink difficult, when it tends to Obey him.

XIII.
When we cannot apply any Remedy to an Evil, it is in vain to seek it. If by thy
Advices and Remonstrances, thou could undo, what is already done, thy Silence
would be Criminal; but there is nothing colder than Advice, by which it is
impossible to profit.

XIV.
Poverty and Human Miseries are Evils in themselves, but the Wicked only resent
them. It Is a Burden under which they groan, and which makes them at last to
sink; they even distaste the best Fortune. It Is the Wiseman only who is always
pleased: Virtue renders his Spirit quiet: Nothing troubles him, nothing
disquiets him, because he practices not Virtue for a Reward. The practice of
Virtue is the sole Recompense he expects.

XV.
It is only the Good Man, who can make a right choice; who can, either love or
hate with Reason, or as need requires.

XVI.
He that applies himself to Virtue, and strongly addicts himself thereto, never
commits any thing unbecoming a Man, nor contrary to Right Reason.

XVII.
Riches and Honors are Good; The desire of possessing them is Natural to all
Men: But if these Good Things agree not with Virtue, the Wise Man ought to
co^temn, and generously to renounce them. On the contrary, Poverty and Ignominy
are Evils; Man Naturally avoids them: If these Evils attack the Wise Man, it is
lawful for him to rid himself from them, but it is not lawful to do it by a
Crime.

XVIII.
I never as yet saw a Man that was happy in his Virtue, or afflicted with his
Defects and Weaknesses; but I am not surpised, because I would have him that
delights in Virtue, to find so many Charms therein, that for it h^ should
contemn the Pleasures of the World: And on the contrary, that h^ who hates
Vice, should find it so hideous, that he should use all ways to keep himself
from falling therein.

XIX.
It is not credible that he who uses his utmost Endeavors to acquire Virtue,
should not obtain it at last, although he should labor but one single Day. I
never yet saw the Man that wanted strength for this purpose.

XX.
He that in the Morning has heard the Voice of Virtue, may die at Night. This
Man will not repent of living, and Death will not be any pain unto him.

XXI.
He that seeks Pride in his Habits, and loves not Frugality, is not disposed
for the Study of Wisdom; thou ought not even to hold Correspondence with him.

XXII.
Afflict not thy self ^or that thou art not promoted to Grandeur and Public
Dignities; Rather grieve for that thou art not, perhaps, adorned with those
Virtues that might render thee worthy of being advanced.

XXIII.
The Good Man employs himself only with his Virtue, the Wicked only with his
Riches. The first continually thinks upon the Good and Interest of the State;
but the last has other Cares, he only thinks on what concerns himself.

XXIV.
Do unto another as thou would be dealt with thy self: Thou only need this
Law alone; it is the Foundation and Principle of all the rest.

XXV.
The Wise Man has no sooner cast his Eyes upon a good Man, but he endeavors to
imitate his Virtues: But the same Wise Man has no sooner fixed his Sight upon a
Man given up to his Vices, but mistrusting himself, interrogates himself in a
trembling manner, if he be not like that Man.

XXVI.
A Child is obliged to serve and obey his Father. Parents have their Failures:
A Child is obliged to acquaint them therewith, but he ought to do it with
Moderation and Prudence: And if whatever Precautions he takes, he always meets
with opposition, he ought to rest a while, but never desist. Counsels given to
Parents do frequently draw Punishments and Severities upon the Child; but on
this account he ought to suffer, not to murmur.

XXVII.
The Wise Man never hastens, neither in his Studies, nor in his Words; he is
sometimes as it were Mute; but when it concerns him to act, and practice
Virtue, he, as I may say, precipitates all.

XXVIII.
The truly Wise Man Speaks little, he is little Eloquent. I see not, that
Eloquence can be of very great use to him.

XXIX.
A long Experience is required to know the Heart of Man. I imagined, when I was
young, that all Men were Sincere; that they always Practiced what they said; in
a word, that their Mouth always agreed with their Heart: But now that I behold
Things with another Eye, I am convinced that I was mistaken. At present I hear
what Men say, but I never rely thereon, I will examine whether their Words are
agreeable to their Actions.

XXX.
In the Kingdom of Ci there was formerly a Prefect that slew his King. Another
Prefect of the same Kingdom, beholding with horror the Crime of this
Parricide, quitted his Dignity, for sook his Wealth, and retired into another
Kingdom. This Wise Minister was not so happy as to find at first what he sought
after; in this new Kingdom he only found wicked Ministers, little devoted to
their Masters Interest. This, says he, shall not be the place of mine abode, I
will elsewhere seek a Retreat. But always meeting with Men like to that
Perfidious Minister, who by his Crime had forced him to abandon his Country,
Dignity, and all his Estate, he wen^ through the whole Earth. If thou demandest
my Thoughts concerning such a Man, I cannot refuse telling you, that he
deserves great Praises, and that he had a very remarkable Virtue. This is the
Judgment that every Rational Man ought to make thereof. But as we are not the
Searchers of Hearts, and as it is properly in the Heart, that true Virtue
resides, I know not whether his Virtue was a true Virtue; we ought not always
to Judge of Men by their outward Actions.

XXXI.
I know a Man, who passes for Sincere in the Peoples Mind, who was asked for
something that he had not. Thou imaginest, perhaps, that he ingeniously
Confessed, That it was not in his Power to grant what was asked of him. He ought
to do it, if his Sincerity had answered the report it had amongst the People:
But behold how he took it. He went directly to a Neighbors House; he borrowed
of him what was requested of himself, and afterward gave it him. I cannot
convince my self that this Man can be Sincere.

XXXII.
Refuse not what is given thee by thy Prince, what Riches soever thou possessed.
Give thy Supersluities to the Poor.

XXXIII.
The defects of Parents ought not to be imputed to their Children. Because that
a Father shall, by his Crimes, render himself unworthy of being promoted to
Honor, the Son ought not to be excluded, if he renders not himself unworthy.
Because that a Son shall be of an obscure Birth, his Birth ought not to be his
Crime, he ought to be called to great Employments, as well as the Sons of the
Nobles, if he has the Qualifications necessary. Our Fathers heretofore
Sacrificed Victims only of a certain Color, and pitched upon these Colors
according to the Will of those that sat upon the Throne. Under the Reign of one
of our Emperors, the Red Color was in Vogue. Think you, that the Deities, to
which our Fathers Sacrificed under this Emperors Reign, would reject a Red
Bull, because it came from a Cow of another Color.

XXXIV.
Prefer Poverty and Banishment to the most Eminent Offices of State, when it is
a wicked Man that offers them, and would constrain thee to accept them.

XXXV.
The Way that leads to Virtue is long, but it is thy Duty to finish this long
Race. Allege not for thy excuse, that thou have not strength enough; that
Difficulties discourage thee, and that thou shall be at last for^'d to stop in
the midst of the Course. Thou know nothing, begin to run: It Is a sign thou
have not as yet begun, thou should not use this Language.

XXXVI.
It Is not enough to know Virtue, it is necessary to love it; but it is not
sufficient to love it, it is necessary to possess it.

XXXVII.
He that persecutes a Good Man, makes War against Heaven: Heaven created
Virtue, and protects it; he that p^rsecutes it, pers^cutes Heaven.

XXXVIII.
A Magistrate ought to honor his Father and Mother; he ought never to faulter
in this just Duty; his Example ought to instruct the People. He ough^ not to
contemn old Persons, nor Persons of Merit: The People may imitate him.

XXXIX.
A Child ought to be under a continual apprehension of doing something that may
displease his Father; this Fear ought always to possess him. In a word, he
ought to act, in whatever he undertakes, with so much precaution, that he may
never offend him, or afflict him.

XL.
Greatness of Spirit, Power and Perseverance, ought to be the Portion of the
Wise. The Burden wherewith he is loaded is weighty, his Course i^ long.

XLI.
The Wise Man never acts without Counsel. He sometimes consults, in the most
important affairs, even the least intelligent Persons, Men that have the least
Spirit, and the least Experience. When Counsels are good, we ought not to
consider from whence they come.

XLII.
Eschew Vanity and Pride. Although thou had all the Prudence and Ability of
the Ancients, if thou have not Humility, thou have nothing, thou art even the
Man of the World that deserves to be contemn^d.

XLIII.
Learn what thou know already, as if thou had never learned it: Things are
never so well known but that we may forget them.

XLIV.
Do nothing that is unhandsom, although thou should have Art enough to make
thine Action approved: Thou may easily deceive the Eyes of Men, but thou
can never deceive Heaven, its Eyes are too penetrative and clear.

XLV.
Never contract Friendship with a Man that is not better than thy self.

XLVI.
The Wise Man blushes at his Faults, but is not ashamed to amend them.

XLVII.
He that lives without Envy and Covetousness may aspire at every thing.

XLVIII.
Would thou learn to die well? Learn first to live well.

XLIX.
A Minister of State never ought to serve his Prince in his Extravagancies and
Injustice. He ought rather to renounce his O^^^ce, than to tarnish it by base
and criminal Actions.

L.
Innocence ceases to be a Virtue, most of the Great Ones are fallen therefrom.
But if thou demandest what must be done to recover this Virtue. I answer, That
it is necessary to conquer thy self. If all Mortals could, in one Day, gain
over themselves this happy Victory, the whole Universe would, from this very
Day, reassume a new Form; we should all be perfect, we should all be innocent.
It Is true, the Victory is difficult, but it is not impossible; for in short, to
conquer thy self, is only to do what is agreeable to Reason. Turn away thine
Eyes, stop thine Ears, put a Bridle upon thy Tongue, and rather remain in an
Eternal ^naction, than to employ thine Eyes in beholding Sights where Reason is
stifled; than to give Attention thereunto, or to Discourse thereon. Behold how
thou may overcome! The Victory depends on thy self alone.

LI.
Desire not the Death of thine Enemy, thou would desire it in Vain; his Life
is in the Hands of Heaven.

LII.
It is easy to obey the Wise, he commands nothing impossible; but it is hard
to divert him therefrom: That which often times Rejoices others, makes him to
Sigh, and forces Torrents of Tears from his Eyes.

LIII.
Acknowledge thy Benefits by the return of other Benefits, but never Revenge
I^juries.

LIVE.
In what part of the World soever thou art forced to spend thy Life, correspond
with the Wisest, associat^ with the best Men.

LV.
To Sin and not to Repent, is properly to Sin.

LVI.
It Is good to Fast some times, to give thy Mind to Meditation, and to the Study
of Virtue. The Wise Man is taken up with other Cares, than with the continual
Cares of his Nourishment. The best cultivated Earth frustrates the hopes of the
Labourer, when the Seasons are Irregular: All the Rules of Husbandry could not
secure him from Death, in the time of a hard Famine; but Virtue is never
fruitless.

LVII.
The Wise Man must learn to know the Heart of Man, to the end that taking every
one according to his own Inclination, he may not labor in Vain, when he shall
discourse to him of Virtue. All Men ought not to be instru^ted after the same
way. There are diverse Paths that lead to Virtue, the Wise Man ought not to
ignore them.

LVIII.
Combat Night and Day against thy Vi^es; and if by thy Cares and Vigilance,
thou against the Victory over thy self, courageously attack the Vices of others,
but attack them not before this be done: There is nothing more Ridiculous than
to complain of others defec^^, when we have the very same.

LIX.
The good Man Sins sometimes, weakness is Natural to him: But he ought to watch
so diligently over himself, that he never fall twice into the same Crime.

LX.
We have three Friends that are Useful to us, a Sincere Friend, a Faithful
Friend, a Friend that Hears every Thing, that Examines what is told him, and
that Speaks little: But we have three also whose Friendship is pernicious, a
Hypocrite, a Flatt^rer, and a great Talker.

LXI.
He that applies himself to Virtue, has three Enemies to conflict, which he
must subdue, Incontinence when he is as yet in the vigor of his Age, and the
Blood boils in his Veins; Contests and Disputes when he is arrived at a mature
Age, and Covetousness when he is old.

LXII.
There are three Things that the Wise Man ought to Reverence, the Laws of
Heaven, Great Men, and the Words of Good Men.

LXIII.
We may have an Aversion for an Enemy, without desiring Revenge. The Motions of
Nature are not always Criminal.

LXIV.
Distrust a Flatterer, a Man affected in his Discourses, and who every where
boasts of his Eloquence. This is not the Character of true Virtue.

LXV.
Silence is absolutely necessary to the Wise Man. Great Discourses, elaborate
Discourses, pieces of Eloquence, ought to be a Language unknown to him, his
Actions ought to be his Language. As for me, I would never Speak more. Heaven
Speaks, but what Language does, it use, to preach to Men, that there is a
Sovereign Principle from whence all things depend; a Sovereign Principle which
makes them to Act and Move. Its Motion is its Language, it reduces the Seasons
to their Time, it agitates Nature, it makes it produce: This Silence is
Eloquent.

LXVI.
The Wise Man ought to hate several sorts of Men. He ought to hate those that
divulge the defects of others, and take delight in discoursing therein. He
ought to hate those that being adorned only with very mean Qualities, and who
being moreover of a low Birth, do rev^^e and temerariously murmur against t^ose
that are promoted to Dignities of State. He ought to hate a Valiant Man, when
his Valor is not accompanied with Civility, nor Prudence. He ought to ha^^
those sorts of Men that are puff'^ (...) with Self-Love; who being always
Conceited of their own Merit, and Idolaters of their own Opinions, do assault
all, deride all, and never consult Reason. He ought to hate those who having
very small Illuminations, do presume to censure what others do. He ought to
hate proud Men. In a word, he ought to hate those who make it a Custom to spy
out others Defects to publish them.

LXVII.
It is very difficult to associate with the Populace. These sort of Men grow
familiar and insolent when we have too much Correspondence with them: And
because they imagine they are slighted, when never so little neglected, we draw
their Aversion upon us.

LXVIII.
He that is arrived at the Fortieth Year of his Age, and who has, hitherto,
been a Slave to some Criminal Habit, is not in a condition to subdue it. I hold
his Malady incurable, he will persevere in his Crime un^il Death.

LXIX.
Afflict not thy self at the Death of a Brother. Death and Life are in the
Power of Heaven, to which the Wise Man is bound to submit. Moreover, all the
Men of the Earth are thy Brethren; why then should thou weep for ^ne, at a
time when so many others remain alive?

LXX.
The Natural Light is only a perpetual Conformity of our Soul with the Laws of
Heaven. Men can never lose this Light. It is true, that the Heart of Man being
inconstant and wavering, it is sometimes covered over with so many Clouds, that
it seems wholly extinguished. The Wise Man experiences it himself; ^or he may
fall into small Errors, and commit light Offenses: Yet the Wise Man cannot be
Virtuous, whilst he is in this state, it would be a Contradiction to say it.

LXXI.
It is very difficult, when Poor, not to hate Poverty: But it is possible to be
Rich without being Proud.

LXXII.
The Men of the first Ages applied themselves to Learning and Knowledge, only
for themselves, that is to say, to become Virtuous: This was all the praise
they expected from their Labors and Lucubrations. But Men at present do only
seek praise, they study only out of Vanity, and to pass for Learned in the
esteem of Men.

LXXIII.
The Wise Man seeks the cause of his Defects in himself: But the Fool avoiding
himself, seeks it in all others besides himself.

LXXIV.
The Wise Man ought to have a severe Gravity, but it ought not to be fierce and
untractable. He ought to love Society, but to avoid great Assemblies.

LXXV.
The Love of Hatred of People, ought not to be the Rule of thy Love or Hatred;
Examine whether they have Reason.

LXXVI.
Contract Friendship with a Man whose Heart is upright and sincere; with a Man
that loves to learn, and who can teach thee something, in his turn. Other Men
are unworthy of thy Friendship.

LXXVII.
He that has Faults, and strives not to amend them, ought at least to do his
endeavor to conceal them. The Wise Man's Defects are like the Eclipses of the
Sun, they come to every ones Knowledge. The Wise Man ought upon this account to
endeavor to cover himself with a Cloud. I say the same thing of Princes.

LXXVIII.
Readily abandon thy Country when Virtue is there depressed, and Vice
encouraged. But if thou designest not to renounce the Maxims of the Age, in thy
retreat and exile, remain in thy miserable Country; for what Reason should
thou leave it?

LXXIX.
When thy Countries Safety is concerned, stand not to consult, but expos^ thy
self.

LXXX.
Heaven shortens not the Life of Man, it is Man that does it by his own Crimes.
Thou may avoid the Calamities that come from Heaven, but thou can never
escape those which thou drawest upon thy self by thy Crimes.

FINIS.

