The CONFESSION And EXECUTION Of the PRISONERS at TYBURN ON Wednesday the 11th
of this Instant June 1679. Viz.
Robert Bareford for a Burglary. Benjamin Dauforn for Pocket-picking. Henry
Senson for a Burglary. Richard Capel for Felony.


Being a satisfactory Account of all their Crimes for which they suffered, the
rest being most graciously Reprieved.

WITH An Account of their Deportment in Prison, and at the place of Execution,
with several other remarkable Circumstances.

As also a true Narration of a notorious Robbery committed on the House of Sir
Tho. Nightingal of Langham in the County of Essex, by five persons, on
Thursday-night the 5th of this instant June, two of which are now taken, and in
Newgate.

LONDON: Printed for D. M. 1679.

The Execution of the Prisoners at Tyburn.
THE miserable Catastrophies of these deplored Wretches, whose sad ends (though
well deserved by reason of their Crimes) I here purpose to relate, the which
may sure amuse the World, and rouse secure Sinners from their drousiness, lest
dreadful Fate awake 'em, when too late, only to view their sure and certain
Death.

The first in this Disaster was Robert Bareford, for committing a Burglary upon
a House in St. Katherines, commonly called by the Name of the Seven Stars; and
thence felloniously bearing away, contrary to the established Laws of this
Nation, and His Majesty's Crown and Dignity, several Parcels, as well
Houshold-goods as Money, to a considerable value. Part of the Goods being found
upon him he was committed: and in Court the Felony and Burglary proved, he
received Sentence, and on Wednesday being the 11th of this instant June, 1679
suffered accordingly at Tyburn. His penitence, as to outward appearance, seemed
more than commonly from such Offenders can be expected

The next of whom we shall treat, that by his evil courses brought himself to
this untimely and disgraceful end, was Richard Capel; a young Man, but an old
Offender; having been once burnt in the Hand at Surry Assizes: And in the late
Conflagration of New Prison, he then being Prisoner there, escaped thence in
the Hurry and Throng of People assembled at that time for the extinguishing of
the Fire: of which Fire I suppose few are ignorant. He not being content with
his liberty, fell to his old Employment afresh; for, as our English Proverb
more fully denotes, Impossible it is to wish an Ethiopian white, so accustomed
Crimes do seldom leave indulged Sinners; for these often warnings were not
sufficient to prevail upon his serious thoughts, but following still those
fatal Tracks that tend to Death and Hell, at last he was Ensnared in his
Devices: For one Evening, somewhat late, he did commit a Felony in a Cooks
House in Blackamore-street, bearing thence as much Pewter as he could
conveniently carry; being met and stopped by the Watch, he told them he had it
in such a place, but the people being called up would not own it; but after
some time they, by the Marks, found the right Owner; whereupon he was
committed, and after sentenced, and this day executed. His Behavior in Prison
after his condemnation was more than ordinarily pennitent, confessing and
bewailing his former lude and vicious courses; for it is commonly seen that
Death's unavoidable approach often startles the hardest Sinner. At the place of
Execution he desired all to take warning by his untimely end, and that they
timely would repent.

Benjamin Dauforn was the next; for that Artificial Trade of Pocket-picking;
and it is the more remarkable by reason he durst venture upon that unlawful Art
in the Grand place this Nation has so long been pleased to build (...) Seats of
Justice in; I mean Westminster Hall: for on (...) 18th of May last past, he
unlawfully took a Purse out of (...) Gentleman's Pocket, and in it 4 or 5
pounds, it being then Term-Time: He being pursued, threw down the Money in the
Corner of a Window; but notwitstanding he was Apprehended and Committed for the
same: and it appearing upon his Trial that he was an old Offender, he was
Sentenced, and this day Executed. He likewise at the place of Execution, when
he saw all hopes of pardon vain, and that Death's fatal Aspects were so
dreadful, shed abundance of tears for his former sins, and begged eternal mercy
for his Soul.

The next, in order, was Henry Season, for robbing a Person of Quality in
Cheswick, and felloniously bearing away a Flitch of Bacon, two Kettles, and
other things, he having been an old Effender heretofore, was sentenced, and
accordingly executed. He much bewailed his Offenses during his being in the
Hold, and said, That bad Company had enticed him to act that, and many other
Exploits; but that he hoped for mercy from above, although he could expect none
here below, by reason of the hainousness of his former Offenees; and he was
exceeding penitent to the last, desiring the Spectators to supplicate
Omnipotence for mercy on his Soul, when he should appear before the Dread
Tribunal, to answer for his wilful and heedless Sin, and former Offenses.

There were seven more Condemned to Die, but received a most gracious
Reprieve, in expectation of their Amendment for the future.

And now one would imagine these so often repeated Examples of offended justice
should restrain offending miscreants; but Deaths grim terrors seem but shadows
till his sure approach do undeceive their blinded Judgments; as may in this be
seen the narration of which I shall here unto Annex by reason Crimes deserving
death may nearest suit with its intendancy: The which narration is of a
notorious Robery committed by five persons, (two of which are now in Newgate)
who breaking into the House of Sir Thomas Nightingall of Langham, In the County
of Essex, on Thursday-night the 5th. of June 1679. and bearing away from thence
in Money, Jewels and Plate the value of seven hundred pounds.

The Account of the Felony and Burglary Committed at and upon the house of Sir
Tho. Nightingal, at Langham, in the County of Essex, on Thursday the 6th of
this Instant June, 1679. the manner as follows.
THE said Sir Thomas his Son entertaining in his Service, as his Footman or
Attendant, one Tho. Cotton (commonly called Longboy by reason of excellent
skill in running) who, for his many misdemeanors, and offenses, his said
Master thought fit to discharge of his said employment and service; who lying
up and down the said Town of Langham, could not content himself but must needs
though unadvisedly, spread some sinister Reports of Sir Thomas, the Father of
his said Master, for which he was taken and stripped of his Livery, the which
enraged him so far as to vow revenge, for so (as he termed it) grievous Affront
within a Fortnights space; upon which he immediately made to London, where
being arrived he went to a certain Vintners house with whom he had been
formerly acquainted: The Vintner, at the first sight of him, demanded why he
went without his Livery he was formerly wont to wear; upon which the said
Cotton told him how his Master had used him, and aggravated the Circumstances
to an extreme degree: Whereupon the Vintner demanded whether he would pass by
such an Affront without any endeavors to requite it in some nature or other,
who answered no, for he had already vowed revenge: The Vintner demanded whether
the said Sir Tho. Nightingal had not any Park of Dear adjoining to his house, a
symbolical meaning used by such kind of persons, but the said Cotton not well
understanding the interpretation simply answered no, but that he had only two
Does feeding before his house: Whereupon the Vintner asked him more plainly
whether he had store of Silver, Gold, or Jewels, in his present possession, who
told him he had to a confiderable vallue; whereupon they agreed to go down
together in a Callash or Chariot, drawn with one Horse, the which they put in
execution; and being arrived at the place aforesaid set up at a little Inn or
Alehouse, some distance from the aforesaid Sir Thomas his house, where
drinking for some time they went to view the Inlets and Conveniences of the
said Sir Thomas his house, and although the aforesaid Cotton was as
conveniently designed as possible, yet was he observed and taken notice of by
several of the Inhabitants of the place who were formerly acquainted with him;
the which, after the Robbery, raised the first suspicion of his being a Party
in the same; but the Vintner and he, after having taken a serious view,
returned again to London, and sending for a Company of dexterous Fellows,
skilled in that Employment, they altogether after some merriment agreed to go
down and break up the house, the said Cotton describing to them the manner
order and Affairs of the same, as also where the Plate, Moneys, Jewels, and the
like were disposed of, where on Thursday-night, the day aforesaid, they entered
in and carried away to the value of 700 pounds in Plate and Moneys without
being discovered by any of the Family. The number that effected the same were
only five, viz. Thomas Cotton, and the Vintner now in Newgate, with three
others not yet taken in this pernicious Intreague. There was one thing worth
observing, having broke into a Closet, they found amongst the rest six (or
thereabouts) Bottles of Mumm, the which Sir Thomas had reserved for his own
drinking; these they in a bravado must needs drink off before they would
depart, after which they hasted to London, and at the Vintners house shared
their Prey. The next morning Sir Thomas finding himself robbed, and considering
the strength of the place thought that the Thieves must have Intellegence from
some that were well acquainted with the house whereupon he began to call to
mind the threatenings of the aforesaid Cotton: As likewise having intellegence
by some of the Neighbors, that he had been lately in the Town; where upon
sending up with all speed to London, he was seized in his Lodging and being
carried before a Magistrate he confessed his accomplices and the contrivance of
the Robery as before recited whereupon a Constable being sent the Vintner was
taken in his own house but the other three escaped; for this Fact the said
Thomas Cotton And the said Vintner were committed to Newgate on Monday the
9th. of this instant June 1679. In order to their Trials etc.

FINIS.

