CONCERNING THE PRIVILEGE OF THE UNDER CLARK'S In the Court of CHANCERY AS NOW
IN CLAIM AND PRACTICE.

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1649.

Tyranny and Popery discovered, by a breife and narative discourse, of the
claimed privilege of a six clarks clarke, alias, a subclarke in the Court of
Chancery.
And humbly Dedicated to His Excellency the Lord General FAIRFAX.
IN time of open hostility for upholding the national rights and liberties of
the freeborn people of England, against all invasive attempts of prerogative
or power; by fortune (or rather to my costly misfortune) I have met with a
limb of tyranny, and popery, as yet lurking in high places of Judicature, and
at this day practiced, under a notion of the jurisdiction and privileges of
the courts, to their respective Clarks, insomuch that a sub clarke in the court
of Chancery (in right of such his relation) claims and enjoyes the following
advantages.

If he be disposed to contention, he may, at his election, under some equitable
pretense, trouble his proposed adversary, by calling him into the said court by
writ of Sub poena, and there charging him by any tedious frivilous bill, which
personally to appear to, copy out, answer, plead, or demurre to; together
with the expenses of his travill, attendance, and a day of hearing (besides
motions, orders, and answers that commonly interpose) the poor defendante is
soon run out of 20. or 30. pound to the clarks nothing, in respect of his
privilege; and if then the bill be dismissed with 20. shillings costs against
this clark, it may be thought a happy reparation, notwithstanding the drawing
up, entering, and copy of this order of dismission* with the Suppoena, and
other charges conducing to the recovery of these costs, may possibly come to
nineteen shillings of the money.

Or if otherwise this clarke pretends to a legal right, which he enjoyes not,
he may take his writ of privilege out of the Pettibagg Office, and thereby
compel the parsonall appearance of the deffendant, with four sabsedy men for
spetiall bail to (his individuum vagum) his action then after to be made
appear, albeit the defendant himself be responsable for tenfould the value of
the clarke, if wholly exposed to sale, and the like for so many several actions
as he shall pretend to. All which being performed, there yet remains a remnant
of further charge and servitude: for this clarke may constrain the defendant
to attend his pleasure (a die in diem) to receive his declaration and plead to
it *there being no imparlance against his privilege) but the clark at liberty
not to declare before the third following term, and thereby put the
deffendants to a further charge and attendance.

So that suppose this deffendants abode be 100. or 200 miles distant from
London, thither he and such his bail must go with hazard of their healths,
neglect of their families, loss in their several occasions and certain great
expenses in their travel and attendance as aforesaid, to the clarks nothing;
nor the business, when once understood, appearing any other then like the
fabulous issue of the Mountains, which after a great and long expectation of
some huge birth, it proves but a ridiculous mouse, some trivial 2 pence
matter, or rather a design of vexation.

Now again admitting this Clerk to be never so injurious to others, in their
bodies, goods, or good names (be their case proper for Law or Equity) the Clerk
claims it for part of his privilege, not to be impleaded but in one of the
forenamed Courts, where the Plaintiff will assuredly find the Salve worse then
the sore (unless it be the greater) for he shall certainly spend his Estate to
nothing, and have great fortune if he ever get half his costs allowed, nor any
Bail to be put in for security of what he shall recover.

So that this clerk (in right of such his place and privilege) carries about
him (Armatam Nequitiam) such desperate destructive advantages, that he may at
pleasure exercise an insulting tyrannical power over others (of what
incomparable worth soever) and himself remain as careless in doing right, as
fearlesse of suffering wrong, ever making his privilege Isntrumental to his
malicious and mischeivous purposes in the one case, or the other.

Now how dangerous is it to entrust the pravety of man's nature, with a
privilege so inconsistent with the liberty of the Subject, and so unwarranted
by the Law of God and the laws of the Nation, both which; Impartialy look^ on
the Actions of mankind without respect of persons, whether in administration
of reward or punishment; being the two feet on which the Empires of the world
march, with honor and safety.

And what less could be expected from the late Lord Keeper, Finch, and others,
the then Judges of the Land, then a compliancy by their utmost skill, and
cunning to serve their Prince in the designs of Ship-mony, and all illegal
Monopolies and miscariages, (to the begetting of intestine miserable Wars)
when as yet they continue such high and Papal indulgencies to their Clarks;
whereby they give them power to become Devils to honest men; by destroying
them in their livelyhoods, and comforts of life as aforesaid.

And what has been here said of Chancery Clarks, being above 70. in number,
does in part extend to the Attorneys and Clarks in all the Courts of Record at
Westminster, for I find it affirmed by diverse of them that (Mutatis Mutandis)
they all lay claim to privileges by their places, to the cherishing of much
vermin in the land, when they incline to contention.

It remains now to understand how these privileges be gronnded, whether on
Grant from the Crown, or the customary usage and practice of the Courts. If it
be answered by Grant; it is replied (nihil Dat quod non habet) nor the Crown,
nor the King (when in his Solstice of Majesty) was ever admitted such a
privilege in his own case. For if any Subject had cause to capitulate his
right with the King by contest in law or equity, (were he Plaintiff or
Defendant) the King by his Counsel could only make a fair use of those
prerogative advantages which diverse Statutes of the Land and the practice of
our municipall Laws had entitled him to, (in special Cases) for upholding
the rights of the Crown against the cunning and craft of common persons; and
that without the least Arbitrary power, or undue and destructive prosecution.

Or if it be answered to be a privilege, grounded on an ancient and continued
practice of the courts; it is then replied (Malus usus est abolendus) nay more,
a custom so repugnant to law, reason, and common right, as this is (in most of
the species;) is in it self void. For every Native (in common right) has a
like and equal portion of birthright in the Laws of the Nation; and be all
alike level to law. And how preposterous is it to reason, and how horrid to
nature, for a superior to be exposed to mischeife and misery, at the
discression of his inferior fellow subject, by any hethenish grant or custom,
let any men judge.

But to draw to a conclusion (brevity being the thing intended) I believe these
privileges to be of a mixed nature, patched up partly by grant, and partly by
the customary favors of the court, as a boon intended to the clarks, which
write to the great Seal, in respect of such their reference and subordination
thereto. I also find this grant and these customary fovours to have been very
ancient, and to have had their original in time of greatest superstition and
blindness, when the six clarks themselves were priests; but as now (after so
many years light of reformation, and in the time of an intended thorough
reformation) to be countenanced in the highest courts of Judgment and Justice,
is a wonder to amasement.

Now out upon all relative worship; as being a relic of popery and worst of
Jdolatry. Out upon such Jdolizing feeble mortal Majesty, in ascribing such
honor and immunities to any scrub clarke that (in way of livelihood) offers up
a little Jnke and Paper to the effigies of its person, and impress of 'its
power.

For according to the latitude of Religion, or reason, in this relative
worship, the invocation of Saints (who are constant attendants about the
omnipotent Majesty of the immortal God) may be fully justified. And what
honor or rather addoration may any piece of wood claim (above the Ce (...)


