THE CONGRESS AT THE HAGUE.

LICENSED,

May 8. 1691. J. FRASER.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms-Inn, Warwick Lane. 1691.

To the Right Noble THE MARQUESS of CARMARTHEN, EARL of DANBY, etc. LORD
PRESIDENT of Their Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, and Knight of the
Most Noble ORDER of the GARTER.
My LORD,
I Humbly entreat your LORDSHIP to throw an eye upon these few Papers I have
written about the Congress at the Hague, upon the eager solicitations of some
worthy persons of my acquaintance, who being curious to know what had past
there, were not perhaps left at liberty to consider how incapable I was either
to refuse, or to satisfy them, especially in so nice a Language, as the
English; for I am afraid that by some uneasy Words, and by some struggling
Expressions, it will be easily discovered that I am a Stranger to that
Language, and consequently I run the hazard to be thought a Stranger to the
Subject too. In fine, I am between fear and hopes; and I humbly beseech your
LORDSHIP to redeem me from that pain. If your LORDSHIP can persuade your self
to begin to read this little Book, and if you do not throw it away before you
have finished it, that will be an infallible sign of my success; and your bare
indifferency will do me more Honor, than the applauding-Praises of an infinite
number of others. And in this case, I humbly desire your LORDSHIP to present it
to Her Majesty; to tell Her that the Author does humbly dedicate it to Her, and
that if he has not done it in the usual manner, it is only because he
endeavored well to manage the profound Respect and Veneration he has for Her
Majesty's Sacred Name. I do not question but Her Majesty will peruse it, seeing
it is recommended by so Great a hand; and I shall think my self extreme happy
to have once in my Life, for one half hour, entertained the most Pious, most
Virtuous, and most Beautiful Queen in the World. It is, I confess, a very great
presumption in a Foreigner to desire so signal a Favor from the chief Minister
of State; but that very Name of Foreigner seems to soften the boldness, and
carries with it an Argument so much received by all Civilized Nations, that
pleads for your generous Patronage. The mighty weight of the public Affairs,
lies indeed very heavy upon you; yet, by reason of your LORD-SHIP's vast
Capacity and Courage, you seem still to be able to bear a greater one; you have
still some Moments to distribute amongst your Friends and Clients; and I humbly
beseech your LORDSHIP to be pleased to receive me amongst the Number of the
last. I shall be very careful not to render my self unworthy of that Name; and
I intend to make it mybusiness, to convince your LORDSHIP, by all my Thoughts
and Actions, That there is no body in the world with more respect and
submission, than,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, C. W.
London, May 5. 1691.
THE CONGRESS AT THE HAGUE.
BEing desirous to see the famous Congress at the Hague, where the King, to the
immortal Glory of the English Nation, was to be met by most Princes of the
German Empire, and amongst them, by those that make the greatest figure in it;
where the ablest and most refined Ministers of Europe, in the illustrious sight
of so many Potentates, were to signalize their Eloquence, Experience, Counsels,
Skill in Politics, Faith, Zeal, and what else could make them recommendable to
the Wisest and Most Discerning of Princes in the Universe: Being, I say,
impatient to see this August Assembly, I parted from London, January the 30th.
1690/1. and arrived at Harwich the 31st at Night. It was certainly in the worst
Season for Travelers, and in the worst Weather of that Season. The Rain that
had lasted several days, and did still continue, accompanied by a very high
North-east Wind, gave us but a very melancholy prospect of our Voyage.

February the 1st, Wind and Weather were still the same; and at a time we
entertained our selves with the little success we were like to meet with in our
little Voyage, the Captain of the Pacquet-Boat, called the Vine, came to tell
us, that he would set Sail in the Afternoon; and that whoever had a mind to go
along with him, must be ready at that time. He told us, That a Messenger was
arrived from Her Majesty, with the Particulars of my Lord Preston's and his
Accomplices Trial; and I fancy, with somewhat of greater consequence, and that
required a greater expedition; That he had express Orders to depart
immediately; and though it was a hazardous enterprise to put to Sea at a time,
when those that were upon it would certainly wish themselves, tho with the loss
of all that was less dear to them than their Lives, to be a Shore; yet he could
not but be obedient.

Prince Charles Rudolphe of Wirtemberg, Brother to that brave General that
Commands the Auxiliary Troops of Denmark in Ireland, was then at Harwich,
waiting for the first opportunity to go over into Holland. This Prince, tho in
the prime of his Age, being but Twenty three years old, had already given great
proofs of his Courage and Conduct, during three Campaigns in Morea, being
Colonel of one of the Regiments the Prince Regent of Wirtemberg, his Cousin,
had sent to the assistance of the Republic of Venice; but being informed (as
the News of great and Noble Enterprises is soon spread over the World,) That
the King was going himself to Head his Army in Ireland, he immediately resolved
to leave those ungrateful Fields, dyed with the Blood of so many brave Germans,
that have lost, and still lose their Lives, worth a better fate, in the ignoble
Service, and for the advancement of the Empire of some few grave and easy
Politicians, and to signalize his early and better bestowed Valor, in the
sight of the bravest of Generals, and best of Monarchs. Much time was required
to pass over the wide Mediterranean; and though there was but too little given
to the tender embraces of the Princess his Mother; yet Germany, Holland, the
Channel, England, and the Irish Sea were not so soon crossed, but the impatient
Prince hearing, that two obscure names, the Boyne and Limmerick were
Nobilitated, by the Intrepedity, Skill, Travels, and Conduct of their Royal
Sire, he applauded the King's, and grieved at his own destiny. The Season was
spent, and no hopes left for an opportunity to exercise his Courage this year,
when upon a sudden, the Earl of Marlborough was Commanded by the King to
Embarque, with a considerable Body of Men. Every body knows the success of this
enterprise, and how soon this fortunate General rendered himself Master of Cork
and Kingsale, and all this in so critical a time, that in the History of the
King's Campaign in Ireland that year, the Expedition of my Lord Malborough will
certainly serve for a glorious Postscript. There were many illustrious
Volunteers that served in this Expedition; brave Grafton fell, and if the
Prince, who in the same quality served in the Troops Commanded by his Brother,
did escape the danger, he may thank his kinder Destiny for it. He did all that
could be expected from one, that neglecting the advantages he enjoys by an
Honor derived from his Ancestors, desires to render himself Illustrious by his
own Merits. He was constantly in the Trenches; no Assault given, but he was
amongst the most advanced; and He made Prisoner with his own Hands the late
Governor of Kingsale's Brother, who offering a considerable Sum for his Ransom,
he gave him to one of the Commanding Officers, reserving only for himself the
Honor and Consciousnes of that Action. He was now come from Ireland, to wait
on His Majesty at the Hague; and I having had the Honor to be known by him
some years ago at Paris, I waited on him, to hear if he was resolved to part;
he with a smiling Countenance, despising the Danger, told me, That he would
make use of the first opportunity to be as soon in Holland as was possible;
That he had already sent his Baggage on Board the Pacquet-boat; and that he
would immediately follow: I, thinking by my self, Caesarem Vehet, without any
more ado resolved to follow him.

Most of the Passengers, stayed behind, and wise they were; for having scarce
made four Miles in five hours time, and suffered all the torments an excessive
Cold, a terrible Storm, and an enraged Sea, can cause men to suffer, we were
forced to return into the Harbor, where we lay till February the third.

We had that day Full Moon; and by its influence Mariners commonly expect some
change of Weather. The Sun rose indeed very bright, the Sea was less rough; but
the Wind was still contrary: We set Sail however, in hopes to get over with the
Tide; which we did in three days time. We had no sooner lost the sight of the
British Coast, but we espied a French Privateer, that was making up toward us;
I could not find that any body in our Boat was in the least concerned at it:
The Cannons were immediately charged with Bullets, Arms distributed, and all
things made ready for a Fight; but the Monsieur being come near enough to
distinguish the Pacquet-boat, away he went, without leaving us the least sign
of his good breeding.

There are but Three Pacquet-Boats that are employed to entertain a
correspondency with the Continent; they are all extraordinory Sailers, and
their Equipage, in reference to their bigness, is very considerable. Ours was
mounted by Sixteen pieces of Cannon, and Forty Mariners; and though Their
Majesty's pay for Fifty, yet some invincible accident or other will happen,
that excuses some from doing their Duty; and the want of half-a-score does not
break the square.

The Captain of our Vine had indeed no outward appearance of that current name,
that by a meaner Courtesy of the English, for want of better acquaintance, is
thrown away upon every Red-Coat, though never so scandalous; his look (with
reverence to his Sword be it said) was not much bigger than that of a lusty
Country Farmer; but in times of Danger, that is to say of Blows, he had, and
did still discover so jolly an ignorance of the Peril, and so hearty a
negligence of his Ease, that we could not but admire the simplicity of his
Courage. The French King was some months ago at a great loss to get
intelligence of our designs. William the third, according to his own opinion,
was, le meilleur homme de Cabinet, That Is to say, a Prince that knows how to
choose such Ministers, that besides their unquestioned experience in State
Affairs, have the Pistoleproof Talent of Keeping Counsel. Some little remains
of the late-coyned Plate of his Kingdom, were promised to such Privateers as
would attempt to render themselves Masters of one of our Pacquet-Boats, and
consequently of one of our Mails. Three of the boldest of them, allured by the
gain, offered their Service: They had the good luck to attack our Captain, who
considering the odds, immediately threw the Mail overboard, and defended
himself afterward with so much Vigor and Conduct, that with the loss of one
Man only, and one Wounded on his side, he Killed numbers of the Enemy; who
valuing themselves upon having escaped so unciviliz'd an Antagonist, brought
the French King no other News, but what was writ in Bloody Characters, upon
their own harassed Carcasses.

The 5th, We came within the sight of the Coasts of Zealand, and toward Night
to an Anchor. The 6th. we Weighed Anchor about Two a Clock in the morning,
advancing by favor of the Moon and the Tide: Being awakened by the Noise of
our Crew, I went upon the Deck, and looking round about me, I fancied we were
near the Coasts of Greenland or Nova-Zembla. I did not see but swimming
Mountains of Ice, striking by intervals, with such violence against our Boat,
that some weaker Brothers of our Company were not a little apprehensive of a
far greater Night than that which equally divides the year in those unfortunate
Climates. The Captain ordered several Guns to be discharged, to inform the
Inhabitants of Helvetsluys of our Danger; and a little time after we spied a
Sail, that coming to our assistance, took us on her Board, and brought us
safely into the Harbor.

The Prince of Wirtemberg, my Lord John Hamilton, the Young Marquess de la
Bar, and I, with some other Gentlemen, went to the next Inn, where we found
some little Refreshments the Country could afford; and how little soever the
reputation of a Turf-Fire in England be, yet I am sure we found it very
comfortable. From Helversluys we went to the Brill, from thence to
Masdandslays, being about three hours a crossing the Maese, by reason of the
Ice that was floating upon it, and through which we were forced to make our
way; and toward Night we arrived at Rotterdam.

Walking through one of the finest Streets of that City, I saw some little
Remains of a House belonging to the Here Nifelt, the chief Magistrate of that
Place, that was some time ago razed to the Ground by the Multitude upon this
occasion. One being made Ensign of the Militia of the City, was accompanied by
some of his Friends, carrying some Galons of Rhinish to the Guard-House, in
order to treat the rest of the Officers according to the Custom of that Place.
Some Officers of the Custom-House meeting them in the Street, offered to seize
the Wine, under pretense that they had not paid the Excise; and tho they were
told that it was upon an occasion that excused them from paying it, yet a
quarrel arose, in which one of the Officers of the Customs lost his Life: They
did not fail to secure one of the Company; and though the Crime could not be
positively fastened on him, yet the Scout (which is the Name of the Chief
Magistrate) sentenced him to have his Head cut off, which was done accordingly.
The man had a good Reputation amongst all his Neighbors, and died with a
masculine Constancy, tempered by a Christian Humility: He told the People, that
tho no man could positively say he had committed the Crime for which he
suffered, yet he himself could not say neither, that he had not done it: He
prayed fervently, and then submitted to the Stroke, that depriving him of his
Life, gave birth to the most dangerous Monster in a Body Politic. It was
reported, That the Scout had a pique against this man, for having once hindered
the advancement of some Affairs, that he thought might have turned to his
advantage: Some pretended to have heard him say, That if ever he had the good
luck to fall into his clutches, he would remember him for his Kindness; which
being spread all the Town over, made some sad impressions upon the Spirits of
the People; preparing the most forward of them for an Insurrection: Numbers of
them were seen walking together in the Streets, carrying some mischievous marks
of indignation in their countenances; all of them speaking, and none hearing;
when upon a sudden one of the Soldiers of the Militia (a conscientious Rebel)
came to tell them, That he himself had had the misfortune to kill the Officer
of the Customs, showing the bloody Sword with which he had perpetrated the
Crime, and that the other was fallen an innocent Victim to the revengeful
Scout; That he was sorry -- but they would hear no more; they got Arms, and
away they marched to the Scout's House, and by going, their strength did
increase. It was observed that the Women were the most forward, beating some
rusty Kettles for want of Drums, and by that homely Noise encouraged the weaker
Men to do Mischief: In short, the House was pulled down in a moment, and the
Scout and his Son did narrowly escape the fury of the Mobb, by changing their
Clothes with two Soldiers of Baron Fricksem's Regiment, that by the order of
the States was advanced to appease the Tumult. To do the Scout justice, he has
the Reputation amongst sober Men, of being a Person of sound Principles, a
Zealous Patriot, and consequently a cheerful Promoter of his Majesty's
Interest, and they look upon this Accident as an unhappy Consequence of his too
strict adherency in this Point to the Laws of the Land.

From Rotterdam I went to Delpht, and from thence to the Hague, where I arrived
February the 7th at Night.

The King had made his public Entrance here February the 5th. that is to say,
two days before our arrival. I shall not trouble my self to copy out of the
Gazette a relation of that Ceremony, that had nothing very extraordinary in it,
but the joyful acclamations of the People. All the World knows how natural an
aversion his Majesty has for that vain Ostentation, that is so much affected
elsewhere; how much he has declined it upon all occasions; and that with Cato,
that noble Stoic, he had rather future Ages should ask, Why he had none? than,
Why others had some Statues erected them? In doing great Actions, and exposing
his Royal Person again and again for the Safety of his Subjects, He calmly
follows the genuine Dictates of that generous Mind, that desires no other
Reward, but what is stamped upon each glorious Enterprise; nor any other
Monuments, than those are daily raised Him in the hearts of His People; too
sincere, and too natural, to be imitated by an Italian Architect. And it was to
satisfy those that flocked to the Hague from all the Provinces to see Him,
that His Majesty after a sudden arrival at the Hague, the same day he was come
ashore, was at last prevailed with to go to dine at a House called Sorgflie, a
Mile from the Hague, belonging to My Lord Portland, and at his return to his
Palace, to pass through the Triumphal Arches the States had erected Him in
several places.

The Structure of them is indeed noble and magnificent, and several of the
Inscriptions answerable to the Dignity of the Subject; but whereas they are
very numerous, I had neither leisure nor humor enough to copy them: I shall
only give you a short description of one of the Arches that stands nearest to
the Court, by which you may guess at the rest.

This Arch is builded according to the Italian Architecture, in a Dorick Order.
It has three Portals, the middle of which is higher than the Body of the
Structure it self: It is adorned on both sides with sixteen Columns, standing
upon large Basements, that are separated from the main Building, each Basement
supporting two of the said Columns. The middle Portal has a very large Cupulo,
and upon it stands a Pedestal, upon which the King is represented on Horseback
to the life, Man and Horse very richly gilded. At each side of the Pedestal
there are couching two Slaves in a Brass Collar, turning their Backs toward
it; and the main Body is so artificially painted, that it appears to be made
out of Stone: In each Field between the Columns there are in Black and White
represented most of His Majesty's Glorious Actions: Over the Cornish is raised
a Balluster of the same Order, with sixteen Pedestals directly above the
Columns, supporting Statues that represent to the life promiscuously Men and
Women, and round the Cupulo are writ these following Words.

PIO. FELICI. INCLYTO. GVILIELMO. TERTIO. TRIVMP HANTI. PATRIAE. PATRI.
GVBERNATORI. P. C. J. P. RESTAVRATORI. BELGII. FOEDERATI. LIBERATORI. ANGLIAE
SERVATORI. SCOTIAE. PACIFICATORI. BERNIAE. REDVCI. His Majesty had before, and
did after his public Entrance constantly assist the respective Assemblies of
the States General; the States of Holland, and the Council of the State,
employing all his Minutes to the dispatch of such Affairs, as were most
conducing to the Safety and Prosperity of the Commonwealth in particular, and
in general to the advancement of the Common Cause.

In a Speech the King made at his first appearance at the Assembly of the
States General, he told them, That when he saw them last, he had informed them,
that he was resolved to cross the Seas to rescue three Kingdoms from Popery and
Slavery; That God Almighty had blessed his righteous Undertakings in so signal a
manner, that his Success had been beyond his Expectations, nay, and beyond his
Wishes too. That England and Scotland had offered Him their Imperial Crowns,
which he had accepted, not, as he called God to witness, to satisfy his
Ambition, but to be in a better capacity to maintain the Protestant Religion,
and a lasting Peace and Tranquillity in these Kingdoms, and to assist his
Confederates, and especially this State, against the powerful encroachments of
France. That he was now come accordingly into these Provinces, not only to
Concert with his Allies, the Measures that were to be taken the next Campaign,
but to exercise also with all imaginable application the Charge of
Captain General of the United Provinces. That he was in hopes God Almighty
would make use of him as an Instrument to confound the malicious and dangerous
Designs of the Enemy, to turn off the Danger from their Heads, and to
reestablish an Universal and lasting Peace in Europe. That He should die with
the greatest satisfaction in the World, if he could compass these Designs. He
concluded his Speech with some tender Assurances of his unalterable Love to the
State, and it was answered accordingly.

The first thing the King did, was the regulating the Dutch-Fleet, declaring,
that his Intention was, it should be commanded by Admiral Tromp. It is not
easily expressed how much his Royal Pleasure was applauded by the States, and
what universal Rejoicings it caused amongst all sorts of people.

Lieutenant Admiral-General Tromp, Son to that famous Hero, that from a simple
Mariner raised himself to the next to the chiefest Command in the State, is a
Man of a full Stature; an ordinary look, and that wearing an old fashioned
Black Coat, an ill tied Cravat, and his own weather-beaten Hair, makes at the
best no better Figure, than that of an ordinary Burgher of Amsterdam; but by
his great and numerous Exploits, he has discovered that which is hidden in his
Phisiognomy, that is to say, a greatness of Soul, a boldness of Spirit, and so
wise a Conduct in his most perilous Enterprises, that considering his long
Experience, he is now looked upon as one of the greatest Seamen in the World.
To restore a brave, but unfortunate Prince to his lost Kingdom, or to save it
when he stands upon the fatal Brink of loosing it, are Blessings, few of the
greatest Generals of all Ages can boast of; and if Heaven ever before employed
the hand of a particular Man about so great a Work, it was after it had
anxiously instructed his Valor, variously exposed his Life, and narrowly
inquired into his Success in a thousand lesser Actions, and then it was the
immortal Reward of an equally Great, Successful and Aged General; but bold
Tromp reapt that Glorious Title of a Royal Restorer from one of his first
Warlike Essays, and in the Flower of his Age. Frederick the Third, King of
Denmark, had in spite of his Virtue and Valor, lost all the strong Places of
his Kingdom; Coppenhaguen the Capital City, and sole Remainder of that
unfortunate Country, was besieged by Sea and Land by the Swedes, and though
the Citizens behaved themselves to a Miracle, animated by the presence of their
Royal Sire, and the whole Royal Family, yet they must have given way at last to
a valorous and successful Enemy. It Is said, That the Swedes, sure of the prize,
had already divided amongst them the Quarters of that City, and that some
ungenerous Counselors of the Enemy did design the Royal Progeny for a Victim
to secure the Conquest; when upon a sudden a numerous Fleet of the States,
Commanded by Tromp, appeared in the Sound. It was not known upon what Design he
came, for the States were then in Alliance with neither of the Parties, and
both equally feared and hoped for his Assistance, but Tromp quickly decided the
matter; for since it is the Interest of all Europe, and in particular of the
States General, to Balance an equal Power between the two Northern Crowns, he
fell upon the Superior Party, destroyed their Fleet, relieved the City, and by
that Strenuous Action caused that sudden and wonderful Revolution, that did not
only render the King once again Master of his Kingdom, but Absolute Master too.
The King to show his Royal Gratitude, made him a Count of his Kingdom, and
besides honored him with the Noble Order of the Elephant. King Charles the
Second made him Knight and Baronet of the Kingdom of England, but these are
Titles that signify but little with the Dutch Seamen; they know him to be Just
and Brave, they Love him as their Father, and cannot forget, nor abide to call
him by any other Name, than by that plain familiar and Dutch one, of Cornelis
van Tromp. He has since that time signalized himself in several Sea Fights with
the English. They are too well known, and their Consequences have been too
fatal to both Parties, to need to be mentioned here. The English have
experienced his Valor, and he has theirs, and this mutual consciousness of
each others Bravery, (how different soever their manners are) together with the
urgent necessity of their Affairs, as it cannot but by joining their Fleets,
make a Glorious Confederacy of their Hearts, so we have all reason to expect
such Effects from it, as will be answerable to the greatness of the Design.

Some few days after His Majesty had nominated Admiral Tromp to Command the
Dutch Fleet, it was confidently reported at the Hague that Tromp was poisoned;
I think it was the effect of Fear of some that did not love to see certain
Persons there. He fell suddenly Sick indeed, but whatever the cause of it was,
he did as soon recover; and at a time the Report did still continue,
accompanied as it is usual by some particular Circumstances, I saw the Admiral
in good Health in the King's Antichamber, where he staid above an hour; he is
not much above Two and fifty years old, and is said to be very Vigorous,
principally when he is in his own Element; yet he looks very decrepit. It seems
great and constant Fatigues at Sea, as they take away that brisk and jolly
Appearance of Youth in the Face, so they strengthen the Body, and inure it to a
long Life. And I am told, That the Famous French Protestant Admiral Du Quesne
looked as old Thirty years before, as he did when he died.

Whilst His Majesty with an unsatigable Care advanced the Interest of the
States, and their Confederates, there past scarce one day, but some Prince or
other came to the Higue. Many of them keep Great and Splendid Courts in
Germany; and the Two Electors of Bavaria and Brandenbourg, make a Figure in the
Empire not inferior to that of Great Monarchs. They all stand very much upon
their Prerogatives, and to speak the truth, there is in no Country more time
spent in observing the superfluous Nicety of Ceremonies, than in Germany; but
it seems William the Third had set them a Pattern. They came to Consult, to
Act, and not to show their Grandeur. No public Entrances were made, they all
arrived incognito, and to prevent that ceremonious Respect that must needs have
been paid to their Illustrious Characters; the Elector of Bavaria (as it was
said) did assume the Name of Count of Thungen; the Elector of Brandenbourg,
that of Count of Ravensberg, and they were imitated by the rest of the Princes.
And since very few, that were at the Hague, had either that Leisure or
Advantage; that I had of being well informed of the exact Number and Name of
the Princes. I have thought fit to communicate to you this following List.

Maximiliam, Elector of Bavaria. Frederick, Elector of Brandenbourg. George
William, Duke of Lunembourg-Zel. Anthony Vlric, Duke of Brunswig-Wolfembuttel.
Charles, Landgrave of Hessen-Cassel. Philip, Prince-Palatine of Sultzbach. John
George, Prince of Saxe-Eysenach. Christian Lewis, Prince of Brandenbourg.
Earnest Lewis, Landgrave of Hessen; Prince of Hirschfeld, Count of
Catzen-Elnbogen, Dietz, etc. The Prince of Darmstad his Brother. Frideric
Charles, Duke Administrator of Wirtemberg, and Teck Count of Monpelgard, etc.
General of the Emperor's Horse. Uncle to the Prince Regent of Wirtemberg. John
Frideric, Prince of Wirtemberg his Brother. Charles Rudolph, Prince of
Wirtemberg-Newstad. Christian Albret, Prince of Anspach. George Frideric,
Prince of Anspach. The Landgrave of Hombourg. The Prince of Nassau-Idstein. The
Prince of Nassau-Dillembourg. Lewis Frideric, Duke of Holstein-Beck. Charles
William of Anhalt-Zerbst. Friderick Casimir, Duke of Courland. Ferdinand,
Prince of Courland. The Prince of Holstein. The Prince-Palatine of Birkenfeld.
The Prince of Waldeck. The Prince of Nassau-Sarbruck. The Prince his Son. Henry
Casimir, Prince of Nassau, Governor of Friseland. The Marquess of Gastanaga,
Governor of the Spanish-Netherlands.
Many of these Princes had no other Reason for their coming, than to wait on
the King, and to pay His Majesty that Respect which is due to the Hero of our
Age, and the Great Protector of the Protestant Religion; but others that have a
greater Power, came to Concert with His Majesty the Measures of the next
Campaign, either to assist, or to be assisted, to increase His Majesty's Troops
with theirs, or theirs with His Majesty's Forces, and the most considerable of
these are.

The Elector of Bavaria. The Elector of Brandenbourg. The Duke of
Lunembourg-Zel. The Landgrave of Hessen-Cassel. The Duke Administrator of
VVirtemberg. The Governor of Friseland, and the Governor of the
Spanish-Netherlands.
February 3. Arrived at the Hague, Frideric, Marg-Grave of Brandenbourg,
Arch-Chamberlain, and Elector of the Holy Roman Empire, Sovereign of the Ducal
Prussia, Duke of Magdebourg, Juliers, Cleve, Bergen, Pommern, of the Cassubes
and Vandals, Duke of Crossen and Jagerndorf in Silesia, Burg-Grave of
Nuremberg; Prince of Halberstad, Minden, Camin and Rugen; Count of the Mark and
Ravensberg, etc. accompanied by two Princes of Anspach, and attended by a
numerous and splendid Court, and several Foreign Ministers, and the same day
his Electoral Highness waited on His Majesty. Certainly there can no stricter
Alliance be made in the World then that has always been, and is now more
solemnly renewed between these two Potentates; for instead of being of the
nature of those, that alas! till now, have most commonly been made in Europe,
by the Intervention of some hardy French Minister, who to make out the Name of
Plenipotentiary, thought to have a full Power to Cheat with a Method, to Lie
with an Emphasy, nay, to swear false for his Master's Interest; it is concluded
by the Illustrious Principals themselves, without an authorized Spy, and
grounded upon the same Interest, Religion, Parentage, Personal Affection, and
what else is most sacred amongst Men; and as on one hand, the Confederacy of so
great a Monarch cannot but be very Glorious to His Electoral Highness, so His
Majesty on the other may reap great and considerable Benefits from it, for he
is a powerful Prince, his Dominions are of a vast extent, His Nobility
numerous, His Subjects warlike, and he entertains an Army near Threescore
thousand Men, well Armed and better disciplined; most of them are the Veteran
Remains of those Victorious Troops that served under the Banners of Frederic
William, his Father, deservedly called the Achilles of Germany. As the Memory
of that Great Prince will be Sacred for ever amongst all, that either have a
Soul capable of being touched by the benign Influences of a just and solid
Reign, that lasted near half an Age, or that are competent Judges of the true
Character of a completely experienced and vigorous Warrior, which he maintained
to the very last minute of his Glorious Life; so there is yet another Reason we
are more particularly concerned in, to Reverence and Bless his Name: I say,
That great Respect, and that passionate Love this old Great Man always
entertained for his Nephew, the Prince of Orange, His Present Majesty, in so
eminent a manner, that to cross the Empire by tedious Journeys from one end to
another, in order to have a frequent enterview with the Prince, to join the
Electoral with the Orange-Banner, and to plant their Princely Tents on the same
Meadow, he reckoned amongst the greatest Blessings of his Life. His now
Electoral Highness his Son follows exactly as in this, so in every other
Respect the Glorious Footsteps of his Father. He was Born July 1. 1657. he is a
wise and politic Prince, and tho he be but of a little Stature, not altogether
answerable to the Greatness of his Soul, yet he has a brisk Look, and a martial
Vivacity in his Face, that does become extremely well the Conqueror of Bonne.

February 8. Arrived Friderick Charles, Duke Administrator of Wirtemberg, Uncle
to Eberhard Lewis, Prince Regent of Wirtemberg, who being Born September the
18th. 1676. and is consequently still under Age; he and his Dominions are
governed by his Uncle, according to the Tenor of the Imperial Laws during his
Minority. Stutgard is the Residence of the Prince, and the Capital City of a
plentiful Country. It is famous through all Germany, by reason of the
well-provided University at Tubingen, and the Illustrious School there, which
none but Princes and Noblemen are admitted to, renders it yet more conspicuous.
It Is true, it has very much suffered in that fatal War that lasted Thirty years
in Germany, and it has yet some fresher marks of Desolation, stamped upon its
very Bowels by that Cruel and Common Enemy, who to this day Usurpes of the
House of Wirtemberg, the whole County of Mompelgard with all its Dependencies;
yet by the wise and gentle Government of its Illustrious Administrator, the
Prince Regent makes still a Figure suitable to the grandeur of his Name; his
Subjects are taught to live happy, and whilst some of his Troops are dispersed
in the Service of those that carry the War into the very heart of the Ottoman
Empire, he has still a reserve of a good Body of Men, either to increase the
Confederate Army, or to be increased by his own Subjects. There is no Country
of that compass of Ground, can be in so good a Posture, except it be governed
by an extraordinary Prince; and such is He we have seeen and admired at the
Hague. He was Born January the 24th. 1652. He is a Prince of an admirable
Presence, a well-set Body, a graceful Gate, a majestic Deportment, and a
masculine Face, that would be lessened by being called Beautiful; and as these
are qualities that strike the hearts of his beholders with a Sacred Horror, so
it is said, That by reason of his vast Understanding, his clear and sound
Judgment, together with a Noble eagerness to advance the Common Cause, he was
one of the Princes, that had the greatest part in His Majesty's Favor and
Esteem.

February the 16th, about Ten a Clock at Night, arrived Maximilian Emanuel,
Duke of the Upper and Lower Bavaria, and the Upper Palatinate; Count Palatin on
the Rhine; Arch-Sewer and Elector of the Holy Roman Empire; Landgrave of
Leuchtenberg, I need not say upon what occasion the Electoral Dignity, that was
torn from Friderick V. Elector Palatine and King of Bohemia, was bestowed upon
the Illustrious House of Bavaria, since that unfortunate Prince did himself
inform the English Nation of it; neither do I intend to enlarge upon the great
Wealth and Power of that Ancient Family, since it is notorious, That the Elector
of Bavaria alone, of all the Princes of the Empire, (I mean of those that are
of a Religion required in an Emperor, by the fundamental Laws of the Empire) is
in a condition to support, and consequently to dispute the House of Austria,
the Imperial Crown; which is so well known by the French King, that some years
ago he left no stone unturned (I had almost said no Plate unmelted) to gain his
Electoral Highness over to his Interest. A Match was made between the Dauphin
and his eldest Sister; and seeing that he was then very young, and that
consequently, the Charms of the first Crown in Christendom, and the Name of an
Emperor might possibly make a great impression on so tender an Age; He promised
him to get him, by his Intrigues, to be chosen King of the Romans, in case he
would espouse his Interest; That Is in plain English, to help himself or his
Dauphin to the thing he did promise Him as a reward of his assistance. Great
numbers of French Ministers resorted daily to Munichen, to observe, nay, to
obsede the Prince. They entertained him with nothing but the Grandeur of their
Master; They made a considerable figure themselves, and care was taken to
intermingle their premeditated Discourses with some immoderate Praises of the
surprising Beauty of the Princess of Conty; and I am credibly told, that some
had, at last, the Front, to offer the Marriage of one of the King's Bastards to
him that was designed for a Daughter of an Emperor: But his Electoral Highness
soon defeated their unreasonable hopes, and at a time the whole Empire was
preparing to mourn the loss of so powerful a Prince; He upon a sudden turning
the Scale, concluded a strict Alliance with the Emperor, Married the
Arch-Dutchess of Austria his Daughter; and sending his numerous Troops to his
assistance in Hungary, entered himself those memorable Fields, that have Crowned
his Head with everlasting Laurels. And it was this young Hero, that by taking
Belgrade by Storm, one of the most important Fortresses in the World, gave us
the fairest and solidest prospect of the entire downfall of that monstrous
Empire, that till then had been the terror of all Christendom.

He was born in the year 1662. June the 11th, and though I am no Astrologer,
yet I dare say it was under a very happy Constellation. Those that have had the
Fortune to see him at the Hague, English, Germans, French, Spaniards, Italians,
Dutch, Swedes, Danes, all did agree in the praise of this Prince, each of them
seeming to observe in him what makes an accomplished man, to the particular
notions and nicety of their own Country; in so much that he may be said to
have been the Titus Vespasian, that is to say, the Darling of the Hague. To make
a true Picture of this admirable Prince, and to express his Character in every
particular, especially after what I have said, is too hard a task for such a
Scribler as I am; for though we are all apt to Copy, yet we cannot Copy from
the Life. It Is true, it is easily said, That this Prince is of a Middle-size,
and such as may be called modestly, Tall; That his Limbs are strait, his Body
slender and well-shap'd, his Shoulders large, his Face Oval, and every part and
lineament of it happy; That his Looks are refined; and though he be of a
smiling Countenance, yet that it is hard to distinguish, whether it be to
applaud the exact comportment of some, or to despise the want of it in others;
That he is Obliging to all the World; That his Conversation is Charming; in
fine, that in all respects he is a very accomplished Prince; yet these are but
general Notions, that will not satisfy those, that in this lovely Prince have
observed somewhat peculiar to himself, that by some secret Charms gains him the
hearts of all that approach him; and this I ingeniously confess is beyond my
abilities to express. And it is this Prince, that though he be of a contrary
Persuasion to that of His Majesty, yet has been one of the most forward to pay
His Majesty his respects in so obliging and extraordinary a manner, as could
hardly be expected either from a Prince of his Rank, or be paid to any other
than to the great Protector of the liberty of Europe; and on the other hand,
His Majesty has given him such unusual marks of his Esteem, Love and
Friendship, given and received with so mutual a satisfaction, that never two
Princes did either more sympathise, or had more reason to be satisfied with
each other's enterview.

February the 21st. arrived Charles Landgrave of Hessen, attended by the Count
of Lip, General of his Army, and Baron Gortz his Chief Minister, and several
other Great Persons. He was Born in the year 1654. August the 3d. He is a
Prince of a fine Appearance, a mild Temper, his Government is gentle and easy,
and he maintains that great Rank, and defends that Religion in the Empire, he
has derived from his glorious Ancestors, with great success and Honor. His
Great Grandfather Philip the first, and John Frederick Elector of Saxony, were
the two first and chief supporters of the Protestant Religion, when it was in
its infancy. They Raised and Headed themselves an Army against that Great and
Victorious Emperor Charles the 5th, who seeing that all the Projects of Rome,
to hinder the progress of a Doctrine that was Preached by Luther, with a
success answerable to the Holy eagerness, and Apostolical boldness of that
Great Man, were defeated, was going to employ some stronger and surer
Arguments; and a bloody Battle was fought at Mulberg near the Elbe. The Roman
Eagles, Roman then indeed, accustomed to look their Enemies out of Countenance,
were then first taught to Tremble, and their Wings were clipped by these
undaunted Warriers, that were resolved, either by overturning the Enemy, to
acquire the great Name of Conquerors; or by signing the Truth of the Gospel
with their Illustrious Blood, to deserve the more Glorious one of Confessors.
And though the Battle was lost at last, and the Brave Elector of Saxony made
Prisoner; yet the Emperor fearing that he should be overcome if he gained such
another Victory; and on the other hand, considering, that neither he himself
nor his Religion would be safe, as long as Landgrave Philip was unconquered, he
made use at last of those inglorious Arts, that in one moment deprived the
Prince of his Liberty, and the Emperor of that Honor, that till then had been
sacred.

The Two Princes had been kept Five years in Prison; and the Protestant
Religion was as many years nearer to its ruin, when brave Maurice of Saxony,
having secretly raised an Army, surpised the Emperor so suddenly at Inspruck,
that though he himself did escape, yet the Captive Princes were set at Liberty,
and Ferdinand the Emperor's Brother, and King of the Romans, made a Prisoner.

It was, indeed, a sudden Change, and that may well be ranked amongst the
brightest blessings of that Miraculous Providence, that till now, with so much
solicitude and care, has preserved and advanced the Protestant Religion. For
from this time it began to rise apace, secured from the insults of its Captive
Persecutor, who to gain his Liberty, readily Signed the famous Contract of
Passaw, in which the Protestants had those mighty advantages granted them, they
to this day enjoy in the Empire, being protected by so many great and powerful
Princes, and amongst them by his Highness Landgrave Charles, upon whose
occasion I have made this little excursion, not only to give you a hint of the
Power of his House; but to show also what great obligations all Protestants
have to his Illustrious Family.

The last of all the Princes that arrived at the Hague, were their Highnesses
the Dukes of Lunenbourg-Zell, and Brunswig-Wollfembuttel. The fist being
hindered by some indisposition, did not arrive till March the first, and the
second few days after it. George William, Duke of Brunswig and Lunenbourg-Zell
was born in the Year 1624, February the 16th. and consequently has past the
67th Year of his Age. Those that are acquainted with the History of his
glorious Life, that know, that he has several times baffled the Hectoring
Monarch, routed his Armies, and that one of the greatest and most experienced
Mareschals of France was forced to follow his Triumphal Chariot, could not but
infinitely be pleased with the sight of this venerable Old man; for it seems,
that being inured to Fatigues, and used to conquer, he can now be overcome by
nothing; nay, not by Age it self. His Body is still vigorous, his Judgment
clear and sound, his Thoughts strong and unconfined; he apprehends still as
quick as he speaks, and far from that sowerness of Temper, that most commonly
attends the Infirmities of Ancient Persons; he awakens and rejoices the hearts
of all those that approach him, by a smiling Countenance, so unusual, yet so
well becoming to a Great Age. His Court is certainly one of the most refined in
Germany. His Ministers have acquired themselves that solid Reputation, but few
in Europe can pretend to; and as they are capable to form and to concert, so he
has a General, that at the head of a well disciplined Army, can as bravely
execute a great Design.

I cannot forbear to say, That of all the Respects paid to His Majesty, during
his stay at the Hague, by so great and illustrious Princes, that of his
Highness the Duke of Zell, must needs make the deepest and strongest
Impressions on sober and thinking men. It will be said perhaps, That most of
the rest being young, valiant, and ambitious of that Glory his Majesty has
gained by so many great and hazardous Enterprises; they were come to adorn the
Triumphs of the Hero of our Age, out of mere Galantry; but to see so Wise and
Old a Prince that has outlived so many various Changes and Revolutions in
Europe, and that consequently has got such an Experience, that far from being
taken up by outward splendid Appearances, he is able to look into the very
bottom of the Design, and to weigh each particular Circumstance of it; I say,
to see such a Prince to undertake a tedious Journey in so rough a Season, in
order to wait on, and to consult with his Majesty, and to pay him all
imaginable respect in so extraordinary a manner, is a thing that will convince
the most obstinate, that William the Third is universally looked upon as the
great and blessed Instrument in the hand of God to rescue Europe out of the
insatiable hands of its cruel Oppressor; to maintain in, or to restore
oppressed Princes to their Rights, and to establish once more a Solid and
Universal Peace.

And these were the chiefest Princes that did in Person concert with his
Majesty the measures of the approaching Campaign. It was indeed a glorious
Sight; and that could not but pierce the Souls of all those that have a true
love and veneration for His Majesty, to see so many great Princes daily come to
Court, to pass through the crowded Antichambers,, and to go into that sacred
Closet, where the Fate of Europe was to be decided. To write the History of
what has past there, would be worthy of the most Eloquent and Refined Pens of
our Age, and it would be a Piece that would without doubt surpass all that has
been to this time writ in Politics; but it is as yet a Mystery, and I dare
say, a Mystery to the very Ministers and Plenipotenciaries themselves, and that
nothing but Time, and I hope the next Campaign, will unravel.

The most usual time to go to Court, was between Twelve and One a Clock in the
Afternoon; and between Eight and Ten a Clock at Night; and they that walked to
Court a foot, at this time, as they were deafned by the continual Noise of an
endless number of Coaches; so they were forced to be in a continual motion, and
to turn from one side to another to give way to their numerous and clamorous
Attendances. The most considerable Princes were soon known, or else easily
distinguished by their Livery and Attendance; and when they were going or
coming, notice was given to the Suiss-Guards, who immediately ranged thgmselves
in the Form of a Half Moon, having one of their Officers at their Head, and
both Wings of the Door that gave entrance to the Antichamber were opened,
though this last Honor was also granted to Foreign Ministers, and other
persons of Quality, especially if the Suissers had been well remembered. The
Princes passing through the Anti-chambers, were attended by their Ministers,
some walking before, and some behind them; and at Night one of his Majesty's
Gentlemen Ushers carried the Candle before them. In His Majesty's Apartment the
King and the Princes were all standing, and bare-headed. They called the King,
Your Majesty, and the King called Them by that Name that is usually given by
Kings to Sovereign Princes; but His Highness, the Duke of Zell, had the Honor
to be called Father by His Majesty.

There was none of the Princes, but that did immediately upon his Arrival at
the Hague, wait on the King; the most considerable of them, had the Honor to
have their Visits paid by His Majesty, and they received Him in the Street at,
and conducted Him again to his Coach. At Court the King dined always alone; and
when he treated some of the Princes, it was in one of his Palaces that are out
of the Hague, and the most considerable of them had the honor to treat him
also at their respective Palaces, where they did reside. At His Majesty's
entrance into the Dining Room, there was at first found but one Cover laid upon
the Table for the King; a little while after it, there was another laid for the
Prince, that did, or that was treated; and they being both set down, his
Majesty gave a Wink to such Persons of Quality as were to have the honor to
dine with Him.

When His Majesty drunk a Health, He named it softly to the Prince, who did the
same to his Neighbors, and so it went ound, and the Trumpets did only sound
when the King and the Prince were ra drinking. One Sunday the King treated the
most Considerable Princes at Sorgfliet (a House His Majesty has given to my
Lord Portland) from thence they went to Shevelinguen; And being about Five a
Clock in the Afternoon, returned to the Hague, they went to the Tour a la Mode.
The Elector of Bavaria was placed at His Majesty's left side; the Elector of
Brandenbourg at the right, and the Landgrave of Hessen, at the left-side in the
foremost part of the Coach, being followed by the Duke, Administrator of
Wirtemberg in another. There was an infinite number of Coaches there, but they
all stopped while His Majesty was making the Round. The Tour a la Mode at the
Hague, is very near the Court, and certainly one of the best contrived in
Europe. It goes first in a very long and straight Line, and at the end cuts to
the right, into another, so that the Round makes a good English Mile. There are
Rales made, and great Trees planted at an equal distance on both sides, the
middle being for persons that walk on Foot, and the Coaches go round about.

There were several Princes of the several Branches of the Great and Ancient
House of Nassau at the Hague, who as they have distinguished themselves by
their own Illustrious Merits, so they made a Figure suitable to that Great
Name. Time is too short, and the designed Compass of this Relation too narrow
to speak of each of them in particular; yet I cannot forbear to say something
of Prince Henry Casimir of Nassau, Hereditary Stadtholder of Friseland and
Groninguen. He was Born in the Month of January, 1667. He is a Prince of an
extraordinary little and slender Stature, but he has a vigorous Look; and he is
so Valiant, and so Brave, that in all Respect he deserves to be called the
Alexander of our Age. But since the Dignity of Governor of Friseland and
Groninguen, in which he did succeed his Father when he was but Seven years old,
has been made Hereditary to him, and that it was brought about by some very
remarkable means; I think it will not be amiss to make a short Relation of it.
Henrica Emilia, the Princess Dowager his Mother, was still supporting with her
Authority and Counsels, the tender Age of her Illustrious Infant, when one
Vander Vayen, a Minister of great Learning, and a subtle Spirit, who had been
exiled out of Zeland, his Native Country, for some Opinions of his, the Divines
did not approve of, did arrive in Friseland; after he had for some years led a
private and obscure Life at Amsterdam, and having obtained the Liberty to
Preach at Lewvarden before the Court, his frequent and elaborate Sermons, which
he pronounced with an audible Voice, and an humble Mien, accommodated to the
genius of that Nation, had such secret Charms, and made so unaccountable
Impressions upon the Spirits of his Auditors, that they were universally
applauded by those that did, and that did not understand them. He employed his
private Hours in teaching weak and ignorant Persons the Principles of the
Christian Religion; and to those that were of a greater Capacity he explained
the Mysteries of Philosophy and Divinity, always refusing to take Money for his
pains, the most charming of Affronts in that Country. He had a peculiar Art to
convince, to persuade, and to conquer the Hearts of those he conversed with, by
some familiar Arguments; and as his Conversation was charming and easy, so it
was too nice, and too refined for one that pretended to know nothing but the
Greek and the Hebrew.

The Form of Government in Friseland, is much like to what the Ancient Romans
did observe in their conquered Provinces. The People is divided in Tribes, to
each Tribe belongs a certain district of the Land, and they have each for their
chief, one of the Nobles, that has the biggest Estate, and the greatest
Interest in the Country. Upon some Emergency in the State, these Nobles have
the Privilege to collect the Votes of the People, and they know how to dispose
them according to their Inclination and Interest. They have no Obligation to
the Prince for their Charges, and consequently may without any hazard cross his
Design, in case they are not well affected. The only way to secure the Princes
Interest from such troublesome Attempts, was to make the Stadtholdership
Hereditary; but since that could not be done without lessening the Authority of
the Nobles, it was looked upon as impracticable. Vander Vayen was the first Man
that dared to form the Design of it. He persuaded the Princess Dowager to
Invest him with the Title of Honorary Counselor of the Prince; and being
authorized by that Character to advance his Master's Interest, he very easily
gained the Divines, who making it their Business in their Sermons to make the
People mindful of the Great and Signal Services the late Prince their Governor
had rendered them, and that they lay under the strongest Obligation in the World
to show their Gratitude to the Prince his Son, worthy of so Great a Father, and
worthy of their Love, by securing the Title of their Governor, to him and his
Heirs for ever; they did first attentively hearken to, and in a little time as
readily performed it.

From the Governor of Friseland, I come to the Governor of the Spanish
Netherlands, and with him I intend to conclude the Article of the Princes. The
Marquess of Gastanaga, Governor and Captain General of the Spanish
Netherlands, appeared at the Hague with a numerous Court, and in a very
splendid Equipage. He is said to be a Man of Fortune, that has raised himself
to that high Station by his great Merits; and the latter part of this common
Report is abundantly justified by the great Esteem His Majesty had for his
Person. To govern a Country that is at so great a distance from its Monarch,
and so near to its Enemy, where most of the Inhabitants are so infatuated by
their Priests, that they had rather be destroyed by a Catholic Enemy, than to
be saved by a Protestant Friend, is indeed a very hard task, and they that
blame the Marquess's Conduct, are without doubt incapable to imitate it. As to
his Personal Presence, he exceeds in that very thing Lewis the 14th; and the
esteem a great many have for the latter upon that Score, will infinitely be
lessened by the sight of the Marquess of Gastanaga. He is indeed a graceful
Spaniard, and if by the Governor's Appearance one might reasonably judge of
the Constitution of the Country he Governs, it would be thought to be one of
the finest and best proportioned in the World. He was very frequently at Court,
and had several private Conferences with His Majesty, and his Electoral
Highness of Brandenbourg; but by reason of the movements of the French Army in
Flanders, he parted from the Hague before his Highness the Duke of Zell was
arrived. Being upon his departure, a Gentleman in His Majesty's Name presented
him with a Couple of Horses, which he received with great Joy and Respect,
presenting the Gentleman with a Ring of great Value, he had drawn from his own
Finger.

They that have not been at the Hague, and that know it to go under the Name of
a Village, will hardly imagine how it could furnish Palaces enough for the
Entertainment of so many Great Princes; but when they will be informed, that
besides these Princes, there was a considerable number of Foreign Ministers,
Envoys Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries, never before seen at one single
Monarch's Court, who being the Representatives of their Princes, must needs
make a Figure answerable to the Grandeur of that Name; They will easily fancy,
that under the humble Name of a Village, Hague must needs have an Air of a
Capital, nay of the once Capital City of the World.

The ordinary Ministers that reside at the Hague, are,

Count de Berka, Envoy Extraordinary from the Emperor. The Chevalier
Crampricht, The Emperor's Resident. The Sieur Lenth, Envoy Extraordinary from
the King of Denmark. Count Oxenstierne, Envoy Extraordinary from the King of
Sueden. The Sieur Moreau, the King of Poland's Minister. The Sieur Meyers, from
Mentz. The Sieur Champagne, from Tryer. The Sieur Solemacher, from Collogne.
The Sieur Prillmeyer and Baron Baumgarten, from Bavaria. The Sieur Smettau and
the Sieur Die, from Brandenburgh. The Sieur Zigel, from the House of
Lunenbourg. Baron Gortz and the Sieur Kappelhere, from Hessen Cassel. The Sieur
Norf, from the Bishop of Munster.
But those that were sent to His Majesty, either to Treat with, or to
Congratulate Him upon His Success in Ireland, and His happy Arrival in Holland,
were,

Count Windishgratz, Envoy Extrordinary and Plenipotentiary of the Emperor. Don
Emanuel Colomma, the Marquess of Castel-Moncayo, and the Count of Piremont,
Envoys and Plenipotentiaries from his Catholic Majesty. Count of Reventlaw,
Envoy Extraordinary from the King of Denmark. The Sieur Haxhausen, Envoy
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary from his Electoral Highness of Saxony. The
Sieur Dalberg, Envoy Extraordinary from the Elector of Mentz. The Baron of
Leyen, Envoy Extraordinary from the Elector of Tryer. General Baron Bernsaw,
Envoy Extraordinary from the Elector of Cologne. The Sieur Heterman, Envoy
Extraordinary from the Elector Palatin. The Sieur Klenk, Envoy Extraordinary
from the Duke of Hanover. Baron Groseck, Envoy Extraordinary from the Duke of
Brunswig-Wolfenbuttel. The Count de Prelat, Envoy Extraordinary from the Duke
of Savoy. The Sieur Gerke, Envoy Extraordinary from the Duke of
Holstein-Gottorp. The Sieur Mean, Envoy Extraordinary from the Prince of Liege,
etc.
There were besides several Deputies sent to His Majesty by some of the
Imperial Cities.

To speak of each of them in particular, to enlarge upon their Characters, to
relate the manner of their Reception, and to Copy their Speeches, numerous
enough to form a Book of true State-Eloquence; although it would be instructive to
young Politicians, and besides be very acceptable to those that cannot hear
enough of things relating so much to the King's Honor, and where their own
tender Sentiments of all His Majesty's Designs, Reason and Duty inspires them
with, are unanimously approved and confirmed by the Mouths of so many eminent
and able Ministers, yet it would be a Theme both of greater skill than I can
pretend to, and of more time than I have allowed me.

The usual time of Audience for Foreign Ministers was between Nine and Ten a
Clock in the Morning, being conducted by Sir Charles Cotterel, Master of the
Ceremonies; and they were received with more or less, according to the Quality
of their Principals. The respective Envoys of the Emperor, of the Kings,
Electors of the Empire, and of the Princes that have the Honor to be Related
to his Majesty, were conducted to the public Audience in Coaches with six, and
the others in Coaches only with two Horses. I shall only give you one instance,
by which you may judge of the rest.

Count Windishgratz, Plenipotentiary and Envoy Extraordinary from his Imperial
Majesty, had his Audience February the 14th. He is one of the greatest and
ablest Ministers of the Emperor's Court; for having been employed all his
lifetime in Foreign Embassies, he has acquired himself that prodigious
knowledge of the Affairs and Intrigues in Europe; that as it is answerable to
his great Age, so there are none in the World that can pretend to surpass, and
but few that can reasonably be compared with him.

It was observed by those that are nice in remarking each particular
Circumstances of great Actions, that this venerable Politician, for all his
being used familiarly to entertain Kings and Emperors, when he came within the
sight of His Majesty, discovered so noble a Concern, and so opportune an
Awfulness in his Face, that as it was far from that signal Fear, that puts
others out of Countenance, so it did infinitely express his Respect and
Veneration for so Good and so great a Monarch.

As soon as His Majesty had notice given, him that the Imperial Envoy was
arrived at Court, he came into the Antichamber, and being Seated on His Royal
Throne, his Grace the Duke of Norfolk conducted the Envoy to, and my Lord
Chamberlain received him at the Door of the Antichamber. Being entered, he made
three deep Bows; the first, at his entrance; the second, after he was a little
advanced; and the third, when he was come near to His Majesty; Who as often put
His Hand to His Hat: and having humbly inclined his Body toward His Majesty,
he, to the best of my remembrance, told him:

That he was sent by the Emperor his Master to Congratulate His Majesty on His
happy Arrival in Holland; that he wanted words to express the great Esteem his
Imperial Majesty had for his Heroical Virtues; that they were a Subject that
entertained his Thoughts at his dearest hours; and that in his Opinion, as well
as of all those that had a true sense of Honor, he past for an incomparable
Prince. That he was infinitely obliged to him for the infatigable Cares His
Majesty had and did still take to advance that Just and Glorious Cause, in
which he himself and all Europe was engaged: and though it was matter of great
trouble to his Imperial Majesty to see him expose his sacred Life to so many
Hazards and Dangers; yet since it was evident that His Majesty was looked upon
by all the Consederates as the Sacred Anchor of their Cause, and the chief
Supporter of their Interest, and that without His generous Influence, their
best endeavors might possibly be rendered fruitless, he could not but entreat
His Majesty to continue in His Noble Fervency to animate the Confederates, to
second their Designs, and to teach them to overcome by His Glorious Victories.

The King having answered him in short, but solid terms, so much becoming
Majesty, and so natural to Himself, the Envoy retired with the same respect,
and observing the same Ceremonies as he did at his Entrance, not turning his
Back till he came out of His Majesty's sight.

To give you a List of the Persons of Quality, Counts, Barons, Generals and
others, remarkable by some singular Merits, that were at the Hague, is more
than I, and I think any body else can do. It seemed His Majesty's Anti-Chambers
at the Hague were made the general Rendezvous of all Illustrious Persons in
Europe. There was every Day seen some great Foreigner or other, who by a brisk
and wandering Look, by short and frequent Embraces of some well-met Friends,
discovered that he was but lately arrived; and though to ask his Neighbors who
he was, seemed to be an established importunity, yet some great Prince or other
passing through the Antichamber, and the courteous Multitude striving to give
way, he that was to give the Answer was lost in the Crowd, and with him the
hopes of ever making an exact Catalogue.

Amongst the Generals, there were remarkt two of the Imperial Army, General
Count Palfy, and the Prince of Commercy. The latter is a Prince of the House of
Lorrain, and Nephew to that great Man that was once, alas, the Terror of the
Turks and French; the Glory of the Germans, and the Hopes and Delight of all
the Confederates. I think I have said enough to raise in your fancy a high Idea
of his Character; and indeed it cannot be beyond his merits. He is in all
respects worthy of that great Name, Young and Gallant, Generous and Brave, and
his Soul inhabits a Body answerable to its greatness: He is very tall and yet
well shaped, he wears his own Hair, which as they are large enough to cover his
Back and Shoulders, so they leave a full view of his graceful Face; His Steps
are firm, and such as those of Pompey when he made the World tremble; His Look
is strong, vigorous, and, indeed, somewhat like that of an Eagle; insomuch that
they that have the fortune to fight under this brisk General, may in their
Leader's Face discover the signs of the Imperial Banners.

As there were Great and Renowned Generals at the Hague, so there was a simple
Soldier, a Soldier of Fortune amongst them, that was too remarkable to be past
over in silence. I went once to dine at a French Ordinary, where I found a
great Company, and amongst them a little Man in a Blue Coat, with a large
Golden Lace, who at the Table was the only Man that entertained the Company; He
spoke of great Feats and Actions, of many Thousands defeated by some few
Hundreds, of firing and killing, of advancing, and never retreating; and one
asking him some news of a certain Colonel of the French Army, Him, said he, I
have killed with my own Hands; and another, naming a French Lieutenant Colonel,
To him, said he, I gave Quarters. I had strange Thoughts of this Man, and some
of them, I confess, were not to his advantage: When the Company rising, and the
little Stranger going out of the Room, I asked my Neighbor, who that Terrible
Gentleman was, that had so little dined, and so much spoken; and I was
surprised to hear him say, that it was Monsieur Arnaud, the Famous Minister of
the Vaudois.

This was enough to correct the ill Opinion I had of his Discourse, and to
change it into a great eagerness to get into his Acquaintance; and seeing him
return into the Room, I insensibly engaged him to tell me some Particulars of
the surprising Actions of the Vaudois under his Conduct, which he did then, as
I thought, with great Reservedness and Modesty, I being now, perhaps, as much
pre-possess'd in his Favor, as I was before against him. After all, he telling
his Stories without a disguise, and without modestly passing over his own
Exploits, did confirm the Truth of the Character that was given me of the
Sincerity and Plainness of the Vaudois, Courteous Breeding, and a Nice
Behavior, being their least quality. Indeed future Ages will hardly believe,
that a simple Minister, at the head of a handful of oppressed and starved
Wretches, was not only capable dutifully to oppose the forced Cruelties of
their own unwilling and dear Tyrant, but to check the Power of Lewis the
Fourteenth, to defeat great numbers of his best Troops, and to maintain his
Soldiers, his Countrymen, his Friends, his Brethren, his Children, his All, in
the grateful possession of their dear beloved Valleys.

He was now come to the Hague, as Envoy from this wonderful People, to
prostrate himself at his Majesty's Royal Feet, and to implore the continuance
of his powerful Protection and assistance, in order to make them more capable
to fight for, and to defend their good and gracious Master: And it is said, that
His Majesty, in consideration of his great Service, was pleased to make him a
Colonel of one of the Regiments he designed to send to his Royal Highness the
Duke of Savoy's assistance.

And thus much of those Great and Illustrious Foreigners that were at the
Hague. I should now say something of His Majesty's Court, and those great
Persons that did compose it, if I were to write to any other Nation but the
English. They know them too well, by reason of their great Birth, Wealth and
Merits, to need to be told, that they made a great Figure at the Hague; and to
name Norfolk, Ormond, Devonshire, Dorset, Nottingham, Monmouth, etc. is to
write an Elogy of the English Nobility. And I do not question but some
ingenious German or other, will oblige his Country by writing about so great
and splendid a Subject; and the rather, since I have seen many of them,
renowned for their Parts and Learning, to be very industrious and inquisitive
about the Particulars of these Noble Persons: and it is from one of them that I
had this following List:

The Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshal of England, Knight of the Garter. The Duke
of Ormond, Captain of a Troop of Guards, Knight of the Garter. The Duke of
Schomberg, Colonel of the First Regiment of the Guards. The Earl of Nottingham,
His Majesty's Principal Secretary of State. The Earl of Devonshire, Lord
Steward of His Majesty's Household, Knight of the Garter. The Earl of Dorset,
Lord Chamberlain of His Majesty's Household. The Earl of Portland, Groom of the
Stool. The Earl of Monmouth, Gentleman of his Majesty's Bedchamber. The Earl
of Scarborough, Captain of a Troop of Guards. The Earl of Essex. The Earl of
Warwick. The Bishop of London. Mr. Wharton, Comptroler of His Majesty's
Household. Sir Charles Cotterel, Master of the Ceremonies. Monsieur Overkerke,
Master of the Horse. Monfieur Zuilestein, Master of the Wardrobe. The Earl of
Silkirke. My Lord John Hamilton. My Lord Dumlanerigh. My Lord Angus. Sir --
Stairs, etc.

Some of them are Persons of an extraordinary Presence; and some especially
being distinguished by the Garter, they were as much reverenced by all
Foreigners, when they past through the Anti-chambers, as the greatest Princes
and Electors were by the English.

The Right Reverend Father in God, Henry, Lord Bishop of London, was one of
those that was most taken notice of. His Great and Noble Extraction, his Piety,
his obliging Behavior toward all Persons, and especially his untainted Zeal
for their Majesty's Interest and Person, have rendered his Name dear to all
that have the happiness to be Protestants, Foreigners as well as English: And
they that have seen him in His Majesty's Antichamber, in his Velvet Gown, as
they could not feed enough their Eyes on so Reverend an Object, so they all
agreed, that he was the truest and liveliest Representative of that great
Church that has so vast a Reputation amongst, and that is certainly one of the
best ordered of all Protestant Churches in the World. In his Habit, they
discovered that Ceremonious Decency, that is so successfully observed, and in
the mild and benign Lineaments of his Face, they read in Legible Characters
that saving and peaceable Doctrine, that according to the Rules of the Gospel
is so much preached up by the Church of England. In fine, they all concluded him
to be one of the greatest, and most deserving Sons of so blessed a Mother.

As to Matters of Ceremony that were observed amongst the German Princes, and
the English Noblemen, there was no body put to the trouble to remove
Difficulties. They freely paid and received, they received and paid their
Visits with a mutual satisfaction; and these Two generous Nations striving to
overcome each other in Civility, made a grateful Confusion of their different
Characters. The Right Honorable the Earl of Devonshire gave very frequent
Visits to the Elector of Bavaria, and his Electoral Highness did pay him every
one of them.

It seems, that as there is amongst some Nations in Europe, the French and the
Spaniards, the Poles and the Moscovites, the Swedes and the Danes, either a
Natural or Established Antipathy, so there are no Nations in the World that
sympathize more than the Germans and the English do. The same Freedom of
Humor, the same Largeness of Soul, the same Courage, the same Complexion, the
same Virtues, and (I beg leave to say) the same Vices too, as they naturally
incline and prompt them to a mutual Love and Friendship; so those that are
versed in History, and know that the one did descend from the other, seeing
them together, will hardly distinguish the Copy from the Original.

I conclude this Paper with the Pleasures and Diversions of the Hague: There
were every Day Two Plays acted in Two different Play Houses, one of Dutch, and
the other of French Comedians. The latter are in his Highness the Duke of
Zell's Service, by whose Order they were come to the Hague to divert that
Illustrious Company. The Princess of Saxen-Eysenach, who was come to the Hague
with the Prince her Brother, kept a Cercle every Night; and she being certainly
one of the most beautiful and accomplished Princesses in the World, all Persons
of the highest Quality came frequently to pay her Homage, and the time was
spent in pleasant Discourses. Those that had a mind to play at Cards, found
that Diversion every Night at the Countess of Soissons her Lodgings. This Lady
has been a very great Traveller; she has been in Paris, Madrid, London,
Brussels, the Hague, and is consequently so well known, that I need not write
her History. She is one of Cardinal Mazarin's Nieces, who married her to the
Count de Soissons, a Prince of the Royal Blood in France, by whom she had Three
Children, the Count de Soissons, the Heir of his Father's Estate, Prince
Philip, who enjoys great Benefices in France, to the value of Two Hundred
Thousand French Livres a year, and the brave Prince Eugene of Savoy, who has so
much signalized himself in the Imperial Army, and who now is one of the
Generals of the Duke of Savoy's Forces. The Current Money at Play were English
Guinea's, the German Ducats being too weak, and the Spanish Pistols too crooked
to dare to appear within sight of them.

Hunting was also one of the Pleasures of that Illustrious Assembly. His
Majesty gave that Diversion several times to the Princes; and I remember, that
when they were once at Honslardike, there was a Partridge shot, which being
taken up by the King, made a sudden escape out of his Hands, and was lost in
the Air. There were not wanting some that took it for a very bad Omen; but
other, less superstitious, and more wise, said, That if it was an Omen at all,
it was certainly a very good one, and a lively Instance of the Happiness of
those that fell into His Majesty's Hands.

In fine, the Sixth Day of March did arrive, that set a period to one of the
greatest Assemblies the World ever saw. His Majesty, accompanied by their
Highnesses, the Dukes of Zell, and Wolfembuttel, parted from the Hague that
Day, about Eight a Clock in the Morning, in order to go to Loo; and his
Electoral Highness of Bavaria, who was some few Days before gone to Amsterdam,
was to meet them on their way. The King was no sooner gone, but every body did
prepare for departure. There was every moment seen some parting Coach, or
other, with Six Horses, thundering through the Streets; and the mournful Hague
seemed to be threatened to be turned into a Desert.

It was said, His Majesty did intend to stay but Four or Five Days at Loo, and
then strait to return into England. I could easily imagine, that by reason of
His Majesty's great and numerous Attendance, it would be very difficult for me
to get a passage in the Fleet that was to conduct him over; and being informed,
that the Katherine and Soudike Yacht lay at Rotterdam, waiting for my Lord
Dorset and my Lord Monmouth, I parted from the Hague, March the 7th, and
arrived at Rotterdam at Night.

March the 8th, hearing that their Lordships were arrived, I went to the
Captain of the Soudike Yacht, belonging to my Lord Monmouth, desiring him to
intercede with his Lordship for my passage, which, upon the first word, was
freely and generously granted. My Lord being come on Board about Two a Clock in
the Afternoon, we fell down the River, and passing by the Katherine Yacht, she
saluted his Lordship with all her Guns.

March the 9th, we had the unwelcome News, that the Gorcum, a Dutch Man of War,
that was designed for our Convoy, could not be ready in less than Six or Seven
Days time. We had a very clear Sky, the Wind was fair, and fairer, perhaps,
than some of our Waiters wishes; for whatever they were, some of the Seamen of
the Dutch Man of War were hanged the next Day, for having revolted against
their Captain.

Brill is not a Town that can pretend to divert impatient Travelers: Every
body was thinking of means to get out of that solitary Place; and my Lord
Monmouth, whom all the World knows to be very Active, and of a Temper to
despise all Perils, had a good mind to venture over without a Convoy: At last
he found a way to oblige two French Privateers (the only name we ought to have
been afraid of) to secure our Passage. To speak plain, there were two French
Privateers, of twenty Guns each, riding in the Maese, that had been taken by
the Dutch, and being turned into Merchant men, and manned with French
Protestants, they were ready to set sail for Port-a-port; by the help of a
handful of Guinea's they were prevailed with to accompany us to the English
Coast: And my Lord Dorset and Mr. Wharton being arrived at the Brill in the
Katherine-Yacht, and approved of our Design, we set sail about four a Clock in
the Afternoon. We were in all six Sail, two Yachts, two Privateers, and two
Merchantmen, and the Katherine-Yacth being the stout Admiral of our little
Fleet, we had these following Orders sent us from on Board of her.

1. If we weigh Anchor in the Daytime, then we will hoist up our Top-sail and
fire a Gun; if in the Night, we will hang out a Light in the Shrowds and fire a
Gun.

2. He that spies any Sail at Sea more than his own Company or Squadron, shall
hoist and lower his Ensign as often as he shall see Ships; if in the Night,
then to make false Fires until he be answered with the like.

3. In case of thick and foggy Weather, we will every quarter of an Hour
tinckle our Bell, or fire a Gun now and then; which must be answered with the
like, by every Vessel, with a Musket.

4. If any lose Company, and meet again in the Daytime, he that is to the
Windward shall hall up his Main-Sail, and keep it in the Brayls, until such
time as he that is to Leeward shall come up with him.

5. If any make Land in the Daytime, he must hoist up his Ensign, and keep it
out until he be answered.

6. If any spy Land or any Danger in the Night, he is to hang out two Lights
more than he had before, and fire one Gun, and bear away, or tack from it.

7. If we make Sail in the Night, we will hang out a Light at the Ensign-Staff;
if shorten Sail in the Night, then we will fire one Gun without altering our
Lights.

We could not get that Night out of the River, the Wind being very low, and the
Tide spent, and we were forced to come to an Anchor about seven a Clock at
Night, five or six Miles beyond the Brill, where we continued for two Days and
two Nights together.

March the 12th. We weighed Anchors early in the Morning, making use of a fresh
Gale that blew North-east, insomuch that having advanced that Day and the
following Night, we came the next Morning within two Leagues of Marget.

March the 13th. The Sea was extremely calm, yet the Katherine-Yacht making use
of her Oars, and we striving to follow her, we came at last so neat the Shore,
that my Lord Dorset and Monmouth, with their Company, thought fit to land in
their Barges.

March the 14th. A thick Fog hindered us to gain the River; but toward Night we
weighed Anchor; and having weighed and cast them out again for several times,
acording as the Tides served, it being the only means by which we advanced, we
arrived March the 16th. at Greenwich, and from thence we went to London.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford Arms in Warwick Lane.
THe Memoirs of Monsieur Deageant: Containing the most secret Transactions and
Affairs of France, from the Death of Henry IV. till the beginning of the
Ministry of the Cardinal de Richelieu. To which is added, a Particular Relation
of the Archbishop of Embrun's Voyage into England, and of his Negotiation for
the advancement of the Roman Catholic Religion here; together with the Duke of
Buckingham's Letters to the said Archbishop about the Progress of that Affair:
Which happened the last Years of King James I. his Reign. Faithfully Translated
out of the French Original.

The Cabinet Opened, or the Secret History of the Amors of Madam de Maintenon,
with the French King. Translated from the French Copy.

Victoriae Anglicanae: Being an Historical Collection of all the Memorable and
Stupendous Victories obtained by the English against the French, both by Sea
and Land, since the Norman Conquest. Viz. The Battle 1. Between K. Henry II.
and Robert of Normandy 2. At Morleis. 3. At the Rescue of Calice. 4. At
Poicters. 5. At Cressy. 6. At Agincourt. 7. At the Mouth of the River Seine. 8.
At Vernoil. 9. At Cravant. 10. At the Relief of Orleance; with the great
Actions of the Lord Salisbury and Talbot. 11. Of Spurrs. Dedicated to all the
Commissioned Officers of the Maritime and Land Forces.

The Present State of Christendom considered, in Nine Dialogues between 1. The
present Pope Alexander VIII. and Lewis XIV. 2. The Great Duke of Tuscany, and
the Duke of Savoy. 3. King James the Second, and the Marescal de la Feuillade.
4. The Duke of Lorrain, and the Duke of Schomberg. 5. The Duke of Lorrain, and
the Elector Palatine. 6. Louis the XIV. and the Marquis de Louvois. 7. The
Advoyer of Berne, and the Chief Syndick of Geneva. 8. Cardinal Ottoboni, and
the Duke de Chaulnes. 9. The young Prince Abafti, and Count Teckeley. Done out
of French.


