CONFESSION OF FAITH Of those called ARMINIANS, OR A DECLARATION Of the
OPINIONS and DOCTRINES OF THE Ministers and Pastors, Which in the UNITED
PROVINCES are known by the Name of REMONSTRANTS Concerning the Chief Points of
Christian RELIGION. Translated out of the Original.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Walsall at the Heart and Bible, near the West End
of the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, MDC LXXXIV.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
Chap. 1. Of the Sacred Scripture, and its Authority, Perfection, and
Perspicuity. Page 59 Chap. 2. Of the Knowledge of the Essence of God, or of the
Divine Nature. 78 Chap. 3. Of the Holy and Sacred Trinity. 93 Chap. 4. Of the
Knowledge of the Works of God. 96 Chap. 5. Of the Creation of the World, of
Angels and of Men. 98 Chap. 6. Of the Providence of God, or his Preservation
and Government of things. 105 Chap. 7. Of the Sin and Misery of Man. 117 Chap.
8. Of the Work of Redemption, and of the Person and Offices of Jesus* Christ.
128 Chap. 9. Of the Knowledge of the Will of God, revealed in the New Covenant.
138 Chap. 10. Of the Precepts or Commendments of Jesus Christ in general; and
of Faith and Repentance, or Conversion unto God. 141 Chap. 11. Of Faith in
Jesus Christ. 145 Chap. 12. Of good Works in particular, and of the exposition
of the Decalogue. 155 Chap. 13. Of directing and denying of our selves, and
bearing of the Cross of Christ. 170 Chap. 14. Of Prayer and Thanksgiving, and
in particular of the Lord's Prayer. 181 Chap. 15. Of special Callings, and of
the Precepts and Traditions of Men. 193 Chap. 16. Of the Worship and Veneration
of Jesus Christ the only Mediator, and of the Invocation of Saints. 196 Chap.
17. Of the Benefits and Promises of God, and first of Election unto Grace, or
Calling unto Faith. 200 Chap. 18. Of the Promises of God that are performed in
this Life, to those that are already converted and are Believers; that is, of
Election unto Glory, of Adoption, Justification, Sanctification, and of
Obsignation or Sealing. 209 Chap. 19. Of the Promises of God pertaining to the
Life to come, or of the raising again of the Dead, and eternal Life. 216 Chap.
20. Of the Divine Threatenings and Punishments of the wicked, pertaining both
unto this Life, and unto the Life to come: to wit, of Reprobation Hardening,
Blinding, and of Eternal Death and Damnation. 218 Chap. 21. Of the Ministry of
the Word of God, and of the Orders of Ministers. 222 Chap. 22. Of the Church of
Jesus Christ, and its Marks or Notes. 230 Of the Marks or Notes of a visible
Church. 224
Chap. 23. Of the Sacraments, and other Sacred Rites. 237 Of Baptism. 238 Of
the Sacred Supper of the Lord. 240 Of other Sacred Rites, but yet such as are
indifferent. 242
Chap. 24. Of Church Discipline. 246 Chap. 25. Of Synods or Councels, and of
their manner and use. 254 The Conclusion. 260
ERRATA.
PAge 29. line 14. read, are so tied. P. 35. l. 18. r. the very said. P. 37. l.
12. r. by God for disturbing. P. 38. l. 9. for those, r. these. P. 39. l. 2. r.
use a thing well. P. 55. l. 12. r. for such. P. 80. l. 25. r. state and
relation of each to other. Ibid. l. 27. for of, r. by. P. 88. l. 5, 6. r. no
ways sworn to any. P. 91. l. 19. r. of any other Enemies. P. 124. l. 1. r. now
long since. P. 140. l. 2. for assent, r. assert. P. 151. l. 10. r. come to. P.
182. l. 18. r. both these parts. P. 185. l. 5. r. and in whom. P. 186. l. 8. r.
to forsake. P. 202. l. 14, to 18. r. nor for that thereby, the will of him that
is called, is by an irresistible power, or by some omnipotent force (which is
neither more nor less than Creation or raising from the dead) so effectually
determined to believe. P 223. l. 27. for in, r. to. P. 242. l. 4. add after
themselves, as coverts of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. P. 243. l. 10. r.
as also. P. 250. l. 19, 20, 21, 22. unto the Word Sin, to be expunged, and to
read, And also withal there is even in the first place an exact regard to be
had of the diversity or difference of Sins. P. 256. l. 24, 25. add after
brought in, that they be taken away or removed.

THE PREFACE TO THE Christian Reader.
THERE is no doubt, pious A Prolepsis concerning a fourfold sort of
dissenters, touching things of this kind.
Reader, but that this Declaration of Faith, which is published by us, will be
liable to the various and different judgments of men: For as every one stands
persuaded in his own mind touching both the necessity, profit, form and manner
of suchlike Declarations, so is he like also to pass judgment upon this of ours.

There are some, who think we ought to abstain altogether from all Confessions
or Declarations, and judge that they are not only not necessary, nor profitable
for the Christian Weal-publick, but they are also unlawful, dangerous, and
hurtful in the Church. There are some, who do not indeed think it altogether
unadvised to publish Confessions or Declarations, much less do they think it
unlawful or hurtful; but they judge they ought to be conceived and framed only
in mere pure Scripture-words. There are some, who indeed do not altogether
disallow of Confessions, though conceived in other than bare Scripturewords,
but will have them to be so general and brief, that they shall contain and
comprehend nothing but what is absolutely and precisely necessary to be known
and believed unto Salvation. There are, lastly, others far different from
these, who judge particular Confessions and Declarations even of several most
minute and small Controversies, not only so far profitable, but also necessary,
that without them a Christian-Society can neither have being, nor well-being.
The so various, diverse, and differing judgments of all these this our
Declaration is doubtless like to undergo: and these indeed severally have
specious and not altogether improbable grounds for their opinions whereon they
build and rely.

Those who judge that we ought altogether to abstain from Confessions, or
Declarations, Objections of the first and second sort.
or that they ought not to be conceived but in mere and plain Scripture-words,
(of which sort of men in this age there are found not a few, otherwise pious
and good men) they, as far as we can gather, pretend for the most part three
things for their opinion. 1. For that by reason of them there is done no light
prejudice to the Majesty and Authority of the Scriptures. 2. For that by
occasion of them there is mighty damage and detriment done to the liberty of
Churches, or Conscience and Prophe^y. 3. For that by the same a wide gap is
opened for Factions and Schisms in the Church.

And first indeed they think, that by this very means the Majesty of the
Scriptures is not a little derogated and detracted from, for that both their
sufficiency and perspicuity seem to be suspected and doubted of; to wit, as if
they either did not fully and sufficiently contain all things, that are
necessary and profitable for every Christian Congregation to know, believe,
hope and do, or at least did not use those forms of speaking, which do clearly
and perspicuously enough express those Divine Senses or Meanings, which are
chiefly savingly necessary and available to be believed, but had need of Men's
phrases and forms, for the right understanding of them, and application and use
to make a due difference between Truth and falsehood. From whence afterward they
say it comes to pass, that the authority of the Scriptures is more and more
weakened, and at length wholly falls, and is transferred by degrees to those
forms of Men as either more perfect, or the more clear discoverers of what is
right and false. And certainly the experience of many ages seems not a little
to confirm these Men's opinions, in which (say they) for the most part it
usually fell out, that, after forms of Confessions and Declarations began to be
in esteem, and the said honor to be given to them, as though they did most
fully express the hidden and involved senses of the Scriptures, and most
clearly and plainly propose those things whichare necessarily to be held by the
Churches of Jesus Christ, the Majesty and Authority of the Scriptures began by
little and little to decline, and the truth as also the necessity of all
Judgments and Opinions pertaining to the business of Religion to depend upon
those forms; in so much indeed, that waving and undervaluing the Sacred
Scripture, they appealed unto them as the most certain Squares or Levels, and
unexceptionable Rules, and he that swerved but a fingers breadth from them,
although moved thereto out of a regard to the Scriptures, was without any
further proof accused and condemned of Heresy. And though at the beginning,
and in the very Cradles or Infancy of Forms, as they say, it fell not out, but
also over and above by Cautions, or Restrictions, and Protestations, and other
ways of that kind, they obviated and withstood the same; yet in tract of time,
by little and little their Authority prevailed and increased, and through
secret increasings by intervals and degrees it was insensibly established and
confirmed; until at length, having spread its roots deep, it began in a manner
to overtop the very Scriptures. So by this means in process of time some
Ecumenical Councils, and Forms of Belief, or general Creeds, which were
concieved and maintained in them, began to be so highly valued, that a like and
equal Authority was given to them the Gospels themselves by the most of men.
Yea further, even those things, that were disputed and determined by one single
Augustine against Pelagius, at length in process oftime were advanced to that
Dignity and Authority, (and that even among those who otherwise are not wont to
set much by the Authority of Councils and Fathers) that it is enough to condemn
any one that teaches in the Church, if his opinion only seem to come near to
Pelagius. And that it does commonly so fall out in other questions of Faith,
and has fallen out from every age past they do very speciously affirm. In
brief, these seem not to complain in vain, that all Forms usually do together
with their age receive the strength and increases of too much Authority; and
that howsoever oftentimes they seem not openly and manifestly to be advanced
and promoted to an unmeasurable greatness, yet they become by degrees not
withstanding (even cautions and protestations to the contrary notwithstanding)
the immutable Canons of Faith, and at least secundary Rules and Levels, and
that indeed by so secret and imperceptible motions and advances, that they are
found of a certain not to come, but to have come, nor to grow, but to have
grown to the top of more than humane Authority and height of supreme Dignity.

They suppose also that these Forms do mightily endammage and prejudice the
Liberty of Churches, or Conscience and Prophecy; for that where they are
admitted into the Church, it is impossible but that forthwith a tyrannical Law
be brought in at the back door, so that a man may not think, speak, write,
teach, compare and interpret the Scriptutes but according to what they
prescribe; and to call them into doubt, or to contradict them, though modestly,
is thought an heinous wickedness. Nor do they want their pretense: viz. That
the public Peace of the Church may be preserved entire, Confusion avoided, and
Liberty turn not into Licentiousness: from whence further (they say) it comes
to pass, that none, (especially if it be believed that the Commonwealth also
is interessed therein) durst either inquire into those Forms, and examine the
Opinions that are contained in them by the standard of Truth, or if any one
called upon for parts and industry for that end shall inquire into them, and in
his judgment find some things to be false, he cannot without apparent danger
publish, and discover them for the amendment of others. And that indeed by this
means such like Forms of Confessions and Declarations did terminate in most
rigid bonds, and more than Adamantine Fetters, wherewith Liberty together with
Truth are most straightly tied up, and that Error, which is once received and
admitted, becomes stable and firm, yea eternal.

Lastly, they affirm that a large gap is opened by these very Confessions and
Declarations for Schisms and Separations; because (as they have been hitherto
used) they have been the open and public signs of dissensions, by which, no
otherwise then by certain partitionwalls, Christians, who ought to be most
strictly joined together, and who in very deed agree in the main of saving
doctrine, are divided each from other, whilst 1 Cor, 1. 12.
one indeed says, I am of Paul, another, I am of Gephas, another, I am of
Apollos, another, I am of Christ: and every one believes that the purity of
Religion, and the hope of immortal life consists within his particular
Congregation: So that whosoever belongs not thereto, he is almost judged
altogether excluded out of Heaven and the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. Whence it is
necessary that there arise and flow, as it were from a continual Spring,
perpetual and immortal hatreds, and divisions of minds and affections.

These for the most part are the chief A general Answer.
props, on which the first and second sort rely, and whereby they support their
opinion: specious indeed they are, if viewed, at first sight, for that they
make show of no ordinary zeal for the Authority of God's Word, for Liberty of
Conscience, for the Peace and Concord of Churches: yet such, as if more nearly
looked into, have not appeared to us of so great weight, as that for their
sakes we should deem our selves bound to desist from our purpose of publishing
this Declaration of ours. For doubtless they seem not undeservedly to reprove
so much the thing it self, as the corruption and abuse of the thing, which (as
a Wen to a fair body) oftentimes is wont to grow and cleave even unto those
things, which are best and most sovereignly wholesome in themselves, and
through a more sharp viewing of the vice, and otherwise most just hatred of the
abuse to be carried and fall unawars even into a detestation of the very thing
it self. Which that it may be plain, it will be worth our labor to premise
some what of the nature, necessity, utility and right use of Confessions or
Declarations. For from thence it will most clearly appear and become manifest,
both how greatly they are mistaken, who are wholly averse from them, and reject
them one with another, and what is our end and scope in the putting What is the
true use and end* of Confessions.
forth of this.

As for Confessions then, or Declararations in general, they are nothing but
clear and manifest expositions of our Faith propounded and laid down in a
certain method, wherein more or fewer, eitheir by word or writing, discover
their judgment concerning points of Christian Religion, and make it known to
the Christian World, for the clearing up of Divine Truth, the cutting off
Calumnies, wherewith innocent persons are oppressed, and the edifying of
Churches in true Faith and peace. This at length is the proper, true and
genuine nature and genius of Confessions and Declarations, from which we are to
make judgment of their true both necessity, and utility, and no ways from the
disposition and design of those, who have oftentimes abused Confessions and
Declarations to far other different ends. For those things have not been the
faults of the Declarations, but of the Declarers, and not the uses, but abuses
of Confessions, and they such as might easily but for our selves be severed
from the Forms of Confessions themselves.

That these kind of Forms indeed are That they are not precisely necessary.
not precisely and absolutely necessary we willingly grant, and therefore do we
not like of their opinion, whom we mentioned in the fourth place, who account
them at least for secondary Symbols of Faith, and who determine or maintain
that they are precisely necessary, if not to the being, yet at least to the
well-being of a Christian Church. For where a right and concordant or unanimous
understanding of the Scriptures has its place, there simply is no need of
other Forms of belief, or expressions, but what are in the Scriptures
themselves: and those Forms which are in the Scriptures, they are sufficient
unto Faith and Salvation; and if one bring with him an honest, and docile mind,
and studious of Divine Truth, for the discerning of them, and withal use those
means, which he ought to use, and which become a Reader earnestly desirous of
so great things, they are so clear and perspicuous, that they may and ought at
all times abundantly to suffice every Christian to draw from thence both for
himself and others a most perfect Declaration of Divine meanings. For verily it
cannot be justly doubted, but that those Forms and Phrases, wherein God himself
and our Lord Jesus Christ were pleased long since to express and declare the
meanings of their mind to private and ordinary and unlearned men, are also at
this day sufficient for us to understand and declare those very same meanings;
since to that end they are no less left of God and delivered by the Scripture
to us than unto them, that from them we might draw and fetch those things,
which concern the Worship of God, and our own and others everlasting Salvation.
From whence it follows, that it is altogether possible, that the Church of
Christ may not only be, but that it may also well be without such like humane
Forms.

In the mean time though such Forms That yet they are useful and lawful.
are not precisely necessary, yet are they not therefore also to be judged
unprofitable, and consequently unlawful and hurtful. For if Prophesyings, or
Interpretings of the Scriptures are not unprofitable, yea rather if they be
sometimes in certain respects necessary, which several Teachers and Pastors
propose in Universities and Churches, or which otherwise are performed in
Christian Assemblies, when for the informing of the ignorant, the reducing of
them that go astray into the right way, the relieving the doubting, and
convincing gainsayers, they declare and illustrate the meaning of the
Scriptures, as far as may be, by familiar and clear and withal usual forms of
speaking, bebesides the very express words of the Scriture, (...).
it cannot verily seem unprofitabe, much less unlawful or hurtful, if more
Ministers of Jesus Christ do by mutual consents, joint studies and endeavors,
for the greater illustration or clearing up of divine Truth, removing of
slanders, the edifying of the generality or the most of men, or other holy and
pious ends, publicly open and declare their judgment upon the same meanings of
Scripture, and that in certain composed Forms.

Yea further, if you shall duly consider That they are sometimes also necessary.
the matter without affection and prejudice, we shall find that those times may
happen, wherein such Declarations ought to seem not only profitable, but also
very necessary. For if foul and gross errors, noxious to Christian Religion
and piety, should seize on our age, if necessary heads of belief should be
neglected, or be minded but by the by, or those that are not necessary be
earnestly urged as necessary, as also profitable doctrines not be distinguished
from those that are necessary, as they ought, lastly, if men's consciences shall
be bound up by humane inventions or devices, and every thing, though never so,
false be palliated and clothed with Scripture words and expressions, there is
certainly a necessity laid upon all and every Christian, espesially upon
Pastors of Churches, seriously to consider and advise among themselves, by
what means they may withstand so many and great evils; and, if they shall
perceive that those blind miserable mortals may profitably and prudently be
helped by a more clear proposal and elucidation or discovery of the Divine
meanings, than has been formerly made, as it were by a Torch lighted in the
dark, unanimously and as it were with joint forces to agree and conspire, how
they may discover and set before their eyes those divine senses and meanings in
certain Forms now long since with profit received and familiar, if peradventure
by the help of these they that err may be delivered out of the said deep
darkness, and be reduced into the right way of everlasting Salvation. In the
next place, if it fall out that those, who perform this profitable service to
the Christian Commonwealth, should notwithstanding, as it usually comes to
pass, be loaded with Calumnies, be soyled with foul and dishonest suspicions,
and as it were overwhelmed with a certain deluge of false accusations, as the
Patrons of all the wicked opinions in the World, who hang out as it were upon
new posts old Heresies either all or some of them, dig up again out of Hell or
their Grave Errors long since condemned, who hold nothing firm, nothing solid
in Religion, and are divided and severed among themselves by so many and so
monstrous Opinions, that they may justly seem rather Monsters of men, then
Christians; who is there who will not think them like to do a work worth their
pains, yea that will not think them by some necessity constrained hereunto, by
a public and solemn Declaration to obviate so atrocious and enormous slanders,
and by an ingenuous Confession of their judgment to testify to the Christian
World, what and what manner of Persons they are in Religion, and what in very
deed they think touching the chief heads of belief, and by this unblamable
means, as by a bolt and bar firmly set against those infamous revilings and
slanders, to vindicate and approve or commend to all good men the integrity of
their good name and esteem, and the innocence of their lives? Especially if
they see, that, unless they do it, all good men even the best will be estranged
from them, the weak will be turned aside from the love of the Truth, or else
that no light scruples will be cast into their minds, that an occasion will be
given to many, in other respects in no wise bad men, to continue in their
errors, or to return, as it were to their vomit, to their former filthiness
which they had left, that their Friends will be withdrawn from all affection of
good will toward them, and violently separated from their fraternity, that
more plenteous matter will be ministered to their Enemies and Foes to
calumniate, and consequently that through the side of their wronged reputation
the Truth of God will be wounded, and all their labor, care, industry and
pains, hitherto spent, or further to be spent in the promoting of the same,
will be rendered unprofitable and fruitless? Certainly he that is touched with
any desire of the public good, any care of the glory of God, any desire of the
truth and peace of the Church, he cannot but believe, and certainly conclude,
that in such a case there is some kind of necessity laid upon those men, if
they can with a good conscience, and men of highest degree and lowest degree
require it, even in conceived Forms of Declarations to purge themselves from
those false reports and calumnies, and to testify to the whole Christian World
their innocence. Nor indeed can it seem sufficient for the washing away of the
said Calumnies, if they contain themselves within the mere and bare expressions
of the Scripture, and deliver their Opinions or Judgments in so many
Scripture-Words and Phrases. For seeing that this very thing is charged upon
them as a crime, that under Scripture* words they in their Bosom cherish their
worst meanings, and most prejudicial to the Glory of God and the Salvation of
Men, and that they do upon occasion either readily sought after, or offered by
others, disseminate or spread the same, when they perceive it is for their
advantage: verily they are reduced to that necessity whether they will or no,
as for the Glory of the Truth of God, the edifying of the weak, and the
detection of Calumnies, by that means which seems best and most profitable,
that is, by some public Declaration of their Judgment, to purge themselves,
and to maintain and defend the sincerity of their belief. Which things being
so, so far is it that Confessions, or Declarations of Faith ought to seem
hurtful or unprofitable of themselves, that they are sometimes to be accounted
of in the Church of Jesus Christ, for useful vindications of the Truth, and in
a manner necessary remedies of the greatest evils.

Howbeit because such is either the Three remedies against the abuses of them.
inconsiderateness, or sloth, or malice of the most of Men, that those things
which of themselves might be useful and pious documents of our duty, or most
present remedies of great evils, they suffer them by reason of their additional
corruption and abuse, by degrees to become superstitious bands of Consciences,
and insensibly to degenerate into idols and hurtful Poisons, yea often they
themselves turn them to the damage and detriment of the best things; we ought
diligently to beware, and endeavor with the greatest care that may be, to
vindicate such forms from all manner of abuse and corruption, and to inculcate
and assert at all times their right and true use, which we indeed believe may
be commodiously done, if we have always these three things before our eyes, and
carefully observe them. First, if in the Church there be no Authority Of their
true and false authority.
that is (...).
unquestionable, that is, irrefragable, and beyond all exception, under any
title, pretense or show whatsoever, either directly or indirectly, in things
pertaining to Religion, given to these Forms, nor suffered to be given them, to
wit, in such sort, as that the Consciences of any should be tied, or obliged to
the same as Rules of Faith, either primary or secondary: Which indeed that it
may be easily provided against, is beyond all doubt if they be only had in that
esteem and place, as indeed they ought to be had, to wit, for bare expositions
of our belief, or for such Forms, which do not define, or determine, what is to
be held for true, or false, what is to be believed, or not to be believed,
after what manner any thing is to be expressed, or uttered; but which only may
make known and testify, what they hold for true and false, what they believe,
or do not believe, how they express the meanings of their Mind, whose own those
Forms and Declarations are. For if they be had in no other account, or greater
esteem, there is no danger that their Authority (we say not) should be
equalled, much less be preferred before the Scriptures, but that they find not
indeed any place, though the lowest in the Church. For doubtless, as we have
already said before, they will not then be held for Squares and Rules of Faith,
whereby Truth, or Falsehood, Heresy, or Error may and ought to be known; and
which are published for that end, that by them what is true or false may be
known, and discovered or sound; but only for bare Signals and Symbols or
Tokens, which only show and declare, what the Authors believed and judged of
those and the other Articles and Meanings of Christian Religion. And truly if
we consult the ancient Annals of the Church, they who first put forth such
Symbols, Ecclesiastical Canons, Confessions and Declarations, had no other
design, aim or end, but thereby to testify, not what was to be believed, but
what they themselves believed; and that these Symbols, etc. should be even
instead of Watch-Towers, to declare and show to the unwary and imprudent the
Shelves and Quicks of Errors that were hurtful to Piety and Salvation, or also
to serve against Calumniators, for Apologies, whereby every one might
understand, how far they were from those Errors, Blasphemies, and Crimes,
which through Calumny were by men ill-imployed fastened upon them. And
certainly if all Declarations and Confessions had at all times kept within
these bounds, they had not indeed at any time, obtained any Dictator-like
Dignity or Authority, much less greater than, or equal to the Scriptures in the
Church. Wherefore that the Church may in the first place always hold this firm
and unalterable, we are to endeavor again and again, and therefore est-soon
upon all occasions to inculate upon Churches, and in the very Forms of our
Confessions and Declarations accurately to express, That they indeed ought not
to be received for certain Judices or Discoverers, much less for Judges of the
true Senses or Meanings, viz. of Scripture, but only for the Indices of those
Senses or Meanings, which the Authors thereof have held for true, and that they
were published to that end. If that be done, these three abuses will
sufficiently and easily be avoided.

1. None will flee to the said Forms, to Of their threefold abuse.
draw and take from them, as from Fountains with a Faith void of doubting,
those things that are to be believed: and further he will not run unto them in
doubtful Senses of Scripture, as the Indices of what is straight and crooked:
nor try and examine dark and controverted senses by them, as by a touchstone.

2. None will be tied, or suffer himself to be tied to their Meanings upon any
other terms, than so far and so long as he himself does certainly find and is
convinced in his Conseience, that they accord with the Meanings of the
Scriptures.

3. In Disputations, Conferences, Examinations or Trials men will never appeal
to them, neither will controversies of Faith be brought to the Anvil thereof;
but they will all wholly without fear or danger be brought to and examined by
the Word of God alone, as the only Rule beyond all exception, and the true form
of sound words, which our alone Master Jesus Christ and his Apostles have left
unto us. And thus indeed there will be nothing, that can justly be desired to
detract Divine Authority from them, and to give it wholly to the Sacred
Scriptures. Neither shall we then need to fear, lest idols be made of them to
be set up in the Church of Jesus Christ, and placed in equal degree with the
Scriptures, or honored with any like honor with them, or lest bands should be
knit of them, whereby the Consciences of men should be bound; or lastly lest
poisons should be prepared of them, whereby the sincerity of Faith might be
infected, or the Truth of Doctrine adulterated. For a moderate liberty to
examine them.


This Foundation therefore once rightly laid, and this Principle firmly
supposed, there will always remain in the Church of Jesus Christ whole and
entire liberty, whereby any one may (pre^rving safe the Laws of Christian
Mo^esty, Charity and Prudence) without anger inquire into those Forms, and
without scruple contradict them: that ^y this means there may be always a
^anifest difference between them and ^e Word of God, to which alone that
^riviledg ought to remain sacred and in^iolate, that it alone is above and
beyond ^ll Controversei and Contradiction, and that the Consciences of
Believers are to ^e tied to it only. And yet is not this ^berty to be extended
so far, as to turn ^^to a dissolute and irregular licentious^ess, whereby every
Man may unadvi^edly speak what he please. For he as ^uch abuses liberty, who
too much at ^leasure loosenth the button thereof, as ^e who fastneth it too
strait. All ex^eams are to be avoided, and we to sa^rifice to moderation, which
consists ^^ the midst between Tyranny and a Wild and Unbridled
Licentiousness. Therefore Prudence and Charity are always to be taken into
Council, which will ^asily dictate, when and how this liberty may profitably,
and without the Scandal of the Godly, be made use of. It is the part of
Prudence to weigh things, and to consider fit times and places, wherein this or
that Opinion either by word or writing may commodiously be proposed. It is the
part of Charity, to have a regard of persons, that they be not offended or
troubled, who ought to be edified. It is not the duty of a Prudent and Pious
Man, and one truly Charitable, to use promiscously, upon every occasion, with
all Persons or in all Places, when he so thinks fit, the liberty of
contradicting, nay nor always and everywhere patiently to bear with all the
Contradictions of others. Against the unbridled Licentiousness of some.
There is often a regard to be had both of the Things or Opinions which are
contradicted, and of the Persons with whom such Contradictions are propounded.
For there are some things of so great Weight and Moment, that they cannot be
gainsaid without the extreme hazard of our Salvation. Freely to contradict
these, or quietly to suffer them to be contradicted by others, would be the
farthest from Prudence and Charity possible. There are some things of that
nature, that they may without the danger of any Man's Salvation suffer indeed
contradiction, but which yet to contradict is not necessary for the sake of the
public good, and to be contradicted everywhere and at all times, is not
expedient. For not every thing, that is lawful, is presently also expedient and
edifying. Very often the weakness of others ought to give law to our liberty:
and not seldom also the importuneness of others, who have an itch after or unto
variances, brablings, and contradictions, and are pleased with the opportunity
of strife and contention upon every occasion. To the one we must not give
occasion of offense, lest they fall: From the other we must withhold all
encouragements, lest they hurt themselves and others. For in this manner we
ought always to shun all endangerings of the Faithful, especially of the weak,
lest we abuse our liberty to the destruction of any one, but use it aright and
to the edification of all. But in things not altogether necessary, and amongst
those, whom the Scripture calls perfect, and who have their senses exercised
in the Scriptures to discern between what is true and false, or who are more
then ordinarily desirous of Truth that is more abstruse, this liberty may
always have or take place without offense or danger. For their industry indeed
is sharpened by moderate contradictions, which are as it were the Whetstones of
Truth, and from which, as from the striking or beating of Flints against each
other, this Fruit is drawn or produced, that either they see clearly that
error that formerly lay hid, or are more solidly confirmed in the truth they
hold. Which fruit cannot but afterward redound unto the whole Church, and that
to the eminent promoting of truth and the glory of Gods name. But to digladiate
or strive with gain-sayings before the people out of the Pulpit, and to desire
or endeavor by the vellications or twitchings of public Forms, and
Obtrectations or Back-bitings out of the Desk or Pue, to make a Tumult among
the rude common people, or by public Writings to traduce and contumeliously to
provoke and inveigh against others, would be next unto madness, and most
scandalous and dangerous. Nor indeed can the knowledge of an unnecessary truth
ever do so much good, as the importune and immodest inculcating or urging
thereof may do harm and prejudice both publicly and privately. And thus far
concerning the first caution diligently to be observed in Confessions.

The second thing that is to be observed Nor bands of Consciences.
as to the right use of Forms, flows from the first: if to wit there be not
contrived of such Forms of Confessions and Declarations certain Spiritual
Bonds, Stocks and Fetters, whereunto the Consciences. Tongues and Pens of the
Declarers be not so tied and fastened, that none may recede from the phrases
thereof, manner of speaking, order, method, etc. but that he is also forthwith
suspected and accused of Heterodoxie, who is found to expound the Divine
Scripture, and sentiments of his own mind, in other expressions or other order
or method, then what are expressed in them, i.e. in those Forms of Confessions.
For by this means that liberty, which so long as the truth of the Senses or
Meanings themselves remain safe, ought to continue whole and entire to all
Believers in their expounding the Scriptures, as they shall judge meet, for the
greatest furtherance of the Truth, and edifying of Churches, is not only cast
out of doors and banished out of the Church, but also the authority of the Word
of God is secretly and as it were by mines supplanted and overthrown by the
same. For it can hardly otherwise be, but that where the expressions of such
Forms begin to be of more account than those of the Word of God it self, there
the Authority of the Word of God should by degrees grow vile, and sink in
estimation beneath those Forms. And indeed if we will but mind it, the chief,
and happily first step, whereby humane Forms ascended to the height of an usurped
Authority and Majesty almost Divine, was this, that at the first they
attributed to the phrases, words, order and method thereof more than was meet;
as if in them all senses to be believed, hoped and practiced, were more
clearly, briefly and substantially expressed, than in those which we meet with in
the Scriptures. For from hence has the esteem of them by little and little
been increased, and that of the Scriptures lessened: insomuch that according to
the words, phrases, yea almost syllables and ^etters of the said Forms, and
according to ^he method and peculiar order of the same ^hey began to determine
and declare ^ouching the truth and falseness of almost ^ll Opinions and
Meanings; as if that ^ould not be true, which did not exact^y and in every
thing agree with them, and as if he could not be free from Heri^ie, or at least
from error and falsehood, who should (though never so modestly) contradict
them, or go but a straws ^readth from them, yea that should not ^lmost swear
unto the words thereof. The which pernicious abuse, and so manifest a
corruption and inconvenience to withstand and prevent, we ought at all times
earnestly and almost only to inculate or repeat, that such Forms of
Declarations are not made for that end for to teach, that the Senses or
Meanings of Christian Religion may or ought most commodiously to be expressed
in this order, in this method, in these phrases or manners of speaking, and not
in others; but that in or by them they may be expressed rightly and
commodiously enough, or that in the judgment of those very Men that make such
Confessions, they are very exactly and truly contained in them. For so to use
them will not be a matter of absolute necessity, but of mere liberty; and he
that uses them, will indeed do well, and yet he will not be judged to do ill
that uses them not, especially if he receive the sum of saving doctrine
delivered in them, and do not condemn those who That they are not limits nor
bounds within which Religion is to be shut up.
in this point dissent.

The third thing, which flows from those things that have been already spoken
of, necessary unto the right use of Forms, is this, That these Forms be not at
any time held for limits and bounds, within which Religion and the saving
knowledge of God is believed in such manner to consist, as if they, who cannot
in conscience assent to them or give their voice for them, were therefore
excluded from Salvation, and shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven. Far be that
from us, who firmly believe that Christians may unwittingly err in many things
without the loss of Salvation, and who judge that there are very few things,
that are precisely necessary to be known and believed for the obtaining Eternal
Life. Wherefore that we may demonstrate that this proud cruelty is exceeding
far from us, we do openly show and declare, that Forms of Confessions and
Declarations are to be had in no other respect or account, than for certain
Ensigns and Standards set up, whereby they declare, who set them forth, that
they judge, that those Senses, which are contained in those Forms, do come very
near the Truth, and therefore, unless they were taught better, do heartily
desire and wish, that all others that are desirous of Truth and Peace would
embrace them, not indeed properly for this end, that so at length they might be
saved, but that they might withdraw themselves from the danger of erring to the
greatest distance may be. For neither ought it to seem enough to a Christian,
to make toward Eternal Salvation by every means and in every way whatsoever:
the safest and surest is to be chosen, except happily a just fear of some greater
danger or scandal in the Church hinder the same. For the good of Eternal
Hapiness and of an immortal life ought to be of so great price with him, that
he ought to hate and carefully to shun all dangers, which may turn away, or
withdraw his mind from embracing the same. Nor has he any reason to fear, that
he does therefore abet and patronize Schism, which the Apostle calls a work
of the flesh. For if he happily depart from some Congregations to others, he does
not forthwith contemn those, which he leaves, or judge them as excluded from
the hope of Salvation, but only goes from those that are more impure to those
that are more pure, that he may show, that he has a care and tender regard of
every truth any ways serving to his own Salvation, and approve his Conscience
unto God and our Lord Jesus Christ. Nevertheless in the mean while he does his
endeavor sedulously to maintain Peace and Concord with all that are truly
pious, as far as is possible, and to testify his moderation, or (...).
aequanimity, to all that are good.

And indeed if Forms of Confessions (...)
and Declarations be drawn up with these bounds and as it were sacred limits o^
their right use, they will be judged no^ only not unlawful or hurtful, but on
the contrary most peofitable and wholesome ^o the Christian Commonwealth, yea
and also sometimes necessary. From ^hence, they who would have them not ^nly
not necessary, but unprofitable, and ^onsequently unlawful and hurtful, are
^orthy to be thought to cast an uncivil ^eproach upon them. For so far are they
^f themselves from derogating any thing from the Majesty of the Scriptures,
that ^s, from their perfection and clearness, that on the contrary the true
authority ^hereof is no less confirmed and establish^d by them, than by
Prophesyings, or Expositions of the Scriptures. For seeing their truth, both as
to their sense, man^er of expression, and method, is to be ^sserted and
maintained from the Scrip^ures themselves, yea seeing the said very ^orms do
profess, that all and every one ^ay and ought freely to do the same, and
^onsequently do remit or send us back from themselves to the Scriptures, and
^xpresly command us to appeal to them ^lone in all Controversies whatsoever,
^ertainly they ought not to be thought ^o confer unto the shaking or
subverting, ^ut on the contrary to the establishing of ^he Authority of the
Scriptures. Not do they in the least prejudice the liberty of Churches, since
none is precisely bound unto them, yea seeing it is freely granted to every one
to try them by the Standard of the Word of God; lastly, seeing every one may
without danger or fear contradict them sobeit only there be a careful regard
had of Prudence, Charity and Modesty. Nor indeed do they open any gap to
Schisms and Separations. For neither is he to be thought to make a Schism, that
joyneth himself to those Assemblies, wherein he sees greater purity of
Doctrine, and Holiness of life to flourish and thrive, sobeit he do no^ proudly
despise other Assemblies, and forthwith judge them excluded out of Heaven, or
from the Hope of Eternal Life, whom he sees somewhat more estranged from his
own Society. For Christian Peace and Concord may continue entire, yea and also
ought, amongst Congregations divided and distinguished in or by Opinions, so
that the fault be not in us, that all those, who hitherto hold all things
necessary to Salvation, and do not obstinately press Doctrines or Opinions
prejudicial to Godliness, do no^ agree together, and embrace each other with
mutual Charity and brotherly Love in the Lord Jesus. But if we hinder those
Churches from growing together and being consolidated into one body, which
might and ought to grow and be consolidated together, or if being united and
joined together, we unnecessarily divide them, and separate them into parties,
then indeed make we our selves guilty of Schism, and deserve to be impeached
with God of disturbing Peace and Concord: which is so true, that the Apostle
seems no less to make or prove them guilty of Schism, who gloried that they
were of Christ, no less, I say, at least, than 1 Cor. ^ 12.
others, who said that they were of Paul, or of Apollos, or Cephas, for that
those despised these in comparison of themselves, and did as it were think it
scorn that they should be compared with them, yea did reject them as it were
strangers from Christ. Insomuch that the desire of Truth, though the best and
wholsomest, does not excuse any Man from the crime of Schism, at least before
God himself, unless it be accompanied with a true love of Peace and Concord,
and an endeavor after mutual good will. For of so great price with God is the
true Peace and Concord of his Church, that he is even displeased with a
seditious Truth, or a schismatical and turbulent manner of propagating the same.

And yet we deny not, but that it may Of b^waring of an accidental abuse.
and does usually sometimes fall out, that in tract of time those like Forms
obtain greater veneration and honor than is meet, and at length, unless there
be diligent provision made aforehand, and the growing evil sedulously looked
unto or bewared of, do very easily degenerate into Idols and Bands of
Conscience and Ensigns or Badges of Schism: Yet because all this is wont to
fall out by accident, we must not from thence make judgment of them: seeing
that is not the fault of the Forms themselves, but of those, who according to
the preposterous diligence, or rather malice of their own disposition, do upon
occasion abuse them; and seeing the true value of things is not to be taken
from the right or perverse and ill use of them. For he that is evil and
imprudent may sometimes abuse in the wor^t sort the very best things, as on the
contrary, a good and prudent Man may use well a thing that is evil and hurtful
in it self, and improve it for a wholesome remedy at some turns. Furthermore in
the next place, it hardly falls out, but that, if such Forms of Declarations
be not sometimes set forth, a wide gap is opened unto other miscarriages and
inconveniences, if not more grievous, yet at least alike and equal, and a way
is easily paved unto a dissolute licentiousness of foolishly venting every
thing, at least no better than tyranny: Lastly seeing by that means, which we
have spoken of, we may timously withstand those miscarriages and
inconveniences, which some think will arise from thence. For if those, who
have thought meet to set forth Confessions and Declarations of their belief,
had always kept within the said use of them, they had never had place given
them for their excessive authority in the Church. But after that an exact
account ceased to be had thereof, their Authority began by little and little,
and as it were by degrees to be advanced, insomuch that the Consciences, Eyes,
Tongues and Pens of Men became to depend on them, as upon certain Standards,
and undoubted Rules of Faith. Whence afterward it came to pass, that some by
means of them, as it were by certain letters of Heralds at Arms, have
denounced War against all other Congregations, and that they might have no hope
of reconcilement left them, the assemblies of Christians thereby have been
divided and separated one from another, even as Empires heretofore by
Boundaries, and Enemies Camps by Trenches and Bulwarks. Lastly, which is the
utmost line of Tyranny, that they have punished those, who did contradict these
Forms with Force and Sword, and that with so great a zeal and heat, yea fury,
that, when profane Persons, Ungodly, Dispisers of the Scriptures and Atheists
are upon very easy terms pardoned, these alone are destined to Prisons, Racks,
Wheels, Gallowses, Crosses, Flames, and all the most exquisite punishments and
torments imaginable, and all for this only end, that the Authority of these
Forms may be freed from contradiction, and vindicated from contempt, and by
that means forsooth the outward Peace of the Church, and quiet of the
Commonwealth may be preserved undisturbed. The which way of procedure, as it
ought most justly to be hated and abominated of all Christians, so has it all
along exceedingly disliked us, who indeed religiously fear to give or grant to
any Writings, Decrees or Ordinances of Men any Authority whatever either
directive or coactive in matters relating to Faith and Conscience, or to suffer
the same to be given by others.

From hence, pious Reader, thou The scope of this Confession.
wilt easily understand, what was our end and aim, which we propounded to our
selves in setting forth this Declaration. Indeed, the very same we said before,
and none other. For this Declaration is not put forth to that intent, that
thereby a new snare of Consciences should be prepared, or a constant Square and
Rule of Faith and Doctrine prescribed to any, to wit, which should absolutely
bind the Consciences of Men before God, and therefore none should depart from
it even in the least, to wit, neither in Matter nor in Words, nay nor in method
or manner of Teaching. Far be so proud a vanity from us, who know that this
honor agrees not with any Writings of Men, how accurate soever, and
diligently, and long and much considered, but only with the Word of God
contained in the Holy Scriptures; and who both know that from the abuse of such
Writings, which is too frequent and too common, new Schisms, Sects,
Condemnations, Persecutions, and other Scandals of that kind have more often
arisen, and do seriously bewail the same. And this was our principal aim, To
satisfy the often earnest requests of those, who judged that we owed this
Service both to the Church and Commonwealth, and indeed for to promote the
Public good, that is, both for the more ample illustrating the Truth of God,
and for the the more happy procuring and on every side propagating of Peace in
them both. Another end is, that we might by this means the more commodiously
vindicate the truth of our Opinions and our Innocence against the inique
accusations of those, who when as themselves hold grievous and very hurtful
errors, among others, that in the first place concerning fatal Predestination,
and other points annexed thereto, (as also concerning the killing of Heretics)
yet will be thought the only Orthodox Men, and the altogether pure Reformed,
and stick not to fasten upon us not only Errors, but also Heresies and
Blaspemies, yea who while themselves exercise new dominion in the Church, and
do not only cause Schisms and Sects, but do also every where raise up direful
Persecutions and Banishments against harmless Men, do nevertheless complain of
us (whom having in part indeed cited in their Conventicle of Dort, they very
lately condemned, yet unheard, and without making our defense) more than
Calumniously as of the true Authors forsooth of all the Scandals and
Disturbances, that have been hitherto made in the Belgic Churches. For the
fuller conviction therefore of these Men, before God and the whole Christian
World, of their manifest calumny, and manifold injustice hitherto used against
us, and withal for the truer information of all that are pious, and lovers or
studious of the Truth of God and the Churches Peace, we have thought not
without weighty and just cause, that we were bound to set forth this public
and unanimous Declaration of our judgment touching almost the whole Christian
Religion. In the framing indeed whereof we have first of all diligently
endeavored, that there might not be omitted therein any Opinion or Doctrine,
either necessary, or very useful, and that there might not be any thing, either
false, or confused, or lastly any thing idle and superfluous contained in the
same. But that it might comprehend in it the very form of sound, or rather of
healing words, which abundantly express unto us Christian Faith and Piety, both
briefly and plainly, and no less methodically, and as it were in a brief survey
hold forth the whole thereof to be viewed of all: and that by the unanimous
consent of all the Brethren, (not so much as excepting those who are held shut
up in Goals) all which jointly and severally diligently read it before, and in
the fear of the Lord examined it by the rule of the Holy Scripture, as far as
they might by reason of the iniquity of the times, and at length with one Heart
and one Mouth did all approve of it.

And indeed we have called it not only Against the Calumni^s of some.
a Confession of our Faith, but also a Declaration of our Mind and Judgment,
for that such a Declaration promises somewhat more full and pregnant, than a
bare Confession of Faith alone does: For indeed we were willing to satisfy the
hope and expectation of those, who desired a more copious, full, and clear
exposition or unfolding of our Judgment concerning for the most part all the
Articles of the Christian Religion: and withal also to put a bolt upon the
mouth of those, who having nothing justly to carp at in us, would persuade the
people, that we would never agree together upon any common, clear and uniform
Judgment touching the chief heads of Religion: that we did conceal some things,
of which we were ashamed to give our judgment in public, and that they were
such, which did overthrow the very chief heads, and as it were the (...), the
Tenths or chief of the Spoils of Christianity: or if we did sometimes also
publish or utter these, that we did hide and cover them, by obscure doubtful
and uncertain expressions, or some general and deceitful coverings of words.

This false accusation of theirs, although long since elsewhere often detected
and sufficiently refuted by us, yet had we rather obviate it even by a public
and general Declaration of our Belief, than by other means more liable to
calumny. So secure is a good Conscience and the Confidence of a good Cause,
which we have thought worth our while, even upon this occasion publicly to
declare. And this among others was a cause, why we conceived or framed it not
in mere Scripture-Words, lest we should indeed nourish that suspicion, to wit,
that we sought lurking Holes, and hid, as some indeed think, mischievous and
profane meanings under an equivocal covering of the words of the Sacred
Scripture: and that we might by this means cut off all new matter of
calumniating from those, whose solemn study and chief labor it is to blur and
stain, under any pretense or color whatsoever, the credit and good name of the
Remonstrants with heinous reproaches, or at least with sinister suspicions.

As to thorny and too subtle questions, Of the matter of this Confession.
which are proper to your Universities and Schools, and which neither advantage
the knower, nor prejudice the ignorant, we have purposedly waved them, leaving
them to idle and to curious Wits, and which are troubled with an incurable evil
habit of disputing, to whom it is matter of pleasure to make show of their
acuteness; and from this kind of paste, made to comfort the stomach with, to
seek or purchase to themselves the petty Garland of Victory. We have bestowed
our time and service on that Truth alone, which is according to Godliness, and
indeed in conjunction with an ingenuous and open simplicity, the which even the
Unlearned may understand, and the Learned ought not to disdain. Lastly, we have
thought it best and safest, to keep within the bounds of things necessary, and
in our judgment profitable, waving and passing all other things of set purpose,
and that indeed the more commodiously to avoid both the extremes, towit, the
excess, and the defect. For neither Against the third sort of dissenters.
do we like their Opinion, who will have nothing contained in Confessions and
Declarations, but what is precisely necessary to be known and believed. We have
thought it meet to have a regard o^ those things that are profitable also,
especially of those, which in this kind excel the rest, and as it were lead and
guide the Family. For these, like Spurs and Goads, mightily excite and put
forward the will, the more freely and* cheerfully to mind and endeavor after a
love and observation of those things that are necessary. From hence we se it
sometimes come to pass, that some things, which are not indeed precisely
necessary to Salvation, do nevertheless draw after them strong motions of
minds, and do strongly incline and bow by their weight our affections and whole
will to this side o^ part or to the other, so that he who sets his foot less
aright, or less firmly in them, is upon a light occasion put by the staydness
of a right mind, and easily like a restless wave, driven this way and that way.
Wherefore although it be not absolutely necessary for all to know them, yet to
be willing not to know, or sometimes to be simply ignorant of them, is
dangerous, and often times very hurtful.

And we have directed all things to the What heads her^ are chiefly expounded,
and why.
practice of Christian Piety. For we believe that true Divinity is merely
practical, and not either simply, or for its greatest or chiefer part
speculative, and therefore whatever things are delivered therein, ought to be
referred thither only, that a man may be the more strongly and fitly inflamed
and encouraged to a diligent performance of his duty, and keeping of the
Commandments of Jesus Christ. For it is a dry, decayed, barren, and
consequently spurious Divinity, which consists within the bounds of an empty
speculation, and mere contemplation, and which, after it has a long time
greatly wearyed the diligence of every the most vigilant, and with pain
exercised his wit only, does not yet reach to his will, and beget therein a due
obedience unto God; and therefore works not in us a true and saving knowledge
of God and Christ. For he that says, that he knows God, and 1 John. 2. 4.
and keeps not his Commandments, he is a liar, and the Truth is not in him.
The first therefore and chiefest praise of Theology consists in this, that it
bows the Heart of Man unto an Obedience toward God, and so inclines or bends
that part of us, which God has endowed with a natural liberty, and made as it
were to be at its own pleasure and dispose, that it do again of its own accord
subject it self wholly unto God, and abandoning the former abuse of its own
liberty, does only follow the ducture of the will of God. All other things,
unless they be directed to this mark, are before God vain and frivolous, and of
themselves of the least price, and consequently in a manner nothing to be
esteemed. The knowledge therefore of them, is neither necessary, nor profitable
farther, than so far as i^ may and is wont to serve unto this principal scope
or design.

For this very cause also, those things Of the five controverted points in
Holland.
which pertain to the five Articles, as they call them, to wit of
Predestination, and the heads annexed thereto, we have somewhat more largely
expounded them, and here and there diligently intermingle^ with other things.
For if there be any Articles of our Faith, which are very profitable, and in a
manner absolutely necessary unto practice, or for the inculcating and begetting
in us an observation* or keeping of the Commands of Jesus Christ, these at
least are to be accounted such. For these are every where and diversely
scattered or spread abroad through out the whole body of Divinity, as certain
nourishments, yea as it were Sinews, small strings, A^teries and Veins, whereby
our Spirit is effectually moved unto the exercise of Piety, and kept, nourished
and cherished, yea continually carried and put forward in the same: and so
consequently strongly engaged unto a continual progress therein. Which also was
the cause, why we have every where here and there, where the matter so
required, with reasons also added, openly rejected ^he contrary Articles
unhappily established in the Synod of Dort, as some unhappy cockle-weed and
tares that are very hurtful to true Piety and Holiness, yea ^s the foul blots
and spots of the Christi^n Religion, which all pious people ought ^o otherwise
to detest, then botches and ^mposthumes, wholly sucking up the whole ^uice,
blood and vigor of Goodness and Honesty, and drawing them out of our souls, to
nourish themselves. For there ^s nothing so much an Enemy to Religion, as that
fictitious fate of Predestination, and unavoidable necessity of obeying and
offending. We had yet another cause of this our doing, to wit, that by this
means we might testify and declare to the whole Christian World, how just and
weighty causes moved us, why we impugned their Opinion, who obstinately and
stiffly urged the said fatal Predestination, as the chief basis, as indeed it
is, or (...).
pillar, and ground of their Religion, and refused to tolerate in our
Netherlands their brethren that dissent with them about the same, to wit,
because, if indeed it be considered by its self and according to its genuine
disposition and tendency, we saw that it was greatly hurtful to Religion and
Piety: and then that we might leave it to all godly Men to judge, whether we any
way deserved, upon that account to be so unworthily and ignominiously dealt
with by the Synod of Dort, to be dismissed with reproach, to be put out of our
places, to be taken and vioiently haled from our Churches, though never so much
against their wills; and furthermore afterward by the most Illustrious Lords,
the Lord, States General, which were but a little before every where after an
unusual manner for a great part altered and changed, to be cast out of our
Country, and Banished for ever, for that, being moved only with Religion and
Conscience, we could not promise, that we would keep in everlasting silence
that our Opinion, and that we would no where, whether privately or publicly,
whether directly or indirectly, whether upon occasion sought, or offered,
disseminate the same, or inculcate it upon our Churches; being in other
respects ready to perform and discharge all the duties of good Citizens and
Subjects together with our Countrymen: concerning both which proceedings, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, no doubt but God and his Church in their due time
will ^udg far otherwise, than our adversaries desire or expect.

Lastly, we have no where added to Against rash Anathema's.
^his our Confession the direful Anathema's, i. e. cursings of men's persons,
and that (a sorrow it is to speak it) too ^hread-bare worn, Damnamus, We
condemn; but have everywhere only bare^y, or simply spoken our Opinion or
Mind, or with a moderate rejecting of certain errors added thereunto: Not that
we religiously fear, to denounce an Anathema there, where the holy Spirit of
God goes before us by his own example* For with the Apostle Paul, we doubt not
Gal. 1. 8.
to bid Anathema to Angels and Men, if they preach any other Gospel than what
has been preached: Yea further with 1 Cor. 16. 22.
the same, We bid Anathema Maran-ath^ unto all that love not the Lord Jesus
Christ, that is, to ungodly, prophan^ and Atheistical persons. But where we
have not the Spirit of God going before us, there we upon good right demur^ and
withold our assent, and do bot^ beg and grant pardon by course, remembering
that, which our Savior advises us; Judge not, that ye be not judged: and Mat.
7. 1.
which the Apostle, Judge not any thing 1 Cor. 4. 5.
before the time, until the Lord come, wh^ will bring to light the hidden
things of darkness, and make manifest the Councils ^ Men's Hearts, and then
shall every Man have praise of God. Hence we do not easily denounce an Anathema
to him, who we believe is held with a pure mere error, if he be otherwise
pious, fearing God, and studious of a good Conscience and Divine Truth; that
is, if he seem to us to love the Lord Jesus, and highly to prize his Gospel, by
which alone he is willing to maintain his error, through which he ignorantly
errs. For we know, how ready a matter it is, in so great a multitude of
Opinions, so great a company of those that err, so great a variety of wits or
dispositions, so great a plenty of hindrances and scruples, so great weakness
of judgments, in such to slip and err: and how easy it is by arguments true in
appearance to be deceived, and mistaken: how harmless also it is in it self to
err and to mistake in many things: how great also clemency and kindness God is
like to use toward such as simply err, who pardons and remitteth even
willful sins themselves to those that repent, and how aliene or far from the
gentle and meek disposition of our Lord Jesus it is, not to pity those that
stray: Lastly how sad and tragical disturbances that both rash and proud
confidence of condemning has at all times occasioned and made. For Anathema's
are wont to provoke Anathema's, and where this chance is once cast, all is past,
and there is an end of all hope of remedy. For the direful hatreds of parties
succeed, and the reins of hatreds being let loose, they An exhortation to the
study of peace, moderation and forbearance.
commonly at length with deadly and spiteful minds rush upon the slaughtering
and Butchering of one another, and the last fruit of these Condemnings and
Anathematizings is, an everlasting despair of cure. That we might therefore
avoid these mischiefs, we have carefully and purposely forborne Anathema's,
deeming it sufficient ingenously to have spoken the Truth, and to have showed
the error: leaving in the mean time unto others a free judgment touching every
error, and the greatness of the error, but chiefly to him, who alone judges
righteously, and searches the Hearts and 1 Pet. 2. 23. Apoc. 2. 23.
Reins of Men. We have already sufficiently sacrificed to unseasonable
Anathema's, and to those direful forms of sentencing to punishment each other:
we condemn, we execrate and curse, etc. It is now time, that we sacrifice to
Christian Concord, Meekness and Charity. After so many sad and dismal cursings,
whereby on every side the fierceness of hatreds and mortal fallings out has
been irritated and exasperated, let us lay aside such Enemy-like and
exulcerated Minds, and by gentleness, by long-suffering, by kindness, by the
Holy Spirit of Christ, by love unfeigned, by the word of Truth, by the power of
God, by the Armor of Righteousness, on the right hand, and on the left, after
the example of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of his Apostles, let us fight against
Errors, that to our utmost power we may save those that err, and de^iver them
out of the danger of Eternal Jam. 2. 1. Ma. 2. 3. 10.
Perdition. Let us not be many masters: for one is our Master: Let us assent to
or approve of the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that doctrine 1 Timothy 6. 4, 5.
which is according to Godliness: Let us shun vain questions, and strifes of
words, from which arise envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, perverse
disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, supposing that
gain is godliness: Let not us condemn, or shut out of the Communion of the
Church those that Christ does not condemn, nor shut out of his Kingdom. Again,
let us not become the Servants of Men, but withal neither let us be Lords over
Phil. 4. 5.
the Faith of others. Let our moderation appear unto all, and in modesty and
mutual charity bear with one another, being certainly persuaded, that none is
lightly to be condemned, or blotted out of the register of Christians, that
holds fast his Faith in Christ, and in hope of the good things promised by him,
does seek from the heart to obey his Commands, though in the mean time he err
in many things, tha^ in some sort or other concern Religion* the which holy and
worthily to be praise^ moderation or equanimity, when the be^^ and greatest God
shall have inspired the hearts either of all, or at least of the most of those,
who bear rule in Churche^ and Commonwealths with, then at leng^^ the Truth of
the Gospel will every where flourish, and an holy peace in the Lord, an^
Concord will set up a settled place of a^ bode among all that are truly Godly
The which that it may shortly comet^ pass in the whole World, especially in the
Christian, but most of all in the Reformed, we humbly beseech of God through
Jesus Christ in Spirit and Truth. These things thus premised, we shall now com^
directly to the heads of our Declaration as those which we would have alwaye^
joined by an indissoluble tie with thi^ very Preface.

The Confession or Declaration of the Ministers or Pastors, which in the
United Provinces are called Remonstrants, concerning the chief points of
Christian Religion.
CHAP. 1. Of the Sacred Scripture, and its Authority, Perfection, and
Perspicuity.
1. WHosoever desires to worship The Foundation of Religion, is Faith in God.
God aright, and certainly and undoubtedly to be everlastingly saved, he must
of necessity first of all Heb. 11. 6.
believe, that God is, and that he is a bounteous rewarder of those that seek
him: and therefore must conform himself according to that Rule and Square,
which it is Mat. 7. 21. Gal. 6. 16.
undoubtedly manifest was delivered, and prescribed by the true God himself,
the supreme Lawgiver, and established upon the promise of Eternal Life.

2. That God is, Heb. ^. 1. 1 John 1. 18.
and that he has at The Revelation of the Godhead in the Old and New Testament.
sundry times, and in diverse manners spoken in times past unto the Fathers by
the Prophets; and that he has at length in the last^ ^^mes most fully declared
and manifested his last Will by his only-begotten Son, has been a thing
confirmed by Heb. 2. 3, 4. Deuteronomy. 29. per totum. Act. 2. 22. 1 These. 1. 5. and 1 John 1. 1, 3.
so many and great Proofs, Signs, Wonders, mighty Deeds or Works, Gifts or
Distributions of the Holy Ghost, and other wonderful Effects, and certain
Events of several Prophesies, and Testimonies of Men worthy of belief, that any
more certain, more substantial, and more complete cannot be given, or justly
desired.

3. The whole Declaration of the Divine The Canonical Books of the Old
Testament.
Will, which pertains unto Religion, is contained in the Books of the Old and
New Testaments, and indeed authentically only in those, which are called
Canonical, or which it can upon no just ground be doubted, but that they were
written or approved of by those Men, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17. 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21.
who were inspired with, and instructed and guided by Gods Holy Spirit: such as
in the Old Testament, are Luke 16. 29. and 24. 27, 45, 46, 47. Act. 17. 2, 3.
and 24. 14. and 26. 22, 23. Romans 1. 2.
the five Books of Moses, the Book of Joshua, Judges, Ruth, the two Books of
Samuel, two of the Kings, two of the Chronicles, (or Paralipomena, i. e. things
omitted or past by) Esdras, Nehemiah, Ehster, also Job, the Psalms of David,
the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, the Song of Songs, the four greater Prophets, to
wit, Esaias, Jeremiah, with his Lamentations, Ezekiel, and Daniel: the twelve
lesser Prophets, to wit, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum,
Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi.

4. In the New Testament there are The Books of the New Testament.
the four Evangelists, Luke 1. 1, 2, 3. Joh. 19. 35. and 20. 31. Act. 1. 1. and
diverse other places.
Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John; the Acts of the Apostles; the Epistles of Paul,
to wit, 2 Pet. 3. 15, 16. 1 These. 2. 2. and Ephesians. 2. and 3. 17.
to the Romans, the former and latter to the Corinthians, to the Galatians, to
the Ephesians, to the Philippians, to the Colossians, to the Thessalonians two,
two to Timothy, to Titus, to Philemon; also the Epistle to ^he Hebrews; one
Epistle of James, 2 Pet. 3. 1. 1. Joh. 1. 1, 2, 3. 4.
two of Peter, of John three, of Jude one: lastly the Rev. 1. 1. and 22. 18,
19. with other places. The certainty of both.
Revelation.

5. That all the said Books were written or approved of by Men Divine, and no^
to be excepted against, has in forme^ times been clearly found and proved by
so many, and so certain and evident Testimonies and Proofs, that there can
nothing further justly or reasonably be desired. For though at sometimes ther^
has been made some doubt of some fe^ of them, to wit, whether they were penn'^
or approved of by those very Authour^ whose names they bear, yet at length the
matter being more narrowly examined, and the truth searched into, it has been
abundantly evicted, that they were indeed and in truth penned or approved o^ by
Divine Men, and those whose Authority was infallible, and credit undoubted of
with all Believers.

6. Besides the said Books of the Old* The Apochryphal Books.
Testament, there are others also, which have been now long since had in great
esteem with many, commonly called Apochryphal, the which although they are not
of force to confirm Doctrines of Faith, yet may they (though some more, some
less) profitably be, and are usually read for the proficiency of Faith and
Life; such as are Tobie, Judith, Baruch, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, the third and
fourth of Esdras, three Books of the Maccabees, and certain additions unto
Esther and Daniel, which are commonly known.

7. That the Doctrine contained in Arguments for the certainty and truth of the
Scriptures.
the Books of the New Testament (by which also the Truth and Dignity of the Old
Testament is abundantly establshed and confirmed) is altogether True and
Divine, is not only clear and evident from its being written or allowed of by
the said Divine Men, we named before, and its being delivered by them unto the
Churches; nor from its being confirmed and established or ratified by Act. 5.
11, 13, 14, 15. Heb. 2. 3, 4. Act. 10: 37, 38, 39.
diverse and innumerable miracles and mighty deeds, Signs and Prodigies,
exceeding all humane and Angelical Wisdom and Power, and furthermore by the
Act. 2. 14, etc. Act. 5. 29, 30, 31, 32.
glorious Resurrection from the dead of the first Author of it, even our Lord
Jesus Christ, and his Exaltation asserted by many irrefragable Testimonies and
Proofs; but also even chiefly from its containing precepts so transcendently
Mat. 5. 6, 7, 8. chapters.
perfect, righteous, just and holy, that any more perfect, just, equal and holy
cannot be devised or though^ of; and promises 2 Pet. 1. 4. Heb. 8. 6. 2 Cor. 7.
1.
so exceeding Great* Rich and Precious, that neither the mind of Men, nor
Angels can conceive of any more Excellent, more Divine an^ Worthy of God. To
which the admirable Romans 10. 18. 1 Cor. 2. 3, 4. 2 Cor. 3. throughout. 2 Cor.
4. 2, 3, 4, 5. etc. 2 Cor. 6. 4, 5, etc. Col. 1. 6. 23. Act. 5. 14, etc. Act.
19. 11, 12. and so following.
force and efficacy of the Doctrine it self adds no small weight, to wit,
tha^ it, although such an enemy and so ungrateful to the flesh, was by a very
few Apostles, and they plain, simple, weak Men, Men most aliene or free from
no^ only the crime, but also the very suspicion of all simulation and forgery;
Me^ advantaged by no helps of Worldly Eloquence, of no renown upon any accounts
of humane Authority; without force, without arms, only by the persuasion of
Reasons and Arguments, and demonstration of the Spirit; withal by men armed
merely with Innocence, Sanctity of Life and Patience, in a very short time, in
all places, (though the whole Kingdom of Satan and all the World almost made
resistance and head against it) was wonderfully disseminated, and so spread it
self far and wide on every side into all quarters, that innumerable myriads of
men, of all ranks, Orders, and Conditions, not only of ignorant or private men,
but of the most learned and wise not a few, leaving their ancient and
countrey-rites and Religions, in which they were born and bred, without any
hope of any Earthly advantage (nay but rather with a certain expectation of
afflictions, ignominy and all manner of dangers and miseries) did most
constantly adhere and cleave thereunto: yea so far did the force hereof
prevail, that all other* Religions else, although every where established by
humane power and force, the Jewish only excepted, because that was of God, did
almost wholly vanish, and became extinct at the rising brightness of the same.
A Prolepsis, or prevention, and answering of an objection touching the
Testimony of the Church.


8. And although indeed the primitive Church, which was in the Apostles days,
might most certainly know, and undoubtedly also did know, that these Luke 1. 1.
Col. 4. 16. 1 These. 5. 27. and 2 These. 3. 17.
Books were written, or at least approved of by the Apostles; and delivered as
it were from hand to hand the knowledge hereof unto us, and deposited or left
the same with us as a certain pledge in trust; yet do we not therefore hold
these Books for True and Divine, because the primitive Church has by its
uncontrollable Judgment judged them true, or that they contain in them Divine
Senses or Meanings, and has by its infallible Authority decreed, that they be
held or accounted for such. For first, it was not necessary that the Church by
its Judgment should define, and by its Authority determine, that those Books,
which were written or approved of by the Apostles, were true and Divine, or of
God, or no: for that, both before, and without all such manner of Judgment, was
altogether certain and undoubted of by all Christians both in general and
particular: insomuch that as soon as any one of them knew, that any thing was
written or approved of by the Apostles, he might even Ephesians. 2. 20. Act. 2. 42.
and 1 These. 2. 13.
thereby, and of right ought to know, that the same was true and of God or
Divine, and needed not any other Judgment in the case. In the next place,
neither indeed could such a judgment of the Church suffice; seeing no Man can
be certain, no not so much as probably, of the being of any Church, unto which
such an Authority is said to belong, except he be first assured, that those
books* wherein the said Authority is said to be given or assigned to the
Church, are true and Divine: and seeing he cannot know and determine for
certain, that any Church is the true Church of Christ, Romans 10. 14, 15, 16, 1^.
Joh. ^0. 3, 4, 27. 1 P^t. 1. 23, 24, 25. and chap. 2. 1, 2, 3, etc.
if he be not already undoubtedly sure and certain before, that, whatsoever is
contained in the said Books, the same is true and from God: for by virtue of
that very Faith or Belief, whereby the Church embraces or receives that as
true, ^he her self finally obtains and has her being a true Church. And if
indeed such an Authority as this agrees not with the very first primitive
Church it self; much less ought we to believe, that it belongs to any Church at
this day, or any indeed succeeding that first and primitive one.

9. The Doctrine therefore contained The Auth^^ty of the (...). (...) 1. 2, 3.
Heb. 1. 1.
in these Books is of it self altogether Authentic, and indeed of Authority
Divine, and uncontrollable: and by reason of the infallible v^racity of God,
deserves altogether and challenges undoubted Credit and Belief, and by virtue
of its autocratorical or absolute and supreme Power, most humble Obedience D^^t
4. 2. and ^^. 32* ^ Tim. ^. 15. ^ Pet. ^. ^.
from us. And whatsoever Doctrine or Tradition wants this privilege of being of
a Supreme and Divine Revelation, it has not by any Right, either the same, or
the like Authority with it: much less that, which either decrees any thing
else, (either contrary to it, or diverse from it) and that by an usurpt
Authority, Mat. 15. 9. and 16. 6. Gal. 1 8, 9.
or at least otherwise than is contained in writing in these Books, commands
it to be declared, or being declared to be believed* upon the pain and peril of
the loss of Salvation: since God can neither contradict himself; and no
Authority, either Humane, or Angelical ought to be equalled to the Divine.

10. And now because such Divine-like The Sacred Scripture is the only Rule of
Controversies of Faith.
Authority as this belongs unto, and agrees with these very Books only; it
is therefore even withal necessary, that by them Isa. 8. 20. Act. 17. 11.
alone, as by Touchstones and firm and umovable Rules, we examine and try all
Controversies and Debates in Religion, and by them only to reason, discourse
and judge of them; and so to leave them to God alone and to Jesus Christ, as the
only, supreme and infallible J^m 4. 12. Mat. 23 8.
Judge, peremptorily to be decided: for we are not to think, that it was any
ways God's will and pleasure in the least, that they should be decided by any
judicial or authoritative right, by any visible Judge, and one ordinarily
speaking in the Church, since it has pleased him to leave us in his Word, a
rule only directive, or to judge only Psalm. 19. 8, 9. and 119. 105. Luke 16. 29,
31.
directively by, and not withal coactively or by way of constraint: but that
there ought to be an infallible Judge always speaking in the Church, he has no
where signified: nor has he in his Word pointed out, who he should continually
be; but has expressly commanded all and every one alike Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7, etc. and
chap. 11. 8. and so on.
to search his Laws, or Judgments and Statutes, to 1 John 4. 1. and so on. ^ 1
These. 5. 21.
try the Spirits, whether they be of God, yea to try all things, and to hold
fast that which is good; and moreover has promised to such as search into his
Prove. 2. 2, 3 4, etc. and chap. 3. v^^s. 13. and so on. Psalm. 1. 2. Act. 17.
11. 2 Pet. 1. 19.
Laws, and seek the understanding of them, his Grace and Holy Spirit; and those
who have searched the Scriptures, and examined Controversies of Faith by them,
yea who have diligently tried by the Rule and Square of the Scripture those
things, which have been spoken by the Apostles themselves, he has commended
and praised them with singular Elogies.

11. Therefore they who do freely And not the Church or a Synod, etc.
give themselves, or suffer to be given by others this irrefragable Authority
of peremptorily deciding of Differences and Controversies of Faith or Religion,
either all or some, either. to some certain Church, or Synod of Doctors, or to
any Society of Men whatsoever, or to any single Person, who also may be ungodly
and profane, as to a visible and speaking See the places cited a little before,
Isa. 8. 20. etc.
Judge, and will have Men's Consciences held and bound by this decision, they
build upon no firm reason, much less upon any Divine Authority; nay rather they
are to be thought to do it against both the Psalm 119. 33, and so on. Ephesians 1. 16.
and so following. chap. 3 14, 15, etc. Mat. 7. 7, 8, etc. Jam. 1. 5. An
examination and confutation of the contrary error.
one and the other alike. Besides that they do by this means greatly weaken and
wholly void that Christian duty of searching the Scriptures, of trying the
Spirits, of proving all things, etc. and withal both the necessity and
advantage of pious and devout Prayers.

12. For this therefore at least most weighty and withal most just cause, we
suffer not our selves in Controversies indeed of Religion, and in the sacred
concerns or causes of Faith, to be pressed with the bare Authorities of Men,
suppose with the Glosses and Opinions of the Fathers, as they are called, the
Determinations of Councils, or Synods, the Articles of Confessions, the Placits
or Opinions of Divines, or the Conclusions of Universities; much less with long
since received Customs, or with the Splendour and Number, or Multitude of Men of
the same Opinion, or lastly Prescription of a long times continuance, etc. For
doubtless at this turn we ought not to mind, what this or the other Doctor of
the Church or Assembly of Doctors, though never so renowned for their supposed
Learning and Sanctity, nor what this or that Synod or particular Church, but
what he, who is before all, and who alone can neither Mat. 23. 8, 9 Rom 15. 18
Gal. 1. 8. and so following.
deceive, nor be deceived, our Lord Jesus Christ, has said and prescribed in
his Word.

13. Nor is it strange: for in these very The Perfection and sufficiency of the
Holy Scriptures.
Books is perfectly contained a full and more then sufficient Revelation of all
the Mysteries of Faith; especially of those, which are simply necessary for 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16 and 1 Pet. 1. 23, 24, 25. and 2 Pet 1 19, 20, 21.
all Men in general, and every Man in particular, to know, believe, hope, and
do for to obtain everlasting Salvation: so that there is no one point, no not
the least requisite for the right information of Faith, or of a life pleasing
unto God, precisely necessary to be held by any Christian, which is not
abundantly contained in these very Sacred Books. Romans 10. 9, etc. Mat. 5, 6, 7
chapter throughout. Heb. 5. 9. Gal. 5. 6. and 6. 15 and 1. Joh. 5. 1. etc.
And by things necessary unto Salvation we only understand those things,
without which it is utterly impossible for any Man either to obey the
Commandments of Jesus Christ aright and as he ought, or firmly to believe his
Divine Promises: and which are therefore such, that without a Man's own
manifest fault, they cannot be denied, unknown or called in question by him.

14. Furthermore the Psalm. 19. 8, etc. Psa. 119. 105, 130. 2 Cor. 3. 14, 15,
etc. and 4. 3, 4, and 2 Pet. 1. 19.
perspicuity of The clearness and perspicuity thereof.
the said Books, although in some places (especially to the unlearned and less
exercised) they be obscure or dark enough, is so great, especially in Meanings
necessary to be understood unto Salvation; that all that read them, not only
the Learned, but the Ignorant also (that are endued but with common Sense and
Judgment) may, as far as is sufficient, attain to the understanding of them;
sobeit they suffer not themselves to be blinded with Prejudice, vain
Confidence, or other corrupt Affections; but search this Scripture diligen^ly
and devoutly, (which we believe is not only lawful for all, Joh. 5. 39. 40. 2.
Pet. 1. 19. Luke 16. 29. etc. 1 These. 5. 20.
though otherwise Rude, Ignorant and of the common People or Laics: but also
commanded and enjoined them of God) and study to be acquainted with those
phrases or manners of expression, which are peculiar to the Scripture, and were
most clear and significant at that time wherein those Books were written, and
whilst the same idiom or propriety of speech yet flourished; that such as
these, we say, may from them abundantly understand all things pertaining to
true Faith and Godliness, not only those things which are necessary, but also
under the very reason of their necessity, towit, that they are necessary, and
as far as, or how and upon what accounts they are so: and that Men honest, Psa.
25. 12, 14. Joh. 7. 17. and 8. 47.
teachable and truly fearing God do really most easily understand them.

15. But because there be very many even The causes of its obscurity.
amongst Christians, who either do not at all, or else not with sufficient Joh.
3. 18, 19, etc. and 5. 39* 40 etc and 12. 39, 40, etc.
attention read these Books, nor with care and Judgment consider what they
read; or do not frequently, as is meet, piously implore the Divine Help and
Assistance, or 2 Pet. 3. 16. 2 Cor. 3. 14.
else being tainted or filled with Prejudice, Self-Confidence, Hatred, Envy,
Ambition, or other corrupt Affections, are imploi'd in reading of these Books;
and then indeed next, because even in these very Books themselves we often meet
with here and there, as well things as Acts 8. 30, 31, etc. and 18. 24, 25, etc.
phrases peculiar to the said ancient times, and also tropical and figurative
manners of speech, which at this time afford us some darkness and difficulty;
and which are such, that unless one be solidly instructed in all these, or else
bring with him a mind very docile, honest, and void of Affection or Partiality,
unto the judging or discerning of them, they may easily be wrested to a wrong
sense, yea to a perverse, and such as is prejudicial to Salvation; from hence
arises not only just reason alone (that we And of its Interpretation.
may not treat of many other now) why the 1 Cor. 12 7, 8, etc. chap. 14.
throughout 1 Thessalonians. 5. 20, 21.
interpretation, and explication o^ the Scriptures profitably may, yea and
always ought to have its place allowed it in the Church.

16. But the best Interpretation of Which is the best and surest Explication of
Scripture.
^cripture is that, which most faithfully ^xpresseth the native and literal
sense ^hereof, or at least comes nearest to it, as that alone which is the
true and living ^ Word of God, whereby, as by incor^uptible Heb. 4. 12, 13. 1
Pet. 1 23, 24, 25. Jam. 1. 18, 21.
Seed, we are begotten again unto ^he Hope of Eternal Life. Now we call ^he
native and literal sense, not so much that, which the Words properly taken hold
forth, (as indeed it very often falls out) as that, which though the words
rigedly taken do not insinuate or hint it, yet is most agreeable to right
reason, and the very mind and intention of him, that uttered the words, whether
it were expressed properly or figuratively.

The which may and ought to be known and discovered by the scope and occasion
of every place, also from the Mat. 4. 4, 5, etc. and chapter 22. 29. 2 Pet. 1. 20
21. 2 Cor. 3. 13, 14* 15
Subject Matter, Antecedents and Consequents, that is, things going before and
following, also from comparing of like places with like, and from palpable
Absurdities otherwise like to follow, and other Arguments of that kind, or from
the consideration and weighing of things together.

17. But to desire to fetch or take thi^ exposition from any other Author^
Head, or Fountain whatsoever, to wit* from any Symbol or Creed of Men's making,
or Analogy of Faith in this o^ that place received, or any public Confession
of Churches (which we also before advised in our Preface, which w^ would never
have at any time severed o^ divided from this our Declaration) o^ from the
Decrees of Councils, or Consen^ of Fathers one or other, though even the most
or greatest part of them, is a^ thing too uncertain and oftentimes dangerous.

18. And yet do we not therefore lightly A prolepsis or prevention of an
objection.
despise the pious, probable, or long-since received interpretations of others,
especially of the ancient Fathers whether Greek or Latin: much less so as
proudly, or arrogantly to reject their unanimous consent; but we do then at
length, and that indeed modestly recede from them, when we find in our
Conscience, that they alledg things aliene from, or not agreeable with the true
sense of the Scriptures, or things contrary to it. Nor do we think, that we do
by this means do them any wrong: Since not only every of them apart, but also
the most of them jointly, yea all of them taken together, might in many things
err; and themselves also have freely acknowledged it of themselves with one
accord: and therefore do expressly forbid, that their writings be simply or
without any more ado believed, but desire that we at length so far approve of
them, as they agree with the Sacred Scriptures; and on the contrary, that we
freely reject them so far as they disagree with the same.

CHAP. II. Of the Knowledge of the Essence of God, ^ of the Divine Nature.
1. FUrthermore our whole Religion The two chief heads of Religion
contained in these very Book^ does briefly consist in our righ^ knowledge of
the Joh. 17. 3. 1 John 2. 23. and chap 5. 11, 12. and 2 John 9
one only true Go^ and Jesus Christ the Mediator, wh^^ he has sent; and in a
lawful or due Worship of both in or under the hope of ^ Life eternal and
immortal after Death* to be certainly obtained and enjoyed i^ the Heavens
according to the free promise of the same.

2. And that God may be rightly known and pious^y worshipped, and that Three
things to be known of God.
according to the Scriptures, Heb. 11. 6, 7, etc. Acts 14. 15, etc. and chapter 17.
24, etc.
three things offer themselves necessarily to be considered and held by us; his
Nature* Works, and Will. The Nature indeed of God, that we may understand, that
he is of or in himself most worthy to be worshipped of us: his Works, that we
may know, that he may rightfully and deser^edly require of us, what manner of
wor^hip soever he please; lastly his Will, that we may be clearly convinced,
that ^e will be worshipped of us; and withal ^now after what manner he will,
and ^ught to be worshipped by us; that we ^ay assuredly hope for Eternal
Salvation But not equally, or alike necessary.
from him. Howbeit concerning the Nature and Works of God, all those things are
not necessarily to be held, which in every respect, at least whatsoever belongs
to the Divine Essence, and all the modes or manners of its working and kinds of
operations: much less all those things, which either according to the likely
and specious placits of the Schools, or from the probable discourse of Reason,
are wont to be affirmed of them: but those only, without which the Divine Will,
revealed in the Scriptures either cannot A twofold knowledge of God.
be rightly understood, or performed by us: Since they only, who do the will of
God and Job 28. 28. Jer. 2. 8. and 22. 16 Hos. 6. 6. Tit. 1. 16. 1 John 2, 3,
4, etc. and chapter 3. 6.
keep his Commandments, are every where in the Scripture said truly to know
God, and on the contrary, they that do not the same, are said not to know God.
So that that alone deserves to be called the saving Knowledge (...) God, which
is joined with the practice (...) Piety. But other things pertaining her^ unto,
although happily they may b^ profitable more or less, either for the promoting of
Piety; or for the better understanding, and more happy composing (...)
Controversies of Religion that may happen; yet they ought not to be hel^ for
necessary doctrines of Faith, which we cannot be ignorant of without the los^
of Salvation.

3. As to the Nature of God, the Of the Nature of God.
Scripture holds forth God unto us under a twofold consideration. 1. Absolutely
and generally in his essential Attributes: to wit, whereby he does unfold or
declare unto us Exodus 34. 6, 7. 1 Timothy 1. 17. and 6. 15, 16.
his Spiritual Nature and glorious Majesty common to the distinct or several
Persons, sofar as is requisite for our Faith and Salvation in this Life. 2.
Distinctly and relatively in the mystery of the Mat. 28. 19. 2 Cor. 13. 14. 1 John 5. 7.
Sacred Trinity, which respects the internal and mutual habitude, i. e. state
or standing, and certain proper economy, i. e. ordering or disposing of
things, of the persons among themselves.

These Attributes, so far as they necessarily pertain hereunto, are these that
follow.

5. I. God is Deuteronomy. 6. 4. and 32. 39. Ps. 86. 10. 1 Cor. 8. 6. 1 Timothy 2. 5.
one, because he is God is one and the Supreme Lord of things.
alone, without Associate, the most Supreme and Highest; who has neither any
before him, nor above him, whom he should depend upon in Being, Willing, or
Acting; but has his Godhead, or Divine Power, or Dominion over all things from
himself: nor is there any other besides him, nor can be, with whom all the
Attributes of a true Deity from himself may or can agree; and therefore he is
of altogether absolute Genesis 14. 18. Deuteronomy. 10. 17. Isa. 41. 4. and 44. 6. and
45. 6, 7.
Au^hority, or uncontrolable Power, so that ^e can dispose of his Creatures and
all his Goods howsoever he pleases; that ^s, so as to Job 9. 4, etc. Deuteronomy. 32.
39. etc. 2 Chronicles. 20. 6. 1 Samuel 3. 11, 12, 13. Dan. 2 21, etc. Jam. 4. 12. Mat.
20. 15. Prove. 16. 4 Isa. 42. 61 and 48. 11.
give, take away, preserve, destroy, make alive, kill, command, forbid, permit,
punish, pardon, increase, diminish, change, translate, etc. as he knows it to
make for his own Glory, and the Salvation of those that ^re His, and as he
shall see it to comport and agree with his Wisdom, Goodness, and Justice.

6. II. He is Eternal, Rev 1. 4. Psalm. 90. 2. 1 Timothy 1. 17. and 6. 15, 16.
because he Eternal and Immutable.
always was, ever is, and will be the same, without all beginning and end, and
all alteration; yea alone living necessarily by (his) Nature, or having Life
and Immortality of or from himself; and therefore in himself always invariable,
Jam. 1 17 Romans 1. 20, 23. Mat. 3. 6. Psalm. 102. 26, 27.
incorruptible, and every way immutable: Lastly, He is the supreme Author, and
sole and only Donor of that very 1 John 5. 11. 1 Timothy 4. 10. Tit. 1 1.
Eternal Life it self, which he himself has graciously promised unto us in and
by Jesus Christ.

7. III. He is Infinite and Immense; Immense and every where present.
1 King. 8. 27. Ps. 1 39 8, 9. J^r. 23 24. Isa. 66. 1. Acts 7. 48, 49.
because he so fills Heaven and Earth, that he cannot be circumscribed by any
certain spaces of places, nor concluded or enclosed within any bounds; but he
is everywhere present in all places, although never so secret or hidden and
most remote, in a general and incomprehensible manner. Albeit in a certain Ps.
2. 4. and 11. 4. and 33. 13, 14. and 115. 3. Mat. 6. 9.
peculiar manner, he both gloriously dwells in the Heaven of the Blessed, and
exerts or puts forth a special efficacy of his 2 Cor. 6. 16. Joh. 14. 23.
Grace in his Saints, though not in all in like measure. From whence there may
easily be understood various degrees of the Divine Presence in the several
things that are created.

8. IV. He is Omniscient, and indeed Omniscient and supremely W^se.
of infallible Knowledge; Job 42. 2, 3. Psalm. 139. almost throughout. and 147.
5. Pro^. 15. 11. Isa. 41. 22, 23.
because he not only altogether most thoroughly knows all things, which have
any entity or being, as they are severally in themselves, whether they be good
or evil, past, present, future, also possible and future Events; yea, and also
the closest thoughts of the Heart, the most secret Sayings or Words, the most
hidden Deeds, (under which also we will comprehend things of Omission, or that
are left undone) but also because he keeps them most present in Jer. 17. 9,
10. 1 Samuel 16. 7. Ps. 7. 10. and 94. 11. 1 Cor. 4. 2, 5. Heb. 4. 13. 1 John 3.
20.
memory, and sees them, as it were, set before his Eyes, whatsoever are at any
time well done by us or otherwise: So that this Knowledge ( viz. of his) cannot
be defaced, either by ignorance, or forgetfulness, or fraud, or craft, or any
deceit or guile: Lastly, Because he knows Isa. 40. 13, 14. Romans 16. 27. 1 Timothy 1. 17.
most wisely to order, dispose, direct and dispense, and govern all things.

9. V. He is of Will most Of most free Power and Will.
free, Exodus 33. 19. Ps. 115. 3. and 135. 6. Mat. 20. 15. Romans 9. 15. 13.
because he is determined neither by any inward necessity of his own Nature,
nor by any outward force, either of any power or efficacy of Object, from
without himself, to will, or nill, or to permit those things, which are, or
come to pass; but according to his most free Pleasure, or mere Counsel, and
good pleasure of his own Will, he puts forth himself either to will, or
nill, or permit them all. And indeed all things good he so wills them, that
he also Ps. 11. 5, 7. and. 81. 14 Isa. 5. 1, 2, etc. Mic. 6. 7, 8. 2 Cor. 5.
20. Heb. 13. 18.
approves of them, and procures them: Some things also he commands,
counsels unto, wishes, desires, and in his own way effects. But evil
things of faults Ps. 5. 5, 6. and 11. 5, 6. E^. 20. 5. and 34. 7. Deuteronomy. 25. 16.
and 28. 65.
or sins, (that is, not only the malice or wickedness it self, but also vicious
Acts, so far indeed as malice or blame does necessarily cleave to them, either
of themselves, or by reason of some positive Law) he in very Deed does not will
them, but hates, detesteth, forbids, disswadeth from them, punishes them,
and oftentimes hinders them, but never causes or procures them. Yet he
willingly permits them, and will permit them; Psalm. 81. 13. Acts 24. 2, 6.
not that he does will that they should be done by us, or efficaciously
ordains or decrees that they should be done; but because he suffers our
Actions to proceed in them, and does not hinder it as he might: and this he
does that he may not overthrow the order once settled by himself, and destroy
and void that liberty, which he gave his Creature.

10. VI. He is most Psalm. 10. 1, 2, etc. and 25. 8, etc and 36. 5. and 103. 8,
etc. and 145. 8, 9. J^el 2. 13. Romans 2. 4 Ephesians. 2. 4. Tit. 3. 4. Jam. 1. 17. 1 Timothy 2. 4. and^ ^. 10.
good, both Most good in himself and toward us.
in himself, and toward his Creatures: because he is not only most highly
perfect by Nature, and therefore most highly lovely; but he is also very kind
and liberal toward his Creatures, although not toward all alike, yea
sometimes also toward sinners: but toward his faithful or believing Ones, he
is most gracious, gentle, long-suffering, and merciful; yea, he is most readily
disposed to communicate to them the highest and eternal Good, that is, than
which none better or greater can either be desired or possessed by them.

11. VII. He is most just and Genesis 18. 23, etc. Deuteronomy. 32. 4 Psalm. 11. 5, 6, 7.
and 145. 17.
equal, Just, Holy and True.
and indeed of Justice and Equity inflexible: not only because he always loves
that in us, which is right and equal, and hates all iniquity, in which respect
also in Scripture he is called Holy; but also because he Ezekiel. 18. 23. and 33.
17, etc. Man. 20. 13 2 Thessalonians. ^. 5, 6, 7. Rev. 19. 2.
never does wrong to any; and in all his Works and Judgments (and especially in
making Laws, distributing Rewards, and inflicting Punishments) he does always
exactly observe Rectitude and Justice, whereby he gives to every one his due,
and exercises most equal right: Lastly, because he is True, 1 Samuel 15. 29.
Romans 3. 4. 2 Timothy 4. 8. and 2. 13. Tit. 1. 2. Heb. 6. 10. 1 John 1. 9.
Sincere, and in no wise dissembles in his Words; and in performing his
Covenants and Promises, he is most highly faithful and constant.

12. VIII. He is Omnipotent, or of Omnipotent.
invincible and insuperable power; Genesis 17. 1 2 Chronicles. 20. 6. Ps. 115. 3. Mat.
19. 26 Mar. 14. 36 Luke 1. 37. Rev. 1. 8. and 4. 8.
because he can do whatsoever he pleases, though all Creatures be never so
much against it: yea, indeed he can always do more, than indeed he ever will;
and therefore he can simply do all things whatsoever, that do not imply a
contradiction; that is, which are not necessarily and of themselves repugnant
to the certain truth of things, nor to his own Divine Nature.

13. IX. Lastly, He is most blessed or happy, and indeed Blessed and every way
perfect. ^ Psalm. 5. 12. Ma. 11. 25. A^. 17. 24. 1 Timothy 6. 15, 16. J^m. (...)
14, 15, 16, 17.
of * complete and incomprehensible blessedness; because he possesses both a
Nature in all respects absolute, and a Majesty in the highest degree glorious,
and every way abounds with the Treasures of all good; and fears not any
hurt or evil from any, nor stands in need of any good from without himself at
any time; but does largely of his own give all unto all, as he pleases,
because he is the first, chief, and ever inexhaustible Fountain of all things
that are good.

14. And thus much touching the essential The Use of the Doctrine of the Unity
of God.
Attributes of God, pertaining indeed to this Head: all which generally and
particularly we believe to be most * Deuteronomy. 6. 4, etc. Mat. 4. 10. 1 Cor. 8. 5,
6.
profitable, yea hitherto necessary to be known, insomuch that without the
knowledge of these we cannot worship God aright; but by it we may. For because
God is One, it is altogether just and necessary for us, that we with Soul and
Body depend wholly upon him only, as the first or chief Author of our
Salvation; and again likewise, that our whole Worship terminate and end in him
alone.

15. Because he is of Irrefragable Of his Supreme Power and Authority
Power, and Supreme Authority, it is altogether meet and necessary, that we do,
whosoever we be, and wheresoever at least we are, in all things most humbly
submit our selves unto him, as King of Kings, Genesis 18. 27. 2 Samuel 15. 25, 26.
Lam. 3. 25, 26, etc.
and Lord of Lords, any where sworn to none, nor obnoxious to any; that we do
pray continually unto him for Phil. 4. 6. Jam. 5. 1, 2, etc. and 1 Pet. 3. 17.
his Benefits, and other things necessary, or at least useful for us, that we
give him thanks for things received: Also that all Adversity, whatsoever he
sends, we should bear it patiently, and quietly, and contentedly, and that we
should never abuse our Prosperity, or grow proud thereby.

16. Because he is Eternal and Immutable, Of his Eternity and Immutability.
it is requisite that we be very believingly to expect, and firmly to hope for
the reward of Romans 16. 25, 26. Tit. 1 2. Jam 1. 17, 18.
Eternal Life, graciously promised unto us by him in Christ; and certainly
believe, that he will never at any time either alter or change it himself, nor
suffer it to be violently taken away from us by others.

17. Because he is Immense and Omnipresent, Of his Omnipresency
it is meet that we everywhere walk circumspectly, reverently, and carefully,
as in his Psalm. 139 7, 8, etc. Amos 9. 2, etc. Mat. 6. 1, 2, etc.
sight: that we also always pour out unto him our Prayers and Supplications,
with all humility and submission, and a firm confidence of being heard; and
that we think, speak, or do nothing at any time, but what is serious, grave, or
weighty, and worthy the presence of so great a Deity.

18. Because he is of infallible Knowledge, Of his On^^isciency.
it is expected that we walk and live uprightly, and sincerely, and
circumspectly; that we always study to approve our Thoughts, Psalm. 34. 16, 17.
and 94. 7, 8, etc Mat. 6. 4, 6, 18. Rom 8. 27 Heb. 4. 11, 12, 13. 1 Pet. 3. 12
Words, and Actions unto him; that we continually commend our Cause, when good
and just, unto him; that we with boldness offer unto him our Prayers, Sighs,
and Groans; And lastly, That we be thoroughly persuaded that he takes care of us
and all our Concerns.

19. Because he is of most free Power Of his most free Will and Pleasure.
and Will, it behooves us, that whatsoever Genesis 32. 10. Deuteronomy. 4. 4, 5, etc. and
7 6, 7, etc. Psalm. 18. 1, 2, etc and 116. 12, etc. 1 Cor. 4. 7.
good things we have, either in common with others, or peculiar before and
above others, (whether bodily or spiritual) we attribute it to his alone
spontaneous liberality, and most free munificency; that we always diligently
and seriously seek his grace and favor, and carefully endeavor to retain the
same; that we humbly deprecate or pray against his Punishments and Threatenings;
and whatsoever he either does himself, or suffers to be done by Romans 9. 18,
etc. and 11. 33, etc. Job 1, and 2, throughout.
others, or wills to be done by us, we do not measure the same by our own
proper sense and apprehensions, but that we always religiously adore it, as
proceeding from his most good and free pleasure and disposal.

20. Because he is most good and Of his Goodness and Bounty.
bountiful, it is fit and meet Deuteronomy. 32. 6, 7, etc. Psalm. 18. 1. and 145,
throughout. 2 Cor. 1. 3, 4, etc.
that we love and delight in him with all our Heart, with all our Soul, and
with all our Might; that we resolutely trust or rely on his Promises,
confidently implore his Grace and Mercy, do willingly and cheerfully conform
our selves to his most bountiful Will, and that even under the Cross, and
always and everywhere obey him.

21. Because he is of inflexible Equity Of his Justice and Truth.
and Ps. 36. 6, 7 and 73. 2, etc Romans 9. 14 etc. and 11. 33, etc.
Justice, and also Truth; we are to see that we never murmur against him, when
he commands, tempts, visits, punishes, permits evils, etc. and that
we never at any time doubt of his Promises and Threatenings, and other his
Sayings. And because he is in the highest degree holy, Lev. 19. 2. and 20. 7. 1
Pet. 1. 15, 16.
that we also imitate him in a serious study and exercise of Holiness.

22. Because he is of insuperable Of his Omnipotency.
Power, it concerns us that we fear him, who is able to cast Body and Soul into
Mat. 10. 28. Deuteronomy. 32. 39, etc. Jer. 5. 22. Job 40. 1, etc.
Hell; and that we dread his terrible Anger, and the Evils indeed which he
threatens, that we seriously fear them; and the good Things which he
promises, that we do with a firm and undoubted Faith expect them; Lastly, That
we do not, so long as we serve Christ, too much fear the force and power Psalm.
2. 3. and 27. and 46 throughout. Joh. 10. 29. Romans S. 31, etc. Of his
Blessedness
either of the Devil, or Death, or Hell, or Tyrants, or any of other Enemies;
or for their sakes ever commit or do any thing unworthy of the Name of Christ.

23. Because he is most blessed, and indeed of perfect Blessedness and glorious
Majesty; it is our Duty that we earnestly aspire unto, or breath after a
participation of his Glory and Joy, according to our measure; and therefore
desire to be perfectly united with him after Death, to see him face to face,
and to be blessed and satisfied with the fullness of his House; and being
supported with this desire and hope unshaken, that we sincerely do all things
that he commands; carefully avoid those things which he forbids; Lastly,
That we bear with courage whatsoever he will have us to bear, although the
Punishments of the most bitter and most ignominions Death were to be undergone
by us for his Name.

And thus far concerning the Nature of God in common or absolutely considered.

CHAP. III. Of the Holy and Sacred Trinity.
1. BUt God is considered by way of The Mystery of the Trinity.
distinction, and relatively under a three fold Mat. 28. 19. Joh. 14 16, 26.
and 15. 26. 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6. 2 Cor. 13. 14.
Hypostasis, or three Persons; under which indeed he himself in his Word has
manifested his own Godhead, to be considered of us oeconomicall^ ( i. e. by way
of dispensation) and with respect to it self. And this 1 John 5. 7.
Trinity is, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. As one Hypostasis (or Person) of the
Godhead is (...).
without cause, that is, unproduced and unbegotten: another is produced of the
Father by Generation, or the only begotten of the Father: Lastly, Another in
peculiar manner proceeds from the Father and the Son, or flows from the
Father by the Son.

2. For it is the 1 Cor. 8. 6 Ephesians. 4. 6.
Father only that is The distinction and order of the Persons.
void of all Original, or altogether unbegotten and proceeding from none other;
but who yet has from Eternity communicated his own Deity both to his only
begotten Joh. 1. 18 and 3. 16. Romans 8. 32
Son, not indeed by Creation, Job 1. 6. and 2. 1. and 38. 7.
(in which respect the Angels are called the Sons of God) nor by gracious John
1. 11, 12. Gal. 3. 26.
Adoption, (by which we that are Believers are also the Sons of God) nor only
by the Joh. 3. 35. and 5. 22, etc
gracious communication of Divine Power (or Authority) and Supreme Glory, as he
is Mediator; but also by a true, but yet secret and ineffable Ps. 2. 7. Heb. 1.
2, etc. Joh. 1. 18.
Generation; and also to the Holy Spirit proceeding from both, Joh. 15. 26.
Gal. 4. 6. 1 Cor. 2. 11, 12.
by likewise a secret emanation or spiration: and therefore the Father is most
justly counted the Fountain and Original of the whole Duty.

3. The Son therefore and Holy Their Communion of or in the same Deity.
Spirit, although as to both their hypostasis, and manner, and order of having
the Deity, they be truly distinct from the Father; yet are they truly partakers
of the same Deity, or Divine Essence and Nature absolutely and in common
considered with the Father: as amongst other considerations is chiefly proved
from the Divine Joh. 1. 1, 2, etc. and 20. 28. Romans 9. 5. Col. 1. 15, etc. Heb.
1. 2, etc. Rev. 1. and 2. and 3. and 4. almost throughout.
Names or Titles, Isa. 11. 1, etc. and 63. 10. 1 Cor. 2. 10, etc. and 3. 16,
etc. and 6^9, 22. and 12. 4. 11. Act. 5. 4. and 13. 2. and 20. 28. Mat. 12. 31,
32.
also from the Divine Properties and Operations which are every where in the
Sacred Scriptures clearly given to them both. And here is the sum of the whole
Apostles Creed, wherein we profess that we believe in one God the Father
Almighty, etc. And in his only begotten Son, etc. And lastly, In the Holy Ghost.

4. And these things may suffice concerning A pious Caution concerning this
Mystery.
even this Mystery: the which indeed to treat of very soberly, prudently, and
religiously, we judge altogether necessary; and very safe as far as may be, to
express the same in the proper and express Phrases or Words of the Holy Ghost:
Since the Spirit of God himself 1 Cor. 2. 10, etc. Joh. 1. 18. Mat. 11. 27.
must best know himself, and be best able most rightly and truly to express his
own Nature; nay farther, and has also been pleased, as far as is necessary and
sufficient, to declare the same unto us in his Word; whom we ought so long
reverently and most religiously to follow, until at length we 1 John 3. 2 1
Cor. 13. 12.
see God himself face to face, know him perfectly; as he will then indeed in
that glorious World to come hold forth himself most clearly to be seen and
known of us. And thus far indeed of God himself.

CHAP. IV. Of the Knowledge of the Works of God.
1. IN the second place there come to Of the Works of God their various Use.
be considered the Works of God, whereby he manifests his own Glory, and
communicates certain good things unto us, and in some respect holds forth
himself to be known of us: and which consequently are a certain Foundation,
whereon there is grounded a right and authority in God, Exodus 20. throughout.
Deuteronomy. 32. 6 etc. Ps. 136 throughout. Act. 17 24. etc. Rev. 4 11.
by virtue or reason whereof he may, and of Right usually does require Worship
of us, both for matter and manner or kind as he pleases; also a Justice and
Equity, according unto which we are obliged to yield unto him wholly and
entirely such Worship, Mal. 1. 6. and 2. 10.
as himself according to his due right requires of us.

2. These kind of works fall under a 1. Division into Decree and Execution.
twofold consideration. 1. As they were fore-known and foreordained of God
Act. 15. 18. Ephesians. 1. 4, etc. 1. Cor. 2. 7. 2 Timothy 1. 9. 1 Pe^* 1. 20.
before all ages, or before the Foundations of the World were laid, which are
wont in one word to be called his Decrees. 2. As they are manifested in time,
or according to the manner and order, now long since most wisely established
and pitched upon in the Divine Decree (whether general or special, or absolute
or conditional) are put in Execution. And from this Execution, and Psalm. 33.
11. Isa. 14. 26, 27. and chap. 46. 10. J^r. 18. 7, etc.
the reason and manner thereof, we are to judge of the Decrees themselves. For
such altogether are the Decrees, as is the Execution of the same: nor can it be
without a mark of inconstancy, that the Execution should not answer the Decree,
much more that it should be repugnant to, and cross or thwart the same.

3. The Works indeed of such Execution, 2. Into Creation and Redemption.
are principally two: to wit, the Work of Creation, Genesis 1. throughout.
when Man was not yet in being; and of Re-creation and making anew, or
Redemption, 2 Cor. 5. 17.
when Man together with his whole posterity was now fallen, and by reason of
sin become liable to Death and eternal Condemnation. To both these Works the
continual Providence of God, Ephesians. 1. 10. etc. Col. 1. throughout, Psalm. 104.
or Conservation and Government of things does closely cleave; and that always
accommodate to the Natures and Properties of the things that were created,
except when any thing falls out extraordinarily, as in Miracles, etc.

CHAP. V. Of the Creation of the World, of Angels and of Men.
1. THe Creation of the World is The Creation of the World. 1 Genesis 1. E^od. 20.
11. Isa. 40. 12, etc. Psalm. 104. and 136. Act. 17. 25, etc. Rev. 4. 11.
that first and most powerful Production of all things made of nothing, to wit,
that primaeve perfect forming of the Heaven, and the Earth, and the Sea, and of
all things that are therein: of which also there is mention made in the
Apostles Creed, when we say, I believe in God the Father Almighty, Creator of
Heaven and Earth.

2. Among the Creatures, Col. 1. 16
Angels Of the Angels.
and Men are the most excellent, the one being the Inhabitants of the Heavens,
the other of the Earth; the one being invisible, the other visible. The Angels
are ministering Spirits, dwelling ordinarily in Heb. 1. 14. Dan. 7. 9, 10. Rev.
5. 11. Mat. 18. 10. Psa. 103 20, 21. and 104. 4.
the Heavens above the World, and there stand before God, as Officers or
Servants and Messengers attendant on him: both continually to declare aloud his
Praises, and to either declare, or powerfully to execute his Commands
throughout the whole World.

3. Subtilely to define many things A waving of things curicus.
without the Scriptures concerning their Essence, Order, Degrees, Number, etc.
we deem neither necessary nor useful, but rather dangerous. It is sufficient
for us, piously to believe what the The Angels of two sorts.
Scriptures do clearly affirm of them. That indeed some of them keeping their
Original or first Estate (Principality) 1. Good.
have constantly adhered to God their Lord Creator, which therefore are called
Mat. 25. 31. 1 Timothy 5. 21. 2 Cor. 11. 14. Col. 1. 16. 1 Pet. 3. 22. 2. Evil.
Holy, Elect, and Angels of Light: distinguished indeed by diverse orders, into
Thrones, Powers, Dominations, etc. But which no Man in this Mortality can
easily define or determine. That others, 2 Pet. 2. 4. Jude 4. Jol. 8. 44.
sinning against God, abode not in the Truth: but left long since their first
estate and place of abode and office; and therefore being thrust out of the
Heaven of the Blessed into Hell, and bound under Their wicked designs and
endeavors.
chains of darkness, they everywhere in this lower World under their Ephesians. 2.
2. and 6. 12. Rev 12. 9, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. and 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
Prince (who is called that old Serpent, the great Dragon, also the god and
Prince of this World, the Tempter, Devil and Satan) wander to and fro through
the Air: and being become, through their own fault, evil Demons and impure
Spirits, they are everywhere Adversaries to the Glory of God, and the
Salvation of the Godly: but in the Wicked and such as obstinately refuse to
obey the Will of God, they 2 Cor. 4. 4. and 11. 3. Joh. 1. 6. and 2. 1. Act. 5.
3. and 16. 16. and 19. 12, 15. 1 Pet. 5. 8. 1 Kin. 22. 21, etc.
powerfully rule and reign through Seductions or Errors, through Wickednesses,
mischievous Deeds, worldly Lusts, and various Arts, Deceits, Force, Idolatry,
Tyranny, and other works proper to the World: being hereafter together with
wicked and ungodly Men to be cast into Mat. 25. 41. Rev. 20. 10. The Creati^n
of men unto the image of God.
everlasting fire.

4. God at the beginning made Men only two, Genesis 1. 26 27. and 2. 7. etc.
Man and Woman; and the body indeed of the Man he formed of the Earth, but the
body of the Woman he formed of a Rib-Bone of the Man: and endowed them both
with a rational and Eccl. 12. 7. Mat. 10. 28.
immortal Spirit, yea created them unto his own Genesis 1. 26. and 9. 6. Jam. 3.
9. Psalm. 8.
Image and Likeness; and placed and set them in this World, as in a most goodly
Kingdom beautified and adorned for their sakes; yea further, he placed and set
them in the most pleasant Paradise or Garden of the World it self, as in an
august or stately Palace, as Lords and Princes of the rest of the Creatures.

5. God also indeed adorned and beautified Their happy Estate before the Fall.
them with a pure and clear Understanding, a right Mind, with a Eccl. 7. 29. An
explication whereof see Ecclesiasticus, 15. 14, etc.
free Will, and other upright, entire, and sound Affections: Furthermore he
sufficiently furnished them with all necessary Wisdom, Integrity, and variety
of Grace in this Estate, that they might know not only to use and improve
aright their glorious Rule, Dominion and Command over the rest of the
Creatures; 2. and 3. chapters.
but also that they might above all rightly understand the Will of God toward
themselves; and freely subject their own Will (by which in other respects they
did freely exercise Command not only over other, but also over their own proper
actions) unto God as their indeed Supreme Lord and Lawgiver; and by constant
obeying of him might live not only here according to their hearts wish, but
also hereafter be for ever Happy and Blessed.

6. Wherefore this work of Creation The use and scope of Creation. * Psalm. 8.
and 104. and 136 and 145. Act. 14. 15 etc. and 17. 24, etc.
chiefly serves to this end, that Man might understand, * that whatsoever good
he has, he is wholly owing unto God for it, and that he is bound, if he
require it, to render and consecrate the same wholly unto him; lastly, that he
is obliged by the highest right always to give him Thanks. For Rev. 4. 11 and
14. 17.
he that has no good of himself, owes all to him from whom he has whatsoever
he has; and therefore ought continually to glory in him only 1 Cor. 1. 31. and
5. 7.
and not in himself.

7. But they who premise or hold, as A Confutation of the Error contraryto
this Truth from the absurdity following.
previous and antecedent to this Work, not only an absolute Election of certain
particular Men unto Eternal Salvation, See Calv. Instit. l 3. c. 21, 22, 23,
etc.
but also the like Reprobation of others, the greatest part, unto Eternal
Torments; and indeed both peremptory, and made concerning particular Persons,
every of them by Name from all Eternity; they do not only invert the Natural
Order of things, but also deny the true use of the Creation, and wholly and
plainly take away the Native Power or Force resulting from this Work, to wit,
of obliging Man to obey God in all things. For indeed God cannot of right
require, that a Man should wholly divest himself of the exercise of his
Liberty, which he received by Creation, and deprive himself of the use and
enjoyment of diverse pleasures, and in all things subject himself to the Will of
another, to or with his greatest labor and trouble: if he have now
beforehand, for no fault of his own foregoing, determined to inflict upon him
a far greater and more grevous Evil, then that Good is which he gave him by
Creation: nay, if he therefore bestowed on him that temporal and lighter Good,
that he might under some pretense inflict upon him an Eternal and truly
lamentable Evil absolutely destinated to him before. And now is not a Man by
any right bound to obey him, who before he was disobedient, yea before he was
able to obey, did fatally destine him to this Eternal Evil. Moreover the
Authors of this Opinion do not only make God unwise, for that he destinateth
him who is not yet in being (yea of whose being there is nothing yet decreed)
unto Eternal Life or Death; but also most unjust, and consequently the true and
proper Author of Sin. For if God, as they are pleased to speak, has
predestined his innocent or harmless Creature to an Eternal, and really
dreadful destruction; it is necessary likewise, that he destinated the same
unto Sin also: Genesis 18. 23, 24, 25. Ezekiel. 18. 4. Isa. 50. 1. and 59. 2. Romans 3.
5, 6.
because where there is no sin, or transgression, there punishment or penal
perdition cannot justly take place; and so neither a just Destination or
Appointment unto any punishment, much less unto eternal torments, and
everlasting and endless lamentations and wailings. Therefore, See Calvin on the
said pla^^s.
according to the Opinion of these Men, even God himself most properly, and by
reason of his prime intention, will be the truest Cause of sin, for that he is
the alone Cause of Destination both to destruction and sin. Nor can a Man now
be justly punished for such a sin unto which he was precisely (or absolutely)
destined of God, and consequently unto which he is by the most powerful Will or
Decree and Ordination of God at last compelled.

CHAP. VI. Of the Providence of God, or his Preservation and Government of
things.
1. CReation is immediately suceeded What Providence is.
by Gods Actual Providence, which in the mean while also extends it self to
the Work of Redemption, and to all both Ages and Works, and things, which are,
or come to pass in this World. For this is nothing else, Psalm. 36. 6, 7. and
94. 7, etc. also 104. and 105. and 106. and 107. Prove. 16. 7, 9, 33. Isa. 45.
6, etc. Amos. 2. 6, etc.
but a serious and continual Inspection, Care and Government of this whole
Universe, but chiefly of Man (for whose good, unto the glory of God all things
were created and made) or the Conservation and upholding of all Creatures, to
wit, both of things and persons: also the governing and directing of our
actions; and of all events (whether they be good or evil) which in time in any
manner befall the Creatures, and especially Men, but most of all the Godly: and
this instituted and contrived according to the most exact rule of Divine
Wisdom, Justice and Equity.

2. This therefore is partly general, 2 Kinds. General in reference to ^ll
Creatures.
Mat. 6. 26. and 10. 29, 30.
as it respects all Creatures, partly special, 1 Cor. 9. 9. 1 Timothy 4. 10.
as it concerns Angels and Men; but most of all as it concerns the Godly and
Saints. By his general Providence God takes care of, and governs all things,
whatsoever and wheresoever; Psalm. 10. and 11. with others already cited.
yet in a different manner and diverse degrees of actings, and that according to
his own Eternal good Pleasure and truly to be admired Wisdom. For he does not
only conserve their natures, or properties, and powers or force; but he also
uses them according to his free power and pleasure, either for the good or
punishment of Man, to wit, by communicating them, or by denying them, by taking
them away, by transferring them, by exciting or stirring them up, by giving
check to them, by repressing them, by directing or disposing of them, by
multiplying them, by lessening them, by intending or strengthening them, by
remitting or weakening or abateing them, etc. Either as the Goodness, or Grace
or Mercy and Long-suffering of God; or on the contrary his Revenge, or Wrath
and Severity shall think meet to require. The special Providence of Special in
reference to Angels.
God about the Angels, Genesis 28. 12. and 32. 1, 2. and 48. 16. Exodus 14. 19. and
23. 20, 21. Psa. 91. 12. 2 King. 16. 17. and 19. 35. Isa. 6. 3, 4. and 37. 36.
Mark 18. 20. Luke 22. 43 Heb. 1. 14.
so far indeed as is revealed unto us in the Scriptures, has been already
sufficiently showed before in their Creation. For God uses their service both
for to manifest his own Glory, and also for to govern all the parts of the
World; and in special he makes use of their singular and passing both Wisdom,
Power, Swiftness, Number, or Multitude, etc. And that indeed for to instruct,
take care of, observe, keep and comfort Men, or even also to punish them, as he
judges it comportant with his own Glory, or the Safety and Salvation of his
People. And about Men, or rather Special in reference unto Men.
about the free, and especially about the Religious Operations of Men, it is
diverse ways exercised and employed. For first he limiteth and boundeth the
liberty of their Will, by Legislation or making Laws: Exodus 20. 1, etc. Deuteronomy.
20. Isa. ^. 19. Gal. 3. 19.
that Man cannot without sin, either will or do, whatsoever he has a Will and
a Mind to do: yea chiefly for this very end, that he may not will, nor do but
those things that are right and just: and that by that means, as a lively
Image, he might reflect or look back upon his Creator, and remain always freely
subject to him. Again, Exodus 19. 5, etc. Deuteronomy. 27 and 28. 2 Cor. 5. 11. and 7.
1. 2 Pet. 1. 3, 4. 1 John 3. 5. Rev. 3. 18. Ezekiel. 18. 30, etc. Act. 2 22, etc.
and 10. 38. Psalm. 81. 14. Isa. 48. 18.
that Man might willingly and cheerfully yield and perform the said Obedience,
God ratifies and confirms the Law which he makes for him by notable and great
Promises and Threatenings: and that he may the more effectually and the better
draw out and procure the same, he makes use of diverse Persuasions,
Exhortations, Entreaties, Signs, mighty Works and Wonders with him, etc. And
does excite, put forward, help, and strengthen him, as far indeed as is
sufficient, that Man might really and truly obey him, and persevere in such
his Obedience even to the end. Thirdly, Psalm. 10. 17. and 18. 20. and 33. 18.
Romans 12. 1, 2. Heb. 13. 16 Mal. 3. 16, 17.
his Obedience, and Actions obedientially performed, he does with special care
observe, approve of, delight in them, and always faithfully remember them as
worthy of his promised gracious Reward, and as such continually sets them in
his sight.

3. As touching Disobedience or Psalm. 5. 5, 6. and 11. 5, 6. Zech. 8. 17. Psalm.
81. 15. Act. 1416.
Sins, Providence about sins.
although he hate it with the greatest Hatred, yet does he wittingly and
willingly permit or suffer it to be, yet not with such a permission, the which
being granted, Disobedience cannot but follow; (for so disobedience would as
necessarily follow from Gods permission, as the effect does its cause, and by
this means God would be altogether the Author of sin: yea sin would indeed be
no longer sin, much less worthy of Eternal punishment) but which being granted,
Man only may become actually disobedient (though not without danger or
punishment) if he be altogether so minded or will. For What permission is.
true Permission requires, that not only the power of the Will be free in it
self, but also that the use and exercise of the said power be free also, and
indifferently disposed or inclined to the opposites or contraries; or that it
remain free from all necessity whatever both inward and outward. Secondly,
Prove. 16. 9. and 21. 1. Ezekiel. 21. 20, 21, 22. Genesis 45. 3, etc. and 50. 20, 21.
Isa. 10. 5, etc. Joh. 7. 30. and 18. 5, etc. Luke 22. 53. Mat. 24. 22. 1 Cor.
10. 13. Psalm. 124. and 125. 2 Pet. 2. 9. 2 Cor. 4. 8, 9.
the actions that flow or proceed from Disobedience he variously according to
his own Infinite Wisdom, directs them, either unto this or that object, and
to some certain end, what for matter and kind he pleases, Man himself
oftentimes knowing nothing of it, nor suspecting any such matter, yea sometimes
when it is wholly against his Will: and he does withal so determine or bound
them, that they do not always really come into act, when the Devil and Wicked
Men would have them, neither are so many, nor so grievous, nor last so long, as
they would desire them. Thirdly, Exodus 34. 7. Romans 9. 18. Nahum. 1. 2, 3. Psalm.
11. 6.
being committed he punishes, or remitteth them, as seems good to himself.
But he never decrees evil actions, that they should be; nor does he approve of
them, nor love them; Jam 1. 13.
neither does he ever properly bid or command them: much less so as to cause or
procure them, or to stir up or force any one to them, and for the same so
procured by himself to punish and take vengeance on him: but he always
seriously hates and Psalm. ^. 5. Zech. 8. 1^. Jer. 15. 1. Ezekiel 14. 14. Romans 1.
25, etc. and 2. 5, etc. 2 These 2. 10, 11.
detests them; and therefore does holily prohibit and forbid them, and at
length does punish sinners, especially the rebellious and obstinate, severely
for them.

4. The manner of this same Providence The various manner of Previdence about
diverse kinds of things and men.
does vary, both in respect of quantity and also of quality. In respect of
quantity: because first it does not primarily nor equally extend its care and
affection to all its objects alike. For it takes care of Men first, and more 1
Cor. 9. 9. Mat. 6. 26, 27.
than of other living Creatures; and among Men more of the Godly Psalm. 33. 18.
1 Pet. 5. 7. Psalm. 105. 5.
than of the ungodly; and among the Godly those that are eminent, that is,
those who excel or are eminent either for Virtue, 2 Chronicles. 16. 22. Act. 18. 10.
Psalm. 73. 1, etc. Zech. 2. 8. Psalm. 91. 11, 12. Mat. 4. 6.
or places of Office, and Divine Gifts, either in the Church or Commonwealth,
above others: Whereunto also belongs that of the Apostle, Does God take care
for Oxen? Secondly, he does love and accept more of internal actions morally
good in themselves, than of bare or mere Persons. Genesis 4. 7. Pro. 16. 7. Jer.
7. 3. etc. Heb. 11. 5. 6. Joh. 14. 22, 23. and 15. 14. and 16. 27.
For such or such actions do not therefore please him, because the person does
in some respect or other please him; but on the contrary, because these actions
please him, therefore the Person pleases him. Thirdly, toward Persons not yet
doing their duty (whether because of gross Ignorance, under which through the
corruption of the times they still labor; or by reason of some finful habit,
happily more deeply rooted than ordinarily, and which they cannot easily put off)
he oftentimes exercises greater Patience, Act. 17. 30. 1 Timothy 1. 13. Rev. 2.
and 3. Heb. 6. 4, etc. and 10. 26, 27, 28. 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21.
Longsuffering and Forbearance, than toward those that are illuminated, and do
either constantly, or ever and anon make head against or resist their
enlightened Conscience, or have more frequently relapsed. Fourthly, about those,
who are truly pious and already do their duty, he ordinarily shows greater
Psalm. 5. 11, 12. and 18. 20, etc. Mat. 13. 12. and 25. 29. 1 Cor. 1. 7. Phil.
1. 6. Rev. 3. 9. 10.
Affection, Pleasure, Study, and Care about them than about any others. Whence
also he affords them more and greater Assistances of his Grace, Gifts of his
Holy Spirit, and Means of Salvation, than to others; yea he is wont to bear
with them with greater Patience and Forbearance, and more ardent Zeal, when
they fall through infirmity, then with others. Fifthly and lastly, toward those
who altogether do not their duty, and are guilty of long contumacy and
rebellion, he commonly exercises greater hatred and wrath toward them, than
toward any other sinners whatsoever, to wit, by laying upon Psalm 5. 5, etc.
Psalm. 109. 17, etc. E^od. 7, and 8. Lev. 26. 14, etc. Isa. 6. 9. Joh. 12. 40 2
These. 2. 11. To. 2. 25, etc. Ephesians. 2. 2. and 4. 17, 18, 19.
them oftentimes more then ordinary grievous curses: Sometimes also by blinding
them, by hardening them, by delivering them up unto the efficacy of error, and
unto their own corrupt desires, and unto a reprobate mind, (which does not so
much as approve of what is right, nor justly approve it self to any other) yea
up into the power of Satan himself, who works powerfully in the Children of
disobedience. Lastly, sometimes by punishing them exemplarily and openly, Exodus
9. 16. Isa. 14. 4. Dan. 4. 28, 29, etc. Act. 12. 23.
asit were upon the Theater of the World before the Sun, and in the sight of
others he magnificently makes show of his just displeasure and terrible power
in them.

5. It varieth in respect of quality: Another diversity from the manner of
working.
because, first, about some objects, either to effect them, or to hinder them
from being effected, or for the directing of them, God uses his absolute and
irresistible Omnipotency; 2 Chro. 20 27, 28. Isa. 10. 5, 6, 7. etc. ^h. 46. 10.
Act 7. ^1. etc.
about others he affords his concurse and help fit and accommodate to things,
and as it were attempered to our own nature. Secondly, some things he does
immediately work by himself, other he works mediately by Angels, men or other
creatures. 3. some things he accomplisheth as it were by a Physical or natural
action or way of working; other he effects by an ethical or moral Operation:
and both these are done according to the natures and faculties or powers
implanted in things in their Creation: seldom indeed above, but never contrary
to them. Lastly, he does administer or manage and order all things in the best
manner, that is, always for the most part agreeable to his own nature, and the
nature of things.

6. Wherefore although the Providence A consectary for contingency and the
liberty of the will.
of God do intervene or interess it self in Prove. 16 4. etc. chapter 21. 1. etc.
all the deeds, words and thoughts of all Men; and God thereby disposes of all
outward actions, and events of all things according to his alone pleasure: yet
the natural contingency. of things, and the innate Deuteronomy. 30. 15. etc. 1 Chro.
21. 10, etc. Isa. 1. 19, etc. Act. 5. 4. etc. 1 Cor. 7. 37. 2 Cor. ^. 11. and
9. 7.
liberty of Man's will, once long since given it in Creation, he does never take
away thereby: but leaves ordinarily the natures of things safe and entire: and
in such sort concurreth with the will of Man in acting, that he suffers it also
to act acording to its own nature, and freely perform its part: and therefore
does not at any time lay upon it a necessity of doing well, much less of doing
ill.

7. There is therefore nothing that comes 2. Against Fortune ^ Fate.
to pass any where in the whole World rashly or by chance; that is, God either
not knowing of it, or not regarding it, or only idly looking on; much less he
altogether withstanding it, or being wholly against it, and not in the least
willing to permit it. And there is nothing also done by Man, whether good or
evil, altogether fatally and incontingently, or precisely necessarily, that is,
God violently forcing their Wills to this or that* or at least offering any
irresistible force to any Men, by any absolute and evermore efficacious decree
(whether you will call it effective or permissive, as some are pleased fondly
to speak) to do so, or otherwise.

8. Therefore by reason of the true 3. Against the Epicureans, Stoics, etc.
Providence of God (to wit, wisely, holily, and righteously moderating or
ruling all things) there is no place left at any time in the World, either for
the blind fortune and brute temerity of the Epicureans, or for the Iron and
fatal necessity of the Stoics, Manichaeans, or Predestinarians. Which two
rocks, as being indeed extremely prejudicial and dangerous, are chiefly in this
point or matter to be taken heed of and avoided. From whence furthermore those
who are truly pious, being rightly informed of al^ these things, in Adversity
become always patient, and Job. 1. 21. and 2. 10. Psalm. 18. and 116. 12, 13,
etc. Mat. 6. 25, etc. 2 Timothy 4. 17, 18.
in prospetity al^ was thankful toward God; and moreover for the future also
do repose willingly or freely and constantly their chiefest confidence in God,
as their mos^ faithful and trusty Father.

CHAP. VII. Of the Sin and Misery of Man.
1. BOth these Works of the Divine Sin goes before Redemption.
Goodness, of which we have spoken, to wit, Creation and Providence, are
seconded or followed by a singular Work of Grace and Mercy: but such as unto
which sin it self has ministered a certain occasion, Romans 3. 20. etc. and 5.
12. etc. and 6. 20. etc.
and, which is the consequent of sin, the just punishment, or penal or
miserable Estate of Man: from which they that believe are freely delivered by
Christ: of which things we are hereafter in order to treat.

2. Sin was at first in this manner Of Adam's first Sin.
brought into the World. Genesis 2. 17.
Man being created with such Faculties as we have said, God gave him a Law, of
not eating of the Fruit of the Tree of the knowledge of Good and Evil, standing
in the midst of the Gar^en, under the pain of Eternal Death and diverse Miseries
besides. That Law Adam brake, Genesis 3. 1. etc. Romans 5. 12. etc. 1 Timothy 2. 13,
14. 2 Cor. 11. 3.
together with Eve his Wife, being beguiled by Satan, and deceived by his false
persuasions. He brake it, I say, not only by a Spontaneous Will, or a Will not
forced, but by a Will Exodus 7. 29. Romans 5. 18, 19. Genesis 2. 1. etc.
altogether free: because he was not forced either by any outward violent
impulse, or any secret and hidden determination or necessitation (proceeding
either from God, or the Devil) to will to pluck or eat of the Forbidden Fruit:
nor did he fall into the sin, through any withdrawing or denying (which some
ignorantly call permission or the efficacious permissive Decree) of any Divine
Virtue, or action necessary for the A confutation of the error touching the
manner and cause of this Sin.
avoiding of sin: nor lastly was he impelled or moved by any Power, Command or
Instinct, althoughn ever so secret or hidden, to transgressof or from God: (to
wit, that God might have an opportunity to exercise his sparing or pardoning
Mercy, and punitive Justice) as some perversely teach. For by this means God
would truly, properly and chiefly, nay solely be the Author of Sin: yea by this
means that transgression would not be truly and properly sin at all: not could
Man by reason thereof have become truly guilty, or justly miserable thereby:
furthermore, neither had God therefrom gotten an opportunity of showing Mercy
and exercising Justice, as truly and properly such: But Man by the mere pure
liberty of his Will, altogether free both from all inward and outward
necessity, only the permission of God intervening, and the alone swasion and
motion of the Devil, the which Man might easily have resisted and not listened
unto, preceding, and the Beauty and Gracefulness of the Fruit in the case
outwardly enticing, he committed this sin.

3. By this transgression Man by Virtue The guilt arising the^e^ro^.
of the Divine Threatening became Guilty of G^n. 2. 17 and 3. 16. etc. Romans 5
12. etc. Genesis 3. 21. etc. Rev. 2. 7. and 21. 14.
Eternal Death, and manifold Misery: and was stripped of that primaeve Happiness
which he received in his Creation, and therefore cast out of that most
delightful Garden, (a Type of the Celestial Paradise) in which otherwise he
did happily converse with God: and was for ever debarred from the Tree of Life;
which was the Symbol or token or pledge of a Blessed Immortality.

4. And because Ada^ was the Stock The propagation thereof unto his P^sterity.
and Root of all Mankind, therefore he involved and entangled not only himself,
but also all his Act. 17. 26 Heb. 7. 10. Romans 5. 12. etc. Joh. 14.
posterrity (who were as it were shut up in his loins, and were by Natural
Generation to proceed from him) in the same Death and Misery with himself: so
that all Men without any difference, our Lord Jesus Christ only excepted, are
by this one only Sin of Adam deprived of that primaeve Happiness, and destitute
of that true Righteousness, which is necessary for the obtaining of Eternal
Life, and consequently are now born liable to that Eternal Death, and likewise
manifold Misery, that we spoke of. And this is usually and vulgarly called
Original Sin. Concerning which, notwithstanding we are to hold, that the most
bountiful God, in and by his beloved Son Jesus Christ, as in and by another and
new Adam, has provided or prepared a free Remedy for all against that Evil or
Malady, which was derived unto us from Adam. So that even from hence the
mischievous error of those, who use to lay the ground of the Decree of
absolute Reprobation, being a thing forged their own Brains and Fancy, in this
sin, See the Canons of the Synod of D^rt. chapter 1. at the beginning.
may sufficiently appear.

5. Besides this sin, there are also other, Actual Sins.
which are every Man's own proper Sins or actual Sins, Genesis 6. 5. and 8. 21. 2
Cor. 4. 3. Ephesians. 4. 17, 18, 19. Jer. 13. 23. Joh. 8. 24. Romans 7. 14, etc. 2 Pet.
2. 19.
the which also do really multiply our Guilt before God, and do in things
Spiritual darken our Minds, nay and by degrees blind them, and lastly by
custom in sinning do more and more deprave or pervert our Wills.

6. Of this sort of Sins there are diverse Their Kinds and Degrees.
kinds and several degrees, as may be understood by their several Objects,
Subjects, Causes, Manners, Effects, and Circumstances: to wit, there is one of
Luke 12. 47. Jam. 4. ult.
commission, another of omission: 2 Cor. 7. 1.
one of the Flesh, another of the Spirit: 1 Timothy 1. 13. Luke 23. 34. Act. 3. 17.
one proceeding from ignorance, Gal. 6. 1. Mat. 26. 70. 1 Samuel 25. 13, 21.
another from sudden passion or infirmity, Psalm. 19. 14. Number. 15. 30. etc. Mat.
16. 14. 15. 2 Samuel 11. 15.
another from set Malice: Luke 12. 47. Psalm. 19. 13. Their Destinction into the
works of the Flesh and Lighter Failings.
one against Conscience, another not against Conscience: Romans 6. 12.
one reigning, another not reigning: 1 John 5. 16.
one unto death, another not unto death: Mat. 12. 31, 32. Mar. 3. 29. Luke 12.
10.
one against the Holy Ghost, another not against the Holy Ghost, etc. Hence
concerning these we must always hold this for certain, that there are some
actual sins of which it is either expressly written, or not obscurely hinted,
that he that does them shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven and Eternal
Life, such as are all those works of the Flesh which are described, Gal. 5. 1
Cor. 6. Ephesians. 5. Tit. 3. And elsewhere, and those that are like unto them: Number.
15. 30. Romans 1. 28. and 2. 17. 21, 22, 23. and 3. 8. etc.
whether they be accompanied with a contempt of God, and a manifest abuse of
right Reason: or at least such, as Joh. 2. 15. Mat. 6. 31, 32.
in no wise become him, who is desirous of Eternal and Heavenly good Things:
such as are the love of the World and of the things of the World, anxious and
continual cares and disquieting thoughts about getting them, and possessing
them and keeping them, etc. But there are others that are such, that deserve
rather to be called lighter Failings, then Crimes or Wickednesses, Psalm. 19.
13. Mat. 18. 24. etc. Gal. 5. 17. etc. Heb. 5. 2. Jam. 5. 2. 1 Pet. 4. 8.
which, according to the Gracious Covenant of God, and his fatherly Love and
Kindness, do not exclude a Man from the Hope of Eternal Life; although he be
not yet wholly freed from some one of them: if so be he do not wittingly, and
advisedly bring this difficulty of freeing himself there from upon himself, or
by any other means whatever of continuing in them: but that he falls into
them only through incogitancy, frailty, want of consideration, or some sudden
passion, whether it proceed from some natural temper, or evil custom, or some
unexpected chance, etc. Therefore Acts here are for the most part accurately*
to be distinguished from habits, and, in that respect or kind, manifest
Imperfections and Frailties are likewise carefuly to be distinguished from
those Acts, which are committed against the express and present dictate of
Natural Kinds of punishments.
Reason or Supernatural Revelation, and accompanied with an open transgression
of some Command, and hurt or wrong of our Neighbor (especially according to the
sense of the new Testament.)

7. According to the diverse quantity and quality of Sins, so also are there
Genesis 3. 16. etc. Deuteronomy. 27. 28. Romans 5. 12. and 6. 23.
diverse Punishments appointed and ordained of God for sins: to wit, both of
loss and sense, both temporal and eternal; lastly both bodily and spiritual,
etc.

8. And indeed that twofold Force and A twofold power of Sin, under the old
Testament.
Efficacy of Sin, which has been formerly mentioned (to wit, Damnation or
Death Eternal, and the servitude of Sin, or Captivity under the custom of Sin)
has now long most clearly all along appeared, whilst God did not as yet
plainly and fully reveal his saving Grace or Favor designed before all ages
Jam. 1. 18. M^. 11. 27. Ephesians. 3. 9, 10, 11. 2 Timothy 1. 9, 10. Tit. 2. 11.
unto sinners; but did only afar off, obscurely and as it were through a
Lattice or Casement, make discovery of it, to wit* under a general promise
thereof, Genesis 10. 1 etc. and 17. 7.
and under a Type Heb. 11. 16. and 10. 1. Jo 1. 17. Col. 2. 17.
and shadow of bodily things. For although under the Old Testament there were
not altogether wanting some, who through the Assistance of the said Divine
Grace believed on God and through Faith walked uprightly and sincerely before
God; and by a Life ordered according to the Will of God, shook off the Dominion
of Sin, and by the said lively Faith also were truly justified or absolved from
the guilt of their sins, and endowed with the reward of Eternal Life: Genesis 4.
4, 7. and 5. 24. Heb. 11.
as is clear in the examples of Abel, Enoch, and Abraham the Father of all that
believe, etc. Yet were the most carried away, and as it were 1. before the
^iood.
overwhelmed with the weight of their Sin and load of their Misery. For whereas
at the beginning there was as yet no written Law given; but the dictate of
Natural Reason, Traditions of Fathers, and certain other Divine and Angelical
Revelations, and Apparitions only, God so ordering the matter, did take place
or bear sway amongst Men: Romans 5. 13.
Sin was not only in the World, but also did so far exert and put forth its
power, that all flesh (a few only excepted, who were Genesis 5. 24. and 6. 9. Act.
11. 3.
righteous, and by Faith walked holily before God) corrupted Genesis 6. 5, 11, 12.
and 8. 21.
its way, and every Imagination of Man was only evil from his Childhood. Whence
the Guilt of sin was then so far increased, that an Universal deluge of Water
was brought upon the World of the 2 Pet. 2. 5. 2. After the flood.
Ungodly.

9. Again, after the Flood Sin was not only not washed away, but rather like
leaven, was diffused and spread throughout the whole race of mankind: so that
Josh. 24. 1, 2. Genesis 12. 1, 2.
whole People, Nations, and Countries every where defiled themselves with
Idolatry, and other foul and abominable sins, and in the greatest and largest
Societies or Communities of Men there were Genesis 18. 32.
scarce ten Righteous Persons to be found. At length when God, having passed by
other Nations, Act. 14. 16. Psalm. 147. 19, 20. Deuteronomy. 7. 6, 7, etc. chapter 9. 4, 5,
6, etc.
did choose some certain Men from the rest of the multitude of Idolaters and
Sinners unto himself, and out of his Special Grace did impose or lay upon their
Posterity a written Law, consisting of many and diverse Precepts (moral,
ceremonial, political) Act. 15. 10. Gal. 3. 23.
as a burdensome and insuportable Yoke and Fence, Gal. 3. ^4.
and, that they might be the more effectually restrained from sinning, and
compelled to do their duty, did also ratify and confirm the same by most severe
Lev. 26. 3. etc. Deuteronomy. 27. 15. etc. and 28.
Threatenings and manifold Promises: yea further did ever and anon, by Isa. 61.
1. etc. and 62. 6. etc. 2 Chronicles. 36. 15. Act. 7. 51, 52, 53.
his Prophets and other of his Servants cause the Sermons of his Gracious Will
and Pleasure to be repeated and inculcated upon them for the further let and
hinderance of Transgressions; yet sin nevertheless and notwithstanding all
still prevailed and overcame, and its Dominion was not only not extinct by this
Law, and the Guilt thereof by Romans 5. 20. and 7. 8. Heb. 7. 18, 19* and 7. 20.
and 10. 4. Romans 3. 19, 20. and 11. 32.
the Blood of Bulls and Goats, and other sacrifices of that kind, not taken
away; but sin was ever the more and more increased, and as it were by a prick
or goad stirred up and provoked by the Law; and the Guilt of Death and
Condemnation so far aggravated, that the whole World became shut up under sin,
and liable unto Condemnation.

10. From whence at length the most The use and necesity of the Grace of God.
high necessity, and also advantage of the Grace of God, prepared or
preordained for us in Christ before all ages, has evidently appeared: for
without it we can neither shake off the miserable Yoke of Sin, nor do any thing
truly good in Romans 6. 14. etc. and 7. 1. etc. and 8. 1. etc. Gal. 3. 24. Act 4.
12. and 13. 38, 39.
Religion at all, nor lastly ever escape Eternal Death, or any true punishment
of Sin. Much less are we at any time able without it and of our selves, or by
any other Creatures, to obtain Eternal Salvation.

CHAP. VIII. Of the work of Redemption, and of the Person and Offices of Jesus
Christ.
1. Wherefore it seemed good The work of Redemption what it is.
to the most Merciful God, in 1 Cor. 10. 11. Gal. 4. 4.
the end of the World, or in the fullness of time, in very deed to set upon and
thoroughly to accomplish that most excellent Work, which 1 Pet. 1. 20. Ephesians. 1.
9, 10.
he had foreknown or purposed in himself before the Foundations of the World,
and in successive ages all along under diverse figures, Heb. 9.
shadows and Types (as it were in a rude draught pourtrayed) held forth to be
seen afar off, and darkly known of Men; to wit, the Work of Redemption 2 Cor.
5. 15. etc. Rom 5. 12. etc. chapter 8. 3. etc. 1 Pet. 1. 3, etc. Ephesians. 2. 1, etc.
or of a New Creation: whereby he might of his ^^eer Grace and Mercy deliver
Man, who by reason of sin was become liable to Eternal-Death and Condemnation,
and lay in miserable sort under the bondage of sin, from the said Guilt, and
restore him unto the Hope of an eternal and immortal Life; and minister to him
sufficient, yea and superabundant Power and Ability, to cast off the Dominion
of Sin, and to obey the Will of God with his whole Heart.

2. This Work God has accomplished The Execution or accomplishment thereof by
Christ,
by his one only begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ: Joh. 3. 16, etc. and 8.
26. Man* 11: 27. Joh. 1. 18. Act. 4. 12. and 10. 43. Gal. 4. 4, etc. Tit. 2 11,
12.
whom indeed he therefore sent into the World, not only that he might by him
most openly declare, and diverse ways confirm his most Merciful Will, concerning
his bestowing Eternal Life freely upon Sinners that do seriously and truly
repent and believe; but also in very deed, that he might through his most holy
Obedience, and the effectual working of his Holy Spirit in us, as far as in him
lies, by degrees bring us to the said wished and desired end.

3. Furthermore, the whole Knowledge Of the person of Christ.
of this Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, as far indeed as is savingly
necessary, consists chiefly of two parts. For it respects partly his Person,
and partly his Office. In respect of his Person Jesus Christ is true and
Eternal God, Joh. 1. 1. etc. and chapter 20. 28. Romans 9. 5. 1 John 5. 20.
and withal true and perfectly just Man, 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6. Mat. 16: 16. 1 Cor.
10. ^1 22. Romans ^. 3,
in one and the same person: for that he is the natural, only begotten and
proper Son of God, Joh. 1. 14. etc. and chapter 3. 18. Romans 1. 3, 4. and 8. 32.
Gal. 4. 4. Luke 2. 31, etc. Heb. 414. Of the Truth, Perfection etc. of his
humane nature.
in the fullness of time, by the Operation of the Holy Ghost, made true and
entire Man, and born of the Virgin Mary, without any Spot or Stain of Sin.

4. And he was not only true, or entire and perfect Man, as to his substance,
to wit, consisting of a true humane body, and a reasonable Soul: but also truly
obnoxious, or subject to the same Infirmities, Joh. 1. 14. etc. Heb. 2. 14.
etc. and 4. 15. and 5. 7. To. 1. 3. and 8. 3. Gal. 4. 4, etc.
Passions, Miseries, Afflictions, Troubles, Griefs, Sorrows, Ignominy,
Reproaches, and consequently the most sharp or bitter Death, as we are: and
that for this very end, that being in all things made like unto his Brethren
(yet without Sin) he might be our merciful and Faithful high Priest in things
pertaining unto God, to expiate the Sins of the People. And this is meant by
that Article of the Apostles Creed concerning Christ Jesus, I believe in Jesus
Christ, the only begotten Son of God, our Lord: who was conceived by the Holy
Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary.

5. The Office of Jesus Christ is threefold: His threefold Office and twofold
estate.
Prophetical, Priestly, and Kingly: Luk 1. 32, 33. Act. 3. 22, 23. Heb. 5. ^,
7. Rev. 1. 5, and 19. 16. His State of humiliation.
all which he did partly now long since in this World in his State of
Humiliation and abasement or emptying of himself faithfully administer, and now
also partly does gloriously administer or discharge in Heaven, in his State of
Glory and Exaltation. Unto the former State pertain these Articles following: 1 Timothy 6. 13. Act. 2. 36. 1 Cor. 1. 23, and 2. 2. Ephesians. 4. 9. Psalm. 2. 4, etc.
Heb. 2. 16.
He suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried, he descended
into Hell. By which, as it were by certain Steps or Degrees, the whole
Humiliation of Jesus Christ, to wit, such as became him as our Prophet, and
Priest, Of Exaltation and Glory
was leisurely consummated and finished. Unto the latter are to be referred
these Mar. 16. 19, 20. Romans 8. 34. Heb. 7. 25. and 8, 1, etc.
The third day he rose again from the dead, he ascended up into Heaven, he
sits at the right hand of God the Father Almighty: from thence he shall come
to judge the quick and the dead. By which things is excellently described,
partly a certain preparation unto both the Kingly and Pontificial Dignity of
Jesus Christ, partly this very Dignity it self, and the magnificent exertion,
or showing forth of the same.

6. His Prophetical Office he has now His Prophetical Office.
long since fully performed and finished, not only when he openly revealed unto
us by Joh. 1. 18. and 5. 19. 2 Timothy 1. 10.
his Gospel the Will of God concerning the communicating of Salvation truly
such, or of Eternal life to all that only believe and obey after death: but
has also by manifest Signs Joh. 5. 36. etc. chapter 15. 24. Act. 2. 22. and 10. 36.
and Miracles too great to be questioned or excepted against, and also by 1.
Pet. 2. 21. Phil. 2. 5, etc.
the example of his own proper Obedience, both in his life and death most
evidently confirmed it; and withal yet further after his death he has most
substantially by diverse arguments, for Act. 1. 3. etc. Joh. 20. and 21.
forty days together, asserted and proved the same.

7. His Priestly Office he partly performed 2. Priestly.
long since, when at his Father's * Phil. 2. 8.
command, whom submissively obeying, he underwent on our behalf the cursed
death of the Ephesians. 5. 2. Gal. 3. 13. Heb. 2. 9, 10. and 10. 5, 6. 1 John 2. 2.
Cross, and offered up himself to God his Father as a propitiatory Sacrifice
for the Sins of all Mankind, and suffered himself being innocent to beslain
upon the Altar of the Cross: Rom 8. 34. Heb. 7. 24, 25.
partly he does yet still daily perform the same, whilst being alive again he
continually appears in Heaven before the Face of God, for the sake of Men,
and does in effectual and glorious wise intercede for those that believe,
showing himself indeed at all times and in all places a most faithful Advocate
and Patron to them.

8. His Kingly Office he does even 3. Kingly.
now continually exercise, since, being once raised from Death by the Father,
and advanced to the Throne of Supreme Majesty Heb. 1. 3. Rev. 3. 21. 1 These. 1.
10. Psa. 110. 1.
in Heaven, and set down at the right hand of God on high, Man. 28. 19. Act. 2.
36.
and having obtained all power in Heaven and Earth, he rules every where in
magnificent manner: and indeed he does so dispose of and govern Ephesians. 1. 20, 21,
22, etc. and 4. 11, etc. Psalm. 2. 8, etc. and 110. 1, etc.
all things according to his own Will and Pleasure, that he does chiefly and in
the first place consult the Safety and Salvation of his faithful ones: to wit,
since he has not only now long since instituted the Ministry of the Gospel for
our good, but does also continually in powerful-wise preserve it against all
sorts of Obstacles or Hindrances, and therein still admirably does exert his
own spiritual Efficacy: and whil^t he does by his Spirits and Angels, his
Ministers and Attendants, powerfully guard, protect and defend even in this
Life Rev. 2, and 3. Act. 12. 11. and 18. 10. Heb. 14.
his faithful Subjects against the Devices, Wiles, Snares, Force and Power of
Satan, Tyrants and all other their Enemies: until he shall in the last Mat. 25.
30, etc. 1 Cor. 15. 24. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8, 9. ^ Thessalonians 4. 17. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9, 10.
Mat. 24. 31.
Judgment utterly destroy the one, and take up the other into his heavenly and
immortal Glory, and make them everlastingly happy and blessed. And indeed upon
these Offices is built both the Knowledge and Worship, proper and peculiar to
Jesus Christ as he is Mediator, of which hereafter in their order and place.

9. But from hence it appears that Jesus Christ is not our Savior in one
way, or upon one account only and alone, to wit, not only by his Preaching
Example and Martyrdom or Suffering: or that he is not so only therefore,
because he has declared unto us the way of Eternal Life and confirmed it by
Miracles, also by the examplariness of his Life, and by his Death, and by this
means has purchased to himself a Supreme power and virtue to save us: But
withal indeed by virtue of Merit with or toward God, and Efficacy arising or
proceeding therefrom, and immediately respecting us. By virtue of Merit
doubtless or Desert, Mat. 20 28. Rom 5. 8, 9, 19 Phil. 2. 5, etc. Tim. 2. 5, 6.
because he has merited eternal Salvation for us by his Obedience, or because
by the Mediation hereof, especially of his violent and bloody Death, (as by a
(...), or Price of Redemption, and propitiatory Sacrifice) God has thus far
reconciled all Sinners unto himself, that for the sake of this Price of
Redemption and Sacrifice he was pleased to be at one with them again, and to
open the door of eternal Salvation, and way of Immortality to them: even as it
was prefigured many ages before under diverse Types, Figures, and Shadows Lev.
16. Heb. 9, and 10.
of the Old Testament, and especially under the Type of that solemn Sacrifice,
which the High Priest once every year performed in the Holy of Holies. And he
is our Savior indeed by way of Efficacy, Romans 3. 34, etc. chap. 14. 9. 1 Jol
2. 12. He^ 4. 4, etc. 1 P^t. 1. 3.
in as much as he does effectually apply the Spiritual virtue and fruit of the
said Merit of his, to his faithful Followers, and really affords it to them to
enjoy, and makes them through Faith really partakers of all those Benefits,
which he by his Obedience has purchased for them, of which more afterward.

10. But those Men, who hold that there The Confutation of an Error.
was both an absolute Election, and an absolute Reprobation of certain Persons
(whether considered before the Fall, or only under or after the Fall, without
Faith in Christ on the one hand, or Disobedience on the other hand) was in
order first made and past, before Jesus Christ was designed of the Father as a
Mediator for them, they enervate, nay do wholly and utterly overthrow the
universal force and virtue of this same Merit, and the truth and reality of its
Efficacy. Neither indeed was it necessary, that there should be made any true
or real Expiation of Sins by the (...), or Redemption of Christ for them, nay,
nor indeed was it so much as possible (if Truth may be freely spoken) who were
now long before by name peremptorily and absolutely destinated or appointed,
part unto Life, part unto Death. For the Elect as they call them, or those who
are predestined unto Life, have no need of any such Expiation and
Reconciliation; because upon the very account of their being precisely or
absolutely elected unto Salvation, they are like wise upon the same account in
actual Favor with God, and already necessarily beloved of him, with the
highest and immutable Love, and such as is peculiar to those that are Sons and
Heirs of God. And as for the Reprobate, as they call them, they themselves deny
that there was, or is any Atonement truly made for them; and besides, the thing
is absurd of it self, as that which implies a contradiction. For upon their
being reprobated, according to these Men's Opinion, they are thereupon wholly
and altogether excluded from the Atonement made by Christ. Because those, whom
God has by an immutable Decree once reprobated or excluded from Salvation, or
devoted to to eternal Destruction, he does not seriously will, nor can will,
nor can will, that any thing savingly good should really be conferred upon
them, much less that the said Atonement should be common to them with the
Elect. And thus far in general of the chief Works of God hitherto.

CHAP. IX. Of the Knowledge of the Will* of God, revealed in the New Covenant.
1. FUrthermore the Will of God, A twofold Will of God in the New Testament.
Jer. 31. 31, etc. Heb. 8. 9. and 9. 15, etc. chapter 10. 15, etc.
comprehended in the Covenant of Grace, which our most high Prophet the only
begotten Son of God has clearly and fully revealed unto us in his Gospel,
contains two chief heads: First, those things which God on his part by his Son
Jesus Christ has decreed to do or work in us, or about us, that we may be made
partakers of that eternal Salvation that is offered to us by him. Secondly,
those things which he altogether wills by the mediation or means of his own
Grace to be done by us, if we will really obtain eternal Salvation.

2. Those things, which God has decreed A Subdivision of the former.
to do on his part in order to our Salvation, are chiefly two. 1. He has
decreed for the honor of his beloved Son, by him to choose unto himself for
Sons unto Salvation and Life eternal, to adopt, justify, seal with his Holy
Spirit, and at last to glorify Joh. 3. 16. etc. chapter 6. 29. Ephesians. 1. 3, 4, etc.
Romans 8. 28, etc. 2 Timothy 1. 9, etc. Heb. 3. 6, 14.
all those, and those only, who truly believe in his Name, or obey his Gospel,
and persevere in the said Faith and Obedience even unto death: and on the
contrary to reprobate or reject from Life and Salvation Joh. 3. 18, 36. Mat.
25. 41, etc.
Unbelievers and Impenitent Persons, and everlastingly to condemn them. 2. He
has decreed through or by his same Son, to confer or bestow upon all that are
called, although wretched Sinners, such effectual Grace, Tit. 2. 11, 12. Act.
3. 26. and 5. 31. and 26. 16, etc. 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20. and 6. 1. 2 Pet. 1. 3,
4.
as by which they may be truly and really enabled to believe on Christ their
Savior, obey his Gospel, and be delivered from the Dominion and Guilt of Sin:
yea also by which they may actually believe, obey, and be delivered, unless by
a new Contumacy and Rebellion they reject the Grace of God that is offered unto
them.

3. The first Decree is the Decree of Predestination unto Salvation.
Predestination unto Salvation, or of Election unto Glory, whereby is
established as well the real necessity as profitableness of our Faith and
Obedience in reference to our obtaining Salvation and Glory: before which
dogmatically to See Calv. and the Canons of the Synod of Dort.
assign or assent another Decree first or before it in order, whereby some
certain particular Persons by name were elected, and that indeed peremptorily
unto Glory; and that all other were reprobated unto eternal Torments, is indeed
to deny the true nature of this Decree, to invert its right order, to take away
the Merit of Christ, to darken the Glory both of the Goodness, and
Righteousness, and Wisdom of God; yea, utterly to subver^ the true Force and
Efficacy of the whole Sacred Ministry, and so of all Religion.

4. The other Decree is the Decree of Vocation unto Faith.
Vocation unto Faith, or of Election unto Grace: whereby is established the
necessity, together with the profit or advantage of Romans 10. 14, etc. 2 Timothy 1.
9, 10. Tit. 2. 11, 12.
Divine Grace, or of means necessary for us, unto our yiedling Faith and
Obedience unto Jesus Christ on our part according to the Will of God revealed
in his Gospel. But because we ought to be first certain of, or clear in that
Will of God, that he will have to be performed by us, before we be certain of
the Grace that is necessary for our performance of the said Will, and before we
be certain of the Glory that is promised to, and undoubtedly hereafter to be
conferred upon those that do the Will of God: hence is it that we shall treat
of them all henceforth in the same order, wherein they have been propounded or
laid down.

CHAP. X. Of the Precepts or Commandments of Jesus Christ in general, and of
Faith, and Repentance, or Conversion unto God.
1. THe Will of God, which he would The Sum of the Precepts or Commandments of
the New Testament.
have performed or done by us, that we might obtain eternal Salvation by
Christ, is fully contained in the Precepts or Commands of Jesus Christ: all
which, Mat. 5, and 6, and 7.
although they be many and diverse, yet may be comprehended under this one
Precept or Commandment of Faith in Joh. 3. 16, etc. Romans 1. 16, 17. 3. 22.
Jesus Christ (but withal of such as is lively, or true, and works by Love)
and for the most part in the sacred Scriptures they are usually comprehended
under the same: Although in the said Scriptures Mat. 3. 2. and Act. 3. 19, etc.
the Precept also of Repentance, or Conversion, for the clearer explication of
the thing, is often usually added thereto.

2. Now we call that a living and true Saving Faith includes the whole Piety of
the New Testament.
Faith, Gal. 5. 6. and 6 15. 1 Cor. 7. 19. Jam. 2. 14, etc.
which has necessarily in conjunction with it good Works, and a sincere
Reformation or Amendment of the whole life, ordered and regulated according to
the Commands of Jesus Christ. For because the J^. 3. 36. and 6. 40.
Promise of eternal Life is every where by our Savior annexed or joined to
true Faith, yea Romans 4. 5 etc.
Faith it self is said to be imputed for Righteousness to him that believes:
and yet nevertheless James affirms, that we are justified by J^m. 2. 24.
Works also, and not by Faith alone: and 1 Timothy 4. 8.
Paul also asserts, that Godliness has the Promise of the Life that now is,
and of that which is to come; yea further, the Heb. 12. 14.
Author to the Hebrews does peremptorily avouch, that without Holiness no Man
shall see the Lord, and other things to the same M^t. 7. 21, etc. Heb. 10. 36.
Jam. 1. 15.
sense or import not a few are expressly read in the Holy Scriptures: doubtless
it is necessary that the Command of Faith be no otherwise considered here, than
as it includes in its own natural property the Obedience of Faith, and is as it
were a fruitful 1 John 5. 1, etc. 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7, etc. Ephesians. 3. 17, etc.
Mother of all good Works, and the Fountain or Spring of all Christian Piety
and Holiness. So little reason is there, why it self ought or of right may be
opposed to the said Obedience and Piety.

3. Faith therefore thus considered, What true Conversion is.
contains within its orb or circuit the whole Conversion of Man, as it is
prescribed in or by the Gospel: which does not only contain Penitence, vulgarly
so called, or Contrition, and serious Sorrow for Sins past, but also Mat. 3. 3.
Act. 3. 1^. Luke 13. 3, 5. Act. 26. 18. 1 These. 1. 9. Joh. 3. 5, etc. Gal. 6.
15. Ephesians. 2 1, etc. chapter 5. 14.
Repentance plainly and properly taken; or a sincere change of the Mind, Heart
and whole Life according to the Scriptures for or unto the better: although
also some times, Act. 16. 18, etc.
for the fuller explicating of both, the one in the Scripture is distinguished
from the other.

4. And of this every Christian in general The three necessary requisites or a
lyuncts of it.
must hold this, to wit, that Repentance or Conversion may be accepted of God
unto Salvation, there are three things ordinarily necessarily thereunto 1. That
it be Jam. 1. 22. and 2. 26. and 4. 15. 2 Pet. 1. 8, 9. chapter 11. Romans 8. 1.
effectual, and therefore is not completed and perfected by a mere Velleity or
light woulding only, or mere Affection, or bare Desire of, or Endeavor after
Piety: But also that continually, as often as there is occasion, and it may be
done, it exert and put forth it self outwardly in acts of virtue; to wit, in
such sort, that a man neither Joh. 8. 34. ^ Joh. 3. 7, 8, 9.
neglect himself what is commanded, nor wilfully or purposely does that, which
he knows to be evil or forbidden, Romans 14. 32.
or that whereof, he doubts whether it be pleasing to God or no: And also
that he does not Ephesians. 5. 11. 2 Pet. 2. 8. Rev. 2. 2.
connive or wink at the Sins of others, and by his Consent, Silence,
Dissimulation, or any other means approve of them. 2. That it be sincere, Mat.
6. 1* etc. and 19. 8. and 22. 11, 12. 1 Timothy 1. 5.
and therefore that it does not proceed only from a certain and solid knowledge
of the Divine Will, but that it also does suppose a true Honesty of Mind or
Heart; that is such, as does not arise from a divided, dissembling, feigned
Heart, but from a whole and entire or upright Heart. 3. That it be Mat. 10. 24.
and 24. 13. Heb. 3. 6, 14. and 10. 38, 39. Rev. 2: 7, 10, 16. and 3. 21.
continual, and therefore that it be not performed only once, or at
certaintimes, as it were by intervals, and that it endure not only for a time,
but that it persevere or hold out even to the end of our life, that is, until
God himself set a bound or end to our Obedience. But it is worth our while and
our labor to consider both these Heads, both of Faith and good Works
particularly also.

CHAP. XI. Of Faith in Jesus Christ.
1. FAith in Jesus Christ is a Heb. 11. 1, etc. Romans 4. 18, etc.
deliberate The definition of Saving Faith.
and firm assent of the Mind, given or yielded to the Word of God, and joined
with a true confidence or trust in Christ; whereby we do not only firmly
assent, and confidently adhere or cleave unto the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, as
true and Divine, but whereby we do also wholly rely upon Joh. 14* 1. Heb. 4.
16. Ephesians. 3. 12, 17.
Jesus Christ himself, as our only Prophet, Priest, and King, given unto us of
God his pure Grace, for Salvation: so that we doubt not to expect from him
alone, as Heb. 5. 9. and 10. 15, etc. Act. 4. 12. and 13. 39.
our only Redeemer, eternal Life and Salvation; but yet not to be obtained, but
by that means, and in that way, which he himself has Its Parts or
prerequisites.
revealed in his Word.

2. Therefore knowledge Joh. 13. 17.
of the Divine Will alone, or of all those senses, that are savingly necessary
to be known, to wit, which are contained in the Gospel, is not enough to speak
a true saving Faith. For this may be both without assent and trust, yea is
really Jam. 2. 14, etc. Luke 13. 47. Tit. 1. 16.
in the Devils themselves, and in many ungodly and unbelieving Men. Nor indeed
is it every assent, to wit, Mat. 13. 22. Heb. 4. 1, etc. Romans 12. 1, etc. Ephesians.
5. 17.
a sudden, perfunctory, implicit, brutish or blind one, that is grounded
upon no reason, and yielded without any judgment: for this by it self and taken
alone is not saving, nor can it ever sufficiently move or engage the Will to
any rational or free service and Obedience: and therefore it is found even in
them, who live little like Christians: but there is altogether requisite a firm
and solid one, and such as is backed by the command of a deliberate Will: Ephesians.
1. 17, etc. and 3. 17, 18. Mat. 9. 2. Heb. 11. 1, etc.
lastly a fiducial and obedient assent: which also is called affiance or
confidence: not indeed an absolute confidence of special Mercy, as already
perceived or enjoyed: to wit, whereby I believe that my sins are already
forgiven me: Romans 1. 17. and 3. 25. and 4. 4, etc. and 5. 1. and 10. 9. Act. 4.
12. and 13. 38.
(for this is not the essential form that constitutes justifying Faith: but
only a certain consequent* adjunct thereof: yea does necessarily presuppose
saving Faith it self, as a prerequisite condition of it) but whereby I firmly
conclude Heb. 5. 9. Act. 5. 32. Joh. 3. 36. Romans 10. 16.
that it is impossible, that I should by any other means, than by Jesus Christ,
and in any other way, than by that prescribed by him, escape eternal Death, and
on the contrary obtain eternal Salvation. And which for that cause immediately
of it self brings forth, and has always joined with it that new Obedience,
which is due unto Jesus Christ himself from us, that is, not only some barren
purpose to obey, or an Affection without its Effect, but true and actual
Obedience it self.

3. From whence further we conclude, A consutation of an Error
if Faith be such an assent as we have said, to wit, which is seriously
commanded of God under the promise of eternal Life and the threatening of a
contrary death, and performed by Man according to or by virtue of God's
command: that it cannot then be any thing, that is See the Canons of the Synod
of Dort. chapter 3. and 4. Arto. 11, 14, 17. Reject Art. ^.
wrought in us without us: much less that is produced in our Wills by an
irresistible Force, or an Omnipotent Operation of God, by what name at length,
or title soever it be called. For what we mere purely suffer from God, and what
things are produced in us by God's irresistible Omnipotency without us, those
fall not under any Precept properly so called, nor can they of right come under
the name of Obedience: and therefore cannot any ways justly be rewarded or
recompensed, or judged worthy of any Praise or Commendation.

4. And that this assent may commodiously Two things necessary for the getting
of Faith.
be drawn from us, there are two things chiefly necessary. 1. Such Arguments or
Reasons on God's part, unto which nothing can probably or with any show of
reason be opposed, why those things should not be credible, or deserve our
belief, which are proposed to us. 2. A pious docility or teachableness, or
honesty of Mind in him, of whom this belief is required. For all Men 2 These. 3.
2.
have not Faith. And he that will do the Will of God, he shall Joh. 7. 17.
know (or understand) whether the Doctrine of Christ be from God or no. But he
that does evil, hates Joh. 3. 19, 20, 21.
the Light, neither comes he to the Light, lest his deeds should be reproved:
but he that does the Truth, he comes to the Light, that his deeds may be made
manifest, for that they are wrought in God. Also he that is of God, Joh. 8. 47.
and 10. 26, 27. Act. 2. 41. and 13. 46, etc.
hears Gods words; therefore ye being wicked hear not, because ye are not of
God. Also ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep.

5. Such a fiducial assent therefore, or Its connection with good works.
this obediential trust or relyance, is at length that true and living Faith,
which necessarily draws along with it a keeping of the Commandments of Jesus
Christ, Joh. 5. 3, 4, 5. Gal. 5. 6. and 6. 15. Mat. ^. 17, etc. chapter 12. 34, 35.
or good works. For he that truly believes, and is certainly persuaded, that
Jesus Christ is ordained of God to be an Author of Salvation to all that obey
him; and that live piously and holily; and to them or such only: and that it is
impossible that Men should any other way Heb. 5. 9. and 11. 6 and chapter 12. 14,
^5, 16 etc.
attain to eternal Salvation, or escape eternal Death, but in or by way of true
Obedience or good Works: he doubtless being filled with good Hope, will both
willingly and cheerfully engage or enter into this way: and by true Repentance,
or a change of his Mind, Will, and all his Actions for the better, earnestly
make toward eternal Glory, especially, if he shall have rightly and duly
considered with himself, both what eternal Salvation, and eternal Death are and
mean.

6. Howbeit because those, who are Three degrees of Believers.
newly converted to the Faith, do for the most part usually labor under some
Custom of sinning: from hence it comes to pass most usually, that this Assent,
though deliberate and strong, does not immediately altogether excuse or shake
off Joh. 2. 1. 13. 2 Cor. 3. 1, etc. Heb. 5. 13, etc. and 6. 1, etc.
that sinful Habit, especially having now been deeply rooted by long custom;
but gets greater strength by steps and degres ( viz. for the shaking off of the
same.) From whence this Faith is usually distinguished into certain degrees,
according to which furthermore, there arise three Classes, Ranks or Orders even
of those that believe and repent, or are regenerate, that is, of those who by
Faith do good Works. The first order or classis is of Incip^ents or Beginners.
Incipients or Beginners, Heb. 5. 13, 14. and 6. 1, 2. Col. 3. 5, etc. Gal. 6.
1, etc. Jam. 4. 1, etc. Rev. 3. 1, etc.
which indeed truly assent unto the Gospel; but by reason of an inveterate
custom of sin, and some strong grown Habit thereof, do with great labor,
trouble and struggling of the flesh, ever and anon still breaking out, and
kicking against the Spirit (or their Mind enlightened by the Spirit of God
through or by the Gospel) come and subdue the assaults and motions of the same.
2. The second is of Proficients, that is, Proficients.
of such as have made some progress, who, Gal. 5. 16, 17. Ephesians. 4. ^4, etc.
by the help or benefit of Faith having now for some time used themselves to
some more severe and orderly or correct way and course of Life, and having
exercised themselves somewhat more in the study and exercise of Piety, do more
easily and with less resistance refrain themselves from a custom of sinning:
albeit sometimes they still feel no light struglings thereof with in
themselves. 3. The Adult and perfect.
third is of the Adult, that is, of those that are full grown, Romans 12. 1, etc.
and ver. 9, etc. Romans 15. 1, etc. Phil. 3 17, etc. Act. 9. 36.
or of those who a^e in some respects perfect, that is, of those, who, having
been now already confirmed in Piety, do by the help of their Faith, with
Pleasure, Joy, and a certain delight, exercise and addict themselves to
Holiness, and love Righteousness and Truth with all their Hearts, with all
their Soul, and with all their strength: So that the Scripture does chiefly
affirm of them, 1 John 3. 9. and 5. 18.
that they sin not, yea, that they cannot sin, etc. Not that they never can
commit, or never really or actually do commit, no not so much as through
ignorance or some sudden passion, or other like infirmity (especially under
some great temptation) any offense or miscarriage, no not the least ( 1 King.
8. 47.
for there is no Man upon Earth that sins not) but that they have now
altogether put off all Ephesians. 4. 23. Col. 2. 11. Romans 6. 4. etc.
vicious habits, and do abstain from a custom or course of sinning: and
therefore, if by chance they fall into any sin (which yet falls out very
seldom, so long indeed as they are, and remain truly regenerate) it happens
only through error or mistake, or through some surprizal, or some over
clouding and darkening of their Minds. Of all therefore, and every How far all
these are truly regenerate.
of those we judge, that they are truly born again through the Grace and Spirit
of God, or that they are such as truly believe and repent. So that they do most
diligently do their endeavor to be freed from the said vicious custom of
sinning wholly and altogether; and continually study more and more to amend
those infirmities, unto which for the most part all according to the diverse or
different respect of their age, temperature, places of abode, state, condition,
and of other circumstances, are more or less obnoxious or liable to. Both Romans
6. 14. Ephesians. 6. 13. Phil. 4. 13. 1 John 4. 4. Jude. v. 24.
which indeed we do religiously believe, are through the Grace of God possible,
nay and withal necessary.

7. But although such as have once The regenerate may and often do fall away.
1 John 5. 9.
gotten the very habit of Faith and Holiness, can very hardly relapse or return
unto their former profaneness and dissoluteness of Life: yet we believe that it
is altogether possible, Heb. 6. 4, etc. Rev. 2 and 3. 2 Pet. 2. 18, etc. Eze
18. 24, etc. Heb. 4. 1, 2. and 10. 28, 29, 38, 39. 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20. Romans 11.
18, etc.
yea and that it does not seldom come to pass, that they do by degrees relapse
thereunto, and at last wholly fall from their first Faith and Love, and having
forsaken the way of Righteousness, return unto their worldly pollutions, which
they had quite or really once left, like Swine unto their Wallowing in the
Mire, and Dogs unto their Vomit; and are again entangled with those lusts of
the Flesh, which they had formerly truly escaped: and so fall totally, and at
length also finally; unless through the Grace of God they timously and
seriously repent. And yet in the mean time we do not absolutely deny, Contrary
to the Canons of the Synod of D^rt, chapter 5. Psalm. 51. 2 Cor. 2. Isa. 1 Deuteronomy. 30.
but that it is possible, that they, who have once truly believed, when they do
relapse unto their former profaneness of life, may by the benefit and help of
the Grace of God be renewned again, and repent or become good Men: although we
believe that it seldom falls out, Luke 11. 24, etc. Heb. 6. 4, etc. 2 Pet. 2.
and can very hardly be effected. And even such as these, as often as through
the Grace of God it comes to pass, we deem or judge that they are altogether to
be counted of the order or number of those, that are truly Godly, and do truly
repent, and are certainly to be saved, if indeed they persevere in this their
renewed Conversion.

CHAP. XII. Of good Works in particular, and of the exposition of the Decalogue.
1. OF good Works some are common The division and sum of good works.
Mat. 5, and 6, and 7.
unto all Christians in general, others are Ephesians. 5. 22, etc. and 6. 1, etc.
proper to Christians of certain vocations or callings. The sum of those, which
are common to all Christians alike without difference, may be comprised under
these three heads. 1. In our loving of God and our Neighbor, which is wholly
contained in the Moral Law, as it is expounded by Jesus Christ. 2. In the
directing or denying of our selves. 3. In daily praying unto God, and giving
him thanks for his benefits received.

2. The Decalogue is an Epitome or a The sum of the Decalogue.
brief summary of the Moral Law, which is contained in two Tables: of which the
first contains four Commandments, and the second six. Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5, and 6.
Mat. 22. 37, 38, 39, 40. Mar. 11. 30, 31.
The one immediately and firstly respects our loving of God, the other our
love of our Neighbor. Both of them have for the most part general Precepts,
and altogether negative, which bind in all places, at all times, and
absolutely. Under which are comprehended also affirmative and special Precepts
every where in the Scripture not a few: unto both which it is necessary that a
Christian Heart always diligently attend.

3. The first Precept of the former Table The first commandment against
Idolatry.
commands, that we have not another God (much less other Gods) before him the
one true God, or besides him, that is, Deuteronomy. 6. 11, 12, etc. chapter 32. 16, 17. 1
King. 11. 4, etc. and 12. 28. Jer. 2. 11, 12, 13. Mat. 4. 10. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 9.
Act. 14. 15. Gal. 4. 8.
that we do not either we our selves according to our pleasure devise, or by
tradition from others, without the express Command of God, admit of any thing
whatsoever (whether true or feigned, whether created, or made, whether alive,
or dead, whether rational or brute) whereunto to attribute, whether directly or
indirectly, either Divine Nature and Power, or Properties, or Actions, or
Divine Authority or Command and Rule over us: and that we honor it not with
such Actions, either inward or outward, which may argue a certain opinion of
Divinity ascribed to it: such as are Acts Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and 10. 20
of Religious Worship, suppose of Faith that is due to God and Christ, and
withal of Hope, Trust, Love, Fear, Adoration, Invocation and of answerable
Praise and giving of Thanks, which arise from thence; also of outward
Sacrifice, Oath, Vow, or other such like Sacred Devotion. For whosoever gives
such like honor as this, either to any thing, Ephesians. 5. 5. Phil. 3. 19. Isa. 44.
16, 17. Jer. 2. 27.
or Person, or performs about or toward it such like acts as these, he is
said in Scripture to have that thing or Person for his God. Therefore the
meaning of the Precept is, that we ought diligently to avoid all Idolatry, both
inward and outward: and on the contrary, that we ought always religiously to
worship Mat. 4. 10. Jer. 17. 13. Psalm. 50. 14, 15. and 116. 5, 6. Rev. 14. 7.
and 15. 4. and 19. 10.
that one true God, who has revealed himself unto us in his Word: that is,
that we rightly know him, holily love and fear him, suppliantly adore him,
humbly call upon him with a pure Heart, laud and praise him, and continually
place our whole hope and confidence in him alone, as the only Author and
Fountain of all Good.

4. The second Commandment is, that The second is against worshipping of Images.
we do not worship and reverence Images, or the likness of any sort or kind:
that is, that we do not fall Lev. 16. 1, etc. Deuteronomy. 4. 15, etc. Psalm. 97. 8.
and 115. 4, etc. Isa. 42. 18, 19, etc. and 44. 9, etc. Act. 17. 29. Romans 1. 23,
25. 1 Cor. 12. 2.
down in a way of Reverence or Worship before any Statues, Pictures, or Images
(representing any thing in Heaven or Earth, either true or false Deity, or
thing, that really is, or figment and thing feigned, which is not, either of
Man, or Beast, or Angel, or any other thing else) or perform such outward works
to them or about them, which the sacred Scripture clearly affirms to be signs
and tokens of Religious Worship, and such as is due only unto God: yea Isa. 44.
16, 17. Jer. 2. 27, 28. Mat. 6. 24. Ephesians. 5. 5. Phil. 3. 19.
even when a Man professes and openly declares, that he does not count those
Images, or Resemblances before whom he does those things, for God. For in such
manner of forbidden Worship God does not judge of the actions by or according to
the Mind or intent of the Worshipper, but rather judges of the Mind by the
actions: So that Men are said to make that an Idol, and really to call it their
God and their Father, which they worship in this manner, although they know
that it is nothing but a Stone or a Stock, yea and also protest that they
account it such: 1 Cor. 10. 14, 15, etc.
but on the contrary that we do carefully avoid all this kind of outward
Idolatry, and as the Apostle John warns us, 1 John 5. 21.
that we flee from Idols, to wit, being assured by the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 6.
16.
that the Temple of God has no Communion with Idols. Lastly, that because he
is most severely jealous of his own Glory, we ought always wheresoever we are,
to worship the true God himself alone in Spirit Isa. 42. 8. and 48. 11. Joh. 4
23.
and in Truth according to what he himself has prescribed in his Word, even in
an outward way and manner.

5. The third Commandment is, that The third Commandment is against Blasphemy
and vain Oaths
we do not use the Name of God in vain or rashly: that is, that we do not at
any time in our Words or Speech Lev. 19. 12. Deu. 5. 11.
(whether we be minded to affirm or deny, or promise, or threaten any thing)
use the magnificent Name of God Lev. 5. 4.
irreverently or lightly: but especially that we do not at any time Lev. 24.
10, etc.
blaspheme it; or swear Lev. 5. 4 Mat. 5. 33, etc. Jam. 5. 12.
rashly, inconsiderately, or falsely by it: and lastly that we do not by a
false boasting of the name of God, (as the false prophets of old Deuteronomy. 10. 20,
22.
often did) deceive or seduce others: but on the contrary; that speaking of God
and the things of God, we use those words, and that speech, which are fullest
both of Holiness and Godly Gravity, and also most reverential of God and the
Sacred Scripture: and that our Communications, according to the appointment of
our Lord Jesus Christ, be yea and nay: or if at any time we be religiously to
swear (which indeed even now also is altogether Romans 1. 9. and 9. 1. 2 Cor. 1.
23. and 11. 31. Heb. 6. 16. Phil. 1. 8. Rev. 10. 6.
lawful for Christians in case of real necessity; to wit, when the Glory of
God, and the Salvation of Men is concerned) that we do not only not lyingly,
not rashly, or without a real necessity: but also not without the highest
reverence, pious submission of mind, comely gesture, and sincere and candid
words, invocate or call upon that most Sacred or tremendous Majesty, as a
Witness or Maintainer of Truth upon or against our own Souls.

6. As for the fourth Commandment The fourth of sanctifying the Sabbath.
of sanctifying the Sabbath Day, or the Seventh, it was indeed strictly to be
observed in the Old Testament; Deuteronomy. 5. 12, etc.
but because Romans 14. 5, 6. Gal. 4. 10. Col. 2. 16.
the difference of days is wholly taken away by Jesus Christ, in the times of
the New Testament, no Christian is precisely bound to the observation thereof.
Howbeit in the mean while, because we read, that Act. 20. 7. 1 Cor. 16. 2. Rev.
1. 10.
the first day of the Week, which is usually called the Lords Day, was
appointed or set a part by the primitive Church for Sacred Assemblies and
Exercises; and mostly because to attend upon or to give up our selves unto
Spiritual and Holy Works, and even also unto outward Exercises of Piety is a
thing laudable of or in it self; we altogether judge, that Christians do rightly
and piously, that after the example of the primitive Church (except some more
urgent necessity force them to do otherwise) neglect not to observe that pious
use or custom; and set a part the first day of the Seven, yet far from all
Judaical Superstition, as Holy form the rest: and to that end abstain from all
Works not necessary, that they may the more diligently and without distraction
attend upon and wholly bend their minds unto Divine and Heavenly Meditations
and other Godly performances and duties: and on the Tertu^. Apol. c. 18. ^ de
Corona militis. item Historiae ^ripart. lib. 1. c. 10.
contrary, those that do otherwise we judge them worthy of just reproof; as
breakers of public order, and decorum or decency. And thus much of the
Precepts of the first Table. Now follows the second.

7. The first Precept of the second Table, The fifth, of honoring of Parents.
or fifth in order is, that we honor our Parents: that is, that we yield unto
them E^od. 21. 15. Lev. 20. 9. Prove. 20. 10. Ephesians. 6. 1, etc. Col. 3. 20.
due Reverence, or Honor and Love, not only in words and outward gesture, but
also in lowliness of Mind, and sincere Affection: yea that we commend our
selves unto them by our ready Obedience and free and cheerful service: howbeit
always in the Lord, that is, in nothing but in those things which well agree
with the Commands of the Supreme Lord of all, Jesus Christ, or at least are not
repugnant thereunto. ( Mat. 10. 37. Luke 14. 26.
For when there is this contrariety between the commands of the one and the
other, we are then commanded even to hate our Parents, and to leave or forsake
them.) Lastly, that we requite them, and show from the heart all Thankfulness
for the Benefits and Kindnesses, that we have received, 1 Timothy 5. 4. Mat. 15.
4, etc.
from them: to wit, by relieving their Wants, by winking at their Infirmities,
by modestly hiding their Faults, or gently excusing them, and putting a
favorable construction upon them: and in special manner by bearing with
Patience and Longsufferance their Harshness and Frowardness, and, as far as may
be, by amending them by fair and courteous means.

8. And under the name of Parents be Of Magistrates and Subjects.
and usually are comprehended, not only Parents properly so called; but also
all other Ephesians. 6. 5, etc. Exodus 22. 28. Act. 23. 5. 1 Timothy 5. 1.
Superiors, to wit, Lords or Masters, Tutors or Guardians, Schoolmasters,
Pastors, Elders; especially good and pious Magistrates, who indeed represent
the place of Parents, that is, who rule their Subjects by Deuteronomy: 17. 14, etc.
Psalm. 82. and 101. Act: 25. 10, etc. Romans 13. 1, etc.
just Laws and equal Judgments, and defend indeed the Good and Innocent against
the Injuries of the Wicked; but restrain villainous and lewd Persons by just
Terror; yea, who out of a Love to the Public Good and Zeal of true Justice
(yet with a regard always had of Christian Clemency, Moderation, and Lenity) do
not let them go unpunished: and so justly distribute Rewards to the Good,
Punishments to the Bad, and to every one his own due right: lastly, who protect
and defend their loyal or faithful Subjects, when necessity altogether requires
it, and when, after more gentle remedies tried in vain, it cannot be done
otherwise, even by the Sword (as far as they can with the safety of Christian
Piety and Charity.) To whom again their Subjects stand bound to give them M^t.
22. 21. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. Tit. 3. 1, 2. 1 Timothy 2. 1, etc. Romans 15. 1, etc.
not only Honor and Reverence, but also to pay them Tribute, Custom, and
Taxes, and to perform unto them other Offices of Obedience of that kind. Which
is so far true, that they ought not to deny these, so far as it may be done
with the preservation of the Integrity of their Conscience, no not to those
Magistrates that are cruel and unjust.

9. The sixth Precept is, That we do no Against murders, hatred, revenge.
Murder: Genesis 9. 5. E^. 20. 13.
that is, that we do not at any time purposely hurt or prejudice the Life or
Health of our Neighbor, and if happily he be our Enemy, by whom we have been
hurt or injured, that we do not Prove. 29. 22. and 17. 13, etc. Iev. 19. 16. 17,
18.
out of a desire of Revenge hurt him again, or Romans 12. 14.
wish him any Mischief, much less do him any: but that we be always free from
Ephesians. 4. 26. Romans 12. 19.
all unjust Anger, Hatred, and desire of Revenge, Mat 5. 22, 24.
and that we everywhere show the same in our Words, Gestures and Deeds: and on
the contrary, that we do not only wish him well in Mind and Affection, but also
that we bless him withour Mouth and Tongue, and wish and pray for all things
healthful to him both for Body and Soul, And furthermore, that Deuteronomy. 15. 7, 8,
etc. and 22. 1, 2. Luke. 6. 35.
according to our Ability and Power, we do really do him good, and in very deed
relieve him: if he hunger, * by Romans 12. 20. Mat. 25. 35. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 15. 1
Pet. 3. 9.
giving him Food; if he thirst by giving him Drink; if he be naked, by clothing
him; if he be sick by visiting him; if in Prison or a Captive, by comforting
him; if he have offended us, by forgiving him: Lastly, if he will, wish and do
us Ill, that we do all the quite contrary to him, and so at length overcome
Evil with Good.

10. The seventh Commandment is, Against fornication, etc. (...)
that we do not commit Adultery: that is, Lev. 19. and 20. 10, etc. Mat. 9. 28.
that we do not upon any account, whether we be Bond or Free, libidinously
defile our Neighbors Bed, or violate his Chastity. And 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, etc.
chapter 7. 2, etc.
in particular, that we diligently avoid Poligamy, and all wilful Divorces (out
in case of Adultery) Mat. 5. 32.
and therefore take heed of marrying her that is put away for any other cause
than Adultery: that we keep our selves far 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3, 4, 5. 1 Cor. 6. 18.
and 7. 4.
from Fornication, extravagant Lust, and Heb. 13. 4. Mat. 19. 3, etc. 1 Cor. 7.
9. Col. 3. 5.
all Impurity, and the occasions and Provocations thereunto, both in a Married
and Single Estate: Romans 13. 12, 13. Gal. 5. ^9. ^9. Against Thefts, Rapines etc.
and that we carefully on the contrary exercise Continency, Chastity and
Honesty at all times, and in all places, even in Words and Gestures.

11. The eight Commandment is, That we do not Steal: Exodus 22. 1, etc. Deuteronomy.
25. 13, etc. Isa. 5. 8. Amos. 8. 4, 5, 6, 7. Mich. 6. 11, 12. Jam. 5. 1, etc.
that is, that we do not seek to convey and keep unto our selves the Goods of
our Neighbor (whether public or private, whether sacred or profane) by any
unlawful means, either Force, or Deceit, or Guile: but rather that we put by
and prevent all damage and loss unto him, as far as lies in our power; Psalm.
15. Ephesians. 4. 28. Luke 30. 31, etc. and 12. 33. 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18, 19. Ezekiel. 18.
7, 8, 12, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6. 1 John 3. 17.
and therefore, if happily he be simple, that we do not deceive him; if he be
imprudent or unwary, that we do not circumvent him; if he be weak, that we do
not overpower him, ot run him down: that we do not by Terror, Threatenings and
other unjust ways, compel him to give or to lend unto us: if he be Poor and
Needy, that we do not oppress him with Usury: but rather that we assist him
with our Alms, all manner of advice, and our help and endeavor; and of those
things, which are not precisely necessary for our own natural support, we
freely and liberally minister Supply unto him: lest happily, whilst we keep to
our selves those things, which are due unto him, especially in his greatest
necessity, both by the Law of Nature, and the Law of God, we commit some
indirect and seceret Theft in the sight of God.

12. The ninth Commandment is, that Against Lies, Calum^ies, etc.
we bear not false Witness against our Neighbor: Deuteronomy. 19. 15, etc. Prove. 19.
5, 9, 28. Job. 31. 16, etc. Psalm. 15. 2, 3.
that is, that we do not only forbear Lies, Slanders, Backbitings, and rash
Censures of others (especially if they may bring any Prejudice or Damage to
them) but also that we hearken not unto the Lies, and Slanders, and False
Testimonies of others concerning them: nor suffer our Neighbor by our silence,
as by a mute Testimony, or silent assent to be burdened by them: but on the
contrary, that we do maintain and defend his Mat. 7. 1, etc. Luke. 6. 37. Ephesians.
4. 25. Jam. 4. 11.
Honor, Credit, and Good Name both in public and in private to our outmost
power: Lastly, that we diligently and carefully pursue, follow after and
exercise Candor, Truth, and sincere Faithfulness in our Words, Contracts,
Doings, and Testimonies every where, either in places of Judicature or out of
them.

13. The tenth Commandment is, that Against e^il desires.
we do not Covet either our Neighbor's Wife, or his House, or any other thing
of his: that is, that we do not only do our Neighbor no outward Wrong; but
also that we covet none of his Goods Romans 7. 7, 8. Jam. 1. 14. and 4. 1, 2.
that are necessary, or profitable or delightful to him, to his loss and wrong:
or at least by any unjust way or means, though never so secret, desire to usurp
them to our selves, and make them our own: but that we turn away our Minds, Job
31. 1, etc. Mat. 5. 28.
Cogitations, Desires and Longings, from all those things, which the most good
and most wise God would have subject unto the right or use of another; and so
in Godly sort always keep our Affections within those Bounds and Limits of
Righteousness which God has prescribed or set them: ever and anon thinking of
these two sayings.

1. That it is our Duty ^ev. 19. 18.
to love our Neighbor as our selves. 2. That Mat. 7. 12.
we do not unto another, what we would not have done unto our selves. Unto all
which ought to be added, as the Colophon, end, or complement of all, that
ultimate act of Charity, which Christ himself Joh. 15. 12, 13. 1 John 3. 10, 16.
inculcates by his Apostle John, that we stick not even to lay down our Lives
for our Brethren.

CHAP. XIII. Of directing and denying of our selves, and bearing of the Cross
of Christ.
1. BEside the Precepts we have already What the directing of our selves is.
spoken of, there is this also required, Romans 6. 12, 13, 16. and 12. 1. 2 Cor.
7. 1.
that we direct and order, or diligently compose and frame our selves according
to the Rule and Prescript of the Divine Will. Which indeed may two ways
especially be effected. 1. If we wholly Luke. 9. 23, etc. chapter 14. 16, etc.
deny our selves and all things that are ours. 2. If we do 1 John 2. 15, 16.
Mat. 10. 38. and 16. 24.
in no wise love this present World and the Lusts thereof; but rather for God's
sake do freely forsake all, even those things which are most dear unto us, and
to that end and purpose, continually following Jesus Christ, and treading in
his steps, we refuse not, nor shun to bear his Cross.

2. Now we deny our selves aright in this The denying of our selves is three
fold.
manner. First, when in the worship of God we do not in the least take counsel
of our own carnal Reason and worldly Prudence or Policy: Mat. 11. 25, etc. 1
Cor. 1. 19, etc. and 3. 18, 19. Isa. 5. 21. Prove. 3. 7.
but in all things follow the guidance and command of him alone, (and that
willingly and without any scruple) who alone cannot err himself, and will not
deceive others. In the next place, when we wholly subject our corrupt
Affections to the Will of God, and Romans 8. 6, 7, 12, etc. Gal. 5. 17. Tit. 2.
12. Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24. Col. 3. 8, 12.
chiefly that particular Affection, whereby we are more easily and readily
inclined and swayed unto some certain Vices, (or sometimes unto some one) and
when by contrary Virtues and those works of the Spirit, which the Apostle
reckons up, Gal. 5. we do as it were crucify them, and reduce them into order:
suppose Anger by Gentleness and Meekness; Morosness by Courteousness; Sloth by
Zeal and Fervor; Sadness by Joy; Litigiousness by Facility and Peaceableness
etc. Lastly, we deny our selves most of all, and indeed most properly, when we
are ready for Christ's sake to put off that first and most natural Love, Mat
16. 24. Luke. 14. 26. Joh. 12. 25. Act. 20. 24. and 21. 13.
whereby we are wholly inclined to favor our Lives and the Happiness, or
Accommendation thereof: and refuse not to forsake our lives themselves, yea to
lose them with or by the greatest pain and torment, rather than endure to
commit any thing unworthy of our Profession, and the glorious Religion of
Christ.

3. We then deny this World and A threefold denial of the lusts of the World.
the Lusts thereof, or love them not, 1 John 2. 15, 16. 1 Cor. 3. 1, etc. Ephesians.
4. 17, 18, 19.
when we do not only cordially and sincerely renounce those gross and foul
Vices, such as have been condemned by the better sort of Heathens themselves,
to wit, which are contrary to civil Honesty and Justice, and are for the most
part manifestly injurious to God and our Neighbor; and those things which in
respect of our Animal or Natural Life, in this World are good, and Mat. 6. 31,
etc. Luke 21. 34. Jam. 5. 1, etc. 2 Pet. 2. 10, 13.
pleasing, and delightsome to our Flesh, we do not desire or covet after them,
so as to be induced in any way or by any means whatsoever possible (to the
Prejudice likewise and Detriment of our Health, and the Injury and Hurt of our
Neighbor) to pursue and possess or enjoy them: but also love and long after no
good things of that kind Mat. 6. 19, 20. Tit. 2. 12. Col. 3. 1, etc.
more immoderately or further, than we ought or is meet, to wit, to the
hindrance of our duty, which is enjoined us of God, or to the loss and
prejudice of better and heavenly Cares. The which indeed does then usually come
to pass, when Rom 12. 11, etc. Phil. 3. 20. Rev. 3. 15, etc.
true, heavenly and eternal good things, we either wholly neglect them; or at
leastwise coldly, or lukewarmly, perfunctorily, or occasionally, upon some
other Account, or by reason of some violent motion, or sudden pang of passion
we mind them only by the by: or when we stick so fast fettered and entangled
with a continual sollicitousness about the concerns of this Life, and with
Thoughts and Cares for our Animal Life, as if we either placed our whole or
chiefest Happiness in them: and as if our Hearts were scarce, nay not so much
as scarce at all, touched or affected with a love and care of things of an
heavenly import and nature.

4. And indeed we then love not the A moderate use and desire of earthly things.
good things of this World too immoderately, when we neither desire to enjoy
the World it self, 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30, 31, 32. Heb. 13. 5, 6.
nor those good things, which are in the World so, as if we placed any true and
solid, or stable and lasting Good in them: but on the contrary do only desire
to use them, and that only so far as is sufficient to satisfy natural
necessity, and our leading a life worthy of a Christian. (to wit, without the
hurt or grieving of another, and transgressing of the Commands of Jesus
Christ.) Lastly, when we are contented with 1 Timothy 6. etc.
necessary Food and Raiment, and do not sollicitously seek, or desire any thing
further.

5. The good things of the World of A threefold lust of the World.
this kind, according to the Apostle 1 John 2. 16. etc. 1 Pet. 2. 11. Jam. 4.
1, etc.
John, are these, unto which all other may fitly enough be reduced; to wit,
Riches, Honors, and Pleasures: the immoderate desiring, or too much love
whereof is called the Lust of the Eyes, the Pride of Life, and the Lust of the
Flesh. Which very things themselves, because they war against solid Piety, and
the Salvation of the Soul, are seriously to be denied by a Man that is truly
Pious.

6. An immoderate love of Riches is Covetuousness.
Mat. 6. 25, etc. Luke. 12. 15, etc. and 16. 11, 12, etc. 1 Timothy 6. 10. Heb. 13
5.
Covetousness, or a desire of having more, or a love of Money. Now he denies
this, who does not sollicitously and eagerly desire more Moneys, Wealth, or
Possessions, if happily he have them not, than is necessary for him and his,
being indeed always content only with Food and Raiment to cloth or cover him:
and Psalm. 62. 10. Mark. 10. 23, 24. 2 Cor. 9. 7, 8, 9.
when through the Blessing of God they flow in upon him or increase, he does
not hold them so fast, and possess them so greedily, but that he will willingly
whatsoever abounds unto him over and above, than what is necessary for the
support of himself and his, impart and distribute of the same unto others (if
indeed need so require) yea indeed unto Psalm. 37. 21, 26. and 112. 5, 9. Mat.
25. 40. Gal 6. 10.
all, who are in want; but especially to the Brethren, and those that are of
the Household of Faith, and when by the Will of God or his permission they are
violently taken from him, or by any cross chance do decay, he is not so grieved
and made sad, as if he had lost any true and chief good: but relying upon God
and his fatherly Bounty, Phil. 4. 11, 22.
whether he have or want these Riches, he has a continual and diligent regard
of his duty; lastly, who does so get, possess and lose the good things of this
Life, as if Cor. 7. 29, etc. Luke. 16. 1, etc. Ambition.
he got, possessed and lost them not.

7. An immoderate love of Honors, or Pride is Ambition and Mat. 7. 22. Act.
12. 21. Jam. 4. 2. 1 Pet. 5. 6.
Arrogance. Now he who denies this, who does not earnestly seek after Honors,
high Places above others, Dignities and the Applauses of People; and if happily
he get them, he is not so delighted in them, as if there did any true and solid
happiness consist in them, and Mat. 6. 1, etc. and 23. 5, 6, 7. Luke. 16. 15.
Joh. 5 44. and 12. 43.
therefore who does neither himself (for any cause in the least whatsoever) in
Speech, Countenance, Gesture, Gate or Going, Habit, etc. lift up and advance
himself above others; and if he be extolled by others, he does not delight
therein, as in any true and stable good, but always calls to mind Romans 12.
16. Phil. 2. 3, etc.
the Divine Grace and his own vileness and unworthiness before God, and
Christian Humility in every State and Condition of Life; so that he does not
grudg or think much to show himself modest, mild, Ephesians. 4. 2. Col. 3. 12. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 6, 7. 1 Pet. 3. 8.
affable, and courteous, yea and demiss or humble too, in all places and
toward all (except sometimes that Magistrates must have a due regard of the
public Majesty and their own Authority;) and therefore in Gestures and Words,
and in Luke 16. 19 Act. 12. 21. and 25. 23. Jam. 2. 1, etc. and 5. 1, etc. 1
Pet. 3. 3, etc. 1 Timothy 2. 9.
Apparel, Diet, House, and household Furniture does observe a moderation with
decorum, to wit, so, that he does neither unadvisedly render himself
contemptible, through an affected sordidness; nor greedily catch after vain
Glory by an excessive, proud, or disdainful Splendor; lastly, so that he in
all things or places shows such an habit (or attire of body) as becomes true
and serious holiness, and always Joh: 13. 14, 15. and 1 Timothy 5. 10.
clotheth himself with that affection, which will not be ashamed to follow
Jesus Christ when he washed his Disciples Feet.

8. An immoderate love of pleasures is An immoderate love of pleasures.
the lust of the flesh. Romans 13. 12, 13, 14. 2 Pet. 2. 10, 13, 14. Jude v. 8.
12, 16,
He denies it, who does not at all endeavor the delighting or pleasing of his
outward Senses, whereby the flesh enjoys its peculiar pleasures, and therefore
Job. 31. 1. Psalm. 119. 37. 2 Pet. 2. 14.
who does not feed his Eyes with the sight or beholding of things vain or
unlawful for pious men, and altogether unprofitable; nor pleases his ears with
obscene, uncivil and foolish jests, and neither utterreth himself lascivious
Quips or Scoffs, or scurrilousand Ephesians. 2. ^9. and ^ 4.
wanton Verses or Songs, 2 Pet. 2. 8.
nor hears them but sore against his will; who also studieth Sobriety and
Temperance, and takes no operose or toilsom Care for his Palate or Belly; who
in Meat and Drink seeks not those things which are Luke 16. 19. and 21. 34. 1
Pet. 4. 3, 4. 2 Pet. 2. 13.
superfluous, costly and splendid; nor does overcharge his heart therewith, so
as to render himself unapt or unfit for the right and due discharge of his
calling; moreover who seeks to possess his 1 Thessalonians. 4. 4, 5. 1 Cor. 6. 15,
etc.
Vessel in Honor, and always and every where observes that true Chastity, as
it is prescribed by Christ, and carefully shunneth all occasions and incentives
to lust ( Luke 16. 19. and 21. 34. Ephesians. 5. 18, 19.
to wit, Drunkenness, Luxury, Riotings, and Banquetings, Ephesians. 4. 28. 1 Thessalonians.
4. 11, 12. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 8, etc.
Idleness, and all vanity in Words, and Gestures and Behavior) and on the
contrary, does seriously plie and delight in all meet helps for the cherishing
of Continency and Chastity (to wit, in Mat. 26. 41. 1 Pet. 5. 8. 2 Cor. 6. 5.
Watchings, Studies, Romans 12. 11.
pious Conferences, 1 Cor. 15. 33. 1 Pet. 2. 12.
and holy and honest Conversation or Company); lastly, who does in particular
manner commend unto himself Dan 93. Joel. 1. 14. and 2. 15. Jonah. 3. 7. 1
Esdr. 8. 21. Mat. 4. 2. Luke ^. ^7. 1 Cor. 7. 5. Act. 13. 2, 3. and 14. 23.
fasting, for the better subduing of the flesh, and the greater exciting and
stirring up of the Spirit, especially in time of the Cross and Affliction, or
any Public or Private Calamity, and therefore does not so highly prize the
rest or quiet, nor the advantage, nor sweetness of any of these things, which
may incur or enter into the outward senses; but that he had rather want and be
without all those things, than recede from the commands of Jesus Christ, so
much as a nails breadth.

9. Whosoever is thus minded and The imitating of Christ and bearing of the
Cross.
disposed, he will at length rightly imitate Christ; and to him in particular
it will not be grievious, patiently and quietly to take up and bear Mat. 16.
24. Luke 9. 24.
the Cross of Christ: that is through 2 Cor. 6. 8.
Ignominy, Reproach, Heb. 10. 34. and 11. 36.
Spoiling of goods, Want, Hunger, Nakedness, yea through Prisons, Romans 8. 35,
etc.
Fires, Wheels, Crosses and Swords, etc. after the example of his Heb. 12. 2.
Captain and Lord (as often as need shall require, and it shall seem good 1 Pet.
3. 17. 18.
unto God) in this way with violence to press toward eternal and immortal
Glory; and unto a stable both Rest and Happyness. For the pious Meditation of
this very thing has added so great courage, and so mighty resolution or Spirit
to the Apostles and Prophets, and other Act. 5. 41. and 7. 60. and 1^. 25. and
20. 24. and 21. 13. Heb. 11. 3, 5, and^. Rev. 6. 9. and 7. 14.
Holy Men of God of old time, (and also in our own age to faithful Martyrs of
Jesus Christ not a few) that they have gone very often rejoicing and cheerful
to their Torments, although never so most cruel: and in the midst of Fires and
Flames have blessed God, and Jesus Christ his Son, with Singing and Hymns: Romans
5. 3. and 8. 21, etc.
yea, yet further have gloryed in their very Afflictions and Sufferings (and
that under the hope of the Glory of the Sons of God) that they were accounted
worthy to suffer those evils for the sake of their Lord Jesus Christ, and to
seal his Truth, and to illustrate and set forth his Glory with their Blood.

CHAP. XIIII. Of Prayer and Thanksgiving, and in particular of the Lord's
Prayer.
1. BUt because the whole Life of Believers, The use and necessity of prayer.
(as we have said a little before) and especially their Obedience of Faith,
which they constantly perform or yield unto Jesus Christ, is daily exposed unto
diverse Dangers, Temptations, and Assaults of Satan, the Flesh, and the World,
and obnoxious and liable to many wants and necessities: lest therefore in so
difficult a conflict they should faint or despair, Mat. 7. 7, etc. chapter 26. 4.
Luke. 18. 1, etc.
Jesus Christ has willed, that all Believers in general and particular should
Joh. 14. 13. and 16. 23.
in his alone Name, with an unwearied and entire Mat. 11. 24. Jam. 1 5, 6.
Faith, and that always Romans 12. 12. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.
without ceasing, (but especially in great Temptations and Adversities) implore
and earnestly entreat the continual Help and Grace of God, and Phil. 4. 6.
Psalm. 116. 12, 13. and 102, and 103, and 194. 1 Timothy 2 1. Col. 3. 17. and 4. ^
continually give him thanks for the Benefits and Mercies they have received,
by this means testifying and declaring, that they ow unto God, as the chief and
prime Author, their whole Happiness, and that by his alone Aid, and free
Blessing or Benefit, they are able to perform, yea and really do perform all
things whatsoever are necessary to be done or performed for the obtaining of
it. Whence arise two principal parts, or kinds of Divine Worship: Prayer
strictly and properly so called, or an earnest entreating of the Divine help
for good things to be obtained, or for the taking or turning away of things
evil: and giving of Thanks, and solemn Praising of the Name of God for
Blessings and Mercies received.

2. Both parts or kinds God every The causes and manner of calling upon God
aright.
where Psalm. 50. 14, 15. and 91. 14, 15. and 145. 18, 19.
commends unto us in his Word: 1 Timothy 2. 18. Job. 4. 24.
but especially Jesus Christ in the New Testament: whilst in all places,
whether in public or private, as the case or occasion shall serve, he commands
both to be performed in Spirit and Truth. And indeed as touching Prayer or
invocation, Jesus Christ has not only Mat 7. 7, etc. Luke. 11. 9.
commandded it in words, but also has commended it to us by Mat. 14. 23. and
26. 39. Luke 22. 41, etc. Job 17.
his own example: and also has prescribed Mat. 6. 9, etc. Luke ^1. 2, etc.
the manner, and a certain form of performing the same, according to which, as
an infallible and certain rule, our petitions (whether they be conceived or
framed for our selves or others) ought always to be conformed: adding withal a
promise, that our Prayers, if so be they be 1 John 3. 22. and 5. ^4.
according to the Will of God (and be accompanied also with a due disposition
o^ us that pray, both in respect of our inward and outward Man: to wit, 1 John
^. 9. Psalm. 32. 2, etc. and 51.
with true Repentance for sins formerly committed, firm Confidence Heb. 4. 16*
and 10. 22. Ephesians. 1. 18. and 3. 12.
concerning the Grace of God purchased by Christ, 1 John 3. 21, 22. 1 Pet. 3.
12.
a sincere endeavor after Holiness, and especially Mar. 11. 25. Mat. 5. 23,
24. and 6. 14.
of brotherly Love: also with serious Luke 18. 1, etc. Luke 18. 10.
Attention, devout Submission, and lastly with an Luke 18. 1, etc. Rom 12. 12 1
These. 5. 17.
unwearied Diligence and Constancy in Prayer) shall most certainly be heard of
God.

3. This form of Prayer is called, from The Lord's Prayer. and its parts.
the Author of it our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord's Prayer: whereof there are
three chief parts, the Preface, Narration, and Conclusion: although this be
Mat. 6. 9, etc. Luke 11. 2, etc.
wholly wanting in Luke, nor does it necessarily of it self pertain to the
substance or essence thereof.

4. In the Preface we are taught, whom we ought at all times to invocate, or
pray unto, and with what heart and in what manner: to wit, our Heavenly Father,
or who is in Heaven, that is, unto whom we ought to speak both with an humble,
as also a Son-like Affection, as one who is not only by nature most high and
powerful, or the best and greatest (and now not dwelling, as of old time, in
Exodus 40. 34.
Moses his Tabernacle, 1 King. 8. 12.
or in Solomon's Temple between the Cherubims; but dwelling gloriously only in
the Act. 7. 48, 49.
highest Heavens themselves, the most true Seat, and as it were Castle of
Eternity and Immortality, Jam. 1. 17.
from whence all good things flow down unto us) but as one also who shows
himself 1 Timothy 2. 4. and 4. 10.
merciful and kind unto all; and is indeed always Fatherly Psalm. 103. 2, 3.
Joh. 14, 13. etc. Romans 8. 15.
affected toward all his Faithful or Believing ones; as those whom he always
graciously loves in Christ: so that he will write down all them and them only
for Gal. 4. 6. Romans 8. 17.
Sons and Heirs of his Heavenly Glory and Immortallity; and therefore as one
who both easily can and willingly will Luke 11. 10, etc. Jam. 1. 5.
largely bestow all things upon us, that are of a saving import: in whom
therefore we again likewise, and that indeed as unanimously joined or knit
together in or by the bond of Romans 12. 10. 2 Pet. 1. 7.
brotherly Love, by Ephesians. 2. 18. and 3. 12.
the same Jesus Christ, our only Patron or Advocate and Mediator, both safely
may, and of right ought with greatest reverence and filial Affection to trust.

5. The Narration contains six Petitions: The distinction of the six
petitions.
of which Joh. 14. 13. 1 Cor. 10. 31. Col. 3. 17. 1 Pet. 4. 11.
the three former do immediately and properly respect the Glory of God, and the
three following do chiefly respect our profit and Salvation: Although both the
one and the other by mutual relation and certain consequence jointly aim both
at the same mark, Psalm. 50. 14, 15. and 34. 16, 17, etc. and 91.
seeing that neither the Glory of God can be disjoined from our Salvation, and
this again likewise ought wholly to be referred to that.

6. In the first Petition* then we are Of sanctifying or hallowing God's name.
commanded to pray, that the Name of God may be sanctified or hallowed: that
the Glory of the Divine Goodness, Isa. 6. 3. and 42. 8 and 48. 11. Ezekiel. 20.
41. and 28. ^^; 25. Psalm. 96. 97, and 99.
Wisdom and Power, especially as it is revealed in the Gospel, might every
where be rightly known, and worthily celebrated or extolled: and therefore that
God would assist us and others with his help, whereby both they Romans 10. 6, 9.
Ephesians. 3. 20. and 5. 19, 20. Col. 3. 16, 17. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11, 12. Rev. 48, 9. and
5. 12, 13.
and all other men being even provoked by our example and encouragement,
forsaking all Idols or profane Deities and Deasters or petty Gods, may above
all in Words, Deeds, Hymns, Prayers, Writings, and that as it were with one
Mouth, praise and extol the only true God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ:
ever and anon singing both with Heart and Voice: Holy, Holy, Holy is the God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; to him be Praise, Honor and Blessing for
ever and for ever. Amen.

7. The second Petition is, that his 2 For the coming of his Kingdom.
Kingdom may come: that is, Mat. 2. 2, etc. Col. 1. 6, etc. Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. and
3. 16, 17.
that he himself by a true and plentiful knowledge of the Religion of Christ,
which as yet at that time was small and sparing, and as it were advancing or
approaching afar off, would more and more direct our hearts unto a solid
sanctifying of his divine Name: and that he would be pleased in a large and
plentiful measure to bestow the same Grace upon very many others more besides,
Isa. 2. 2, etc. Mich. 4. 1, etc. Psalm. 122. 1, etc.
to the end that they also might give up themselves to be ruled by him, or
freely submit themselves to his Laws and Commandments, and that so both might
daily more and more be made fit and meet Cor. 15. 24, etc.
for the Kingdom of Heaven, hereafter to be most fully possessed in a blessed
immortality.

8. The third is, that the Will of God 3 Is for the doing of Gods will.
may be done in Earth as in Heaven, that is, that God would grant us, and
others that Grace, Phil. 2. 13, 14. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23, 24. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11.
that we might every one do his Will, now heretofore expressed in his
Commandments, as readily and as cheerfully, as the holy Dan. 7. 10. Mat. 18.
10. Heb. 1. 14
Angels in Heaven are wont to perform it. In the next place, that those evils
which God either Heb. 10. 36. and 12. 7 etc. 1 Pet. 3. 17. and 4. 12, ctc.
suffers, or wills, and procures to befall us, we may bear them patiently;
and without any repining improve them unto our spiritual advantage, or
proficiency in Faith and Obedience. And furthermore of our Salvation.

9. The fourth is, that he would 4 For daily Bread.
give us this day our daily Bread: That is, that he would vouchsafe always to
give us all things, Mat. 5. 25, 31, etc. 1 Timothy 6. 8. Heb. 13. 5. Phil. 4. 11,
12, 13.
which are necessary for us to pass this life withal without any true and real
want or debility of body; and on the contrary, to pass it in Peace and
Tranquillity; and to attend upon, and (with a serious cheerfulness of Mind and
Spirits) diligently to apply our selves, and to mind those things, that are
most sacred and holy: and that those things, which he has already given us,
and bountifully bestowed upon us, he would be pleased continually further to
bless them unto us, that so, being by their help and means, as by Lev. 26. 26.
a Staff sustained and supported, we may the better be employed in sanctifying
of his Mat. 6. 33. Luke 10. 41. 42.
Name, propagating of his Kingdom, and in the doing of his Will, and indeed
apply our studies and time unto Godliness without distraction. 5 For
forgiveness of Sins.


10. The fifth is, that he would forgive us our Debts, as we also forgive our
Debtors: that is, that he would graciously pardon unto us in Christ all Mat. 6.
14, 15. and 18. 21, 35. Luke 7. 47. and 18. 13. Romans 4. 7, etc.
our sins at any time committed, either through error and mistake, or
Infirmity, or chiefly through Wickedness and Malice; even as we also do from
our Heart ^ardon, and are always ready to pardon ^ll Col. 3. 12, 13. 1 Pet. 4.
8. 1 John 1. 7, 9. and 2. 7, 9.
Injuries and Offenses (and that upon this account only, because he wills and
commands it) to all those who at any time have hurt or wronged us.

11. The sixth is, that he would not For the mitigating of Temptations.
^ead us into Temptation, but deliver us from evil: that is, that he would not
at any time suffer us to be oppressed Mat. 26. 41. 2 Pet. 2. 9. Rev. 3. 10.
by too sore and long Temptations, much less to be overcome by them, 1 Cor. 10.
13.
or to be endangered above our strength, but that he would Ephesians. 3. 16, 17, 18.
and 6. 11, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 2, etc. 1 Pet. 5. 10. Heb. 13. 20, 21. Romans 5. 2,
etc.
always, according to his singular power, and also Fatherly Love, strengthen
and support us by his Holy Spirit: especially in sore Afflictions, difficult
Dangers, and Calamities, and other evils of that kind, by which Satan assayeth
altogether to destroy us, and to turn us from God; lest happily being too much
pressed thereby, we design and commit any thing, which may be contrary to his
Divine Will, and prejudicial to our own Salvation, or a good Conscience.
Lastly, that 1 Cor. 10. 13. 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9, 10. 1 John 5. 18.
he would always together with the Temptation afford an happy event or issue,
that we may be able to bear it, and so at length be delivered from all the
snares and enticements, and a the fraud and force of Satan, yea an^ freed from
all danger of everlasting pe^dition.

12. The Conclusion has a threefol^ A threefold reason of these Petitions.
ground or reason, why we should mak^ bold to desire and ask of God in Praye^
those things, of which we have alread^ spoken, and consequently why it becomes
us to ask them. Because indeed hi^ is the Psalm. 145. 11, 12, 13. and 146. 10.
Rev. 12. 10. 2 Pet. 2. 4.
Kingdom: that is, because he himself only is absolute, and obnoxious o^
subject to none, being King and Lord o^ all; and who has command and righ^
over all; and therefore over even Satan himself, though God and Prince of thi^
World. Because also his is the Power Psalm. 115. 3. Mar. 14. 36. Rev. 12. 7, 8.
that is, because he alone can do (that is, give, take away, send, turn away,
permit, hinder,) whatsoever he will, and that according to his own alone Mind
and good pleasure: and therefore is he one, against whom Satan, together with
the whole World, cannot at all prevail, so as for to destroy us. Lastly,
because his is the Glory: that is, 1 Cor. 6. 20. and 10. 30, 31. Col. 3. 17. 1
Pet. 4. 11. Rev. 10. 5, 6.
because it is he alone and he only, to whom we ought to ascribe whatsoever
good we either wish for and desire, or already have and possess, and unto whose
alone Glory, as to its last end, our whole and universal good is to redound.

13. But because those who piously Of the word Amen.
worship God, are certainly persuaded of their Prayers being heard, which they
pour out or make according to the Will of God, and because they wish and most
earnestly desire, 1 John 3. 22. and 5. 14, 15. 1 Cor. 14. 16. Psalm. 89. 52.
that the everlasting Glory of God, and their own Salvation, may more and more
be promoted by the same, therefore is there subjoyned the word Amen. Which
partly contains a certain Affirmation or avouching of the things propounded,
and partly also a pious Wish, and religious Vow of a faithful or believing Soul.

14. The other part or kind or sort of Of giving of Thanks.
Prayer largely taken is giving of thanks, Ephesians. 5. 10, 19, 20. Phil. 4. 6. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 15, 18. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 3. and 2. 13. 1 Timothy 2. 1.
whereby we give thanks unto God by Jesus Christ for benefits already received,
whether pertaining to this Life, or to that which is to come: and that both in
public and in private, especially in his Church: and testify and declare Psalm.
116. 1, etc. 2 Cor. 9. 11, 12, etc. Col. 1. 12. 13. and 3. 16. 17.
a thankful and mindful Heart, both by a singular study and exercise of Piety,
and by Praises, Psalms, Hymns, Almsdeeds, and other pious Duties, and such as
make for the Glory of God and the Good of Neighbor, according to the quality
and quantity, both of our own Abilities, and of the Benefits and Mercies we
have received.

CHAP. XV. Of special Callings, and of the Precepts and Traditions of Men.
1. ANd this indeed is the sum of Kinds of special callings.
those Commandments, which are enjoined us of Jesus Christ in common, or which
are necessary for all Christians to observe alike, for to obtain Salvation.
Besides which notwithstanding every Believer has his particular calling, which
every one is diligently to mind. As for instance, Romans 13. 1, etc.
of Magistrates, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.
Subjects; Parents, Children; Masters, Ephesians. 6. 1, etc.
Servants; also Ephesians. 5. 22. 1 Pet. 3. 1, etc.
of Husbands, Wives, 1 Cor. 7. 8, etc.
single Persons, 1 Cor. 7. 25, etc.
Virgins, 1 Timothy 9. 3, etc.
Widows; of 1 Timothy 6. 17. etc. Jam. 2. 1, etc. and 5. 1, etc.
Rich, Poor, etc. Of all which we have already before, in some part treated of
in our exposition of the Decalogue: and of the rest there are special
instructions or admonitions (but proportionable to those already spoken of, and
agreeable to every man's state in particular) every where easy to meet with in
the Holy Scriptures.

2. Of these in general we must hold The Rule that is to be held concerning
these.
that rule of the Apostle, Let every one abide in 1 Cor. 7. 20, etc.
that Calling, wherein he was called. The which notwithstanding if we can, with
the salvage of piety better, it is free for us so to do. For all these
conditions of themselves are indifferent: Col. 3. 11.
and therefore do neither commend us unto Christ, nor make us hateful or or
less acceptable to him. Wherefore (for instance) there is no greater Sanctity
to be attributed to Virginity 1 Cor. 7. 25, etc.
or a single estate or life, than unto a married estate, nor to Poverty, than
to a wealthy estate, etc. Neither are rash vows to be made unto God concerning
these things, whereby to wit, we perpetually tie our selves to this, or that,
yea whereby we tempt God, and cast a snare upon our selves, and our own liberty.

3. But all other works, especially Of the Commandments of men.
such as are merely outward, which are counted Religious, and which are devised
by man's Mat. 15. 2, etc. Gal. 4. 9, etc. chapter 5. 1, etc. Col. 2. 8, etc.
Spirit, besides and without the Word of God (whether they be imposed upon men's
consciences, with or by the authority of others, especially of the Church,
under the pretense of Traditions, or whether they be freely and voluntarily
performed by us, with an opinion of Worship, if not altogether necessary, yet
at least meritorious or satisfactory) they certainly are not necessary to
Salvation: Yea further, they are in no wise to be thought worthy of the
specious or goodly title of works truly good, or of divine worship, (much less
of supererogation, or of any excellent, and singular strain of Religion) for
that they cannot come under the august or sacred name of true 1 John: 2. 17.
Mat. 7. 21, etc. chapter 15. 16. and 23. 23.
Obedience, which is of it self acceptable and of right due unto God and
Christ, our only Lawgiver (and therefore is commanded under the promise of
Eternal life) yea also which are not seldom a great hindrance to the 1 Timothy 4.
8, etc. chapter 6. 3, etc. Tit 3. 8, 9.
principal and main part of divine Worship, (to wit, the loving of God and our
Neighbor) and hurtful to true Piety: especally if, as it often falls out,
they be not only equalled with, but also preferred before the Commandments of
God.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Worship and Veneration of Jesus Christ the only Mediator,
and of the Invocation of Saints.
1. ANdhithertoindeed we have chiefly The Majesty that is proper to Christ as
Mediator.
treated of the knowledge and Worship of God only. Now follows and succeeds
the Knowledge and Worship which is proper and peculiar to Jesus Christ as he is
Mediator. For in the said Knowledge, and in the Worship which follows from
thence, even eternal life also is expressly said to consist, Joh. 17. 3. For
unto Jesus Christ, as the only Mediator of the New Testament, is Mat. 28. 18.
given all power in Heaven and Earth, and all judgment, Joh. 5. 22, 23. and 3.
35. and 17. 2.
or an universal Government is delivered unto him of the Father, that all men
should honor him, even as they honor the Father: and Joh. 5. 17.
Authority is given him to execute Judgment, because he is the Son of man.
Therefore also God Heb. 2. 7, 8.
has crowned him with glory and Honor, and put all things under his feet,
Ephesians. 1. 21, 22.
and has made him head of his Church over all etc. And furthermore has given
him the Name above every name, Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11.
that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, both of things in Heaven, and
things in Earth, and of things under the Earth; and that every tongue should
confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God the Father etc. Which
indeed proper and peculiar Majesty of his, was conferred on him by God the
Father, 1 Pet. 1. 21. and 3. 22. 1 Cor. 15. 27. Act. 2. 36. and 5. 3^. and 10.
36, 42. Rev. 1. 5, etc. and chapter 3. 11.
chiefly for our comfort, and is to be acknowledged by us with religious and
thankful Hearts, and continually to be spoken of and praised, unto the glory
of God and Christ himself.

2. Therefore he that holily and religiously Religious worship due unto him.
worshipeth Jesus Christ as he is our 2 Timothy 2. 5. 1 John 2. 1. 2.
Mediator with God (especially since the time he was advanced Phil. 2. 9, etc.
to that supreme Right, and set Heb. 1. 3 and 7. 26. and 8. 1. Rev. 3: 21.
in the Throne of his Father, at his right hand) that is, he that Heb. 1. 6.
Joh. 5. 23. Phil. 2. 10, 11.
adoreth, calls upon, places his Act. 7. 59. and 9. 13, 14. 1 Cor. 1. 2.
hope and trust in him, and humbly gives Joh. 14. 1, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 11. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 5.
him thanks, and blesses him for the Rev. 5. 8, 9. 12, 13.
Salvation purchased by him for us, does altogether well and according to the
most certain Will of God. And he that does not acknowledge the foresaid Majesty
and Glory of his, and therefore refuses to yield unto him this Veneration and
Worship, he does both to God and Christ great wrong: especially if he accuse,
or rather defame and disgrace it, under the name of Idolatry, or false Worship
and Superstition.

3. But besides and over and above Against the invocation of or praying to
Saints.
this one 1 Timothy 2. 5.
Mediator between God and Man, religously to worship any others either Col. 2.
18. Rev. 19. 10. and 22. 9.
Angels or Men, whether living or dead (whether they have been really and truly
Holy, or only so in our opinion only) that is, to give them more than civil
reverence, or to invocate and pray unto them, as indeed our Patrons and
Advocates with God: or to dedicate Temples, Altars, Feasts unto them, to offer
Sacrifices, to make vows unto them, or to trust in their Merits and Power, and
Grace and Favor with God, etc. we judge wholly and altogether unlawful, and
displeasing to God: especially when the business is concerning the dead,
although Saints; for that the Holy Scriptures Heb. 4. 10. Rev. 14 13. Job. 3.
11. 12, 13, etc. chapter 41. 21. Eccl. 9. 5. 2 King. 22. 20. Isa. 38. 19. and 63.
16.
everywhere affirm of them, that they know not our condition or concerns, and
that they no way mind those things that are done under the Sun. Yet that the
memory both of the one and the other is holily to be kept, and their virtues
with worthy praises to be celebrated, and to be proposed or commended to us and
others for our and their imitation, we rightly judge. So far are we either from
condemning or any ways blaming the mutual intercession of Believers Romans ^5.
30. 2 Cor. 1. 11. E^h. 6. 18, 19. Col. 4. 3. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2. Heb. 13. 18.
who are yet alive, with God for one another.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Benefits and Promises of God, and first of Election unto
Grace, or Calling unto Faith.
1. BUt that Man might not only be The benefits of God that precede Faith.
able to do or perform those Commandments of God, which have hitherto been
expounded; but that he might be willing to do them readily, freely and
heartily, it has pleased God on his part to do all things, that are Jer. 31.
32, 33, 34. Heb. 8. 8, etc. Ezekiel. 11. 19. and 36. 22, etc. 2 Cor. 7. 1. 2 Pet.
1. 3, 4. 1 John 3. Col. 1. 4, 5. 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4, etc.
necessary for the effecting of both these in Man: that is, he has determined
to bestow such Grace upon Man that was and is a sinner, whereby he might be apt
and fit to perform all that, which is required of him in the Gospel: and
further to promise such good things unto him, whose excellency and beauty might
far exceed the capacity of all humane understanding, and the desire and certain
hope whereof might provoke and inflame the Will of Man actually to yield
obedience to the same. All which indeed benefits God, who is most merciful in
himself, and fatherly affected toward us in Christ, is wont by his Holy 1 Cor.
2. 10, etc. chapter 12. 3, etc. 2 Cor. 3. 6, etc. 1 John 2. 20, 27. Romans 5. 5. and
8. 9, etc.
Spirit (whereof we have treated more largely before) both to make known unto
us, and also really to bestow and confer upon us.

2. First therefore God bestows Vocation or calling unto Faith.
Grace Mat. 11. 20, etc. Joh. 5. 34, 40. and 6. 44, 45. 2 Pet. 1. 2, 3, 4.
on sinners not only necessary, but also sufficient for their yielding Faith
and Obedience, when he calls them by the Gospel unto himself: and seriously
prescribes to them Faith and Obedience under the promise of eternal Life on
the one hand, and the threatening of eternal Death on the other. This Vocation
or Calling in Scriptures is sometimes called 1 Cor. 1. 26. 2 Timothy 1. 9. 1 Pet.
2. 9.
Election or Choosing, to wit, unto Grace or the means of Salvation: differing
much from Election unto Glory, or Salvation it self, of which hereafter. Now
this Vocation is wrought and completed by the Mat. 28. 18. Joh. 5. 34. Romans 10.
14, 15. 2 Cor. 3. 5, 6.
preaching of the Gospel, and the Virtue or Power of the Spirit joined
therewith: and that indeeed with a gracious and serious intention to save, and
therefore to bring unto Faith, 1 Timothy 2. 4, etc. Tit. 2. 11. 1 Pet. 1. 23, 25.
all those that are called: whether they really believe and are saved or no,
and so obstinately refuse to believe and consequently to be saved.

3. For there is one Vocation that is Romans 8. 28. 29. 1 Cor. 1. 24, 26.
effectual, so called rather from the event, A twofold sort thereof.
then from the bare or sole intention of God, to wit, which does obtain its
saving Effect: not indeed for that it is out of a precise or absolute intent of
saving, so administered by some certain and singular Wisdom of God, so as
effectually or successfully to agree with the Will of him that is called, by an
irresistible Power, or by some Omnipotent force (which is neither more nor less
than creation or raising from the dead) so Act. 2. 4, 13, 48. Romans 6. 17. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13.
efficaciously determined to believe, that he cannot but believe and obey: but
because man, who is now called and sufficiently prepared, does not resist God
that calls him, nor set any Bar against the divine Grace, which otherwise he
might set against the same. There is indeed another that is Prove. 1. 24. 25.
Ez. 12. 1. Isa. 5. 1, etc. Mat. 23. 37. Luke 7. 30. Joh. 5. 40. Act. 7. 5. and
13. 46. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1, 2. Contrary to the Cannons of the Synod of Dort chapter 3,
and 4.
sufficient, but yet withal ineffectual, to wit, which on man's part is without
any saving effect, and through the alone voluntary and vincible or avoidable
fault of man becomes unfruitful, or obtains not its wished and due event and
end.

4. The former, which is accompanied Conversion or regeneration on Gods part.
with its saving effect, or is already in its exercit act, is sometimes called
in Scripture, Act. 3. 19, 26. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 9.
Conversion, Joh. 3. 5, etc. Jam. 1. 18.
Regeneration, a Ephesians. 2. 6.
Spiritual raising from the dead, and a Gal. 4. 19. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Ephesians.* 2. 10.
new Creation: to wit, because by it we are effectually turned from a corrupt
course of living, to live Tit. 2. 11, 12.
soberly, justly, and piously, and are raised of God from a Romans 6. 2, etc.
death of sin, or a deadly custom of sinning, unto a Spiritual life, or Holy
way of living: Lastly being reformed according unto the Romans 6. 17.
similitude or likeness both of the doctrine and of the life of Christ, we are
as it were begotten again: and so by repentance and faith are in him made Ephesians.
2. 24. Col. 3. 10.
new Creatures.

5. Man therefore has not saving Faith and conversion are not of our selves.
Mat. 11. 17. and 13. 11. and 16. 17. etc.
Faith of or from himself; nor is he born again or converted by the power of
his own free will: seeing in the State Mat. 7. 17. and 12. 34. Joh. 6. 44, 45,
65. and 3. 5, etc.
of sin he cannot so much as think, much less will or do any good, which is
indeed savingly good (such is in special manner Conversion and saving Faith) of
or from himself: but it is necessary that he be regenerated, and wholly renewed
Phil. 1. 5, 6. and 2. 13. Ephesians. ^. 1, etc. Jam. 1. 17, 18. 1 Pet. 1. 23.
of God, in Christ, by the word of the Gospel, and by the virtue of the Holy
Spirit in conjunction therewith: to wit, in understanding, affections, will,
and all his powers and faculties, that he may be able rightly to understand,
meditate on, will and perform these things that are savingly good.

6. We conclude therefore that the But from the grace of God alone.
grace of God is Ephesians. 2. 5, 18. Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13. and 3. 4, 5. Phil. 1. 6.
the beginning, Joh. 15. 5. 1 Cor. 1. 4, etc.
progress, and 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23, 24. Ephesians. 6. 13.
complement of all good: so that not so much as a regenerate man himself can,
without this preceding, or preventing, exciting, following and cooperating
Grace, think, will, or perform any thing that is savingly good: much less
resist any Mat. 26. 41. 1 Cor. 10. 13. Ephesians. 2. 4, etc.
temptations, that do draw and entice unto evil. Insomuch that Faith,
Conversion, and all good works, and all pious saving actions, which any one can
think of, are wholly to be ascribed to the Grace of God in Christ, as their
principal and primary cause.

7. Yet may man Ezekiel. 12. 2. Prove. 1. 24, 25. Mat. 13. 19. and 23. 37. Act. 7,
51. and 13. 46.
despise and reject The grace of God may be resisted.
the Grace of God, and resist the operation of it: so that, when he is called
of God unto Faith and Obedience, he may render himself unfit to believe, and
obey the divine Will; and that by his own proper fault, and that too, true and
vincible; either through Mat. 13. 19.
secure inadvertency, or through Joh. 7. 3, 4, 5, 51.
blind prejudice; or through 2 Cor. 3. 13. Romans 10. 2, 3.
inconsiderate zeal, or through an inordinate love of the Luke 14. 18.
World, or of himself; or other irritating or provoking causes of that kind.
For such an irresistible Grace, or force, which, as to its efficacy, is neither
more nor less than Joh. 5. 44.
Creation, not Generation properly so called, nor raising from the dead (and
which does effect the very act of Faith and Obedience in such manner, that it
being afforded or granted, a Man cannot but believe and obey) cannot certainly
but altogether ineptly and unwisely be there made use of and applied, where
free Obedience is seriously commanded, and that under the promise of an
exceeding great reward, in case it be performed; and under the threatening of
the sorest punishment, if it be neglected. For in vain and without cause does
he command this Obedience, and require it of another, and promise to reward the
Obedience, who himself both ought and will work the very act of Obedience by
such a force as cannot be resisted; and ineptly and against reason is he
rewarded, as one truly and really Obedient, in whom this very Obedience is
effected by such a kind of force of another's. Lastly, punishment, especially
eternal, is unjustly Another twofold reason for resistible grace.
and cruelly inflicted on him, by whom this Obedience is not performed through
the sole and alone defect of that irresistible Grace; which is indeed
necessary, as one disobedient, who really and indeed is not disobedient. That
we may not now say, that it is every where in the Scriptures affirmed of some,
that they have 2 Cor. 4. 4. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2. 2 Timothy 3. 2, etc. 1 John 5. 4. etc.
resisted the Holy Ghost, that they Act. 7. 51.
judged, or rather made themselves unworthy of eternal Life; Act. 13. 46.
that they made void the Counsel of God against themselves: that they would not
Luke 7. 30.
hear, Prove. 1. 24, 25.
come, Joh. 5. 40.
obey, that they have Act. 7. 39.
closed their ears, and Zech. 7. 11, 12, 13. Jer. 5. 3.
hardened their hearts, etc. And of others, that they heard the Word readily
and Act. 28. 24. Heb. 3. 12, 13. and 4. 2. Psalm. 95. 7, 8.
willingly: that they obeyed the Truth and the Faith; that they showed
themselves attentive and teachable; that they Act. 2. 41. and 13. 47. and 6. 7.
and 17. 11. Romans 6. 17. 1 Pet. 1. 22.
attended unto the Truth of the Gospel; that they received the Word with
cheerfulness; and that they were therein more generous then those who rejected
the same; lastly, that they obeyed the Truth, or the Gospel from the Heart,
etc. All which things certainly to attribute to those who either can no ways
believe or obey, or cannot but believe and obey when they are called, is
doubtless too inept or weak, and plainly ridiculous.

8. And though there be a very great Sufficient grace is afforded to all that
are cal^ed.
disparity of Romans 12. 6, etc. 1 Pet. 4. 10.
Grace according indeed to the most free dispensation of the Divine Will: yet
does the Holy Spirit bestow and confer so much Mat. 11. 21. Tit. 3. 4, etc. 1
Pet. 1. 23. and 2. 9. Jam. 1. 18. 2 Cor. 3. 6. Heb. 4. 12.
Grace upon all Men both in general and in particular, to whom the Work of
Faith is ordinarily preached, as is sufficient to beget Faith in them, and to
carry on their saving conversion gradually unto the end. And therefore not only
those, who do actually believe and are converted; but also those, Isa. 62. 2.
Ezekiel. 18. 11. Prove. 1. 24, etc. Mat. 23. 37. Luke 8. 12.
who do not actually believe and are not really converted, have sufficient
grace vouchsafed to them, to believe and to be converted. For whom soever God
does call unto Faith and Salvation, he Tit. 2. 11, 12. 2 Timothy 1. 9. 2 Cor. 5.
20. and 6. 1, etc. Isa. 5. 2, etc. Psalm. 85. 13, 14. Joh. 5. 34. and 10. 10.
calls them seriously; that is to say, he does not call them only in outward
show, or only by his vocal Word (to wit, as therein his serious Precepts and
Promises are held forth to those that are called in general) but also with a
sincere, and every way unfeigned intention of saving them, and will of
converting them: So that he never intended any decree of absolute Reprobation,
or immerited or undeserved blinding or hardening to precede or pass before
concerning them.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the promises of God that are performed in this life, to those
that are already converted and are Believers; that is, of Election unto Glory,
of Adoption, Justification, Sanctification, and of Obsignanation or Sealing.
1. COncerning Men that are sinners, Five saving acts about or toward
believers in this life.
but yet are already effectually called and converted by the Grace of God unto
the Faith of Jesus Christ, and who do by the help of the same Grace, by true
Faith, order their life according to the Commandments of Jesus Christ, God is
pleased and uses to exercise toward them, and to prosecute them with several
Romans 8. 28, etc. Ephesians. 1. 3, etc.
saving acts, but of two sorts: of which indeed some pertain to this Life,
others to that which is to come.

2. The acts which pertain to this 1. Election unto Salvation 2. Adoption or
Sonship.
Life are five: of which the two former are Election unto Glory, and Adoption,
or Divine Filiation, or Sonship. By the one of which Mar. 13. 20. Jam. 2. 5.
Romans 8. 29.
they that are already converted, and do truly believe, are separated from the
profane rabble of those that perish, and being exempted out of the number of
those that are to be damned, (as to their present estate) are as it were set
apart for God's own peculiar Treasure: By the other the same are moreover more
nearly or thoroughly taken into the Joh. 1. 12. Romans 8. 17. Gal. 3. 26. and 4.
5, 7.
Household of God, and so unto a Right of the Heavenly inheritance, in due time
to be entered upon, and so are ranked and registered among those that shall be
saved, or among those whom God will no ways punish, but will pardon unto them
their Sins freely in or through Christ. Although Adoption Romans 8. 23. Luke 6.
36. 1 John 3. 1, etc.
elsewhere in Scripture is wont also to denote the very Redemption it self of
our bodies, or the blessed Resurrection, to wit, because the complement and
consummation thereof will then and there at length appear.

3. To these are immediately joined 3. Justification or absolution.
other Acts, as Justification, Sanctification, and lastly a certain singular or
peculiar Obsignation or Sealing by the Holy Spirit. Justification is a merciful
and gracious and indeed full absolution or discharge of a Sinner that truly
repents and believes, from all Psalm. 32. 1, etc. Luke 18. 13, 14. Act. 10.
43. and 13. 38, 39. Heb. 8. 12. Romans 3. 24, etc.
guilt before God, through and for the sake of Jesus Christ apprehended or laid
hold on by true Faith: or a gratuitous or free remission of all Sins, obtained
or received by true Faith in Jesus Christ, yea further also, a liberal and
munificent imputation of Faith it self Romans 4. 3, etc. and 5. 1, etc.
unto, or for Righteousness, for that indeed in God's judgment and account we
attain not unto it, but of Gods mere pure grace, Gal. 2. 16. Ephesians. 2. 4, etc.
Tit. 3. 4, etc.
and by Faith only in Jesus Christ, (but yet a living one, and such as works
by love) without all merit of our own works. And this is the meaning of that
Article of the Creed, when we say, I believe the remission or forgiveness of
Sins.

4. Sanctification in special manner 4. Sanctification strictly taken.
so called (for 1 Cor. 1. 2. and 6. 11. Heb. 2. 11. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. 1 Pet. 1.
2. Act. 20. 32. and 26. 18.
otherwise sometime in the Sacred Scripture it is taken for Regeneration also
or Conversion, or effectual Calling (of which before) or finally for any
Spiritual cleansing whatever, although it be only outward) is a certain, more
perfect, and which continually grows and increases, separation of the Sons or
Children of God from this impure or unclean World, being partly a more
plentiful and fuller enlightening of true Believers, and such as out of Faith
diligently perform and do their duty in the Joh. 7. 17, 18. Joh. 2. 20, 27.
Heb. 6. 4. and 10. 10, 14.
knowledge of the Will of God (which even God oftentimes is wont to effect and
work in many and admirable manners) partly a more 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. 2 Timothy 2. 21.
effectual and through-extimulation or engaging of them unto a constant hatred
of Sin, and study of Holiness and true Godliness, and a confirmation of them in
this zeal or earnest affection: so that the Will of a Man that is a true
Believer is made more prone and inclined, yea more cheerful unto virtue every
day than other: And these obstacles or hindrances, which otherwise he is wont
to meet with in his study of piety and virtue, he either suffers them not to
be laid in his way, or being laid he diligently and carefully removes them,
and courageously and cheerfully overcomes them. 5. Obsignation or Sealing by
the Holy Spirit.


5. Obsignation or Sealing by the Holy Spirit, is a more solid and strong
confirmation Romans 5. 5. and 8. 15, 16. 2 Cor. 1. 21, 22. and 5. 5.
of us in a true confidence and hope of the Heavenly Glory, and certainty or
assurance of the Grace and Favor of God, whereby it comes to pass that
Believers, as by an earnest or certain pledge received, are more and more
assured of their Adoption, Justification and finally of their following
Glorification, and unless themselves hinder it, they may be preserved even unto
Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. and 4. 30. 1 Cor. 1. 8, 9. Phil. 1. 6, 7, etc.
the end, in a sense or feeling of the Grace of God, and in true Faith against
all manner of temptations, or may have the gift of a total and final
perseverance vested in them and bestowed upon them.

6. And these kinds of gracious acts Three sorts of just or justified Persons
in this life.
God exercises toward all those, and only those (though unequally and in
different measure) who truly believe and repent: of whom therefore in the
Scriptures we find three sorts or orders. 1. Of those Mat. 13. 20. Luke 8. 12,
13, 14. 1 Cor. 3. 1, etc. Gal. 1. 6, etc. Rev. 2. and 3. chapter
who are called novices or beginners, and who are newly or but lately converted
to the Faith, who together with a sincere assent do withal bring indeed a
serious and deliberate purpose or resolution of obeying the Divine Will: but
yet such, as when Persecution, or the Cross and Affiictions, or other dangerous
Temptations do arise, does immediately again grow weak, or sometimes also
vanishes, and wholly decays. 2. Of those Mat. 10. 17, etc. and 24. 9, etc. ^ Thessalonians. 3. 3, etc. 1 Timothy 1. 19. and 4. 1, etc. Heb. 6. 4, etc. and 10. 31. 2
Pet. 2. 18, etc. and 3. 17, 18.
who do for some time remain constant in the true Faith, and this same holy
resolution and purpose, and for a while also demonstrate the truth of their
Faith by good works: but yet notwithstanding at length, what through the
enticements of the World, or of the Flesh, or of Satan, or by some violent
Tyranny, they defect and revolt from the Faith, as overcome or wholly
discouraged and broken. 3. Of those, who either without any defection or
interruption, do continually persevere and hold out in the said pious
resolution, Mat. 10. 22. and 24. 13. Luke 21. 19. Ephesians. 3. 16, etc. Col. 1. 21,
etc. and 2. 5, etc.
and in holy Works, even unto the end: or who having once or again lapsed or
fallen, or Luke 22. 32. 2 Cor. 1. 7, 8, etc. and 7. 10. 2 lim. 2. 25, 26. Mat.
10. 22. and 24. 13.
somewhat more often revolted, do again seriously repent: and so being restored
again by the Grace of God, do at length finally persist and hold out. Therefore
the two former orders of Believers are indeed truly elected, adopted, and
justified, but not altogether absolutely, nor but for a time: to wit, so far
and so long as they are and remain such: but the third and last sort only even
finally, and peremptorily, to wit, according to that which we read in the
Gospel: He that continues to the end, the same shall be saved.

7. For these acts are Divine acts, which The confutation of an error.
are sometimes continued, and sometimes interrupted: to wit, which so long
continue and take place here, as the requisite condition thereof (that is,
Faith and Holiness that are agreed upon by Covenant) endures and abides in
us. But they are interrupted when we no longer stand to our Covenants; or when
we do or commit such acts as can no ways consist with true Faith and a good
Conscience: according to that of Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 18. 24. Romans 11. 12, etc. 1
Cor. 9. 27. and 10. 11, 12, etc. Col. 1. 21, 23. Heb. 3. 6, 14. and 10. 35, 36.
Rev. 2. 10. and 3. 11, 12.
If the just or righteous shall turn away from his righteousness, and do
iniquity, according to all the iniquities, which the wicked shall do, shall he
do it and live? all the righteousnesses which he has done shall not be
remembered: for his prevarication wherewith he has prevaricated, and for the
sin wherewith he has sinned, for them, I say, he shall die. Whereunto are
consonant very many other sacred testimonies of like sort, together with
examples.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Promises of God pertaining to the life to come, or of the
raising again of the dead, and eternal Life.
1. THe acts of God pertaining to the Three saving acts in the World to come.
life to come, are the raising again from 1 Cor. 15.
death (or instead thereof a sudden change of our mortal nature) and
Glorification, or the Mat. 25. 31, etc.
bestowing of Heavenly Glory and Life eternal: according to those two last
Articles of the Apostles Creed: I believe the Resurrection of the Flesh, and
the Life everlasting. 1. The raising of the dead.


2. This raising will be at Mat. 16. 27. and 25. 31, etc.
the second and glorious coming of Jesus Christ unto the general Judgment: to
wit, when he shall raise unto life again all the Rev. 20. 12, 13.
dead, both the just Act. 24. 15.
and unjust, and judge both them, and those that shall then remain alive, Romans
14. 9, 10, 11,
at the Judgmentseat of his Father, and assign or award unto them all just
rewards or condign punishments, according to 12. 12 Cor. 5. 1. 0. 2 Thessalonians. M 7,
etc. 3 at. 25. 1, etc.
the quality and quantity of their Works, which they have done in the body,
whether good or evil. For then he shall raise up his faithful ones, and Saints,
which 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. 2 Cor. 5. 4, etc. Phil. 3. 21. 2 The changing of those
alive.
were indeed dead, out of the dust of the Earth, unto a Life eternal and
blessed, and shall endow them alone with a glorious and incorruptible body: And
those which he shall then 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. 1 Cor. 15. 51, 52.
find alive, and surviving of them, those he shall on a sudden, and as it were
in a moment, change, and make them immortally blessed with the other.

3. This-like raising, and in part a 3 Glorification and life eternal.
change, shall be immediately succeeded by that blessed Glorification, which is
the complement of all the other acts: 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16, 17. Mat. 24. 30, 31. and
25. 31, etc. 1 John 3. 1, etc.
whereby the Lord Jesus (after he shall have descended from Heaven with a
shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God to the now
said Judgment) shall take them, being raised by the Angels of his power, with
himself into the Air, and most powerfully deliver or translate them from 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8, etc. 2 Pet. 3. 10, 11.
the universal corruption or total destruction of the whole World (being then
to be altogether on a flame) into the everlasting and glorious mansions Heb. 2.
5. 2 Pet. 3. 13. Rev. 21. 1.
of the Heavens (which in the Scriptures are called new Heavens, a new Earth,
and the World to come) and shall give them to enjoy unspeakable Joh. 12. 26.
Mat. 25. 21, 23. Luke 22. 29, 30. Rev. 3. 12, 21. and 14. 13. and 21. 23. and
22. 5.
joy with himself, and with God, and with his holy Angels for ever and for ever.

CHAP. XX. Of the Divine threatenings and punishments of the Wicked, pertaining
both unto this Life, and unto the Life to come: to wit, of Reprobation,
Hardening, Blinding, and of eternal Death and Damnation.
1. Toward the Wicked and Unbelievers, Four Acts of Anger or Wrath and Revenge
about unbelievers.
Mat. 10. 14, 15. and 11. 20. Luke 19. 41. Romans 2^2, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15, 16.
or those who refractorily or obstinately refuse to believe and repent, and
who, although they have been long and much called upon, admonished, reproved,
chastened, etc. do yet nevertheless persist to disobey the Gospel, God is
minded to exercise acts altogether contrary to the former, and they no less
severe, than just and holy, the which he has threatened them with in his Word,
and do pertain partly to this life, partly to that which is to come.

2. The acts pertaining unto this Life 1 Reprobation or casting off.
are Reprobation or Desertion; Also Blinding and Hardening, and other temporal
punishments of that or the like sort, of which the first is the just casting of
wicked men off: to wit, Mat. 8. 12. and 21. 43. Romans 11. 2, 20, etc.
when God will no longer have or account them for his people: and therefore
does righteously withdraw from them the Joh. 12. 35. Luke 13. 24. and 17. 22.
Mat. 10. 14, etc. Act. 14. 16. Rev. 2. 5, etc.
Grace of his holy Spirit, which has been so often despised by them; yea
sometimes also he thinks not meet to bestow upon them those outward means,
which he is wont ordinarily to make use of for the Salvation of his people: to
wit, by leaving them in their own darkness and sins, without true Pastors,
Godly Teachers or Monitors, and diligent Searchers out of Truth.

3. Next follows Blinding and 2 Blinding and Hardening
Isa. 6. 9. Mat. 13. 14, 15. Joh. 12. 40. Act. 28. 26.
Hardening: to wit, when these sinners being now left destitute of the light of
Heavenly Truth, are by Gods permission and just judgment deeply involved in
Romans 9. 18. and 11. 8.
gross ignorance and errors, and in wonderful and diverse manners seduced: and
when they are given up to their own Romans 1. 24, 26. etc.
unclean lusts, or left to their vile or filthy affections, or are on every
side exposed to the temptations, delusions, and snares of 2 Cor. 4. 4. 2 Thessalonians.
2 11, 12.
Satan: also when their wicked counsels, endeavors, and Psalm. 10. 4, etc. and
71. 4, etc. Jer. 44. 17, 18. Deuteronomy. 32. 14, 15.
practices are suffered for a time to go on with some happy success, and
themselves for a while to sin scot-free; lastly Ezekiel. 14. 5, 9. Isa. 63. 16, 17.
when manifold occasions of erring and sinning are presented to them: and their
Ephesians. 4. 19. Romans 11. 8.
Consciences in the mean while are not pricked or troubled with any sad remorse
or serious sorrow for their sins committed, etc. All which things indeed, and
very many other more of like sort, profane men are wont to turn to their own
destruction. From whence there grows or increases more and more a strange
blindness of mind, an obstinate hardness of heart and filthy greediness of
sinning: and finally a thick and gross darkness; that is, a certain brutish
ignorance of God, and secure profaneness of life 3. Exemplary punishing.
does wholly seize and possess them. And sometimes indeed those acts are
seconded and followed even with Exodus 9. 16. Act. 12. 21. and 5. 5. 1 Cor. 10.
5, etc. 2 Pet. 2. 5, 6. Jude. 4, 5, 6. 4 Eternal Damnatiou.
some exemplary also and public punishment of these men in this life, and such
as is visible or obvious to the sight of all.

4. The penal acts that pertain to the life to come, are most usually contained
under the words of the Wrath and Vengeance of God, also of Mar. 3. 29. Romans 2.
5. 2 Thessalonians. 1, 5. 2 Pet. 2. 9. and 3. 7. Jude. v. 7.
Judgment and Condemnation, Romans 5. 16. and 8. 1.
whereby God will not only by judgment irrevocably pass or give away Mat. 8.
12. and 22. 13. and 25. 41, 46.
from the wicked and unbelievers immortal glory, but will also inflict upon
them the torments of Hell and eternal punishments. Which indeed shall be done
openly at the last day, when he shall throw them, together with the Devil and
his Angels, into everlasting fire, Mat. 25. 41. Jude. v. 7. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9.
that there they may be punished with everlasting destruction, being banished
from the presence of God, and his glorious power.

5. And these things being thus finished, The new World to come.
there shall immediately 2 Pet. 3. 13. Rev. 21. 1, etc. and 22. 1, etc.
arise that new World, wherein dwells Righteousness; and where Jesus Christ,
our Lord and King, having wholly or utterly destroyed all his Enemies, shall
deliver up or restore the Kingdom to Rev. 2. and 3. 1 Cor. 15. 24, etc.
God and his Father, that from thenceforward, God may be all in all.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Ministry of the Word of God, and of the Orders of Ministers.
1. ANd this indeed is the Will of The use and necessity of the Sacred
Ministry.
God, which is necessary for us to know, for that it consists of such like most
holy Precepts and so excellent Promises, the which, that it might become known
unto miserable mortals, and be continually set before their eyes, it pleased
that great Pitier or Compassioner of mankind, that it should not only be
tacitly insinuated or conveyed into them Mat. 28. 19, 20. Act. 10. 41, etc.
Romans 10. 14, 15. 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. 2 Timothy 4. 2, etc. The immediate Election and
sending of Ministers.
by private reading of the sacred Scripture: but also that it should by open
and public preaching be every where proclaimed, and daily and openly as it
were implanted, and inculcated or beaten in to them.

2. And that it might be rightly or duly performed, there was first of all
necessary a solemn and immediate both election or separation, Romans 10. 15. Ephesians.
2. 20, etc. Rev. 21. 14.
and mission or sending forth of some certain men, for the discharge of the
said office; and the same indeed accompanied and backed with an infallible
instruction, and a certain irrefragable authority, or spiritual power.
Wherefore the Lord Jesus pitched upon or designed him Act. 1. 8. and 10. 41,
etc. 1 Cor. 12. 28, etc. Ephesians. 4. 11.
certain Ambassadors extraordinary, as eminent and singular Ministers of his:
and furnished them with all gifts Mar. 16. 15, etc. Act. 2. 1, etc. 2 Cor. 12.
12. Heb. 2. 3, 4.
and virtues of the Holy Ghost necessary for the discharge of this their
Embassage: and Act. 13. 1, etc. and chapter 16. 6, 7.
continually so ruled, governed, strengthened, and confirmed them; that they did
not only once alone openly and publicly declare this Will of God, and solidly
by all kinds of signs and miracles establish and confirm the same: but also
every where gathered them Ephesians. 4. 12. Act. 14. 21, etc. and 15. 36. and 19. 8.
Assemblies or Congregations of pious men, among whom the preaching of this his
Will, as far as might be, might always flourish, and be preserved whole and
entire, to wit, for the continual edification or building up of all that were
called in the true and saving Faith of Jesus Christ.

3. And indeed these first and chief The singular authority of the Apostles.
Preachers were Mat. 10. 1, etc. and 28. 19, 20. 1 Cor. 12. 28.
the Apostles: who as in teaching and gathering Churches, so in the governing
and keeping them together, used such Authority, 1 Cor. 5. 3, etc. 2 Cor. 10. 1.
2, etc. and 13. 10. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6, 14.
as they had immediately received from the Lord Jesus: to wit, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13.
2 Thessalonians. 2. 19. 2 Timothy 3. 14.
such as was uncontrollable and unquestionable, and to which all Believers were
bound to yield and obey. And to these indeed were joined both Act. 15. 32. and
21. 8. 1 Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.
Prophets and Evangelists, and Teachers and Pastors, and other such like, who
also themselves used and bestowed their utmost diligence and pains, either for
the gathering of new Churches or Assemblies, or afterward for the nourishing
and feeding and further instructing of these that were already gathered by the
Apostles.

4. But when such Foundations and Their following success.
first beginnings had now been laid by these; lest when they were either
absent, or dead, those Congregations should be scattered, and decay again or
come to naught, and so by this means, this divine and saving Doctrine by little
and little should vanish away and be lost; they everywhere in those places
where Churches were already gathered, appointed them their successors: to wit,
Act. 14. 23. and 20. 28. Heb. 13. 7, 17. Phil. 1. 1. 1 Timothy 4. 16. and 5. 17.
Bishops, Elders and Deacons: by whose help endeavor and care those Churches
might continually be preserved, and as much as might be, also increased in
number: and gave express advice and command, that the same afterward at all
times and in all places should be done in all Congregations: giving withal an 1 Timothy 3. 1, etc. Tit. 1. 5. 6, etc.
exact description, what manner of persons they ought to be, who were
thenceforth to be set over the Congregations for this end.

5. And they indeed therefore appointed Bishops and Elders.
Act. 20. 28. 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. and 4. 2, 5. Tit. 1. 9, etc. and 2. 5, 17.
Bishops and Elders, that both of them by preaching the Gospel, by teaching
wholesome or saving Truth, by confuting errors contrary thereunto; also by
exhorting, comforting, reproving, correcting, ruling, and lastly by going
before others, by 1 Timothy 4. 12. Ti^. 2. 7. 1 Pet. 5. 3.
their example, etc. might preserve or keep together the Churches already
planted, and by a continual succession, to their utmost power, might propagate
the same. And they ordained Deacons, Act. 6. 1, etc. 1 Timothy 3. 9, 10, etc.
that, after they had been first proved or tried, they might diligently employ
themselves, in gathering and distributing alms, and in pious, and tender
care-taking of the poor in the said Congregations. From whence arises the
perpetual necessity, and manifold use of the whole Ministry of the Church.

6. But because after the Apostles days, The authority of those limited.
and those first Preachers of the Gospel, or Founders of the Church (when the
doctrine of the Gospel had now already been fully enough proposed, and in the
judgment of God himself abundantly confirmed, and lastly clearly committed to
writing) that immediate sending of Ministers ceased, together with infallible
instruction, and the undoubted assistance of the Holy Spirit: therefore an
irrefragable Power, or infallible Authority, in teaching and ruling, has no
more place also. Which also even the Apostles themselves were minded to
testify, when they gave, and left unto the Bishops and Elders, a certain 2.
Tim. 3. 10, 14. Act. 15. 24. 1 Cor. 14. 37, 38. Tit. 1. 5.
and perpetual rule of Doctrine and form of Discipline: according unto which
these were to teach and rule the Churches for the future by: and expressly
commanded them, and seriously charged them, that they should diligently keep
the 2 Timothy 1. 13, 14.
pattern or form of sound words, which they had heard of them; and that they
should remember, and hold fast that Tit. 1. 9.
faithful doctrine, which they had learned: and therefore bade an Gal. 1. 8, 9.
Anathema to those who brought any doctrine contrary to, or differing from
that, which they themselves had delivered, Romans 16. 17.
and withal enjoined the Churches, that they should receive or admit of no
other doctrine besides that, which they had received from the Apostles, no
although even an Angel from Heaven brought it.

7. But since it is the Duty and Office Of degrees and order among them.
of all Bishops and Elders 2 Timothy 1. 13.
to teach, and 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3.
govern the Churches, according to that form that is laid down by the Apostles,
it appears manifest enough, that they have not by any divine right any Mat. 20.
25, etc. and 23. 8.
Command and Power or Authority, properly so called, one over another. And yet
do we not therefore notwithstanding altogether disallow of, much less proudly
reject, those degrees of Teachers, and Rulers, which have now long since been
appointed, and every where hitherto taken place in diverse Churches of Christ,
for order and decorum's sake, or for preserving good order; (For indeed God is
not the 1 Cor. 14. 33, 40. 1 Timothy 3. 15.
Author of Confusion, but of Order) if so be they do not at length degenerate
into Tyranny, and make show of some worldly Dignity and Power rather, than of a
spiritual Ministry, and of that modesty and moderation which becomes the
Disciples of Christ.

8. But if any one shall abuse the pretense Against the manifold abuse thereof.
of this order unto pride and haughtiness; and in particular, if any by these
degrees shall not stick to climb so high, as arrogantly to assume unto himself
not only a supreme Right to determine in matters of Religion, and to decide all
Controversies of Faith, Mat. 24. 49. Luke 12. 42. etc. 3. Joh. 9. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
4, etc. 2 Pet. 2. 1, etc. 2 Cor. 11. 20. Rev. 11. 7. and 13. per tot. Gal. 4.
29.
but also to usurp Lordship over the Lords Heritage, and over his
fellow servants, yea over Kings, and Princes: yea further, whether directly or
indirectly, to usurp a coactive power (that is, armed with outward force, or
upheld by the secular arm) to punish others: yea to punish them with the Sword
and with Death, who cannot out of Conscience attribute this Authority unto him
(or who refuse to subscribe to his Determinations, Decrees and Statutes) though
in all other respects they be good and loyal subjects to the Commonwealth: if
any, we say, shall under this pretense usurp such a power in the Church of
Christ, or any other whatsoever like it; or at least attribute to himself the
same in words, or suffer it to be attributed to him by others, truly he seems
unto us to recede very far from the Office of a true Bishop.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Church of Jesus Christ, and its marks or notes.
1. FUrthermore, those Congregations The Church of Christ, and the Communion
thereof.
or Assemblies, which either by the public pains or labor of these Ministers,
or otherwise by the word of the Gospel any ways whatsoever preached, read or
heard, are gathered as it were into one body (all and every of whose members
have a certain mutual communion amongst one another, and a spiritual communion
with their one only and true Head our Lord Jesus Christ) as they really are, so
also are they rightly called Mat. 16. 18. and 18. 17. Act. 20. 28. and every
where else.
the Church of Jesus Christ. Of both which, to wit, the Church, and the
Communion thereof, we say in the Apostles Creed: I believe the holy Catholic
Church, the Communion of Saints.

2. For this Church is nothing else, What the Church is.
but an Assembly of men called by the Gospel, Romans 10. 10, 14, etc. Ephesians. 5. 23,
etc.
and believing on Jesus Christ, or at least with their mouth professing his
Name and Doctrine, as saving: although some more some less, either sincerely
and purely, or firmly and constantly, believe on Christ, or at least outwardly
in words and rites profess Christ.

3. For the Church, whilst it is militant In what respects it is invisible.
here on earth, is wont according to the Sacred Scripture to be considered
under a twofold respect. 1. As an Assembly Ephesians. 5. 23, 25. Gal. 6. 10, 16. 1
Pet. 1. 22, 23.
of Men and Women truly pious and believing, and that do cordially and
sincerely embrace and love, and with their whole heart keep and order their
lives and conversations according to that saving Doctrine of Jesus Christ,
which they profess with their Mouth. Which Assembly is visible, and certainly
known Romans 2. 28, 29. and 8. 27. and 10. 9. 1 Cor. 4 5. Rev. 2. 23.
to God only: but is invisible unto us: Seeing true Faith and Piety, which lie
hid within the heart, none but God, the alone indeed searcher of the Hearts and
Reins, can behold them.

4. But to hold the saving Doctrine What Congregations are to be counted for
the true Church of Christ.
of Jesus Christ, is not forthwith so perfectly to know Romans 14. 1, etc. and
15. 1, etc. Phil. 3. 15, 16.
all that is every way contained in the doctrine of Christ, so as to err or
hesitate in no one Article at all, or no Sacred History, or sense of the Holy
Scripture: but at least well and rightly to hold or understand 1 Cor. 7. 19.
Gal. 1. 6. and 6. 15.
all that, without which we cannot rightly observe and perform the Commandments
of Faith and Obedince, nor consequently according to the Mind and Will of God
obtain eternal Salvation. Therefore all those Churches, which agree in the
belief and profession of necessary Truth, we believe that they ought to be
counted for true Churches of Jesus Christ: although in the mean time they
differ in many other things, and in some respects not inconsiderably swerve
from the Truth.

5. The Church is considered, as it is How far it is visible.
a visible Multitude of those that Act. 2. 41, etc. chapter 5. 11. and 8. 1, etc.
and 14. 32.
publicly profess the Faith and Doctrine of Jesus Christ, although happily they
do not truly believe in him: which as to the outward Confession of the Mouth,
and other manifest signs of Faith of that kind, is of it self even sufficiently
known, and visible unto us: although it appear Romans 10. 9, 10. and 11. 3, 4. 1
Cor. 4. 4, etc. Another division of it into Catholic and particular.
sometimes, less evidently or clearly.

6. Again both may be considered either as Catholic 1 Cor. 1. 2. Romans 10. 11,
12, 13. 1 Cor. 11. 12, etc. Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. and 5. 23, 24.
or universal, which being spread throughout the whole World, comprehends or
contains all Congregations together, either of those who truly believe, or at
least profess so to do: or as local, or particular, 1 Cor. 1. 2. Gal. 1. 2.
Romans 1. 7. and 16. 1, 4, 5.
which is gathered in certain places by parts severally; for instance, at
Corinth, in Galatia, at Ephesus, etc. Of which this, or the other, whatever it
be, may not only err in doctrine, but also revolt from the true Faith, and the
profession thereof: Rev. 2. and 3. tot.
yea and oftentimes also does actually revolt from the same (the Catholic
Church in the mean time still remaining safe and entire notwithstanding.) Nor
indeed is there any divine promise extant, whereby the sincere profession of
true doctrine and a continual succession therein, or an uninterrupted and
uniform continuance of the continual assistance of the Holy Ghost, and of the
Orthodox Faith (and that to be always clearly seen) is promised to any certain
particular Church or Congregation: yea indeed rather both examples 1 Thessalonians. 2.
3, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 1, etc. 2. Tim. 3. 1. 2 Pet. 2. 1, etc. Act. 10. 29, 30.
and presages of the defection of many are every where obvious or easy to meet
with in the Holy Scriptures.

Of the Marks or Notes of a visible Church.
7. Furthermore the Notes and Marks (such indeed as are certain and infallible)
which clearly demonstrate unto us, and make a Church or Christian Assembly,
which is already gathered by the preaching of the Word, visible, may be reduced
unto one only general; that is, unto the profession Mat. 10. 32, 33. Joh. 10.
4. 5. 27. and 12. 42, 43. and 13. 34, 35. and 14. 21, etc.
of that sacred and saving doctrine, which was delivered by Jesus Christ, in
conjunction with at least an outward keeping Act. 2. 41, 42. and 4. 32, etc.
Romans 10. 9. 1 Timothy 3. 15.
of the Commandments of Jesus Christ. For whereas true Faith, which is given
unto the saving doctrine of Jesus Christ, does, as the more inward form, and as
it were the Soul, constitute and make a true and invisible Church of Jesus
Christ, it is necessary doubtless, that the alone profession of that true and
saving Faith, which we have spoken of, make the same visible unto us.

8. But with labor and toil either to Against fallacious and uncertain Marks.
seek or demand, or to desire to show unto others, other Notes or Marks,
whereby those, who as yet are wholly ignorant what a true Church of Christ is,
or which or what is the saving Doctrine thereof, may come certainly and
undoubtedly to the knowledge of the true Church, and consequently to the
knowledge of the Truth it self, is altogether vain and foolish; for that so to
pretend, is neither See the places just now quoted.
necessary, nor profitable, nay not possible rightly or orderly to be
performed. So far is it from such Marks consisting in those things, which the
World and Fleshly reason are wont so highly to esteem, to wit, in Antiquity,
Multitude, Consent, Succession of persons, outward Splendor of Congregations,
or worldly Happiness, etc. of which many of late do vainly boast.

9. Furthermore, the duty of those who The duty of the Citizens of the Churches.
belong to this visible Church does not only consist in every particular Man's
professing with his Mat. 8. 38. Romans 10. 9.
mouth and in life this saving doctrine of Christ for himself: but also in
Believers being united and joined together among themselves, 1 Cor. 11. 20,
etc. and 14. 4, etc. Act. 2. 41, 42, Mar. 18. 16. 1 Cor. 16. 1, etc.
whether they be more, or fewer, in their doing or performing those things,
which ordinarily cannot, nor use to be performed, but in a Society or
Congregation, and which render the Society or Congregation it self more
Illustrious and Conspicuous.

10. Which sort or kind of duties, Three in chief.
besides hearing of the Word preached, and the profession of Faith already
spoken of, are chiefly two: to Act. 2. 41, etc. and 8. 12, etc. and 20. 7.
wit, the use of the Sacraments; as they are called, and Mat. 18. 17. 1 Cor. 5.
4. 1 Timothy 5. 1, 2, 20.
the exercise of Christian discipline: of which more immediately.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Sacraments and other Sacred Rites.
1. When we speak of Sacraments, What a Sacrament is.
we understand the outward Ceremonies of the Church, or those sacred and solemn
Rites, whereby as by foederal Romans 4. 11, etc. 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3, 16, etc. 1
Cor. 12. 13.
signs, and visible seals, God does not only represent and shadow out unto us
his gracious benefits, especially those promised in the Covenant of the Gospel,
but does also in a certain manner clearly hold forth and seal the same unto us:
and we again likewise do openly and publicly declare and testify, that we do
embrace Romans 6. 3, 4. and 2. 25, 26. 1 Cor. 10. 16, etc. and 11. 25, etc.
all the promises of God with a true, firm, and obedient Faith, and that we
will always with continual and thankful remembrance celebrate with praise his
benefits and favors.

2. And these like Rites, if we must What their number is in the N.T.
speak properly and accurately, in the New Testament, are only two: to wit,
Baptism, and the Sacred Supper. Of which the one by a Genesis 17. 10, etc. 1 Samuel
17. 36.
certain analogy ( i. e. proportion or likeness) does not unaptly answer unto
Exodus 12. 26, etc. Lev. 23. 5, etc.
the sign of Circumcision, which under the Old Testament was a sign of sacred
initation ( i. e. entrance) or of a certain ingraffing into the people of God;
and the other to 1 Cor. 10, etc.
the eating of the Paschal Lamb, which was a Rite of solemn Eucharistia (i. e.
blessing) or public Thanksgiving, for to praise and celebrate God openly for
the typical deliverance of the people of Israel, that is, for their deliverance
out of Egypt.

Of Baptism.
3. Baptism is the first public and The description and use of Baptism.
sacred Rite of the New Testament, whereby all in Covenant (without any
difference of age or sex) are by the solemn washing of water ingraffed into the
Church, and initiated into the worship of God; or are therefore dipped into, or
washed Mat. 3. 11. and 28. 19. Mar. 16. 16. Joh. 3. 15. Joh. 4. 1. Act. 2. 41,
etc. and 8. 12, 36, 37, 38. and 10. 47, etc.
with Water, in, or into the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost; that hereby, as by a Symbolical sign, and sacred signal, they may
be confirmed concerning the gracious Will of God toward them: that as the
filth of their bodies is washed away by Water, so they themselves by the Blood
and Spirit of Christ (if they do not through their own default make void this
gracious Covenant unto themselves) are to be cleansed inwardly, or most fully
delivered from the guilt of all their sins, and finally to be endowed with the
glorious Immortality, and eternal Happiness of the Sons of God: and withal that
they also on the other side may be obliged, and Romans 6. 3, 4. 1 Cor. 1. 13,
etc. and 12. 13. Gal. 3. 27. 1 Pet. 3. 21.
to that end openly declare that they constantly expect all Salvation from God
alone, and the Lord Jesus Christ, their only Mediator, Priest, and King, that
they trust in him with their Heart, and casting away the filth and defilements
of all their sins, are willing by the virtue or power of his Holy Spirit, to
obey him throughout the course of their whole Life.

Of the Sacred Supper of the Lord.
4. The other Sacred Rite of the New The description and end of the Sacred
Supper.
Testament is the Sacred Supper instituted by Jesus the night wherein he was
betrayed, to celebrate an eucharistical and solemn Mat. 26. 26, 27, 28. Mar.
14. 22, 23, 24. Luke 22. 19, 20. 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17, etc. and 11. 23, 24, 25.
commemoration of his Death, wherein Believers, after they have examined, and
truly proved themselves to be in the true Faith, do eat the sacred Bread
publicly broken in the Congregation; and also drink the Wine publicly poured
forth: and that to declare or hold forth with solemn thanksgiving the Lord's
bloody and cruel Death, undergone for us (whereby as our bodies are sustained
by meat and drink, or by Bread and Wine, so our hearts are nourished and fed
unto the hope of eternal life:) and again likewise publicly to testify and
declare before God and the Church their quickening and spiritual Communion with
the body of Christ crucified, and his blood shed (or with Jesus Christ himself,
who was crucified and Died for us) and consequently with all the benefits that
were procured and purchased by his Death, and with all also their mutual love
one amongst another.

5. Certainly from those things, which The reproof or confutation of an error.
every where Luke 22. 19, 20. 1 Cor. 11. 24.
in Scripture are read concerning this whole sacred Rite, and concerning the
things* signified thereby, and which the very Articles of Faith (concerning
Christ's true humane body, and his ture Act. 1. 9, 10, 11. and 3. 21. Heb. 8. 4.
ascension into Heaven and exaltation, etc.) do suggest unto us, and lastly
right reason it self dictates; it easily appears, 1. That here is no Mat. 26.
27. 1 Cor. 10. 16. and 11. 24, 25^ etc.
substantial change made of the Signs into the things signified, to wit, of the
Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of the Lord. 2. And that there is not
any local conjunction, or corporeal including, or any physical or natural tying
or uniting of both together. 3. So far is one of the signs (to wit, the use of
the Chalice or sacred Cup) from being justly or worthily to be taken away from
Believers under this pretense, And 4. that true and quickening, or expiatory
sacrifice of Jesus Christ, Heb. 7. 27, 28. and 9. 25, 26, 27, 28. and 10. 10,
11, 12, 13, 14, 18.
now long since once offered by Christ himself, our only and alone high Priest
for our sins, from being to be believed to be really repeated, and daily
performed or done over again anew herein. And 5. in the last place, so far are
the Symbols or the Signs themselves from being religiously to be adored and
worshippped by us; and for this very end, from being either to be showed
publicly in Churches, or from being enclosed in coffers or pixes, or from
being carried about in processions, etc.

Of other Sacred Rites, but yet such as are indifferent.
6. Besides these there are also other Other Sacred rites.
Sacred Rites, generally so called: which although they be not to be observed
by Believers, by virtue of any express command of Christ perpetually, and
necessarily; yet for good orders sake, and for outward discipline's sake, have
been now long since commonly observed by the Apostles, and their Disciples, and
may, without impiety at least and superstition, be also even freely observed
now, and indeed profitably enough for example's sake, imposition or laying on
of hands, Act. 6. 6. and 13. 3. 1 Timothy 4. 14. 2 Timothy 1. 6.
and that upon diverse accounts, to wit, in ordaining of Ministers; in Act. 8.
17, etc. and 19. 5, 6. Heb. 6. 2.
examining and confirming of new Converts, or of those that are Catechized; 1 Timothy 5. 22.
in the public receiving again, or reconciling of Penitents, who had formerly
grevously fallen: also the solemn joining of persons in Marriage, and the
blessing of the same in the Assembly of the Church, etc. So that there be no
Superstition in the case, or opinion of divine Worship, also of absolute
necessity, etc. and on the contrary there be only a regard had of order and
decency and public edification; and finally a true liberty in such things,
Romans 14. per tot.
and Christian Charity (and consequently also a true moderation and mutual
toleration between dissenters) be always preserved inviolate and safe: and the
peace of the Church, for the sake of such outward Rites, and of themselves
indifferent, be not rashly disturbed.

7. Hereunto also may be referred those Another sort.
Ecclesiastical or Liturgical observations (being indeed indifferent in
themselves, but yet which notwithstanding the outward and public Assemblies of
Believers can hardly want or be without) about the public order and manner in
Churches, of reading, praying; 1 Cor. 11. 2, etc. and 14. per tot. and 16. 1.
singing, prophesying, gathering the alms, also Act. 20. 36. and 21. 5. Ephesians. 3.
4. Mat. 26. 39. Mar. 14. 34, 35. Luke 22. 41.
kneeling in time of Prayer, etc. also about public Act. 12. 12. and 13. 3.
and 14. 23.
Fasts, and solemn days of Supplication or Prayers, and other outward things of
that kind, merely of themselves ritual, but yet pious exercises, not indeed
prescribed of God in particular (much less meritorious of the Grace of God, or
of eternal Life) but yet profitably serving for the outward good order, 1 Cor.
14 33, 40, and 11. 16.
or decent policy, i. e. Government of the Church: yea also in some respect
either stirring up, or cherishing pious devotion in our minds, and therefore
not lightly to be contemned of themselves, nor, where they are publicly
received, rashly and with the scandal of those that are godly to be abrogated.

8. For in all these (as in the whole Order, Peace, and Edification are chiefly
to be minded.
Sacred Liturgy, and the whole outward Government of the Church) that only is
to be minded, that all things 1 Cor. 14. 33. 40:
in the House of the Lord, be done decently, and in order, and that they always
1 Cor. 14. 26.
serve unto the edification of all especially Romans 14. 13, 15, 19, ^^. and 15.
1. 2.
of the weak (but yet of such as are studious of true piety) and not cast a 1
Cor. 6. 12. and 10. 23, 24, 29.
snare upon any one, or infringe Gal. 5. 1^ etc. Col. 2. 8, 16, 18, 20.
Christian Liberty, or finally give any Romans 4. 13. 1 Cor. 8. 13.
scandal or offense to the weak. For the better and more easy attaining of
which end, there is every where an exact regard to be had of the outward, and
the order, Romans 12. 17. Phil. 4. 8.
gravity, and decorum, which have been already long since received; also of
diverse places, times, and other circumstances, and in particular the Authority
of the Christian Magistrate, wheresoever it may be had, is, for the public
tranquillity and quiet of the Church, always to be heeded or attended to in
such cases.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Church Discipline.
1. BUt because no Society, although The use and necessity of Discipline.
never so well established, furnished and provided with good Laws, can long
subsist, unless it be governed by certain Reason, Counsel or Advice and
Discipline, whereby even they who belong thereunto, may be continually kept in,
or hold to their duty: hence it is, that in the visible Church of God (which is
the 1 Timothy 3. 15. Ephesians. 2. 19, 20, 21.
House, the Luke 12. 40, etc.
Household, the Heb. 12. 22. Rev. 21. 2, 3.
City, and Luke 1. 33.
Kingdom of God) we judge it both most profitable, and most meet or just, that
such a discipline, as has been prescribed by our Lord and Mat. 28. 20. A
description thereof.
King, should flourish and be exercised therein.

2. And it consists in brotherly and mutual admonition, in reproving and
correcting of those, Mat. 18. 15, etc. 1 Cor. 5. tot.
who have fallen into any sin, which shall come to our knowledge, but especially
into any enormous crime or wickedness: to the end indeed that they may speedily
repent and amend: or, if having been admonished, they nevertheless obstinately
go on and refuse to repent, in shunning or avoiding of them, and withdrawing
our selves from 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6, 14, 15. 1 Timothy 5. 19, 20.
all brotherly fellowship with them: as those indeed who have now rendered
themselves unworthy of the lovely name of Brethren, or of those, who call upon
the most holy name of Christ, and profess themselves the Scholars or
Nurse-Children of Piety and Sanctity: and all this to this end, that the
Religion of Christ and his Church may not be evil spoken of, and receive any
detriment by reason of their Society: but rather that the health and safety of
all the members thereof be procured and provided for.

3. And this Discipline concerns and 1. The kinds of discipline about or
concerning the Ministers.
takes hold of both Pastors and Governors of Churches, and also the Sheep
themselves, or Hearers. The Act. 20. 28. Romans 12. 6, 7, 8. 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3.
Col. 4. 17.
Pastors and Rulers, if in ministering, or teaching and ruling, both the Church
and themselves, and their families, they so carry or behave themselves, that
they cannot with profit, or at least without scandal perform or discharge the
said office in the Church. In teaching, to wit, 1 Timothy 1. 3, 4. and 4. 7, 12.
and 5. 17, 18. and 6. 3, etc. 2 Timothy 1. 13, 14. and 2. 14, andC. and 3. 10.
etc. and 4. 1, 2. etc. Tit. 3. 8, etc. 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. 3 John 9. 10.
if they command those things, which are forbidden by the laws of Jesus Christ,
if they forbid, what they command; if they consent or yield to those things,
against which they are strictly charged to the contrary; if they make those
things necessary, which are free and indifferent; if they too sharply and
fiercely strive, and stiffly contend for or about things unnecessary, or of no
great use and profit; so as to disturb the Church with Factions, and to divide
them into parties: or otherwise if in teaching they do not observe that manner,
way, or method, which becomes the serious Teachers of Piety to do; but which
may rather serve for the nourishing of contentions, brablings and strifes, than
for spiritual edifying; and for the cooling of pious zeal, rather than for the
kindling of it. In governing themselves, 1 Timothy 3. 2, etc. and 5. 17, etc. Tit.
1. 6.
if they be not blameless, the husbands of one Wife, vigilant, temperate,
grave, composed or sober, given to Hospitality, moderate, just and impartial;
if they be given to much Wine, soon angry, lovers of filthy lucre, fighters,
hypocritical, covetous. In ruling their own families, 1 Timothy 3. 4, 5. Tit. 1. 6.
if they have or keep not their children in subjection, with all honesty and
gravity: Lastly; if in ministering Act. 6. 3, etc. Romans 12. 7, 8. 1 Timothy 3. 8.
12. Concerning or about the hearers.
they do not faithfully, ^hearfully and prudently dispense those things that
are committed to their trust.

4. It is employed or exercised about Gal. 3. 1. 1 Cor. 4. 18, 19. 2 Cor. 13.
1, 2, etc.
the Sheep or Hearers; if either they carelessly neglect, or ^wittingly and
wilfully omit those things, which are commanded of God; or commit and do those
things which are not agreeable to the commands of Jesus Christ, or if otherwise
in things indifferent, 1 Cor. 11. 1. etc. and 14. per tot. Romans 14. tot.
they do disturb the public order and peace of the Church, and consequently if
they do those things, which may be prejudicial both to their own Salvation and
to the edification of their Neighbor.

5. But this Discipline is to be exercised, The diverse manner of it accordto
the nature or quality of the Persons.
with all possible Charity, Gal. 6. 1, etc. Mat. ^ 18. 15, etc.
Prudence and Discretion: according to the different quality, and varions
nature, reasons or respects both of persons and sins; for the greatest good and
profit both of the Offenders themselves, and of all other, and that by certain
steps or degrees declared and laid down in the Word of God. And first indeed
there is to be had a just or due regard of persons. For 1 Timothy 5. 1, etc.
elder Men are not to be rebuked, but to be entreated or advised as Fathers,
younger Men, as Brethren Elder Women, as Mothers, etc. But chiefly a regard is
to be had of those persons, which are set in Authority, and in any public
Office. For we are not readily and lightly to receive any accusations and
charges against 1 Timothy 5. 19, 20.
Elders: but when they have sinned (that is, shall manifestly be found to have
sinned) they are then to be rebuked before all, that others may be afraid. The
like regard also is to be had of Magistrates, Romans 13. 7. 1 Pet. 2. 17.
and of all those which are set in any eminent or high place.

6. But if withal the offender add a Diverse degrees according to the degrees of
Sins.
notorious obstinacy, and a contempt of all admonitions unto the enormity and
heinousness of his Sin. For if the sin be Mat. 18. 15, etc.
secret, or yet not publicly known, there needs only but a private
admonition: and that sometimes repeated, making use also of those that are
privy to it, or of witnesses if need be. But if the crime be 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6, 15.
public: that is, not only an heinous sin, but also was committed to the
public scandal of the Church it self: or if otherwise all Mat. 18. 16.
private admonitions be stubbornly rejected, then is an 1 Cor. 5. 3, 4, etc. 1 Timothy 5. 20.
admonition to be commenced and used in the presence of all, or in the Assembly
of the Presbyters, that the Author or Offender may be ashamed, and that others
by his example may be deterred from sinning. But if withal the offender add a
notorious obstinacy, and a contempt of all admonitions unto the enormity and
heinousness of his sin, so that no amendment of life follows: Mat. 18. 17. 1
Cor. 5. 11. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6, 14.
then is all familiar or brotherly converse with the offender to be avoided:
(if happily by this means shame may be wrought in him, and himself be brought to
saving repentance) adding withal, if extreme necessity require it, an express
and serious Declaration of the Church, that, as long as he remains impenitent,
he is a stranger from, or wholly unmeet for the Kingdom of Heaven, as one that
wittingly and advisedly persists in a manifest crime, or work of the Flesh. Yet
notwithstanding the peace of the Church, or the said communion thereof, is
always readily to be restored to those that are avoided or excluded from the
brotherly communion thereof, after probable testimony given of their
repentance, 2 Cor. 2. 7, 8, 9, 10, 1^. and 7. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
especially if they shall seriously desire it.

7. Howbeit from this avoiding, which A caution about avoiding.
we have spoken of, as to domestic Society or Converse of Life, they are to be
exempted, who are either mutually bound and tied to each other, or at least the
one part to the other, either by some divine and indissoluble contract, as Mat.
19. 5. 1 Cor. 7. 10, etc. Ephesians. 5. 22, etc.
Husbands and Wives, or law of nature, as Ephesians. 6. 1, 2.
Children, or necessity of duty, as Ephesians. 6. 4, 5. Tit. 2. 9, 10. Philem. 10,
etc. 1 Pet. 2. 18, 19. Another about the whole Discipline.
Menservants and Maidservants.

8. Furthermore, this Discipline is not such a kind of action, as is exercised
by the Church with 2 Cor. 10. 3, 4, 5. 1 Cor. 5. 10, 11.
any carnal power, or worldly Authority, or coactive force: but it is only the
Churches own Romans 16. 17, 18. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6, 14. Tit. 3. 10, 11. 3. Joh. 10, 11.
voluntary departing or separating from him, with whom they may no longer live
or converse as with a Disciple of Jesus Christ. So that the Rulers or Governors
of the Church do not so properly nor so much sever and separate the said person
from themselves, as they sever and separate themselves, together with their
people from him, and that by the command of Jesus Christ himself, their Lord,
and cannot nor will not otherwise converse with him, than with Mat. 18. 17.
an Heathen and Publican, or with any public and profane sinner, so long
indeed as he shall continue impenitent.

9. Wherefore they, who exercise this A confutation of a pernicious error.
same discipline not only with a fleshly power, and coactive force, but who do
also extend it unto bodily and capital punishments (especially under pretense
and color of Heresy, commonly so called) they do arrogate and assume to
themselves too great a power, yea altogether unmeet and Mat. 13. 28, 29, 30.
Gal. 4. 29. Luke 9. 55.
unlawful; yea further they do in deed and truth, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 20, 21. 1 Cor.
14. per tot.
oppress the liberty of Men's Consciences and of Prophecy: and do change this
saving and wholesome remedy, in Wisdom appointed by our Savior for the
amendment of Sinners, into a most deadly poison: and that which was designed
for their health and safety, these Men turn to their subversion and ruin:
wherefore also those, who any ways patronize or defend the killing of
Heretics, or any the like 2 Cor. 10. 3, 4, etc. and 13. 10. Ephesians. 6. 11, etc.
Tyranny or persecution for Conscience sake, we hold and judge, that they are
altogether estranged from and contrary to that most meek or mild Spirit of
Christ, and do also fight with unmeet and preposterous weapons against
heresies, and consequently do bring themselves under the guilt of a most
heinous sin in the sight of God.

CHAP. XXV. Of Synods, or Councels, and of their manner and use.
1. ANd thus indeed all particular The use and end of Synods.
Curches, being taken severally or apart, are to be governed by their own
Ministers, that is, by their own Bishops and Elders. But if in the mean while
any thing more hard then ordinary in Doctrine, or Manners, or Rites, proper and
peculiar to the Church, which may either concern all, or at least many
Churches, shall happen or fall out to be disputed and debated: then may Synods,
or Ecclesiastical Assemblies, profitably be appointed and held, and sometimes
ought (and that after the example of the Apostles themselves) and they either
greater or lesser, as the necessity of the case shall seem to require. They
may, we say, profitably be appointed and held; if indeed a right and lawful
order and manner be observed in them: and chiefly if these following Articles
or Heads be diligently attended to and kept, Act. 15. 1. etc.

2. I. If in them both the truth, and Their conditions, or the manner and order
to be observed in them.
profitableness, and necessity of all Opinions or Doctrines be nor examined and
tried by any humane Gal. 1. 8, 9. Act. 17. 11, etc.
square, or factitious ( i. e. made or devised) rule, whatsoever it be, but
only by the Word of God. II. If a full and plenary liberty be granted 1 Thessalonians.
5 21. 1 John 4. 1. Act. 17. 2, 3. 1 Cor. 14. per tot.
to every one to speak his own Opinion or Judgment, without scruple or fear of
danger; and to enquire into the Opinions of others, and duly to examine the
whole matter that is in Controversy. III. If there be none admitted in them
but fit and meet Men, that is, Men skilful in divine things, 1 Timothy 4. 12, etc.
and 6. 3, 4, 11, etc. 2 Timothy 2. 2, 14, 24, 25. and 3. 8, 16. and 4. 3, 4, 5.
Heb. 4. 14. Jam. 3. 13, etc.
and who are mighty in the Scriptures, and have their Senses exercised to
discern between what is true and what is false, and especially Men pious,
prudent, grave, moderate, studious or lovers of Truth as well as of Peace, as
also truly free, and during the time of the examination of the Controversy,
simply tied to none, either Person, or Church, or Confession, etc. but only to
God and Christ, and his sacred Word: Lastly men free from all corrupt or
perverse affections, as wrath, hatred, partiality or abetting of parties. IV.
If in them it be not precisely or chiefly urged, that Controversies of Faith
be, by any means at least whatsoever, it matters not what, right or wrong,
taken away or removed, or decided against one party or the other: and that only
for this end, either to procure, or preserve the outward quiet and tranquillity
of the Commonwealth, but that it may be chiefly endeavored that 2 Timothy 2. 2^.
Mat. 7. 15. and 16. 12. Romans 16. 17. 2 Cor. 11. 13. Gal. 5. 11, 12, etc.
Heresies, Schisms, and other such like public miscarriages, and scandals, be
first and foremost kept out of the Churches, or that being already brought in:
and so by that means Piety and Truth, as also liberty and Christian Charity may
be always consulted and provided for in them: and therefore, V. If plain,
saving and necessary Truth be straightly and closely held, and retained in them:
and yet so, as that for those that dissent, and who are yet ignorant of the
Truth, there be no danger created for them upon that account, 2 Cor. 4. 1, 2.
and 10. 4. Jam 4. 11, 12, 13. 2 Timothy 2. 22. 1 Pet. 5. 3. Col. 3. 12, 13. Ephesians.
4. 1, etc.
nor any force or violence done or offered to their Consciences: but that
saving Truth be only pressed upon them by persuasions and reaonss, and that with
the greatest gentleness and meekness of mind and spirit imaginable: and in
other things that a moderate Liberty of dissenting upon certain terms and
conditions may remain safe and inviolate, and the Remedies of mu^ual peace and
concord commodiously sought out. VI. Finally, if what is determined in them be
always left liable 1 John 4. 1, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19, 20, 21.
to a free examination, and a further review afterward; yea, if it be
seriously willed and commanded, that all their Decrees be diligently examined
and weighed by the Word of God, and that no Man be envied, and maligned, or at
any time endangered for so doing.

3. And in those Synods, next to or The duty of the p^ous Magistrate about them.
after the Supreme Authority of God, and of Christ, there ought also to
intervene the Authority of the Christian Magistrate, as of a nursing Father
Isa. 49. 23, etc. and 60. 1, etc.
of the Church, if so be there be any such in the Church, as of one indeed
whose duty it is, after the example of Godly Kings and Princes under the old
Testament chiefly, or after the manner of Master Builders to moderate Joh. 24.
1, etc. 2 King. 23. 19, etc. 2 Chton. 17. ^, etc. and 31. 2, etc.
the outward order and government of the Church, and to pro^erve the Worship of
God whole and entire therein, and therefore as often as need requires, himself to
convocate or call Synods together, and in his place to preside in them, to
propound together with Ecclesiastical Persons those things that are to be
debated or treated of peaceably and softly, to hear the Judgments of all in
general, even of Dissenters themselves, to enquire diligently into the Truth
out of Gods Word himself, to collect the free votes of others, to give or
declare his own Judgment and Sense together with them, and to his utmost power
to provide and take care, that all things be managed and carried on in them
according to God, as of right he may, so of duty he ought.

4. And yet is it not his right, or duty, A caution against Abuses.
to put in execution the Decrees of Synods by any secular power and force: and
to repress and keep under those, who in Conscience refuse or think much to
subscribe unto them, either by Threats or Romans 13. 1, etc.
Fines, much less by Banishments, Imprisonments, Bonds, finally by Death or
other such like cruel Punishments. Furthermore, neither ought he, nor of right
can he trouble or molest those, who modestly, Act. 1. 13, etc. and 13. 1, etc.
and 20. 7, etc.
and always preserving inviolate the Reverence that is due to Superiors, do
only for Religion and Conscience sake desire to assemble and meet together,
without or out of those public places, which always remain subject to the
Magistrates right or power: to wit, Act. 4. 1, etc. and 5. 17. etc. and 6. 9,
etc. and throughout the whole Book.
by Edicts, Proscriptions, Incursions of Soldiers, and other violent ways of
acting: but is bound to preserve unto them whole Act. 5. 34, etc. and 18. 12,
etc. and 26. 31, 32, etc.
and untoucht their liberty of worshipping God in public, and to take care and
endeavor that the Truth of God and Religion be maintained only by 2 Cor. 10.
4, 5. Ephesians. 6. 12, etc.
spiritual weapons; and persuaded unto only by arguments and reasons: lest
otherwise he seem to desire to offer violence to the Consciences of his
Subjects, and to suppress Christian 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19, etc. 1 Cor. 14. pe^ tot. 2
Cor. 1. 24. and 3. 17. and 4. 2, etc.
liberty, and lastly to usurp the Power and Authority that is proper unto God,
and unto our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Conclusion.
And this at length is our judgment of all, or at least of the chief Articles
of Christian Religion, whereby Christian Reader, whoever you are, you may
easily understand, and most clearly see, that we are free and clear from all
those Heresies, Schisms and other noisome and ungodly Opinions, which have been
hitherto by our Adversaries slanderously fastened upon us: And that we do not
dig up again, or, as they say, hang up upon a new Post or Pole any erroneous
Opinious and such as have been condemned by the ancient and first Professors of
Christianity: also that we do not shake, nor subvert those things, which have
been at any time established by the Church of Christ by universal consent: that
we do not define, nor obstinately and proudly decide in those things, which
have long since been dubiously controverted to and fro, and which make not
greatly either for the promoting of the Glory of God, or of our own Salvation
or our Neighbor's: finally that we do not operously and subtly seatch into
those things, which are not revealed to us: lest indeed we intrude our selves
into those things, which the most wise God would have to be kept secret. But
that we make this our only and sole endeavor, that we may preserve whole and
entire that Truth, which is according to Godliness, and which it concerns us
all solidly for to know, and that we every where pursue, and, as much as in us
lies, promote those things which make, both for the maintaining or cherishing,
and promoting of mutual Peace and Concord amongst Christians; always remembering
that advice of the Apostle's, Tit. 3. 8. This is a faithful saying, and these
things I will that thou constantly affirm (...), that they which have believed
in God be careful to maintain (or go before, or excel others in) good Works.
For these are good, (excellent) and profitable to (for) Men: and that which the
Apostle elsewhere exhorts unto; Follow ye peace with all Men, and Holiness;
without which no Man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14. In these two is placed
the chiefest Glory of the Christian Religion. With these therefore hitherto we
are wholly taken up. But about things unnecessary, and not greatly profitable
to Salvation, we are loath to draw to and fro the Saw of Contention, and the
Mysteries indeed; that are sublime and abstruse, we receive with a simple Faith
and free from all scrupulous subtilness of Wit and Reason, nor but soberly and
sparingly, and as one of the Ancients is reported not unfitly to have said, we
handle not the burning Iron without Tongs. And as for unprofitable Speculations
and vain Niceties, we keep at the farthest distance from them, for that they
rather gender or produce strifes and questions, than godly edifying which is by
Faith, 1 Timothy 1. 4. Concerning things indifferent, as also Rites and
Ceremonies, we lightly trouble no Man, so that the offending of the Weak be
diligently avoided on the one hand, and Superstition carefully provided against
on the other. Finally, we direct all our studies to this mark, that we may hold
forth those things which are either necessary, or very profitable to
substantial Piety and our own everlasting Salvation, and that in other things
we may willingly and readily tolerate and bear with all that dissent from us,
and heartily follow, maintain and cherish peace and concord in all the Churches
of Jesus Christ, although in our opinion or judgment they are out of the way.
Which things being so, we earnestly entreat and beseech you by the Lord,
(Christian Reader, whoever you are) that you would not give any room with your
self unto any suspicions to the contrary, nor admit of the unjust Accusations,
Calumnies and Slanders of our Enemies, or easily harken unto those, whose
chiefest interest it is that we should be evil spoken of, lest they should seem
to have condemned and banished us undeservedly, and as innocent: but that
having a careful regard to Right and Equity, you would pass judgment of us
according to this our Confession and public Declaration of our Belief. If in
any thing happily you suppose or believe us to err, instruct us in the Spirit of
Gentleness and Meeekness, which most highly becomes the Servants of Jesus
Christ. We are ready in all places, and at all times, to yield to those who
shall show us better, and give place to the Truth of God, which is more
precious to us than all things else. If at any time notwithstanding, or in any
place, we dissent and differ in things not necessary to be known, let us bear
with one another in the Lord; and being mindful both of Christian Charity and
Prudence, let us study to keep the unity of the Spirit through or in the bond
of Peace, Ephesians. 4. 3. Nevertheless in that, whereunto by the help and guidance
of Christ we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, and be alike
minded or affected. and if in any thing we be otherwise-minded, God will reveal
even this unto us. Phil. 3. 15, 16.

Grant he, that we may daily more and more to his Glory grow and make progress
in true Faith, Piety, Charity, Prudence, Gentleness, Meekness, and other holy
Endowments and Christian Virtues, and endeavor patiently to bear with, and
gently or mildly to amend one another Infirmitities, Errors, and Failings,
that being Ephesians. 3. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
rooted and grounded in Love, we may be able together with all Saints to
apprehend, what is that breadth, and length, and depth and height and that
love of Jesus Christ which passes all understanding, that so we may be filled
even unto or with the whole fullness of God. To him, who with infinite
redundancy is able to do above all those things which we ask or think,
according to that power which works in us, to him, we say, be Glory in the
Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, World without end.

Amen.
FINIS.

