THE Concurrence and Unanimity Of the People Called QUAKERS; In Owning and
Asserting the Principal Doctrines of the Christian Religion; Demonst^ated in
the Sermons or, Declarations, of several of their Public Preachers, Namely

Mr. Robert Barclay, Mr. George Whitehead, Mr. John Bowater Mr. Charles
Marshall, Mr. William Bingley, Mr. John Butcher, Mr. James Park, Mr. William
Dewsberry, Mr. Francis Camfield, Mr. William Penn Mr. Richard Ashby, Mr. Samuel
Waldenfield, Mr. Jobn Vaughton, and Mr. Francis Stamper.
Exactly taken in Shorthand, as they were Delivered by them at their
Meeting Houses, in Grace Church Street, Devonshire-House, St. Martins-le-Grand,
St. John's-street, wbeelerstreet, and Ratcliff, in and about London.

And now Faithfully Transcribed and Published; With the Prayer at the end of
each Sermon.

London: Printed for Nath. Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultry, near Cheapside.
1694.

ADVERTISEMENT. There are lately Published several Sermons or Declarations of
Mr. Stephen Crisp, of Colchester in Essex, Deceased: In two small Volumes.
THE First Volume contains Eight Sermons, upon the following Subjects. 1. The
Great Mediator of the Everlasting Covenant. 2. Heart Preparation for receiving
the Gospel. 3. The First and Great Commandment. 4. The Standard of Truth. 5.
The necessary duty of remembering our Creator. 6. The Divine Monitor, or Light
from Heaven. 7. The Inward Preacher, or the Office of Conscience. 8. Saving
Faith the Gift of God alone.

The Second Volume contains Ten Sermons upon the following Subjects. 1. Truths
Testimony against the Power of Sin and Satan. 2. Bearing the Cross, the right
mark of a Christian. 3. The Spirit of Christ the only true Guide. 4. Pure and
Spiritual Worship. 5. The Divine Life of Christ Jesus. 6. The Kingdom of God
within. 7. The undefiled way to Eternal Rest. 8. The dawning of the Day of
Grace, and Salvation. 9. The Excellency of Peace with God. 10. True
Christianity. With his Prayer at the end of diverse Sermons. All exactly taken
in Shorthand, as they were delivered by him at the Public Meeting Houses, of
the People called Quakers, in Grace Church Street, Devonshire-House, and St.
Martins-le-Grand, London.

And are to be sold, either single, or bound together, by Nath. Crouch, at the
Bell in the Poultry, near Cheapside.

HAving lately published several of the Sermons or Declarations of Mr. Stephen
Crisp, Decased which have obtained general acceptance with Persons of
different Persuasions; I often heard it objected, that though this Person
clearly owns, and earnestly recommends the practice of the Principal Points of
the Christian Faith, Yet others of the chief Leaders and Teachers of the People
called Quakers, were not of the same opinion in these Matters; Now the Writer
of Mr. Crisps Sermons, having taken the Declarations of several of their
public Preachers, at their usual Meetings, I think my self obliged in Truth
and Justice, to make some of them public in this small Volume, to demonstrate
their Concurrence and Unanimity in asserting and pressing the most necessary
and Practical Doctrines, and Duties of Religion (both in their Sermons and
Prayers) that most Christians profess to acknowledge and believe; Thereby to
obviate mis^representations, and to rectify the thoughts of those who are
prepossest with contrary sentiments; To which end they are now faithfully
Printed, and referred to the Judgment of all impartial Readers.

N. C.

A SERMON, Preached by Mr. ROBERT BARCLAY, At Grace-Chruch-street, May, the 16.
1688.
MY Friends, This is the Testimony that was born of Old, and it is also born
this Day, that there may be an Agreement between the Members and the Head, the
Word and the Power, the Notion and the Substance, He that has the Son has
Life, and he that has not the Son has not Life; So that in this the Substance
is known, whereby Men are Redeemed to Live unto God, and to Live for God and to
Glorify him. This is the end of the Testimony of the Gospel of our Lord and
Savior Christ Jesus, that we may all come to partake of his Life, and that by
partaking of it we may live upon it, and being made alive to him we shall then
be made able to serve him, then shall we be enabled to Worship him, to Glorify
him, and to Declare of his Glory and of his Power and of his Wisdom, and of his
Goodness to those that are Strangers to him, and to Invite all to be Partakers
thereof. Let all your Eyes this Day be toward him, and to the Enjoyment of his
Life, that you may be Sensible, and that you may be Witnesses of his Life.

And this Life is not to be obtained but by Death; There is a Dying before
there is a Living: Every Plant, Seed or Grain that is placed in the Earth, it
dies before it grows up, there is a Dying before there is a Living, Those that
come to the Life of the Son of God, they come to it through Death; For it was
through Dying that he obtained this Life, it was necessary that the Son of God
(the Prince of Life) should die, that he should be Crucified, else he could not
finish the Work of our Salvation, and make way for the Revelation and the
Sowing of that Seed, and the Dispensation of that Grace, whereby we might come
to have a Share with him in that Eternal Life he obtained for us, They that
come to the Life of the Son of God they must obey him, for they must receive
the Sentence of Death to that Life, which they derive from Adam, that Cursed
that corrupt Life of Unrighteousness, that Life of Ungodlyness, that Life
wherein Self and the Will of Man delights, wherein the Natural Man, the Animal
Man has a Life: We must die, and by Dying come to be Partakers of the Life of
Jesus, He Communicates himself to us, and by our Receiving him we Receive Life;
He that has the Son has Life, and be that has not the Son has not Life, and
the Consequence is, He that has not this Life, has not the Son of God.

This is the true way for every One to Try and Examine themselves by, and to
make a true Judgment of themselves, that they may know whether they have the
Son of God or not, whether they have Christ or not; if they have Christ, they
have the Benefits of his Death, and of his Blood and sufferings, they that have
this Life in them, they are in the Faith, they are Partakers of Justification,
and Sanctification, and Adoption; And all those that are under the Dispensation
of the Gospel, that have the Benefits of Christ's Death, to those he gives
himself, and those to whom he gives himself he gives this Life. This is not
the Life of Adam, a Life of Unrighteousness, but a Life that Springs from the
Heavenly Incorruptible Seed, such as Partake of it are born again of the Word
of the Lord that remains for ever, This is a Life that comes from the Lord from
Heaven, the Quickening Spirit, and this Life tends Heavenward, it looks
Heavenward; it carries the Affections toward the things that are above, it
dwells not in them that have their Pleasures in this World; it looks not to the
things of this World, it comes from Heaven and tends to Heaven again, it
raises the Soul that is Quickened by it. They that are born of it are made
Heavenly by it, it makes all Heavenly that are Quickened by it. By this we may
know that we have the Son of God, by this we have an Understanding of him, and
are brought into him that is true.

And this is the Living Manifestation of Christ whereby he comes into thy Soul
and into my Soul. This is the Gift of God, We Receive Gods Gift, that we may
receive Life from and by him, that we may Live this Life; This is that which
makes the Yoke of Christ easy, and his Burden Light, and his Commandments not
Grievous to us. The Life of Christ does the work of Christ naturally; Those
that are in the Flesh-mind, the things of the Flesh, those that live a Carnal
Life they mind the Works of the Flesh, it is their Joy, their Delight and their
Pleasure, that which their Hearts are carried after. They Rise early, and Lie
down late, and all for this end, it is that which their Hearts Run after all
the Day long, What is the Reason of it? They are in the Flesh, in the Life of
Lust, That Life moves them, and Acts them, and Governs them, That Life uses
and Imployeth all their Faculties, their Understandings, Wills, Affections and
Imaginations, and it uses all the Members of their Bodies to please the Flesh,
and fulfill the Lusts thereof; these are the Consequences of a Life of
Unrighteousness in those things that are Unrighteous.

But those that have Received the Spirit of God, they have Received Jesus
Christ the Son of God, and this is the Consequence, they are become Dead to the
Life of Unrighteousness: All that are Dead in Sins and Trespasses he has
Quickened. Now when you have received the Son of God, you have received a New
Life, another Life; then your Affections are set upon things that are above,
and you are come to sit in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus, you sit no more in
the Earthly place, nor Live an earthy Life, but in the Heavenly place where the
Heavenly Life abounds. For this end the Eternal Son of God came into the World
that we might have Life, and that we might have it more abundantly, that we
might abound in the Life of Jesus, and in the abundance of it; This is that
which is recommended to us, that we might receive the Son of God into our
Souls, and by receiving him, partake of his Life: and then let this Life
produce its Actions; Let the Word of God dwell Richly in you, in all those
things that are Divine, in all those things consequences that it brings forth
amongst the Children of God.

For it is not the things of the Earth that we are to remember, and to have
dwelling in us, but the Word of God; and that which proceeds from the Life of
the Son of God. All Words and Testimonies, Preachings, Prayer, Exhortation, and
Spiritual Counsel if it be not from the Life of the Son of God, it edifies not
the Body of the Lord Jesus Christ in Love; Let us receive that which comes from
the life of the Son of God, which is manifest amongst us, and shed abroad in
our Hearts; let us Watch and take care that whatsoever is not of this Life may
not appear, may not be manifest and made known among us. And this Life that we
receive from the Son of God, is that which will stand us in stead in the Day of
Trial and as many as live unto God in this Divine life he is well pleased with
them, and the Tempter, the Wicked one cannot touch them at all, nor reach them,
nor hurt them. This is my Testimony unto you from the Life of God, which to the
Glory and Praise of his Name has risen in my Soul in some measure: It is the
desire, and Labor, and Travel of my Soul that you may be inwardly gathered
into this Heavenly Life, that all my Dear Brethren and Sisters who are of the
Household of Faith may be inward in this Life, that the Fruit thereof may be
manifest, that the Notice thereof, the Sound thereof, the Language thereof may
be heard in this Assembly at all times, that the Lord our God may be made known
to us, through this Word of Life in our Hearts, to the Praise, Honor and
Renown of his Name who alone is worthy, To whom be Glory for Ever and Ever,
Amen.

The Prayer after Sermon.
O. Most Powerful Lord God of Life, and of Glory and Blessedness; precious in
thy sight are thy People whom with thy Power thou have Visited with the Day
Spiring from on high, and upon whom thou have breathed with a Divine
Inspiration, and made them alive to thy self, through thy tender Mercy and
Goodness which in the Son of thy Love thou have freely extended to us whereby
we are made capable of drawing nigh to thee, and of having access into thy
Blessed Presence to enjoy Communion with thee, through the Lord Jesus Christ.
We desire to wait upon thee, and seek fervently after thee; All our expectation
is from thee, from Day to Day, and from time to time, that we may receive
Relief. that we may receive strength from thee who art the God of all our
Mercies. Thou have not been wanting to us in the needful time, thou have had
regard to the sighing of the Poor, to the breathing and Supplieation of the
Needy, whose desires have been truly after thee, and the sweet enjoyment of thy
Presence, the feeling of thy blessed Power, and, the beholding of the light of
thy Countenance wherein there is Life and Salvation. Blessed be thy Name for
ever, all living praises and Holy Thanks givings be in truth and Humility
offered up to thee, through the Dear Son of thy Love, by all thy Children and
People, whom thou have sought out by thy blessed Spirit, and whom thou have
gathered by the Arm of thy blessed and mighty Power that they might be a People
to thy praise, serving thee in newness of Spirit, Worshipping thee, in the
beauties of Holiness, and in Spirit and truth, and not according to the oldness
of the Letter, not according to an empty and outward formality, but in the
sense of the Springings up of that pure Life, of that fresh Spring of Life,
that thou have placed in the Heart of a Remnant, by thy blessed Power. O
Righteous and Holy God, the Sense and feeling thereof is beyond Words, beyond
Expression, and beyond utterance: Therefore we humbly entreat thee, by the
blessed Arm of thy Power, gather thy People more and more into an Inward Sense
of the Springings of Life, that they may attend upon thee, and feel Life in
their Souls, and breathings after thee in their Hearts, that in their Daily
attendance on thee, they may receive day by day, of those living suitable
supplies of Life, Virtue, Wisdom, and Power whereby they may be supported
through all Trials, and Adversities, and through all Oppositions and
Temptations that they may meet withal, for the trial of their Faith, and for
the exercise of their Patience, that all their Afflictions and Exercises may be
sanctified to them for the bringing them nearer and nearer to thy self, and
into a more lively inward and single Dependence on thee, and thy Divine Grace
and Truth which thou have made known by Christ Jesus, our only Mediator, by
whom alone we have access to thee, and whereby we are made capable of beholding
the light of thy Countenance, and partake of thy Divine goodness and blessing,
and of those precious promises which thou have left upon Record, and Impressed
upon our Minds and Hearts. Thou have poured into us a living and inward sense
of that pure Life of thy Dear Son whereby we may be enabled to live to thy
Praise; and O Blessed Powerful Lord God, those that are not convinced and
persuaded of thy Way and blessed Truth, that are not come into it, and to
partake of the Life of it, that are not yet come to live to thee, and to live
in Obedience to thy Blessed Son the Lord Jesus Christ, who are not come under
the Power of his Cross, that they may be Crucified to the World, and have the
World Crucified to them, Lord awaken them, utter thy Voice that shakes the
Mountains, rend the Vail and draw in their Hearts, and Minds, and Affections,
from earthly and fading Objects, that they may come to breathe after thee; and
feel that Spirit in them wherewith thou do Inspire thy People, whereby they
may supplicate thee for relief, for strength, and Victory over the Spirit of
the World, and over the Temptations of the Devil and the Flesh, which do easily
beset Men; and whereby many are led Captive, who cannot yet make mention of thy
Name, and walk in thy Truth: Lord awaken them by thy Powerful Voice, and
incline their Hearts to seek thee, while thou art to be found, and call upon
thee while thou art near, that thou may be known in thy glorious Visitation.
The Cords of thy Love thou have extended that they may lay hold thereon, that
they may be drawn out of the Pollutions of the World, and of Sin, and Satan
that have brought Death over them; let the fear of God take place that they may
be afraid to offend thee, as knowing that thou art a Jealous God, and thine
Eyes are upon all the ways of the Sons of Men, thou art the Heart searching
God; there is no secret can be hid from thine All seeing Eyes, Under that
Consideration O Lord let many come unto thee, and reverence thy Great Name, and
not provoke thee to Displeasure against them. And O blessed God thou have been
graciously pleased to begin a good Word, a glorious Work of Righteousness in
our days and tim^s, Blessed God and Father, we humbly pray thee carry it on and
make it prosper. Prosper the Souls of thy People in it that they may be a
growing, thriving, and increasing People in thy Holy ways, and in thy blessed
Work; and as thou have sown a precious seed, and Planted a Noble Vine by thine
own Almighty hand, and given us a Root of Life, the Foundation of our Faith,
Love, and Obedience, which Foundation thou have laid in Zion, Lord keep thy
People sensible of it, that they may mind it, and wait upon thee, and be
preserved in that Root of Life wberein thy Blessing is, that thy. People may
partake of thy Blessing, and gr^w up into the Nature of that Life, to bring
forth Fruit to ^hee, to increase in Faith and Love, in Obedience, and Humility,
and Meekness, that the Life of true Christianity may be Promo^ed and Inc^eased
among thine Heritage, that they may live in it, and shine forth in it as thy
Workmanship, which thou have Created in Christ Jesus unto fruitfulness unto all
good Works, that they may walk in them, That so Powerful God and living
Creator, they may live unto thee, and Act entirely to thy Praise, H^n^ur, and
Glory in their Day, Age and Generation, and that their bright shining forth in
the Light if Truth, and Righteou'ness may appear more and more as an Invitation
to th^se that are afar off; That in this thy Day wherein thou art setting up
^be Tabernacle of David, the Kingdom of thy Bel^ved Son, and Repairing the
Ruins and wast Places thereof, Lord God Eternal grant that the Residue of Men
may seek after thee, and be sensible that thou art at Work, and raising an
H^use for thine Honor. and promoting the Kingdom of thy Son which is a Kingdom
of Righteousness, that of his Government there may be no end that all those
that desire after Peace, and after Happiness, in the Kingdom of thy Dear Son,
may wait to see him Rule and Govern, to see him Reign whose Right it is; That
Sin may not Reign in their Mortal Bodies, that Sinful Lusts, and Vile
Affecti^ns, and an Earthly mind may not have Power over them, and prevail
against them, that so their Souls may be lifted up to thee; That, Blessed
Eternal God, they may wait upon thee, and Renew their Strength and Renew their.
Thankfulness, for the Renewing of thy Mercies, and the Incomes of thy Love
which are fresh and New every Morning; That they may fear thee, and wait upon
thee, and Diligently seek after thee, and have sweet Communion with thee, in
the Enjoyment of thy Presence; And Blessed be thou O Lord God Eternal for all
thy Mercies, Preservations and Encouragements so frequently Afforded to thy
People, whose Eyes and Hearts are toward thee: Our Souls are deeply engaged to
thee, and we have cause to Bless, and Praise, and Honor thy Great and Excellent
Name, and through t^y Dear Son to offer up praise and Thanks giving to thy
Great and Excellent Majesty for thou alone O God art worthy to Receive the
Honor and Praise of all thy Mercies, Benefits, and Blessings, by all the
^iving here and elsewhere who art God only over all Heaven and the whole Earth
Blessed and Praised for Ever, and Ever, Amen.

A SERMON Preached by Mr. WILLIAM DEWSBERY, At Grace Church Street, May, 6.
1688.
My Friends,
Except you be Regenerated and Born again, ye cannot inherit the Kingdom of
God.
THis is the Word of the Lord God to all People this day, this lies not in airy
Profession, and in vain Imagination, and whatsoever else it is that you deck
your selves with all, you must every particular Man and Woman be born again,
else you cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. This was the Doctrine of
Christ in that prepared body wherein he appeared in the World, and Preached to
Nicodemus That standing Doctrine to this moment of time, and will be so while
any man breaths upon the Earth; there is no other way, no other gate to enter
into Life by but this great work of Regeneration. Now to enforce People to come
to this great Work, and to set forward from Earth to Heaven, all being driven
out of Paradise by the Cherubim set with a Flaming Sword, there is no returning
to that Blessed Life, but by the loss of that Life that did grieve the Spirit
of God, and which did cause Man to be driven out; there is no other way of
return again but by this New Birth. As you are all driven and forced out of
Paradise, and the Flaming Sword and the Cherubims are set to keep the way of
the Tree of Life, so you must return into the favor of God again by the Light
of Christ, and you have Line upon Line, Precept upon Precept, here a little,
and there a little, to direct your minds to the Light of Christ Jesus. As the
first Adam was made a living Soul, so the second Adam is a quickening Spirit.
This know for certain, no Man or Woman can be quickened and raised up into the
life of the second Adam, till the life of the first Adam be taken away from
them.

So now, let every one of you deal plainly with your own hearts, how you came
to be a slain People to the life of the first Adam, in which life there was a
working of the Mystery of Iniquity in every part of Man. One cries lo here is
Christ, another, lo there is Christ, and every one is following his own
imagination about the Letter of the Scripture, this is still but the vain
Spirit of Man running and striving to recover himself; and this is the cause
there is so much profession of God, and so little of his Nature appearing among
the Sons and Daughters of Men. Now all of you that come to be regenerated, you
must come to the light of Christ, there is no other way to it. He will search
your hearts, and try your reins, and set your sins in order before you, and
trace out the iniquities that compass you about, therefore you must see your
selves a lost People, a sinful People, and so come to feel the weight of your
Sins upon your Consciences, there is no other way to come to life; you will
never complain of Sin till you be burdened with it, 'till you have a Trumpet
sounding in your ears, to awaken you that you may arise from the Dead, that
Christ may give you light; there is no other way Dear People, you must bring
your deeds to the light of Christ, and abide the sentence of Condemnation; if
you save your lives, you lose them; if you will lose your lives for Christ's
sake, there is no danger of your Eternal Life. John the Baptist Christ's
forerunner declared, I indeed Baptize you with water unto Repentance, but he
that comes after me is mightier than I, the Latchet of whose Shoes I am not
worthy to unlose, he shall Baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire,
whose Fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor, and will
gather his Wheat into his Garner, but the Chaff he will burn with unquenchable
fire. What is it the better for you to read the Scripture, if you know not this
fiery Baptism which all must know that are regenerated; deceive not your
selves, Christ will appear in flaming fire, and take vengeance on all them that
know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

I stand here as a Witness of the Lord of Life this day, there is no way for
people to come to Salvation, but they must know Christ revealed in all their
hearts. What is he doing but rendering Vengeance upon the carnal mind,
self-pleasing, and all inordinate Affections; he comes with Vengeance to take
away thy Life, he will Baptize thee with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire. If thou
know not this, thou art not a true Christian. Thou will never look Death in
the face with joy, nor go down to the Grave with Triumph. If thou live at
home in the body, and flyest for thy life, and wilt not be willing to lose thy
life for Christ if thou art called to it, and if thou will not have Christ to
wash thee (some for shiness, and some for self-love, will refuse this) if
Christ does not wash thee, thou have no part in him; you must come to Christ to
purify you in the fiery furnace, the Day of the Lord shall burn as an Oven (as
the Prophet speaks) this is a dreadful day, a day of Vengeance, the day of the
Lord Jesus Christ, who Redeemeth his People from their Sins, Zion is Redeemed
with Judgment, and Established with Righteousness. Do not make the way to
Heaven easier in your minds and imaginations than indeed it is, and think it
not sufficient to live in an outward observance of the ways of God. If your own
wills be alive, and your corruptions remain unmortified, the Judgment of God
will be your Portion, therefore in the Lord's name come along with me, I am
come to declare what I have heard and seen of the Father. Come and examine thy
Conscience, have thou brought thy deeds to the light? then thou have received
Condemnation upon thy self, and thy haughtiness is bowed down, and laid low,
and thou see thy self a poor miserable wretch before the Eternal God.
Whatsoever thou know of the mind of God, have thou reformed thy ways, come
along with me, and tell me what is the ground of thy Faith? and thy considence?
is it thy obedience and qualifications? because thy obedience is right, and thy
qualifications right, what use do thou make of tnem? read the Book of
Conscience have thou no ground for thy Faith, thou have put on the Reformed
Faith, and live an unreformed Life; search and try thy self, Man, or Woman.
Do thou watch over thy self, and keep in a sense of thy dissolution,
notwithstanding all thy qualifications and partial Reformation? Do thou
strive to enter in at the strait Gate, and the narrow way, here is the lost
Sheep, thou seek the life of thy will, the life of the first Adam; the
justice of God will not suffer thee to make a Savior of thy Duties and
Qualifications, and to take God's Jewels and to deck thy self with them, thou
can not be saved without the Righteousness of God in Christ Jesus. What says
thy Conscience, art thou brought to this change of thy Mind, and of thy
Conversation? Are you all willing to part with your Sins, with your Pride and
Haughtiness? Are you willing to part with your vile Affections? this is the
work of Gods grace upon you, do thou place thy confidence in thy Duties and
Qualifications, and take God's Jewels and Oraments, and deckest thy self with
them? Thou tookest my Jewels says the Lord, and did play the Harlot; if thou
return to the Lord, and humble thy self, and get through this difficulty, thou will be happy for ever. This Judgment of God, this Flaming-Sword that turns
every way, will keep thee from returning to Sin, and bring thee to Christ, and
cut thee off from all hope of Salvation but by him, and make thee to see the
absolute need of a Savior, and that thy Life is hid with Christ in God.

It is Gods infinite goodness to Men that he will hide pride from them, and
humble them under his mighty hand. This is the Condition of poor Creatures that
are slain by the hands of the most High; How may I know when I am slain and
baptized, and come to have sincerity? They that have this Baptism enter into
the Heavenly Life, if you love the light of Christ Jesus, it will be thus with
you, God will make short work in the Earth. He will set thy Sins in order
before thee, and make thee watchful unto Prayer, and lead thee to holiness of
Life and Conversation, and make thee abhor thy self, and despise all the Pomps
and Pleasures and Vanities of the World; when he has adorned thee with his
Graces, then watch for the Light, and in the Light of Christ thou shall see
Light, and that all thou have done, and can do, is but thy Duty. All this
thou ought to do, thou art Gods Creature, and all this will not justify
thee in order to thy Eternal Salvation for these services thou owe unto God.
If thou diligently wait, thou shall see more light, then the Sword that
proceeds out of the mouth of Christ who is called the word of God, will cut
thee off from all thy hopes of Salvation from any thing thou have done, from
any of thy qualifications, from any thing that thou can do, so that thou will
be a hopeless Soul, nothing in thy own sense and apprehension, the power of the
first Adam must die before him, and thou will cry out, I am a dead, lost, and
undone Creature, but there is a Life hid with Christ in God for me, but I can
never have it 'till I be slain into the will of God, and become as a little
Child, and be stripped of all my own Excellency that I have attained; I must come
to a sense of my own misery, and fall down at the foot of God; when I am become
as a little Child humbled and slain as to my own will and confidence in my own
righteousness I will not then question but I shall live a Holy Life, but I will
give all that Life I had, for that Life which is hid with Christ in God; O!
there is none come so far that ever miss of Eternal Life. All Shuffling People
that would have Salvation by Christ, and will not let him exercise his Heavenly
Power, his Princely Glorious Power to Baptize them into his Death, it is they
that come short of Salvation; but all those that yield themselves up to Christ
to be Redeemed through Judgment, and are become as little Children, these are
sn a happy state. You know that our Lord Jesus Christ took a little Child in
his Arms, and said whosoever becomes not as a little Child cannot enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven; you must all of you become as little Children, and
depend upon the Mercy and Free Grace of God; you must all come to a Holy
resignation of your selves to Gods disposal: If you come to Christ as little
Children and depend upon him, you cannot miss of Salvation; it is entailed upon
such Souls as hear the Voice of Christ, they that hear the Voice of the Son of
the God shall live.

I Stand here as a Witness for the God of Heaven, I never heard the Voice of
Christ (as his follower) till I was slain, and Baptized and lay as a little
Child under his Heavenly Chastisements; as soon as ever my Soul was brought to
this in my Humiliation, O then the dreadful Judgment was taken aaway, and the
Book of Life was opened unto me: and the Lord spoke comfortably to me, I have
loved thee with an Everlasting Live, and I was made a Christian through a Day
of Vengeance and of burning as an Oven; and the haughtiness and Pride of Man in
me was brought low. Now in this conformity to Christ's Death, People may die
into Life, and Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord for they rest from
their Labors, and their Works do follow them. Away with all your own Wills,
and your Pride, and Haughtiness, and your Hypocrisy, and Deceit, and all
depend ancy upon any qualification of your own; you must come to have your Life
separated from you else you will all perish. Those that will die with Christ,
and be willing to die for him, he is revealed as a Savior to them. He was
before us in the Days of his flesh, and complied with his Father's Will, he was
Nailed to the Cross. The Son of God when he was come to the depth of his
sufferings, what was his cry, My God, My God, Why have thou forsaken me? This
was for thy sake, and my sake, and every Man and Woman's sake that do believe
in him; he drank the Cup which his Father gave him to drink; If it was done
thus to the Green Tree, What shall be done unto the Dry? He went before us, and
when he comes again he will take us to himself, and take us from the filth of
Sin, that we may be made New Creatures.

Now except we be born again, we cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, and
there is no becoming new Creatures tell we be slain to the Old man, Thou must
be slain to thy Pride, and Haughtiness, and the corruption of thine own Will,
and all selfishness, thou must have God to burn it np in thee; The Holy Ghost
will destroy, and burn up nothing in thee, but that which will bring an Eternal
fire upon thy Soul, show me thou whom my Soul Loves, where is the Path of
Life, the footsteps of the Flock, of thy Companions, Why should I be as one
that goes aside; Now every one that lives at home in the bosom of self take
this with you, though you profess the truth and live in an outward conformity
thereunto, yet if you secretly indulge your corrupt wills, and live a
Fleshpleasing Life, and consult with Flesh and Blood, and are not rent off from
your Lusts, you cannot enjoy the Lord of Life; While I am at home in the body I
am absent from the Lord.

The body of Sin is as a Loadstone to draw you from the Life of God, and from
Glorying in the Cross of Christ; This is flesh and blood, and flesh and blood
cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, For the Lord's sake, for your Soul's sake,
and for the sake of your Eternal Happiness, put not off this work, but pursue
it, and it will be perfected, See how Christ is revealed in you by the Holy
Ghost, and with fire, God will Redeem you by the Spirit of Judgment and
burning; It is not ranging abroad with your minds, but you must know Christ is
in you except you be Reprobates; If he has set your Eyes and Hearts upon
himself, and made you to Water your Couch with your Tears, If he has broken
your sleep, so as you have cried out, I shall be damned and never come to
Salvation; (This will be your cry, it was once my cry,) O let not your Eyes
slumber, nor your Eyelids, take any rest till you be sure the Lord is your
God; If you find these Qualifications you are on your way, otherwise you will
be like a deceitful Bow, and never abide in Judgment; If you reject the Counsel
of God against your selves, and refuse to be Crucified with Christ, and to be
Baptized with his Baptism, you will never have Life; But by his Baptism, and
through the Heavenly operation of his Spirit, if thou have Faith in Christ's
name, thou shall be Married to him in Everlasting Righteousness, Salvation
shall be brought to us, and Eternal Life be bestowed upon us, even that Life
that is hid with Christ in God, he will give to every poor mournful Soul that
submits to his blessed will, and believes in the Lord Jesus Christ; This is
not a faith of our own making, nor a Garment of our own Embroydery, but that
which the Lord has given to us, O happy Man or Woman, that obtainest this gift
of God! O! Who will not lose their lives for this Everlasting Life? Who will
not die for this Eternal Life? Now the matter lies in the Death of your own
Wills, when you have done the will of God, then watch that your own wills be
slain, and that your cursed self take not the Jewels of God, and his Bracelets
and Ornaments, and bestow them upon self, and Paint and Deck cursed self and
take not the Members of Christ, and make them the Members of an Harlot; If you
be dead to your own wills, you are risen with Christ, and shall receive a
Resurrection to Eternal Life, Crucify self, and set the World at naught, and
trample upon it, and all things of it, and count them as dross and dung in
comparison of Christ, that the Father has revealed to be our Life in the days
of our Sorrow and Mourning, in the day of our calamity, in the day when we
cried our hope is lost.

Thus it has been with the Holiest People on Earth; it is not by works of
righteousness of thy own that thou can be saved, Christ comes to cut all
these down, that thou may be Ingrafted into him, and justified by his Grace.
Do not make this matter of Talk, and say I have heard this and that, but look
into you own hearts, and see what Heavenly workings are there; What there is of
the Power of the Lord Jesus that has made you to loath this World, and the
inordinate Love of the Creature, that you may enjoy all these things as if you
enjoyed them not, We cannot when we are slain and Crucified to this World but
say my life is in Christ, when we come to ascribe nothing to our selves, and
all to Christ here is a blessed Harmony, broken Hearts, melted Spirits, and yet
joyful Souls; poor Creatures that were mourning and sighing, and crying before
the Lord in retired places, and yet rejoicing in Christ Jesus, I am risen with
Christ, I said my hope is cut off, I will lie down in thy will O God; do what
thou will with me, it is in thy Sovereign pleasure and free gift, whether thou
give me life or deny it to me: There must be a resignation of our selves to the
will of God, it was so with the Lord Jesus, and it is so with every true Saint
of God, you must be humbled as little Children before judgment be taken away,
and the loving kindness of God sealed up to your Souls; if you seek this work
of God you will find it, if you seek it upon your Beds, in all your Labors and
concernments, in all your Stations and Relations; if you press after the new
Birth, you must use this World, as if you used it not and live a Married life,
as if you were Un-married, for the fashion of this of World passes away. This
is not Rantism.

But let me tell you, a New World comes by Regeneration, a Man is not lifted up
in his own mind, but laid low in his own Eyes, he waits for the Wisdom of God
to govern him, and he is as a Steward of the Grace of God, to give to them that
stand in need, when a Man is regenerated and born again, he is as contented
with Bread and Water, as with all the enjoyments of this World; what is the
matter? His own will is gone, and put down under his feet, and whatsoever it is
that gives life to all his vain desires and Affections; there is a Harmony of
all within, a Man praising of God, and blessing his Holy Name, there are no
Intanglements shall draw away the Heart from serving of God, and seeking his
Glory; and if God shall call the Husband from the Wife, or the Wife from the
Husband, for the Glory of his Name, there is no whining and complaining, and
crying out but giving them up, and a praising and blessing God when they are
called to such an exercise, and if they are not called to that then they set
their Hearts to glorify God in their several places and stations, then they
have a full content in a blessed resignation; Here their Wills are slain but
they praise God they have no desire, but Lord thy will be done, always praising
God, always having the fear, and the glory of God before their Eyes. All the
mischief is hatched in pleasing men's own Wills: That is, the Counsel of every
Heart that Christ does not govern, Will you live as the Quakers, then you must
live contemptibly, the Mistress and Maid are Hail-fellow well met; No, every
one must walk in humility, and live in acquaintance with the God of Heaven, s^e
that is wrought upon by the same Spirit, must with all diligence behave her
self as becomes a Servant of the Lord. Here is now a New World, and the
fashions of the Old World are gone, all Pride, Haughtiness, Crosness, and
Trampling upon one another are all gone, all slain, through the operation of
Christ.

What remains now, Christ is in me, and we are all one in him; Christ laid down
his Life for thee and me; Now he reigns in me, and he has prepared my body to
die for the truth, as his prepared body was laid down for my Sin. It is a kind
of Foolish Profession to make Profession of Christ and live in Covetousness,
Profaneness, Sensuality and the like; they that are come to this Heavenly Birth
seek the things that are above, thou can do no other; Make the Tree good and
the Fruit will be good. You must be Ingrafted into the Vine of Gods
righteousness, O! slight not the Day of your Visitation, What was it to me to
read of any being born again, till I was slain, and knew the Heavenly Baptism
of Christ Jesus? Till I saw the Flaming Sword ready to slay me in every way, in
every turning. The Light of Christ convinced me of Sin, and his Righteousness
justified me, and those Works were abominable to me that hindered my Souls
passage to Christ; Christ Jesus in Marrying my Soul to himself seized upon me,
and did work effectually in me; There is the Testimony of Christ in me, he has
Sealed up my Soul to the Day of my Redemption, here is a certain passage, and a
certain way which never any miss of that lose their Lives for Christ: If you be
not ready and willing to lose your Lives for Christ, you shall never come here;
The Gate is strait and the way is narrow, none come hither but those that die
into an Heavenly Oneness with Christ. O Friends let us empty our selves that
Christ may fill us, let us be nothing in our own Eyes that we may be all in
him, and receive of his fullness.

Now I commend you to God's Witness, that you may remember what has been
spoken among you, but consider, if you do not harken to it, it will follow you,
and be a plague to you to all Eternity; if you will not yield up your selves to
Christ this day that burns like an Oven, this Fire you must dwell with when out
of the Body, there will be no quenching of this Fire for ever; but if you be so
wise for your Souls as to resign your selves up to Christ, and come to him as
little Children this will not hinder your Earthly concerns, though the World
may account thee a Fool, yet thou have that part of Heavenly Wisdom to do what
thou do as unto God; thou carriest to thy Wife, as in the sight of God, that
she may be Sanctified to thee, and thou to her; and thou carriest becomingly to
thy children and Servants, and thou will abound in Grace and in every good work
which will be for thine Eternal welfare.

O I beseech you People, for the Lord's sake wait for the light of Christ, to
guide you, learn of him to be meek and lowly, then happy are you, for he
dwells with the humble, but he beholds the Proud afar off. This New Birth
which is a true work, a sincere and heavenly work, it will make you for ever. O
make room for Christ in your Hearts, or else he is never like to dwell with
you, he loves to dwell with the poor and humble and contrite Spirit, he abhors
the Proud, he will empty your Souls that he may fill them.

And so I commend you to God, I have been long held in durance under great
weakness; and I was restless till I could come up to this Great City of London,
to Preach the Everlasting Gospel among you, and you see I am among you here,
pray every one of you turn Inward; let not these Words passing through a mean
Vessel be as a bare empty Discourse of Truth to you, which you only hear, and
take no further care of your Salvation. Take heed of despising the light that
shines in the midst of you, and be pressing forward to the Heavenly work that
is laid in the Power of Christ Jesus even through Judgment into Death, and then
he will give Eternal Life; the Lord confirm this that it may rest upon your
Hearts that you may be dead to the things of World: We are not come to Mount
Sinai that gen^ers to bondage, but we are come to Mount Sion the City of the
living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innume^able company of Angels, to
the general Assembly, and Church of the first born which are wr^tten in Heaven,
and to God the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of just Men made Perfect, and
to Jesus ^be Mediator of the New Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling that
speaks better things than that of Abel. This is the Inheritance of the
Redeemed of the most High, blessed be the name of the Lord; let us rest in hope
till he bring us to Humility and Lowlyness of mind, that he may cloth us with
Heavenly Glory according to his Promise, I will Beautify my House with Glory
says the Lord. This is the Portion of a Poor People that cast down themselves
before the Lord, that he may lift them up, and be all in all to them, In whose
blessed Presence they shall have of Joy, and Rivers of Pleasures at his right
hand for ever more.

The Prayer after Sermon.
BLessed and Glorious God, thy presence and power is with thy People every
where, and thou art stretching forth thy Almighty Arm for the Salvation of thy
chosen ones, and thou art Influencing their Souls with thy Grace and Spirit in
all their solemn meetings and Assemblies; we desire to extol and magnify thy
great and excellent Nause for all thy M^rcies and blessings; we pray thee bow
down thy Heavenly Ear, and (...)ken to the Cries and supplications of thy
People that are breathing forth the desire of their S^uls to thee, that art a
God hearing Prayers, supply their wants, and establish their Spirits, and
uphold them with thy free Spirit, Crown all thy chosen ones with thy
lovingkindness, and tender mercy, rend the Cloud of darkness that hangs over us
and take away the Vail, and bow the Heavens, amongst us, and visit us with thy
Salvation and reveal the mysteries of thy Truth unto us, and in all our ways
let us acknowledge thee, and do thou lead us in the way everlasting; Righteous
God of Love while we live on Earth, let our Conversa^ion be in Heaven, where
Christ our Mediator sits a^ thy Righthand; let us follow his Example, who was
Holy, Harmless, and undefiled, that we may sit in Heavenly places with him. Be
thou a Sun and Shield to us in our earthly Pilgrimage, whom have we in Heaven
but thee, and there is none on Earth that we desire besides thee; let us walk
before thee in sincerity and truth, and do thou conduct us in the way of truth,
and righteousness by thy blessed Spirit, Blessed be thy Name, for the light of
thy saving truth, that has shined in our minds, and the light of thy
Countenance, that has been lifted up upon us in our meetings, thou have
furnished a Table for thy People, as in the days of old, we cannot but Admire
thy great love, and condescension toward us, and extol and bless thy Holy name
for thy abounding mercies and the Riches of thy Goodness to us, we desire to
give thee honor and renown, and praise and Thanks giving for thy renewed
mercies, and Spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus for whom we bless thee, and in
whom we desire to be found not having our own Righteousness to him with thy
self and thy Holy Eternal Spirit, be Glory for Ever, Amen.

A SERMON Preached by Mr. GEORGE WHITEHEAD. At Grace Church Street, October. 4.
1693.
THE Great God who made Heaven and Earth, the God of our Salvation, he has
prepared a Sacrifice for himself in the hearts of a Remuant whom he has
gathered by the Arm of his Mighty Power, and he has kindled that Sacrifice
that is of his own preparing, and this to a Remnant is a manifest Token of the
Love of God, and of his Divine and special Providence for their safety and
preservation that trust in him, and that are sincerely devoted to his service
and fear, and that walk in humility before him; and this, my Friends, is matter
of weighty and tender concernment upon my Spirit, to mind all of you that come
to our Meetings, and hear the Truth declared from time to time, that you
seriously consider the great work that the Lord is about to bring to pass, that
every one should wait for, that they may feel his Mighty Power preparing their
hearts for himself, and raising up Breathings and Supplications to him that is
a God hearing Prayers that are offered in uprightness and sincerity from a
broken heart and a contrite Spirit, which are Sacrifices that the Lord has
regard to: And as it was said of Old, when Manoah took a Kid asith a Meat
Offering, and offer^d it upou a Rock unto the Lord, and the Angel did
wondrously and Manoah and his Wife looked on, for it came to pass, when the
flame went up toward Heaven from off the Altar, that the Angel os the Lord
ascended in the Flame of the Altar, and Manoah and his Wife looked on and fell
on their faces to the ground, and Manoah said to his Wife we shall surely die,
because we have seen God. But his Wife said unto him, if the Lord were pleased
to kill us he would not have received a Burnt-Offering and a Meat Offering at
our hands, neither would he have showed us all these things, He would not have
manifested so great Love to us; surely a Remnant may say at this day, from a
sense of the great things that the Lord has shown us, and of his blessed Power
working in their hearts and inward parts a tenderdess and subjection to him,
that we owe obedience to the Lord, and we believe that the Lord intends good to
his People, in that he will exalt his Name in us, and prosper his own work of
Righteousness, that Righteousness may be exalted, that many may come to behold
the great things and the worthy things which the Lord our God will bring to
pass in our Day.

These things have been foretold, for the encouragement and for the
strengthening of the Faith of those whose Faces are Sion-ward, whose eyes are
turned toward the Lord their Maker, who have tasted in some measure of the
Power and of the Goodness of the Lord our God, that they may continue in the
Faith, whereby their hearts may be drawn after the Lord, that those who have
been made partakers of the true and living Faith of the Son of God in his Name
and Power, may keep the Faith, and not let go the Faith, that they may hold
fast the Profession of their Faith without wavering, that the Enemy may not be
suffered upon any account either to weaken or destroy the Faith of any, who
have known some degree of Faith in the work of God, and concerning his
Goodness, and special care, and Providence for the safety, and for the
preservation of them that fear him; who are the called of the Lord, who are
chosen out of the World, and out of the corruptions of it, that they may be a
living and a peculiar People and a chosen Generation, to show forth the praise
of him that has called them out of Darkness into his mavelous Light. He has
called us, and chosen us for that very end that in our Lives and Conversations
we might answer his Call of Grace, and the truth that we are made partakers of,
and thereby show forth his praise; and such now have cause to bless the Lord,
and praise his Holy Name for all his Mercies for preserving of them, and
helping them in their Way, and in their Spiritual Journey and Progress that
they are brought into.

Therefore, dear Friends, be ye concerned, and be inward with the Lord, and
attend upon him without distraction, that nothing may hurry, discompose, nor
distract your minds, or turn them about from the Faith, trust and Confidence
you have in the Lord which he has gathered his People into, that every one may
be exercised in a Watchful state, and in Lowlyness and Humility, and look unto,
and depend upon the Lord for strength for help, and Power to enable us to stand
against all the Wiles of Satan, that none may be led into any extreme from the
sense of Truth, and from a feeling of that Power that does prepare the Heart
for God and fix it upon him; That none may be drawn out either into
carelessness, negligence, slothfulness, or presumption on the one hand, or into
diffidence, distrustfulness, or despair on the other, but that all may look
unto Jesus who is the Author and finisher of their Faith, that they may be
sensible of the benefits of his Death, on Earth and of his Intercession in
Heaven, of the Effect and benefit of his Prayer unto the Father; that their
Faith when they shall be tried and tempted may not fail, that all may witness
and partake of this that he told unto Peter, I have prayed for thee, that thy
Faith fail not, Satan has desired to Winnow thee (to toss thee and blow thee
about) but I have prayed for thee that thy Faith may not fail.

So my Friends, and Friendly People let your Faith stand in that Power that
has gathered you, in that Arm of the Lord that he has made bare, and
stretched forth to bring a People to himself; that every one may live by Faith,
and have their dependence upon the Lord for strength and for relief, that they
may partake of the immediate influence of his Spirit, which he he is ready to
Minister and Communicate to those that are given up to serve the Lord, that
your Prayers and Supplications may be in the Spirit to that God that pours
out a Spirit of Grace and Supplication upon his People, and he is daily pouring
out his Holy Spirit upon his People, that their Prayers and supplications may
reach to him, who is a God hearing Prayers; That they may be prevalent with God
for the Preservation of themselves and others, and for the good of all Nations,
that they may awaken many to repent, and seek the Lord, whil he may be found
and call upon him while he is near, that they may be turned from the evil of
their ways, and from the many Provocations whereby the Inhabitants of the Earth
have greatly incurred the Displeasure of God, and that they may be sensible how
ready the Lord is to turn away his wrath from them.

This is the desire of the Hearts and Souls of a Remnant, on the behalf of many
whom the Lord will yet visit and reach unto and call out of the dark ways and
by Paths of Sin and Corruption, that they may be brought into a Capacity to
know the way of Truth, and Righteousness and Peace. And my Friends, while
People are sensible that there are true breathings and desires after God, and
that there is a particular Travel of Soul for the good of a Nation, and for the
converting of Sinners from the Evil of their ways, this is a sign that God is
waiting to be gracious; He may visit a People and Nation with Chastisements and
Judgments, yet I am sensible it is for his Peoples sake, even a Remnant that he
has gathered out of the empty Professions, and Forms that are in the World
that the Lord is still waiting to be Gracious and extending his Patience and
Long-suffering, that he may convince them, humble them, and overcome them with
his Love, and when he corrects and punishes, yet he has Reserves of Mercy,
for them if they will repent and turn from Sin, and humble themselves under the
mighty hands of God, that he may in due time exalt them, and bring them from
under the weight of their Iniquities, and the guilt of their transgressions
that they may receive mercy for his Name's sake, and for his dear Son's sake.

This is the Breathing, and the Travel of the Souls of a Remnant, and we may
truly say, the Lord has left a Seed, a small Remnant that look to him and
trust in him, though a People and Nation have sinned against the Lord, who
otherwise had been as Sodom and Gommorrah; if God had not left us a Seed, yet
for the sake of a little Seed, even for the sake of the Worm Jacob that
wrestled with him by Prayer and Supplication, the Lord has spared many, and
waited to be Gracious to them; they are truly a People that are a Praying
People that have the Advantage of all others; yet I do not condemn all forms of
Profession, there are some that have a secret sincerity, and a fear of God, and
a desire after the Lord, that are as Sheep scattered upon the barren Mountains,
that yet the Lord will gather; there are those that have a secret longing and
thirsting after the living God, that desire to know the things that belong to
their Peace; There are other Sheep of Christ which are not of this Fold, them
also will he bring home, that they may know where the Green Pastures are, and
be led by the still waters, and find relief and refreshment from the Lord.

Therefore all those that the Lord has gathered, and preserved and kept to
this moment, and helped them, and supplied them, and continued his mercy to
them should be thankful, and sensible of his loving kindness, that by an
Invisible Power has given them comfort and refreshment while they have been
waiting on him; let their minds and hearts be still fixed upon the Lord, and
staid on him, and he will preserve them in quientness and peace, and they shall
know he will show his Providence with them, that their Bread may be sure, and
their Waters may not fail, the Lord will preserve them to the end of their
Days, in humility and lowlyness, wherein they may be capable of Instruction;
and by his Holy Spirit he will lead them in the way they should walk, those
that come unto the Lord with weeping and supplication the Lord he will lead
them by the Rivers of Water in a plain way, where they shall not stumble. The
Lord our God has prepared a Sacrifice, and he will accept that Sacrifice which
is of his own preparing, and this (I say) to a Remnant is a manifest token of
his Love.

God Almighty Preserve you, and bless the labors of his Servants among you,
who labor in the Word and Doctrine, and in the Gospel of your Salvation whilst
they are among you, that you may know the Goodness of the Lord that waits to
be gracious, and have renewed experiences of his Love, and observe for your
encouragement the tender care he is pleased to manifest toward his Heritage
both in this and other places; We have great cause humbly to be thankful to our
God for what favors we enjoy, and to be diligent to make the best Improvement
we can of all the Seasons of Grace, and opportunities for Working out our own
Salvation which the Lord is pleased in his abundant mercy to afford unto us.

His Prayer after Sermon.
GLorious and Blessed God, who art the God of all Grace and Mercy, and of all
our helps and Preservations; unto this moment thou have been with us, unto this
Day we have had thy Gracious presence with us, even in the needful time; Thou
have gathered us to be a peculiar People unto thee; thy presence is the very
Life of our meetings, and the Beauty and Glory of our Assemblies wherewith from
time to time thou have succored and relieved and revived thy People, whose
Eyes have been toward thee, and whose expectations have been from thee, to be
supplied and saved by thy bountiful band, those Living, Divine and Heavenly
supplies wherewith thou have from time to time Relieved thy People the poor and
needy, those whose Souls are bowed down in deep Humility in thy sight and
presence; so that Powerful Father of Life we have great cause to remember thee
in thy ways, We have cause to fear thee O Lord, and to think upon thy Name, We
desire to wait upon thee, and cry to thee, and breath after thee, and trust in
thee; We bless thee for the continuance of thy Love and Goodness, for thy
renewed blessings and multiplied favors, we have abundant cause to bless and
praise and honor thee O Lord, to magnify thy great and excellent name for thy
Love and great Goodness, for making bare thy mighty Arm, and stretching it
forth to help the helpless, and to relieve and support the poor and needy,
whose trust is in thee, whose confidence thou have raised up by thy Power to
stand in thy Presence; O Righteous Powerful Father of Life, Gather thy People
more and more into an inward sense and feeling, and experience of thy Power and
Goodness, that their Hearts may be engaged to thy self to walk before thee in
an Holy Awe and reverence, and with such Sincerity, Humility, Lowlyness, and
tenderness of Heart, as becomes those that have the enjoyment of thy Presence,
and as becomes our solemn meeting and appearing before thee from time to time,
that all thy People who are called by thy Grace, who are convinced and
persuaded of thy blessed truth, may be truly and livingly awakened, and stirred
up into a sense of thy Glorious Power, that they may know what it is to appear
before thee, and how they ought to come before thee, the most glorious and most
high and holy God, who inhabitest Eternity, who dwell in the highest
Heavens, and yet have a place in the lowest Hearts, in the Hearts of those that
with a true Reverence, and holy fear desire to worship thee with such a frame
of Spirit, and temper of mind, and heart as thou requirest in all them that
approach thy Presence; We beg the influence of thy Grace and Divine Spirit,
that we may be thereby comforted and refreshed, and uouchsafe unto us O Lord
such sweet incomes of thy Love, and such renewings of thy blessing as may
settle and establish our minds and hearts in a sense of thy Goodness, and of
thy power and presence, that we may not be shaken in our minds, nor weakened in
Faith, and Confidence in thee by any Temptation what soever; That, Lord God
Eternal, the Hearts of thy People may be fixed, trusting in thee, and in thy
blessed Name and Power, and find safety and preservation; That all thy people
every where may be sensible that thou art their dwelling place as thou have
been in all Generations. And so, Lord God Eternal, let them dwell in thee, and
do thou dwell in them and say, this is my habitation, for I have desired it,
That, Blessed Father of Life, they may be sensible of thy Love in it, that no
Calamities, or disiresses, nor Sword, nor Famine, nor Necessities, nor
Afflictions, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present,
nor things to come, may be able to separate them from thy love in Christ Jesus.
O Lord thy People may say to thee as Israel said of old, if it had not been the
Lord who was on our side, when men rose up against us, then they had swallowed
us up Quick when their wrath was kindled against us, then the Waters had
overwhelmed us and the siream had gone over our Soul; Our help is in the Name
of thee, O Lord that made Heaven and Earth, Thy Name and thy Power, and thy
mighty Arm has appeared for us, and compassed us about; Thou have surrounded
thy people with thy favor as with a shield, and have preserved them for the
praise and the honor of thy Name, and the exaltation of thy Holy Truth; And
the Confidence, and trust of a little Remnant is, that thou will still be with
them for their Confidence is in thy Name, which is a strong Tower, and their
dependence upon thee; Thou will not cut off a people which thon have Appointed
for thy praise, thou will not not destroy them but surround them with thy Mercy
and Salvation, as with Walls and Bullwarks about them; This is the Belief and
Confidence that thou have raised in the Hearts of a Remnant. Therefore O Lord
we have cause to wait upon thee, and continually to trust in thee, and breath
and cry unto thee for thy whole Heritage, for all them whom thou have gathered
by the Arm of thy Power, that they may may be preserved faithful to the end of
their Days, that they may be saved, from the Evils and Pollutions and
Corruptions of the World, that they may be Obedient to thy Call, and to thy
Heavenly Counsel, that they may come to wait upon thee, and harken to thy Voice
as those that are willing to obey, and not to touch any Unclean thing, but
being sensible of thy goodness, thou will turn away thy wrath from them, that
turn from their Provocations; For this end thou have raised desires and
breathings, and begotten a Travel in the Souls of a Remnant, of the Sons and
Daughters of Men, particularly for the Land of our Nativity; We pray both for
High and Low, Rich and Poor, Rulers and People, that by thy Powerful Visitation
they may be excited to seek the Lord, and to wait upon thee, and walk in thy
humility in thy sight and presence, that they may desire none in Heaven but
thee, and none upon Earth in Comparison of thee; Work an effectual deliverance,
and Salvation for us both inward and ontward, that our Confidence may not be in
any thing below thy self; Let every one of us have an Understanding, and an Eye
opened for the light of truth, that we may look unto thee, and expect Salvation
from thee, by Jesus Christ our Mediator and Redeemer. Remember all thy People
here and elsewhere that are recommended to thee; keep them in a sense of thy
ower and in humility before thee, that they may receive Comfort, and Wisdom,
and Instruction from thee, and do thou graciously establish their goings, and
keep them in the way wherein they are to walk; the way of Truth and
Righteousness, Life and Peace; Be thou known in the Assemblies of all thy
People, and revive and strengthen them; And be with all thy People in their
respective Families, that they may be engaged to serve thee, and fear thee in
sincerity and humility, and call upon thy Name; that thou Lord God Everlasting,
may take care of them, and thy special Providence may watch over them; and
let the Angels of thy presence pitch their Tents about all them that fear thy
Name. Blessed and Everlasting Father of Mercies, dwell among us, hide and
secure us under the shadow of thy Wings, that we may enjoy Communion with
thee, through Jesus Christ thy Dearly Beloved Son and our alone Savior, and
offer up living Sacrifices of praise and Thanks giving unto thee, the God of
all our Mercies, Blessings, and Deliverances, for thou alone art worthy, who
art God over all Blessed for Ever, and Ever, Amen.

A SERMON, Preached by Mr. FRANCIS CAMFIELD, At Grace-Church street, May, the
14. 1693.
MY Friends, You have often heard by the Servants of the Lord that have given
Testimony to Jesus, the only and alone Savior, you have often heard the
Report, and the Report is true, That there is no Name under Heaven by which any
man can be saved, but the Name of Jesus; And you have oftentimes read also in
the Holy Scripture of this Jesus the only and alone Savior, all the Holy
Prophets gave Testimony that he should come and when he was come all the Holy
Apostles and Ministers of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ they gave Testimony
that he was come, and they were made able Ministers of the New Testament, and
their great business was (as Instruments in the hands of the Great God) to turn
men from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to the Power of God,
that they might receive forgiveness of sins and an Inheritance among them that
are Sanctified; you know the Scripture speaks plentifully after this manner. I
hope there are none here but have believed the Testimonies that have been
given, but the great thing is for every one to come to a Consideration of this;
Since you have believed the Report, that which is every ones concern now, is to
examine themselves whether or no they are really turned from Darkness to the
Heavenly Light; None come to be turned from Darkness to Light, but they come to
know Repentance from Dead Works, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. And
as every one comes to know this, they come to know what it is to lay a good
Foundation; This was the Foundation the Primitive Christians laid, as you may
Remember the Exhortation of the Apostle, in the Sixth Chapter of the Epistle to
the Hebrews, Therefore leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let us
go on unto Perfection not laying again the Foundation of Repentance from dead
Works, and of Faith toward God.

Thus you see he presses them to go on to Perfection, that is the business of
every one of you that believe in the Name of Jesus that you keep walking on in
the Holy way, We that are come to know this Holy way through the Riches of the
Love and Grace of the Great God to us, it is our main business to walk in this
Holy way, they that know any thing of true Christianity know this to be their
great concern, to walk in this Holy way that leads to Everlasting Life; Christ
is the Way, the Truth, and the Life; and every one that comes into this way,
and walks in it, they are going on toward Perfection. And they are putting
off the Old Man; They feel in themselves a Power at work that Crucifies the Old
man with his Deeds, then they go on in the Name of the Lord. This Power does
work till every one in their own particular comes to be Crucified with Christ;
It was the Primitive Christians experience, what the Apostle says of himself,
2 Gal. 20. I am Crucified with Christ neverthless I live, yet not I but Christ
lives in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the Faith
of the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me.

Great is the Mystery of Godliness, You that are engaged in the Christian
Warfare, and that live the Christian Life, and are making War in righteousness
against the Devil the Enemy of your Souls, you know that Great is this Mystery
of Godliness, this Mystery is opened among the Disciples of Jesus among the
Holy Offspring of God, who are begotten again through the Word of Eternal
Life; who as the Holy Apostle says, are begotten of his own Will through the
Word of Truth, that they should be a kind of First fruits of his Creatures; We
to whom God has Graciously manifested himself in the Blessed Son of his Love,
our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, how ought we to walk as becomes the Gospel,
O that the serious and weighty Consideration of this, might rest upon every one
of us, that we ought to have our Conversation as becomes the Gospel of Christ,
and be going on to Perfection; you know what the Apostle speaks, 3. Phil. 12.
Not as though I had already attained, either were already perfect, but I follow
after, if that I may apprechend that for which also I am apprehended of Jesus
Christ; This I am sure every true Christian Man and Woman will do, as the same
Apostle did; who says, I press toward the mark for the Price of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus. And as every one comes to grow up in the Life
of Righteousness, they will come to know an increase of Faith, they will grow
up in Faith, and in that Hope which has been as an Anchor to their Souls, in
the day of their deep Exercise, and they will remain steadfast and unmovable,
as they walk in the holy way; And so every one as they keep humble and bowed
before the God Heaven, they will know his Teachings more and more, and have a
sensible feeling of it in themselves, every one in their own particular.

And certainly, it is all our business to be waiting for the fulfilling of
those many great and precious promises, which are recorded in the Holy
Scripture, which were enjoyed by the Primitive Christians in the Ages that are
past and gone, and in succeeding times shall be likewise enjoyed by all true
Christian People as they come to be Followers of Jesus; as we have begun well,
let us go on toward Perfection, not laying again (as I said before) the
Foundation of Repentame from dead Works, and Faith toward God and the Lord
Jesus Christ; for who ever expects Salvation by Christ the only Savior, must
be going on to Perfection, they must begin at the work of Regeneration, and
Experience in themselves a New Birth, for if we be not born again, we shall die
in our Sins; you know our Savior has left this upon Record, and it remains
the same truth to this day.

And therefore how ought every one that makes mention of the name of Great God,
and of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, How ought every such a one to be
weighty and considerate, and Examine themselves whether they are come to know
Repentance from Dead Works, Whether they have turned from the evil of their
doings; Some are ready to say I would gladly turn from the evil of my doings,
but I find I am beset with the Devil, the Enemy of my Soul; Well if thou
believe in the Light wherewith Christ Jesus has enlightened thee, then Cry
to him, and he will give thee Power to withstand the Enemy of thy Soul.

Praised and Blessed be the Name of our God, that a Remnant can say as soon as
we did really Believe in the Name of Jesus, we received power in some measure
as the Primitive Believers did that received Christ, we received Power to
become the Sons of God; you that have received this Power, let your Eye be to
the Lord, and cry to him, for Divine Assistance; for of our selves we are not
sufficient, we have not power of our selves to think a good thought or do a
good Action, but we depend upon the Power of God to enable us to Work out our
own Salvation; For it is God that works in us both to will and to do of his
own good pleasure.

Therefore Repentance, and Remission of Sins are Preached in Christ's Name, and
without the Knowledge, and Christian experience of this, and believing in the
Name of Jesus, we cannot be saved from the wrath to come; Let us wait upon God
who by our Lord Jesus Christ saves all his People from their Sins; Not by
Works of Righteousness that we have done, but (as the Apostle says,) According
to his Mercy he saved us, by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the
Holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior.
Those that have experience of the work of Regeneration, and of being renewed in
their Inward parts where Christ bears Rule, when they meet together in the
Solemn Assemblies of the Lords People, he will be in the midst of them, and
they that come to hear the word of the Lord, and wait upon him, know it to be
so; you that are real Christian People, you know this by your own experience,
therefore wait upon the Lord your God, that the work of Regeneration may go on,
and you will find strength more and more ministered to you, and you will feel
the pouring forth of the Spirit abundantly upon you, the same Spirit that
raised up our Lord Jesus from the dead, and quickened him, shall quicken you,
that you may live to him here, and with him for ever hereafter.

The Prayer after Sermon.
Most Glorious Powerful and Infinite Lord God of Life, thou have sought out a
People to serve thee, and thou have made choice of many from among the Sons and
Daughters of Men to honor thy Name in the Land of the Living; that we might be
capable so to do, thou have opened an everlasting Fountain, and the streams of
Life have reached to us; Thy Divine Comforts, O Lord have been our portion from
one day to another, and we have tasted thy goodness, and our hearts have been
deeply affected with it, blessed God and Fathe, when we consider how thou have
nourished us thy Children, and brought us up in troublous times, and made a way
for us in the Wilderness, and a path in the Desert, and brought us through the
deep waters; When we were ready to be overwhelmed, when our Souls cried to thee
Lord to be present with us, then thou have been near unto us; when we have been
seeking thy face and thy glory. thou have refreshed us with the light of thy
Countenance, when we have been walking in thy way thy Banner over us has been
love, and Lord out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings thou have brought forth
praise and glory to thy self; O that all that partake of thy Divine goodness,
may magnify and praise thee. This has been our Supplication O Lord from year
to year, Lord reach to the Nations, gather a People under the shadow of thy
wings, secure them from all dangers, and let them have great delight in thy
ways, and let thy word be sweet to their taste: Most tender and everlasting
Father of life, and God of all grace, we humbly entreat thee to gather the
Inhabitants of this Island, and bring down all haughtiness and pride to the
dust, and bring all thy people to humility, and self abasement before thee the
God of glory, that the knowledge of the Lord may cover the Earth as the Waters
cover the Sea, that thy great Name may be exalted; Lord we entreat thee gather
together those that are broken and contrite, and are as dead and dry bones, can
these dry bones live? Thou know, O Lord. Shall I ever be capable of praising
the Lord (says one) by a sense of thy favor to my Soul? Lord thou can reach
these, and gather to thy self a numberless number that no man can number, that
(everlasting God of Power) shall stand before thee without spot and blemish, in
whose mouths there is no guile. Lord increase the number of those that seek
after thee the living Fountain of all goodness, with tears flowing from their
eyes, and sorrow in their hearts. Everlasting God of life, let the day of our
Tranquillity be lengthned out, and preserve the Land of our Nativity and let no
desolation be among us; Father of Mercies, many have been visited with dreadful
Judgments from thy hand in other Nations, O preserve this sinful Land and let
thy continued mercies and blessings, and thy long suffering prevail upon us,
that we may be turned to thee with all our hearts, and cry mightily to thee
from one day to another, that we may be as so many Jacobs wrestling with thee
to the break of the day that thou would bless us, and that thy blessing may
never depart from this Island; O Lord hear the cries of thy People that are
seeking thy glory, and the good of their own Souls; let thy mercy prevail for
us, and let thy blessing be with all thy Servants that cry to thee, we beseech
thee for the sake of Jesus Christ let not thine anger be kindled against us
least we perish; and, O Lord, let thy judgments which are impendent be
diverted, and stir up thy People to wrestle with thee with all their Souls,
that thou would save this Nation, that England may live in thy sight, cover
us under the shadow of thy wings, and let the hearts of all thy People be
turned to thee, and turned from Sin to Righteousness, that they may be
preserved in thy fear and love, and partake of ihe Fountain of life, and may be
delivered from the snares of death. Father of life, preserve all thine that
have waited on thee, thou art a God that changest not, therefore we are not
consumed, Glory Honor and Praise be rendered to thee for all thy love and
favor, blessings and benefits vouchsafed to us, and for all the opportunities
which we have had for our Souls, break and soften the hearts of all thy
Children, and kindle in their Souls a Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving,
that we may say it is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes, that
we may rejoice and Triumph in thy great Salvation, through Jesus Christ who
alone is worthy, and God over all, blessed for ever and ever, Amen.

A SERMON Preached by Mr. JOHN BOWATER. At St. John's-Street, March 18. 1693.
To as many as have received Christ Jesus the Lord, to them gave he power to
become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name.
Now, my Friends, they that have believed are to wait to receive his power
according to the Exhortation of our Lord Jesus Christ to his Disciples, wait
until you be endued with a Power from on high, Luke 24. 49. Many People make a
profession of belief in the Lord Jesus Christ, but do not come to know this
mighty power to work Sanctification, Redemption, and Salvation. Let all and
every one of you be concerned in waiting upon God, and attending upon him, that
you may receive strength and power and ability from him, whereby you may be
enabled to perform your bounden duty, which God requires of you, he has shown
unto Man what is good, and what the Lord requires of him, which is to do
justly, and love mercy, and to walk humbly with God. Every one of us that have
believed, let us wait for power to perform that which may answer the requirings
of God, that we may receive ability from him to enable us to perform our duty,
that we may not only be Professors of the blessed truth of God, but possessors
of it, that we may not only be Professors but Possessors of life, whereby we
may live to God, through Jesus Christ, and perform our duty acceptably to God.

It is a blessed to be found in that which gives acacceptance with God; now
there is no acceptance with God, but as we are found in Christ Jesus, in him
that was the promised Seed, whom God promised should break the Serpents head;
the Serpent beguiled Eve through subtilty; Now God promised that the Seed of
the Woman, that is Christ Jesus should break the Serpents head; It is through
him that Redemption and Salvation is known; It is through Christ Jesus the
Mediator between God and Man, that Man becomes reconciled to God, and no
otherwise. He tasted Death for every man, and he died that he might destroy him
that had the Power of Death, that is the Devil. It is through Christ the
Mediator that we are reconciled to God, and for this says the Apostle, was the
Son of God manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil. Sin in all
Ages has been the work of the Devil, and the Devil is the Author of Sin, but
the Lord Jesus Christ the Mediator, he is the Author of Eternal Salvation to
all them that obey him. So that whatsoever your Profession may be of God or of
Christ, his Servants ye are, to whom you obey; Now consider whose Servants you
are, whether you are Servants of sin, or bought by Christ Jesus, and Redeemed
from an ungodly life, and from a vain Conversation. We cannot serve two Masters
where there is such a contrariety as Light is to Darkness, you cannot serve
them at one and the same time, there must be a cleaving to the one, see that
you cleave and join your selves to that which is good, to that Principle that
God has placed in your hearts, and this will season your Souls, this will
leaven you to God, Luke 13. 21. The Kingdom of God is like leaven which a Woman
took and hid in three Measures of Meal' till the whole was leavned.

God does give to every Man a measure of Grace that brings Salvation; This
Grace has appeared to all Men, teaching us that denying ungodliness and
Worldly Lusts, we should live soberly righteously and godly in this present
World; yet too many People have not had regard to the grace of God given to
them, but rather trample upon it, and do despite to the Spirit of Grace; the
Grace of God in Christ Jesus is extended to all the Children of Men, without
respect of Persons, God is no respecter of ^ersons, but in every Nation he that
fears him, and works Righteoasness, is accepted with him, Acts 10. 35.

Now my Friends, we cannot work Righteousness but by the ability and assistance
of the grace of God, now this grace is from Christ Jesus, I John 17. For the
Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, that grace
came by Christ that works sanctification. Now the Law did not make the comers
thereunto perfect nor purge the Conscience, but the bringing in of a better
hope did, by which we draw nigh to God; There is no drawing nigh to God but
through Christ Jesus, no Redemption but through him, he is a complete Savior,
he does not only redeem in part, but he saves to the uttermost, all that come
unto God by him; he is a complete Savior, he that has begotten good desires
in our Souls, whereby we breath after him, and are raised to pant and desire
after that which is good; and as there is a giving up to him that has begotten
these good desires in the Soul, the Lord in his good time will answer these
desires; see that ye be of humble and meek minds, and lie low before him, and
wait on him, and he will in due time perfect the work which he has begun.

Friends, I testify among you at this time, there is not a living desire in
the Soul to that which is good, but Christ is the Author of it, he is the
Author of Eternal Salvation to as many as obey him. It is he that begun the
work, he met with us by his Power and Spirit when we were strangers to God. For
we, as well as others, were in the broad way going hand in hand with a
multitude to do evil, and we did not seek God, till he did first seek us, we
did not desire the knowledge of his ways till he raised desires in our Souls,
he met with us in the way of his Judgments, causing terror to take hold of
Transgressors, so that we could not take delight in vanities and pleasures as
we had done, because his terrors took hold of us, blessed be the name of the
Lord. It was good for us that we were afflicted, before we were afflicted we
went a stray, but now we have learned his Right^^^s Judgments; Judgments upon
the unjust we have found to be Mercy to the just. Blessed be the name of the
Lord that did seek us out, that met with us, that put a stop to us in our way
that we could not delight in vanity as we had done. The Lord brought us to a
consideration of our ways and doings; He manifested to us, if I live and die in
this way I am in, I am undone for ever, I am miserable for ever, if I do not
know Redemption and Salvation by Jesus Christ. The Lord manifested to us by the
shining of his Divine Light in our hearts, that we were in the Broad way that
leads to destruction, we read of the Narrow way that leads to Life, and of the
Broad way that leads to destruction. We read of the narrow way, but we did not
know our selves to be in that way; when we saw the Broad way that leads to
Destruction, this begat a breathing in our Souls, and an earnest desire that we
might know the way that is pleasing to him.

And there being many Opinions in the World, many of us were hurried in our
Minds, and where we saw any thing of sobriety and weightness of Spirit, we were
willing to try them all, that we might know the mind of God. Friends, God
raised a travel in our Souls, and appeared farther to us; God that Commanded
the Light to shine out of Darkness, shined into our hearts, whereby a discovery
was made of that which is good, and of that which is evil. This the Lord
discovered to us by the shining of his Divine light and grace in our inward
parts, so that we need not look abroad, we retired inward, we saw that we had
business enough at home, we saw that when we had grieved the good Spirit of God
we had trouble for it, and when we answered the breathings of the Spirit we had
peace within us; so that we must distinguish between that which gave acceptance
with God, and that whereby the Spirit of God was grieved from day to day.

Now, my Friends, we came under a travel, God by his light and grace discovered
to us his way, so that now we are come to a certainty of the way; Christ is the
way to God, and if any man be in Christ; he is a New Creature, he is born
again, born of the Spirit, you should all of you be concerned, and consider
what you know of a change wrought in you by the power of God, whether you have
received virtue from Jesus to stop the bloody issue of Sin. It is an easy
thing to make a profession, and to call your selves Christians, but it is a
weighty thing to be a Christian, to be so in reallity, united unto God through
Jesus Christ; to be a Christian is to be a follower of Christ; in the way of
Regeneration and self-denial, except a Man be Regenerate and born again he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. There are many People would go to God's
Kingdom when they die, but do not mind being prepared for it, many have been
pleading for Sin in their life, but would go to God's Kingdom when they die,
where must People be cleansed from sin but on this side the grave? there is no
Repentance in the Grave, nor no Redemption out of Hell. This is the day of your
Visitation, God has prepared means whereby we may be accepted of him, consider
of it, the gate stands open that leads to the Holy City, there is none can
enter into God's Kingdom in their desilements, their hearts must be purged,
their minds purified, they must know the work of Sanctification, if they will
enter into God's Kingdom. Now the preparation of the heart, and the answer of
the Tongue is from Lord.

I do not question but here are many tender hearted ones that have tender
desires and breathings of Soul after God, that desire to know peace with God,
and reconciliation with their Maker. Now, my Friends, there is not another
Mediator besides Jesus Christ, he is the alone Mediator and Redeemer, it is he
gave himself a Ransom for us, it is he that reconciles Man to God, and we must
be found in him if we will come to have acceptance with God; So let every one
of you consider with your selves how far you are broken off from your evil
ways, we are all by Nature Children of wrath, consider how far you are broken
off from the Wild Olive Tree, from that which is corrupt by Nature, and whether
you be grafted into Christ; If thou be grasted into him, thou receivest
strength and nourishment and ability from him, and for this end we have waited
after we have believed, we have waited for power; many a time we have traveled
many Miles to a silent Meeting, People have wondered what encouragement we could
have to travel to a silent Meeting, indeed we have had great encouragement to
meet together, and we have traveled in great hazard and jeopardy, yet we have
met together and the Lord has made us living Witnesses of the fulfilling of
that promise that where two or three are gathered together in my Name I will be
in the midst of them, this was that which beautified our Meetings, and we were
willing to wait, there was a disposition of Soul in us, that if the Lord did
hide his face from us we were troubled, if we did not enjoy the Lord, and find
him in the midst of us, it brought a great concernment upon our Minds and
Spirits, and we were willing to reflect upon our selves, and examine within our
selves what was the matter that the Fountain did not send forth its living
streams as at other times, and what the reason was it was withheld from us?

Friends, this was a great exercise upon our Minds, but the Lord graciously
manifesting himself appeared to us, causing the Cloud many times to vanish away
and the light of his Countenance shined on us, and our Spirits were revived,
and we were comforted, and this was a great encourrgement to us to wait upon
God, seeing our own weakness to perform that which is our bounden duty which
God required of us, of necessity this brought a constraint upon us to wait upon
the Lord that we might renew our strength, seeing our own weakness,
insufficiency and infirmity, there was a necessity that constrained us to wait
for a Savior, for a Redeemer, Isa. 40. 31. They that wait upon the Lord shall
renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run
and not be weary, they shall walk and not faint.

My Friends, we have need of Supplies from God every day, we have need of our
daily bread, and God gives bread to the hungry Soul, he fills the hungry with
good things, this is that we labor and travel for; now it is those that are
hungry that God takes notice of, and gives bread to, he has promised that
those that hunger and thirst after righteou^ness shall be filled. See what you
are hunting after this day, what is it that your Souls do desire, you have
presented your bodies here at this time what is it for? is it to hear what a
Man can say? to hear Eloquence of Speech, to hear some novelties, or is it your
end to wait upon God, I would have every one of you to wait for your selves,
you that have been acquainted with the manifestation of the Spirit wait in it,
feel your minds exercised toward God, wait at his Footstool, this was Mary's
choice when Martha was cumbred about many things, Mary attended at the
Footstool of Jesus. her attendance was upon him; So Friends, let us all look
unto the Lord, and wait upon him, wait for his appearance, and for his
Salvation to be manifested to us. Wait that you may know that arm of Power that
wrought tenderness in you, and did beget desires in your Souls after that which
is good; wait that you may be strengthened in that power, that you may be a
growing People, that you may grow in Grace and Virtue, that you may grow in
Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; there are
degrees of grace, and there are several statures and degrees of growth, you may
read of several statures, 1 John 2. 13. Children, young Men, and Fathers, I
have written unto you Fathers, because ye have known him that is from the
beginning, I have written unto you young men because ye are strong, and the
word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one; I write unto
you little Children, because ye have known the Father.

Now you that make a profession of the truth, see how far you are grown into
the Life of it, see how far it has prevailed so as to season your Souls and to
make you savoury to God, that you may not only stand in a profession and be
Professors of Life, but Possessors of Life, of the Life of Jesus, that you may
receive life and ability from him every day, so as to be enabled by his power
to perform what he requires of you; Now there is no more required of us but
faithfulness according to the ability of grace given, the Lord God has been
free in his Love, and has communicated to us a Tallent or Tallents. Now it is
those that are faithful in a little that he will commit more unto, but do not
expect a greater Tallent, or more to be communicated, till you have been
faithful in a little, which has already been faithful in a little, which has
already been made manifest to you; see that you be every one concerned for your
selves, mind your Travel, Lay aside every weight and burden, and the Sin which
does so easily beset you, and run with patience the Race that is set before
you, looking unto Jesus who is the Author and will be the Finisher of your
Faith; If thou do give up thy self to him, he that is the Author will be the
finisher of thy Faith, to the Joy, and Comfort of thy Soul, he will Perfect the
Work, he has begun in thee.

I would have neither Old nor Young to satisfy your selves with an outside
Profession of the truth of God, but see that you be Converted, that you be
broken off from the Wild Olive, and Ingrafted into Christ, see that there be a
through Reformation wrought in your Souls, and that you be separated from that
which is Evil; what does an outward Separation signify, if there be not an
Inward Separation, 2 Cor. 6. 17. Wherefore come out from amongst them, and be
ye separate says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive
you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters,
says the Lord Almighty; Wait upon the Lord, and know an Inward Separation, for
what will it signify to change the Name, and retain the Corrupt Nature, the
Old Nature, and to live in Pride, Vanity, Lust, Covetousness, and other
Abominations, What does it signify to make a profession of Christianity, while
People live in these sins from Day to Day, Consider how it is with you, how you
stand related to God; I do not Question but that all here make a profession of
God, and Christ, and true Godliness, that are too much like to some, that
profess God in Words, but in Works deny him, being abominable, and to every
good Work Reprobate. I would have better hopes of you that are here present;
There are many that make a profession of Christianity that are vile in their
Lives, and ungodly in their Conversations, more like Heathens, then weighty
sober solid Christians, their Lives do not speak them to be Christians, they
have the name of Christians, they are called so but their Lives speak them to
be otherwise.

Now Friends, I hope and believe, that many of you here present, do abhor those
Abominations that are acted among many that are called Christians; you that
hate and abhor these Abominations, do not you retain that which is Evil in the
least degree; but now there are some that may abhor to be seen in abominable
Pride, and yet there may be something of that Nature that does in secret
remain, and though they may seek to hide it from Men in their Profession, yet
God will find them out; If I regard Iniquity in my Heart, God will not hear my
Prayers. See that you be a clear People, a People Redeemed to God; do not halt
between two Opinions, that so you may come forth clear for God, you whose
Understandings God has opened, see that you be Preaching for God. Do not keep
correspondency with the Spirit of the World, though we may have Commerce and
Dealings among Men, Be Watchful, keep your selves from the Evil of the World,
as Christ Prayed for his Disciples 17. John 15. I Pray not that thou should
take them out of the World, but that thou should keep them from the Evil. So
that we must have a care that we partake not with them in their Sins, least we
p^rtake with them in their Plagues.

Take heed of mixtures this was an Abomination in Israel; they were not to Sow
their Land with mingled Seed or Grain, nor to wear Garments of Linen and
Woolen; Take heed of the Spirit of the World, Do not mix with it least you be
Corrupted by it, and the Enemy prevail, Sin will harden a People, the longer
they go on in a course of Sin, and the longer People take liberty in that which
is vain, the harder they will grow, and the more stupid and benumbed if they
answer not the call of God to come out of the Abomination of the World: God
calls us to Purity and Holiness, for without Holiness (says the Apostle) no
man shall see thee Lord; they shall not see God to their Comfort, to their Joy
and Consolation; see that you be found in that Holy way which God has cast up;
many Men have been casting up ways their own devising, but God has cast up a
way for the Ran^omed of the Lord, that the wayfaring man though a Fool, shall
not err therein; the Unclean Beasts have not trod in this Way; The Ransomed of
the Lord, those that are Redeemed from their Vain Conversation, these are they
that walk in this pure and Holy way, the way of Righteousness and truth; see
that you be joined to the Truth and that will be for your good, not that God
has need of us, but we have need to be reconciled to him. Man has need of
Reconciliation to God his Maker for he has gone astray from him, and has been
separated by reason of Sin, and had need be Reconciled.

Friends I would have you to prize the Mercy of God, and the day of his
Visitation, he has stretched forth his hand, and his Love and Mercy have been
extended to us; There are many good People, zealous People that have desired to
see the Days that we now see, and have not lived to see them, but have died in
the Faith of this, that God would send forth more of his Light, more of his
Grace to the Children of Men, and that the light of the Moon should be as the
light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun as the light of Seven days; many
good People that are gone to their Rest have died in the Faith of it, though
they never attained to see the days that we have seen; God has stretched forth
his hand to the Nations, and sent forth his Servants to declare the glad
tidings of Peace and Salvation to be prefected through Christ Jesus the
Mediator. Now God has made us partakers of this Grace and Blessing, Blessed be
the Lord our God, who has made a Remnant partakers of it, that have given up
their All, that they might enjoy Truth, and be Professors of the Truth, and the
Lord has preserved this Remnant through many Tribulations, ever since we have
been a People, the Love of God and his Almighty Power has surrounded us, and
he has gathered us to be a People; many of us have living experience of the
tender Mercies and Blessings of God We cannot say that he has been a bad
Master he has not laid hard things upon us, he has fe^ his Flock like a
Shepherd, he has gathered the Lambs with his Arm, and carried them in his
Bosom, and does gently lead those that are with Young, Isa. 40. 11. The Spirit
of the Lord has led us on gently, and has Instructed us according to our
Capacities, he has not laid hard matters upon us, when we were as weak
Children, but he has nourished us by degrees, and fed us with the Sincere Milk
of the Word, that we might grow thereby; that we might grow in Grace, and in
Virtue, and Goodness, that you may be strengthened in your Inward Man; the
Outward Man cannot long subsist without Food, but the Body without Food will
grow Weak and Feeble, nor can the Soul live unto God except it receive strength
and nourishment from him, who fills the hungry with good things, and sends the
Rich empty away.

Wait upon God that you may be strengthened, and enabled to perform your Duty,
and what God requires of you; Obedience is better then Sacrifice, and to obey
the Voice of the Lord, then the Fat of Rams. It is in Christ alone that we have
acceptance with God, and he is the Author of Eternal Salvation to all them that
obey him; Acceptance with God is of great value, and much to be desired, O many
an honest heart desires to have acceptance with God, and enjoy his Favor; Sin
in all Ages has made a separation between God and us, Sin has caused Man to
be driven out of the Paradise of God, Thou came unto separation by Sin, it
was Sin that separated between God and thee, Thine Iniquities have kept good
things from thee, there is Partition Wall between God and us made by Sin, but
Christ is come to break it down, and to finish Transgression and make an end of
Sin and bring in Everlasting Righteousness. This every particular Man and Woman
is to wait for, to wait for the Salvation of God, and to be in a Travel of
Spirit and Soul to know the way of truth; after the truth came to be made
manifest to our understandings, that we were at a certainty in the ways of God,
we found a straitness in our selves, a want of Power and Ability to perfom what
God required of us; a want of enlargedness from God and of Love to him;
according to the certain knowledge we have of God, let us see that we be found
Faithful to him, and wait upon him for strength and ability to perform our Duty.

Now Friends after there were good desires in our Souls, We have found our
selves at a loss, for want of watchfulness, the Enemy many times has prevailed
upon us and drawn us to things that were not convenient, whereby we came to
have distress upon us, and many times we were compassed about with sorrow and
trouble of mind, in seeing there was such a shortness in our selves after we
knew the truth, for to will was present with us, but how to perform that which
is good we found not; until we received ability from God, we found a shortness
in our selves, but we found a sufficiency when joined to the Grace of God; So
it was with the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 7 8. Least I should be exalted above
measure, (says he) through the abundance of Revelations, there was given to me
a Thorn in the Flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me, etc. For this thing
I besought the Lord thrice that it might depart from me; And he said unto me my
Grace is sufficient for th^e, for my strength is made perfect in weakness We
have had a sufficiency of Grace to withstand the motions of sin, when we came
to Christ we found him a complete Savior, that he is able to save to the
uttermost all that come unto God by him.

Be not content my Friends to sit down under bare Convictions, least your
Ca^cases fall in the Wilderness; But let all of you travel on, that you may
possess the good Land, the Land of Rest, that you may know Peace with God for
your Immortal Souls, Israel had much of Travel in the Wilderness after they
came out of the Dark Land, the Land of Egypt, now God showed many sings and
wonders for their Deliverance, he fed them and sustained them and though they
were many years in the Wilderness their Garments waxed not Old, God supplied
them with Food, and caused Manna to be Rained d^wn upon them, they did ^at
Angels Food, he ^ent them Meat to the full, so they did eat and were filled f^r
he gave them their own desire, they were not estrang^d from their Lust, but
while their m^at was yet in their Mouths, the wrath of God came upon them, and
their Carcases fell in the Wilderness; and for the hardness of their Hearts
they never attained to the Land of Rest, though they drew near to it they did
not enter into it; They hearkened not to those that brought good tidings, and
brought the Cluster of Grapes from the Brook Eschol, and said to Moses, we came
to the Land whither thou sentest us, and surely it flows with Milk and Honey,
and this is the fruit of it, Numb. 13. 30. And Caleb stilled the people before
Moses, and said let us go up at once and possess it, for we are well able to
overcome it but the men that went up with him said, we be not able to go up
against the people, for they are stronger then we, And they brought up an evil
report of the Land they had searched, saying, it is a Land that eats up the
Inhabitants thereof, and all the people that we saw in it are men of great
sta^ure; And there we saw the Giants the Sons of Anak, and we were in our own
sight as Grasshoppers. Thus they harkned to those that discouraged the People,
and their Carcases fell in the Wilderness, and they never went through Jordan
with Caleb and Joshua to possess the Land, who were Men of Noble and Excellent
Spirits and followed the Lord fully; and brought news of the good Land, saying,
the Land which we passed through to search, it is an exceeding good Land; If
the Lord delight in us then he will bring us into this Land, and give it us, a
Land which flows with Milk and Honey; only Rebel not ye against the Lord,
neither fear ye the People of the Land, for they are bread for us, their
defense is departed from them, and the Lord is with us fear them not; But all
the Congregation bad stone them with stones, Though the Lord had done
mavelous things in the sight of their Fathers in the Land of Egypt, in the
field of Zoan; He divided the Sea and caused them to pass through, he made the
Waters to stand as on heap, and they passed through the Sea as on dry Land, and
the Waters covered their Enemies, and there was not one of them left. I will
sing unto the Lord (said Moses) for he has triumphed gloriously, the Horse and
his Rider has he thrown into the Sea. Psalm. 78. 106. Psalm. 11. Exodus 15. 1.
These Faithful Men Joshua and Caleb, Remember the Lord, were not unmindful of
his Power, and the Lord subdued their Enemies, and made them as Ashes under the
soles of their Feet, and they went on and prospered, and prevailed till they
came into the possession of the good Land.

Though many fall in the way, and though thy Exercises be much, as in the
Wilderness, and though thou may many times question the way, yet God has
prepared a certain Guide for Man, the Spirit of Truth that Christ promised, 14.
John 16. And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another comforter,
that he may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of Truth, whom the world
cannot receive because it sees him not, neither knows him, but ye know him
for he dwells with you, and shall be in you. Here is a certain guide to lead
you into the way of Peace and Righteousness, wherein you shall not go astray
from God, he will bring all things to your remembrance; He will convince the
World of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment; You must know him as a
Reprover before you come to know him as a Justifier.

My Friends, God calls upon us, Turn you at my Reproof, Behold I will pour out
my Spirit upon you, I will make known my Words unto you, I have called and ye
Refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded, but ye have set at
naught my Counsel, and would none of my Reproof, 1. Prove. 23, 24. Though God
pours out his Spirit abundantly, and makes known his mind and will, yet many
hearken not to the Reproof of the Spirit of the Lord, but they harden their
Hearts, and Rebel against the Light, against Gods Spirit that striveth with
them; As Gods Spirit did strive with the Old World, so God will now be striving
with the Children of Men by his good Spirit; If they will hearken to his
Reproofs and turn at his Reproofs he will manifest himself more abundantly to
them, if People will harken to his Counsel and obey his Voice, and turn at his
Reproofs, he will make known his will to them; Woe to the R^bellious Children
says the Lord, that take Counsel, but not of ^e says the Lord, and that cover
with a covering, but not of my Spirit: Those that walk in the Spirit shall be
covered with it as with a Garment, and be led into all truth; As many as are
led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God; Try your selves what Spirit you
are of, there is a Spirit in Man, but it is the Inspiration of the Almighty
that gives understanding, God has opened the understanding of many by his
grace, and given them understanding to know him that is true, they that are led
by the Spirit of God, shall not only know his way but have their Hearts
enlarged in his way; Here is our happiness to travel on in the ways of Gods
Commandments with enlarged Hearts, God has sent forth his Light and his truth,
and has prepared a certain guide for Man, that he might not mistake his way,
as he gave to Israel a Pillar of a Cloud by Day, and a Pillar of Fire by Night,
to guide and direct them in their Traveling and Journeys in the Wilderness.

Take heed least the mystery of Inquity work in your minds and Spirits, work to
a fleshly liberty, to liberty to Sin! The Spirit of God works liberty and
freedom from Sin, and from the bondage of Corruption, not to give way to it; If
Christ has made you free, then ye shall be free indeed, where the Spirit of
the Lord is there is Liberty, a freedom from Sin; The Lust of the flesh, the
Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life they are not of the Father, but of the
World; many People Indulge the Lusts of their own mind, and embrace Pride,
Vanity and Arrogance, those things that are Evil, and so corrupt themselves,
and go out of the way of God reaching after the pleasures of the World and the
Lusts of it, Here People go astray; but by keeping to the Spirit, when a
Temptation com es to us to gratify our flesh, the Spirit of the Lord lifts up
a Standard against it; we have tried our selves and our own Spirits, and in our
own strength we could never get forward in the ways of God; we have been
convinced of it, that though our understandings have been clear to know the way
of Truth, Yet by our own striving we can never get forward, by striving in our
own Wills.

Take heed that in your striving you do not set up self, but humble your selves
to the Dust, and sit at the Feet of Jesus, learn of him to be meek and lowly,
He that is the chief among you let him be the Servant of all, do not strive for
high places, and for Honor and Dignity, and to be accounted of among Men; If we
may have the favor of God we should be content to dwell in a low place, to be
a Door keeper in the House of God, we shall think it sufficient; I doubt not
(will a Gracious Soul say) but God has a sufficiency in store for me, when so
ever he calls me out of the World; Christ Jesus my Lord is gone before to
prepare a place for me, and he has also promised, I will come again and
receive you to my self, and where I am there shall my Servants be. If Christ be
gone to prepare a place for us, we need not question our Reward, if the Spirit
of God bears witness with our Spirits that we are the Children of God; And if
Children then Heirs, Heirs of God, and Joint Heirs with Christ.

Seek Peace with the Lord, seek Reconciliation with God in the right way, there
are two ways, the way that leads to Life, and the way that leads to
Destruction; the Narrow Way, and the Broad Way; be you in that way which God
has cast up, if you are in Christ he is the way, the Truth and the Life; if
you are in Christ, you are New Creatures, consider what you know of a Change,
of Dying unto Sin, and living unto Righteousness: Put off the Old man with his
Deeds, and put on the New man, which after God is Created in Righteousness and
true Holiness. Consider, how it is with you, whether you live in Sin, or in
Holiness, and Righteousness; All Sin is of the Devil, He is the Author of Sin;
What fruit had ye in those things whereof ye are now ashamed, for the end of
those things is Death, ye were the Servants of Sin, but being made free from
Sin, ye became the Servants of Righteousness, and now being made free from Sin,
and become Servants to God, ye have your fruit unto Holiness, and the end
Everlasting Life. Here is a good change from being Servants of Sin, to be made
free from Sin, through the Mediator Christ Jesus.

Consider of it, I do not design to enlarge, you have had Testimonies upon
Testimonies, you have been put in mind of these things; you that make a
profession of the truth, there is a necessity and a constraint upon me to
Remind you of former things, of things that you have been told of and been
stirred up by the Servants of the Lord to remember, I see a necessity of
reminding you of them; there are many that are in a Profession of the truth,
that do not dwell in the life of it, they are sunk down into the form of
Godliness, but they do not mind the power of it, they do part of the Work, they
do not go through with it, they are for sparing some Sins, that they will not
mortify them; they are like Saul, they make profession of doing the Will of
God, Saul said to Samuel, blessed be thou of the Lord, I have performed the
Commandment of the Lord, 1 Samuel 15. 14. And Samuel said what means then this
bleating of the Sheep in mine Ears, and the Lowing of the Oxen which I hear;
And Saul said they have brought them from the Amalekites, for the People spared
the best of the Sheep and of the Oxen, to Sacrifice unto the Lord thy God, and
the rest we have destroyed

Now my Friends, there are many People which are willing to give themselves up
to an outward Profession of Religion, they would not be found in Profaneness in
that which is an Abomination in the sight of God, they would not be found in
Abominable Pride in the view of Gods People, they will not be seen in that
which is Abominable, and shameful Wickedness, they will keep up a Profession of
the truth that they may be without Rebuke; Though they are not so vain as to be
for the fashions of the World, yet they are of the same Nature and Spirit with
the Men of the World, and they conform themselves too much to the Vanity and
Custom, and Fashion of the World, tho they will not be seen in the height of it.

There are many other things might be mentioned, in short, I would only mention
this, whether you have not kept a secret reserve of some Sins and make a fair
pretense for the use of them, this will be a sting to you, He that loves any
thing mor than me (says Christ) is not worthy of me, He that denies me not
himself, and forsakes not all that he has for my sake he cannot be my
Disciple. When a trial comes all must be given up, and nothing vain and evil
must be reserved that is contrary to the Nature of Truth, the mind must be
subject to the Will of God, and subdued to the Power of God, there must be a
through change and Reformation, we must know a Mortification of Sin, and not do
the work only in parts, but we must go through with it. Now that we may do this
effectually God has laid help upon one that is mighty; There are many
Weaknesses and Infirmities do attend us poor Crearures, that many times we are
ready to faint; Have an Eye to Christ, let us look unto Jesus, God has laid
help upon him who is mighty, and who is able to save to the utermost, not only
from that which is vile and Contemptible, but he is a complete Savior, that
will save to the uttermost, all that come unto God by him; There is no coming
to God, or being reconciled to God but by him, and all that come to God by him
shall have complete Redemption for their Immortal Souls; He is the Author of
Eternal Salvation to all them that obey him, He is the Author and finisher of
our Faith; He that believes in Christ will submit to him, and say in sincerity
Thy will be done; It is an ordinary thing for People to say, Thy Kingdom come,
and thy Will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven. This is a good Prayer that
Christ taught his Disciples, There are many People that are often saying over
these words, but they do not give up and resign their own Wills to the Will of
God, if any trial Affliction or Exercise befall them, they are very apt to fret
and repine; If God shall take away a near and dear Friend, or a Wife or a
Child, we must quietly submit to the Will of God, who knows best how to dispose
of them whether it be by Life or Death, when God is pleased to take Children
from Parents, or Parents from Children, People must not be discontented at the
will of God, but submit to his afficting hand, God does not afflict willingly,
nor grieve the Children of Men; He is not willing that any should perish, but
that all should come to Repentance; God calls upon Sinners, 1. Isa. 16, 17.
Wosh you, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine
eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well relieve the oporessed, Judge the
Fatherless, plead for the Widow, come now and let us reason together says the
Lord, Though your Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow, though
they be Red like Crimson, they shall be as Wool; Let the Wicked forsake his
way, and the Uunrighteous Man his thoughts, and turn to the Lord, and he will
have mercy upon him, and to our God for he will abundantly pardon; see that you
accept of his mercy when it is tendered to you, and Answer when he calls, for he
calls upon the Children of Men, Return ye Backsliding Children, and I will heal
your Backslidings and love you freely; God does not delight in the Death of a
Sinner, but rather that he might turn and live, and find favor with him.

Man has a Day afforded to him by the Lord, and time and strength to do the
work of the Day, therefore Work while it is Day, for the Night comes when no
Man can Work. There is a Day and hour wherein Man is appointed to do his Work;
some are called at one hour and some at another, some are called early, some
are called at the sixth hour, and some at the eleventh hour, Now those that
come in at the eleventh, had their penny, had their reward as well as those that
bare the heat and burden of the Day, God will be rewarded of all them that
Faithfully give up themselves to him, and Answer his Call in the day of his
Visitation; He that came in at the Eleventh hour had his penny as well as he
that came in first.

Delay not my Friends, for time is precious, those that were first bidden and
made excuses, were not counted worthy to Partake of the Supper; Make not
excuses, while God works with thee by his Power join to it, and Answer when
God calls, least it happen to thee when thou art in distress, and call upon
God that he Answer thee not, and hear not thy Prayers, because when he called
thou would not hear him, Prove. 1. 24. Because I have called and ye refused,
I have stretched out my hand and no Man regarded, but ye have set at naught all
my Connsels, and would none of my Reproof, I also will laugh at your Calamity.
and mock when your fear comes, when your fear comes as desolation, and your
destruction comes as a Whirlwind, when distress and anguish comes upon you;
Then shall they call upon me but I will not Answer, they shall seek me early
but they shall not find me. The Foolish Virgins they had a Day and a time, they
made a profession, they took their Lamps, and took no Oil with them; But the
Wise took Oil in their Vessels with their Lamps, while the Bridegroom tarried
they all slumbred and slept. And at Midnight there was a Cry made, behold the
Bridegroom comes, go you out to meet him; Then all those Virgins arose and
trimmed their Lamps, and the Foolish said unto the Wise, give us of your Oil
for our Lamps are gone out; But the Wise answered saying, not so least there be
not enough for us and you, but go ye rather to them that sell and buy for your
selves, and while they went to buy, the Bridegroom came, and they that were
ready went in with him to the Marriage and the door was shut, afterward came
also the other Virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us; But he answered and
said, Verily I say unto you I know you not; Watch therefore, for ye know
neither the Day nor the hour wherein the Son of Man comes.

Friends you see the Foolish Virgins came when it was too late, therefore prize
your Day, and keep your Watch; I cannot but Admire the Mercy of God that has
extended a Day of Grace, and favor to us; God has not only striven for a
little time, but has continued striving; Take heed that you harden nor your
Hearts in this Day of your Visitation, least it be said to to thee, The Harvest
is past, and the Summer is ended and thou not saved; Work out your Salvation
with fear and trembling, for it is God that works in you to will and to do of
his own good pleasure; While it is the good pleasure of God to work upon thy
Heart, give up thy self in Holy Obedience to him even while the good Spirit of
God moves upon the face of the Waters; The Day of your Visitation is not yet
over, yield up your selves to the striving of Gods Spirit that you may be found
a willing People in the Day of his Power; There is Balm in Gilead, there is a
Physician of Value there; Prize the Love and Mercy, and forbearance and long
suffering of God, and bless God that has not cut thee off in thy Sin, and in
the midst of thy Iniquites, and that thou have not thy Portion with Hypocrites,
where there is weeping and wailing and gnashing of Teeth.

His Prayer after Sermon.
Most Blessed and Holy Lord God, thou art full of Grace, thou art the same
yesterday, thou art the same to day, and thou remainest the same unchangeable
God for ever; unchangeable in thy Nature, and unchangeable in thy Love; Thou
have not said to the Seed of Jacob seek ye my Face in vain; Where thy People
have been gathered, there thy Presence has been; Where two or three have met
together in thy Name, thou have been in the midst of them, thou have not been
wanting to us when we have called upon thee, but have been a present help unto
us in the needful time, when we have been under Trials and Exercises, and when
Troubles and Temptations have come upon us like a Flood, thou have been with us
in all our Conflicts, and covered our Heads in the Day of Battle, and stood by
us, and preserved us by thy Almighty Arm. Thou art a Gracious and Merciful God
and have regard to the Work of thy hands, We commit our Souls to thee as into
the hands of a Faithful Creator, We pray thee watch over us and go a long with
us, and when we are ^ parated from one another, Let us not be separed from
thee; Everlasting God of Glory, let thy presence be with us and accompany us,
and lead us into the way wherein thou would have us to walk, and enlarge
every one of our ^ea^^s ^o follow hard after thee; O Infinite Everlasting God
of Glory, Prosper thy Servants in t^^r Labors and Travel, to whom thou have
given any abilities to speak in thy Name, that they may declare thy truth as it
is in Jesus, and deliver the whole Counsel of God to thy People; O Sanctify
those Mercies thou have vouchsafed to us at this time, and the blessed
privilege we have had in meeting together to be partakers of thy Grace and
Favor, We thank thee for thy unspeakable Love in giving thy Beloved Son to die
for us, and to Redeem us from all Iniquity; We desire to Magnify and bless thy
Name, that thou have drawn near to us when we have drawn near to thee; and that
thou have beautified our Assemblies with thy Living Presence, We desire in all
Humility to Walk before thee, with a single Heart, and an upright Mind, and
that we may give thee for all thy Mercies and Blessings through the Son of thy
Love, the Lord Jesus Christ, Praise, Honor, and Glory, and Thanks giving, not
only at this time, but so Ever, and Ever, for thou alone O Lord art Worthy, who
art God over all Blessed, for ever more. Amen.

A SERMON, Preached by Mr. WILLIAM PENN. Upon occasion of the Death of Mrs.
Rebecca Travers, an Aged Servant of God; June 19 1688.
TIMES and Seasons pass away, but the Word of the Lord endures for ever, And
it is that which has been the Root of Life to the Heritage of God in all Ages
and Generations, that from whence their Joy and Hope always sprung, that in
which their Faith was finished; It was their Alpha, and it was their Omega. In
this the Righteous begun and set forth, and by this they were preserved in
their Heavenly Race, till they came to their great end, the prize of their High
Calling, the Heaven of Everlasting Rest, after all the Storms and Tempests of
time; It was this they had their Eye to in the beginning, and it was their Joy
that opened in the Eternal Word, by which they were Quickened and Revived, and
that caused them to endure to the end without fainting, and you shall likewise
by patient continuance in well doing in due time Reap if you faint not. It was
the Word of God to the Children of God of Old, and it is his Word in this Day
to us you shall Reap if you faint not. Blessed are you that are called into the
Vineyard you shall have an Everlasting Harvest, If you faint not now, you shall
Reap then, What shall you Reap? Vanity and Vexation of Spirit and
disappointment. No, you shall Reap Glory Honor, Immortality, and Eternal Life.

So Friends though every Day we have Renewed occasions of remembering our latter
end, yet there is that which never shall have end has dawned unto us, which
has been presented to our View in this glorious day of our Visitation; if we
lift up our Eyes to it, and have regard to it in our rising up and lying down,
in our going out and coming in, and in all we put our hands unto, and if we
place our Interests and Portion therein, then our minds will be established,
and we shall not be ashamed now, nor blush before the Lord hereafter. If our
Hearts condemn us not, we shall have boldness before God.

So shall all Travelers that have regard to the Word of Truth while they are
in their Heavenly Pilgrimage; They set their Faces Sion ward, and go on not
Fainting, not Doubting, not desponding, they have an Eye to the Lord Jesus
Christ, and have their Hearts kept by that Word that abides for ever; Their
Belief and Hope is beyond Time, fixed upon that which God has owned to be his
Word before the World was, and shall be when Time and this World shall be no
more; The outward Garment which shall be worn while it last, shall then be put
off; Blessed are they that know the White Linen, that which is whole and all
of a piece, that God gives to his Children that Love the Lord Jesus in
Sincerity who is the Resurrection and the Life; He that comes to know and
experience this, The Second Death shall have no Power over him.

Now this change is not only in the Outward Man but in the Inner Man, there is
a putting off that which is Fading, Mortal and perishing, and a being Clothed
upon with Immortality, and Glory Blessed are they which come to receive that
Word of God, which has been the Life of God in our Souls, This is a Day of
Life to us; Blessed are they that shall be placed in that Eternal Kingdom, and
Region where all Time shall be swallowed up, and all Tears wiped from their
Eyes and sighing, and sorrow shall be no more; O Friends lift up your Heads for
the Day of your Redemption draws nigh; That you may not be shaken with every
Wind of Doctrine, know that the Foundation of God stands sure, that is his
Word that was in the beginning with God, that Word that was God, in this
Eternal Word which is God, know you dwelling and Habitation, and wait upon God
in it; it was David's Buckler, his Shield and strong Tower, it was his Rock, God
set his Feet uyon a Rock that is higher than Man's Power, and all Man's Wisdom
and Strength; In this the Righteous begin, in this they Travel on; Blessed are
they that walk by Faith, that Live to the Lord, and Dye in the Lord, and shall
be for ever with the Lord. They are blessed that wait upon the Lord for a sense
of this, They are above all the Changes of time and Mortality.

It is this that was a Reviving Cordial to our Deceased Friend, who received
the Truth in early Days, the Days of the Dawning of Gods Power in this Land,
and in this City, the Remembrance of it was sweet to her Soul; let us Remember
the Love of God, and the Power and Glory of the Name of the Everlasting God
that shined then, that we may be encouraged to keep together as a peculiar
People to the praise of him that has called us out of Darkness into his
Mavelous Light; That God over all may be Glorified for ever, that we may live
to the Honor of his blessed Name; That Christ's Kingdom may be set up among us,
and that Gods great Name and Power, and Majesty may be exalted, and all flesh
abased before him.

We are Travelers here in this Vale of Tears, in this Earthly Pilgrimage into
the Land of Rest the Heavenly Canaan; Let us follow our Blessed Joshua that is
leading us into that Land of Promise, and he will give to every one his Lot,
and they shall stand in that Lot at the last day; O Blessed are they that are
waiting for their Lot and Portion in that Heavenly Country to which Abraham
had his Eye, that City the New Jerusalem the Mother of us all, and that House
not made with hands Eternal in the Heavens whose Builder and Maker is God.

This Word which I have been speaking of is that by which we are humbled and
bowed before the Lord and Instructed in Judgment and Righteousness; To this
Word which is God, I Commit and Commend you and all the Flock of God, that you
may be preserved to the end of your Days, that you may then lay down your Heads
in Peace, that your Testimony may not end before your Lives end, that the Lord
may be with us to shelter and overshaddow us in the midst of all our Trials and
Exercises, while we are following Christ in Patience, Humility, and self
denial, and bearing his Cross, for no Cross no Crown. That which is pleasing to
God is walking by Faith, What is this Faith? A pure resolution of Living to
God, in a Holy dependence on him, and a committing our selves entirely to him,
that so we may know and enjoy the purifying Virtue of his Word, that we may not
offend God, for without Faith faith the Apostle, it is impossible to please
him; By what means (says the Royal Psalmist) shall a young man cleanse his
Way? by taking heed thereto according to thy Word, This is the Blessed Word
that has been a Root of Life in all Ages, let us abide in this Word to the end
of our days, and we shall then be blessed with that Life which shall never end,
but shall remain when time shall be no more.

The Lord preserve you by his Mighty power in his Favor and Divine Presence,
that you may live to his Glory and Praise, and Die in Peace, and be gathered
into that blessed and Heavenly Assembly, and Church of the Firstborn which are
written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and the Spirits of Just men made
perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, and the Blood of
Sprinkling that speaks better things than that of Abel; That you may
Eternally Magnify and Celebrate the praises of the Eternal God, to whom be
Glory for Ever, and Ever, Amen.

A SERMON Preached by Mr. WILLIAM PENN. At Wheeler-Street, April 13. 1694.
IT is the Great Cause and Work of God in which you are all concerned this day,
Now that all of you may see how you quit your selves before the Living Eternal
God your Maker, and Answer the Visitations of his Love in the discharge of your
Duty, that you may feel an Answer of Peace in your own Bosoms, and find your
selves nigh who were afar off, that you may all know your selves nerer then
when ye first believed, nearer to the Lord, nearer to his Love, and more in his
Favor, that you may perceive your Interest to grow and increase your Divine,
your Eternal Interest, that which will out-last the World for it Centers in
that which shall never have an end; O Friends, see to it this Day, it is the
Redemption of your Immortal Souls, that the Lord God has visited you for, it
is in order to this; And all the Religions in the World, Articles, Creeds,
Confessions and Professions that leave out this, they are all Imperfect and
insignificant and will not avail Men in the Great Day of Account.

Therefore see to it how the Work goes on, the Work of your Redemption and
Salvation, Do you feel your selves near to the Lord? Do you find your selves to
have more Power over your Souls? Do you know your selves advanced in the Work
of God? Are ye come to dye daily to that which is contrary to the Lord? For as
you dye daily, you live that Life, you Live in the Flesh by the Faith of the
Eternal Son of God Christ Jesus, who has Redeemed you from all Iniquity, and
called you to Glory and Virtue.

Now that you may all be Faithful Stewards of the Grace and Mercy, and Heavenly
Talents which God has bestowed upon you, and be all found working, not Idle in
the Market Place; Christ Jesus the Lord has not been wanting to you, He has
Piped to you, have you Danced? He has mourned have you wept? He has called,
have you Answered his Call? See to it this Day, for the glorious Power and
Presence of that God that visited you in the beginning, is here this Day. It is
his Heart-reaching Power, his Heart-melting Power, his Divine sweet Presence
which brought us out of Pharoah's House, and out of Egypt's Land, and took us
by the hand and led us peaceably to walk by the Rivers of Gods Pleasures; I
say, see to it this day that you may answer the great Love of God, that the
Lord does vouchsafe his Heavenly Presence in the midst of you, and lift up the
Light of his Countenance upon you, that ye may be found answering his Love in
his renewed Blessings, that as he renews his Mercies, you may renew your
Obedience, and as he renews his Loving kindness, you may renew your
Thankfulness, that your Souls may be filled with high Praises, for it is a Day
of Praises for the Lord, they who have obtained a Deliverance by Gods mighty
Arm and Power, that brought his People out of Egypt's Land into the Wilderness,
and through the Red Sea and over Jordan's River, unto the Banks of Salvation,
they who have received a mavelous Deliverance from their Spiritual Enemies,
they do not hang their Harps upon the Willows but Rejoice and Praise the Living
God, they resolve with the Prophet, Although the Figtree shall not blossom,
neither shall Fruit be in the Vine, the Labor of the Olive shall fail, and the
Fields shall yield no Meat, the Flock shall be cut off from the Fold, and there
shall be no Herd in the Stalls, and although there be Plague. Sword, Fire,
Desolation and Destruction: Yet we will rejoice in the Lord, we will joy in the
God of our Salvation. Is it so with you this Day? Are you come into this Divine
Fellowship, into this Intimacy with the Lord, have you this Holy Frame of Soul?

O ye Sons and Daughters of the Morning, the Everlasting Day of God has dawned
upon you, that you may look into your Hearts, and see how it is with you, and
see your experiences, see the things that your Eyes have seen, and your hands
have handled; You have tasted the good Word of God, and known the Operation of
his Power, these are things that they have that are Children, not empty Notions
but Experiences; If we travel on we shall be enabled to overcome, and if we
take unto us the whole Armor of God, we shall be enabled to stand in the Evil
Day, and having done all to stand, and what is the reward of them that
overcome? they shall eat of the Fruit of the Tree of Life, that grows in the
Paradise of God, as many as are fed from this Tree, they are not to be standing
Idle, but Work the Works of God, and are brought into the Paradise of God, and
enjoy the Delights of God in the Presence of God, and the Lord will fill and
satisfy them with his Divine Goodness, and they shall grow and increase in the
Divine Life more and more.

Consider how does the Work go on? Consider the Lord Jesus he came in our
Natures, before he comes into our Hearts: Now Christ Jesus within us is the
Hope of Glory, and the Mystery that was hid from Ages and Generations is now
Revealed in us, Christ is now come, not only into our Natures bu^ into our
Hearts, into our Inward man; and all those at the Door of whose Hearts he has
knocked, If they have opened to him and received him, He has come to Sup with
them, and he has given them the Bread of Life, and the Cup of Salvation, and
they have come into Divine Fellowship with him, and so they have eaten his
Flesh, and drunk his Blood, and fed upon that Bread that comes down from
Heaven; and all that open the Door and let him in, they come to eat of this
Bread, and they come to see him that is the Desire of all Nations, and the
Light of the World, and they walk in his Light.

This is an Ancient Testimony, when you were first turned to the Light of
Christ, it was not a Natural but a Divine Light that you were turned to, the
Light of Jesus manifesting himself in us, in this Light you received him, and I
desire to know what you have tasted, what surther Joy is there? What more
excellent object, what more excellent mark than this? then the Light of the
Nations that we are come to walk in?

Here is Divinity, here is that which was before the World began, here is made
known the Divine Nature. It is testified here that you might be partakers of
it, that you might be a chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, a Holy Nation, a
Peculiar People that you should show forth the Praises of him who has called
you out of Darkness into his mavelous Light; see how this Work advances in
every one of you, that you may be faithful and improve your Tallents, that you
may be able to give up your account to the Lord with Joy, and not with Grief;
When you shall hear a Voice saying, Come, come away There is no more Time, the
Glass is Run, then how joyfully will thou hear that Voice, if thou have not
been Idle but Working out thy Salvation, and answering the Call of God, and
adoring him for his Love to thy Immortal Soul: thou art not like Martha cumbred
about many things, but mindest the one thing needful, that good part that shall
not be taken away from thee. If you thus Work out your Salvation, it will be
said unto you Well Done, not Well Taught, not well Disputed, but, Well Done
good and faithful Servants, enter you into the Joy of your Lord

My Friends, Time goes apace, and we are wearing off, and in a little while we
shall be here no more; Time will be gone, and the Day of your Visitation
quickly over, the Thought and Consideration of this has affected me many a
time; Look Friends that you be all traveling on in your Heavenly Journey as a
faithful people, and that the Work of your Salvation is carrying on, and that
is Christ is a Redeemer to you, and that he does deliver you from the Dominion
of Sin and the Bondage of Corruption, Art thou free? who has made thee free?
If the Truth has made thee free, If the Son of God has made thee free then
art thou free indeed. If thou art made free, thy Knowledge will be accompanied
with experience, and not notions only; you want not notions but Possession of
Inward freedom and liberty; Does your knowledge of Truth make you free from
Sin; Oh the tumblings and tossings that thy Soul was in! Oh the Covenant
making, and the Covenant breaking, there was no Peace, no Rest because you were
fallen, and because you did not know Dominion and Victory over Sin, which is
only by the Life and Spirit of Christ Jesus which will lead you into the Path
of obedience, then you will know that in Christ there is Life and this Life is
the Light of Men, and the Light shines in Darkness and the Darkness
comprehends it not; you have Life only in Christ, and you have it in him as
in the Fountain, this you must know, that you may be delivered from sin; By
this saving knowledge of Christ and Believing in him the All-sufficient
Savior, you will come to Reign as Kings and Priests, and sit with him in
Heavenly places. This will bring you to the General Assembly and Church of the
First born which are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the
Spirits of Just Men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New
Covenant, and to the Blood of Sprinkling that speaks better things than that
of Abel. Whatsoever your hand finds you to do, do it with all your might, and
work out your own Salvation with Fear and Trembling. Live as those that are
concerned for Heaven and Eternity: Be Faithful and Diligent in your Generation,
that you may be Rich toward God, Rich in the Love of God, and in Peace with
God, These are Heavenly Treasures, which Moth and Rust cannot corrupt, nor
Thieves break through nor steal from you. Walk in the way of Righteousness, and
in the Paths of Judgment, that you may have your fruit unto Holiness, and the
end Everlasting Life.

My Friends, that which should exercise your Minds, and which all should have
an Eye unto, is this, that your Hearts be fixed upon God, and your Affections
set upon things above, that walking in the Spirit, you may beled by the Spirit
of God, as the Children of God, and Heirs of God, to the Inheritance above
where you shall be for ever with the Lord.

Friends, This is my Exhorration to you, that you will keep near to the Lord,
and Live under his Guidance and Government, and Rely upon Christ alone for
Salvation, and live in the Light as becomes Children of Light; Trust to nothing
that will fail you in the Day of your Dissolution, for then you will be under
an Everlasting disappointment, see that it be a true Foundation that you build
upon, and see what it is that you build upon it, that it be not Hay and Stubble
that cannot stand the Fire; Build upon a Right Foundation, the Eternal Word of
God, and build right things upon it, That you may be always under the Guidance,
and Power, and Government of the Blessed Spirit of the Living God, that the
Exercise and desire of your Hearts be toward the enjoyment of his Living
Presence, of his pure Power, and quickening Spirit. This is a Building which
will abide the Fire, This is a Building upon a Right Foundation; What is that?
The Light of the Lord, the Lord Jesus Christ who is the Light of the World,
here is the Right Foundation, let us be found in him, and keep close to the
Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Author of Eternal Salvation to all them that obey
him. This is the way to be preserved.

You that have got into a good state and condition keep in it, and live near to
the Lord, and you will feel his Daily, his Refreshing Presence, and his
Assisting Power to carry you on, and conduct you in your Travel and P^grimage,
that you may not faint in the way but in the end Reap the Crown of Immortal
Glory, that God has laid up for those that fear him.

My Friends ^e was the Glorious Light of the Lord, and the (...) of the ^^ving
E^^rnal God, by which you were (...) in your Early Days, Nay ^^ the (...) we
have often had in this (...) good Spirit of the Lord, and the (...) Lue (...)
among us, Praised and (...) be the Lords Everlasting Power that (...) bee^
extended to us; The Lord Grant that that (...) was our Alpha may be our Omega,
that that which began to turn our Hearts and Minds God ^^d, may ^atch over us,
and continue with us, that we may be kept as an experienced People, a Holy
Pecu^^ar People Z^alous of good Works, that God may have all the Honor and
Praise, to whom it belongs, who is God over all who is worthy to be Praised,
Adored, and Magnified by us and all his People henceforth and for ever and
ever, Amen.

The Prayer after Sermon.
MOST Glorious and Infinite God of Heaven and Earth, in thy great and
unspeakable Mercy thou Vifitest the Children of Men, and extendest thy Love
from one Generation to another, and yet in this Age in which we live thy Day of
Grace and Mercy reaches unto our Souls, and we have been called by thee unto
Righteousness and Holiness, that so it might be well with us when we shall be
removed out of this World, and be no more seen of Men. Everlasting God, If we
consider aright thy dealing toward us, the exceeding Riches of thy Grace in
Christ Jesus, It may provoke us and constrain us to Love thee, and fear thee,
and serve thee in our Generation; Lord thy Visitation has been effectual upon
the Hearts of many of the Children of Men who are Devoted to thy fear and
service, and give up themselves to Worship thee in the Beauties of Holiness,
Lord thou have Gathered a People to thy self, and thou have brought them
through many trials and Exercises, and resined them by a Spirit of Judgment,
and they have been Baptized with the Holy Ghost and with Fire, O Lord God of
Life, thy Mercy is exceeding great and thy Love unspeakable in all the
Dimensions of it, we pray thee that thou will be pleased to grant according to
the Riches of thy Glory that we may all be strengthened with might by thy
Spirit in our inner man, that Christ may dwell in our Hearts by Faith; that we
being rooted and grounded in Love, may be able to comprehend with all Saints
what is the Breadth, and Depth, and Height, and length, and to know the Love of
Christ which passes knowledge that we may be filled with all the fullness of
God; Blessed Father of Mercies, deliver us from this present evil World, and
the corruptions and pollutions that are in it; let us not live as the Children
of this World, as those that are of it, but as those that are of it, but as
those that are hasting out of it to the coming of the Day of God, and help us
to grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ who
has Redeemed us from all Iniquity, not with corruptible things as Silver and
Gold, but with his own precious Blood us of a Lamb without blemish and without
spot, that we might live to him that Died for us; and be holy in all manner of
Conversation; O Let the Lion of Tribe of Judah deliver us from that Roaring
Lion of Hell that goes about seeking to Devour us; make it our Delight O God to
do thy Will, and let thy Law be written in our Hearts, that by patient
continuance in well-doing, we may seek for honor, glory, Immortality and
eternal Life, and that while we are engaged in the Christian Warfare we may
take unto us the whole Armor of God, and resist the Devil, and overcome the
World, and be more than Conquerors through Christ that has loved us, that
having fought the good fight of Faith, we may lay hold on Eternal Life; And
Blessed and Heavenly Father, for all thy abounding Mercies and Blessings
vouchsafed to us and all thy People, and for the refreshing we have had from
thy Presence in our present Meeting, we desire to render Praise, Honor, Renown
and Thanksgiving to thy Great and Excellent Name, for thou alone art worthy,
who art God over all blessed for ever and ever, Amen.

A SERMON Preached by Mr. CHARLES MARSHAL. At the Close of a Meeting, in
Grace-Churchstreet. March 11. 1693. With his Prayer after Sermon.
My Friends,
THE Testimony which lives in my Soul at this time is unto the excellency of
the Love of God in Christ Jesus; which Love is indeed ^ncomprehensible and
unspeakable, the Love of the Everlasting God through his Beloved Son Christ
Jesus; which because of the hardness of the Hearts of Men, and for want of
understanding, and of a feeling Heart, and of a perceiving mind, many of the
Children of Men have not the Knowledge of; Herein was the greatness and
extensiveness of the Love of God unto mankind in sending his Son into the
World, who came from the Bosom of the Father, that he that knew no Sin might be
made Sin fo^us, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him; O the
Wonderful Mystery of the Incarnation of Christ Jesus, Great is the Mystery of
Godliness, God manifest in the Flesh, The Professors of this Age have been
strangely ^gnorant of it, and have been ready to reflect on those that Admire
it and have an high esteem of it.

But blessed be the Lord our God that we can say in Truth that we have an
esteem of that one offering of the Eternal Son of God, that we can say as the
Apostle did in his Day. By one offering he has perfected for ever them that
are Sanctified; This is that which has opened upon my Soul this Morning; The
Lord God of Glory in this Age and Generation has laid a necessity upon us to
Preach Christ under the Denomination of a glorious Light, for he is the Light
of the World and the only Savior and so we are to have Faith in him.

The Apostles made it their Work to persuade the People from Morning to
Evening, that Jesus was the Christ, the true Mesiah, that made a good
Confession before Pontius Pilate, and that he was Crucified, Died, and Rose
again, and ascended up into Heaven, and sits at the Right hand of God, and
lives for ever to make Intercession for us; This was the Labor, Travel and
Exercise of the Apostles to Preach Christ Crucified and Risen from the Dead,
But the Jews Assembled with the Chief Priests, and Elders to take Counsel
together, and gave large Money to the Soldiers, saying, say ye his Disciples
came by Night, and stole him away while we slept; This was the Labor of the
Apostles, and Servants of the Lord, to persuade the People in their Day that
Jesus was the Christ, and that after he was Crucified and Died, he was risen
from the Dead, but the Jews, the Scribes and Pharisees they did oppose this, and
said he was not the Promised Messiah; But in process of time through the
powerful Preaching of the Gospel, the Children of Men did Receive and believe
this Testimony, that Jesus was the Christ, the Eternal Son of God and only
Savior, and when the Enemy could no longer withstand that Belief, when it came
over the Nations, then the People were turned about, and then there was an
Admission of that Belief that Jesus was the Christ, and many contented
themselves with the bare Name of Christ, and with a Profession of the Word,
without the Power.

But the Lord of Glory has raised a People in this Age and Generation, as
Instruments that might show forth the Power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ
Spiritually, not thereby denying or not in the least opposing his manifestation
bodily, which died without the Gates of Jerusalem, for this was the end of his
manifestation, For this purpose, says the Apostle, was the Son of God
manifested that he might destroy the Works of the Devil.

So that now Friends, That which opens and lives in my Soul, and that which I
have to say, and demonstrate to you at this time is this, That the Lord God of
Heaven and Earth, has raised up a People in our Day to Preach Christ under
that Denomination, that the Servants of the Lord Preached Christ in former
Days, Ages and Generations; They gave testimony on this wise, In the beginning
was the word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, the same was in
the beginning with God, all things were made by him, and without him was not
any thing made that was made, in him was Life and that Life was the Light of
Men, and the Light shined in Darkness, and the Darkness comprehended it not.
There was a man sent from God whose Name was John, the same came for a Witness,
to bear Witness of that Light, that all men through him might believe, He was
not that Light but was sent to bear Witness of that Light, that was the true
light that Lights every man that comes into the World, he was in the World
and the World was made by him, and the World knew him not, He came to his own,
and his own received him not; But as many as received him to them gave he Power
to become the Sons of God to them that believe on his Name.

Did the Apostle John that gave Testimony of Christ, as the Light of the World,
oppose his Appearance in that Body that was prepared for him of the Father to
do his Will in? No, no more then the Apostle Paul who Preached his Spiritual
Appearance, and manifestation, opposed his bodily Appearance, and being
manifest in Flesh, when he says, The Grace of God which brings Salvation has
appeared to all men, teaching us that Denying, Ungodliness, and Worldly Lusts,
we should live soberly, righteously, and Godly in this present World; No more
do we deny or oppose Christ's bodily appearance, who Died without the Gates of
Jerusalem; Though we are misunderstood, and misrepresented by many in this
Generation; The Lord in mercy by his Heavenly power remove this
misunderstanding and take away this Vail from the Hearts of the Children of
Men, and so bring them to a sense and knowledge of the Spiritual Appearance of
Christ Jesus, and the blessed end of his coming in that blessed body wherein he
suffered, and tasted Death for every man, not that any man might live in Sin,
because he dyed a Sacrifice for Sin; He did not dye for Sin that men should
live in Sin, but that they might dye to Sin and live to God, so likewise we do
not Preach any thing opposite to Christ's appearance in that blessed Body who
was God manifest in the Flesh, for therein he wrought Salvation for us, He is
the Captain of our Salvation, and was made Perfect through sufferings, He is
the First begotten of the Dead, the Prince of the Kings of the Earth that has
loved us, and cleanses us from our Sins ^n his own blood.

The Lord open the understandings of the Children of men, that they may come to
know the Excellency of his Life and love; When the Lord comes to open and
manifest to the Children of Men, his great Love in sending his Son out of his
Bosom in the fullness of time to dye for us (for Christ had a being before the
World began) when Men's Eyes and Hearts I say are wonderfully opened to see this
Love of God, then their Hearts will be melted and broken, and their prejudices
removed, and they will be brought to the Obedience and Service of God.

We own the Doctrine of the Life and Death. Resurrection, and Ascension, and
Intercession of Christ Jesus; And for any to say we den^ this, how inconsistent
is it with what we have Preached and declared, and how shameless is it for any
to misrepresent or falsely Charge us with the contrary, since we have g^^e
through many Exercises, and suffered many Persecutions, Buffetings and
Imprisonments, for Declaring the Truth as it is in Jesus, so that if in this
Life only we had hope, we were of all men most miserable; And if Christ be not
risen from the Dead our Preaching is vain, and your Faith is also vain.

We have spoken the Truth according to the Scriptures of Truth, yet how have
the Children of Men been prejudiced against us; How many have been bewildred
and led into Error, and into misapprehension concerning what we have plainly
declared among you.

And now to give a little ease to my Spirit, I would speak something briefly to
you, let the Love of God in Christ Jesus extended to you affect your Hearts, if
you are in the living sense of this love, it will engage you to live in
Obedience and subjection to this Heavenly Light, by which you were brought out
of Darkness, and Redeemed from Iniquity to be a peculiar People, Zealous of
good Works; It will engage you to live to Christ that died for you; and as you
know a Translation from the Kingdom of Darkness into the Kingdom of God's dear
Son, you will Reap the Fruits and benefits of his Death, Resurrection and
Ascension, and Intercession at God's Right hand; The Lord God of Heaven and
Earth open all your Hearts, that while you have a little time, and are on this
side the Grave, and on this side Eternity, you may serve the Lord in your
Generation, and fulfill his blessed Will and finish the Work which he has given
you to do, that you may Glorify the Name of the Lord God of Heaven and Earth,
who is worthy of all Praise, Glory, and Renown Worship^ Love, Service, and
Obedience, who is God over all Blessed for Ever, and Ever, Amen.

His Prayer after Sermon.
MOst Glorious Heavenly and Divine Fountain of Love and Life, who have let us
see the beginings of thy Excellent Day, and participiate of thy Love in making
bare thine Arm of Salvation, which thou have Revealed and made bare in our Age.
O God of Glory and Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth, it is in the Power of
thy hand to open the Hearts of thy People, as thou did open the Heart of
Lydia, that the things that belong to the Peace of every Soul may be seen,
known and experienced. Lord God of Glory, our Eyes are unto thee, and our Souls
are bowed before thee, for the showing of mercy, and the handing forth of the
blessings, which thou promised'st to the Children of Israel, by the mouth of
thy Holy Prophets; That thou living Father of Life, wilt bless them in turning
every one from their Iniquities and the Evil of thtir ways; for Lord God of
Life, this is greatly wanting both in this City, and throughout the whole
Nation; Thy mercies and Favors have been received by many, and thy loving
kindness has extended it self wonderfully; O Glorious Fountain of Heavenly
Love and Life, be pleased to remove that Insensibility that is ready to come
over the minds of men, that the nearer thy Wrath and Judgments do approach to
us, by reason of that Inundation of Sin, and Wickedness that overflows the
Land, the less Sense and Apprehension there is of it; Lord open the Peoples
Eyes and Hearts that they may see, and consider the danger of their State and
Condition, and be humbled for their Sin, and seek thy Face, and turn to thee
with all their Hearts, that, Glorious God of Life, the Souls of thy Children
may be affected with thy Goodness, Patience and Long-suffering, that this may
be the blessed effect of thy Goodness, that it may lead all to Repentance never
to Repented of, that we may mourn before thee, for the manifold Sins and
Transgressions of the Land, against thy Divine Majesty; That, Glorious God of
Love, and Life, we may not again provoke thee to anger; O Rend the Vail of
Darkness that is spread over this Land, that it may not hinder the bright beams
of Gospel Light from shining, nor the Children of Men from seeing their
Spiritual State and Condition; Lord God of Life, let trembling and astonishment
take hold of the wicked, that they may have a deep sense of the Sins, and
Provocations this ungrateful Land is guilty of that they may lament and mourn
before thee O Lord; O Tender God of Love, and Life thy mercy and loving
kindness was extended to the Inhabitants of Niniveh, that great City wherein
were more then Six score thousand persons that could not discern between their
Righthand and their Left; Did thou not enlighten their minds, and melt their
Hearts when thou had a Controversy with them, and denounced'st Judgment by
thy Prophet against them; Did not the Mighty come down from their Seats, and
the King from his Throne, and lay his Robe from him, and the Nobles and all the
People of the Land did they not all put on Sackcloth and sit in Ashes, and
mourn before thee, and Cry mightily to thee, and turned from their evil ways?
and thou did turn away thy Wrath, and Repent of the Evil which thou said
thou would do unto them, and did it not, but extended'st thy mercy and
favor to them, and saved'st them with a great Salvation; Blessed Lord thou art
our God, O save us, for we have none in Heaven but thee, and none upon Earth
that we can desire in Comparison of thee, we have none to make our moan to but
thy self, our Eyes and Hearts are toward thee; Let us hearken to thy Counsel,
and turn at thy Reproof, and let sorrow take hold of their Hearts tha^ have
rejected thy Favors and Mercies; O give Repentance unto Life, that thy wrath
may not wax ho^ against the Nation, and the Inhabitants thereof, and that thy
Fury and Jealousy may not Consume and burn them up; O make them sensible of
the Sins that have been committed, and of the misery they have deserved, that
they may come to thee for Pardon and Reconciliation with thee through the Lord
Jesus Christ, and let not any content themselves with a bare Profession of
Christ, and the name of Christians, but make us Christians indeed, true
Israelites, in whom their is no Guile; We pray thee, let the Power of Godliness
shine forth in our Hearts and Lives, let none be found among us that Crucify
to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to open shame, and trampl^
upon the Blood of the Covenant, and do despite to the Spirit of Grace; Bring
such, we beseech thee, to true Repentance as have made light of Christ and
Salvation, that they may seek thee while thou may be found, and call upon
thee while thou art near; Glorious God of Lise and Love, thine Eye is over all
thy People at this time, and their condition is known to thee; and the living
sense which thou have given thy Servants of the state and condition of thy
People, makes them humble Mourners before thee, and and does bow down their
Spirits in thy sight. O Lord God of Glory, let not thy wrath and Indignation
break forth like Fire against the People of this Land, but look down with an
Eye of Compassion from the Throne of thy Glory, and make bare thy Victorious
Arm, and make them a willing People in the Day of thy Power, that they may be
moved and excited to Repent, and turn to thee, and cease from their vain
Conversation, and serve thee in sincerity, and in the beauties of Holiness; Let
the Spirit of Life quicken them that ar^ dead in Sins and Trespasses, and
remove the Stupidity, Darkness, and Ignorance of those that are strangers to
thee, and know not the things that belong to their Peace, and open their Hearts
and Minds that they may know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou
have sent. And O tender Father of Life, thou art at this Day threatening this
Nation, and shaking thy Rod over the Land of our Nativity, cause the
Inhabitants thereof to humble themselves under thy mighty hand, and bow before
thee, and to consider how fearful a thing it is to fall into the hands of the
living God If thy wrath be kindled but a little, blessed are all they that put
their trust in thee, Blessed God of Glory, Whom have we in Heaven but thee? And
there is none upon Earth that can help like thee, thy loving kindness is better
than Life, and thy displeasure more terrible than Death; When thou hidest thy
Face we are troubled, but when thou liftest up the Light of thy countenance
upon us, and smilest upon our Souls, and with a Ray of thy excellent Glory
shining on us, speak peace unto us, and openest a Door for us into the
secret of thy Presence, then we are filled with Joy unspeakable, and satisfied
as with Marrow and Fatness, then we dwell safely as in the Munition of Rocks.
Most Glorious excellent Fountain of Divine Goodness, be present with all thy
People, keep them as the Apple of thine Eye, under the shadow of thy Wings,
and in all their solemn Assemblies when they meet together to Worship thee, O
Lord meet with their Souls, and let them see that thou Rulest, and art present
in the midst of them, who art the Fountain of living Waters to those that
thirst for thee, the living God; Let them in their Assembling together drink of
the Brook of Shilo, which runs with pleasant streams, and there let them find
Refreshment to their Souls, we pray let them see the great design of thy love
to them in that thou sendest them plentiful supplies from Heaven, and give
the streams of Life, where thou feedest thy Flocks, and make them to rest at
Noon, and to ly^ down in Green Pastures, and leadest them by the still Waters,
though they walk through the Valley of the shadow of Death, they shall fear no
Evil for thou art with them, Thou preparest and furnishest a Table for them in
the presence of their Enemies, and they are abundantly satisfied with the
Fatness of thine House, and thou make them to drink of the Rivers of thy
Pleasures: But, everlasting God of Life, thou have a Controversy with those
that dwell at ease in Zion, that do not lamen and mourn for the Sins and
Abominations committed is the midst of them, show them that their Rest is not
the Rest of God; Let them cease from their own Works, and serve and Worship
thee in truth and Sincerity; And let them know there is a Sabbath, an Heavenly
Rest for such to partake of. Show them the many secret working of the Enemy,
that they may watch against him, a^ not be Ignorant of his devices, who is
going about like. Roaring Lion, seeking to devour them, and to dest^^^ their
Souls; Arise O God of Glory and appear in Jacob^ Dwellings, and search
Jerusalem as with Candles, ^^ not thy People spare or hide any Darling sin from
the Slaughter, nor keep Amaleck alive, nor s^^^ those Enemies which thou have
determined to Destruction; Lord God of Life and Love, thou Sovereign L^^ of
Heaven and Earth, do thou graciously strength^^ and keep in all tenderness thy
People every where ^^ all their Travels, Labors and Exercises, let them f^^^
Favor and Acceptance with thee, in and through the Lord Jesus Christ the Great
Mediator; Let them know thy Heavenly Gatherings, and there let them abide
under thy Shadow; Let their Quiver be filled with the Arrows of the Almighty,
that may reach the Hearts of many by thy Power, and let their Bow abide in
strength, let them hear the Heavenly Sounding of thy Trumpet from the Holy
Mountain of thy Glory, and in all their Assemblies; let the pleasant Streams of
life flow from thee upon their Souls, and (...) pray thee let them grow green
and flourish, and be as a Watered Garden, bringing forth pleasant Fruits; Then
Blessed Father of Life and Glory, thy love will be discovered to thy People,
when they are in the daily exercise of thy Grace, and under the living
Influences of thy good Spirit, when thou take them into thy
Banqueting House, and thy Banner over them shall be love, Blessed Lord God of
Glory, when it shall be thus with us we shall behold thy Heavenly Countenance
shining upon us, and thy glory in the Face of Jesus Christ, and we shall be
taken and delighted with the excellency thereof; Thy Blessed Banquet will be
sweet to our Taste, and we shall be satisfied and overcome with thy Love, then
will thy Glory shine, and thy Voice be heard, Eat O Friends, Drink, yea Drink
abundantly, O Beloved; Now for all thy Mercies and Blessings, and wonderful
patience, forbearance, and Longsuffering toward us, We desire to offer our
Thanksgivings to thee; for thy tender Compassions extended to those that are
sorrowful, Afflicted, and bowed down before thee, Father of Life, thou have
opened thy Bosom of Love, and given them some ease and Refreshment, thou have
Remembered us in our low Estate, and thou have been with us and kept us in all
our Exercises, and Labors, and Travels, and thou have made thine to grow up as
the Lilly of the Valleys, and as the Rose in Sharon, and watered us as with the
streams from Lebanon, Lord God of Glory, We do thankfully acknowledge thy
wonderful Care over us and Love toward us, and to all the Children of Men; And
we desire to offer to thee Praise and Glory through Christ Jesus the Son of thy
Love, who art worthy of all Honor Glory and Renown, Power Blessings and Praise,
who art God over all Blessed for Ever, and Ever. Amen.

A SERMON, Preached by Mr. RICHARD ASHBY. At St. Martins Le Grand. Feb. 16.
1693.
THE Testimonies and Declarations which are given forth in obedience to the
Lords requirings, are to bring every one of you to a sense and feeling of the
Inward Testimony of Truth in your own Bosoms, to the feeling of the Work and
Operation of the Lords Spirit, upon your Hearts, to give to every one a clear
sight and understanding of those things that tend to their Souls profit, and to
their Spiritual advantage and a Divine growth in Grace. If any of us are
satisfying our selves in sitting down in an outward Gathering, and only
exercising our natural faculties to hear and to understand, and come not to
know and be acquainted in our selves, with the Inspiration of the Almighty, the
Word of Truth, we are Strangers to it, and the good and excellency of it is hid
from our Eyes.

So that it is matter of great concernment for every one to know what it is to
be inwardly retired, and to know the Operation of Gods Gift upon their Souls,
and to be acquainted with the Work of Gods Spirit in their inward parts, else
we shall be deficient in learning what we ought to know, and fall short of
certainty in our knowledge, and we shall be among the number of those that are
always Learning and never come to any stability, and come not to the power, and
to know the Substance of all; such are in the Dark, they are groping for the
Wall, they are at uncertainty, and tossed too and fro, and have not a stability
of Mind and Spirit attending them, and they come not to know a true Exercise;
though there may be some inward desires, yet for want of keeping to that Power
by which they are begotten, their desires seem to fail.

O my Friends, that every one of you may be ponderous and weighty, that in your
minds you may feel the operation of that Power, and the inward Work of Truth
that is begun in the Soul, as the Foundation of Eternal Happiness that is laid,
that we may know the Instruction and feel the Power of the Lord Jesus Christ in
the Heavenly Gospel in which he is carrying on the Work of our Salvation, that
we have an Eye unto Jesus and our expectations from him, and be waiting truly
upon him for Experience to come to know him that is the Author and Beginner of
the Work of Faith in our Souls and lays the Foundation of Eternal Felicity;
These are such as walk on gradually and persevere to the end, they look unto
Jesus the Author and F^^^sher of their Faith, the great searcher of their
Hearts, and manifester of the Thoughts and Intents thereof; They come to know
him in his Offices as he discovers and makes known to man and shows unto him
what it is that does obstruct and prevent his enjoyment of Peace; They that
come to be sensible of this, come to know an Inward Travel of Soul, and are
brought to a Spiritual exercise that has a profitable tendency, so that now
they, discover those things that are pleasing to the sight of their Minds, not
those things that please the carnal desire, and bring reproof unto the Soul.

Here is the proper effect of Faith, when there is Impressed upon the Soul a
sense of Sin, and of the Works of Unrighteousness, and here is a Foundation
laid for true Repentance, toward God and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, for
says the Apostle, Him has God exalted with his own Right Hand, to be a Prince
and a Savior, to give Repentance and Remission of Sins. He gives Repentance to
those that come to feel their Need of a Phisician to heal them, he makes such a
discovery to their Souls, such a sense he gives of their Sin and Transgression,
as makes it appear exceeding sinful; These are such as come to reflect upon
themselves, and see their woeful state, this will lay low their Minds, and bow
down their Spirits; these are they that come to Self-abhorrence, and to have a
Travel in their Spirits, and they come down into a lowly state, according to
what the Prophet Jeremy speaks, Lam. 2. 29. He fitteth alone and keeps
silence, He puts his Mouth in the Dust, If so be there may be hope:
Wherefore does a Living Man Complain, a Man for the Punishment of his Sins? It
is of the Lords Mercies that we are not consumed, because his Compassions fail
not.

They that come to be acquainted with the Lord as a Judge and as a Reprover,
here is a Decision made in the Soul, and a Separation from Sin, after it is
discovered, and the Judgment of God takes hold of the Sin and Trangression, and
a man comes under Reproof; Here is a time of suffering, and here is sorrow
taking hold of him: here is that which affects the Soul with grief, and brings
it into a state of Mourning, and he is brought under a sense of Gods dealings
with him, and he comes to know that sorrow that has an Inward effect upon the
Soul, to take away Iniquity, and make the Heart better; He submits to the
discovery of that Deceitfulness that is lodged in the Heart. For says the
Prophet, The Heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who
can know it? I the Lord search the Heart, I try the Reins even to give to every
man according to his ways, and according to the Fruit of bis doings. The
Apostle speaking to some, of the Heart being turned unto the Lord, said, then
the Vail shall be taken away; As God inwardly appears to a man, there must be
an humble submission to his searching of the Heart, therefore faith the
Psalmist, (Psalm 19. 12.) Who can understand his Errors, cleanse thou me from
secret faults; and he knew a cleansing Work in his own Heart, Psalm 51. 10.
Create in me a Clean Heart O God, and Renew a right Spirit in me; Cast me not
away from thy Presence, take not thy Holy Spirit from me, restore unto me the
Joy of thy Salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit. The Psalmist was in a
Spiritual Travel, and came to an experience of this Work upon his Soul, and he
prays the Lord to uphold him that what he had done might not be marred again:
therefore he begs of God to uphold him with his free Spirit.

You should all labor to go on in this Inward Travel that will bring you to a
Repentance, not to be Repented of, and to have a profitable Evidence that there
is fruit brought forth, not the Fruit of Sin, What fruit have you of those
things whereof you ^e now ashamed, for the end of those things is Death; They
that are sensible of this, know that the wrath of the Lord is revealed from
Heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the Truth
in unrighteousness, Romans 1. 18. The Work of Repentance stands in this, not only
in denying all Ungodliness, but in abstaining from all appearance of evil.
Therefore stand upon thy guard against thine Enemy, that he may not prevail
against thee by his Assaults. If sinners entice thee consent not to them, go
not in the way of evil men turn aside from it and pass away; Learn Self denial
which our Lord Jesus Christ does declare to be of necessity: Except a many Deny
himself, and take up his Cross and follow me, he cannot be my Disciple.

Thou may appear to take up a Cross and deny thy Self, but there must be a
daily Cross, a denying thy self continually, not giving way to our Carnal
Wills, to our own Carnal Minds, for to be Carnally minded is Death, and to be
Spiritually minded is Life and Peace.

Here is a Work that produces profitable Fruit, that will not bring Reproach
and Shame, and Confusion upon us, the Work of the Spirit of the Lord has not
that tendency, but will bring the Soul to possess Virtue, to inherit Glory,
Righteousness that exalts a Nation, but Sin is the Reproach of any People, Sin
brings a man to shame and confusion of Face, because there is a sense comes
upon a man that God will bring every Work into Judgment, with every secret
thing whether it be good, or whether it be evil Eccles. 12. 14. We must all
appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, (says the Apostle) that every one
may receive the reward of the Deeds done in his Body, according to that he has
done whether it be good or bad. O this brings shame and confusion of Face over
a man, many times the Lord appears in his displeasure, and the weight of his
Anger is let forth sometimes, so that it appears intolerable; Sometimes men
are brought under great terror and affliction of Soul and Spirit because of it,
God afflicts men sorely sometimes, and this is in Mercy, that we may fear to
offend him, and be brought to the doing of our Duty, and come up in Obedience
to what the Lord requires of us, and has made known to us, He bath showed
thee O Man what is good, Micah 6. 6. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord,
and bow my self before the High God? shall I come before him with burnt
offerings, with Calves of a year old, will the Lord be pleased with Thousands
of Rams, or with ten thousands of Rivers of Oil, shall I give my first born for
my transgression, the fruit of my Body for the Sin of my Soul? He has showed
thee O Man what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do
Justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God. This the Prophet
tells us is more effectual and efficacious than Sacrifices under the Law.

Be faithful (my Friends) to what God makes known, and give up in Obedience to
the Works of Righteousness, and live to the Glory of God, and in Obedience to
the Truth. This tends to establish the Soul in a Divine Hope and Confidence
which made Solomon to say the Righteous is as bold us a Lion, why so? Because
the Lord is his strength, He is strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his
Might. Friends, see to this every one in your own particular, that you put off
concerning your former Conversation, the Old Man with his Deeds, which are
corrupt, and put on the New Man, which after God is Created in Righteousness
and true Holiness, then you shall find the happy effects of this, the
constraining effect, and efficacy of the Love of Christ, as the Apostle did 2
Cor. 5. 14. The Love of Christ constrains us because we thus judge, that if
one died for all, then were all dead, and that he died for all, that they which
live should not henceforth live unto themselves but unto him which Died for
them and Rose again, And therefore the Apostle comes to declare of those, to
this effect, He that is in Christ, is a new Creature, old things are passed
away, behold all things are become New. How is he a New Creature? He is the
Workmanship of God Created in Christ Jesus. Oh the Work of the new Creation,
How precious is it to be Witnessed to! All things are of God, who has
reconciled us himself by Jesus Christ, and has given to us the Ministry of
Reconciliation. And says the Apostle to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 2. 14. For he is
our peace having made both one, and has broken down the Wall of Partition
between us, having abo^ished in his Flesh the enmity even the Law of
Commandments contained in Ordinances, for to make in himself of twain One new
man, so making Peace, here is Peace upon a sure Foundation, upon a certain
Bottom, This is the Peace that Christ leaves as a Legacy to his Disciples:
Peace I leave with you, my Peace I give unto you. not as the Woald gives give
I unto you What is the difference? The Worlds Peace is uncertain, and attended
with pain and trouble, but the Peace of Christ maintains it self in those Souls
that are gathered into the sense of his Power, and under his Banner, Isa. 9. 6.
says the Prophet, For unto us a Child is born unto us a Son is given, and the
Government shall be upon his Shoulder, and his Name shall be called Wonderful,
Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, of the
increase of his Government, and Peace there shall be no end, And says the
Prophet, Jeremiah 23. 5, 6. Behold the days come says the Lord, that I will
raise unto David a Righteous branch, and a King shall Reign and Prosper, and
execute Judgment and Justice in the Earth, in his days Judah shall be saved,
and Israel dwell safely, and this is his Name whereby he shall be called the
Lord our Righteousness.

Friends, It is the desire of my Soul that you may come to know the precious
effects hereof to your Souls that you may know Christ Jesus to be your Lord,
and submit to him, and take his Yoke upon you, for they that come to Christ
must know what it is to be under his Dominion, for he is a King, and shall
Reign and Prosper, and execute Judgment, The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our
Lawgiver: The Lord is our King and he will save us. Therefore my Friends Be
every one of you resigned in your Minds and Spirits, and live in a dependence
upon him, that you may feel his Power overshaddowing you from Day to Day, then
you will say as it is in the Revelations, Chap. 19. 1. Halleluja Salvation and
Glory and Honor and Power unto the Lord our God, The Power of his Christ is
Revealed to us.

O Friends, that you may feel that you are gathered under his Power, into his
Pavillion, that he may be a safe hiding place to you, and that you may
experience and witness his Power from Day to Day, then your Peace shall be as a
River; O that you may every one find this in your own particular, and not rest
satisfied in outward Forms, and in an outward Profession, that you may feel the
substance, feel the Life and possession, and have Heavenly Treasure in your
Earthen Vessels, then will you be witnesses of Immortal Life, that is brought
to Light by the Gospel, then you shall be of the Number of those that have
fought a good Fight of Faith, and laid hold on Eternal Life, and you shall be
sensible of the Visitation of the Lord Giving Spiritual Life unto the Soul;
Thus the Psalmist experienced and declared All my Fresh Springs are in thee,
Here is an Evidence and Testimony of this Life, O Labor to have a Testimony of
this Life, that ye may have fresh Springs from the Lord and Draw Water out of
the Wells of Salvation. These are renewed in the Soul from time to time; It may
be said that the Stream is but small to some, Oh keep to the Streams and
partake of them though but in the lowest degree, that thou may feel the
risings of them, The Prophet Ezekiel was led into the Temple, says he, The
Hand of the Lord was upon me, and he brought me thither, and behold there was a
Man whose appearance was like the appearance of Brass, with a Line of Flax in
his hand, and a measuring Reed, and he measured a thousand Cubits, and he
brought me through the Waters and the Waters were to the Anckles; Again he
measured a thousand and brought me through the Waters, and the Waters were to
the Knees, and afterward the the Waters were to the Loins. And afterward says,
He measured another Thousand, and it was a River that I could not pass over,
for the Waters were risen, Waters to Swim in, a River that could not be passed
over.

My Friends, here are Divine openings upon the Soul, in feeling fresh springs
of Love and Life, and you may come to know and witness Refreshings from the
Presence of the Lord; you are not strangers to the Fruits of the Heavenly
Canaan, and the fruits of the Tree of Life; When you come to partake of them,
you will say, His fruit was sweet unto my taste, you will find that the Lord
will abundantly open his bountiful hand, and satisfy his poor with Bread. Let
your waiting be continually upon the Lord, and Bread will be given to you and
your Waters will be sure, then you will see the King in his Beauty, the King of
Glory discovering himself; Where the Spirit of the Lord is there is Liberty; We
all with open face beholding as in a Glass the Glory of the Lord. Here is a
precious Object indeed! O the Beauty of Holiness how affecting is it to the
Soul! The Soul is overcome with God; When the Soul comes to the acting of its
Faith and Trusting in the Lord, and Depending upon him continually, to
beholding the Glory of the Lord which is of an affecting nature, this raises
desires in the Soul, according to the Testimony of the Psalmist, Psalm. 17. 14.
As for me I will behold thy Face in Righteousness: I shall be satisfied when I
awake with thy Likeness. The Apostle speaks of beholding as in a Glass the
Glory of the Lord, and being changed into the same from Glory to Glory, as by
the Spirit of the Lord. You that know the Revelation of God in you, you will
find this change from Glory to Glory, and a coming up to the Beauty of Holiness.

Then my Friends, here is a pure Communion, a Communion with the Saints, the
Lord Reveals himself and makes his Spiritual abode in the Soul, these are those
that come to know Fellowship with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ;
They that come to know this, know God to be with them, and do know Gods Power
and Presence in the midst of them; Then though man may frown, the Light of Gods
Countenance shall be lifted up upon us, And If God be for us, (says the
Apostle) who can be against us. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered
him up for us all, How shall he not with him also freely give us all good
things. The Lord will bless us with all Spiritual blessings in Heavenly Places
in Christ. Wait upon the Lord and he will bless thee and encourage thee, that
thou may know additional blessings in thy Soul.

This is the intent, design, and import of these Declarations that are found
among you, that you may all know a being gathered unto the Lord, and may feel
his Power and know the Lot of your Souls Inheritance; and know that the Lord
will continue his mercies to you, and will make good his Promise, that if you
cast your care upon him he will take care of you, they that do this may know
the Lord to be their Portion, and the Lot of their Inheritance to be in him; In
times of distress and tribulation, the Lord will be with them; Israel of Old
though they did all partake of an outward Canaan, yet all had not their Lot in
Shilo, They that come to sit with Christ in Heavenly places, they have their
Lot in Shilo, in a Peaceable Savior, the Prince of Peace; Take a view of your
inward state and condition, see, is the Lord Jesus your Lot and Portion, then
you shall not want, but if you are Strangers to this, and live in the state of
carnal security, sorrow will overtake you; The Prophet saw some to do so; It is
as when a Hungry Man Dreams of Refreshment, but when he awakes his Soul is
empty and faint; If you have not the feeling of the Power of Gods Spirit, and
are at ease, a terrible Day will overtake you.

Therefore Friends while you have time, give all diligence while the Manna
falls about your Tents, and are humbled in the sense thereof, know that the
Lord will preserve you from day to day, then your Bread will be sweet, and your
Water sure; O Friends, The Great Prophet has been sent to you, Behold I stand
at the Door and knock, if any Man hear my Voice and open the Door, I will come
into him, and will sup with him and he with me; Friends, He will bless you and
you shall know your Provisions which are made for you, the Lord Christ will
bless your store, for the Treasures of Heaven fail not, where Moth and Rust
does not corrupt, nor Theives break through nor Steal; and therefore Friends
have respect to the manifestation and Spiritual Appearance of the Lord Jesus,
that you may feel his Power overshaddowing you from day to day, that you may be
kept by the Mighty Power of God; We must wait upon the Lord from day to day, to
be kept and preserved by him, and be retired from the Vanities of the World,
and live that Life we live in the flesh, by the Faith of the Son of God, that
we may come to say with the Apostle Paul, Not I live, but Christ lives in me
that we may be united, to him; He that has the Son has Life. and he has
Power, to as many as received him to them he gave Power; Here is a Divine
Ability, I can do all things through Christ which strengthens me. My Friends,
If every one of you do feel this in your own particular, you will come to a
Heavenly place, to a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, and dwell in a sure
dwelling, and have the Candle of the Lord to shine upon your Tabernacles, light
is sown for the Righteous, and gladness for the upright in Heart, they shall
have Peace through him that is the Prince of Peace; It is the desire of my Soul
that you may feel this inwardly in your selves.

Therefore Dear Friends, retire to that strength that is Treasured up for you
in Christ, Be strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his might, and let all
self Confidence be laid aside, and trust in the Lord for in the Lord Jehovah is
everlasting strength, and he changes not, therefore the Sons of Jacob are not
consumed, He is the same Yesterday, to Day and for ever; Let us take comfort in
the unchangeable Love of God who has given us this Promise, I will never leave
thee nor forsake thee, 13. Heb. 5. 6. So that we may boldly say, the Lord is my
helper and I will not fear what man shall do unto me. Therefore wait to receive
strength from Christ, from day to day, they that build not upon this Power are
upon a Sandy foundation, they make an outward profession of Religion, and have
a form of Godliness, but that will not avail, Obedience is better then
Sacrifice, and to hearken then the Fat of Rams; And our Savior says, Mat. 7.
22. And every one that hears these sayings of mine and does them not, shall
be likened to a foolish man that built his House upon the Sand, and the Rain
descended, and the Floods came and the Winds blew and beat upon that House and
it fell, and great was the fall of it.

Wait upon the Lord, his strength has been Revealed, and his power made known,
and his Arm made bare; Therefore fix your Confidence in him, that so your minds
may be established, Be strong in the Lord and in the Power of his might, and
take unto you the whole Armor of God, Ephesians. 6. 13, 14. This is the Armor that
God has made known for his Christian Soldiers that are making War against sin
and unrighteousness, who are fighting the good fight of Faith; It was the
experience of the Primitive Believers, We are more then Conquerours through him
that loved us, therefore feel your strength fixed upon the Lord, retire and
wait upon him, and be in a watchful frame; The Prophet Habbakuk, when he saw
distress was coming upon the Church says, Hab. 3. 16. When I heard, my belly
trembled, and my Lips quivered at the Voice, and Rottenness entered into my
bones, and I trembled in my self that I might rest in the Day of trouble, then
says he in the 2 Chap. 1. I will stand upon my Watch, and set me upon the
Tower, and I will watch to see what he will say unto me, and what I shall
Answer when I am Reproved.

In this Spiritual Warfare let us be attentive unto Christ, the great Captain
of our Salvation that makes War in Righteousness, let us hearken one day after
another, and then there will be a Holy skill and expertness given to us, you
will be expert in the Spiritual War, and you will find strength and power given
you from the Lord and he will be a hiding place, and a Sanctuary to you, you
shall come to the Mountain of the Lord where there shall be no distress, and
the Voice of the oppressor shall no more be heard, nor destruction within your
Walls, Thy Walls shall be called Salvation, and thy Gates praise; And you that
know that Spiritual dwelling, where the Spiritual Jews are, you are come to
sing the Songs of Zion, which shall be Sung in the strong City, where Salvation
is appointed for Walls and Bulwarks, where the wicked cease from troubling, and
where the Flocks lie down at Noon, where there is a Shadow of a great Rock in
a weary Land, and Rivers in dry places; Here is the plenty of all good things
which in Gods House is opened to us.

Now my Friends, If you are sitting down in outward forms without feeling the
operation of Gods Power and Spirit upon your Souls, and be not brought to an
inward Conformity, the dreadful day will come that the Lord will search
Jerusalem with Candles; that God before whom all things are naked and bare, he
is taking a view of the Imperfections of his People, he is the searcher of the
Heart and a discerner of the thoughts and intents of it, whether you fall short
of that power and Spirit of true Religion, or if there be only an outward
Conformity and not inward Obedience; The Trumpet of the Lord has been blown in
Sion, Lift up thy Voice like a Trumpet, and tell the House of Judah of her
transgression, and the House of Israel of her Sins; Where there is only an
outward Conformity, and not an Inward subjection, there distress will overtake
you which I have seen in the Vision of the Lord (which has been upon me as a
warning to the Remiss and careless ones) and it was delivered with a voice full
of Power in these words; All foundations shall be manifested of what sort they
are; A watcher from the Holy one with severity shall overtake the unwatchful.
Therefore let this be a warning to you all, that you may not fall under the
stroke of Gods severity; The Apostle Paul says, Romans 11. 17. to the believing
Romans, speaking of the goodness and severity of God. And if some of he
Branches be broken off, and thou being a Wild Olive Tree, were grafted in
amongst them, and with them partakest of the Root and fatness of the Olive
Tree; Boast not against the branches, but if thou boast thou bear not the
Root, but the Root thee, Thou will say then, the Branches were broken off, that
I might be grafted in; Well because of Unbelief they were broken off, and thou
stand by Faith, be not bigh minded but fear, For if God spared not the
natural branches, take heed least be also spare not thee. Behold therefore the
Goodness and Severity of God, on them which fell, to them severity, but toward
thee Goodness, if thou continue in his Goodness otherwise thou shall be Cut off.

O my Friends, what need is there of a Watchful frame, think how necessary it
is in your own particular, every one of you to be keeping in your Watch Tower,
the Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, The Righteous shall fly unto it, and be
safe, and when they are assaulted with the Enemy, the Spirit of the Lord shall
be with them, and when the Enemy comes upon them as a Flood, the Spirit of the
Lord shall lift up a Standard for them against the Adversary, and they shall
stand still, and see the Salvation of God; And they shall find the Power of
Gods Spirit come upon them for Sanctification, and they shall be as the purest
Wheat gathered into the Garner of God

Therefore My Friends, let the Testimonies of Truth which the Lord is pleased
by his Servants and Messengers to send to you, take hold of you, and go along
with you, and have a place in your secret thoughts; It is an Exhortation of the
Word of Truth, which God gives by his Spirit to you, therefore let it be
retained, While you are in the Light, walk as Children of Light, and have no
Fellowship with the Unfruitful Works of Darkness, and you shall dwell safely,
and be set upon a Rock that is higher than you, you shall be as Stars shining
in a Dark World, and though there be darkness upon the Earth, yet here is
Light, here is Beauty; Those that are in Zion and in Goshen, the Songs of the
Night shall be given to them; When others are in distress, these are they that
have their Habitation in the Lord, and find a Spiritual repose, and enter into
Rest, and enjoy that peace which God through Jesus Christ his Beloved Son does
give unto the Souls of his People, that Peace that Passes Understanding; Let
the Word of Christ dwell in you richly, in all Wisdom, Teaching and Admonishing
one another in Psalms and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, singing with Grace in
your Hearts unto the Lord. Salvation and Praise be ascribed unto our God
continually for all his Mercies and Favors, for to him Honor and Glory and
Thanks giving belongs; And as you render Praise to the Lord in the Name of his
Beloved Son, you shall find acceptance with him, and an answer of Peace
returned into your Bosoms, when you pray as the Psalmist, Psalm. 141. 1, 2. Lord
I cry unto thee, make bast unto me, give ear to my Voice, when I cry unto thee,
let my Prayer be set forth before thee as Incense, and the lifting up my hands
as the Evening Sacrifice; Hereby you shall enjoy Divine Rest, and Repose, and
Refreshment from the presence of the Lord, and that Joy that is unspeakable and
full of Glory; This is my Desire and Souls Travel, and the end of my Labor
among you, that this may be your Lot and Portion with the Lord.

The Prayer after Sermon.
BLessed Lord God who have in this day of thy Power made manifest thy Self unto
thy Children and People, who are this day waiting upon thee; O Lord God we pray
thee, let thy Infinite Mercy more and more be extended to us, and we humbly
pray thee, do thou preserve us a sensible People, that as thou have afforded
the Visitation of thy Love unto us, we may delight in it, Lord reveal thy Love
more and more to us, that we may obey thee, and delight to do thy Will, Lord
thou have an Eye of Pity and Compassion upon the Sons and Daughters of Men,
whom thou see in a lost and perishing condition, and thou will remember them
in their low estate, because thy Mercy endures for ever; extend the Riches of
thy Goodness to such as are strangers to thee, that they may come to the
knowledge of thee through the Son of thy Love, for this is Life Eternal to know
thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent; O Lord manifest
thy Love to us more and more, and appear is thy excellent Glory for the
bringing down of every thing contrary to thee; Blessed Father and Fountain of
Life. set up thy Throne and Reign in the Hearts of the Children of Men, that
they may own thy rightful Government, and submit to thy Wisdom, and become a
willing People in the Day of thy Power, and be reconciled to thee in the blood
of thy Son; Be with us in all the Dispensations of thy Grace and Love, and
manifest the operation of thy Power upon us in our attendances on thee from Day
to Day, and from one season to another, Lord thou that have revealed thy
Glorious Arm and Power to thy People in their many Travels, Exercises and
Afflictions that have come upon them for the trial of their Faith, and the
exercise of their Patience and Humility, and other Graces, let our Patience
have its Perfect Work, and let the trial of our Faith be found unto Praise,
Honor and Glory at the appearance of Jesus Christ, and let our humility lay us
low before thee, that being humbled under thy mighty band, we may be exalted in
due time, for the sake of Jesus Christ whom thou have have exalted at thine own
Right Hand, to be a Prince and a Savior to give Repentance to us, and
Remission of Sins. Lord our desires are to thee, and our expectations are from
thee, do thou supply us with all things needful for our Souls and Bodies as
thou have mercifully sustained us hitherto; O Lord do thou Bless all the
Manifestations of thy Love and Power unto us, that we may be sanctified and
made meet to serve and glorify thee, that we may give up our account with Joy
at thy Tribunal, that we may then be found in Christ, not having our own
Righteonsness, but being Justified freely by thy Grace, through the Redemption
that is in him, we may enter into Glory, and be for ever with the Lord. Blessed
Father of Life, Remember all those that are scattered up and down upon the
Hills, and Barren Mountains, and are wandering up and down as Sheep without a
Shepherd, Remember them in this Day of thy Love and mighty Power, and bring
them home to the Sheepfold of Christ, who is the true Sbepherd, and Redeemer,
and Savior of Souls; Lord go along with us from this place to our several
Habitations and Employments; Let the Angel of thy presence attend us; Let the
Word that has been preached dwell richly in us in all Wisdom; Dearest God of
Love and Life, one Plants, and another Waters, but thou alone do give the
increase, we pray thee go along with us, and be near unto us, when we are
separated one from another. Now Lord, for all thy Mercies and Benefits, and
Blessings renewed to us from day to day, and from one season to another, we
desire to offer up to thee a pure and living Sacrifice of Praise, and Love, and
Thanks giving, for thou alone art worthy, who art God over all, who with thy
Blessed Son, and Eternal Spirit, Live and Reignest for ever and ever, One God
World without end, Amen.

A SERMON Preached by Mr. WILLIAM BINGLEY. At Grace-Church street, March 4.
1693.
Friends,
IT is weighty upon my Spirit this Day to call upon you all, to take into a
weighty consideration, the end for which the Everlasting God has given us a
Being, and a day of Visitation, and does vouchsafe to us the continuance of our
Lives, without all controversy the Great God has a great end in it, I would
to God the consideration of this end did take impression upon your minds;
Certainly it is for this in the first place, that Man should Serve and Glorify
the Great God that gave Life and Breath, and Being to him; for this is an
indispensible duty, and in the next place, there is a Duty toward man, so that
there is our Duty to God, and our Duty toward our Neighbor.

Now that we may be capable of Answering these things, that we may be rightly
fitted and qualified, that this great end of God may be answered, that is our
Duty to God, which every one ought to perform, and I doubt not is acknowledged
generally by all to be due to him; It is therefore to be considered under what
Qualifications those must be that can perform it acceptably; Now God, who has
required the strict performance of this Duty is a Holy Eternal Being, Pure and
Righteous, whatsoever then is offered to him, must be a pure Offering, and the
Heart and Mind of the Offerer must be pure and Holy, if it find acceptance with
him.

Now if it be so as without all controversy it is; In the first place, you
know as God created Man for this end and purpose, to glorify him, so he
created him in a meet state and capacity to perform it, for he made Man
Upright, Holy and Righteous and whilst he stood thus he had both free access
and acceptance with God his Maker; But alas Mankind through the Workings of
Satan, and through the craftiness and subtilty of the Enemy of all
Righteousness, lost this Innocent state of Holiness, fell from it, and became a
Plant of a degenerate Vine; yet many are not so far fallen, but that they have
a sense sometimes, and believe there is a Duty and Service owing to God, and
have gone about to perform it, though they have not been rightly qualified, for
we find that Israel they went about to perform this great duty in their
unregenerate state, what acceptance did they find? none at all, why? there
Hearts were corrupt; we have diverse Instances thereof in Scripture, concerning
Israel, the Lord complains of them by his Prophets; He does not complain that
they were short in not going about to do something that had the show of Region,
or in appearing in an outward show of Offering something to God; No, but it was
not pleasing for the Lord says Bring no more vain Oblations, (Isa. 1. 13.)
Incense is an Abomination to me, t^^ New Moons and Sabbaths, and calling of
Assembli^ I cannot away with. It is iniquity even the solemn meeting; what was
the reason they were not acceptable, was it that the Lord had not required
those things? No, What was the reason then? Their Hearts were full of
Corruption, their Hearts were defiled, they were not right in the sight of God,
it sprung from a wrong Heart, it was not a Vessel made meet; It was not
prepared and fit for such holy Service and Oblation. And again in the same
place, there they seemed to draw nigh to God, and would presume to tread his
Courts, but what was the return? When you come to appear before me, who has
required this thing at your hands, to tread my Courts, seeing you hate to be
Reformed; these People drew near to God with their Lips, but their Hearts were
far from him; And it is evident the Lord did not accept of them in those
performances, because they were in a corrupt unclean state, but the Lord by his
Prophet corrected them on this wise, Wash ye make ye clean, put away the evil
of your doings from before mine Eyes, cease to do Evil, learn to do well, seek
Judgment, relieve the oppressed, Judge the Fatherless, plead for the Widow.
Come now and let us Reason together says the Lord, though your sins be as
Scarlet, they shall be white as Snow, though they be Red like Crimson, they
shall be as Wool. Nothing but this change could give them acceptance with God.

Now my Friends, this is a great Work, the Work of the Day that every Man and
Woman is concerned in, and ought to be concerned about, to be made meet to
approach before the Lord, to come before him, and perform their duty that is
due from them to God acceptably, but if any should enquire of me, by what means
may we be made meet for this Service and great Undertaking? I will tell you, It
must be by Experience, and sensible feeling of that which was the cause and
real ground of man's losing his access to, and acceptance with God at the
beginning, that which shut the Door and became a Bar and Partition Wall between
God and Man, and that was the Sin and Transgression that he fell into, this
must be removed and taken away, the root of it must be done away by Faith in
him whom God has sent to Restore lost man, Jesus Christ, and by a sensible
feeling the effectual working of his Power in the Soul, to cleanse from Sin, or
else there can be no acceptance with God. How and by what means must it be done
away? God Everlasting in his Infinite Love, has ordained a way, because he
would not have man to perish and remain in a state incapable of answering the
end which God ordained him to, and what is that Way? The Lord Jesus Christ, God
has sent him into the World, in a twofold manner.

First, He sent him into the World in a Holy Body which he had prepared for
him, as it is written, Lo it is written in the Volume of the Book I come, what
for? To do thy Will O God. What is Gods Will? And what is the reason of Christ's
coming into the World? That he might Die for every man, and be a Sacrifice for
Sin, and Redeem Man to God, this was the Work that God gave him to do in that
appearance.

Secondly, There is another coming of Christ a coming in the Spirit; for the
first opened a Door for lost Man, that shut himself out, and by his Sin put a
Bar to his drawing near to God; the first coming of Christ, I say, opened a
Door, for he became a Sacrifice and an Offering, and Atonement for Mankind,
and thereby opened a new and living Way for Man's coming to God. And ^^ second
coming is without Sin to Salvation, and to bring all Mankind that believe and
obey him, into this Way or Door, and to have an entrance into this New and
Living Way which he has opened, and thereby to have the benefit of that one
Offering and Sacrifice, which he has made for sinners, and God has revealed
and made this known to the Sons and Daughters of Men; Blessed be the Name of
God that Christ is come in the Spirit, that he has sent his Spirit into our
Hearts, that he has given us a Measure of his Spirit, to profit withal. The
Son of God is come to wash and purge Men from their Sins, and to destroy the
Works of the Devil, and to waste and consume that Nature, that has separated
Man from God, and the Root and Ground of it, that has hindered our approaching
near to God, Christ is come to finish transgression, and to make an end of sin,
to take it away, and to bring in Everlasting Righteousness.

I would entreat you all in the Love and Tender Compassions of God, to open to
this coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, He is come near to you, he knocks at the
Door of your Hearts, by his secret Reproofs and Heavenly smilings in the Soul,
and shows People their evil Ways and Courses. Now if you in Faith open to
Christ, when he knocks at the Door of your Hearts, He will Work the Work of God
in you; He will work that in you and for you, that no man can work for himself,
nor for another; now the Lord Jesus Christ he is come to Work that Work, which
his Father has given him to do, which is to take away that which has
separated thee from God, and made thee a Child of Wrath, and an Object of Gods
displeasure, he will remove it, and wash it away in his Blood, it is the Blood
of Jesus that cleanses us from all Sin.

O the wonderful Love of the Son of God, that he manifested to us in that Body
which was prepared for him to do the Will of God, in submitting to the Death,
and being a Sacrifice once for all; If thou will hearken to his Reproofs and
Instructions, he will Work the Work of God in thee, and he will wash thee, and
cleanse thee from Sin in his own Blood, and thou must be acquainted with this
washing cleansing Work, or thou have no part in Jesus the Mediator, for he
said to Peter, If I wash thee not, thou have no part with me. He does purge and
wash, and purify all that have a part in him, who is the Fountain that God
has set open for the House of Judah and Jerusalem, for Sin and for
Uncleanness, that you may wash in it and be clean; Seeing the Fountain of Gods
Love is opened to thee, in the Lord Jesus Christ, turn to him and feel the
operation of his Blood, it will take away thy Sin and Uncleanness, yea the very
Root of Evil. And every Plant (as Christ said) that the Heavenly Father has
not planted shall be rooted up, Mat. 15. 13. When thou come to know the
plucking up of these Plants, and art willing to be purged by Christ, and washed
in his Blood, in that Fountain that is opened for Sin and Uncleanness and
come to be made a Vessel meet for thy Masters Use, and come to be a Vessel
in Gods House, and fit toper form the Worship of God, that stands in the Spirit
thou will then find acceptance with God through Jesus Christ.

But this Reformation must not be outward only, but a Reformation of the Mind
and Soul, and the Inward Man, and a being truly rectified there, and this is to
make clean the Inside as Christ said Then thou will come to have a Discovery
of, and to be acquainted with the Mind and Will of God, and thou will then feel
a cry in thy Soul on this wise, O Lord enable me to perform my Duty to thee,
and thou will find the Promise made good to thee: and here thy waiting will be
upon God; They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall
mount up with Wings like Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, and they
shall walk and not faint; Thus when thou art waiting upon God, and doing his
Will thou will perform thy Duty without weariness or fainting, and Serve God
and Glori^^ him in Thoughts, Words and Actions, and th^^ thou will answer the
end for which thou wast made and wilt Worship and Serve God in that ability of
Grace which he has given thee, and thou will experience what it is to be under
the conduct and guidance of the Spirit of God, and wilt Worship God in Spirit
and in Truth, The Father seeks such to Worship him, for the Worship of God
does not stand in outward Observation, nor in any thing barely that a Man can
do outwardly, but in Spirit and Truth. They that are thus exercised, they Live
to God, and in daily feeling of his Redeeming Arm, and the Ransoming power of
the Lord which has broken the Chains of Darkness in which they were held; and
how the Lord has brought them near to himself, and filled them with a living
sense of that Power that has redeemed them, and they cannot but fall into an
holy admiration of God, and admire his Love and bounty, and Wisdom Power and
Goodness.

Here is a Man that Worships God aright, that truly performs the Worship and
Service of God, when the mind is truly humble and dwells in lowlyness, such
find life to spring from God the fountain of it, and thereby their Souls are
kept in a lively frame before him, for it is the living that worship God, it is
the Living that praise him, the Dead cannot praise his Name. The Grave (says
Hezekiah) cannot praise thee O God, Death cannot Celebrate thee, The Living,
the living he shall praise thee as I do this Day, Those that truly Worship God
in Spirit, they have Holiness to the Lord written upon them, stamped on their
outside; And as they have born the Image of the Earthly, so now they bear the
Image of the Heavenly Adam; These perform Duty to God aright, and they are made
meet to serve him, and Worship him, and they have a deep sense of the Love and
mercy of God to them, and in that Sense give Glory to God to whom it does
belong for ever more.

Secondly, As there is a duty we owe unto God, so there is a Duty which we owe
to our Neighbor, and this Duty cannot be performed but as we are preserved in
a sense of that power which has quickened us to God; Therein we are made
Instruments in his hands to call upon others to turn to God, and do good to
them by our Exemplary Lives, and that as we make a Profession of Godliness, so
we ought to walk in Love, and have bowels of Compassion and Love to our
Neighbors that they may be saved and brought near to God. And therefore let us
show forth all Meekness, Goodness, Lowlyness, Justice, Truth, Equity, and all
manner of Holy Conversation and Godliness, and Love God with all our Heart,
with all our Mind, and with all our Soul, and our Neighbor as our selves.

These are the two great Lessons which we ought to learn, and I am sensible
many are short in, not loving their Neighbors as themselves, but are seeking
rather to Circumvent and to defraud one another, letting up bitterness and
malice one against another; Too many Instances may be given of these things,
but our Duty is to endeavor to show forth our Love in Justice, Equity, and
Truth in all things, and to be so far from going beyond or seeking to defraud,
or over reach our Neighbor, as that we should upon all occasions, manifest our
care and love to him, that he may be gained and brought over to the Love of the
Truth, This is that which God has made us Witnesses of in his blessed day, and
Gospel, and it should be our great care and concernment to answer this Duty
that lies upon us one toward another faithfully and to encourage one another,
and Watch ov^^ one another for Good, and not with an Evil Eye or prejudice in
our minds against any, nor to let in any sourness or bitterness of Spirit
against any.

I Counsel and Exhort you in the Love of God, to perform your Duty to God,
whereby ye may receive an Answer of peace, and acceptance with him, an answer
of well done from God, which we shall if we keep and abide in his Love, this
will bring you to the Fountain of Wisdom and the opening and springing of it,
This is the Wisdom that is from above that is pure and peaceable, and gentle
and easy to be entreated, and we shall be preserved in the Conduct of it, we
shall not be short in our Duty, We shall Love one another, and Converse one
with another; This is a particular Mark and Token, and a certain distinction
whereby the Disciples of Christ are manifested and known to the World; Hereby
(says Christ) shall all men know ye ^e my Disciples, if ye have Love one to
another, 13 John 35. Abide in this Love and in the Truth, and show forth the
virtues of it, They that do profess the truth but act otherwise, and are
carried away with any of the Lusts or pleasures, and delights of the World, or
with the Pride, Haughtiness, Bitterness and Sourness of the Spirit of the
World, they that are carried away with these, all their love to their Neighbor
will be hindered, and there will not be a sincere exercise of it.

There are some that make a profession of the truth and come among us, whose
Conversations show they have a Root of Covetousness remaining in them, they
will defraud, and overreach and cheat their Neighbor, and so bring a Reproach
upon the truth; they have an ill Fame, they do not perform their Duty to their
Neighbor in Love and Kindness, neither are they under the Conduct of that
Power, that should direct and guide them in their duty to God.

Therefore my Friends, Watch against the Enemy in these things, be not Ignorant
of his devices, then the designs of the wicked one will not overcome you, and
prevail against you, live in the fear of God which is true Wisdom, keep your
selves in the love of God, and in love to one another; O what Oneness, and
concord will there be? And what sweetness and Harmony will be among us? And
with what a Heavenly Lovelyness will our Conversations shine in the World, when
we abound in all the Fruits of Righteousness, and in love one to another.
Behold how good and how pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell together in Unity,
and Amity, This is beautiful indeed! It is like the precious Ointment on the
head that runs down to the skirts of the Garment; O the Heavenly Garment! the
Garment of Praise, that shall cloth those that live in the love of God, and of
one another; O the Holy Robe of the Righteousness of Christ shall cover such
Souls; O this is that which shines forth gloriously, they that live in love
shall have this beautiful Garment to cover and adorn them; O my Friends, the
weight of this was upon me; O that every one of you may be gathered and made
willing to discharge your selves of this great duty to God and to one another
that an Heavenly opening may be known, This love to God and our Neighbor will
be as a Munition of Rocks where our Bread shall be sure, and our Waters shall
not fail; when the Life we live in the Flesh is by the Faith of the Son of God;
This Union and mutual love will Cement us together, when we are built upon the
Foundation of the Prophets, and Apostles Jesus Christ himself being the chief
corner stone, in whom all the building fitly framed together, grows unto an
Holy Temple, in the Lord, in whom you also are builded together for a^
Habitation of God through the Spirit; If we live in loves as the living Members
of Christ, the Blood will Circulate into the life of every Member from the
Head, and we shall know the Virtues of it; If we live in love Gods name will be
honored, and his Truth will be promoted, from Sea to Sea, and from Land to
Land, from one part of the World to another, and many shall be brought to
behold the Rising of the Sun of Righteousness, and his Glory shining in our
Day, and be preserved in an Holy fear and awe of God, and kept from all Evil;
If we discharge our selves of this solemn and indispensible duty of love to God
and one another, then we shall have an Answer of our Prayers, and of Peace in
our own bosoms, and know that God will accept of us, and we shall be supported
under whatsoever trouble or Affliction shall befall us, God will be our strength
and our stay, and we shall have no cause to murmr or complain, God will bear
us up by his Divine power, and keep us in a tender sense of his love to us,
while we are living in the daily performance of this great Duty of Love to God
and mutual love to one another.

His Prayer after Sermon.
BLessed and Everlasting Father and Fountain of Life, What cause have we to
admire thy goodness and Worship thee, and Reverence thy Great Name, who do
manifest thy self in thy Love, and thy tender Compassions from Day to Day, in
affording us one Visitation after another, and in causing thy Love to be shed
abroad upon our Hearts in our waiting on thee, and crying and breathing after
thee; Thou openest thy hand from Day to Day, and fillest us with thy Spirit,
and thou make a Remnant to be as a Watered Garden to spring, and bud and
blossom; O Lord God of Life those that are Plants of thine own Planting, they
have a Greenness upon them they grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and bring forth the fruits of Righteousness before thee; O God of
Infinite Power and Love, keep them we pray thee, that they may be coming nearer
and nearer to thee, and be more and more acquainted with thee, that they may
come to know and Witness their being built upon that Foundation which cannot be
moved; Let the desires and supplications of thy living ones reach to them that
are scattered, and and are yet unacquainted with thee, that know not thy ways,
nor what thy worship is, nor how to perform it; Do thou open their
Understandings that they may see thy Power in tnrning their minds and Hearts to
thee, and in renewing and cl^^nging them that they may be made the objects of
thy Love, and brought into a nearness to thee, and that they may be made
acquainted with the feeling of thy Virtue and power upon their Souls; Blessed
God of Life do thou fill our Cup with thy Blessings, and refresh us with the
Incomes of thy Love; Thou causest thy People to drink of the streams of those
Rivers of Pleasure that are at thy Right hand; and thou causest the Rain to
Descend and drop upon thy tender Plants, that they may grow and be fruitful in
every good Word and Work, and live to thy Praise, and that they may exalt thy
Gteat Name, and magnify thy Power, manifested to them; Lord remember thine
every where, those especially which are under Affliction, and Exercise of body
and mind, open thy hand and send help to then according to their needs and
necessities, that they may be kept and supported under all their trials, that
they may not be discouraged, nor despond in their minds nor despair of thy love
and goodness to them; O Lord be thou known in thy Love, and shed it abroad upon
us by thy Spirit, that we may all be brought nearer to thee, and be more
acquainted with thee, who art the Fountain and Wellspring of all our Mercies
and Comforts, and have cause to bless and praise thee, that have made us Heirs
of that Life and Blessedness that shall never have an end; We desire to return
living praises to thy Name for this days mercies, for the Incomes of thy Love
and thy presence in the midst of us; Lord our Hearts are engaged to return
thanks and praise to thee, and to give Glory to thy Holy Name, Lord keep us
when we are gone and parted from one another, and keep us that we may live to
thee, and not to our selves, and that we may be Instrumental in turning many
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to thee the living God,
that they may receive Remission of Sins, and an Inheritance among them that are
Sanctified by Faith in Christ Jesus; And that they may show forth the Virtues
of Christ in their Lives and Conversations, and bring Honor and Praise to thy
Name who art worthy of all praise, To whom we desire to give Honor and Glory,
and Thanks giving and Praise, not only at this time but for Ever, and Ever.
Amen.

A SERMON, Preached by Mr. SAMUEL WALDENFIELD. At Devonshire House, March, 11.
1693.
THERE is a Day of Visitation which the Lord has extended unto the Children of
Men, that we might every one of us observe our Season and time, that so we
might be Exercised in those things that relate to our Everlasting Peace, and
welfare in the World to come; For we are like to be accountable to the Great
God for the Deeds done in the Body: Therefore every one had need to weigh and
measure their ways and doings, that they may stand Justified in the sight of
God through Jesus Christ, by whom we are Visited, who has been given of the
Father, not only to be a Light but a Leader to us, and blessed will all they be
that come to be led by the Lord Jesus Christ.

For that is a very precious state to know this One way, for he is the alone
way to the Kingdom of God, and all those that make a Profession of him and
reject his Leadings and his Counsel, they will fall short, they will meet with
many things in the way that will turn them from the right Way to the Kingdom of
God; But all those that follow the Lord Jesus Christ, it is they that shall
receive the Crown of Immortal and Everlasting Life and Glory.

For this following of Christ is a Crucifying the Old Nature of Man, it is a
regenerating of Man in his Inward parts, without which none of us can come to
see the Kingdom of God.

This is not an outward Birth, nor an outward Generation, nor a growing into
any outward comprehension of things, but it is an Inward mortifying of the
Deeds of the Flesh, and that you know no Man can do, but by and through the
Spirit, If Men walk after the flesh they must dye, but if through the Spirit,
(says the Apostle) ye mortify the deeds of the Body ye shall Live; I do not
speak of outward living in this World only, but of living to God Eternally.

People in this World should live to the Lord, then it will be well with them
whom they come to Dye; When this outward Earthly Tabernacle, and House of Clay
shall be dissolved, all such as live to the Lord Jesus Christ the Eternal Son
of God, they shall have an Habitation and a Dwelling with him in his Fathers
Kingdom, they will be made Vessels of Honor to glorify the Lord; Therefore the
greatest matter, and thing that we can press after in this Life, the most
profitable, the most advantageous of all things is, to press after an Inward
walking with God through Jesus Christ, for says Christ to his Disciples, You
that have followed me through the Work of Regeneration, it shall be given to
you, to sit with me in my Fathers Kingdom.

Now most People believe that these things are true, most that are called
Christians believe that they are profitable, but to pursue and press after them
a great many are short in it; Some it may be are hindered by the delights and
pleasures, and vanities of this World, others it may be are hindered by some
great Exercise that they meet withal, and some and some sore Affliction, not
knowing that Power that carries through and gives Victory, and that is the
Power of the Lord Jesus Christ, so that the Knowledge of Christ is a very
profitable thing; I look upon it to be as necessary to be Preached to many that
call themselves Christians, as to a great many that are Heathens, for if a Man
or Woman profess to be a Christian, and be not of a Christian Spirit and
Conversation, What will it signify? The Instance that the Apostle Paul gives
concerning the Heathen, will be more prevalent in the Day of the Lord, and that
is this, Romans 2. 14. For when the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by Nature
the things contained in the Law, these having not the Law, are a Law unto
themselves, which show the Work of the Law written in their Hearts, No doubt
but they were accepted of the Lord, according to their Integrity and Sincerity.

The Apostle Paul was an experienced Man, and understood the Nature, Quality,
and greatness of the Law of God, which was dispensed to the Jews and given them
for peculiar Instruction, and for a Schoolmaster to bring them to Christ, for
it was never given to complete Salvation to any Man without Christ; the Apostle
tells you it was a Schoolmaster till Christ come, And if you observe that in
the time of the Law, the Jews time, Christ was made known in that dispensation,
only there was a Vail over the Hearts of the Jews, and they did not see so
clearly, and there was an outward Sign of it too amongst them, for in their
Worship and Solemn Assemblies, they had an outward Vail to cast over them, but
there is an Inward Vail too, which comes over the Hearts of People, that
Ecclipseth the Glory of Christ, and the excellency of Christ, and till that is
Rent and done away by an Almighty Power, (for there is nothing outward can do
it) when this comes to be taken off Peoples Hearts, then they can see Christ as
he is.

And what if I should say, comparatively, there is a Vail over the Hearts of
many that are called Christians, that hinders them from seeing the Beauty and
Excellency of Christ, they do not know the Power of Christ, nor the Government
of his Spirit in their Hearts, for People may profess Christianity as long as
they will, if they do not know Christ to Govern them, they are not true
Christians; For one of the Prophets among the Jews could Prophecy and Foretell
of him; Let us consider it, and find out a right and true Interpretation of it,
and apply it unto our own Souls. Isa. 9. 6. For unto us a Child is born, unto
us a Son is given, and the Government shall be upon his Shoulder, and his Name
shall be called Wonderful, Consellor, The Mighty God, The Everlasting Father,
The Prince of Peace, Of the Increase of his Government and Peace there shall be
no end, The Government shall be upon his Shoulder. All these Appellations and
Titles are ascribed to Christ Jesus, he has the Government upon him, to Lead
and Guide them in the way wherein they should go; Government is an extensive
Word, It imports Government and Authority, and Rule; This is applicable to
Christ, and teaches that Dignity that was conferred upon Christ, and was
really due to him: No Man can parallel it by any expression, there is Reason in
it, there is Justice in it, there is a Right and Equity in it, Christ has
right to Reign and Rule for ever; I do not speak of outward Government, but of
the Government of Christ in the Souls of Men, and here the Devil was the first
Usurper, He usurped Authority in the Hearts of the Children of Men, and Christ
he was Forsaken and Deserted, People went from him, for Christ was in the
beginning of the World, the World was made by him, Christ's Divinity was from
Eternity, He was before Abraham was, The World was made by him, and when he was
in it the World did not know him; And when he came into the World many were not
willing that he should Reign over them, said the Jews, We will not have this
Man to Reign over us.

Now if we should find this among Christians you would think it more wonderful
and strange. It is now too common among the Children of men, I pray God set
home upon all our Hearts, that we may let him Reign whose Right it is. We will
not have this Man to Reign over us, say the Jews, Do any Christians say so? Did
you ever know a Christian say so? This is but Discourse you will be ready to
say, But let me tell you, where People live in Disobedience to the Laws of
Christ, this they do with a Witness.

But some may say, If we had lived in the Jews time we would not have Crucified
the Lord of Glory, and yet they Crucify Christ after the Spirit; For a Man to
live in Swearing, Drunkenness, Pride, Ungodliness, this is a Crucifying of
Christ, and a Rebelling against Christ, men are not willing that Christ should
Reign over them.

So that Religion and Christianity is a plain thing, People might Run and Read
it, if they would but consider it; if People were but weighty and considerate
in these great Affairs, they might come to know under whose Government they
are. The Apostle he described a People that were under the Power of Satan the
Prince of Darkness, under Satan the Prince of the Power of the Air, that some
were under his Government, and some under the Government of Christ and his
Spirit; One would think these were two Propositions so Intelligible, that if
People did but know and consider, they would for Interest sake escape the evil,
and cleave to that which is good.

Now Friends, I would have you deal Heartily with your own Souls, and see which
Government you are under, The Prince of the Power of the Air, that Rules in the
Hearts of the Children of Disobedience, or the Government of Christ; He that is
disobedient to God, to his Spirit, and Light, and Grace, he is under the
Government, and the Power of the Prince of Darkness; This is fulfilled in the
Prophecy of the Messiah, and it was the great Iniquity of the Jews, and their
great unhappiness and misery, that when the Messiah came into the World, they
would not be governed by him; Do not you think it much more ungrateful, if we
that are called Christians will not suffer Christ to Reign over us; It is
unreasonable, and unchristian, and unequal, therefore that you should all
consider it.

I would speak a little of the Government of Christ, with some Evidence and
Demonstration, and in a twofold manner that you might more easily distinguish;
There are some Christians that expect that Christ shall come and Reign on the
Earth, and then they hope to be under his Government, and it may be they are
not so careful to mind the present time, and to know his Reign and Government
now; There are another sort of People whom God in his Infinite Mercy has
reached to their Consciences and Convinced them that Christ has a right to
Reign now, He had a Right to Reign from the beginning, he always had a Right,
never forfeited it, never was deprived of it, He has a twofold right to Reign
over the Sons and Daughters of Men.

1. The first is by the Right of Creation, he Created us, none deny (I hope)
that the World was Created by Christ, therefore he has right to Govern in it;
This is an undeniable Argument, no man can gainsay it but that there is Right
and Justice belongs to him to Rule and Govern that which he has made,
therefore it is the most ungrateful and unnatural thing for men to oppose the
Reign and Government of Christ.

Secondly, Christ has a right to reign over the Sons and Daughters of Men on
the account of his Purchase; He did not only Create them, but he did also
Purchase them at the dearest rate, with the Price of his own precious Blood, we
were not Redeemed with corruptible things as Silver and Gold, or House, Land,
or Earthly Treasure, but with the Precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb
without blemish, and without spot; He gave himself to be a Ransom for Mankind.
He tasted Death for every Man. One would think that every Mouth should be
stopped; so there is a twofold Right that Christ our Redeemer has to Reign
over us, yet many will not let him Reign, nor let him Exercise his Dominion,
What do you think of these? What will become of them?

Our Lord Jesus Christ was in the World, he spoke a Parable to the Jews, I will
repeat it, and I would have you all consider it, whether the application may
not be made to Christians that Rebel against him, Luke 20 9. etc. A certain man
Planted a Vineyard, and let it forth to Husbandmen, and went into a far Country
for a long time. And at the season he sent a Servant to the Husbandmen, that
they should give him of ^ahe Fruit the Vineyard, but the Husbandmen beat him
and sent him away empty; And again he sent another Servant, and they beat him
also and entreated him shamefully, and sent him away empty; and again he sent
the Third, and they wounded him also and cast him out, Then said the Lord of
the Vineyard, what shall I do? I will send my Beloved Son, It may be they will
Reverence him when they see him, but when the Husbandmen saw him, they reasoned
among themselves, saying, This is the Heir, come let us Kill him, that the
Inheritance may be ours, So they cast him out of the Vineyard and Killed him,
What therefore shall the Lord of the Vineyard do unto them? He shall come and
destroy these Husbandmen and shall give the Vineyard to others. If I should
apply this, and bring it over to Christians, how dreadful would it be; the Lord
turned the Rebellious Jews out of their Country, and overthrew their City, the
City of Jerusalem, and destroyed the Temple, and left not one Stone upon
another.

Now consider, the Lord Jesus Christ he has Planted you a Vineyard, I will
give you Scripture for it if you please, The Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts was
the House of Israel; I mean the Children of Men, It was not an Outward
Vineyard, The House of Israel was his pleasant Plant; Now as the Lord looked
for fruit from them, so he expects fruit from us, The Lord has sent his
Servants in one Age and in another Age, and how have Christians treated them?
they have thrown them into Goals and Prisons, and evil entreated them, and they
have boasted and in effect said, the Inheritance is ours, We have Ordinances,
we have these Accomplishments, and Gifts, and Graces, we need not such a silly
sort of People to come to us, and Preach Christ and the Light w^erin us, there
is no need of that, but you must ^^ Christians, and come to Chruch, to this
Meeting and the other Meeting.

I do not speak by way of Reflection, but I would do it to open your
Understandings in the Mystery of the Kingdom of God and true Religion; The
Faithful Servants of the Lord have had hard treatment in this Country and
other Countries in this present Age as well as in former Ages, but that is not
all, The Lord of the Vineyard, the Great Almighty God has sent his Son among
you, Will you reverence him and bring forth fruit to him, What do you say? Have
you fruit for him? I cannot say of a wicked People they have fruit for the
Lord, for their fruit is untimely Fruit, their Fruit is Iniquity and
Transgression, but the fruit that is acceptable to the Lord is Holiness and
Righteousness, this is the Fruit that God expects from you. Let me tell you
Friends; If you will not reverence his Son Jesus Christ, you will be as
desolate in the day of Judgment as the Jews were; you may possibly escape the
Judgment of God in this World, but not then.

Friends, Countrymen, and Citizens, be you found bringing forth fruit unto the
Lord, and be not joined to that which is evil, be not governed by the power of
the Prince of the Air, you know where his Rule is, he would Rule in your hearts
if you should give way to him, but resist the Devil, and let the Kingdom of
Christ, and his Holy Government be set up in every one of your Souls, then you
will be found bringing forth fruit unto God, which will be acceptable to him;
in the days of old the Prophet takes notice of it, where he says, I found
Israel as Grapes in the Wilderness, I found them so in their innocence, in
their upright State, in their Primitive Condition, your Fathers were a kind of
First Fruits to me, they were as the first ripe Fruits of a Fig Tree before the
times they separated themselves, and bowed to Baal.

Men and Women in their tender days before they came to act evil with violence,
they were in better esteem with the Lord; they were then pleasing to him as the
first Fruits of a Fig Tree, when they were in their innocence and uprightness,
and many People have come into this good frame of Mind and Spirit, and yet
afterward have gone and separated themselves from the Lord, from the Power and
Spirit of Christ; they have gone from it, just as many did that were called
Christians of old; in the Apostles time there were some Christians that took
this course, they were acceptable to the Lord for a time, they did run well for
a time, and pray how did they begin? which way did they go? They began in
Obedience and in Subjection to Christ and his Spirit, but they separated
themselves afterward, and the Apostle writers to them, (do but consider it,) O
Foolish Galatians who has bewitched you that you should not obey the truth,
(why what is the matter) before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently set
forth, Crucified among you, are ye so foolish, having begun in the Spirit, are
you now made perfect by the Flesh? So I may say to many called Christians that
live in this Land, and obey not the truth, but live in ungodliness, oh Foolish
People who has bewitched you, you begun in the Spirit, and then you looked
like Quakers as some might upbraid you.

So that you see it was above Sixteen Hundred years ago that the Apostles did
Preach this truth, Preached the Spirit what have you done? ye did run well,
when ye were first convinced you began in the Spirit, how in the Spirit? the
Spirit of Christ did rule and govern you, there was a right beginning, there
was a right Christian Life, do you now think to be made perfect by the Flesh.

So we have abundance of such Christians in the World that have rejected the
Spirit, and it is no part of their Religion to walk in the Spirit, they have
given it an hard name, an ill name, they have frighted People out of it. Take
heed of the Spirit, that you be not deceived by it, and misled by it, you
pretend to be led by the Spirit, take heed of it say they; but this was the
Foundation of the Gospel Preaching, and Ministry in the Apostles times, they
laid this foundation, I believe an hundred instances might be produced out of
the Holy Scriptures to assert this Doctrine; you know our Lord Jesus Christ
when he was to go out of the World, said I go to prepare a place for you, and
if I go and prepare a place for you I will come again and receive you to my
self, and I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that
he may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of Truth, whom the World cannot
receive, I will send the Spirit of truth that he may lead you into all truth,
what must we reject this Doctrine? must this be no Article of the Christian
Faith to believe in the Holy Spirit? is this not a great obstruction and
impediment to Religion and Christianity; Let me tell you, till People come to
the Lord Jesus Christ, and to his Truth and Spirit, it will never be well with
Christendom; This ungrateful use of the Children of Men in resisting and
grieving and slighting the Holy Spirit, it has brought all the Judgments,
Miseries and Calamities that are come upon us.

Oh how do all manner of Abominations, Iniquities and Transgressions abound in
the World? How do they run down like a flood in the midst of us? There is no
returning to the Lord; If the Lord should send an Angel from Heaven to set a
Mark upon the forehead of all them that sigh and cry and mourn and lament for
the abominations and sins of the People of this Nation that make it desolate,
how few would be found that are true Mourners for their own Sins, and the Sins
of the whole Nation?

This is the end and result of our Ministry and Testimony among you, to turn
People from the evil of their ways, this was the end of Christ's coming into the
World. For this purpose was the Son of God manifested, that he might destroy
the works of the Devil, and that People might turn from their evil ways, and
forsake the Pomps and Vanities of this Wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts
of the Flesh.

This is that which you will find to be owned in the Rubric of the Church of
England; sure it was an excellent Spirit that attended People in those days,
when there was an introducing and bringing into their Church-Society and
Congregation, they were very strict in it, if they mean as they say, which I
heartily wish; when they are admitted as Church Members it is allowed to
Infants and and Little Children to be brought into the Church by that they call
Baptism, or sprinkling of Water upon their faces when this is administered to
them, because they are Infants they have Sureties to appear and speak for them,
and engage for them, and what do they engage? They engage against the Devil the
great Usurper, that so Christ might reign as absolute, the Sureties promise and
vow three things in the Child's Name, that it shall forsake the Devil and all
his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World, and all the sinful
Lusts of the Flesh, and to keep God's Holy Commandments to their Lives end.

There is not a Quaker in England that can Preach up a Doctrine that speaks
more absolutely against the Devil than this; I wish that all the Church of
England and Dissenters likewise, would universally engage themselves in this
Work against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, what brave times should we
have then? How would true Religion and Christianity slourish among us? but they
say and do not, Oh my Friends, it is sorrow to me when I consider it, I do not
speak by way of reflection, but out of pure love to your Souls; Oh that the
Lord would persuade you all to engage in this Holy War against the Devil and
all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of this Wicked World; I may say it with
Lamentation, Wickedness, Pride, and Arogancy abounds in this Land, and in other
Nations, though the Judgments of God have been threatened and his Mercies also
displayed, yet neither the one nor the other have awakened us nor allured us,
we do not grow much better, what is this but a ripening us and fitting us for
Judgment, and for a day of slaughter, when God will pour out all his wrath.

O Friends, bow your Souls before the Lord God of Heaven, and be humbled under
his mighty hand, that so you may escape the wrath that is to come.

So my Friends, you see the nature of Christianity, as well what was intended
of old, as at this day, you have the Testimony of the Prophets and Apostles and
a little hint of the Primitive Christians, and of the Reformers of our times,
in these latter Ages of the World.

I do not question but among such of elder times, as were called Fathers of the
Church, and likewise such as Luther, and Calvin, and those of later days, they
were sincere in their beginnings; what an excellent thing would it be if all
Protestants would put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and set up his Kingdom, and let
him Reign in their hearts; They will in their Prayers acknowledge Thine is the
Kingdom, but they will not let him have it, but shut him out, for the Kingdom
of God is within Men; we read in the Gospel that Christ shall say to some at
the last day, I know ye not, depart from me ye workers of Iniquity; and they
shall say, Lord, do thou not know us? we have eaten and drank in thy presence
and thou have taught in our streets, but he shall say unto them, depart from
me, I was a Stranger and you took me not in; People that live in Rioting and
Drunkenness, Swearing and Profaneness, and Ungodlikenness, they will not let
Christ into their hearts.

Friends, I do assert the present Reign of Christ in the Hearts of the Children
of Men, what do you think of it? Do you believe it should be so? It is said,
Isa. 9. 7. Of the increase of his Government and Peace there shall be no end,
his Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom, the Prophet Daniel speaks os it, Dan. 7.
9. 27. I beheld till the Thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of days did
sit, whose Garment was white as Snow, and the Hair of his Head like the Pure
Wool, his Throne was like the Fiery Flame, and his Whecls as Burning Fire; a
Fiery Stream issued and came forth from before him, Thousand of Thousands
Ministered to him, and Ten Thousand times Ten Thousand stood before him, his
Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and obey him;
the Messiah says the Prophet, shall finish the Transgression, and make an end
of Sins, and make reconciliation for Iniquity, and bring in everlasting
Righteousness.

Some People think that the Reign and Government of Christ is only in Heaven
above, where he sits on the Right hand of the Majesty on high, but they do not
think that he is near the Children of Men; They do not allow his Kingly Office,
his Prophetical and his Priestly Office: Many cry out against the Quakers, that
they deny all these three Office of Christ, what think you of it? I declare to
you that Christ is a King that shall Reign in Righteousness, and the Isles
shall wait for his Law; the Law shall go forth from Mount Sitn, and the word of
the Lord from Jerusalem; so that Christ is spoken of as a King that shall Reign
and Rule, and his Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom.

As Christ is a King to Reign and Rule, so he is also a Priest for ever, not
after the Order of Aaron, but after the Order of Melchizedeek. He is a Priest,
what for? To finish Transgression, to make an end of Sin, and purge it away;
Now the Priests under the Law, after the order of Aaron, they could not do
this, they made use of Blood, they Sprinkled the Sacrifice with Blood, but they
could not cleanse the Souls from Sin, but Christ he comes, he is a Priest, and
he offers a Sacrifice for all, and he offers up himself, and by that one
Offering he has for ever perfected them that are sanctified; he does it
effectually, so Daniel Prophesied, he shall make an end of Sin, and bring in an
everlasting Righteousness.

O say some People, we will allow all this to Christ when he comes to Reign
with his Church, then shall his Reign be one, and his Government one; but you
should let him be a King now, and a a Priest now, consider the reason of it why
it should be now, their is Sin and Iniquity in this World, but there is no
Iniquity in the Kingdom of Heaven, nothing that works Abomination, nor makes
a Lie can come there; if Christ will purge us from Sin, he must come down from
Heaven among us, and so he does, blessed be his Name for ever, he is the High
Priest of our Profession, and he has made us partakers of the Blessing of
Cleansing from Sin. by the purifying virtue of his own precious blood, and the
Sanctification of his Spirit.

Then consider in the next place Christ is a Prophet to teach and instruct his
People in the things that belong to their Everlasting Peace.

If there was an Inspired Prophet in this Land, we should be willing to hear
what that Prophet did say, if he had good things to tell, and would warn us
what evils we should escape; Friends, you have a Prophet now, but you do not
hear him, this is according to the Testimony of Moses of old, A Prophet, says
Moses, shall the Lord God raise up like unto me, and him shall you hear in all
things, Do you hear this Prophet? Who is it? It is the Lord Jesus Christ, hear
this great Prophet, what if we do not hear him? He that hears him not shall
be cut off from among the People; the Apostle when he writes to the Hebrews, he
asserts the Divinity of Christ, and his Priestly Office, and we do own and
assert the Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ also.

Now to make the Application of this to your Souls, Let Christ be your
High Priest, Prophet, and King, your Lawgiver, Counselor, and Leader, that he
may bring you to Glory, to a blessed state of Salvation, and Eternal Life; and
so to the Lord Jesus Christ I do recommend you, and leave you; you may find
much of this fulfilled in you as you give up your selves to the Teaching of the
Spirit of God, and of the grace of God, for if People will not be thus taught
they will never learn Christianity; so that People must come to Christ the
great Prophet to learn of him, and be taught by him, else they can never be
good Christians, Do not you read this Prophecy concerning God's People, They
shall be all taught of God, (and the Apostle Paul tells us the Grace of God
(the favor of God through Jesus Christ) has appeared to all Men, teaching us
that denying ungodliness and Worldly Lust, we should live soberly, Righteously,
and Godly in this present World, looking for that blessed hope and the glorious
appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for
us, that he might Redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a
peculiar People, zealous of all good works.

So that my Friends, this is an excellent State and Condition, the Lord bring
you all into it, and bring you to a certain and saving knowledge of Christ,
this is my desire this day, that you may be Christians indeed, and be Followers
of Christ, and obedient unto him, who is the Author of Eternal Salvation to all
them that obey him.

His Prayer after Sermon.
Everlasting God, and Fountain of Life, from whom all Comforts and Blessings
flow unto thy People through thy dear Son our Savior Jesus Christ; before thee
O thou Great and Almighty God, we are gathered and assembled this day, if thou
Lord be not with us to open our hearts we cannot be edified or comforted
aright; Therefore the cry of thy Servants is, that thou would this day open
the hearts of thy People and Children, that, infinite God of Life, we may have
access to thee, in and through the Spirit of thy dear Son, that thou may help
us on in the way that we should go, and, blessed Father of Life, our eyes are
unto thee, and our expectation is from thee, for thou alone art the Comforter
of thy People and Children; Lord, thy People of old did look dnto thee, their
hearts were only to thee, from whence all their Beings came; thou Infinite God,
and Fountain of all fullness, let our Souls have respect to thee this day, that
so in our solemn Meeting and gathering together before thee, we may be
refreshed, we may be opened, we may be comforted and sustained by thee; Lord
God of Life, we have need of thy Power, and of thy strength to sustain us in
our Pilgrimage and Journey thraugh this World; Holy Farher, we beseech thee to
remember us, and lead us and guide us in thy ways, and preserve us by thy
outstretched arm; thou did make it bare for thy People of old, make it bare
we pray thee this day for the sake of thy People, that so, infinite God, we may
be conducted through the whole course of our Lives in this World, that when our
days and time come to an end our Portion may be with thee, and thou be the Lot
of our Inheritance, that so we may live with thee in thy Kingdom for ever;
Glorious God of Life, thou that did hear the cry of thy People of old, and
did open thine ear to their Prayer and Supplicatsons, hear thy Children this
day that cry to thee, for thou have regard to the cry of the Poor, and to the
sighing of the Needy: In all their exercises in this World, in their many
afflictions and distresses be thou near to them, and be thou near to us here,
and comfort and refresh us we pray thee, that so we may persevere to the end of
our days in thy fear, and die in thy favor. O Lord God, thou Holy one of
Israel, this is the cry of thy Children to thee, for whom have we in Heaven but
thee? and there is none upon Earth that we desire besides thee; O Lord, extend
the Riches of thy grace to every one of us in thy dear Son in whom thou art
well pleased, and turn us from the evil of our ways, Lord our Cry is unto thee,
and our dependence is upon thee, thou have remembered thy People of old, and
have remembered us this day, thou have stretched forth thy Almighty Arm in this
day of our Visitation, and have showed us the way of Salvation by Jesus Christ,
and gathered many into it. Powerful Father of Life, increase thy little Flock,
gather the scattered, and bring home the lost Sheep of the House of Israel,
that so a numberless number may be gathered from the four winds, say to the
North give up, and to the South keep not back, and bring in thy Sons and thy
Daughters from the utmost ends of the Earth; And Lord God of Life, that which
kinders the prosperity of thy work and the spreading of thy Truth and Gospel of
thy Dear Son, remove it and take it out of the way, and put an end to War and
Blood shed in thine own time, and in thine own way, and create Peace on Earth,
and in thy Churches, and let thy Jerusalem be made the praise of the whole
Earth, and an Eternal Excellency, and as the Beauty of all Generations; Bring
Mankind into the Kingdom of thy dear Son, to whom the gathering of the People
is to be, that so thy name may be glorified, and the hearts of thy People
opened to honor thy Name, for thou alone art worthy of all glory, praise, and
thanksgiving; O Lord God of Israel, thou have manifested thy self among thy
People in our day, that thy Name and Fame may be great in the World, and thou
have made thy Gospel to spread from Isle to Isle, and from Sea to Sea, that so
the Earth may be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the
Sea, that the Glory of the Lord, and the spreading of his truth may be from the
rising of the Sun, to the going down of the same; Lord God of Life and power,
bring down the Kingdom of Sin and Satan in this Land, and other Lands, it is
the Sin of this Nation that has brought misery and calamity upon it, and will
do more and more; the Sins of this Nation have justly provoked thee to send
down thy Judgments, and to pour out thy displeasure upon the Inhabitants of the
Land; Let thy mercy be now extended to us, and Father of Life, be entreated to
turn away thy wrath, that thy Judgments may not be executed upon the Children
of Men; Powerful God of Life, in this day of our Visitation, let thy word go
forth, and thy Gospel be Preached, and let thy light arise, and thy Grace be
extended, that brings Salvation, through the dear Son of thy Love unto the
Children of Men; Lord God of Life, when shall the day come that the Kingdoms of
this World shall become the Kingdoms of thy dear Son and our Savior Jesus
Christ, that he may Reign in Righteousness, and Rule in Judgment, that the
Isles may wait for his Law. O Powerful God of Israel, arise in thy Glory, and
let thy Splendour break forth powerfully among all People, and let them be
thine, and enter into an everlasting Covenant with them that shall not be
broken; let there be a removing Iniquity, and a doing away Transgression and
Sin, Lord bring it down, and make the Children of Men weary and heavy laden
under it, and to groan under the burden of Sin, and cry to thee, and seek thee
while thou may be found, and call upon thee whiist thou art near; give us thy
presence at this time we pray thee, and draw nigh to us, and help us to draw
nigh to thee, and op^n our hearts that we may serve thee, and worship thee and
thy dear Son; And Glorious and Infinite God thou have extended in a large
measure thy grace to us that we might serve thee acceptably, and that we and
all thy People whom thou have chosen and set apart for thy self may glorify
thee in our Age and Generation, that when our days and time come to be at an
end, we may live with thee in thy Everlasting Kingdom. and sound forth Praises
and Hallelujah's unto thee, for thou O Lord art worthy to receive Blessing, and
Honor, Glory and Power, that sit upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever
and ever; For all thy Mercies and Blessings in this Day of our Visitation, O
make us sensible of thy Goodness and Mercy and Loving kindness to our Souls,
that we may render to thee Thanksgiving and Praise, and Honor and Worship, for
thou alone art worthy, who art God over all, from Everlasting to Everlasting,
Blessed for ever and ever, Amen.

A SERMON Preached by Mr. JOHN BUTCHER. At Grace-Church street, March 11. 1693.
My Friends,
THE end of our Preaching to you the Principle of the Light within is, that you
might come to the Knowledge of Christ as he does appear nigh to you, he is come
nigh to the Children of Men in our Age, that is, by his Light, Grace, Spirit,
and Truth, whereby he does appear in the hearts of Men and Women; Thus our
Preaching of him does agree with his own Testimony, I am the Light of the
World, and he does exhort all that they should so believe in him; Believe in
the Light says he, that you may be the Children of the Light: What is a Child
of Light? He is such a one as by the Operation of the Power of Christ has know
a being turned, turned from what? From Darkness unto Light, and from the Power
of Satan unto the Power of the living God. And for this we do labor, according
to our ability, which the Lord is pleased to give to us, that People may be
turned from darkness unto light, and the following words are Explanatory, from
the Power of Satan unto the Power of the Living God; so that it does appear,
People have been under the Power of Satan, the Evil One that is called the
Prince of the Power of the Air, he has a Rule and a Government, but in whom?
In the Children of Disobedience.

Now the Labor of those Ministers that were in the days of old, who were the
Preachers of the Gospel, and Glad Tidings of the Kingdom, they being such
Ministers as were of Christ's own making, their Labor was to turn People from
Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan, to the Power of the Living God,
that they might be turned from that evil Power and Spirit that Rules and Works
in the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience, who Rebel against the Light that
shines in their Hearts and Consciences; For the Man of Sin and Worker of
Iniquity has such a power, and we all have been in Captivity to him, we have
all been in Captivity to him, we have all been in Bondage to Sin and Satan,
which God knew, and the Apostle takes notice of it, says he, God has
concluded all under Sin, we have all been under the Power of the Wicked one;
For what end has God concluded all under Sin? For what end is it? that we
might be destroyed? No, God through Christ the Dear Son of his Love, has
extended to you the day of Visitation, that you might come to the knowledge of
Life and Salvation: But wherein may we come to this knowledge? it is in that
way which God has ordained, even by Christ, who is the Way to God, Christ
Jesus the Eternal Son of God, he is the Blessed Mediator and Way to God again.
What is Gods end in concluding all under Sin? was it that he might destroy all
the Children of Men, that are the Workmanship of his Hands, that he has endued
with Rational and Immortal Souls? Was it that they might be destroyed? No, but
that he might have mercy upon all, Gods end in first Making and Creating of us
was, that we might Live to his Honor; and that we might so live in this World,
that when we die, we might obtain a Life that shall never die, and attain to
the possession of the Inheritance amongst the Saints in Light, which Christ by
his precious Blood has purchased for all them that Love him, and give up
themselves to be Followers of him.

Now my Friends, the Mercy of God appears so great to all in and through Christ
Jesus, who is the Light of the World, and who is the only Way, and (as my
Friend observed that spoke before me) we have not another way, nor is there any
other Name under Heaven, by which we can be saved, and obtain Eternal Life, the
Apostle refers this to the Name and Power of our Lord Jesus Christ; Well if so
be that it is only by the Power of Christ that we must know Salvation, where is
it that we must attain it? How shall we do to be made partakers of it, and be
saved from thee Wrath of God which shall come-upon the Workers of Iniquity; For
it is said the Wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the Nations that forget
God.

People hope to escape the Wrath to come, and Everlasting Misery by Christ
whilst they neglect to improve the present time that is afforded to them to
obtain Salvation, Christ he is come to Redeem us, that we may know Redemption
by him, from what? From Sin, for Pollution and Defilement by sin is the cause
why People notwithstanding all their Names and Profession of Religion still lie
under a secret condemnation in their own Hearts; If a man should hold such a
fair Profession that none could charge him, none condemn him, yet if he meet
with secret condemnation, through all should speak well of him, if his own
Conscience condemn him, He would not have any true peace or satisfaction in his
own mind, for the Testimony of a good Conscience is more to him than all the
favor and friendship of the World. The light of Christ if you incline your
minds to obey it, what will be the effect of it? This Light or Spirit of Grace
and Truth, which is all one, is sufficient to Save and Deliver you out of the
Temptations and Snares of the Wicked one, for we may every day while we are
here, meet with Trials and Temptations of one kind or other; What shall a man
do that he may be preserved from the evil of the World, there are many
Provocations and evils that a man meets with in the World, How shall he do to
be preserved from them? Christ has made Provision for us in his Prayer, (John
17. 15.) to his Father, I Pray not that thou should take them out of the
World, but that thou should keep them from the evil. Christ will preserve me
from the evil of the World when a Temptationis presented before me, I shall
overcome it if I obey the Light of Christ which will shine upon me, and show me
that this must be done, and that I must leave the other undone: In my own
Conscience there is something will tell me this thing is evil, and I ought not
to do it when this Power of Christ comes to be close with; For it is an
appearance of Love, Grace, and Mercy, but if I do oppose and withstand this
Grace and Mercy, I may miss of that Power and Strength, which is sufficient to
overcome, and so be overcome by the Temptation. The Apostle John tells us. As
many as received him, to them gave he Power to become the Sons of God: even to
them that believe in his Name. So, that its they that do Receive Christ and
Love his Light and Spirit, so as to be led by it, that come to know this Power
of Christ, and thereby an overcoming; But if People slight and reject the Grace
and Mercy tendered to them, hereupon comes that Sentence pronounced by the
Prophet, Thy Destruction is of thy Self; A man may destroy his own Soul by
giving way to that which is evil, and rejecting that which is good.

Therefore My Friends, Close with that Power which inclines you to that which
is good, if I mind it, and make trial of it, I shall find that within me which
will incline me to that which is good; Though I may find sometimes a corrupt
inclination in me to that which is evil, yet there is something also that will
incline me to do what is required of me; why should I reject that which is
good? Try all things, and hold fast that which is good; I have tried many
things, but none will do me so much good as the Grace and Mercy, Light and
appearance of Christ to me if I mind it and close with it; He has showed thee
O Man what is good, (says the Prophet Micah) and what does the Lord require of
thee, but to do justly, and love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God; The
Lord has showed you what is his Will, be ye doers of it, say then to thy self,
shall I give way to that which tends to my own Ruin, How can I do this
wickedness and sin against God? Shall I join with the Enemy of my Salvation and
yield to his Temptations, and Dishonor God, and Ruin my Immortal Soul? God
forbid; What you know to be contrary to the Will of God, take heed of it, Cease
to do Evil, Learn to do well; Be followers of that which is good, take up the
Cross of Christ, Deny your Selves and your own Will, know a being Crucified to
the World by the Cross of Christ, and the World Crucified to you.

Thus as I said before, This is the end of our Preaching to you that noble
Principle of the Light within, that you might come to the Knowledge of Christ,
as he does appear nigh to you, and will lead you by his Spirit into all Truth,
and incline you to that which is good, and preserve you from that which is
evil, when you are tempted to it; Why should I join with the Devil that dark
Spirit, that would draw me to that which will destroy my own Soul; The Lord
Christ he is come to turn me from Sin, and save my Soul; Why should I not close
with him? He has stood knocking at the Door of my Heart, till his Head is
filled with Dew, and his Locks with the Drops of the Night. Many Souls have
known these Wooings and Entreaties of Christ, knocking at the Door of their
Hearts, and have let him In, and closed with his appearance, by his Light,
grace and good Spirit, and found the benefit and comfort of it; Why should not
I do so? Why should not I esteem him as the chief of Ten Thousand, as the
Beloved of my Soul? He will be the chiefest of all to that Soul that has
chosen him for the chiefest Good; Though there may be some comfort in the
enjoyment of the things of this World, yet though they be useful and necessary
for my present supply, If I lose them all, and find Christ, and be found in
him, and hold him fast, I shall count them as nothing, but despise them in
comparison of him who is the Beloved of my Soul.

You that are come to the Knowledge of Christ, and have embraced the Light of
Truth in your own Hearts, do know the benefit you have by it, in walking in the
Light, as the Children of Light, and of the Day, and in Obedience to Christ who
is the Light, and shines in your Hearts.

Friends I would not be mistaken, I do not Preach Christ as the Light of the
World, in opposition to his outward appearance, and being manifested in the
Flesh in that preapared Body wherein he did his Fathers will when he was on
Earth; All true Christians do esteem and reverence Christ's appearance in the
Body, wherein he suffered death, and became a Sacrifice for our Sins, as the
Apostle says, Ephesians. 5. 2. Christ has loved us, and has given himself for us,
an Offering and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling Savor; If I esteem the
Appearance of Christ in my own Heart, I shall be so far from having a light
esteem of his Bodily Appearance, and his being manifest in the Flesh, that I
shall admire and reverence that Great Mystery of Godliness, and bless God for
the record given thereof in the Holy Scriptures, which the light of Christ is a
Key to open, Even the Great Mysteries of the Kingdom, which men by their parts
and acquirements cannot attain to; For God has not made known these great
things to the Wise and Prudent, as we may gather from Christ's own Prayer, Mat.
11. 25. I thank thee O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid
these things from the Wise and Prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes; Even
so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight.

My Friends, walk in the Light more and more, that by the Spirit of the Lord,
you may be acquainted with the divine operation of the Power of Christ, which
will bring you from under the bondage of Sin and Corruption into the glorious
liberty of the children of God, wait to know this Power in your own Hearts,
that you may be sanctified throughout in Spirit, Soul and Body, and Justified
freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, Romans 3.
24. Walk in the Light, and in Meekness and Humility, and in the Truth, 1 John
6. 7. If we say we have fellowship with him and walk in darkness, we Lie, and
do not the Truth, But if we walk in the Light as he is in the Light, we have
Fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses
us from all Sin. Many of you have known the beginning, go forward, and continue
to walk in the Truth, that you may know the Blood of Cleansing, that as the
Apostle says, Romans 6. 22. But now being made free from Sin, and become
Servants to God, ye may have your Fruit unto Holiness, and the end Everlasting
Life.

His Prayer after Sermon.
Most Powerful Everlasting God of Life, who art Almighty in thy Power, and
can do whatsoever pleases thee, we have cause to bless thy Great Name for
thy Goodness and Mercy which thou have extended to thy People in this Day of
thy Power; Thou have extended a Blessed Day of Visitation to many that were
strangers unto thee, and unacquainted with the way of Life and Salvation,
Powerful God, we have great cause to bless thy Name for thy Goodness, and that
great Love which in and through thy Dear Son Jesus Christ thou have extended to
us. Thou first lovedst us before we loved thee; Thou it was that through the
Visitation of thy Love, did beget and raise desires and breathings in the
Souls of many after thee, and the knowledge of thy living way; And blessed
Father of Life, not only so, but thou have answered the desires and breathings
that thou have raised in the Souls of many, and brought them to the knowledge
of the way of Life and Salvation, And Powerful God, thou have been near to all
thine unto this day, that have been truly given up in faithfulness to thy Will,
and to answer thy Holy and blessed Requirings; Living God, they that have
waited and depended upon thee to be made partakers of that help and strength
that comes from thee, have been thereby enabled to do thy Will, and this is
that we wait for, and from time to time draw nigh to thee, for we wait upon
thee, that we may come not only to know but to do thy Will, and Answer thy
requirings, Blessed God of Life, we have great encouragement from time to time
to draw nigh to thee, for that comfortable presence of thine which we have
enjoyed in the midst of our Assemblies, many a time the Hungry have been
satisfied with Bread; And the Fountain of living water has been opened, and
the Thirsty have been Drinking of it; Praised by thy Name for ever that thou
have appeared with us, and have given us some sensible enjoyment of thy living
Presence, O Lord go a long with thy People, let thy blessing be with us, that
we may hold on through the whole course of our lives in this World, and live to
the praise of thy blessed Name; thou have given us to see our own weakness and
inability, and that we had need depend on thee every day for fresh supplies of
strength that we may able to hold on in thy holy way, and lay hold on the hope
that thou have set before us; There are many Trials, Tribulations and
Afflictions that thy Children and People meet with, and the grand Adversary the
Devil like a Roaring Lion is going about continually seeking whom he may
devour; Thy People have nothing but thy self to depend upon, and there is a
secret help and power that thou give thine, whereby they are enabled to
withstand the Enemy in all his Wiles, and in all his Temptations; Living God,
What we are it is by thee, it is by the Assistance of thy Grace and good Spirit
that we know a perserving and holding on in thy way; Living Father, we pray
thee let us feel every day the Conduct of thy Grace and good Spirit that we may
admire thy love, and praise and glorify thy great and excellent Name; O
Powerful God, thou blessest the Assemblies of thy People that meet together in
the Name of thy Dear Son Jesus Christ, for the enjoyment of thy Comfortable
Presence; Lord blessand Prosper all the Meetings of thy People every where, and
the labors of those whose mouths thou have opened to refresh the sorrowful,
and to bring glad tidings to the poor distressed, Needy, and weary Souls that
would be glad of Rest and deliverance, and those in whom thou raisest desires
and breathings after the knowledge of thee, and thy blessed ways, Lord bear up
the Hearts of those, and strengthen all those good desires and breathings which
thou have begotten in any that they may come to the know ledge of that blessed
Rest, where thou make thy Flock to lie down at Noon, and feedest them with
living Bread, and openest a living Fountain to refesh and satisfy their
thirsty Souls, that they may praise thy great an excellent Name, which is pure
and precious above every Name; Thou have brought many to the knowledge of it:
Let thy Truth be exalted, and thy Everlasting Gospel be still Preached in the
Land of our Nativity, and in other Nations, for the Day of Grace, the time of
love is now come, and the Day of thy Power is broken out in the midst of us;
Arise O Lord in thy Power more and more, and send forth thy Light and thy
Truth, that many may be Called and Converted, and brought from far, from the
utmost ends of the Earth, to the knowledge of thy self and thy Son Jesus
Christ, whom to know is Life Eternal, and let many arise, and praise thy
excellent and Glorious Name, from the Rising of the Sun to the going down
thereof; Blessed Father of Life, make thy Dear Son Christ more and more known
to the World, that they may be no longer Enemies, but be reconciled to thee by
Jesus the Great Mediator of the New Covenant, Lord the way is thine, and the
work is thine; Let truth and Righteousness be brought in more and more, and
bring down the Kingdom, and Man of Sin, and the Power of Darkness, and make thy
Jerusalem the Praise of the Earth; We have seen the beginnings of thy glorious
Work, and the light of thy glorious Heavenly Day, thou have raised and brought
in many to walk in the Light, and to love thy Holy ways: blessed Father of
Life, our Eyes are unto thee, and our dependence is upon thee; Whom have we in
Heaven but thee? And there is none upon Earth that we can desire in comparison
of thee, Therefore our cry is, What shall we do in this World without the
enjoyment of thy self? In thy presence is fullness of Joy, and at thy right Hand
are pleasures for evermore; Lord thou have afforded us thy refreshing presence
in this our Solemn Meeting, (Glory and Honor, and Living Praises, ascend to thy
Name,) which is as a precious Ointment poured forth, therefore our Souls do
love thee; O thou that did open the Heart of Lydea, open the Hearts of all
thy People before thee, that they may go away with a sense of thy love and
kindness toward them; Blessed Father of Mercies, bless this opportunity to us
all that are here before thee, and extend thy blessing to the Meetings and
Assemblies of all thy People where ever they are, one may Plant and another
Water, but the increase is from thee; Our Eyes are toward thee, we wait upon
thee, whether can we go but unto thee, who have the Words of Eternal Life: Lord
God of Life go a long with us when we are separated one from another, and let
the sense of thy mercy remain upon our Spirits, and be an obligation upon us to
walk in Faithfulness, Meekness, and Humility before thee, that being led by by
Spirit, we may when we have finished our Pilgrimage, lay down our Heads in
Peace, and know an abundant entrance into that Everlasting Kingdom which thou
have prepared for them that love and fear thee; And for thy Mercies, and
Favors, Benefits, and Blessings which thou have made us partakers of in and
through our Lord Jesus Christ, thy Dear Son and our alone Mediator, all living
Praises and Glory be rendered to thee, for thou alone art worthy, who art God
over all Blessed, for Ever. Amen.

A SERMON Preached by Mr. JOHN VAUGHTON. At Grace-Church street, April, 1st.
1694.
IT is a great mercy and kindness, that God has been pleased to open the way
of Life and Salvation unto the Souls of many People that in this our Day and
generation were in great distress, for want of the knowledge of it, and this
knowledge is given unto us through the blessed appearance, and Revelation of
the Power and Spirit of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to which my Friends,
Blessed be the Name of the Lord we have been turned in our Day and Generation.

For the Message and Testimony that God raised up his Servants to bear among us
in our Day, and time, who came in the Spirit and Power of our Lord Jesus
Christ, having been made the Monuments of Gods mercy through Faith in him, that
died for our Sins, and rose again for our Justification, That Blessed message
and Testimony which they bare among us, was in the Evidence and Demonstration
of the Spirit and Power of the Lord Jesus; For they came indeed to Preach the
Gospel of Life and Salvation, and the way they took to Preach the Gospel to us
in our Day, was the same way that the Holy Apostle Paul in his Day was sent, to
Preach the Gospel, who said we are sent of God, To turn People from Darkness
unto Light, and from the power of Satan unto God; The Holy Apostle he proposed
the end for which they were sent to turn the Sons and Daughters of Men, from
Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan, to the Power of God, that they
might receive remission of Sins, and an Inheritance among them which are
Sanctified through Faith which is in Christ Jesus.

O Friends, This Faith in Christ, it is a living Faith, it is a Faith of the
operation of God; God works it in us by his own Spirit and Power: there are
many that pretend to have Faith in Christ that are strangers to the operation
of the Power and Spirit of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and so do not
know nor are made partakers of that Faith, which works by Love, that gives
them Victory over the World, and preserves them and keeps them out of the
Evil of the World.

Now Friends, it is my desire that you may turn from Darkness unto Ligh^; That
you may all believe in Christ and walk in him that you may be sensible that the
Blood of Jesus Christ, the Dear and Blessed Son of God cleanses from all Sin,
from all unrighteousness, and from all filthiness of flesh and Spirit, That so
the end of the Labor, Travel and Testimonies of all the Faithful Messengers,
and Servants whom the Lord has raised up in this our Day, and sent to turn Men
from Darkness unto Light, and from the Power of Satan to the power of God, that
their Labor and Travel (I say) may not be in Vain, that we may all come to
believe in the Light, that we may be Children of the Light and of the Day, that
so we may come to walk in the Light; And then my Friends we shall all come to
be brought into an Heavenly Fellowship; If we walk in the Light as he is in the
Light, we have Fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ the
Dear Son of God, cleanses us from all Sins. And this is a Work that will be
profitable for all to know, seeing no unclean thing shall ever enter into the
Kingdom of God.

Friends, Our Justification, that is indeed in and through, and by the Lord
Jesus Christ, for his sake not our own; Any thing that we have done or can do,
will not have a tendency to make our Peace with God, seeing that we can do
nothing our selves that is aceeptable and well pleasing to God; Therefore we
cannot in the least (as has been unjustly charged upon us) diseteem or put a
light esteem on what the Lord Jesus Christ has done for us, in his own Person
without us, nor upon what by his own Power and Spirit he has wrought in our
Hearts; But we believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, both as to his outward
Appearance as he was, God manifest in the Flesh, and also in his Inward and
Spiritual Appearance in our Souls; We believe in him that has appeared by his
Light and Grace, and Truth in our Hearts, and we know the Effectual Working and
Operation of his Divine Power, to Sanctify and Cleanse, and Purify our Souls;
And thereby we come to have a real sense of the benefit and Advantage that the
Souls of the Children of Men have in and by Death, and Sufferings,
Resurrection, and Ascension of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Till People come to believe in his Spiritual Appearance by his Light and
Grace, and truth in their Hearts, and to receive him and entertain him, and let
him have a place in their Souls, that he by his Power may purge away Sin and
Transgression; While Men remain Rebellious and stubborn, and will not let him
in, when he stands and knocks at the Door of their Hearts, that he may come in
and sup with them, and they with him; When Men Rebel against his Heavenly light
within them, and turn away from his Divine Grace and Holy Spirit, and turn the
Grace of God into Wantoness, Lasciviousness, and run into Uncleaness,
Drunkenness, Pride, Envy, Malice, and bitterness, and into those things that
are abominable and Evil in the sight of the Lord, These men have no real
Advantage, or beneby the Death and Sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
Satisfaction and Atonement he has made for our Sins, by that one Offering,
and Sacrifice of himself; and they do not truly know the blessed end and design
of his Appearance and coming into the World; For this purpose was the Son of
God manifested that be might destroy the Works of the Devil, that he might
finish Transgression and make an end of Sin, and bring in Everlasting
Righteousness.

My Friends, the end of the Working of the Invisible Power and Spirit of Christ
is, that he may have a place in all your Hearts, and that you may entertain
him; For the Lord will draw a Line of Judgment upon all that go under a
Profession of Christianity, and own what the Lord Jesus Christ did without
them, but will not receive him, entertain him, and believe in him, as he does
spiritually Appear and shine in into their Hearts by hi^ Divine Light, Grace
and Spirit.

My Friends, Remember the sore Judgments Miseries, Calamities and distress that
came upon the Jews, because of their rejecting Christ in his outward
Appearance, in that prepared Body in which he came to do his Fathers will; They
would not own him in his Bodily Appearance, but rejected him, and set him at
naught, they Crowned him with Thorns, and Crucified the Lord of Life and Glory;
He said unto them except ye believe that I am he, ^^ shall dye in your Sins,
And if ye dye in your Sins, whether I go you cannot come, And thus he spoke to
Jerusalem; O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Thou that killest the Prophets and Stonest
them which are sent unto thee, How often would I have gathered thy Children
together, even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, and ye would
not, Behold your House is left unto yo^ Desolate for I say unto you, ye shall
not see me henceforth till ye shall say, Blessed is he that comes in the Name
of the Lord. He tells them of the Calamity, and distress that should come upon
them and overtake them, and so it came pass, because they rejected the Love of
God, which in Christ Jesus was extended to them, when he would have gathered
them and brought them into a state of Reconciliation and peace with the Living
God but they would not.

So now my Friends, In this day of Christ's Inward and Spiritual Appearance, you
have had the Testimonies of those that have been sent to you in the Name and
Power, and Spirit of the Living God, and yet many will not believe in the Lord
Jesus Christ, nor receive him Inwardly and Spiritually appearing in their
Hearts, nor give way to him, nor wait, and attend upon him, to do that work in
them, and for them which they cannot do for themselves; What work is that? The
Work of Sanctification. For none come to be Justified freely by the Grace of
God through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, as the Apostle speaks, Romans
3. 24. but they are also Sanctified by the Spirit of Christ, and made partakers
of the Divine Nature; So that is absolutely necessary for us to know Christ's
Power and Spirit, to renew and sanctify our Souls, and purify and cleanse us.

When we come to believe in the Inward and Spiritual Appearance of Christ, and
to know the Work of Sanctification, we cannot have a slight esteem of, nor
dis-believe or undervalue what the Lord Jesus Christ has done with us, in his
Person; For we shall come to find the Benefit, Gain, Advantage, and profit of
it redounding to our Souls, through that one offering, when he offered himself
through the Eternal Spirit as a Lamb without spot; He offered himfelf once for
all, and we have the benefit of it, when we come to receive him, live in
Obedience to him, and Answer his requirings, and walk in the Spirit, And then
as the Apostle says, If we walk in the Spirit, we shall not fulfill the Lusts
of the Flesh, for all that is in the World, the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of
the Eyes, and the Pride of Life, is not of the Father, but is of the World, and
the World passes away, and the Lust thereof, but he that does the Will of God
abides for ever.

Therefore see to it, you that make a profession of it. see that as you have
received the Lord Jesus Christ you walk as he walked, that you live in the
Spirit, and walk in the Spirit, and not fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh; that you
live not in malice, envy, or bitterness, and so grieve the good Spirit of God,
and bring a burden upon the Souls of the Righteous.

We that are come to the sight and vision of Heavenly things, and have the
Mysteries of the Kingdom of God opened to us, we are come to be Partakers of
the gift of Charity which is a more excellent way, if this be wanting, all is
wanting; what does the Apostle say, though I speak with the Tongue of Men and
of Angels, and have not Charity, I am become as sounding-Brass, or a Tinkling
Cymbal, and though I have the gift of Prophecy, and understand all mysteries
and all knowledge, and though I have al^ Faith so that I could remove
Mountains, and have no Charity, I am nothing, and though I bestow all my Goods
to the Poor, and though I give my Body to be burned, and have not Charity, it
profits me nothing.

These things have been often said and declared to you, Friends, and I have now
this General Testimony to give in the dread and fear of the Lord God, They that
love God above all, will Love their Neighbor as themselves, they will love
those that are the Friends of God, and of his People; nay it is a duty
incumbent on them, A New Commandment (says our Savior) I give unto you that
ye love one another as I have lovtd you that ye also love one another. By this
shall all Men know that ye are my Disciples if ye have love one to another; And
we are not only to love one another, but to love our Enemies, this our Lord
Jesus Christ commands us, Mat. 5. 44. But I say unto you, love your Enemies,
bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them
that despitefully use you and persecute you, that ye may be the Children of
your Father which is in Heaven, for he causes his Sun to shine on the evil,
and on the good, and sends Rain on the just, and on the unjust.

Now, my Friends, that you may keep in this love of God, and love to one
another, it is the desire and breathing of my Soul, That so your Faith may
stand not in the wisdom of Men's words. but in the power of God; this power will
bring down every high thought and imagination into subjection and obedience to
Christ, that we may walk before bim to all well pleasing, that when we come to
die we may lay down our heads in peace, and be found of him in peace without
spot, and blameless, and at the end of our days we may receive the end of our
Faith, the Salvation of our Immortal Souls.

Friends, to the Grace of God I commend you, the Lord God of life preserve and
keep you, that you may be safe in the hands of God, and abide under the shadow
of his wing, and be surrounded with his Almighty Arm, which has hitherto
preserved us in all our Solemn Meetings and Assemblies, when the Enemies of
Gods truth have risen up against us; The remembrance of it should be sweet and
pleasant to us, When the floods of the Ungodly were mustred up against us, and
sometimes halled us out of our Meetings to Goals and Prisons for bearing
Testimony to the Truth of God in our day, O the sweet and comfortable presence
of the Lord that then attended us, and blessed be his Name he waited to be
gracious to us, and did work manifold Deliverances for us; and Praise and Glory
be given to the Eternal and Almighty God whose Divine Power and Providence has
brought a calm over the Nation, so that now we enjoy our Meetings without
Trouble and Molestation; O that we may be sensible of the wonderful Love and
Mercy of God to us.

And, Friends, it greatly concerns us to be careful in the whole course of our
Lives, that we may not give any occasion for the obstructing or hazarding of
the present Peace and Liberty we enjoy; O there should be a serious care and
tender regard to Gods Glory, and the Honor of his Great and Excellent Name,
and also a care and concern for the Reputation of our Religion, and Religious
Societies, that none may have any occasion or just ground to bespatter and
reproach us, and render us odious to the Government under which we live.

Blessed be the Name of the Lord for the freedom and quiet Seasons we enjoy,
and that are continued by the Mighty Arm and Power of the Lord; let all our
Souls bow before him, and let us walk and live in a continual subjection to his
Divine Wisdom and Will, that our Souls may be all bound up in the bundle of
Life, that we may serve the Lord with sincerity and perrserverance to the end
of our days, that then an abundant entrance may be Ministered to us into the
everlasting Kindom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

His Prayer after Sermon.
GLorious God of Life, the Visitations of thy Love in thy Day of Grace and
Salvation are very sweet and precious to the Souls of thy Children; O Lord we
have cause to bless thy Name that thou have extended a Day of Mercy to us, a
Day wherein thou art visiting the Sons and Daughters of Men, a Day wherein thou
have caused the Heavenly Divine Light of thy Son Christ Jesus to shine into our
Hearts; Thou have given a Remnant to believe in it, the Eyes of our
Understandings have been opened by it, and wehave come to see and partake of
the Visitations of thy tender Love to our Immortal Souls; O the shining of this
Divine Light has made us see our way out of Darkness, and the Day of thy
Glorious Power has Dawned upon us, when many have been in the Region and
Shadow of Death; And thou have manifested thy Loving kindness to the Souls of
men, in and through our Lord Jesus Christ; O Lord be thou graciously pleased to
be nigh to thy People, Preserve them and Guide them in thy Way, the Way of
Holiness and Righteousness, which thou have led them into; O that they may
Perservere therein, and obtain Salvation to their Immortal Souls; O Eternal God
of Life and Glory, we humbly pray thee send forth thy Light and thy Truth, and
open the Eyes of the Understandings of the Sons and Daughters of Men, and make
them willing in this thy Day to embrace the Appearance of the Dear Son of thy
Love, in the shinings of his Light and Grace, and Truth in their Hearts, that
they may be Sanctified and Purified, and made a peculiar People to thy self,
Zealous of good Works; O Eternal God of Power, let the Souls of the Children of
men come to enjoy thy Presence that their Bodies may become Living Temples for
thee to dwell in; O Eternal God of Life exalt thy own Name and Truth, and make
thy self known more and more to the Nations of the Earth, that they may come to
believe in thy Dear Son Christ Jesus, and that they may come to know Redemption
and Salvation, and the things that belong to the Everlasting Peace of their
Souls; O Lord we pray thee, be with the Families of thy Children and People in
all their Exercises, in all their Afflictions, and in all their Temptations, be
thou near to them to preserve them, and keep them, and uphold them by thy free
Spirit, that thou may guide them by thy Consel, and afterward receive them
into Glory; O Eternal God of Life, be with the Young Generation of the Children
of thy Servans, that they may serve thee in their Day, and keep their Hearts, O
Lord, by thy mighty Power, and let them receive the Word of thy Truth in the
Love of it, and seal them by thy good Spirit to the Day of Redemption; And O
Blessed God of Life, let thy Work prosper in the midst of the Earth, and subdue
all that is contrary to thy pure Mind and Heavenly Will, and exalt the Kingdom
of thy Dear Son, and let his name be known and trusted in among all the Nations
of the World, that they may believe in him, who is the Author of Eternal
Salvation to al them that obey him, that so Glory, and Honor, and Everlasting
Renown, and Pure praises, and Living Thanksgivings may Ascend to thee, and let
all thy sensible Ones offer them up to thee, through Christ the Dear Son of thy
Love, in whom thou art well pleased, for thou alone art worthy to receive all
Glory and Praise, who art God over all, Blessed for ever and ever, Amen.

A SERMON, Preached by Mr. JAMES PARK. At Ratcliff, April 19. 1694.
THEY that come to wait upon the Lord and draw nigh to him, and diligently
attend upon him, they shall receive Wisdom, and strength from him, and Power to
enable them to do the Will of God, to fear the Lord, and call upon his Name, to
love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, and to Work Righteousness in their
Time, Day, and Generation, knowing him in whom they have believed, and whom a
Remnant are come to, and are Baptized into him, and walk in him, as they have
received him, and by whom they have been taught.

All are to receive the Lord Jesus Christ, and to Walk in him, who is the Lords
Anointed, the Judge of Quick and Dead, all are to have a certain knowledge of
him, by receiving and embracing him, Did we ever know God aright, and the Lord
Jesus Christ his only begotten Son till we received him, and knew him to be in
us the Hope of Glory? Many of us have received the Lord Jesus Christ, and
walked in him as we have received him, and then we came to know the witness of
him in our selves, such as know him experimentally can set to their Seals that
God is true; We have known God the Father at Work in us, and his Son Christ
Jesus Working mightily by his Almighty Power, in and through whom we come to
Work out our own Salvation with fear and trembling; This causes a great fear
of God to come upon Man; I have known in my time a great Trial to come upon
Man, and then he came to serve the Lord with Fear, and that is good service,
and that undoubtedly will manifest a good servant, when a man comes to serve
the Lord with Fear, and to rejoice with trembling, not with an exalted Mind,
not with a puffed up Mind, keep out of that, beware of that.

Friends, I beseech you all in the Name of the Lord, and in the Fear of God
wait all in Gods fear, and then you will be capable of drawing nigh to God. It
is Written in the Epistle of James, Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to
you, then will you feel the Lord to work in you mightily, and to wash you and
make you clean, and then by the help of the Spirit of Lord you will put away
the Evil of your Doings, cease to do Evil, and learn to do well, and endeavor
to please God in all things, The Children of God are all taught of him, and
their Peace is great, and they are established in Righteousness, and they have
a living Experience of that Promise of the Lord by the Prophet, They shall be
all taught of God, their Heavenly Teacher, and you that are taught of him shall
find him near you, that Teacher cannot be removed into Corners; There shall be
an Invisible Eye^ an Heavenly and Spiritual Eye opened to you, that you may see
the Lord near you, Draw near to him in Faith, and with a true Heart and with
fuil Assurance, and you will certainly know, and you will see clearly that God
is no Respecter of Persons, but that in every Nation he that fears God and
Works Righteousness is accepted of him; God is no Respecter of Persons, his
Love is of large extent with respect to the Sons and Daughters of Men, Those
thou gave s^ me, says our Savior, I have kept, and none of them is lost but
the Son of Perdition, that the Scripture might be fulfilled. The Mercy of God
through Christ Jesus the Son of his Love reaches all, there is Good Will
toward Men, (Luke 2. 9, 10.) The Angel of the Lord came upon the Shepherds
abiding in the Field, and watching over their Flock by Night, and said unto
them Fear not, for behold I bring you good tidings of great Joy, which shall be
to all People, for unto you is born this Day in the City of David, a Savior
which is Christ the Lord, and suddenly there was with the Angel a multitude of
the Heavenly Host, Praising God, and saying Glory to God in the Highest, and on
Earth Peace, Good Will toward men. And the Prophet Isaiah tells us, For unto
us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the Government shall be upon
his Shoulder, and his Name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty
God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. You shall have Christ Jesus
for your Lord; and King, and Counselor, and Instructor; Christ Jesus the Son
of the Highest, he will instruct you and Counsel you safely, and then great
will be your Peace, who can disturb the Peace of such a one, or bereave him of
it? Such a one is also established in Righteousness, and Christ is made to them
of God Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption that they may be
all endued with that Wisdom that is from above, which is pure and peaceable,
and gentle, and easy to be entreated; Let the same mind be in you (says the
Apostle) which was in Christ Jesus, that great Lord and King and Peaceable
Savior, let us come unto him, and learn of him that is meek and lowly and we
shall find rest to our Souls; Come unto him that has a good Will to all,
desiring that all may be saved and come to the knowledge of the Truth, and this
is Life Eternal to know him that is the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he
has sent; The Children of God desire the saving knowledge of the true God,
above all the Idols of the World, and to be made partakers of that Life which
is Eternal, which never shall have an end; They will always fear the Lord, and
think upon his Name.

I beseech you in the tender love of God consider this, It is our great Duty to
fear the Lord, and think upon his Name, wherever we are that is good, they that
fear God always they are blessed of God, they receive Divine Wisdom from God,
how to order their Conversation aright, and so more and more daily partake of
Gods Salvation: For the Arm of the Lord is stretched forth, and made bare to
save those that trust in him, and neglect not that great Salvation, which the
Lord Jesus Christ the Eternal Son of God has purchased and procured for us,
not with corruptible things as Silver and Gold, but with his own Precious
Blood, as a Lamb without blemish, and without spot, for he was a man of
sorrows, and acquainted with grief, his Visage was marred more than any man;
whom the Jews slew and banged on a Tree, had they known it they would not
Crucified the Lord of Glory, he was the Lords Anointed whom they slew, the Lord
of Heaven and Earth, who had all Power committed to him, and he gave Commission
to his Apostles and Ministers to go and teach all Nations, and observe all
things whatsoever he commanded, saying to them, Lo I am with you always, even
unto the end of World. And says our Lord Jesus Christ to them, Behold I send
the Promise of my Father upon you, but tarry you in the City of Jerusalem,
until ye be endued with Power from on high, and they had Power given them to
work Miracles, and to tread on Serpents and Scorpions, and nothing should be
able to hurt them; a mighty blessed and glorious Power did p^eserve them and
fit and prepare them to Preach the Everlasting Gospel.

So now my Friends, my Counsel from the Lord to you is, that you will be
faithful to what the Lord our God, in his Dear Son Jesus Christ, has
manifested and made known to you, be it more or less: you that have received
much, of you will more be required, and they that are faithful in a little,
shall be made Rulers over much, they shall enter into their Masters Joy, that
Joy that the Stranger does not intermeddle with, this Spiritual Joy, this
Heavenly Joy of the Lord it has been our strength, it has been comfortable to
the Children of God from time to time, and from Day to Day. How joyful will it
be to hear that sentence from Christ hereafter, Well done good and faithful
Servant thou have been faithful in a little, I will make thee Ru^er over much,
Enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord, then shall the Redeemed of Lord sing the
Song of Moses the Servant of God and the Song of the Lamb, saying great and
mavelous are thy Works Lord God Almighty, Just and True are thy Ways, thou
King of Saints.

Now my Friends hearken and incline your Ears from time to time, unto what the
Lord shall say, He will speak peace unto his People and to his Saints, but let
them not return again to folly; Who ever you are that are true, real
Chri^^ians, you have Peace with God through Christ Jesus the peaceable Savior,
We are accepted of God in the Beloved, and have Peace with God in and through
Christ Jesus who is the great Peacemaker and Prince of Peace, It is by his
meritorious Death and Sufferings and Satisfaction made to Divine Justice, that
we are reconciled unto God; I never did desire to hear any thing, or speak any
thing that had the least tendency to undervalue the Death, Sufferings,
Satisfaction, Mediation, and Intercession of our Lord Jesus Christ, but have
always owned, believed, and preached these great Truths.

So my Friends, I beseech you all to have an Eye to the Lord, if you draw nigh
to him, he will draw nigh to you, If we keep to the Lord and Joy in the Lord,
we shall find the Lord near to us, answering our desires, he will keep us in
the hollow of his hand, and in the secret Pavillion, then will your Bread (Your
Heavenly Living Bread) be sure, and you will know the breaking of it and the
eating of it; that Bread which Christ gives is that whereby we are comforted
and refreshed.

So my Friends, the Lord God Almighty be with you, it is not in my mind to say
much at this time, though many things were upon me to speak to you in the Light
of the Lord, and the Love of the Lord, I shall at present commit you to the
Lord Jesus Christ to cast your care upon him at all times; in all your
Afflictions distresses Trials and Troubles whatsoever, keep your Eye steadfast,
and your Hearts fixed upon the Lord, and you need not then be afraid of evil
tidings; Trust in the Lord at all times, not for a Day, or a Week, or a Year,
but for ever, Cast your care upon the Lord, for he cares for you. If thy Faith
be tried murmur not, but Rejoice, for the trial of your Faith is much more
precious than of Gold that perishes, though it be tried with Fire, that it may
be found unto Praise and Honor, and Glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ, in
whom though now you see him not, yet believing ye rejoice with Joy unspeakable
and full of Glory; If trials, and sufferings, and tribulations come, do not
boggle at them, Think it not strange concerning the Fiery Trial which is to try
you, as though some strange happened to you, but rejoice, in as much as ye are
made Partakers of Christ's Sufferings, that when his Glory shall be Revealed, ye
may be glad also with exceeding Joy.

Friends, Happy are you, if the Lord shall be pleased to try your Faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ, and to try your Love and your Patience: Verily. I say unto
you in the name of the Lord, we have all need of it in our Spiritual Travel and
Progress, and Heavenly Journey; Ye have need of Patience, that after ye have
done the Will of God, ye may receive the Promise, The Patient and the Meek
shall Inherit the Earth, and have an Inheritance reserved in Heaven; Seek the
Lord (my Friends) that you may be hid in the Day of his Wrath, that you may be
among his hidden ones; when his Indignation shall break out against Sin and
Wickedness, would not you be hidden then? and preserved then? would not you
have the Lord to spare you then ^us a man spares bis Son that serves him? The
Lord will bave mercy upon Sion, and spare his People in the Day of his fierce
Anger, until his Indignatioa be over-past. The Walls of Sion, are the Walls of
Salvation, and they are a Bull wark to Gods People, when did these Walls and
Bulwarks fail you? Have you not been preserved in your Day and Generation, if
these Walls of Salvation had failed, we had not been preserved in Christ Jesus,
we had not now been a People, we have stood the Brunts, we have been kept safe
in the strong City, where Salvation is for Walls and Bulwarks. And so I shall
commit you to the Lord Jesus Christ the Lamb of God, that takes away the Sins
of the World; I desire you all to look to him, and fix your Hearts upon him who
is the Author of Eternal Salvation to all them that believe in him and obey
him, to him be Glory, Praise and Dominion who is God over all Blessed forever,
Amen.

His Prayer after Sermon.
MOST Blessed Lord God thou art Lord of Heaven and Earth, Infinite in Love, and
Life and Glory, the God of the Spirits of all flesh, in whom we live and move
and have our Being, who art nea^ to every one that draws near to thee, and
call upon thee in Truth; Thou openest thy bount^ful hand, and refreshest our
Hearts with thy Mercy and Blessing; O Lord God of Power thy Mercies are
manifold, and they are over all thy Works, and the Works of thine own hands do
all praise thee, and thy Saints bless thee and magnify thy excellent Name,
thou art pleased to magnify thy Law and to send forth thy Light and Truth, and
to make it honor able in the Hearts of many in the Day of thy Love, in the Day
of thy Power; Thou art Redeeming thy People from Iniquity, and purging away all
their dross, and taking away all their Tin; O Lord God of Life and Power, Let
all that believe in thy Son Jesus Christ be purged and purified more and more,
let them be washed and sanctified, that all that may be done away, and removed
out of their Hearts, that is contrary to thy self that the Glory of thy Truth
may arise and shine in their Souls, and let all feel the Power of thy Truth,
and be sensible of it, and believe it, and obey it, that they may follow the
L^adings of thy Holy Spirit, and answer thy requirings, and glorify thy name,
and do thy Will on Earth as it is done in Heaven; Let us all receive our daily
Bread from thee, and have the Light of thy Countenance to shine upon us;
Comfort the Hearts of all thine every where, be thou their strength and stay,
and a present help in trouble, and solace their Souls with the sense of thy
L^ve, which is better than Wine, and with thy favor and loving kindness, which
is better than Life; Strengthen the weak hands that hang down, and co^firm the
feeble knees and succor those that a^e tempted, and comfort them and relieve
them; O Righteous Lord of Heaven and Earth, make known thy Mighty Power in
working upon the Hearts of thy People here and every where; make known by Name
and Glory thr^ughout the Wh^le Earth; Let thy glorious everlasting Gospel be
sounded forth and Preached in all Na^ions of the World; And let thy renown go
forth, and thy fame be spread abroad in all Nations, let all the enemies of thy
People be scattered, and all that make opposition against thy Truth be
conquered and overcome by the Power of it, and submit themselves, least ^hey
perish in their opposition; And let thy People receive thy Truth in the Love of
it, and become willing in the Day of thy Power to serve thee in the Beauties of
Holiness, and gird up the Loins of their Minds, and be kept sober and vigilant,
and hope to the end, and live in love and unity with one another, and keep
themselves in the love of God, and by Patient continuance in well doing, seek
for Honor, Glory, Immortality, and Eternal Life; Let us delight our selves in
thee, that thou may give us the desire of our Hearts, whom have we in Heaven
but thee? And there is none upon Earth that we can desire besides thee; Thou
have many times refreshed us with the sense of thy Love in Christ Jesus, and
thou have brought us into thy Banqueting House, and thy Banner has been
spread over us, we have been satisfied with the Fatness of thy House, and drunk
abundantly of the Rivers of thy Pleasures, we have sat under thy shadow with
great delight, and thy fruit has been sweet to our taste; Bless us and all
thine every where, and mind us of our latter end, that all the Days of our
Appointed time, we may wait till our change come, and be so prepared for our
great account that we may give it up with Joy and not with grief; Now Blessed
God of Heaven and Earth, for all thy Mercies and Favors that we have received,
and the Blessings and Benefits, which thou have bestowed upon us, and continued
to us, and for preserving us from time to time by the Arm of thy Power, and for
opening our Hearts at this time, to receive the Word of thy Truth, and the
Influences of thy Spirit, take thou the Honor and Glory Thanksgiving and
Praise which we humbly and sincerely offer up to thee, for to thee it does
belong, and thou alone art worthy, who art God over all, blessed for ever and
ever, Amen.

A SERMON Preached by Mr. FRANCIS STAMPER, At Devonshire-House, May 3. 1694.
God has laid help upon one that is Mighty, to seve to the uttermost all that
come unto God by him.
THis Mighty One, that the Almighty Lord Jehovah has laid help upon for Man,
it is the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of his Love, and they are blessed of God
that come to partake of the help that is in him, who said to his Disciples and
Followers in the days past, without me ye can do nothing.

Friends, This is a deep and a very near word, and it stands us all upon to
consider whether we have him or no, for we all owe Service, a Duty and a
Worship to the Everlasting God, and of our selves we cannot perform it, without
the help and assistance of his Beloved Son the Lord Jesus Christ; and the
comfort of all that believe in him and love him is this, that he is not only
able to help, but willing to help.

Blessed be the Lord God for ever, may all you say that have been made
partakers of his Virtue, and of his Power and Life, that have found a
willingness in him to assist you in all your troubles, in all your exercises,
in all your afflictions. in all the bowings of your Souls and Spirits before
the Lord, who have said in your Prayers and Supplications, Lord, lend me thy
help, let me have thy gracious aid and assistance; Without this help of the
Lord Jesus Christ we cannot do that good that sometimes we desire, but we are
even like to poor Israel when they had forgotten the Lord, when they had been
cleaving to that that led them in the steps the end whereof was destruction.
The Lord thus complained by his Prophet; O Israel thou have destroyed thy self,
but thy help is in me.

And, O Friends, what greater love could the Lord God have shown to the lost
Sons of Adam then to have sent his Son, his only begotten Son from the bosom of
his Heavenly Love to Redeem Man up to God again, to restore Man again, and
bring him back again out of that alienated state, and out of that undone
condition that he was fallen into by his disobedience and transgression against
the Lord; God has has laid help upon one that is Mighty, Mighty to save.

Is there any poor Soul here this day that wants the Salvation of God, that
wants to be saved from Sin, that so it may be saved from Hell, saved from woe,
saved from distress, saved from misery, O come and lay hold on him by Faith,
that God has laid help upon.

My Friends, Turn your Minds inward this day, have an eye and a^^egard in your
selves to that pure and Divine Manifestation of his Light and Grace and Spirit
vouchsafed to you, in that Light look unto him; Holy Men and Holy Women, Godly
Men and Godly Women waired for this in the days of old, and one of them
expressed his joy and satisfaction even Old Simeon when he saw the Lord Jesus
Christ brought into the Temple, he took him up in his arms and blessed God, and
said Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in peace according to thy word,
for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou have prepared before the face
of all People, a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy People
Israel that he might be for Salvation to the ends of the Earth; Now here Simeon
beheld and saw that which he long waited for and desired after, and he had this
manifested to him by the Holy, Ghost that he should not see death before he had
seen the Lords Christ, he saw him and beheld him that he might see he was come.

So some Souls at this day that are now under another dispensation, they have
waited long and cried to the Lord and said, Lord when will the time come? when
will the day come that thou will open to me that which my Soul has longed for?
Lord, I have sinned against thee, when will the time come that I shall have
help and power against sin? and find strength against sin, and receive power
from on high against my sins? and to resist and overcome Temptations, and
obtain thy favor, and through Jesus Christ be reconciled to thee whom I have
offended?

Friends, You that have long waited for the Consolation of God's Israel, hold
fast your hope, keep your confidence unto the end, keep your Faith and
Patience; Remember the words of Christ to the Church of Philadelphia, These
things says he that is holy and true, thou have a little strength, and have
kept my word, and have not denied my name, because thou have kept the word of
my patience I also will keep thee from the hour of Temptation which shall come
upon all the World, to try them that dwell upon the Earth.

My Friends, The hour of Tribulation is coming apace, and hastening, it is even
at the very door, therefore lay hold on Christ that God has laid help upon; O
my Friends, that you may find this help extended to you in this day of your
Trial and Temptation, that they that are the hindmost of the Flock may come up,
the poor in Spirit, (that are poor in body too) they that are groaning and
crying and mourning in solitary places, that they may come according to the
words of Christ into his John 10. 16. And other Sheep I have which are not of
this fold, them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there
shall be one Fold, and one Shepherd.

This one Shepherd is present here, my Friends, pray here his voice this
Afternoon, his voice is sweet and lovely, and pierces the very heart, it calls
upon you, Open to me my well-beloved; It calls you out of sin, and out of
iniquity, and out of that which offends the Lord; O Friends, this Voice calls,
open to me my Beloved, you that are turned from this World, from the love of
Vanities and Pleasures, from those vain delights that perish in the using, and
the desire of your hearts is that you may be more acquainted with him that is
the good Shepherd of your Souls, that says I call mine own Sheep by Name,
blessed be you that have this new Name; I go before them and they follow me,
and I will give to them Eternal Life, says Christ, what greater gift can you
have? what better reward can you have? you that have the help of the Lord, you
that have the strength of the Almighty, you that have your dependence upon him,
you that can truly say the Lord has laid help upon one that is mighty, I feel
his Mighty Arm, and his Mighty Power that has helped me, and overcome great
things that I thought I could never overcome; Open the door of thy heart says
Christ, and I will overcome that by which thou have been overcome; All praise
glory and thanksgiving be returned through Christ to the Living God and Father
of all.

O My Friends, feel your Minds gathered into a sense of Gods love, into a pure
exercise of his Heavenly life and love, that in this we may go on and travel
together, that in this we may be exercised together for the Glory of God, and
the good and peace and welfare of one another.

Friends, God's care is over his People, his Divine Providence is daily
extended toward them in a plentiful and wonderful manner; There is one promise
of the Lord that comes into the view of my Mind, even that promise made to them
in ancient times, My People shall dwell in a sure dwelling, and shall rest in a
quiet habitation; Let us pray that every one of us may be in the number of
God's People that have a sure dwelling; for, my Friends, great disappointments,
great exercises and trouble will overtake the Habitations of the Wicked, that
are hard hearted and forgetters of God; Let us keep humble and tender and
reverent in the sight of the God of Heaven; all our strength will fail us, and
all our own wisdom if we do not keep faithful to him that God has laid help
upon; What are we poor Worms in Comparison of the Almighty, he can do in Heaven
and Earth whatsoever he pleases; Man is to be wrought upon according to his
Divine will and pleasure; we are to submit to him, and to be resigned and given
up to the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, and to lie low before him, and to come
to that in practice which People have been speaking of in words.

It is part of that Prayer that our Blessed Lord taught his Followers and
Disciples, wherein he said thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven; There
is no Man or Woman can really come to Christ but those that have their Wills
submitted to the will of God, this is the will of God your sanctification, it
is the will of God that we should all be sanctified, that we should be holy and
pure, then the blessing of the God of Heaven will be upon us.

Among the many blessings that Christ uttered on the Mountain, one was this,
Blessed are the pure is heart for they shall see God; it does bespeak this,
that the sight of God shall be very clear, to those that are pure in heart,
that come to have their hearts and minds subjected to the will of God, for he
works in them both to will and to do according to his good pleasure; O then
they shall know the virtue of this purity of heart, they shall see God, O how
precious a thing is it to have that purity that can behold the Lord, no
confession of acknowledgment will be sufficient.

Thus it was when Nicodemus a Pharisee, and a a Ruler of the Jews came to Jesus
by night, he said unto him Rabbi, we know that thou art a Teacher come from
God, for no Man can do these Miracles that thou do except God be with him;
here was a large Confession that Christ was the Teacher of the way of God
aright, yet that would not serve, for Jesus answered and said unto him, except
a Man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God,

Friends, It is a near word that should come home to us, and Convince us of
this truth of God, that we fall short not of this Regeneration, and of having
our hearts and spirits renewed by the God of Heaven, except we be born again we
cannot see the Kingdom of God; This New Birth is that by which the Blessings of
the God of Heaven are conveyed to the Soul, and that through the Lord Jesus
Christ; God has sent his Son to bless us in turning every one of us from our
Iniquities, and from the evil of our ways, from our Sin and Vanity, from our
Corruption and Wickedness to the pure everlasting God; They know it to be thus
that come to fear God, and be partakers of that, Wisdom that leads to
Righteousness Prove. 8. 20. I Wisdom lead in the way of Righteousness in the
midst of the Paths of Judgment, that I may cause those that love me to inherit
substance, and I will fill their Treasures; Can the Treasure of any heart be
better filled?

O That these words of Wisdom might take impression upon every one of your
hearts, that you might feel the love of the Mighty God shed abroad upon your
hearts by the Holy Ghost, that your desires and breathings may ascend like
Incense, and be a sweet smelling Sacrifice to the Lord this evening; O that
every one was so qualified as to Worship the Living God aright, that in the
conclusion of this Meeting every ones heart may burn within them, and may come
with tender breathings and inflamed affections unto Gods Altar, and find
acceptance.

My Friends, the goodness of the Lord has been very great toward you, and his
Long suffering and patience has been largely extended, he wills not the
death of a Sinner, but desires that they should Repent, return and live; As I
live says the Lord, I delight not in the death of a Sinner, turn you turn you
from your evil ways, why will ye die O House of Isael. Now if thou say I
would fain turn from the evil of my ways, I would fain have power and strength
to do good and overcome evil, then come to him that is mighty, upon whom God
has laid help, who is able to save to the the u^termost, not from one or two
sins only, but from all Pollution and Wickedness in all those that come unto
God by him; I am God Almighty says God to Abraham a faithful Servant that
followed him, I am the Almighty God, walk before me, and be thou perfect.

But, say some, that is impossible, but pray consider, God has laid help upon
one that is mighty; and thou may do all things through Christ that
strengthens thee, By his Divine Power working in thy heart he can effect that
work in thee which thou can not do in thy own strength, that work which he
will accept of, the work of Righteousness, Holiness, and Purity, in which State
the Blessing of the God of Heaven is conveyed to thy Soul, Blessed are the Pure
in Heart for they shall see God their eyes being opened to look unto him in
whom Salvation is; In vain do Men look for Help and Salvation from the Hills,
and from the Mountains; Look unto me (says the Lord) and be saved, all ye ends
of the Earth, Mal. 3. 6. For I am the Lord, I change not, therefore the Sons of
Jacob are not consumed.

O here is a good encouragement for you who are wrestling with the Lord God, to
receive a Blessing from his Divine hand, here is good encouragement for you to
wrestle; Jocob was a Wrestler and he Wrestled with God, and as a Prince he
prevailed, and he said, I will not let thee go except thou bless me; Will you
be Wrestlers with the God of Heaven for a blessing from his Divine hand? Labor
to be gathered with a pure mind into the will of God as humble lowly and meek
Creatures, submitting your selves to him, being sensible of your unworthiness,
and that you are less than the least of all his Mercies; Say, Lord, what am I
that thou should be mindful of me? What I have received thou gave me, I
have no breath, no good thing but what thou gave me; I depend on thee for
all, and will give thee the praise of all that I have, and hope for.

Thus you must labor to keep your selves humble, meek, and tender, and in a
self-denying frame; that you may be fit to follow the Lord Jesus who invites
such to come to him; Come unto me all you that labor and are heavy laden and I
will give you rest, Take my Yoke upon you and learn of me, for I am meek and
lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your Souls, for my Yoke is easy,
and my Burden is light; Learn of me (says Christ) for I am meek and lowly: It
is as if he had said, be you so too, learn that Lesson and you shall find rest
to your Souls; What more excellent Reward then to have peace with the Eternal
God, and not only so, but in all our Trials, Afflictions, and Exercises in this
Life to be kept in a quiet and peaceable frame, when the Soul can throw it self
upon God, and say, Lord I will cast all my care upon thee, for thou carest for
me.

My Friends, Look unto the Lord, there will be great need for it; many have
been the warnings given to the Inhabitants of this Nation, and of this City, of
the dreadful Judgments of God that he will certainly bring upon the wicked and
hardhearted, and upon the stiffnecked and Rebellious; and I hope that through
the Divine workings of the Divine Spirit and Power of the Lord Jesus Christ,
and through his Divine and Heavenly light that has attended these warnings and
testimonies many will be stirred up to Repentance.

And I have this more to say, that the Lord God in the opening of his Divine
Word has commanded me; This say to my People in the City of London, and
elsewhere, where I have ordered thy Lot; Be of believing hearts, for the Vials
of my wrath shall be poured out upon the Transgressors; Therefore charge the
Daughters of Sion that they touch not with the Daughters of Babylon, and tell
them that if they partake with them in their Sins, they shall partake with them
in their Plagues, and in the punishments that God will pour down and execute
upon the workers of Iniquity, and greater will be their Condemnation if they do
not repent and believe, than of those that have not had such opportunities.

Therefore Children of Sion look unto the Lord Jesus Christ that Mighty one,
upon whom help is laid, in whom is Divine strength and Power, and from whom you
may have Divine Assistance, that we may perform the good that is required at
our hands, and that is incumbent upon us, and that we owe to our Creator, that
we may Worship him from day to day, and from one time to another; they that
perform this service in the strength of Christ, they will feel the savor of
his life upon them and find the sweetness of joy and peace in their Souls; and
when we are in our Employments, and Callings and Business, we shall feel the
savor of Divine Life going along with us, and in all our Converse and
Communion one with another; and in our Families, we shall instruct and correct,
and direct our Children, and bring them up in the fear of the Lord, that they
may not do as the Children of Israel when some of their Judges were dead, every
one did that which was right in their own eyes, Let them do what they will
says Joshua, choose you this day whom you will serve, as for me and my House we
will serve the Lord.

O get your wills subjected to the will of God, that you may obey his Righteous
Law, and feel your selves engaged in his service, and have the powerful working
of his Holy Spirit in your Souls; God will by his own Almighty Arm and Heavenly
Grace enable you to do what he requires, and is pleasing in his sight, he will
work in you both to will and to do of his own good pleasure; By Grace ye are
saved, says the Apostle, not of your selves, it is the gift of God; To this
Divine Gift we are all recommended, Now the Lord God Almighty gather you all
into a sense of it.

The Apostle when he wrote to the Churches, he committed them to the Grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, for Guiding and Governing them in the whole course of
their Conversations, that they might live in the pure fear and love of God, and
obedience to him, and in Love and Concord one with another, that God in all
things may be glorified, and Praise, and Honor, and Thanks givings may be
offered up to him, through Jesus Christ his Beloved Son, and our alone Savior,
who alone is worthy, who is God over all, Blessed for ever and ever Amen.

The Prayer after Sermon.
BLessed God of Life, who art the Fountain of all our Mercies, the God from
whom we receive all the good we enjoy, our eyes are unto thee, and we wait and
attend upon thee, thou art pleased O Lord to give unto us all things that we
stand in need of, which should engage us always to have an eye unto thee, for
thou never failest any that put their trust in thee; many a time O Lord, have
thy People cried to thee in the sense of their wants, and have bowed before
thee, and lifted up their supplications to thee, and, Lord, thou have had
regard to them many a time, and for the cry of the Poor, and the groaning of
the distressed thou have risen, and been a present help unto them; So that O
Lord we have had encouragement from time to time to draw near to thee, for that
thou do appear in the midst of the Assemblies of thy People that do meet
together in thy Name, and in thy Holy fear; O Powerful Father of Life, we have
cause to bless thy Name, for that we have had a real taste of thy Goodnefs and
of thy Mercy to our Souls; Thou O Lord it was that did appear in the time of
thy Love, and visitedst the Souls of many that were strangers unto thee, and
unacquainted with the way of Life and Salvation; Thou O Lord it was that had
mercy upon us in the day when there was none to help us, when there was none
that could save and deliver, then did thou make bare thy Almighty Arm, and
did bring many to the knowledge of thy living way, and all thine whose eyes
have been to thee thou have Crowned them with thy loving kindness and tender
mercy; Praises Praises be to thy Great and Excellent Name, who live for ever,
and for evermore; Living God of Life, let all thine be preserved by thy Eternal
Arm of Power, that they may live in the World to the Honor of thy Great Name;
Powerful God of Life, our eyes are unto thee, and thou have given us to see
thee, and to have the light of thy Countenance lifted up upon us; Father of
Mercies, we are not able to keep our selves and preserve our selves, but the
eyes of all thine are unto thee, that they may be acquainted with thee, and
have that Divine help and strength which thou affordest to thy People, and to
thy Children, that they may be enabled to run on in that Race that thou have
set before them, that at the end of their days they may come to lay down their
heads in peace, and have an abundant entrance into that Everlasting Kingdom
which thou have prepared for those that love and fear thy Name; Blessed God of
Life, be with all thy People here and every where, draw off their minds from
the love of this World, and the Spirit of it, that they may be brought nearer
and nearer to thee in their Love and Affections; Blessed God of Life, we have
been waiting upon thee, and thou have graciously appeared in the midst of us,
blessed be thy Name; Thy living presence is the comfort of all thine that wait
upon thee; How poor and empty and hungry and thirsty have we come into thy
presence, yet thou do not send us empty away, but thou have filled the hungry
with good things, and opened a Living Fountain that the Thirsty Souls have
known the Drinking of; Our Souls are constrained to offer Praises to thee this
Evening, that we have found Comfort and Refreshment from thy Blessed Presence;
Lord God of Life, go along with us and bless us, and keep us in the fear of thy
Holy Name, that we may live in the World to the praise of thy Name; Lord bless
the present opportunity to all that are here before thee, that we may go away
rejoicing in the sense of thy love and goodness to us, and be engaged to walk
in humility before thee; Lord let our cry come up to thee, keep us every day,
and preserve us, and pity and help all those that are crying to thee, that are
under Exercises, Temptations, Afflictions, Trials, and Weaknesses of Body and
Mind; Be near to them to help them in their distress, and save and deliver them
and us from the Enemy of our Souls, that goes about like a Roaring Lion seeking
whom he may devour; O Powerful God of Life, be with all thine every where, and
bless them, and keep them while they are in the World from the evil of it,
that, Living Father of Life, both they and we, for all thy Mercies and
Blessings which in the dear Son of thy Love thou have bestowed upon us from
time to time, may render Living Praises unto thee; And for thy affording us thy
Presence at this time, and for all the Seasons and Opportunities we have
enjoyed for the benefit and advantage of our Immortal Souls, we desire to
return thee Praise Honor and Glory, through thy Beloved Son Jesus Christ, in
whom thou art well pleased; for thou alone art Worthy, Worthy, Worthy, who art
God over all, blessed in thy self for ever, and evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT. There is newly Published
THE General History of Earthquakes: or An Account of the most Remarkable and
Tremendous Earthquakes that have happened in diverse parts of the World from the
Creation to this time, and particularly those lately in Naples, Smrrna,
Jamaica, England and Sicily; With a Description of the famous Burning Mount
Aetna, and the several dreadful Conslagrations thereof for many Ages. To which
is added an Appendix, containing several other late strange Accidents and
Occurences. As I. A Surprising Account of Angels Singing Psalms In the Air over
the Ruins of the Protestant Church at Orthez, a City in the Province of Bearne,
and other places in France in the year 1686. with the Words they Sang in the
hearing of many hundred Auditors at once, Papists as well as Protestants, II.
The Life of a Great Person of near an Hundred years old, who is now an Hermit
in a Forest in France, with the Devotions, Clothing, Diet and Subsistence of
him and his Companions, etc. III. The wonderful Army of Locusts or Grasshoppers
that were seen near Breslaw in Silesia, September. 7. 1693. and in other parts of
Germany; which in their March took up 16. Miles devouring every Green thing.
IV. Three Miraculous Cures wrought by Faith in Christ, in 1693. As 1. Of Mary
Maillard the French Girl, suddenly healed of an extreme Lameness. 2. The Wife
of Mr. Savage Cured of a Lame Hand. 3. A Shepperd near Hitchin in Nartfordshire
instantly healed of the Kings Evil, under which he had languished Twenty Years.
Price one shilling.

FINIS.

