THE CONDEMNATION OF Oliver Plunket Titular Primate and Arch Bp. of Dublin in
Ireland, And likewise of Edw. Fitz Harris: For High TREASON, at the King's Bench
in Westminster Hall, June 15. 1681.
THE Court being set, Oliver Pluncket was brought to the Bar, and Mr. Attorney
General moved in behalf of the King for Judgment against the Prisoner,
whereupon he was Ordered to hold up his Hand, and demanded what he had to say,
why Judgment of Death should not be pronounced against him, for the High
Treason, upon which he was lately Arraigned and found Guilty of in that Court.

Whereupon Mr. Pluncket insisted upon his want of Evidence, whom he expected
should have appeared on his behalf at his Trial, likewise the improbability of
the Evidence against him, since the place where they Deposed an Army was to be
Landed, was not capable of receiving them: and that it was not possible for him
to raise so much money in Ireland as should maintain them; he also insisted
upon the Jury, alleging that the Laws of England are so favorable to take a
Jury out of the place where the Fact was Committed, that they may the better
judge of Times, Places, and other Circumstances; He acknowledged he was a
Priest and a Bishop in that Kingdom, which he said was not Treason there, and
that while there was connivance, till the Proclamation did forbid him, he did
Exercise his Function there; concluding with many Protestations of his
Innocence.

The Court having with Patience heard what he could say, proceeded to Sentence;
and he was told, He had been Convicted of the greatest and most horrid of all
Crimes, even Treason of the highest nature; Treason against God, his King and
Country: against God, in endeavoring to bring-in a false Religion, and the
most pernicious of all others whatsoever; for whereas True Religion teaches men
their Duty to God and man, this on the coutrary, teaches men (for advancing the
Church, to commit all manner of Villainies and Treasons: and as it was against
God, so certainly he had committed a very high Crime against his Lawful Prince,
since the Design was to be carried on by taking away his Life, to whom he owed
all manner of Allegiance and Obedience; and though he had alleged That it was
not Treason to be a Bishop or a Prelate in Ireland, yet the Court told him,
That for the Pope to set up Bishops and Prelates in His Majesty's own Kingdom,
against His Majesty's Authority, though it were not formal Treason, yet it
seemed to be of a Treasonable nature, since it set up another Power against his
natural Prince: and then the Design was likewise to have brought Blood and
Destruction upon the poor People of Ireland, which had been fully proved
against him.

And as to what he alleged of being Tried in the same place where the Fact was
Committed, he was told, That the Law whereby he was Tried, was not made with a
Design to ensnare him, but that there were many Presidents and Examples, that
diverse have been Arraigned and Condemned in England for Treason Committed in
Ireland.

He was then told, he was near his End, and that it appeared he had lived in a
false and wicked Religion for a long time, but yet there was room for
Repentance even to the last, which the Court wished he might have Grace to make
use of: But all the business of the Court was to tell him, what the Law said,
since there was no room for Mercy in that Court, but they were bound to
pronounce Judgment against him, and the Judgment of the Court was, That he must
go from thence to the place from whence he came, and be drawn from thence
through the City of London to Tyburn, and there be Hanged by the Neck, and to
be cut down before he was Dead, and his Bowels to be cut out and Burned before
his Face, his Head to be cut off, his Body to be divided into four Quarters,
and to be disposed of as his Majesty shall think fit. The Court beseeching God
to have Mercy upon his Soul.

Mr. Plunket then desired the favor, that his Man might be permitted to come
to him, which the Court allowed, and likewise told him, he might have a
Protestant Minister come to him to discourse with him, but he declined it,
saying, He could do his business himself.

A While after Mr. Edward Fitz-Harris, was brought into Court, and the same
Questions were demanded of him, as of Mr. Plunket; that is, What he could say,
why Judgment of Death should not be pronounced against him?

Mr. Fitz-Harris said, He was one of the Kings Evidence, and desired time; But
the Court told him, they could take no notice thereof, and he was now to offer
some matter of Law why Sentence should not pass upon him? to which he had
little or nothing to say, and thereupon the Court proceeded and told him.

That he had been Indicted for Treason of the highest Magnitude, even for
designing the Ruin and Destruction of the King and the whole Kingdom; a
Treason, which if it had not pleased God, mercifully to Discover and Prevent,
would have brought all the Nation into Blood and Misery, and that he had put
himself upon his Country for his Trial, who had found him Guilty of the same:
He was therefore advised seriously to consider of the heinousness of his Crime,
which was to destroy his Majesty, and with him the best of his Subjects, to
which end he had prepared that Cursed Treasonable Libel, which was intended on
purpose to stir up the People to Sedition and Rebellion, a Crime against
mankind, since it would have engaged them to have Murdered and Destroyed one
another, and could have no pretense of bringing any benefit or advantage to the
people of England, being intended only for Mischief and Destruction.

He was farther told, That it appeared he was an Irish Papist, and that he had
formerly instilled very Wicked and Dangerous Principles into the minds of the
People of that Kingdom, and had now endeavored to set this Nation in a Flame
by his Treasonable Practices, thereby to bring in the Popish Religion among us,
but that it has pleased God to deliver us out of their hands, and to bring him
to Justice; and the Court were now to pronounce the Judgment which the Law
passes upon such notorious Offenders.

Then the same Sentence was pronounced against him, as against Pluncket; After
which Mr. Fitz-Harris desired that his Wife might come to him, which the Court
told him, was not denied him: he said, she could not come to him, and desired a
Rule of Court for it; the Court told him, she was never forbid by them to come
to him, and therefore there needed no Rule, but if she were confined upon any
other Account, they could take no notice thereof: Mr. Fitz-Harris then desired
liberty for any Friend to come to him, which was readily granted, and so he was
carried out of Court, by the Warders of the Tower, and from thence he was sent
back by Water to the Tower.

These are some brief Notes of this days proceedings, but we hear that an exact
Account of his Trial and Condemnation will be suddenly Published, to which we
refer the Reader.

London, Printed for Langley Curtiss, on Ludgate Hill.


