THE CONFESSION AND EXECUTION OF Mr. Richard Langhorn, Late Counselor in the
TEMPLE, Who was Executed for his Treasonable Practices against the Life of His
Most Sacred Majesty, And the True Protestant Government, On Monday the 14th of
this instant July, 1679.
With an Account of his Deportment in Newgate, and at the Place of EXECUTION.
With several other Remarkable Circumstances.
IN vain is warning to such desperate men, who will not see their Errors, but
hood-wink themselves upon the verge of Fate, and never consider, till it is too
late, what a vast and boundless depth Eternity still bears; for were such men
but sensible, it ever would start them from their fond opinions, that betray
their Souls, and makes them equivocate and deny a perfect Truth when tumbling
into an immortal state, as has been plainly seen and heard by those Foreign
Romanists, who have their lives most justly paid for those Diabolick Crimes by
them designed, the which extended to the murder of their Native Prince, to
gratify ambitious Tyrants far remote: Nay, so much did Hell-bred malice prompt
them on, that regardless of the Place that gave them birth, they did intend to
Crimson it with streaming slaughter, pressed from out so many hundred thousand
guiltless Souls; and surely, like the hundred handed Giants, would have invaded
Heaven too, had not the Great Jehova looked down, and quelled their daring
arrogance, etc.

But he of whose deserved, though most shameful downfall and catastrophe I here
must treat, that he in such preposterous ways should tread, the which, no
doubt, do tend to death and hell, it might, in most that knew him, raise an
admiration, being counted heretofore a sober, serious, prudent, and, in his
way, a most devout Professor of honesty and true Allegiance to his Prince. But,
as holy Writ explains, [The heart of man is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked, who can know it] for often under the verdent fragrancy, a
poisonous Serpent lurks, whose sting does bear inevitable death; so this
Richard Langhorn, for such is his name, made his outward dealing a Cloak, to
shroud the vileness of his Soul But notwithstanding all his sleights, his
pernicious ways were pri'd into, and Justice found him at the last, nor could
his shifting save him from its hands; for on Saturday the 14th of June, 1679.
he was brought to his Trial at the Sessions House in the Old-bailey, where
holding up his hand, he was Arraigned for High Treason, That he the said
Richard Langhorn did cast off all due Allegiance to his Sovereign Lord the
King, and that he did traitorously join and conspire with several notorious
Villains, and that for the propagating the Roman Cause to subvert the
Government, and that most inhumanely and barbarously to attempt the the Life of
his most Sacred Majesty his lawful Sovereign; and having carried on the said
Hellish design for many years, sending and receiving Letters from Rome and
France, complotting with the French Kings Confessor Le Cheese, and Christopher
Aderton, Rector of the English College at Rome; in which Letters he gave them
notice from time to time how Affairs were carried on in England, and what
courses they were best to take to effect their designs: And that he provided,
paid, and distributed certain considerable Sums of Money toward the encouraging
impious Ruffins to promote the Massacre of all his Majesty's loving Subjects,
that should refuse to join or close with their accursed designs, and pernicious
intreagues, etc. And that he did, to the utmost of his power, encourage and
instruct the chief Traitors: And that he received several unlawful Commissions
from the presumptuous See of Rome, Signed and Sealed, for the despising of
Military and Civil Affairs, and thereby empowered to raise Rebellion in the
Land, to harras, murder, and massacre his Majesty's Subjects. And that he the
said Richard Langhorn, contrary to his Faith and Allegiance to his Majesty
taken, by several Letters to the Benedictine Monks, did require and procure
6000 l. toward the making up the sum promised for poisoning his Majesty, etc.
And that his practice had been for many years employed to serve and promote the
Interest of the Romish Faction, in carrying on their pernicious designs. These,
and many other tedious Circumstances were laid to his charge, of which these I
have premised are the Heads, the whole Arguments being too tedious here to
insert. To this he pleaded Not Guilty. But the Witnesses for the King
appearing, and giving in their Evidences in the Court, they were most plainly
proved, Dr. Oats swearing positively to each particular that was any ways of
any concernment^; as likewise Mr. Bedlow, Mr. Dugdale, and others, who
positively swore to many Principles and Particulars: But Langhorn denied each
Circumstance, adjuring whatsoever was alleged against him, putting many cross
questions for his own defense: But the Witness was so plain, and every
particular managed to the height, that his Scarlet Crimes were most detestably
abhorred by all that heard them, except his own dysasterous Roman Practitioners
for these and such like crimes. After a long audience of all that he could
allege in his own defense, the Court and the King's Council having given
Instructions to the Jury; they, after half an hours debate, brought him in
Guilty of High Treason; whereupon the Court proceeded to Sentence accordingly,
That he should be Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered, according as the Law has
provided in that case for Capital Crimes, of so heinous a Nature. Whereupon he
was conveyed back to Newgate, where, by his Majesty's bounty, a longer time was
granted him than was expected, considering how heinously he had offended so
good and mild a Prince. During the time of his Reprieve, he was carried before
the Council and Examined, having Mercy tendered if he would accept, upon
condition to declare his knowledge concerning his Diabolick Contrivances: but
nothing could be got of him, being hardened by foolish Promises of being great
in another World, for living in wickedness in this; for such are the fond
opinions of such who court that imposterous Religion or Principles, etc.

The small Discovery he made, was only relating to the Lands the Jesuits have
lately purchased in England, whereby to maintain and uphold their Hellish
Practices; the which amounted to sixty thousand pounds per Annum sterling. So
have those Locusts made thoir Footing good in this our English Nation, longing
once more to bring so fair a Soil, sub juga Romani, having once tasted the
pleasantness of its Delights; but he not revealing any thing to the purpose,
the Warrant was Signed for his Execution this day, being the 14th as aforesaid.
In the mean time he put up a Petition, entreating for Banishment, but hard it
is to trust so dangerous a Man abroad, lest there he injure us more than at
home; his Petition not taking effect, Preparation was made in order to his
Execution.

On Saturday-night before his Execution, he seemed exceeding joyful at
approaching Death, and expressed himself much satisfied at the certainty of his
Transmigration to another State; but more because he foreknew the time
prefixed, often kneeling on a Book, with frequent Prayers and Ejaculations,
seeming to continue the hopes of Life, and to promise himself more sollid and
substantial Joys.

He being brought down, and placed in the Sledg, he seemed to be little
discouraged at the near Approach of Death, that ghastly King of Terrors, whose
dread frowns can startle the daring'st he that Roman mischief can invent.

He being in the Sledg, often did extend his Hands and Arms, with elevating his
Countenance, seeming exceeding penitent; from which place being Guarded by the
Sherifs Men and a number of Constables and Watchmen, according to the Order in
that Case as he passed on: whole Crowds of People thronging every Corner of the
Streets and Lanes to see the miserable Wretch, of whom they lately heard so
much.

During the time of his being drawn along, he made many Prayers, and was
seemingly very Penitent, and so continued till he came to the place of
Execution, where being Arrived and helped into the Cart, which was ready there
for that purpose, there he made many Protestations, and denied that he knew any
intreague or Design on foot by the Catholics against this Nation, or any of
his Majesty's Countries or Dominions: And as to a Letter written by the Earl of
Roscommon, the which was aledged against him, he was altogether ignorant of;
and that it was undeservedly laid to his Charge, making many Protestations of
his Majesty's Bounty and Princely Compassion toward him, that he had been so
long pleased to grant him time to fit and prepare him for another Life, the
which he was going to pass unto; and that now his transitory being crauled upon
the utmost Verge of Hope; therefore he desired forgiveness of all that he had
any ways injured, desiring the Prayers of all good People, saying that he held
the Tenets of the Church of Rome a long time, and that he had been very Zealous
in propagating that Faith, and had likewise caused his Sons to be Educated in
the same; and farther, that he did acknowledge his Sovereign, King Charles the
Second, to be his just and lawful Prince, and without any Mental Reservation,
or Equivocation according to the true meaning of the Oath of Allegiance, he did
faithfully believe and hold him to be the lawful Heir of these Realms, and that
neither the Pope nor any foreign Potentate had Right to dispossess him of his
Crown, or depose him of his Government, nor to incense any to take up Arms, or
raise Rebellion against his Majesty, either to the prejudice of himself, or his
Subjects, nor to disturb the Government of the Kingdom, as it is now
established, and that the Life of his Majesty ought to be held sacred upon the
account of the preservation of his Subjects; and that he never was so much as
Guilty of a secret Thought, the which might any ways tend to the hurt of his
Majesty, and that he thought himself bound in Conscience, if he should know any
thing in that Nature, immediately to disclose it; and if that any Conspiracy,
Design or intent whatsoever, were about to be put in Practice, that then he was
obliged to reveal it, as he tendered his Eternal welfare, and hoped to escape
Damnation. These and many other Protestations so common to those kind of
desperate People, who trust in Romes Indulgences and Pardons, and pin their
Consciences thereon, not weighing the displeasure of an angry God, but depend
on the Infallibility of their Roman Impostor, that Devourer of Souls, whose
Tyranny too often had made the Nations Groan, but to the purpose, after his
Attestations and absolute denial, he was executed according as the Law for such
notorious Traitors have designed; the which though he was a Traitor, yet moved
the Hearts of many to pity him, by reason of his Age and Gravity; being a tall
Man, of a Sanguin Complexion, of a moderate Grace and Gesture and of brave
Eloquent and authentic parts, having been a Counselor for this many years.
After he was Cut down and Quartered, his Quarters were by his Majesty's Order
delivered to his Friends, in Order to his Burial, etc.

Now one would suppose that this and many other the untimely Ends of such like
Miscreants, who have of late for their abhorred Crimes been justly made the
Trophies of pursuing Justice, should stand as marks to warn their Brethren
least they should headlong press upon those dangerous shoales of an untimely
Fate; but it is in vain, pernicious men that bend on black Designs, Rush
forwards not caring where they go, so they accomplish their destructive ends.

FINIS.

