THE REPLICATION, Or Certain Vindicatory Depositions, Occasioned by way of
Answer, to the Various Aspersions, and False Reports of Ignorant and Malicious
Tongues, and the Printed Sheets and Pamphlets of Base DETRACTORS, Concerning
the Late Acted CHEAT.

Written by John Carleton of the Middle Temple London, Gent.

Printed by the Authors Appointment in the Year, 1663.

Judicious Reader,
IAm not Ignorant, (though I have been willingly silent) of the Various
Rumors, Reports, Stories, Fancies, daily increasing Fables, and Protens Shapes
wherein the Different Humors, and Dispositions of the World bring forth the
late acted Project, and Cheat. And though I might be justly angry with some,
yet I scorn to take notice of any. For should I begin to un-dress all these
prodigious shapes, and set them out singly in the naked truth, into what a
Confused Chaos should I bring my self? How endless should I make my
sufferings? how many years might I lead my life in discontent, before I could
hear, answer and satisfy the many Niceties, Questions, Curiosities and
Objections of the Giddy-headed Vulgar. Qui non adveritatem rei, sed ad
opinionem prospiciunt. I am satisfied, that as a little time will make a
distinction between the report and the reality, so it will put a conclusion to
both, by burying them in Oblivion.

I shall not give my self the trouble to recollect and declare the several
motives Acts, Inducements, and protestations so often and so highly expressed,
by that (Wise enough indeed, but) deceitful Woman, that provoked and stirred up
that faith and credit in me, as to enter the list of sacred Matrimony. Neither
shall I go about to vindicate my self much (for that the Law will do) or
greatly to vilisie her, that her infamous Actions will best make appear. Nor
shall I endeavor to procure a great Credit in any one, especially in such
whose narrow soul and single threaded faith, cannot believe the Vindicative
Oath of a Christian; Which I dare take to any Assertion that I shall modestly,
and I protest without any thing of singularity, or Affectation, hereafter lay
down, concerning the reality of my Intentions and Actions; Neither will my
troubled thoughts, (Courteous Reader) give me leave to look at the lofty style,
nay not time to salute the Garment of that Noble pleading and Worthy Orator
Cicero: And indeed it best becomes truth to be naked, and glosses of Eloquence,
in some peevish Humors, might invoke jealousies of the intended reality; but
as I respect the least approbation of the Wise and Judicious, so I neglect and
disdain the greatest censure of the Ignorant and Malicious. I seek for no ones
soothing applause, nor I care for no persons rigorous censure; I only beg every
Ingenious Reader (to whose settled and discerning Judgments I submit) to make a
Charitable Construction, and to pass by all errors you may without doubt find
in this little Book, which my Discomposed judgment will not at this time permit
me to see; And I may say of these lines, as discontented Ovid said of his
Verses.

Lib. 1. Eleg. 1. Ovid Trist. Carmina proveniunt animo deducta sereno,
Nubila sunt subitis, tempera nostra malis.
But I hope and wish for a greater serenity, and do expect a calm after this
Storm and then (Worthy Reader) I shall be ready not only to acknowledge and
blush at all faults, but to correct and amend them. Qui non est hodie, cras
magis aptus erit.

Yours in all Friend-ship, JOHN CARLETON.

Cicero was wont to say, Non Recte amat Vxorem, qui corpus amat potius quam
animum. That is, He does not love his second self rightly, that loves the parts
of her body, rather then the gifts of her Mind.
MArriage is my Theme, and I cannot but look at Happiness, and I think it is a
very great Blessing, when the hand of Providence bestows on Mortals, a suitable
conjunction of Virtuous and Good Conditions in VVed-lock, without which parity
none can be really happy therein: And they know not what marriage is that only
know how to lust. I shall not stand to Comment, but will come nearer to my
present Condition. I was unwilling to write at all, but I will not write much.
It was my happy, unhappiness, about the 25th. day of March last, accidentally
to happen into the House, where that (in some things worthy) unworthy Woman
was, she being in the Company of a Person or two of Honor; of whose being
there when I was informed, I was willing to return an acknowledgment of my
Gratefulness, for then late received Courtesies, It being the first
oppertunity that was offered to me, after the receipt of them; Among whom also I
was willing and did spend some time for a diversion. She, as She has protested
to many persons several times since, at my entering of the room, was suddenly
possessed with a strange kind of an affectionate passion, and could not satisfy
her self till she had made a strict enquiry who I was; nor did it cease there,
for presently after She employed a Friend of mine to desire the Continuance of
my Company, as She has since declared.

Here I thought good to insert the Original of our acquaintance, that the world
may the better perceive her cheating design: though it has pleased the
scurrilous Scribler, that either has no name, or else is ashamed of it, in a
late Pamphlet to demonstrate a very great Friendship to that Distressed Lady,
as his Pedantick Pen terms her; and though he speaks without Book, as most if
not all do besides him; yet he endeavous to make it credible that it was She
that carried on a humor and my Relations wi^h my self a Design, which I deny
on both sides, and here attest, that not any of them to whom I owe the Duty of
a Son, or the Love of an own Brother, did ever see her until many days after
Contraction, nay not until three days before Marriage, and then never
entertained any discourse to promote, but rather to hinder the Proceedings; For
She of her own accord, upon a Visit she gave them, told them of her Affection
and Intention and did Politickly and freely declare to them her Great Birth and
Fortune. But to return to our first Acquaintance; I understanding her Fancy,
and finding those Excellent parts she was possessed with, cold do no less,
then poize things in my mind: And considering her Endowments, supposed that she
wanted nothing that might cause a likeing, nor had she any Defect, that might
procure a loathing. I pressed her to the Reason of her Fancy, She replied Love
gives none. I minded her of the Inequality between mine, and her then thought
High Descended Birth and Fortune: She Answered Love knows none. I Objected
again, (she telling me, that she ever Related to me the least of both) and put
Cases of great Danger, to be called in Question, beyond all Law; She Replied,
Love knows no Laws; Let her Judgment alone to secure both. Her Wit did more
and more Charm me, Her Qualities deprived me of my own; Her Courteous
behavior, Her Majestic Humility to all Persons, in all her Actions, Her
Emphatical Speeches, Kind and Loving Expressions, and amongst other things, her
High Detestation and Checks to an untruth, though Jestingly uttered by any; Her
great Zeal to her Religion, her Modest Confidence, and Grace in all Companies,
seating the knowledge of none; Her variety of Tongues; Her neat limned, and
ready answers to all, and all manner of Objections, that I, or the most
Critical Person in the World, (without disparaging any ones Judgment) could in
point of Honor, make and put to her, whereby to discover her, she would so
Nobly, and Seriously Salve, that she left no room for Suspicion; Which did not
only work the belief in me, (that has wrapped me in this present Misfortune)
But also in many Persons of great Wisdom, Gravity, and Quality; All which in a
growing Acquaintance and Conversation, did increase our Credit. She desired
nothing of me but my Love, (And that as She told me and others was always her
intention to Marry a Private Gentleman, whom She could Love, that She might
oblige him highly to love her by her Nobility and Estate;) An Excellent bait
indeed) And I thought She did nobly deserve that. She ever protested a Fervent
Love, and I could not promise an unfaithful. And finding in her so Noble a
Perfection, who could mistrust a real Affection and Intention? None but did
Esteem her Pearlesse in all qualities of mind. Who could have called her Honor
and Honesty into question, when they both, (I must say seemingly) were so
great? But the Scene was soon changed, though I could not so soon believe it.
And in a strange manner there was a sudden discovery of the truth, which is
too long a story to insert here, though in a short time it was made appear that
She was such a cheating person, as before a Majestrate She was proved to be.
Such a sudden alteration, might (like those that looked on Medusae's Head)
have turned me into a Stone; I could hardly put out my former belief; Nay I
protest, when I seriously reflect on all the passages of her former Expressions
and Actions (not in the least thinking of the last Act) I can believe still;
For what person living, that is a Christian, or bears the name only, or knows
the meaning of that title (which She in a High manner did own) Nay, what Turk,
Jew, Infidel or Heathen that sees, wonders at, and Worships the Sun, Moon and
Stars, and that never heard the Name of the Great Jehovah, could Counterfeit
and Religiously gloss over so many heinous and detestable Crimes, without fear
of a sudden and mighty Judgment? Sure she thought to Hood-wink Divine
Providence: The Devil himself, that old Sophister, might be cheated by her, but
that he is so well acquainted with her. Without doubt he would have trembled to
have invoked those Direful Judgments which She wished might befall her, upon
clearing some doubts, if such things were not true, which are as false as God
is true. And amongst all her Protestations I will name only one, which was the
only thing we desired to know the truth of, that was this, upon the
Attestation of one or two strangers to us, who upon the first sight knew her,
she having lodged at their Houses; they related of her several Husbands she had
living; We pressed her to speak the truth, and in the presence of several
persons upon her knees, she wished for a sudden Judgment to befall her, and that
she might Eternally hang in Hell (for so were her words) if ever she was
Contracted, Married to, or knew any man besides my self. Oh Miserable Creature!
I hear so many things daily of her of truth enough, that I think she has the
best part of a score, and she has (...) the best part of a Hundred persons of
good Worth, and others; I dare not (...) what, least I run into extremes; it is
enough, I now find her Honor Dishonor, her Protestations Pretenses, her
Faithfulness Fickleness; and though her Policy did undermine me, her practices,
will overthrow herself. Who would have imagined that deceit, the Devils great
bait, should have lodged here, or that so Noble a mind (though She has basely
Acted) should descend of such an Ignoble Race, or that so great and Discerning
a Capacity should proceed of so base and undeserving Progeny? Base indeed, for
her Father in Law (her grand Agent and factor) did in the presence of a person
of quality, and another Gentleman and myself, upon our entering into discourse
of the News of London, when we left it, and of the great Cheat, and so
proceeding in the story of it, he fell into such a great rage, and said, It was
no News to him, for he was in Town all along, and was with her in the Prison
that day she was Committed, and declared her Name, and that She was his
Daughter in Law, for it will be known said he; That unworthy low spirited,
though hot sottish-headed fellow deserves a further strictExamination. I need
not relate where he lives, nor what he is, former Prints speak truth in that.
But to return to her, the World still finds in her the same Wit, and they will
shortly find less honesty then any did Imagine: would She had less Wit, and I
better fortune; but though my won affections have stung my self and fortunes,
they shall kill neither. Had she been but honest, I should have taken her
discourses of Nobility and Wealth, but as a neat Romance to gloss over the
want of a happy being, which my Relations and my self did really inform her,
she should have, could she vindicate and prove her honesty. Would her High
pretended Honor had been but real intended honesty. I am not alone in the
Cheats of Marriage, (for I believe scarce one in twenty proves true, and
answers all Expectations) though perhaps not in so high a nature. There are
many Presidents higher then this, nay more then I mean to recollect: Menalaus
after his ten years War won but a strumpet. There is nothing new under the Sun,
though new to them that suffer it. I can now shake hands with my Old Grand-site
Adam, and say with him, The Woman beguiled me, and I did, etc. I could pity
her rather then punish her, and yet the Law must punish her, because she did
not pity her self, knowing how narrowly she has escaped the Execution of
Judgment after her former Trial. The faitest fly is soonest taken in the
spiders Web. Indeed she weaved a fine one to catch me, it is well if she hangs
not her self in it. I trusting to her outward (...) was betrayed by her inward
treachery. But though she (...) me, she has not overcome me; and the chiefest
Victory will be, that I can overcome my self, and prevent the dangerous
consequences and sad effects that unhappy accidents and discontents might
cause. My sore, though it be angry I can salve it; And indeed, as it argues
much folly in any person to let the Afflictions and Censures of the World come
so near ones heart, as to set out or inslame ones blood, so it is a great part
of wisdom in my Estimation to suffer admittance so near as to raise ones
spirits to understand an affliction by a serious consideration and reflection.
How mixed with mercies, and in the Highest way we Mortals can retaliate, (if I
may so speak) to return and express a holy gratitude to Divine protection: for
we must so bear our afflictions, that as our grief may not utterly deject us,
so we must have the sense to feel and apprehend it: All the actions of a man's
life, are mixed with bitter ingrediences, like Chequer-work, black and white.
There is no armor against our fates, and they are as uncertain as unevitable.
I am contented with mine, and I hope now the bitter part of my fortune is past,
I may once taste the sweet; if not, I shall be contented, knowing from whose
hand it comes; I am satisfied, that as I have done nothing dishonestly, so I
care for no reports.

Cic. Qui injuriam faciunt infaeliciores sunt quam qui patiuntur.

It is better to be Passive then Active in an Injury.

BUt I have exceeded my Intention, and unless I mean to make a Chronicle of the
whole, must stop all further expression. And here I would end, but upon second
thoughts, in point of Reputation, I find my self engaged highly, to take
greater notice of abuses done to others my Acquaintance then to my self; and
now I must be angry, for it concerns me to be so, and it should quickly be seen
that the fancy pen of that Audacious and Injurious Libeller should soon be cut
by several persons, were it but known where that Corrupted and Diseased soul
has its being, which shall not want for a strict enquiry. I wonder how he
durst presume to insert in his Libel termed (The Ladies Vindication) the name
of that Virtuous and Noble Lady which I will not here denominate. The
Salt Water Grave Cox-comb has published it too much already; Or that his
Confidence should permit him to discover any thing of her Actions in Hide-Park,
which though there may be some little thing of truth, yet it is falsely set
out. And indeed I am much troubled that that deceitful woman, to whom I then
thought my self Related, knowing her own Condition, should offer to play upon
that Worthy Ladies Civility, And I cannot but take notice that this base
Detractor should be so impudent as to throw a dart against that deserving
Gentleman my Friend, that performed the sacred Office of Matrimony. I am not
willing to insert any ones Name, you may understand me by description. Who
prompt him to insert the report of a double Marriage? And that Politic lie of
so great a gratuity as fifteen pounds; I will not satisfy his weak brain what
it was, it is enough to let him know that my friend was satisfied, and I did so
much as became a Gentleman.

Lastly, I will clear but one thing more as to her Name, by which she was
Contracted and Married to me, which was Henrietta Maria De Wollway, though she
has since learned so much Confidence as to deny it, or else some one for her;
And here I make a full stop, wishing all the World better fortune.

Si Populus ^ult dicipi Decipiatur. FINIS.

