THE Conquest of France, WITH THE Life, and Glorious Actions of Edward the
Black Prince,

Son to Edward the Third, King of England, his Victory, with about Twelve
Thousand Archers, and Men at Arms, over Phillip of FRANCE; and a Hundred
Thousand Frenchmen, near Cressey; His Vanquishing King JOHN of France, and
taking him, and his Son prisoners, at the Battle of Poictiers: His Love to the
Earl of Kent's Fair Daughter, and marriage with her. Also all that passed
during that Glorious and Successful WAR against France, with the Battle of
Agen-Court, and King HENRY the Fifth being Crowned King of France at Paris;
being a History full of Great and Noble Actions in Love and Arms, to the Honor
of the English Nation; and the Encouragement of the Horoes of the presnet Age.

battle scene between England and France with knight in foreground

Printed by A. M. for Charles Bates at the Sun and Bible in Pye-corner.

The HISTORY of the Black Prince, etc.
CHP. I.
How the French King, upon King Edward the Thirds coming to the Crown, sent to
him to come to Paris, and do him homage, for the Palaces the English held in
France; how he not only refused it, but laid claim to the Crown of France,
Quartered their Arms with his own; entered into confederacy with the
Neighboring Princes, Invaded them with powerful Armies, his love to the
Countess of Salisbury, the order of the Garter, etc.

WHEN the English valor was famous, and more Renowned, than that of other
Nations, our Warlike heroes contended more for fame than Gold, and brought a
terror on their Enemies, wherever they carried their Arm; proud France then
trembled, and the English Lion grasped, with so strong a hand, their Golden
Lillys, that all the struggling of that large Kingdom was not able to rescue
them from the spoil, and becoming the trophies of out Conquering Princes, as I
shall plainly and largely show you in this Famous History.

King Edward the third in his Fathers lifetime took upon him the Title of king
of England, by the consent of the three Estates assembled in Parliament, when
he was but Fifteen Years of Age, and Young as he was, showed much of a Martial
spirit, and promised great things to the world, which he accordingly performed,
for having Warred successfully in Scotland, and brought that to his terms,
their king submitting and holding fealty of him, he making and unmaking them
at pleasure: Phillip D' Valois The French king, began to mistrust his growing
greatness, and thinking whilst he was young, to put a Check to his forward
Valor, sent to demand his Homage, for the Province of Guyen, held by him in
the kingdom of France; but he not only ^outly refused it, in the terms the
French Required it, by the Advice of his Peers, laid claim to the Crown of
France, as coming to him in the right of Queen Isabel his mother, bein his due
both by civil Law, and order of Succession, as being Nephew to Charles the
Fourth, Brother to the said Isabel; and that as much as Phillip then Reigning,
was descended of a second Branch; to this the French opposed their Salsque Law,
wherein it was provided, that no Woman should inherit the Crown of France; but
this being looked on as contrived to hinder the succession of the English kings
in their Marriages, with the Daughters of France, and king Edward declaring, he
was a Male of a Female that had right to the Crown, that pretense ought not to
Exclude him; a War upon these grounds was Proclaimed, the king quartering the
Arms of France with those of England, and laying a Peremptory claim to the
Crown.

This Business as it was extraordinary weighty, so it required much secrecy,
until it was well laid; for which purpose king Edward craved the Advice of
the Earl of Hanault, Father to Phillipa his Queen, and Mother to Edward the
Black Prince, who was growing up to great Actions, as will hereafter appear;
who with his Brother, and other Nobles of Flanders, procured king Edward to be
created Vicar General of the Empire: that so without being controuled, he might
command the Nobles, and common people of those Countries, to further his purpose
in the intended War.

But how private soever these things were carried, Phillip, the French king had
private notice of what was doing, and stopped the huge Army he ^ad raised, at
the Importunity of Pope Benedict, the Eleventh, from passing into the Holy
Land, to war against the Turks and Sarazens, who there mightily oppressed the
Christians, Resolving to defend his own Country from the threatened storm.

In the mean while king Edward raised great Sums of Money, and Leabyed men, and
with his Queen Sailed into Flanders, where that Winter they remained at
Antwerp, and Conferrnig with the Princes and States of Germany, he so well
settled his Affairs, that in the Spring, he Landed in France, with an Army
consisting of 27000 Fighting-men, bringing a great terror on the Country,
though the French king had on Army of 60000 Common Soldiers to oppose him,
being accompanied with Three kings, viz. of Bohemia, Scotland, and Navarre,
Five Dukes, Six and Twenty Earls, and more than Four Thousond Lords, and
knights; and so both Armies drawing into the Field, and approaching each other,
as the bloody blast was about to be sounded, by the Mediation of Jane, Countess
of Hanault, Sister to king Phillip, and Mother to king Edward's Queen, they
separated from each other, without striking a blow, to the great discontent of
the English, who full of Valor thirsted to begin the Battle on the first
command.

King Edward however laid not aside his pretentions, but hearing the French
king had set out a great Fleet, consisting of 200 Sail of his own, and other
Nations, he had hired, which had on Board them 40000 men, who Robbed the
English Merchants, and made some spoils on our Coast, being full of Magnanimity
and Valor, Resolute in his purposes, and reckoning the French as his Subjects,
and Inferiors in Arms; Especially on the Seas, and hoping by his good success,
not only to win Honor among the Princes, and Sates of his confederacy, and
purposing if he might to strike Terror in the French Nation, concerning those
Wars, set upon their whole Navy, with such incomparable courage, and bold
spirit; that after a long, Obstinate and Bloody Fight, very few or none of the
French Ships escaped; but were either taken, sunk, or burnt by the English,
with a much Inferior Number, with inconsiderable loss on our side: This great
Sea Victory much discouraged the French, and mightily encouraged the English,
and their Confederates, so that the king landing at Slace in Triumph and going
from thence to Gaunt, where his Queen lay, and the Black Prince was accompanied
with Seven Earls, Eight Bishops, Twenty eight Barrons, Two Hundred knights,
4000 Men at Arms, and ^i^e Thousand Archers; all Valiant Englishmen, he joined
the Duke of Brabant, who commanded 22000 men, Jaques Dartwell a famous Fleming,
who commanded 60000 men of these Provinces, also the Duke of Guilder, the
Marquess of Meuse, the Earls of Juliers, Mons, Savens, and Hanault, the Lord
Tralquemont, and diverse others.

With this gallant Army he Besieged the Strong City of Tournay, which was with
great Resolutiou and Valor Manfully defended, for the space of ten weeks; in
all which time, the French king appeared not to Relieve it; however, by the
Mediation of the aforementioned Jane De' Valois, Mother to the Queen of
England, and to the Duchess of Juliers, to the then Earl of Hanault, and Sister
to the French king, a Truce was once more concluded; but that expired, soon
after these delays the War begun in earnest.

During these transactions, the king returned home to beat the Scots out of
England, who; in his absence, dared to Invade it, under the Leading of David
their king, fell desperately in Love with the Fair Countess of Salisbury; in
this manner having delivered her from the Siege laid to her Castle of
Roxbourough, hard pressed by the Scots, he disarmed himself and with ten or
twelve Lords and knights, entered the Castle, where the excellent Beauty, and
modest behavior of the sweet Countess, so Inflamed his heart, that by secret
and Amorous wooing, he endeavored to persuade her to ease his passion, with a
return of her Love; but the Virtuous Lady, first with mild and kind entreatys,
and afterward with quick and nipping Reprehensions, strove to make him see his
own Error; but such was his desire, and her denyal^^ were so peremptory, and
resolute, that Discontentedly at that time he left her; yet love still
prevailing, he wrote the following Letter to her.

The King's Letter to the Countess of Salisbury.
Fair Countess. Your Eyes have enthralled my heart, and A midst the Alarums of
War, my thoughts are chained to your Beautys, and other rare perfections; take
compassion on a King, which nothing on Earth, but your Peerless self, can bring
to the low submission of a supplicant; I own your Virtues are great, yet to
save the life of a Monarch, what should not one, who is all Goodness, and
tenderly made for Compassion, like you, do? Let me entreat you then to take
Compassion on the sufferings of my laboring mind, that I may be restored to my
former peace and tranquillity; and become pleasent to my friends, and as I have
been wont, a terror to the enemy of my Country: So in expectation you will
Relent, and become mild and merciful, I rest in hopes of enjoying that
blessing, I so earnestly wish for, and passionately desire;

Your devout Lover though a King.


The virtuous Countess having well weighed the Contents of this Letter, was
much troubled in her mind, her blushes came and went; she well knew the King
was already married to a Fair and Virtuous Princess; and that he sought by
unlawful Love to defile her bed; this some times put her unto a grievous
passion, and then relenting, Pearly tears trickled from her Eyes, considering
if she yielded, how much it would turn to her dishonor; and if she refused,
how much she must trouble and afflict the bravest Prince on Earth; at other
times, she considered, she was his Subject, and in his power, and knew not to
what force his wild passion might carry him; yet tender and careful of her
chasttiy and honor; in the end she returned him this answer.

The COUNTESSES Answer.
My Sovereign! COuld you but conceive what trouble and disturbance Your Letter
has wrought in my mind, you would cease to afflict me, who so highly Honor you
in all Virtuous ways; but in this matter, without a violation of my Honor,
cannot Condescend to pleasure you; Consider you are Married to a Chaste and
Virtuous Queen, who Loves and Honors you; how then can you stray from the
Rules of that virtue, you have ever Exercised, and Encouraged in others; to
harbor thoughts in your Royal Breast, of wronging her Bed? Cease then, great
Sir, to persecute me with your Love, that cannot be Lawfully returned; lay
aside your passion, and be again your self: I am indeed your subject, and you
may indeed command my life and fortunes, but not in a Dishonorable way, the
spotting my innocence, and Chastity, the first of which I will always be ready
to sacrifice, to the preservation of the Latter: So humbly Entreating you to
consider and weigh these things; I remain your much afflicted Subject and
Servant.

Salisbury.


The King upon Receipt of this Letter was not a little Abashed, tormenting
himself for a time, thus to be Repulsed; but casting many things in his mind,
at length he Concluded, time, and Rich presents, might overcome her Womanish
fears and scruples, rendering her more tractable; and in this business, he
trusted his faithful Confident, the Lo^d Montaone, Brother in Law to the
Countess, who Ignorant of the King's main intentions, so solicited his Fair
Sister, that he brought her to Court, in Honor of whose presence, the King
caused Magnificent Sports and Pastimes; and at last won so much upon her as to
dance with him; when in the end of the Dance a Blew Ribbon, which she had for
her Garter, falling off; the King stooped, and took it up; at which the
Countess blushed, and the Nobles smiled, whereat the King said, Honi Soit Qui
Male Panse; evil be to him that evil thinks: Vowing, that ever long, the
greatest of them, should do Honor to that silken tie, and having Created his
Son Edward, the Black Prince (so called from his terrible deeds in War) Prince
of Wales, he Established the Order of the Garter, Confining the number to 26 of
which himself, and his Successors were Sovereigns, which Order is Yearly
Solemnized, with Princely Magnificence in the Kings Castle at Windsor.

But now to pass from Love again to Arms, we find the Drums rattling, and the
Trumpets sounding to War; great Armies prepared on either side, and the Earl of
Darby Landed with the King's Forces in Gascoin, where they drove the French
Army before them, and took many Citys, Towns and Castles, subduing almost all
that large Province in small time.

But now come I to speak of the black Prince, that honor of virtue, and
Valor, more particularly than I have done.

CHAP. II.
The Birth of the Renowned and Victorious Black, what progedies and wonders
then happened, presaning his greatness; His forward valor and activity in his
young days; His first wars under his Father in France; and the great advantages
that ensued; How King Edward Challenged the French King, and on what account he
refused it; with other matters.

PRince Edward Sirnaned (for his Valorous Actions, so much spoken of throughout
the world) the Black Prince, was born at Greenwich, the 14th of May 1336, being
the Eldest Son of King Edward the Third, and His beauteous Queen Phillip^,
Daughter to the Carl of Hanault; at his birth a blazing Star appeared with a
fiery tail, like a bloody Sword, pointing toward France, at South East; and
bringing a terror upon the world; the Sea overflowed its banks in many places,
and retiring again, left strange Monsterous Fifth on the Shore, the like never
having, been seen on our coast; In Devonshire, Armies were seen Fighting in the
Air, with great blasts of Thunder and Lightening; that which came from the
North vanquishing and pursuing the Southern Army, till it was clear out of
sight; then the skys o'recast, and became as red as blood, red Glares of
Lightening frequently breaking out, to the threatening a destruction of those
that were near Inhabitants:

These strange p^ogidies, made people look for some wonderful Event of things,
and indeed they happened soon after in a cruel war between two mighty Nations,
in which this Prince (now born) was to (...) so great a part.

The King his Father though as yet he was his only Son, brought him not up
nicely and tenderly; but as soon as he had, in a manner, passed his
Sawdling-cleaths, enured him to hardships, in Kiding, Traveling on foot,
Running, Shooting in the long bow, Managing the great Horse, running Carrears,
Leaping, and in the use of the Sword; in all which he became very Expert and
Dexterous, Training up many Children under him, as his Soldiers, when he was
very young; and these he took great Delight to exercise, making them expert in
the trains of War: So that growing up with him, he preferred them to Commands,
many of which became brave Soldiers, and great Commanders, doing wondrous
feats in Arms, to the Terror of their Ensmys, their own Fame, and the Honor of
their Country.

He was scarce Fifteen years Old when the King his Father took him to the Wars,
both against Scotland, and France; and Jaques Dartwell the great General of the
Flemings, was so taken with his monly aspect, and promising virtues, that he
labored to depose Loys Earl of Flanders, as laizey cowardly, and unfit for
Government, and place the Prince over those Provinces; and thus he proposed to
the Nobles in their Assembly, with so much earnestness, Magnifying the young
Prince's Early Valor, and promising virtues to that degree, that though he was
all in all with them before he so far encouraged their hatred, that they
incensed the common people against him, as one that intended to betray the
liberty of his Country to strangers, which took so effectually with those that
had adored him a little before, that he no sooner came home to his house at
Gaunt, but it was best by the Multitude, when coming ont to apprase them, they
in a populer fury Murdered him; and this for a time much hindered King
Edward's affairs; for the flemnigs and others revolted from him; but he did not
greatly regard it, resolving to pursue his right, and by his own power thrust
his Sword into the bowels of France.

The King being now informed, that John the Eldest Son of the French King had
Besieged the Castle of Auguillion, in Gascoine, he took the Prince with him,
and a considerable Army, at the terror of whose approach, the French raised the
Siege, and fled: After this he passed into Normandy, took the rich City of
Harefl^re without Resistance, and bestowed the spoil on his Soldiers; after
this he spoiled the Rich Towns of Cheriborough, Mount-borough Quarentive, and
the Castle there; and increasing his Army, took the great and Rich City of Cane
in Normandy; in which were the Earls of Tankervile, Ewe, and Guyers, who had
brought Forces thither; these were made prisoners to Sir Thomas Holland, an
English Knight, with one Eye, who sold them to the King; and they (with the
Rich Spoils) were sent Prisoners to England: Then the Army marching to Lowers,
quickly won it, s aalso Gilors vernor, St. Germains Enley, Mountrell St. Cloudy
Rely, and the whole Country about Roan, Pout, De Larch, Nauts, Newlench, Robois
Fountain, Polis Vinne; and in all the places he found but weak Resistance, of
which Phillip, the French King, having intelligence; and that King Edward with
his whole Army was within two Leagues of Paris, he fearfully left that City,
and went to St. Denis, where his Army lay, persuading the Parisions, that the
English dared not to look them in the Face, but their fears made them not
Credit it, especially when they heard the Lord Harecourt, King Edward's
Marshall, had routed the Forces that were coming from Ancidus, to their
assistance, killing, and taking most of them Prisoners.

The English Army, under the King, and Black Prince, being thus Victorious,
passed uncontrouled to the Gates of Abaville, and St. Valary; but they were,
for want of guides to direct them, un-a-wars Entangled with the River Some on
the one side, and the French Army on the other, which consisted of 100000 men;
and the place where he was, promised him no advantage if he should fight, but
rather manifested many Inconveniences: This made the King and Prince consult
with the French Prisoners, promising Rewards, if they could find any passable
foards in the River, which one Gobin of Grace undertook to do; but when the
King had Marched his Army thither, he found it defended by 12000 French; yet
when the sea was Ehed, he, with the Prince, and the whole Army, put themselves
into the water, as likewise on the other side, did the French; so that the
fight was bloody, and doubtful, for a long time in the middle of the River;
some were slain by the Sword, others beaten down, and drowned in the River; but
the English at length prevailing, with great slaughter of the Enemy, pursued
them in full chase a League; and so the whole English Army having passed the
River, and Refreshing themselves, resolved to abide the whole power of France,
though six times their number, and dare them to a Battle; King Edward, to his
immortal Honor sent a Challenge to the French King, to fight him by single
Cambate, between both Armies; but he excused it cunningly, by aledging it was
sent to him by the name of Philip De Vallois, and not by the Title of King of
France; and therefore he should betray his Royal Dignity, in accepting it;
however, both Armies drew near, and the bloody day approached wherein streams of
Gore must wet the Earth, and Crimson its green Carpit, which a sanguin Dye; and
of this battle, Fortune designed the Prince the Conduct, and Glory, to new
fledge his plumes with Fame and Renown.

CHAP. III.
How King Edward with the Black Prince, marching with a small Army into the
bowels of France, met Philip the French King; with an Army of 100000 men near
Cressey; How the Black Prince, desired the conduct of the Battle; And how the
King and he in disguise went in the night into the Tents of the Soldiers, and
were over-joyed to find them full of Courage; How the battle was fought, and
the French Routed, with incredible slaughter, by the Black Prince, Of the
taking of Callice, and many other remarkable things, to the Glory of the
English Nation, etc.

THe French King relying on his great Numbers, thinking the English thus
entangled in the heart of his Country, were in a manner Entrapped in a snare,
and could not avoid destruction, which battle gained, and perhaps our king as a
prisoner, would for ever Quell the English Claim to the French Diadem; with
these hopes, and healing thoughts, he d^ew all his Forces near king Edward's
Army, in a spacious field, near the Town of Cressey. King Edward and the Black
Prince (...) of their Numbers, proceeded with all diligence to put their Army
in Aarry of battle; the Prince entreating of his Father, that he might have the
Conduct of the battle, to win his Golden spurs of Knighthood, having lately
been made Knight of the Garter; or, if so Heaven ordered it, loose his life
with the Honor of the Day; to this, the King easily consented, as having
before Determined it.

The whole Army immediately upon this was divided into Three battles, which the
prince caused to be so Imparked, or Barrocaded behind, with Carriages and
Carts, that the Enemy should not be able, if they Enclosed them with their
Numbers, easily to break into their Rear.

The first Battle was Led by the Black Prince, who was assisted by the Earl of
Warwick, and Canford: The Lord Harecourt, Stafford, Manny, Delawar, Chandois,
Cliflord, and Bourcher; Sir Reynald Cobham, Sir Thomas Cobham, Sir Roger Ne^il,
and others; consisting of 800 men at Arms, 2000 Archers, and 1000 other
Soldiers.

The second Battle was Commanded by the Earls of Northampton and Arundell,
accompanied by the Lords Ross, Lygo, Willoughby, Basset, St. Auban, Milleton,
and Delasale; with many other Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen of Note, consisting
of 800 men at Arms, and 1200 Archers.

The Third and main Battle, being placed between the other two, was Commanded
by the King, assisted by three Earls, and many Lords, and knights, Consisting
of 700 men at Arms, 2000 Archers, and 1000 other Soldiers, well approved and
appointed for the War.

Being thus ordered in Expectation of the Enemy, the approach of night hindered
their joining then in battle; the French not withstanding their great brags,
much declyning it: so they spent the night in Prayers to God, and moderate
Refreshment, whilst the king and Prince in Disguise, went from Tent to Tent, to
see how their Courage stood affected; asking the private Soldiers, what they
thought of the number of the French Army, and whether the news held; they
should certainly fight on the morrow, with many such Questions: How the king
and Prince stood affected in the matter?

To this the Soldiers (not knowing them) replied, as for the French Numbers,
they minded them not, for they should* soon by English Valor, and the deadly
points of their Arrows, which they had sharpened, to the purpose, be lessened,
and God willing brought to confusion; as for the certainty they should fight on
the morrow, which they earnestly desired, and were willing to spend their blood
in the honorable cause of their king and Country, they doubted not, unless the
French declined it, by retiring that night; as for the king and Prince, they
said, they doubted not of their Courage so often approved, and were proud to
lose their lives, fighting under their Command.

These words from the unthinking Soldiers, greatly pleased the King and
Prince, and from their natural Courage and Alacrity, drew certain presages of
Victory; and so having gone round the Camp, betook themselves for a few hours
to their repose.

Early in the morning the signal for battle was given on both sides, the French
out of a Bravado first beginning it; Then Philip their King, ordered 15000
Genoways, with their Cross-hows, shooting steel Arrows, square headed to begin
the fight; and these made their first onset on the Princes b^ttel, but either
for want of skill, or making more have than good speed, they were put into foul
disorder by the English Archers, the greater part of them slain, and the rest
soon defeated, and compelled to retire; in which so violent have, in rude heaps
they rushed unto the French King's battle, and so disordered it, that the
French, without mercy put most of them to the Sword.

This first bad success did not so discourage the French, but that trusting to
their numbers, they came resolutely on, and chiefly charged the Princes B^ttel
with great fury, as eagerly thirsting for Revenge; but he stoutly repelled
them, doing wonders in Person; and by his valiant Example, so encouraged his
men, that they fought like Lions, laying thousands of their Enemies dead before
them; and yet for all the Numbers that pressed on them, maintained their battle
entire, and unbroken; by means whereof ^hey made prodigal expense and havoke of
the Frenchmen; who being first broken could not observe any order at all, nor
help themselves by any Ingenious Policy of war; yet, though they fell in great
Numbers before the Price's battle, yet those that came to stop the gaps, Detah
had made, pressed hard on, and many of them met the like fate; however, the
pressing numbers gave no leisure to the Prince, nor his assistants to breath,
or take any respite of refreshment, hoping by that means to weary and tire them
out; so that the brave Prince, though he were full of Incomparable Valor, and
Resolution, yet being diststessed for want of a breathing-time, sent to the
King, who stood a Looker on with his Battle untouched, to come to his Relief.

Of the Messenger sent, the King enquired whether his Son was alive or not, to
which he replied he was, and then fighting among the thickest of the Enemy; If
so, said the king, tell him from me, that he must expect no Aid, for this shall
be the day in which he shall winn honor, and his Spurs of knighthood, or lose
his life; for in life or death, he shall ingross to himself the whole honor
and glory of this day.

When the Prince was informed what the king had said, being urged by sharp
necessity, and Annimated with fresh hopes of a Famous Victory, he Encouraged
his Companions in Arms, that they rewed, and redoubled their strength and
courage, and fought with such undaunted spirits, that the Frenchmen fainted,
and fled, and were so eagerly pursued that the greater part of their Numerous
Army lay breathless on the ground, and in the Chase, two Marshalls of England
Encountered with a multitude of the Inhabitants of Bevois, Regmerry, Aubiville,
and Roan, who ignorant of the defeat, were marching to the French Army, of whom
7000 were slain, and the rest saved themselves by flight; and the next day they
were charged by the Archbishop of Roan and Grand Prior of France, who
conducted a strong Army, whom they worsted, killing great numbers of them: so
that in these battles there were slain of the French, 11 Princes, 80 Barrnons,
1200 Knights, and n^^^^ then 30000 Soldiers: the French king being forced to
fly hastily out of the Battle to save his life. The Plunder of the Field was
bestowed on the Army, and the dead bodies, of such as were of Note king Edward
car^yed with him to Mountrel, and there with due Solemnity, caused them
honorably to be buried.

The king and Prince thus Victorious over their Enemies, marched through the
Country without any oppossition and begirt the strong tow of Callis, with a
straight Siege; to the Relief of which, ater^a Year, the French king came with
an Army of 20000 men, but findin all the passages stopped, he sent to Challeng
the king to a battle in the fair field, as to knowing the Town could not ^hold
out; and that in the long siege his men were wasted, sent him word, he never
feared to meet in the field, as to his Cost he had proved; but now knowing his
advantage at this time, he would declyn it, and gave him the satisfaction he
required at another time; Upon this the French king broke up his Numerous Army
and departed and Calliciaus desparing of Relief, being sorely oppressed with
famine, they began to despair of a longer holding out, and finding no hopes of
relief from the French king, they humbled themselves to king Edward, and sought
his mercy, whereupon he Commanded that Sir of the principal inhabitants should
come to him bare Headed, and bare Legged, with ropes about their Necks, and
bring the key of the town and castle, weich they did: The keys He received, but
commanded the persons to be ^anged, as a terror for their obst^nate holding out
and Robbing the English Merchants: but at the intercession of the Queen and
Prince, they were pardoned: and he made Sir Andrew D' Patt the Lombard Captain
of it and it was held in the hands of the English, till the Reign of Queen Mary
when it was lost again to the French, upon her assisting king Philip her
Husband, contrary to the Treaty, with Forces, and soon after this Philip De
Valois, the French king Dyed, and his Son John was Crowned.

CHAP. IV.
How King Edward and the Black Prince returned to England in triumph, and how
being Entertained at Dinner, by the Earl of Kent, the Prince fell in Love with
his Daughter; Called the fair Maid of Kent: And what then and afterward passed
between them, vowing to each other Eternal Love and Constancy.

KIng Edward having settled his affairs in France prosperously, come to England,
with the Queen and Prince, and was received with great Joy and Triumph at his
Landing at Dover, when in his way dining with the Earl of Kent, the Prince
fixed his eyes on Joanna or Joan, the Earl's Daughter, whose rare Beautys were
so Admirable, that she was usually called the Fair Maid of Kent; This peerless
Lady soon made our Horoick Prince become Enamoured of her, yet not knowing how
his Father might take it, who designed to match him to some Foreign Princess,
to strengthen his alliance, he at this time, bridled his passion all he could;
yet his kind discourses to her, and the more powerful Language of his Eyes; sor
Lovers Eyes will talk, made her see she was not Indifferent to him, but fearing
so brave a Prince, and next Heir to the Crown, rather had set his Eyes on her
for lust, than lawful Love in Marriage; which fear much grieved and afflicted
the tender Lady; but the Prince, whose Virtues were rare and singular, had his
mind far from such thoughts, and was perplexing himself, when he was abscent
from her, how he might might bring about his design of marriage with her,
fearing, if he delayed to make known his mind, she ignorant of his passion,
might give her self up to the Arms of another, and so rob him of all his
expected Ioys; for he was very sensible that the most Exalted Beauty in the
kingdom. accompanied with such modesty and virtue, could not want Adorers; and
therefore knowing the French Wars would soon require his presence, he resolved,
as soon as possible, to let her know his Virtuous, and unfeigned love for her,
and labor if possible to gain her consent, and then do the like to remove all
difficulties that might stand in the way of his happiness; so undertaking to
hunt in those parts, when the Game was roused, and every one in pursuit of it,
The Princes came to the Earl's House, and found the precious Jewel of his heart
attended only by her Waiting Woman, the rest of the Family being abroad.

She no sooner fixed her Eyes on him, but her Countenance changed, she
t^embled, and looked pale, as fearing some rash design had brought him thither,
to make an attempt on her hanour: The Prince well perceiving the alteration of
the beauteous Countenance, took an oppertunity, when her woman was gone a
little aside, past hearing, to say; Ah Madam why fear you him, who himself in
spite of the Courage that has been ascribed to him approaches you with fear,
let me beseech you Fair Lady to think I intend you no harm; dishonesty is a
thought that never harbored in my breast, and if there be any one Living, that
would insure I will right your wrongs, and those that dare attempt it, shall
come upon the Point of my Sword to his own Destruction. The Fair Lady well
noting these words, and observing his Modest and Courtious beeaviour, now took
Courage, and welcomed his Highness to her Father's House, ordering her Woman to
bring forth wine, and other Refreshments; but at his Request discovered not to
her woman, that he was any other her Cozen. The Prince having taken a slender
repast, entreated her to walk with him in the Garden, which she Consenting to,
and sitting ^own, after a turn lady and gentleman walking in an arbor or two,
in a cool Arbor, he after some discourse about indifferent matters, fetched a
deep sigh.

This the Lady perceiving, entreated him to tell her the cause of the
Disturbance of his mind, which she said she saw visibly in his Countenance, and
if any thing lay in her power, she would even bear a part with him to ease it.

The Prince at this favorable opportunity, grasping her fair Hand, said, Ah!
Lady, it is in your power I know, to ease the doubts and fears that labor in
my mind: I wish it may (said the Lady freely, and smiling, though not without
blushes) but I cannot be your Physician, unless I know your grief. Ah! Fair
Lady, (said the Prince) Since I first set Eyes on your Rare Beautys, Adorned
with a pomp of winning Graces, my heart has been made Your Captive, and this
opportunity I have taken, to know from your Beautiful Lips, whether you will
relieve me by your Love.

Alas, my Lord (replied the Lady, still blushing) my Love! why if You wish for
that Love which is in my power to give, that is Chaste and Unspotted Love,
warranted by the strict Rules of Virtue and I safely do it? You should not
pain, not pine; the favor is too mighty for me, and that makes me doubt a
happiness meant to me that way, by a Prince whose Royalty and fame many bring
him a Queen, with Kingdoms to her Dowowre, will ever be mine: most kind lady
(said the Prince) with much Joy, doubt not but that love I pretend, is Chaste,
and it is you above all the Queens on Earth that I apply my self to; make me
happy, O consider (said she) my Lord, how dangerous it is for me to entertain
your love, though there may be no doubt of your Virtuous and Real Intentions,
since the King's Anger may break in upon me, and my Family, to their Ruin:
doubt it not, thou best of Women, (embracing her tenderly in his Arms;) I will
stand between them and you, against his fierce Thunder, and perish rather than
any harm shall befall You; but there is no need of such a fear, only let me be
assured of your love and constancy; and at my return, I will so work the
matters, that our Marriage shall not be hindered: after these, and such other
like discourses, they Sealed their Affections with mutual Vows; and so at this
time, after many tender kisses, not without tears, they parted.

CHAP. V.
How the Black Prince went again into France with an Army, won many strong
places, and fought with a small number of Archers, and Men of Arms, against
John the French King, overthrew his Army, near Poicters of 120000 men, took him
and his Son Philip Prisoners; His Return to England, Married the Fair maid of
Kent: The French King Ransomed. and a Peace Concluded very Advantegeous.

But now the Trumpets sound again to War, and the soft tents of Venus must be
left for the Seely beds of Mars; The Prince must pass the Seas, and so the
Lovers parted with Vows of Eternal Constancy to each other, and as faithfully
kept their promise: Far a short Truce that had been made with France, expiring,
he was sent with an Army into Gascony, where Landing he breathed such a terror
on that Province, that the French venumed with fear, grew heartless; so that a
great number of Towns and Castles fell into his hands, making little or no
Resistance. This made the new King John hasten his Army into the field, in
hopes to stop the Torrent, not doubting to oppress the Prince whose Army
consisted not of above ten or twelve thousand men, with his bu^key numbers, and
so accompanied with Philip his youngest son, he Marched forward toward
Poictiers, where the English army lay, and were preparing to Receive him, and
the Battle soon began with great fury; as for the French King, he had divided
his Army into four Battles, who as it was rheir turns, or lots, came and fought
with much Valor, but little skill; for the thick shot of the English Arrows
gauling unmiserably their large Horses, they ^ouncing threw their Riders, so
that they would brook no Rule: This soon put their Chavalry into disorder, and
they rushing in that confused manner, soon broke the array of their own foot,
so that such as were unhorsed or down, were trodden to Death by their own
friends, who were not able to relieve them, and such as would have p^essed
forward to make proof of their Valor, were driven back by those that retired
from the fury of the English Shot: and such as did recoile, were stoped, and
hindered from flyng, to stand the fairer Marks to our Archers.

However the french kings own Battle, which was better ordered, than the rest,
furiously encountered the Battle the Prince led, who performed rare and
wonderful feats of Chivalry, which, to the utmost of their power, they
increased, being animated thereto by the valor and fortitude of their king,
who exceeded all his Nobles in the Action that day.

But the Black Prince, and his Battle, which was so well marshalled, that no
disorder troubled it, used prowess, with undaunted spirits, each striving to
excel, in seats of Army, that the Frenchmen were not able to stand long
before them; for the Prince, inspired by the love of his fair Mistress, that
she might be the more charmed with his Fame, had vowed, e're the Battle begun,
he would that day acquit himself like a valiant knight; and he performed it to
a wonder (scarce credible) fighting amongst the thickest Troops, and beating
down his Enemies before him, where ever he came.

So that after a bloody fight, the Frency gave way, falling into a strange
disord^r fled, being so violently pursued, that the ^attel in which their King,
and Philip his Son, fought, being opu^ed, the Englishmen entered, killing and
and b^ating down all before; so that a lament^ble cry arose th^oughout the
French Host, where Sir Denis Morbeck took the King, and his Son p^isoners, to
whom ten other Gentlemen laid claim Alleging ^m to be their p^isoner; so that
he was pulled about, and very roughly used, till the Black Prince came up, and
caused their rage to cease; Commanding (on pa^n o^ Death) that none should
inspire the King, or his Son, giving them comfortable wo^ds; and with great
Re^ere^c^ bowed ^im^elf before him. which much revived his heavy spirits; and
that da^ feasted him and his Son, waiting himself ^t the Table, Lodged him in
his own bed; provided for ^im ^o^ourable attendance, and suppl^ed him with all
things that were wanting: so that King John said never pri^on^r met wi^^ so
Noble and Corteous a Conqueror, and he thought him^el^ happy in ^^ll^^g into
such hands, since the fortune of war had d^clared agai^^^ ^im.

In this Battle a great number of the French F^^bility and ^entry, were slain,
and above ten thousand common Soldier^ ^^re were taken Prissoners seventeen
Earls, th^^ce as many Barons, and so great a number of Knights, and Gentlemen
of Note, that (...) English Soldier who had fewest Prisoners, had two; all
which, tog^th^r ^ith the spoils of the field, the Prince freely gave them who
^a^ v^^^^ntly won them by their swords; so that there was not a poor man in the
Army, but every one of them had as much Gold, Silver, Plate, Jewels, etc. as
gave him full satisfaction for the Effusion of (...) blood he lost; and
hereupon the Prince marched, with his (...) Prisoners to Bordeaux. There he
went to king Edward has Father, to give him an account of his Victory and
Success* which ^^^^ed not only a rejoicing in the king, but in all Englishmen,
nor was wanting to send a ^erticular Letter to his fa^^, Mistress, the Earl of
Kents Daughter, who often be-dewed her Rosy Cheeks with Tears for his Absince,
and the Danger he exposed him to: The words were these:

Fairest of Creatures, whom amidst Triumphs and Arms, I let you by this know,
that fortune has favored me with Success over the Enemies of my Country, and
has been kind to let me reap fresh Laurels with my sword, that at my return I
might lay them at your feet, which shall be as speedy as the Great Affairs I
have in hand will permit; in the mean time, not doubting your Constancy and
Love, which can only make me Happy on Earth: I am

Your Faithful and Obedient Servant, Edward


The fair Lady receiving this Letter, kissed it a thousand times, and in
reading wet it with tears of Joy, that flowed from her lovely Eyes, bowing
eternal Love and Constancy to the Mirror of Virtue and Valor, wish his speedy
Return, and praying for his Safty, writing a very loving Answer to him, and
praising the Greatness of his Courage; yet earnestly entreating him, if he had
any tender Compassion of her Life, that was now bound up in his, he would not
too far Expose himself to hazard himself among the swords of his Enemies, for
Fate (as GOD forbid) should destine his Fall in the Noble Strife, she must
remain the most miserable Creature on Earth, the poor remoinder of her Days.

The Prince received this Assurance of his Mistresses Love with great joy; and
to Comfort her, hasted the sooner into England with his Royal Prisoners, where
he was highly welcomed by the King, Queen, and all the Nobility, with the
general Acclamations of the People; and the Savoy was richly furnished for the
French King and Nobles, where (for a time) he was Royally Entertained, and then
removed to the Castle of Windsor, where he had the liberty of Hawk^ng, Hunting,
with such Sparts and Pastimes as he desired; the king of England, and the Black
Prince frequently visiting him, to his great contentment; which noble Usage
begat a lasting Love and Amity between them.

And the Prince impatient to delay his intended Marriage, taking the king his
Father in a good humor, after discoursing many Affairs, fell on his knees, and
humbly besought him, for all the toyls and hazards he had undertaken, to grant
him one suit or request, without naming it: The king hereupon gently raising
him, said; Fair Son, I know your virtues, duty, and modesty, so great, that
will demand nothing but what is honorable; if I would resign my Crown, I know
you would not Accept it while I live, and there is nothing else, but you may
freely be possessed of: Then said the Prince, boldly, I take your Majesty at
your word; my Ambition is far from a Crown, all I humbly Request, is, that I
may have the Earl of Kents fair Daughter to be my Wife. The king was amazed at
this Request, as not knowing of their Loves, and plighted Troths; yet seeing
the Prince earnestly bent upon it, and hearing what had passed between them,
he, with a kind of unwilling willingness, consented, because he designed to
Match him with the Emperor's Daughter, to make a stronger Alliance between
them, to further him in his French Wars: So the Earl his Countess, and
Daughter, were sent for to Court, and their Consent being easily had, the
Marriage was celebrated with all imaginable Pomp and Joy, with Masks, Music,
Dancing, Songs of Triumph and the like; and so that Night the lovely Pair,
enjoyed their Hearts content, for which they had so long wished; and from the
Fruits of that Love, sprung a fair Son, named Richard, who succeeded his
Grandfather in the kingdom; and after a long Reign, was deposed by Henry Duke
of Lancaster, who took upon him the Crown, under the Title of Henry the tourth;
and being Deposed, was murdered in the Castle Pomfret, by Sir Pierce of Exton,
and six other Assassins; but not degenerating from his heroic Father in
strength and volour, siezing a Halbert, he wrested it by main strength out of
one of their hands, and killed sour of them, e're they dispatched him: But to
return:

The french king, and his Son, having been four years Prisoners in England,
began to Grow weary of it, and therefore, for their Releasement, made several
advantageous Over-tures to king Edward, for their Release, and for a Truce: But
Charles the french king's eldest son, having gotten the Regency into his hands,
would not agree with his Father; whereupon the french king was committed a
closer Prisoner to the Tower; and king Edward with the Black Prince sailded
over with an Army, and Landed at Callice; and from thence toward paris,
wasteing the Country as he passed, very dreadfully with fire and sword; so that
many Towns and Castles were yielded to him, by which means he compelled the
Regent, and Nobility to become earnest Petitioners to him for a Peace; and it
was Concluded on these Articles:

1. That the French King should pay four hundred thousand punds flerling, for
his Ransom. 2. That no King of France should Aid the Scots against England, in
any invasion, or rebellion; nor the English Assist the Flemings, in any War
against France. 3. That the King of England should have, and freely enjoy,
without homage, the territories of Gascon, Guyan, with the precincts,
territories, castles, forts, and towns thereto belonging; also the city of
Poictiers, and Peregors, the Earldoms of Bigrot, Poitiors, and Guyens, the
Citys of Limoges, Tharbes, Guares, Ageu, Anglasme, Auguemois, Kyuern, Courus,
the Lordship of Xantogue, Caumesen, Hames, Any, Montrel, with the Signories of
Callis, Marguise, Sandgate, and Collogne.
These glorious Advantages rejoiced the English, and Magnified our Nation
throughout the World, who wondered how a handful of people could compel so
Potent a Kingdom as france, to truckle so low: And for performance of the
Articles, Charles the Regent, and the Black prince (in the presence of six
knights of each Nation) received the Holy Sacrament at the High Altar; and then
king Edward, with the Prince, returned to England, and were (with all
Complements of love and kindness) entertained, and feasted, at the Tower, by
the french king, who was conveyed from thence to Callice, where according to
Agreement, he remained four Months; and then king Edward repaired to him, and
both of them (at High Mass) solemnly swore to perform and keep the Articles;
and then king John (for Hostages of his Ransom) delivered to king Edward, four
Dukes, seven Earls, ten Barons, many knights, and two of the worthiest
Burgesses of every great City of france; and so taking a friendly leave of each
other, the king and prince returned with their Honorable Hostages to England,
who were (with all humility and kindness) feasted and entertained by the king,
prince, and nobility, and permitted freely to use all sports and pastimes for
exercise and pleasure; and about two years after the conditions of Agreement,
being performed, king John came over to visit king Edward, and the Prince; and
to thank them for his former courteous Entertainment; and at the same time came
the kings of Scots, and of Cyprus; so that there were four kings at once in our
Court: But king John of france falling sick at the Savoy dyed, to the great
Grief of both Nations, whence his Body was conveyed to St. Dennis in france,
and there Interred amongst his Royal Ancestors.

CHAP. VI.
How the Black Prince Overthrew the Armies of Spain and France, and Restored
Peter the Deposed King of Castile to his Throne: War again Proclaimed with
France, and many Towns Taken. John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster's great Success,
Marriage, etc. The Black Prince's Sickness and Death. A Brief Account of the
Battle of Again Court, and the total Conquest of France, by Henry the 5th, of
England, who was Crowned at Paris.

THE Black Prince's Fame spreading over the World, he was sued to (by
Distressed Kings and Nations) to Assist and Relieve them with his Valor and
Prowess, and amongst others, Peter King of Castile being Overthrown in many
Battles, by Henry his Bastard Brother, Assisted under hand by Charles the New
French King; Flying his Kingdom, came to the Prince, where he was with his fair
Princes at Bordeaux, settling his New Government in France, humbly Imploring him
to Re-in-stare him in his Kingdom, promissing great Rewards and Treasures, when
he should be Re-possessed.

The Generous Prince, knowing him to be Rightful Sovereign of the Kingdom, and
moved with the piteous Complaint of the Wrongs done him, so for Compassionated
his Case, that he undertook his Protection, raised an Army, and went in Person
to Re-in-thronize him, which Army he led into Castile; and although the French
and Spanish Forces were four times his Number, yet in a Bloody Battle most of
them were Slain, and the rest put to Flight, and king Peter again Restored to
his Crown, and Settled in his Kingdom by the Prince; who, however, returned
again with his Soldiers Vn-payed, because Money (in an un-setled Kingdom) could
not be suddenly Raised, but with promises it should suddenly be done; yet, not
long after, Henry returned upon Peter, and wared so sharply on him, that he
subdued him, took him Prisoner, and put him to Death: However, his two
Daughters and Heirs, were afterward Married to John of Gaunt, Duke of
Lancaster, and Thomas of Woodstock, two of King Edwards Sons, who claimed the
kingdom in their Right, which occasioned future Bloody Wars, and the French
king dealing Treacherously underhand, contrary to the Peace Sworn to, with the
Nobles of Normandy and other king Edwards Territorys in France, persuaded them
to Revolt, so that War again was Proclaimed, and the Duke of Lancaster was sent
with an Army, who, Landing at Callice, Marched from thence, spoiling the
Enemies Country, in his way Vnopposed till he came to Bordeaux, to the Prince
his Brother; and the king sent another Army after him to St. Omers, under the
Conduct of Sir Robert Knowles, who, Marching (with T^^^^r through the adjacent
Country) with Fire and Sword Depopulated it, and the Duke of ^ancaster
Encountering with King Charles, Beat ^im and made him fly to save himself; so
they brought a Teror even upon the City of Paris, and from thence they Marched
into the Earldom of Anjou where they won the strong Towns of Vaas, Ruly, and
diverse others, and, now the Duke of Britain fearing the French would Invade
him, craved Aid of King Edward, and Fortified his Towns and Castles; he sent to
him, the Duke of Lancaster with an Army; who, again, Landing at Callice, wasted
the Country as he passed with Fire and Sword, till he battle scenecome to
Bordeaux, where to his unspeakable Sorrow, he found the Renoned Black Prince
his Brother, exceeding Sick and his Physicians Dispairing of his Recovery;
however, calling the Nobles together he appointed the Duke Governour^ and
Captain General, of all Kin^ Edwards Provinces in France, and made the Nobles
Swear for the performance of their Duty and Obedience to him; and, so the Sick
Prince, who was in pessed to have Poison Given him in Gastillian Vioage, in a
Banquet of Sweetmeats, which cast him into a Lingering Disease, growing worse,
and worse, and so to the unspeakable Grief of the King, and whole Kingdom, he
Dyed on the 8th. day of June, 1376. in the 40th. Year of his Age and was Buried
with all manner of Sollemn Pomp, at the Cathederal Church in Canterbury; and
with him, Sunk much of the English Courage for many years we making but faint
struglings till the Reign of Henry the 5th. who, overthrowing a French Army of
120000 Men at the Battle of Agencourt, with an Army not above 14000 (passed)
Conquering on, till he Compelled the French King to give him his Daughter
Katherine in Marriage, and the Kingdom, after his Decease; so that he was
Crowned at Paris, King of France, and the States Swore Homage to him, so that
an Entire Conquest was then made, (except of a little the Dauphin, who held out
with a party maintained) which Glorious Success Renowns our Nation to all
Posterity: But to come nearer, and conclude my History.

The Black Prince, who was a Comely Stature, Strong Body, Fierce in War, but
Mild and Affable in Peace, being Dead (as is said) King Edward Created Richard
the Prince's Son; Prince of Wales, Earl of Leicester, Duke of Cornwall, and
Appointed him to Succeed in the Kingdom (as has been said) and because he was
Young, he Appointed the Regency to the Duke of Lancaster, till he should come
of Years to Sway the Scepter; and being Worn out with Age, the toyls of War,
and Grief for the Death of the Black Prince, he Dyed, when he had Reigned
somewhat more than Fifty Years, and was Buried at Westminster: And thus,
Reader, have I fullfilled my promise, in a True Account of this Renowned
Histor^, not doubting but it will give Delight and Satisfaction to all that
Read it; and so Encourage us to Imitate our brave Ancestors, that france and
other Nations may know, we are still Englishmen, whose Undaunted Courage
cannot be Baffled, but in Contending for Right and Fame, we Dare as much as
ever.

FINIS.
Books printed for, and sold by Charles Bates, at the Sun and Bible in
Pye-corner, near West-Smithfield, where all Country Chapmen may be Furnished
with all sorts of Historys, small Books and Ballads.
THe famous and Renowned History of the Three Destructions of Troy. The famous
and Renowned History of Guy, Earl of Warwick. The famous and Delightful History
of the Lancashire Witches, etc.


