God and the King: OR Monarchy proved from Holy Writ, To be the only
Legitimate Species of Politic* Government, and the only POLITY Constituted
and Appointed by GOD.

Wherein the Phantasied Principles of Supereminencing the Peoples welfare above
the Kings Honor; and Popular Election of Kings, Are manifested to be
groundless and unreasonable.

Briefly Collected, by Robert Constable, M. A.

(...). Romans 13. 1.
Wherefore we must be subject, not because of wrath only, but also for
Conscience sake, Romans 13. 5.
London, Printed for W. L at the Crown in Cornhill near the Stocks-Market, 1680.

To the REVEREND, and His Loving Father, Robert Constable.
Dear Father,
HOW much I am Obliged to you both for my Being and Well-being, I desire now to
testify unto the world; for though to requite your Love, and Bounty be not
within the Sphere of my Quicquid est quod dat patri filius, utique minus est,
quia hanc ipsam dandi facultatem patri debet. Seneca, lib. 3.
Ability, yet since the 1 Timothy 5. 4. (a) The Stork.
Apostle commands Children to learn to requite their Parents, and Nature it
self has taught unreasonable (a) Creatures this Lesson, I shall Endeavor (by
Gods help) to pay that threefold debt of Obedience, Reverence, and Gratitude,
which all Children owe to their Parents. And therefore I shall ever devote my
self unto your Service, to whom (next under God and my King) I owe my self, and
those Abilities I have, both Natural, and which through Gods Blessing upon your
Liberal Education, by a double Apprentiship, in two St. Leonards College in
St. Andrews in Scotland, and Graies Inn in London.
famous and flourishing Societies, I have acquired. To express therefore my due
Observance, and grateful Recognition of your former Care, and Cost; I here
present you with (the first=born of all my Labors) a brief Collection of the
Divine Right of Monarchy, evidently deduced (e Sacris paginis) to be the only
Species of Politic Government, and that the people have no Right in the
Collation of their King, or any Color to presume to the same. The undeniable
Right of this Subject absolutely lessens my Endeavors; because to prove a
Principle is to deny it the force of a Principle: But, because some in the
world are not ashamed to make this Case disputable, therefore, (pregnant with
zeal, though weak in the Delivery) I brought this into the world, presuming
that the always assented to Truth hereof would strengthen me in my Travel. And
thus brought forth I beg for it (as a true born Son) your Baptism. Hoping that
for the Fathers sake, qualis qualis est, aequo animo consules: And so to the
world, under your Protection, it is committed, by

Reverend Sir, your ever Obedient Son, and Humble Servant. Robert Constable.

GOD and the KING.
GOvernment, in general, is, the Administration and Exercise of that Power and
Authority which the Superior has over the Inferior; which, at the very
instant of the Creation of the world, took beginning; For the very first
Creatures which God made, being inferior to him both in Glory and Power,
became subject unto his Guidance, Rule, and Government. And God, who is a God
of Peace and Unity, to the end to establish and preserve peace and unity
amongst his Creatures of different Kinds and Natures, did by his Providence and
Wisdom create all their kinds in several Degrees of Superiority and
Subordination, that as one kind did naturally exercise a Rule, so the other
might as naturally yield Submission and Obedience. So that Government, being a
word of Relation, necessarily requires a Correlatum, which is Subjection, the
one not existing without the other. And therefore as Government is an
undeniable Institution of God (as in the Series of the whole Universe is most
evident and clear, every Creature having a certain Rule Dominion, and
Dependancy one of anoher) so Subjection or Obedience, being its necessary
Correlate, is as undeniably requisite and necessary. For the wisdom of God
which saw the preservation of the Universe, to have a necessary dependence upon
the mutual peace and unity of these three several kinds of Creatures, (viz. the
Angelical, Intellectual, and Natural Agents) whereof the Universe was composed,
and that peace and unity to have the like dependancy upon their Order and
Government, did likewise see it necessary that the same means should have the
same efficacy in the particulars of each of these three species, lest confusion
in particulars should produce the destruction of the species, and by
consequence of the Universe. For lib. de Moderatione in disp. Servand.
most true is that Saying of Nazianzen, (...). Order is the Mother and preserver
of all things. Therefore the Lord did not terminate the influence of Order and
Government in the species of any of the three several sorts of Creatures, but
did also originally constitute the particulars of each in different degrees of
Superiority and subordination or subjection. As amongst the holy Angels we find
Archangels, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. and, Jude v. 9. And amongst the Devils Beelzebub,
the Prince of Devils, Matthew. 9. 34. And the obedience of Angels (I mean not
that of the whole species unto God, but their obedience unto one another,) is
strongly intimated by Christ in the third Petition of that Prayer (which he
gave to all Christians as a precept, Luke 2. 11.) wherein we desire that our
observance of Gods Will here on earth, may be such as the Angels perform in
heaven: But our observance of Gods will is not terminated in the obedience of
the species unto God, but further comprehends the performance of those duties,
adhibited in the fifth Commandment between Inferiors and Superiors, whether
it be in political or paternal Government.

And amongst the natural Agents which by a natural instinct are dependant and
subservient one to another; as the Heavens to the Earth, the Earth and Heavens
to the Plants and these three to Sensible Creatures; amongst whom the Lion is
invested with a certain natural Power and Authority over the Beasts of the
field; the Eagles over the Fowls of the Air, and the Leviathan or Whale over
the Fish of the Sea. And Jerome affirms the same order to be observed Ad
rusticum Monachum.
amongst every particular Society of Sensible Creatures. The dumb beasts and
wild herds (faith he) do follow their Leaders; the Bees have their King, and
the Cranes fly after one another like an Alphabet of Letters.

But this Wisdom and Providence of God in the constitution of Degrees of
Superiority and Subordination amongst the particulars of the immediate species
of the Universe, is most manifest and perspicuous in the species of the
Rational Creatures. For God, in the very first beginning of the world invested
Adam, Genesis 1. 26. not only with the Rule and Dominion over all the other
Creatures of the world, but likewise with a Monarchical Supremacy; not only
Oeconomical over the one created family in Paradise, but Political over a
Society consisting of many families, which were to descend of Adam. For the
same Law which commanded obedience to Parents did oblige all Adams posterity to
the performance of this Monarchical obedience to Adam. Now although this
Government be styled most commonly Paternal, because all Adams Subjects could
derive their Pedigree from the blood Royal; Yet is it the very same with that
we term Regal. Therefore the Holy Ghost, to demonstrate unto us that the name
did not create any real difference between this Paternal and Regal Government,
did afterward in the Penning of the Decalogue, use only the word, Father, to
express all sorts of Government. And this indeed is the ground of Monarchy:
which, as a Learned Divine has well described, is a Politic Government
instituted and approved by God, consisting in the prudential Administration and
Exercise of the Supreme Power and Authority of one Person over all other within
the same Society, for the preservation of Peace and Unity in order to God's
Glory, the Kings honor, and the Peoples welfare. Where we may observe,

1. The Efficient cause of Monarchy.

2 The End or Final cause thereof,

The Efficient cause of Monarchy, is, either Principal or Instrumental. The
Principal Efficient cause of Monarchy is God, by whom all Power is ordained,
Romans 13. 1. For God is the universal, principal, and primary Efficient cause of
all things (sin only excepted) Romans 11. ult. And Genesis 14. 18. there we find a
King of Gods own making, and His Regal Power of God's own Institution. For Sem
(alias Melchisedec) was by Gods special Ordinance a Type of Christ, both in his
Regal and Sacerdotal Office, Heb. 7. 12. And therefore is styled by the Holy
Ghost, the King of Righteousness, and King of Salem, which is Jerusalem, where
this Melchisedec reigned until Jacob's time. And also several persons received
their Regal Investiture from Gods immediate and particular Consignation, who
had no other Title to that Monarchical Honor and Supremacy; as, Saul, 1 Samuel
10. 1. David, 1 Samuel 13. 14. and Solomon, 1 King. 1. 30. Kings of Israel,
Jeroboam, 1 King. 11. 30. Jehu, 2 King. 11. Kings over the ten Tribes; and
amongst the Heathens, Hazael, 1 King. 19. 16. was made King of Syria by Gods
particular appointment; and Cyrus, Isa. 45. 1. who, although a Heathen, is
there called Gods Anointed, Ergo.

Obj. But it may be Objected. That when the people of Israel asked God for a
King, He was very angry with them, and did declare his dislike thereof by a
miraculous Thunder and Rain, 1 Samuel 12. 18. Ergo.

Sol. To this I Answer; that God was not angry with the Peoples desire of a
King, as in relation to the Object of their desire, viz. Monarchy, but rather
was well pleased therewith, being the very Ordinance of God himself, Deuteronomy. 17.
14, 15. and therefore was sanctified to the people with the promise of a
blessing, 1 Samuel 12. 14. and further confirmed unto them by God himself in his
own particular Election of another King, viz. King David, a man after Gods own
heart: But as in relation to the end of their desire, which was Idolatrous and
sinful, laying the hopes of their deliverance, from those pressures under
which they then groaned, upon the King, looking for deliverance from him, and
not from God, He was angry with them; as God deolared unto Samuel, 1 Samuel 1. 7.
They have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me; Imputing more to the
power of a King for their deliverance than unto my power, so forgetting me
their Creator and Preserver.

And for the further manifestation of the Divine Right of Monarchy God was
pleased to sanctify it with the Blessing of Divine prescription. For Monarchy
began in Adam, and so continued in his Posterity successively until the Flood;
and after the Earth was again replenished, the Church was limited to Sem (as
aforesaid) King of Jerusalem, where he Reigned till Jacob was fifty years of
Age. Who went down to Egypt with all his posterity, and there lived in Bondage
and slavery, till God raised up Moses their Monarch and Ruler, by whose hand he
delivered them, and after Successively continued that Monarchical Rule over
them (as is manifest in the holy History of the Israelites) even from Moses
unto our Savior Christ, King of Kings, and the true King of the Jews, Matthew.
2. 2. Except where their sin and ingratitude made them incapable and unworthy
of the great blessings and favor of the Monarchical Government, and brought
that heavy curse of Anarchy upon them. For whilst there was no King in Israel,
in those days every man did what was right in his own eyes, measuring their
Actions by the Law of their own Lusts. All which enormities the Holy Ghost
justly imputes to the want of a King and Regal Government in Israel. Although
they had their Synedrim and great Council amongst them; Yet it pleased God in
all their Captivities and Distresses during those sinful times wherein they
wanted a King and Regal Government, to raise them up occasional Judges and
Monarchs for their occasional deliverances; thereby to manifest to them the
benefit of Monarchy, and how conducent Regal and Monarchical Government was to
their constant security and happiness; God himself honoring this blessing of
Monarchy with many gracious Pactions and promises, as to David, 2 Samuel 7. To
Solomon, 1 King. 3. yea and to wicked Saul, 1 Samuel 12. and Idolatrous Jeroboam,
1 King. 11. and therefore a token of Gods approbation of that calling of
Monarchy, as a natural gift and blessing* requisite to humane perfection, for
the Lord did never thus directly declare his approbation of any curse or
privation of these blessings, which was an effect of sin; nor of any calling
which was grounded thereupon, such as that Monkish mendicancy which is used in
the Church of Rome. For that command of Christ to the young man in the Gospel
was principally probatory; and all Christ's promises made, either to him, or his
Disciples for remuneration of their piety, who forsake all for his sake, relate
primarily and properly to the love of Christ, and to such disvaluations and
desertions of worldly and natural gifts and blessings, only Accidentally and
in a Secundary sense, when they come in competition with Christ, who is to be
preferred above all other things whatsoever, although never so dear unto us,
Matthew. 16. 25: But I say such curses and privations of Worldly and natural
gifts and blessings were never directly and positively honored with a Sanction
of a remunerative promise, as Monarchy is in the prementioned Texts. And this I
hope may suffice to evidence the Primary and principal cause of Monarchy, to
be God alone. Now it rests to speak of the Secondary or Instrumental cause
thereof.

In Crowns as in all other (nay much more than in any other) Possessions, he
that enters not in by the door of Right and Justice is a Thief and a Robber
whose intent is but to Rob and Steal, whereby to satisfy his own Ambition and
Avarice, as the constant event has manifested in all Usurping Traitors,
Abimelech, Absalom, Baasha, Zimri, Omri, and many others both Ancient and
Modern, as that Traitor the bane of our English Nation O. Cromwell, whose
wickedness (I fear) has drawn those National Judgments upon us, which since
we have suffered: whose name (I call God to Record with me) when I remember,
makes my flesh tremble, stupifies all my senses to think flesh and blood should
be guilty of such execrable Acts, the perpetration whereof Hell with all its
damnable Crew scarcely could or ever did exceed. But the prodigious guilt of
this Miscreant so much exceeds the mild point of my pen, that in the further
process, I should but lessen my own resentments, and seem to favor that which
is the fittest subject for the greatest Satyr in the world.

The instrumental cause of Monarchy, is the secondary means which God makes use
of, for the immediate collation of this Supremacy upon any man, whereby to
Entitle him to the Regal Diadem, and that, either Extraordinary, when God does
declare his will by extraordinary revelation, and that either for a blessing to
his people, over whom he places him, by making him a Minister of his favors
and mercies, or for the Executioner of his Judgments for the punishment of the
peoples sins.

Or Ordinary, when God does advance a man to this Regal Dignity and Honor by
those ordinary ways and means, which are constant Rules for us to judge of,
whereby to acknowledge this Sovereignty and yield our obedience; and this
likewise either, when the Sovereign Power is attained by those ordinary ways
and means which are approved and warranted by the word of God, and the Rules of
Reason and Equity: Or when the same is attained by Violence and Injustice, and
such cursed ways and means, as are repugnant to the word of God, and the Rules
of Justice and Equity. The dispute of the former would be arrogant and impious;
for the extraordinary ways of God, are far above our Judgment, and further
above our imitation: God never intending such for a president whereby to frame
our Actions, but only our Submissions thereunto. And therefore I shall insist
upon those ordinary ways and means which are the rule of our Actions in this
kind; which (as I have said) is twofold. Either when attained by violence and
injustice, and repugnant to the word of God, and the Rules of Justice and
Equity; which is called Vindicative: Or when it is attained by those ordinary
means which are approved and warranted by the word of God; and this is called
Gracious.

Concerning which, there are two opinions, the one, propugned by some, that the
Right of the Royal Investiture pertains to the people. The other, and that
most certainly, is imputed to Birthright and Hereditary Succession. Their
Arguments, whereupon they ground the former opinion, are, partly instantial,
and partly rational.

The instances alleged for the propugnation hereof, are the Inaugurations of
those Kings which the Scriptures mention, to be made or Anointed by the
people; as Saul, 1 Samuel 11. 15. All the people of the Land came to Gilgal to
make him King. And David whom all the men of Juda Anointed King at Hebron, 2 Samuel 2. 4. And afterward was Anointed King over Israel at Hebron by all the
Tribes of Israel, 2 Samuel 5. 3. And Solomon who was likewise Anointed by the
people, 1 Chronicles. 29. 20. And Jeroboam, whom the people made King, 1 King. 12.
20. And Vzziah, whom the people of the Land made King, 2 King. 14. 21. And
Jehoahas, who (although he was the second Son of Joshuah) was made King by the
people in his fathers stead, 2 Chronicles. 23. 20.

The reason, they ground this opinion upon, is taken from that Aristotelian
principle, Honor est in honor ante, and non in honorato. And therefore the
honor (say they) and Submission, which Kings receive, is originally in the
people. And therefore they think it not reasonable, that the people should be
obliged to give obedience and yield honor to any person but him whom they
think and judge worthy of it, and so manifest their Judgment of his worth, by
their Election of him to be their King and Sovereign.

And lastly, they add St. Peter's Testimony, 1 Pet. 2. 13. who terms Regality an
Ordinance of Man, which were false, if it did proceed from God, and not from
the people; for then it were an ordinance of God and not of Man.

Now from these grounds they deduce two damnable (because Rebellious)
Consequences and Corollaries.

1. That though the King be Major singulis, yet he is Minor universis; and
therefore that is no Rebellion, but duty in the people, to resist and oppose
the King, nay to depose and dethrone him, where the people judge it necessary
in relation to the defense of their own safety.

2. That the King does receive and enjoy this honor only by virtue of a
stipulation or Covenant between himself and the people. And therefore if the
King do violate this Covenant and break the Trust reposed in him by the people,
by any acts which are destructive, ad Salutem populi, (whereof they presuppose
themselves to be Judges:) that then the people are absolved from their
Allegiance grounded upon that Trust and Covenant, and may Lawfully provide for
their own safety and welfare, either by resistance, deposition, dethronement,
or any such means as themselves shall judge thereunto conducent.

Now to confute this opinion concerning the Peoples Right and Power in this
Regal Investiture, and in answer, to the Arguments alleged for the
propugnation thereof, and to those damnable and execrable inferences grounded
thereupon; we must know, that these acts of the People, mentioned in the
premised instances of Scripture of making and Anointing Kings, are,

Either acts of Homage and Duty, by way of acknowledgement and testification of
the Supremacy already Legally confirmed upon the person to whom these duties
are performed; which in Scripture are expressed upon two several occasions; The
one, where God did confer this Supremacy and Regal Honor, by any extraordinary
ways and means, as in Saul, David, Solomon, and Jeroboam. The other, where God
used their means for the vindication of the Kings just Title against an
Usurper, as in Joas, whom Jehoida the Priest, and the Captains, and the people
crowned and anointed King in the Temple; restoring him to his just Rights
which had been usurped by his Grandmother Athaliah, 2 King. 11. 12, 13. And in
Hosiah the son of Amaziah whom the people restored to his just Power, which the
Conspirators (who slew his Father) had usurped: And in both these cases, the
acts of the People are good and Lawful, and approved by God; being declared to
be the will of God, upon the former occasion, extraordinarily; upon the latter,
ordinarily. And indeed is nothing else, but the peoples necessitated assent and
manifestation of joy, for that blessing which God has bestowed upon them; and
therefore bound to perform all acts of obedience and Loyalty to him so
Invested, whereunto they do by this act of theirs silently and implicitly
promise and engage. And not by this act of theirs stipulating* or adding any
Authority or Supremacy to the person so inaugurated; as in those instances, if
severally and seriously considered, will appear: For, 1 Samuel 10. 1. we find
Saul, and that by Gods appointment (where the Text faith) has not the Lord
anointed thee to be Governor over his inheritance? as also David, who was
Anointed King by Samuel, according to Gods command, 1 Samuel 16. 13. Solomon by
Zadoc the Priest and Nathan the Prophet, 1 King. 1. 34. Jeroboam, by the
Prophet Ahijah, 1 King. 11. 30, 31. all which being performed by the immediate
command of God, declaring his will and pleasure concerning the advancement of
them to their several Power and Pre-eminence by Extraordinary Revelations, do
evidence, the Right of Royal Investiture, to pertain only to God; by whom
Kings Reign: And that, not only when he does so declare his will by those
Extraordinary means; but also, when that Power is attained by those ordinary
ways and means, which are warranted by Gods word and the Rules of Reason and
Equity; as in Joas whom Jehoida the Priest made King in pursuance to the
promise of God to his servant David that his house should be established for
ever.

Or else these acts of the people are acts of seeming Power or Authority,
collating this Supremacy and Regal Power upon some person, who has no other
Right or Title thereunto, neither of Birthright, nor of Revelation from God;
as upon Absalom, Adonijah, Jehoadas, Judas, Theudas, and Barchozba, (who
professed himself the Messiah, and drew the people into Rebellion against the
Roman Emperor* which occasioned those wars wherein Jerusalem and the Jews were
destroyed,) and these acts of the People are execrable, sinful, and Rebellious,
and so declared by Gods Judgments thereupon, for wheresoever the Scriptures
mention the constitution of a King after this manner, you shall find that they
likewise record (not only the frustration of the peoples endeavors, but also)
that they were frustrated by some heavy and sudden Judgments of God, both upon
the Usurper (whereby he was degraded from his undue honor) and the people, who
presume to confer that honor upon him without a warrant from God, and so by
that means to obtrude a Deputy upon God of their own and not of Gods Election.
Whereof we have a lively instance in the madness of the People of England in
these late times, placing forsooth their (Lord Protector) by those horrible
sins of Rebellion and Sacrilege, not only perpetrated against the Right and
Power of our late dread Sovereign, but even against his Sacred and most Royal
Person. O Heaven! O Earth! what satisfaction can be made for that Sacred blood,
shed, to satiate the gluttonous and Sacrilegious lust of Traitors and Rebels,
who build up Sion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity? But surely God will
avenge the blood of his Servant, crying (like the blood of Abel) for vengeance.

These acts of the people in Anointing of Kings are only mentioned where some
of these occasions happened (that is) where there was an interruption of the
ordinary means of conferring the Supremacy by birthright and Hereditary
Succession; either by the interposition of Gods just Prerogative in the
Advancement of some Person by Extraordinary and Immediate Revelation, or else
by the usurpation of some who had no right or Title at all, but Force and
Violence, (either private of themselves and some few partners, wherein God
stirred up the people to vindicate the Kings right; or Public of the people)
but where the Supremacy and Sovereign Power (with all the Appendages) descended
by Birthright; there is no mention at all made of the people; though the act of
Duty and Homage was as necessary to be performed to all who enjoyed the Crown
by Hereditary Succession (as to Abijah, Asa, Jehosaphat, Jehoram, and the rest,
to whom the people were no less obedient and subject than to those who were
appointed by God) but I say in those cases, the peoples acts of Submission and
Homage are not expressed but presupposed, as known acts of Duty to those Kings
who attained the Supremacy by those ordinary and known means of Birthright. And
how many Instances are there in Scripture of the inefficacy of the peoples
endeavors in this kind, as in Aarons and the Israelites honoring and
Proclaiming the Golden Calf, to be a God and Guide in Moses stead, yet did not
that popular Election Legitimate that Calfes power and Title, Exodus 32. And
Absalom was proclaimed King by all the thousands of Israel, yet did not that
act of the people Legitimate Absaloms Title to the Crown. For the Holy Ghost
terms it a Conspiracy when it was at the very height, 1 Samuel 15. 12. Shcba
had Ten Tribes for him, when David had but one, and yet was he never termed a
King, but a man of Belial, 2 Samuel 20. Adonijah confesses that (although the
faces of all Israel were set on him to make him King, yet) he never had any
just Title or Right to the Kingdom; for the Lord had designed it for his
Brother Solomon, 1 King. 2. 15. upon all which God manifested the guilt of
their sin, by sending those fearful judgments both upon the people and the
Traitors so exalted.

To the reason grounded upon that principle (quod honor est in honorante and
non in honorato) let it be premised; that honor involves a twofold relation:
The one primarily and per se to that quality or excellency which is found in
the person, for which he is honored and esteemed. The other secondarily and
virtute prioris to the act of honor and estimation whereby we judge well of
the person so and so qualified; and therefore all acts of honor in the
secondary sense are acts of duty, as being the effect of that qualification in
the person so magnified and honored. So that it is evident the honor and
submission which the people exhibit to their King, even from this ground and
principle of Aristotle, are not acts of favor to be conferred and disposed
voluntarily at their own will and pleasure, but acts of Duty, not only
morally, as the acts of honor in the premised principle merely intimates; but
also by a Divine necessity, being thereto obliged by the Law of God. And
therefore must be performed to such, as God esteems worthy of the honor to be
his Deputies; and not upon such as themselves judge worthy to be their Rulers:
For you know the people are obliged to exhibit acts of honor and reverence to
a Judge; but it does not therefore follow* that the people make that man a
Judge, but he is made such by Letters Patents from the King, without asking any
consent from the people.

To St. Peter's Testimony I answer, that the Apostles expression there, relates
to the subject of Sovereignty and Power, which is the King, and those who are
over us under him; As manifestly appears by the immediate following words of
the Text, 1 Peter 2. 13, 14. Submit your selves unto every Ordinance of man for
the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme or unto Governors as them
that are sent by him: (as if he had said) Submit your selves to every Humane
Power and Authority that God has set over you, not only to the King himself,
but also to his Ministers and Magistrates, although they are his Subjects as
well as you: for there is no power but of God, and whosoever resists the
Power, resists the Ordinance of God. And they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation, etc. Romans 13. But it does not at all relate to the
Original and Efficient cause of that Power, which is God, and neither King nor
people.

And now (I hope) the profanity of that former inference of theirs is
perspicuous, appearing most damnable being directly contradictory to that
express Rule, which God himself has prescribed in this case, Exodus 23. 2. Thou
shall not follow a multitude to do evil, neither agree in a controversy to
decline after many. Where God plainly declares that the universality of the
offenders cannot legitimate the fault; as appears in the sin in erecting the
Golden Calf, and Absaloms Conspiracy. For though it be a Maxim in Policy, that
Multitudo peccantium tollit peccatum (i. e*) Poenam peccati: and therefore in
crimes of the blackest dye the offenders often times escapes their due
punishment. It is as true a Maxim in Divinity, that multitudo peccantium
aggravat peccatum (i. e.) culpam peccati; and the more I seduce the more guilt
I contract: Although the multitude of partakers may secure me from punishment,
in foro judicii humani, yet I am sure to receive the just reward of that sin at
Gods Tribunal; from which the whole Society of men and Devils, cannot secure me.

But not to bind these nice Disputants to an Argument of Conscience (which
indeed is scarce to be found amongst them) to evince their error, let us
consider the absurdity and sencelesness of their opinion both in Policy and
Reason. For if the Major part of the people be Superior to the King, then the
Government is not Monarchical, but Democratical, every species of Policy
deriving its Denomination and nature from those that are Invested with the
Supremacy: But that Democracy is the basest kind of Policy (Confusion and
Destruction being the conclusion of such a Government) both experience, and the
general consent of all Politians do declare and so asserted both by Jerome, and
Cyprian, and even Calvin himself (although a favourer of the Peoples Right, in
appointing of their King and Monarck) Jerome. cap. 1. ad Titum Ep. ad Evagrium.
diverse men have diverse minds and meanings, and therefore amongst a multitude
of Governors, Emulation and dissension are no rare springs. Nay (both Jerome
and Cyprian) record it for a probatum in daily experience, that so many
Leaders, so many followers, so many Rulers, so many Factions, do tear and rent
in pieces the peace and Unity of all Societies. To which agrees Calvin,
affirming, an equality amongst Governors to be the mother of Factions.

It Is one of our Saviors own Maxims, Matthew. 3. 24. That a Kingdom divided
against it self cannot stand; but every Democracy must necessarily divide a
Kingdom against it self, Ergo, etc. That Democracy must necessary divide a
Kingdom against it self, is proved from another of Christ's own Maxims, Matthew.
6. 24. No man can serve two Masters (much less three or four hundred masters)
but in every Democracy there are (at least) two Masters. And therefore no man
can be a true Subject or servant in such a Commonwealth; but (as Christ faith)
must necessarily be factious, by loving one and hating all others, and adhering
to one, and rebelling against others. And therefore it is observed, that in
Christ's time, when Esaias had prophesied, that there should be an Universal peace
over the whole Earth; that then, there was not any kind of Polarchy in any
Kingdom in the world; because in its own nature every Polarchy is inconsistent
with Peace and Unity; the end and conclusion thereof being absolute ruin and
desolation (the common fate of all divided Kingdoms) except God in his mercy,
prevent the same by the reducement of such a Government to a Monarchy; a
manifest experience whereof we have both in the Athenian, Syracusan,
Lacedemonian, and Roman Commonwealths; whose Polarchical Dissentions
occasioned many Intestine Wars and Tragical Conflicts, which in fine must
necessarily have produced the ruin and desolation of them all, if the
opportune reducement of those Polarchies to a Monarchy had not prevented it.

Lastly, every individual member of the same Society is obliged to exhibit acts
of Obedience and Loyalty to their Lawful Prince (as the former part of this
distinction of these subtle Logicians intimate) allowing the King to be Major
singulis, but upon what grounds they deny his Authority in Vniversis, I leave
to the Censure of every rational Judgment seriously considering this
deduction, Peter is obliged to exhibit acts of obedience to his Prince, so
Paul, so John, and so every individual member of the same Society; Ergo,
(according to that Logical Maxim, a particularibus ad universale valet
consequentia) they all in universal, are obliged to exhibit acts of Obedience
to their King.

To the second Inference (viz.) That the King does receive and enjoy this
honor only by virtue of a stipulation or Covenant between himself and the
people; and therefore if the King does violate this Covenant, and break the
Trust reposed in him by the people; that then the people are absolved from
their Allegiance, grounded upon that Trust and Covenant, and may Lawfully
provide for their own safety and welfare, either by Resistance, Deposition,
Dethronement, or any such means as themselves judge to be most conducent to
their own security. To this I answer that this Covenant (its true) implies a
mutual engagement of the parties therein concerned; but the parties primarily
and originally concerned are, God upon the one party, and the people upon the
other party, as Moses declares, when he recites that Original and general
Covenant (which is indeed the ground of all other particular Covenants) Lev.
26. Deuteronomy. 28.

And therefore Solomon, Eccles. 8. 4. makes this Covenant a ground why people
should obey the Kings Commandments, not as the Kings, but as Gods Commandments*
whose Vicegerent the King is; for where the word of the King is there is power,
and who shall say unto him what do thou? for the Kings heart is in the hand
of the Lord, as the Rivers of water he turns it which way soever he will, Prove.
21. 1. And therefore the King is only the deputative party assigned by God,
and entrusted by him for the performance of the Covenant upon Gods part, either
for a vengeance, or recompense to the people, as the Lord himself judges of
their merits. And though the King may spare the wicked and persecute the
Righteous even unto death, as Pilate did our Savior, yet even in that the King
does but execute Gods Decrees, as the Holy Ghost does declare concerning that
unjust Judgment of Pilates, Acts 4. 28. for Pilate did nothing but what God
had Determined before to be done, For every man's judgment is from the Lord,
Prove. 29. 26. and not from the Judge or Ruler. So that (in a word) the King may
do male (that is) a wrong to himself, (for which he is accountable to God) but
he cannot do malum (that is, any wrong to us) by inflicting any thing upon us,
which is not just and according to our deserts from God, whose place the King
supplies in Judgment, which is the ground of Solomon's assertion, that, The
Kings lips do pronounce Divine sentences, and that his mouth transgresses not
in Judgment, Proverbs 16. 10. Now therefore upon these grounds of Solomon's it
is manifest, that there is no sense, why the people should claim any power over
the King by virtue of this Covenant.

First, Because the King is not their Deputy, but Gods, and every man must
account to him for his Actions, who does constitute and depute him; as when the
King does depute a Judge for any Province or City, the people under his Command
have no power to question him for any act which they conceive unjust, but
either by Petition to that Judge, or else by their addresses to the King his
Master, whose trust all corrupt Judges do deceive, and not the Trust of the
people; for they receive not any Power or Authority from the people, but from
the King: And in like manner the people for redress of their grievances from
the Kings oppressions, must address themselves to the King by Petition, and if
that prevail not, then to God by prayer, (who is the Kings sole Lord and
Master, and from whom he receives his Power, and whose Trust all Tyrannical
Kings break by acts of Injustice) which is the ultimum refugium, as Samuel
declares when he Prophesies of Saul's Tyranny, whereby the people should be
grievously oppressed; for redress whereof the people (when the King would not
hear) should cry unto the Lord, 1 Samuel 8. 18. other means of remedy than which,
the Prophet Samuel did not dream of, nor could prescribe to the people to make
use of; and whereas if he had conceived resistance to be Lawful, he might soon
have found out that way, and have the people so to provide for their own
security.

Secondly, Because the people never receive Injustice from the King, if they
look upon themselves; for the Judgment is the Lords, who cannot do injustice,
nor break the Covenant upon his part; although his Minister and Deputy may fail
and offend in the execution of his Office in his own particular, which is his
own guilt. As a Hangman that Executes the just sentence of death upon a
Malefactor, if in doing his office, his intentions have not reference to the
sentence of Justice, but the satisfaction of some private grudge, or some
Covetous Design or the like, that Officer is guilty of Murder, although the
Malefactor receive from his hand nothing but his due deserts. And thus much (I
hope) sufficiently declares the error and vanity of that opinion, that the
peoples consent and approbation, are the ordinary and instrumental means and
causes of that Supremacy and Sovereign Power, which does Pre-eminence the
Monarch above all others within the same Society.

Now it rests to speak of that opinion, which (and that most certainly)
imputes the Secondary and Instrumental cause of Monarchy and Regal Dignity to
Birthright and Hereditary Succession; the Efficacy whereof Holy Writ does
manifest, Preheminencing, the first born above all his Brethren in Honor and
Possessions, as the Lord declared to Cain, Genesis 4. 7. nor was it in the Fathers
power, either for love or hatred, to alter the Law of the first born, and to
transmit the Honor and Inheritance due to him, to his younger Brother, Deuteronomy.
21. 15. and in that statute, which the Lord himself made, ordering the descent
of honors and possessions, Number. 27. the Lord does direct that they be
conferred by Birthright and Hereditary Succession; and not by the Election or
Discretion either of Moses or the people.

But more specially to our Case, the Lord was pleased to honor it with the
promises of perpetuating these Honors and Royal Dignities unto any Family,
which were always grounded upon the perpetuation of the Royal Issue, in giving
Sons that should sit upon the Throne, as appears in his promises to David, 2 Samuel 7. 12. to Solomon, 1 King. 9. 4. to Jehu, 2 King. 10. 30. and most
manifestly upon Jacobs Prophecy, which upon this very ground Entailed the
Crown and Scepter unto Judah, until Shiloe came, Gen, 49. 10.

The performance of which gracious promise was executed in Abijam, who
succeeded Rehoboam, and Asa him, Jehosaphat him, and Jehoram him, and so in the
rest, as the Sacred Chronicle does at large relate, who all inherited the Crown
by virtue of this Birthright, without the concurrence of any other cause or
meancs. And this may suffice as touching that Instrumental and ordinary means
(viz. Gracious) whereby God does advance a man to the Regal Diadem, Dignity and
Honor, and which is a constant Rule for us to Judge of whereby to acknowledge
this Sovereignty and yield our obedience.

The other Instrumental means of this Supremacy, which creates a Right and
Title to the Crown, is Vindicative, and that is Sword and Conquest, which the
Lord declares to be one of the severest and heaviest of his Curses and
Judgments upon a Nation, Lev. 26. 25. And the Lord styled the victorious King
of Assyria, Isa. 10. 5. The Rod of his wrath, and staff of his Indignation;
because by his sword he was resolved to pour out the Vials of his fierce wrath
upon the Ten Tribes, for their Idolatries and abominations.

Quest. It may be here demanded, whether Conquest be a Lawful and good Title,
and whether any King who does claim from thence, be a Lawful King, or only an
Usurper.

Answ. Conquest in it self makes no better Title to a Crown, than Ahab had to
Naboths Vineyard, or than the Robber has to the Travelers purse: For as it is
an affliction and punishment to the passive party, so it is a sin and Injustice
in the active party; and directly contrary to the Law of God which prohibits
all injuries to our neighbors; but yet such a Title may be legitimated and
made Lawful by the declaration of Gods will concerning the same. Now Gods will
in this case is declared two ways.

First, Extraordinarily, by immediate Revelation; and so Jeroboams, Jehues, and
Nebuchadnezzars Titles were Legitimated.

The second Ordinarily, by the Extinguishment of the Royal Family, which is a
Declaration of his wrath and vengeance upon that House; and so the Lord did
Legitimate Baasha's Title, as himself acknowledges by the Extinguishment of
Jeroboams House, 1 King. 15. 29. Now where the Lord has declared his will by
either of these ways, the Conquerers Title is good and Legal, and all those
who claim from that Conqueror are Lawful Kings. But where the Conquerers. Title
is not Legitimated by one of these two ways, the Conqueror is but a mere
Usurper, and it is not only Lawful, but a necessary duty in the people to
resist him, and to use their utmost endeavors for the Deposition of that
Usurper, and the restitution of their Lawful Sovereign to his just Rights, as
Jehojada, and the people restored Jehoash, by the Deposition and Murder of
Athaliah, after she had Reigned peaceably for six years, 2 King. 11. and as the
people restored Vzziah by the Deposition of those Conspirators, who slew his
father Amaziah, after they had Reigned peaceably eleven years, 2 Chronicles. 26.

Quest. If it be not Lawful for a people to Elect their own King, nor any means
assigned by God for Collation of this honor, but either Birthright or
Conquest; what is to be done when the Royal Family is Extinct, and no Conqueror
does claim; and where a mixed multitude (amongst whom there is no Relation of
Blood to Pre-eminence one above the rest) do consent to make a Plantation, and
to Erect a new Commonwealth?

Ans. Samuel has set us a President in this case, 1 Samuel 10. 20, 21. For
though the Lord had revealed his will to Samuel concerning his own Election and
appointment of Saul to be King, 1 Samuel 9. 15. yet because Samuel foreknew that
King should be a Tyrant, to plague the people for their Idolatrous Trust in a
King, he concealed that Revelation, and would not nominate their King, lest the
people should afterward (when they suffered by Saul's oppression) blame Samuel
for appointing him: but used the means of Lots, to declare the will and
pleasure of God in Electing of a King unto the people. And the like was used by
the Eleven Apostles, when they had no warrant from God to Appoint or Elect
another Apostle, nor durst presume to confer that High calling upon any man
without a warrant from God, as you may read, Acts 1. 23. So that in both those
cases mentioned in this question, we are to use the means of Lots; for that
means is likewise warranted by God, where his will is not otherwise known and
declared, Prove. 16. 33. but the peoples Election is absolutely unlawful (as the
premises, (I hope) have sufficiently manifested) either in those or any other
cases. And this of the Efficient Causes of Monarchy.

The End or Final Causes thereof, are, either Principal, and that is Gods Glory
and the Kings Honor; or less Principal, and that is, the Subjects welfare. The
principal End of Monarchy is, either, (as the Schoolmen term it) Originans,
which is Gods Glory; or Originatus, that is, the Kings Honor. Now concerning
the Original Principal End which is Gods Glory, it is to be understood that we
do not speak of it here in its extent and latitude, as it is the universal end
of all things, but only as it is limited to Monarchical Actions and Duties; in
which sense, Gods Honor and the Kings, are not really, but modally only
different, both of them consisting in the very same Duties, and are of the same
Nature in reference to Monarchy. For all excellency, worth and goodness is
radically and essentially in God, from whom is communicated Personae honoratae
that worth and goodness for which he is honored and esteemed. And therefore
this Politic honor which Preheminences the Monarch above all others in the
same Society, is that excellency which God communicates to him, enabling him
for the execution of the Duties of his Calling, in the Rule and Government of
his people and subjects; and with a Power to constitute and Enact Laws and
Statutes for the Public good, and benefit of the Commonwealth; and with power
to execute the same Laws, either by remunerating the integrity of pious and
just men, according to the merits of their service and obedience; or by
correcting and punishing the Delinquences of Disobedient and evil men: For a
Seditious person seeks only evil, and a cruel messehger shall be sent
against him, Prove. 17. 11.

Obj. But it may be objected, that seeing the Kings Honor is subsequent to
Gods Glory (it being the chief principal End of Monarchy) that then when the
Kings Commands are contrary to Gods, we may resist.

Sol. We may resist his Commands, but not his Power, for in those Cases we must
obey God by an Active, the King only by a Passive Obedience: For which we have
the president of the Apostles themselves, Acts 4. 5. who did refuse to obey the
Commands of the Rulers, prohibiting them to preach in the Name of Jesus, but
yet submitted to their power, in yeiding themselves to be imprisoned and
beaten, according to the commands of the Rulers. So that they obeyed both God
and the Magistrate; the first by doing, the latter by suffering. For Romans 13.
we must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for Conscience sake, by
Christ's example, who needed not to have submitted to Pilate, or the Jews for
wrath (for he was able to overthrow them all with a blast of the breath of his
mouth) but yet to honor the Substitute and Deputy of his Father, he submitted
to their power, Acts 4. 28. which is the Ground of Nazianzens advise, (...); We
must submit to good Kings, as to the Lord himself; to bad Kings, for the Lords
sake. And Solomon, Eccles. 10. 20; makes this more evident, where he extends
the Honor and reverence due to Kings, unto the very thoughts and imaginations
of the heart (notwithstanding they were both Fools, Tyrants, and Idolaters) for
when Solomon prohibited the cursing of the King, yea even in the thought, he
was not ignorant that Saul had been a Tyrant, himself an Idolater, and that his
Son Rehoboam, who should succeed him, was a fool.

Object. You will say, what? must men then think and believe manifest lies?
must we neither say nor think that those Kings are evil and wicked, which
manifest themselves to be such in all their actions, such as the Scriptures
record for most infamous and notorious finners?

Sol. Kings in reference to their duty toward God, may be more wicked than
other men, because they may offend in a double capacity.

First, In their Natural, by transgressing Gods Commandments, which do oblige
them equally* as they do other men.

Secondly, In their Politic, as Gods Deputies by breach of that Trust, which
God has reposed in them, for Ruling and Governing of his people according to
Justice and Equity. But in reference to their duty toward us, they cannot do
wicked things, (as before showed:) so that the words of Solomon are to be
understood only of Kings, in reference to the exercise of their Power upon us;
which whether it be for good or hurt, is still from God: And therefore we may
not think them evil and unjust to us; for the Judgment is not theirs but Gods,
Prove. 26. 29. who cannot be unjust.

Now as God did deligate unto Kings a Power over our persons in his Ordinance,
for their Primary power and Authority; so did he likewise give them a Power
over our Estates, for the Magnificent Maintenance and support of that Honor,
which is their Secondary honor of Maintenance and Revenue: Which was the
ground of Christ's command, Matthew. 22. 21. to render a Tribute of our Goods to
Caesar, intimating that this temporal honor of Tribute, was (by virtue of Gods
Deligation) as due unto Caesar, as the spiritual honor of Praise and Worship
was unto God. And upon the same ground St. Paul commands to render Custom and
Tribute to Kings, not as a gift and favor, but as a due and just debt, Romans
13. 7; and gives this reason for it, because they are Gods Ministers, appointed
to supply his place in Ruling and Judging us. And seeing God has transferred
the greater power to Kings, (viz.) over our lives, by putting the sword into
his hands; the Apostle thence concludes their Investiture with the less, (viz.)
a Power over our Estates, and the like Power we see exercised by Pharao in that
Ordinance for storeing up a fifth part of all the Corn in Egypt for seven years
together; which Law was Enacted by Pharao upon the single Counsel of Joseph,
with the Approbation only of Pharao's servants, or Council, and not by the
general consent of the people, Genesis 41. 34. neither can we pretend this Law to
be Tyrannical, for it proceeded from the wisdom of God, who in this business
directed the mind of Joseph, Genesis 45. 57. nor can any man imagine, but the
State and magnificence of Saul, David, Jeroboam, and others, who of private
persons and others, were advanced by God himself to Regal Honor and Dignity,
was supported by this means of Custom and Tribute, nor do I find any
particular Law or Statute for the particular endowment of those Kings, but
only that general Right and Prerogative, which they derive from God, Investing
them with a Power over both our Persons and Estates.

And now (I hope) our obedience (either Active or Passive) being a necessitated
Duty and incumbency upon us (as the premises do sufficiently declare) to be
performed (both from our Persons and Estates) to our Lawful King and Monarch,
does absolutely manifest the peoples welfare to be the less principal end of
Monarchy; which (though it be really distinct from the Kings honor, yet) is
indeed a mere result and product of the same. For Salus populi can never be
effected or energated by any other means, but those which in the first place do
effectuate and energate the Kings honor, whether we look upon the Monarchical
Actions of King or Subjects, both which are versant about the same object and
matter, only in a diverse manner. For the King is Interested only in the
Active part of Government, by Enacting, and duly Executing of Laws for Gods
Glory, his own honor, and the peoples welfare; the people in the Passive part
of Government, by their obedience and submission to such Laws and Commands of
the King, the violation whereof is a direct means of Dishonor to God and the
King, and of Ruin and of Destruction to the people.

FINIS.

