Considerations touching the Excise of Native and Foreign Commodities, (as
formerly established) as also how the present Excise settled on His Majesty, may
(with some Addition) be improved to the Sum resolved on by the Commons in
Parliament.
ALthough the Impost, called Excise, has by experience been found to be the
most equal and indifferent Levy that can be laid upon the people, (and all
ingenious men who have studied the Nature and Product of it, upon the result of
solemn and serious Debates, have acknowledged it so to be) yet by reason of its
name, and vulgar prejudice (which any Tax of like import will inevitably find
amongst the people) it has had the ill hap to be traduced as the most
destructive thing imaginable to Trade and Commerce, and a badge of slavery and
vassalage, and some have not stuck to affirm, that the Moyetie of what it
produces, is expended in Charges and Salaries to Officers: Now for the removal
of these Clamors and Prejudices, its necessary that the Nature of the Excise be
demonstrated in general, and then to show that it is not considerably
burdensome, much less destructive to Trade, especially not to Foreign
Commerce; and lastly that the Charges and Salaries (as it may be managed) are
no way considerable, as to the bringing in of such a Revenue as it may produce.

The Excise is a certain Imposition laid upon most Commodities which are
consumed and spent within the Kingdom, and was formerly distinguished under two
general heads, vizt.

Foreign or Imported Goods. Native or Inland Commodities.
Foreign Excise.
The Excise on Imported Foreign Goods was an equal and indifferent Levy, and no
impediment to Foreign Commerce, and with a little amendment of the Rules by
which it was formerly Collected, would be no burden to the home Trade.

The Equitableness of the Levy consisted in this, That it was mostly laid upon
such Foreign Commodities as are of vast and profuse expense, as Wines, Silks,
Tobacco, Fine Linens, Fruits, Spices, Grocery, and Druggs, the Income of which
did heretofore produce 220000l. per annum, and by a little amendment of the
Rules by which it was formerly levied (without augmentation of the Rates then
set) it would in a short time have improved to 300000l. per annum, and (in case
the aforesaid Rules had been strengthened by a Law) would have beeen Collected
with much more ease, less charges, and greater satisfaction to the Subject in
general.

The Equitableness of this Impost will further appear if it be considered, That
it was only laid upon the Commodities consumed and spent within the Kingdom
(for whatsoever Imported Commodities were afterward Exported paid no Excise)
so that he which eats, drinks, and wears the Commodities Exciseable (and no
other) pays the Duty, and that insensibly as his own occasions call for it: And
is it not much easier to pay Excise by the penny, when a man's necessities
compel him, then to pay other Impositions by the pound, when the Emergencies of
the Kingdom require them?

It was very prejudicial to His Majesty's Revenue to add any part of the
Excise to the Customs by way of an Additional Duty; for as the Excise was
settled, it was a perfect Cheque upon the Custom-Officers in whom the great
trust lay; and it was by experience found much to advance the Receipts of the
Customs, (which Advance many judicious men have computed to be no less then
40000l. per annum) In like manner the Custome-Officers were a Cheque upon the
Excise Officers; This mutual Cheque was of great use, (especially in the
Out-Ports and Creeks where there are no Comptrolls, and where the greatest
frauds are committed.)

And it is humbly conceived, That the product of those Commodities which this
last year were taken off the Excise and added to the Customs will verify the
truth of what is here asserted; for the said Commodities then added to the
Customs has not produced within the year above 60000.l which the year before
in the Excise did yield 135000l. (as by comparing the Accounts will appear;)
Neither will the Addition of those other Foreign Commodities which yet remain
without any Excise or Additional Duty on them (if added to the Customs)
produce any better Account there; The Reason, as is conceived, is the want of
the aforesaid mutual Cheques. And yet there is great reason that either an
Excise, or an Additional Duty should be imposed upon those Commodities which
yet remain without either, which Commodities are such as these, Spanish
Tobacco, Sugars, Druggs, Fruit, Grocery, Throne-Silk, Iron, Paper, and all
Haberdashery, etc. For that Tobaccoes of our own Plantations pay an Additional
Duty at the Customehouse, and Spanish Tobacco pays none; In like manner Linen,
being a useful Commodity pays, and other Commodities less useful, as Sugars,
Fruit, Spices, etc. pays none.

A further use may be made of this Cheque or Comptroll, in case of Farming the
Customs; for by this means His Majesty may at any time know the certainty of
those Receipts so to be Farmed, whereas if it be laid only as an Additional
Duty upon the same Commodities at the Custom-House, and both Duties be farmed,
the certain knowledge of it will not so readily be obtained, neither will there
be the like security to His Majesty in the aforesaid mutual Cheques.

And as this will be of great certainty and security to his Majesty in his
Revenue, so also it will be a Cheque to the common practices of Farmers in
reference to Trade, who have commonly been very pernicious, if not destructive,
to the generality of Traders; for when the Customs Additional Duty, or Excise
is very high set upon any Commodity that is of vast expense and current here,
the Farmers or their Accomplices will be the chief (if not the only) Traders in
those Commodities; they usually contracting with such persons as they please to
bring in the said Commodity upon payment of half or one third part of the Duty,
to the very great prejudice of young Traders, and the engrossing and
monopolizing of Trade, (which ought to be free) into the hands of themselves or
their friends; whereas if the Excise be distinct, and under a distinct
Government from the Customs, in case any increase of Duty shall be laid by way
of Excise (which is most rational) this evil practice of the Farmers will be
prevented, to the great content and satisfaction of Merchants in general,
especially of young beginners, who ought to be encouraged: Moreover another
evil practice of the Farmers will be prevented by laying an Excise upon
Foreign Goods (and not permitting them to be Farmed) viz. Their filling the
Markets with unperishable Commodities toward the expiration of their Farm,
that shall serve for the expense of the Kingdom for one year at least, so that
if His Majesty shall not think fit to continue his Customs in Farm, but
reassume the same into the hands of Commissioners, there will be a vast loss on
staple Commodities, by reason the Market will be replenished as aforesaid; an
instance of this was lately experimented in the Farm of Salt, etc.

To show that an Excise is no burden to Trade, may be thus evinced; That which
is laid only upon the Consumption of Goods spent within the Kingdom, and paid
by the first Buyer or Consumptioner, can be no burden to Trade, (especially to
Foreign Commerce) But so was the Foreign Excise, Ergo, etc.

Neither is it any such burden to the home Trade, especially if respect be had
to the profit and advantage of the Trader, for who knows not that the
Shopkeeper or Trader rates the Excise he pays (a^ all other his Charges) into
the price of his Commodity, and sells it so much the dearer to him that
consumes and spends the same, who pays it insensibly (as before) only when his
own necessity calls for it.

The two main Grievances which made the Excise formerly counted burdensome,
were, The great trouble to Merchants and Traders. The inequality in paying the
Duty.


First the trouble, for as the Rules then were, no Merchant or Trader could
dispose of, or remove his Goods from place to place,

Secondly a greater burden to Trade, was the inequallity of paying the Duty,
for as the Rules then were, every man was an Housekeeper had credit for the
Excise of his goods, until sale upon his bare Bill of Entry, without any other
security, which caused many mean persons (mutable Inhabitants) to be set up to
Enter Goods for abler Merchants, to the intent they might not be found when an
account was required, so that by this means, the fair Trader that paid his full
Excise duly, was extremely prejudiced in his Trade by the frauds of those which
paid little or no Excise.

Now remedies against both these evils being provided for, by effectual
securing the Duty upon the first Entry of the Goods* with the Officers of the
Excise at the Custom-House, (who must be enjoined to take good security for
payment of the Duty at a time certain) will perfectly cure the di^^ase, to the
Merchants great content, and an advantage to His Majesty's Revenue.

As to that other part of the Excise (to wit) on Native and Inland Commodities,
Native Excise.
as the former has been broken (and consequently in great part lost by
dividing it) so this has been extremely garbled, insomuch that there now
remains only an Excise upon Beer and Ale and other Liquors, and what reason is
there that those other Inland Commodities which were formerly subject to this
Duty, should still remain exempt, it being as proper that Salt, Soape, Lead,
Iron, Hopps, Glass, Silver Wire, etc. should pay a Duty to His Majesty for the
increase of his Revenue, as Beer and Ale and other Liquors, which are only
received from one or two sorts of men, and raises great clamours upon the very
account, that other Native Commodities are wholly exempt from the Duty.

The Income of the Excise of Beer etc. (now established by Law) cannot (without
an augmentation upon other persons or) Commodities) possibly produce above
250000 l. per an. and if (according as the Commons in Parliament have voted)
His Majesty's Revenue of Excise shall be raised to the sum of 400000 l. per
annum, it is humbly conceived that the before mentioned Commodities, both
Foreign and Inland, should be again made subject to this Duty, which being
done, and those Commodities lately added to the Customs by way of Additional
Duty brought back to their proper Channel, viz. to the Excise, the sum
propounded will be raised, (and the Customs will not considerably be lessened)
the same being once made firm and sixed by a Law, and not disturbed by often
changing the method and way of management, and the persons that manage the
same, would in a very short time become a certain and constant Revenue, and not
be so ingrate to the people as other Taxes, which are more gross and bulkey,
and which draw greater sums at once from the Subject.

Neither indeed is this way of Leavy unsuitable to Monarchy, the same having
been long used in the Kingdoms of Spain and Portugal, upon all provisions, and
other Princes have generally Taxes of like nature, as the King of France on
Salt consumed and spent within his Kingdom, and it is a Maxim of our
Neighbors the Neatherlanders (now Masters of the greatest Trade in the World)
to lessen their Customs, and enhance the Excise on the Commodities there
consumed and spent.

And now to answer the great Objection, viz. That the Salaries to Officers,

This is such a mistake that it sufficiently discovers their ignorance that
affirm it. per pound in the whole, and sometimes much less, viz. not sixteen
pence per pound, as can be evinced and clearly made our, if required by
Authority; And how any Receipt of like nature can be collected from such
Multitudes of people (and much of it in remote parts) at a cheaper Rate, cannot
surely by any judicious person be well imagined, yet nevertheless upon a
through settlement of the Excise by Law (according as is before propounded) it
would be brought into His Majesty's Coffers, nett, at less then Twenty pence
per pound.

These things being duly weighed and considered, it must undoubtedly be
granted, That the Foreign and Native Excise, is the most equitable Tax for the
constant raising of such an annual Sum as it produces, and may be effected
without oppression, burden or disease to the people, if the same be settled by
Act of Parliament, with such Rules as may be presented suitable to the
foregoing Discourse.

An ANSWER to some PAPERS lately presented to the High Court of Parliament, in
Relation to the Excise of Beer and Ale, etc. now established as part of His
Majesty's Revenue (by which PAPERS its endeavored to alter the present way and
management thereof, by propounding other Methods) which may be reduced under
two General Heads, vizt.




To the first, for laying the charge on Malt, its by a worthy person, reduced
to these four heads, viz.


To the first, it cannot be denied, Houses, Lofts and Chambers of the people,
which will cause great trouble and vexation not to be endured, and the charge
of Officers will be infinite, for multitudes will turn Maulsters to gain the
Excise; Its not gainsaid, but if Malt could be forbidden upon a great penalty
to be made by any persons, but by certain public Maulsters, this might be of a
veil to increase the Excise in many countries (indeed in all the Countries in
general) for then one Maulster would be able to serve many Alehouses and
Petti-Brewers with Malt; but for the City of London, whose Excise of Beer and
Ale is and more of the whole Excise, and is collected at Four pence per pound
charges, it would be of infinite loss and charges to His Majesty, for in
London, one Brewer spends the Malt of at least 50 ordinary Maulsters, the like
in proportion in other great Cities and Ports; Its therefore humbly conceived
as to the equality of the Tax, that an Assess upon all private Families,
according to their number and quality, is of much more equality and certainty,
then this upon Malt.

The second, it is utterly denied, for there cannot be a more certain way then
the Gage of Tuns,

To the third,

To the fourth, ^sw.
let any indifferent man judge whether the clamours will be less against the
Duty from Brewers, Innekeepers, and Victuallers, then from the multitude of
Maulsters, in case a Duty should be imposed on that Commodity, and whether the
entering into the private Houses and Chambers of all persons that now do, and
hereafter will make Malt, will not be a greater greivance, then entering the
Brew-houses and Outhouses of the Brewers, etc. now is, to which they have been
accustomed, as is aforesaid.

And now having (as is humbly conceived) given a full answer to the Arguments
for the translation of the Duty from Beer to Malt, we shall proceed to give
some further Arguments against it; as, First the different sorts and rates of
Malt cannot be distinguished, some being made of Oats, other of Barley, and
some of Wheat, all of much different prizes, there being almost half in half
difference in the prizes of Malt (and in the making of it) and to make the
proportion hold, the Rate for Excise must be Eight shillings per Quarter on
good Barley Maults, for each Quarter of such, commonly produces three Barrels
of Strong Beer, besides small beer, otherwise it will not answer the Duty now
laid on Beer and Ale.

Secondly, the inexperiencedness of Officers to take the quantity of Malt to
settle the business, will cost the King near a years Revenue of his Excise now
settled by Law, which will be prevented if the Excise be continued upon the
Brewer, as now it is established.

Two things will much increase the Excise, and content the Brewers.

First, make the Duty universal, viz. That whosoever will brew his own Beer,
may pay Excise (as before) and then there will not so many brew for Lucre of
the Excise as now there do, by which means the Brewers Trade will increase, and
His Majesty's Revenue also. Secondly, keep the Quality of drink to a certain
Standard, that the Ale-Brewer who makes Ale of sixteen shillings per Barrel,
may not out-doe (or undo) the Beer-brewer, who seldom makes any above 10 s.
per Barrel, which is a greater grievance to the Beer-brewer then the Excise,
and this will increase the Excise (which is much eluded by this fraud) help the
Beer-brewers Trade, and bring down the price of Maults; as to this strict Rules
must be provided, That no Ale or Beer be made above 10 s. per Barrel, upon
great penaltys both to Brewer and Spender. Lastly, That no Inn, Alehouse, or
Victualler be Licensed till the Duty be compounded for, and there shall not
need a translation of the Excise, to increase this part of His Majesty's
Revenue.
As to the second, viz. The reducing the Excise of Beer and Ale to a certain
yearly Rentcharge upon all Inns and Alehouses, to be collected by the
Justices of the Peace in each County, etc.

The Arguments alleged for this Mutation are two, viz.

It will 1. Ascertain His Majesty's Revenue. 2. Lessen and contract the charges
in collecting it.


As to the first, 1 Answ.
it has been before declared, that the far greater part of the Excise arising
from Beer and Ale (well nigh parts thereof) is collected from Common-Brewers in
the City of London and parts adjacent, and other great Cities, Towns and Ports
within this Kingdom, who pay it weekly as they brew the same upon the Returns
of the Gagers, that constantly attend them at the time of cleansing their
drink, and take the certain quantity and quality thereof, and weekly make such
Returns to the Head-Offices, and these Returns from the Common-Brewers in the
Office of London does produce a certain and constant Receipt of 2000 l. per
week, the charges whereof is very inconsiderable, not above 4 d. per pound (as
before has been asserted) the like is done in all the chief Cities, Ports and
Towns in the Kingdom; and should the Excise be taken off the Common-Brewers in
such Cities and places, and put as a Rentcharge upon the Inns and Alehouses;
1. You exchange a Gentleman, and take a Beggar for your Security, whom if you
trust one Quarter, you trust him for ever. 2. It makes the collection at least
one hundredfold more difficult, and consequently more chargeable, for that the
number of Brewers, is not one of 100. of Ale-house-keepers etc. and therefore
the number of Officers must of necessity be increased. 3. The Excise of all
small Beer of private Families, who take of the Common-Brewer is wholly lost,
also the Excise of unlicensed Alchouses (that ought to be carefully looked
after) and likewise of all Beer and Ale that is brewed for Faires, Wakes, etc.
which is now paid by the Common-Brewer. 4. A certain and constant Revenue will
be disturbed and unsettled, that by twenty years practice has grown to
maturity, and a new way taken up, which has not been tried, and to experiment
and methodize the same, will lose His Majesty at least, half a years Revenue;
and should the same be settled as is proposed, what certainty can there be of
the payment of the rate set upon the Ale-house-keepers, etc. they being mostly
persons so litigious and mutable, and generally so poor, that their Landlords
for their Rents, and the Brewers that trust them for their Ale and Beer, are
necessitated to appoint Bay liffs and Collectors to receive the same weekly,
and commonly have dormant Judgments, by which at their pleasure they take their
Goods, and turn them out of doors, so that His Majesty in that way, will in all
probability come short in his Revenue.


As to the lessening of the charges, 2 Answ.
for that the Justices of the Peace, and Constables will collect the same
gratis;

Besides what has been spoken in the former part of this Discourse (to which
the Reader is referred) touching the charges in collecting the Excise; It is
further answered, That as the number of persons from whom the Duty (if thus
translated) will be multiplied, so the trouble in collecting it, must
necessarily be much greater; and therefore it is not to be imagined that the
Justices and Constables will do it without charges, and if so, it cannot be
supposed to be done at a much cheaper rate then now it is; and whether it will
be thought sit to alter the present way and method which brings in a certain
Revenue to experiment a new way, which is yet uncertain, and must be the loss
of half a years Revenue (as is aforesaid) in expectation of saving some small
matter in the pound, is humbly submitted to serious consideration; And further
it may be considered, who shall give security for payment of what the
Constables, etc. collect? and what cheques can be kept on the several persons,
through whose hands the money collected must pass, before it comes into His
Majesty's Coffers?

To conclude, it must be the work of men, particularly set apart, who make it
their work and business to bring in this Revenue; for as the Proverb is, That
which is every man's business, is no man's business; and therefore if the Revenue
of the Excise be left to the management of the Justices and Constables, etc.
its to be feared that instead of a more certain, His Majesty will find a very
uncertain Revenue, and the charges of collecting greater in the new Methods
proposed, then it will be in the present way and management.


