CONSIDERATIONS UPON THE CHOICE OF A SPEAKER OF THE House of Commons In the
Approaching SESSION.

Caeterum nequicquam perierit ille: cujus interitu quid gavisi sumus, si mortuo
nihilominus servituri eramus? Vivat Hercule Cicero, qui potest, supplex and
obnoxious, si neque aetatis, neque honorum, neque rerum gestarum pudet. Ego
certe cum ipsa re bellum geram, hoc est cum regno, and imperiis
extraordinariis, and dominatione and potentia, quae supra leges se esse velit.
-- Nulla est tam bona conditio serviendi, qua non deterrear. Epist. M. Bruti ad
T. Pomp. Atticum.

Printed in the Year School.

CONSIDERATIONS upon the Choice of a SPEAKER.
EVERY Man who has at any time sat in the House of Commons, must be sensible,
that the Choice of a Speaker is a matter of the greatest importance with
relation to the Freedom of that House: and if Liberty be there destroyed in the
Root, it cannot survive in the Branches. For this reason, as is very well
observed in the King's Declaration, when Prince of Orange, The evil Counselors
of the late Reign thought the surest method to enslave us was, by undermining
the Liberty of Parliaments: And one step which such evil Counselors have
always made in that execrable attempt, has bin by Places, Bribes and Pensions,
to take off the Speaker, well knowing that the Freedom of that House depends in
a great measure upon their Speaker, as our Laws and Rights depend upon that
House.

A Man may easily foresee, that whenever Slavery shall be entirely fixed in
England, as it is among almost all our Neighbors, it must be done by a
corrupted Parliament establishing a Standing Army: by which means this Kingdom
will feel the effects of Tyranny from that Place which ought to be the Source
of Liberty.

Upon this Foundation my Lord Burleigh grounded his Maxim, That England can
never be thoroughly ruined but by a Parliament. And I am sure a Parliament can
never be more thoroughly fitted to ruin England, than when by the influence of
many Members bribed by Places of Profit and Pensions, a Speaker shall in some
future Reign be put into the Chair, to whom those that are his Friends can
allow no other Character than Confidence and Dexterity; and that Character,
those who shall then oppose him, will not deny to him.

Such a one may be granted to be an able Man; but those Abilities in that place
the Nation may justly dread.

Can it with any color of Reason or Prudence be said, That there is no danger,
let the Disposition and Obligations of the Speaker be what they will: He is but
a single Man; and besides does not determine Questions? It Is true, the ablest
General alone, and without Troops, is insignificant: But when regulated and
well paid Forces have a bold and skilful Leader at their Head, they must
conquer; especially if those they encounter be an undisciplined Militia just
brought out of their several Counties.

Mankind can judge of few things otherwise than by outward appearances, which
are often deceitful. This is the Cause, and may be also an excuse, if former
Parliaments were disappointed in their Speaker, whose Frailty, after he was
chosen, may have bin overcome by the Gifts and prevailing Courtship of the
Ministers of State. But surely the Majority of a House of Commons will never
choose one to be their Speaker, whom they find (if the Expression may be
pardoned) already debauched, and once rejected on the like occasion.

This as it will be the first step, so is it of the highest consequence; for an
Error here, like one in War, can never be retrieved: And undoubtedly 'twill be
thought a very ill Omen of what may be expected from this House of Commons, if
they should so unfortunately stumble at the Threshold.

It has bin criminal formerly in a Speaker of the House of Commons to go to
Court: but the Duty of the Office of a Lord of the Treasury must bring him
there, and under the greatest Temptation of compliance to every thing that is
demanded. Nor will the ill effect this may have upon the Liberty of Parliaments
stop here; for it is most certain that such things as are either allowed or
connived at under the Reigns of good Princes, will be made Precedents under the
bad.

Freedom of Speech, and other essential Orders of the House, may probably be
endangered by one who has declared he knows no Order but the Majority: and if
he ventured to speak so plainly, whilst we may presume he was aiming at that
Honor which some would confer upon him, how will he tyrannize with a Majority
that he will either find or bring into the Interest of the Court, when he is
possessed of the Speaker's Chair?

There are some public Trusts, that in their nature are inconsistent with one
another, and ought never to be joined in the same Person, being designed to be
a check upon each other: And a good Man can neither with decency nor honesty
unite such different Trusts in himself. But neither Decency nor Honesty will
bound the Ambition of some Men.

Suppose there has bin the greatest Misapplication of the public Revenues at a
time when the Kingdom is under the extremest necessity, is it probable that a
Speaker will be impartial, or any way assistant to the House in an inquiry
after such Mismanagement, who was Lord of the Treasury during the time of it?

Suppose a Gentleman was sixteen thousand Pounds Debtor to the Crown upon the
Revolution, and in a particular Clause of the Act of Indemnity procured from
the Court a Release of that Debt; Can it be expected, that in Enquiries how
vast Sums have bin imbezel'd since that time, the Grand Inquest of the Nation
will be able to make any progress with such a Foreman?

Suppose there is a Debt growing every day upon the Nation by Seamen not
discharged, while the Money given for so necessary a purpose has bin disposed of
for keeping up an Army that should have bin disbanded pursuant to the
Determination of the last Parliament upon the most mature and solemn Debates;
Must not the House expect Interruptions in bringing on that matter,
Difficulties in wording, and Delays in putting the Question from one who in his
Station at Court may be perhaps charged with advising the keeping up of the
Army; and in the last Parliament was the best and most artificial Advocate
against disbanding it at all?

These and many other things of the highest Importance to our selves and our
Posterity, will fall under the consideration of the Parliament in the ensuing
Session, it being evident that this time of Peace is the most proper, if not
the only season for rectifying Miscarriages; the Examination and Punishment of
which, it may be alleged, was prudent to adjourn during the War.

If a Great Officer be made Speaker, it is the most natural thing in the world
to believe that he will use the same Arts to keep his Office as he did to get
it: And if it be considered how several Members of our late Parliaments got
into the most advantageous places of Profit, whom the Court would not have
seen, nor the Country felt, had they not bin first Members, it must be granted
that they were advanced not by serving the Nation, but the Court.

Let not any Man think this distinction of Court and Country Party in the House
of Commons to be groundless or ill meant: for if ever a Parliament was without
such a distinction, it was when a Court was without such Ministers; who instead
of serving the Government, serve themselves upon it, at the expense of their
Master's Honor, and by impoverishing their Country; who instead of being
qualified to render his Majesty great, and the People happy, seem only to be
fitted to bring the King, if it were possible, into disesteem, and to make the
Kingdom miserable. And whereas the Honor, Safety and Strength of the King
depends upon having no other Interest than that of his People, it is his
Majesty's misfortune to be represented by the Actions of such Officers, as if
his and the Peoples Interest were not only divided, but inconsistent. If such
as these are leading Men in a House of Commons, they give just Reason to all
that love England, and have upon Principles of Liberty freely exposed their
Lives and Estates for the present Government, to make this necessary
Distinction, lest some Men should be induced to believe that Kingship it self
is insupportable, and others that Parliaments are a Burden.

It Is this Distinction must preserve the Honor of our ancient Constitution of
Government, till it may flourish under the Influence of a Parliament, in which
none or few who have gainful Offices shall be Members of the House of Commons.
But a Bill to that purpose is not to be expected, when a Great Officer is
Speaker.

The Executive Power ought not to be lodged in that House, because it would
deprive the Kingdom of that which is the noblest and most useful Work of their
Representatives, The calling ill Ministers to account, and the preserving a
steady Administration in the subordinate Officers of the Government.

But in a House of Commons abounding with Officers, if any one of them be
attacked, it alarms the whole Fraternity, and they all engage to bring him off,
tho it be by the scandalous way of putting the Question for Candles, and
carrying it in the Negative. This was the case of the Admiralty last
Parliament, and may be of the Treasury this Session, if Fortune prove so
propitious, that one of their Number be made Speaker. This Point gained, the
next will probably be to establish the Army, and then to suspend or repeal the
Triennial Act.

Nothing can equal such a Choice, unless we could suppose the House of Commons
should fix upon some old Prostitute of the exploded Pension'd Parliament in
Charles the Second's Reign, who has from that time bin tricking in the House in
so shameful a manner, that the several Periods of his Life may be marked out by
the bargains he has made there, when the Court has come up to his price.

His Corruption in that Station has bin as notorious as his Ability to do
Mischief; for both were extraordinary.

The Speaker's Chair may upon some ACCOUNTS be convenient to such a one at this
time; but I presume the House will have as little regard to his Convenience, as
he has had, and will have to the Liberties of his Country.

In a word, if it be expected that Misdemeanors be inquired into, beneficial
Laws made, and those which we already possess, transmitted to our Posterity, it
must be either prodigious Folly, or an unaccountable Fate, if such a Man, or a
Lord of the Treasury, be chosen Speaker of this House of Commons.

THE END.

