A Continuation of the Curious Collection of PAINTINGS and other Curiosities;
will be sold by Auction at the Barbados Coffee-House in Exchange Alley, over
against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, on Thursday the 14th of January, and the
two following days. The Sale beginning at Four of the Clock each Afternoon.
Conditions of SALE.
I. THE highest Bidder is to be deemed the Buyer. II. The Buyers are to give in
their Names and Places of Abode, and to pay a Third part of the value, if
desired, or to be put up again. III. But if two or more shall claim any Lot,
then to be put up again. IV. The Buyer is to pay for and take away what
Pictures, etc. shall be bought within Three Days after the Sale, and to pay for
the Porteridge. V. No Person to bid less than Six Pence at a Time.


PAINTINGS and LIMNINGS.
234 AN orig sea piece in an ebony fr. 235 an original landscape 236 a Turks
head 237 a winter piece in an ebony Frame 238 a Night landscape 239 3 Closet
pieces 240 St. John an original 241 an Italian sketch 242 a Dutch Droll 243 a
fine piece of two Dogs 244 3 Closet pieces 245 a map of England with Roads 246
a Turk and his Mistress 247 a Droll 248 a Divines head 249 Dr. Oats 250 a
Shepherd and Shepherdess 251 De Wits map of the world 252 K. W. and Q. M. well
done 253 a silver hilted sword 254 3 Closet pieces 255 a Landscape 256 a flower
piece by a Dutch master 257 K. Will. and Q. Mary well done 258 a Landscape by
Ross 259 a flower piece 260 a piece of fruit 261 a of Feast Belshazzar 262 3
Japan closet pc. on Glass 263 The siege of Troy 264 a map of the world 265 a
very fine carved leaf twenty seven Inch Looking-glass 266 The Countess of
Desmond 267 a man's head by the life 268 another ditto 269 a guard chamber with
Sold. 270 a sea piece by a good mast. 271 a flower plece 272 a Landscape 273 a
head well painted 274 a piece of Still life 275 a Landscape 276 a dog well
painted 277 a boys head 278 4 Sybels 279 Acteon 280 6 Caesar's heads 281 an
original winter well done 282 an original Fruit piece 283 a very fine carv.
Leaf twenty seven Inch Looking-glass 284 a large Landscape with ruins and a
Robbery 285 a Moon light piece well painted 286 a Gentleman's head supposed by
Sir Peter Lely 287 K. Will. and Q. Mary finely painted 288 Jane Shore finely
done 289 a Mastiff Dog after Van Dyck 290 an original of Moses strik. the Rock
by Rembrant 291 a bull baiting 292 a festoon of fruit and flow an orig. 293 an
original Landscape by Ostade 294 St. James Park incomparably done by Griffier
295 an original ballad singer 296 a sea piece by Vander Velden 297 K. W. and Q.
M. after Vander Vert 298 Rich. Cromwell strongly painted 299 a Moon Light very
fine 300 Princess Ann of Denmark after Ryle 301 K. VV. and Q. M. in little well
done 302 a head by Cornelius Johnson 303 Rosamond finely done 304 a view of
Constantinople by a Dutch Master on board. 305 an Original Landscape very fine
306 The Sacrifice of Iphigenia by Schizzo 307 6 Metzotinto prints 308 a Bare
Baiting 309 a Sea piece by Vandevilde 310 The K. Arms carved and gilded 311 a
pair of Pistols 312 a Droll piece 313 a view of Windsor Castle by Seylmaker an
Original 314 a Waterfall an Original 315 an orig. pc. of Fruit by an Italian
316 The Royal James by Vandevelde 317 an Original head by Miervelt 318 an
Italian Landscape fit for a Chimn. 319 Gustavus Adolphus 320 an original head by
Morello 321 a Lady going to bed to her Gallant 322 a landscape with Toby and the
Angel 323 6 Metzotinto Prints in frames 324 The Portraiture of the royal Prince
325 a large piece of Cain and Abel 326 a 3 quarter winter well done 327 a
Landscape with a waterfal 328 K. W. and Q. Mary well done 329 6 Metzotinto
Prints 330 The Virgin Mary, Joseph, and our Savior, by an Italian 331 St.
George killing the Dragon 332 a head by the Life exactly counterf. 333 6
Metzotinto Prints 334 a shepherd by an Italian master 335 a sea piece by Vander
Velden 336 a Landscape by Vander straten 337 K. Will. and Queen Mary well done
338 a View of D^vei ^^astle with ships 339 Griffiere painted by himself 340 St.
Katherine by an Italian master 241 a posture head by Vander hagen 342 a battle
by Mullenar an original 343 a sea piece by Potters 344 a flower piece 345 a
Landscape 346 a head very fine 347 a piece of still life 348 a war Horse 349 a
Droll 350 a head well done

