Imprimatur,

G. Jane R. P. D. Henr. Episc. Land. a sac. domesticis.
May 17. 1676.
THE NOTION OF SCHISM Stated according to the ANCIENTS, And considered with
Reference to the NON-CONFORMISTS: And the PLEAS for SCHISMATICS examined:
Being Animadversions upon the Plea for the Non-Conformists.

With Reflections on that Famous Tract of Schism, Written by Mr. Hales.

In Two Letters to a very Worthy Gentleman.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. for William Oliver and George Rose Booksellers in
Norwich, and are to be sold by them there, and Nath. Brooks at the Angel in
Cornhill, and R. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1676.

TO THE READER.
THE Plea for Non-conformists (tending to vindicate them from Schism) came to
my hands long after its Edition, and then by accident too: But the Schism being
still continued, I hope you will not think it too Late, or Impertinent to
publish these Animadversions upon that Tract. Now, should I protest against all
Vanity, and Popularity; disavow all Interest, and Sinister designs: should I
tell you in most Solemn, and Sacred protestations, that I have no other end in
the publication of these Papers, but the Honor of God, and the Peace of his
Church, yet it were still at your mercy to credit these Asseverations, or
receive them as the usual pretensions of every Author. Therefore I resolve
against the Impertinence of an Apology, and leave you to the common liberty of
Censure: If I meet with the fate of St. Paul, to pass through good as well as
bad Report, I shall have Honor, and content enough.

If thou art a sound, and sober member of the Church of England, I know thy
Temper cannot be Sullen, or Ill-natured: it is thy Genius to be Candid, and
Generous, and thy Religion makes thee Charitable: and therefore I am assured
that thy Balms cannot break my Head: and if these Papers may in any measure
contribute toward thy firmer settlement in the Communion of this Church, my
principal End is then effected.

If thou art a Dissenter from this established Church, but have not lost that
Christian Temper of Modesty, and Humility, read on, there is hope of thy
recovery, that thou will not dye a Schismatic. But if thou art one who have
given up thy Name, and thy Reason too to the Leader of a Conventicle; let me
beseech thee to read no further: for this little Discourse will but provoke thy
Passion. I have no Hope to prevail upon Pertinacious resolutions, I never yet
cleansed a Leper, nor raised the Dead* but if I had, I should notwithstanding
Despond of ever persuading any Obstinate, or Passionate man: for it does not
appear to me evident, in all the History of the Gospel, that our Lord (among
his many Mighty Works, and Miracles) ever cured Perverseness.

If thou art a Romish Recusant, let me entreat thee to Suffer thy Reason to
recover its Liberty, and not always be in Vassallage to those Roman Dictators.
I know there are many of that Religion in this Nation, who are Gentlemen, of
Complaisant Converse, and Ingenuous Education: but I wonder that ye (who
pretend so much Abhorrence of Fanaticism, and boast of Loyalty to your Prince,)
should yet degrade your selves to the same Level with the Basest Sectaries, and
live in constant Rebellion to the Laws of your Natural Sovereign.

There is great Reason that the Kings of England should ever have a peculiar
Jealousy upon your Party: for though your Bodies, and Estates are Subjects of
England, yet your Souls, or Religion are under the Empire of a Foreign
Jurisdiction: and as long as ye continue so, there is no Reason in the world,
that can give the Crown sufficient Security for your lasting Allegiance. As for
those of your Religion, who live under the Laws of the Romish Dominions, I have
great Charity for them, for they can plead submission to their own Superiors:
and I am apt to believe that Plea may be very considerable, when they come to
appear before the Prince of Peace, and the God of Order. But for you, whose Lot
has cast you under the Government of the Kingdom, and Catholic Church of
England, and yet to Divide from their Jurisdiction, and subject your selves to
the Canons of a Foreign Church, is not only a Disobedience against the Laws of
this Church, and State, but a Violation of the Ancient Canons of the Catholic
Church; and is so great a Disorder, and unreasonableness, that the Penalties
inflicted for your Recusancy, are as Just, as they are Severe, and ye merit no
Compassion. Indeed if your deserting the Romish, would put you out of the
Catholic Church, I would never upon those hard terms persuade you into our
Communion. Our Profession of Faith ye will acknowledge to be the ancient
Catholic, and Apostolic Creed: I know your principal Prejudice is against the
Succession of our Bishops, and the Authority of our Priesthood: But let me
beseech you to do so much Right to us, and so much Justice to your selves, as
impartially to peruse Mr Mason's Vindication of the Ministry of the Church of
England, and if his Transcript of those Acts, and Monuments of our Church will
not satisfy you, let some of your subtilest Jesuits convict that Author of
Falsehood, or Imposture; and I will acknowledge that we are no Catholic Church,
and you no Schismatics.

There are many of your Religion, persons of great Honor, and Estates in this
Kingdom, who may easily have the Advantage to view, and examine the Original
Records of the Consecration of our English Bishops, in that great Crisis of our
Reformation; and methinks in so weighty a matter, where your Estates (if not
some raster Interest) are highly concerned, ye should be strictly inquisitive,
and not so blindly acquiesce in a popular Mistake, and Jesuitical delusion. In
the mean time I charge you with the guilt of Schism, in Dividing from the
Church of England; and if you think your selves injured by this Indictment, let
any of your Romish Champions be the Doctor's Second, and publish a Plea for
your Vindication; and though I am none of the Worthies of England, yet I will
engage for a Reply. If any of you shall think fit to require it, I dare
undertake to prove, that the Canons of the Romish Church, do no more oblige any
Subject of England, than our Statute Laws do bind the Poles, or Moscovites: and
that it is as great a Disorder and Impertinence, for the Bishop of Rome to
excommunicate any of the people of England, as it were for the Lord Chief
Justice of England, to outlaw Don Juan of Austria.

And now, Reader, I leave you to enjoy your Humor, to be Candid, or Clamorous
as your fancy inclines you. To be wounded with the Arrows of Bitter Words, is a
very easy kind of Martyrdom, and say what you please, I am resolved to be
unconcerned, and subscribe my self,

Your Christian Friend, R. C.

Worthy Sir,
I Not long since received from the hand of a Nonconforming Pastor (by way of
Answer to my impeaching him of Schism) this Tract Intitul'd A Plea for the
Non-conformists, tending to justify them against the clamorous charge of
Schism: by a Doctor of Divinity, whom the Dissenters call Dr. Owen. And whether
I may attribute it, to the slighting or carelessness of our Clergy, I know not:
but as yet I have neither seen or heard of an Answer to it.

Sir, The true Friendship I have for you, and your abilities, which I am no
stranger unto, prompts me to put this Plea into your handling, and beg your
Animadversions upon it: Supposing the Doctor has much wandered from that Notion
of Schism delivered down to us from the Primitive Fathers; the sense of which
Sacred Priests, I shall always rather espouse in any point I find so clearly
determined by them, than the crude and partial (if not Enthusiastic) Writings
of some Moderns, whose heads seem rather flatus't with a prejudiced Interest,
than ballac'd with an Apostolic Sobriety.

When I reflect upon this Intrigue of the present Dissenters from the Church of
England, in confounding the Notion of Schism with that of Heresy, and by that
jejune project would evade that Scandal of being Schismatics; a discrimination
esteemed so odious and perilous among all good Catholics in all Ages of the
Christian Church; I can fancy no other reason they can have than this, (viz.)
lest their Proselytes and followers should be justly affrighted at the
dangerous guilt of Schism and Separation; and consult their return to that Fold
which they have deserted, which is certainly their safest Interest.

Another Stratagem, which has not been less useful for them than the former, is
their contemning an Apostolical Succession of Priesthood; and thereby lessening
the hazard of a Schismatic condition in the opinion of the people: This
unchristian humor they continually instill into the Populacy, and enforce it
with this Anti-Apostolick Maxim, That there is no difference between a Priest
and a Laick, but that the first reads the Prayers of the Church, and Preaches
Morally, as they call it; and the other is gifted with continual Revelations:
for that, they must mean; if any thing, by praying by the Spirit in their
notion. I must confess I am as yet unconverted to these Opinions, and have an
awful respect to your Sacred Order, and I could be as easily Proselyted to
Atheism, as to think a Knipperdolling or an Hugh Peter's were as true Priests of
the Living God, as a Tertullian or a Chrysostom.

Sir, As an obedient Son of the Church of England, and a Loyal Subject to my
Sovereign, and so obliged to be very solicitous of the Welfare of Church and
State, give me leave to sigh out some thoughts which have been and are
afflictive to my Solitudes, and may detect, if not the causes, at least the
encouragements of our Schisms.

When I see the admired providence of our indulgent Prince (so eminently
expressed in his Royal Amnestie and Act of Oblivion) for the obliterating all
Animosities and Rancours (which might still ferment in the hearts of men so
Diametrically opposite, and who had espoused Cases as contradictory as best and
worst,) contemned and flouted by an undutiful and unchristian humor of
persisting in the same stubborness wherewith they have checked two Glorious
Princes, and Mated a third (God bless the fourth) and wherewith they brought
upon our Church and Kingdom, the late horrid and lamentable confusions;
Indignation prompts me to think, that Sincere Religion cannot reside in an
ungrateful heart; nor true Piety and Loyalty, where there are no Symptoms of
their repentance. And let me appeal to common sense and reason, what a
frightful face of Government there would appear in this Nation; if all His
Majesty's evil-disposed Subjects should as boldly resolve to perpetrate all
those Crimes prohibited by the Common and Statute Laws of this Realm, as the
Dissenters do temerariously transgress, or fraudulently evade those Statutes
relating to Conformity.

When I see some of your Sacred Order fly at a Dignity, a Bishopric, and when
they have trussed it, quarry and prune themselves upon it, and live as if a
Diocese were only designed to Gorge and Aggrandize the Bishop, and he not
concerned to be a faithful Shepherd to his flock, but negligent, if not wholly
careless in no small part of his Episcopal Function and Paternal charge
(witness the omission of that Solemn Office of Confirmation:) nor obliged to
moderate over, and inspect the manners of his inferior Clergy, who are in Law
but his Curates, and whose vices and disorders reflect a Blot upon himself, and
a Scandal to the Church; then I think, the longer time runs, its sand will be
the fuller of dust, and I am ready to renounce my Philosphy, and believe that
Gold may rust; and we have too many Rosy-Crucians in Divinity to make their
Remarques.

When our Parochial Clergy shall out of good nature, tepidity or perjury omit,
if not all, at least some part of the Divine Service, to curry their Males, and
coaks their Females: when to please a weak Sister, the Cross after Baptism must
not be used, and for a bribe the Sacrament shall be Administered to a sitting
Bumkin, and the Priest shall civilly be from home, when a thing departed is to
have the Burial of an Ass: when every Parish shall have a singular Directory,
and every waxen Priest shall assume a Papism to dispense with Oath, Canons and
Statutes, and the Diocesan shall be demurely composed into a posture of consent
with closed eyes and folded arms, are we then like to be blessed with one faith
and one way?

When too many of our Nobility and Gentry shall assume that honor and glory to
list themselves in, and be reputed Sons of our Church of England, but by their
Profaneness, Debauchery and prodigious vice, live Antipodes to that holy
Profession, and act below the dictates of uneducated nature; then I think this
must be influential upon the Manners of the Populacy, and create an inclination
to Schism, if not an absolute contempt of Religion in them, who are commonly
capable of no other direction in their Morals and Piety, than the virtuous
examples of their Superiors.

When too many of our Nobility and Gentry shall desert their ancient Seats and
Country Interests, to enjoy an urbane effeminacy, immerge in the gulfs of
Luxury, and to enervate in the Venereal Laboratories of the Town, with the
greater Security to their names, and less observation of the world; this must
be reputed no small cause of Schism in their Tenants and Dependents, who in
many Lordships and places of the Nation want nothing more, than the antique
Hospitality of England, and the Orthodox practice of their Landlords and
Patrons, to secure them against the cantings of the Wolves, and to shame them
into a conformable obedience: and were it seriously considered, how easy and
natural the motion is from immorality and Atheism, to disloyalty and civil
Apostasy, these Monsters would be proscribed the Courts of Princes, to learn
humanity among flocks and herds.

But when the Sacred Name of Jesus shall be mouthed by the most vicious
persons, to disguise an ugly, perhaps a treasonous design, and novi homines,
men of yesterday, shall dare to trifle with that Scepter which dignified them,
and problem the Right of their Prince in the face of his Throne; when
Englishmen shall Italianize and shoot those envenomed arrows, their filthy
Pasquils to wound their Prince in his reputation, which is the soul of his
Throne: O, then I think, if it awakens not all the Sentinels of the Government,
sure they are in their dead sleep or infatuated for destruction.

When I consider the ill-boding circumstances attending the Church of England,
her prodigious rents, her assiduous and impudent Adversaries, accompanied
perhaps with too much Supinity in some of her most Principal members, and when
it comes into my mind, that Miracles are ceased too, then each moment spur on
my thoughts to expect; when Religion (now on tiptoes to be gone) should turn
her back upon us, and that the ultimate failure of the Faith is at hand, ready
to be the Harbinger to the Catholic Doom.

But, Sir, not to trouble your more Serene Meditations with such melancholy
reflections, give me leave to Alarm you to Muster your notions, and by your
Animadversions upon this Doctor, undeceive the deluded multitude in this
weighty subject of Schism, the Dam of our Mischiefs, and which threaten the
ruin of our Church, and with that the unhinging that excellent temper of
Government which has been the envy of the Nations.

SIR, I am yours, etc. W. C.

Honored Sir,
THat Kingship and Episcopacy, have been the ancient and continued Government
of this Nation in State and Church, ever since our Primitive Christianity, is
evident from undoubted Records: But the Gentlemen of our New English Interest,
mock at the two old Grandsires, Monarchy and Hierarchy, and begin to hope that
they are come to their decrepit Age, and not far from a Grave, and they are
preparing for their funeral. It is now scandalous to be Loyal to our Prince, or
Regular to the Church. You will be thought a mean-spirited Gentleman for
expressing any regard to a Minister of Religion. And you have no way to redeem
your Honor, but either to turn Atheist, or list your self a Member of the New
Interest. And now Sir, can it be reconciled to Friendship, to ship your Friend,
when the Clouds look black and threaten a Storm? But since you are as kind to
me as you are to your self; and are pleased to embarque with me, I am resolved
to adventure, and am prepared for Tempest, and that worst of Hurricanes, the
madness of the People.

I think it highly necessary to demonstrate our Non-conformists to be
Schismatics: for though mere State Interest may legitimate many severities
against those Persons and Principles that are Antipodes to the established
Government; yet if that were truth, which the Doctor pretends to prove, That
the Sectaries of England were as much in the family of Jesus, or in the
Communion of the Catholic Church, as the Church of England; it would puzzle my
Reason, to make a Substantial Apology for our Penal Laws. But if we can make it
evident, that these men walk disorderly, and are Separatists from the Catholic
Church, it will then appear, that our Laws are so far from Rigor or
Persecution, that they are more charitable provisions, and only designed to
compel men to come in to that Society, where their Eternal Interest will be
most rationally and manifestly secured.

When I first opened the Doctor's Plea you sent me, mine eye chanced upon a
very pleasant passage, to this effect, viz. That theGreek Church call the
Church of Rome, Schismatic, and the Church of Rome return the Schismatic upon
the Greek Church. The Church of England make the Romish Church the Schismatic,
and the Church ofRome charge the Schism upon the Church ofEngland. -- Again,
The Church of England call her Dissenters Schismatics, and the Dissenters
think the Church to be Schismatics from them; and so we have called one
another Schismatics Round: and therefore Schism is but Vox and praeterea
nihil, nothing but a mere noise and Nickname, which every Party cast upon all
them who are not of their Society.

But let us try the Strength of this Argument, by translating it to another
circulating word, and that is Infidelity. The Mohammedan calls himself Musalman,
which my Persic Dictionary assures me, signifies Faithful or Believer in God;
yet we Christians call the Mahometans Infidels; and they call us Unbelievers.
We call the Jews Infidels, and they return the same name upon us and the
Mahometans too. Both Christian, Jew, and Mahomentan pronounce all Pagans to be
Infidels, and ten to one, but they are as stout and peremptory as the rest of
Mortals, and think all Mankind Infidels but themselves. Thus the whole World
have called one another Infidels Round, and therefore Infidelity is but a mere
empty noise, and there is no such thing in the World as a True Religion. I
appeal to any sober Judgment, if there be not as much Logic in this, as there
was in the other.

I hope it will be an easy discovery, to find out the square of the Doctor's
Circle, and to fix the Notion of Schism upon a certain Basis. And therefore
Sir, in obedience to your Request, I shall discuss that great Question, Whether
the Non-conformists in England meeting together for the Worship of God in
places distinct from the Parochial Churches, are not Schismatics?

To this I shall answer in the Affirmative, and shall consider this Separation,
First, With respect to the whole Catholic Church. Secondly, With relation to
the Church of England.

First, To be a Member of the Catholic Church, there is required a double
Unity: First, in this does not consist the formal notion of Schism. Secondly,
Cyprian calls Unitas Ecclesiastica. Now a Separation from this Unity, has the
formality of Schism. And for a right understanding of this, I must look back to
the first Origin of this Unity.

The Holy Jesus, the great Author and Founder of our Religion, was sent of God,
and all power in Heaven and Earth committed to him. Now before his Ascension,
that he might not leave his Disciples to the end of the World, to be governed
by every pretender to Revelation, which would have exposed his Kingdom upon
Earth, to eternal confusions and impostures, he solemnly ordains and
consecrates the Apostles his immediate Delegates upon earth. John 20. 22. As my
Father sent me, even so send I you: by virtue of which Commission, the power of
Ordaining, Governing and conferring Orders did rest only in the Apostles.

They took care to continue this Succession, and therefore Timothy was by the
Apostles ordained Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus of Crete, and both invested with
power of Jurisdiction and conferring Orders, as is evident from St. Paul's
Epistles directed to them: and though there were many Presbyters in the
Dioceses of Ephesus and Crete, yet none had Authority to ordain Elders or
Priests, but only Timothy and Titus. Linus by Apostolic Consecration succeeded
the Apostles in the Chair of Rome. Symeon governed the Church of Jerusalem, or
the Diocese of Palestine next after St. James. Anianus succeeded St. Mark in
the Church of Alexandria. And this Succession was propagated with so much care
and certainty, that Irenaeus tells us, He could name all the Successors of the
Apostles in the several Apostolic Churches unto his days: Habemus annumerare
eos, Lib. 3. adv.
qui ab Apostolis instituti sunt Episcopi in Ecclesiis, Haer. cap. 3.
and Successores eorum, usque ad nos. And this line of Apostolic Succession of
Bishops has continued through all Ages of the Church to our present times. So
that he who is out of this line of Apostolic Succession, and exercises any
Ministerial Office without the Commission of Episcopal Ordination, is but a
Lay-Impostor, and a Schismatic from the Catholic Church. And all other
Societies of Christian people, who totally withdraw themselves from the
Government of their Bishops, who are the Apostles Successors, and from the
Ministry of those Presbyters lawfully set over them by Episcopal Ordination and
Institution, and cast themselves into any other Model of Government, are guilty
of Schism. This was the formal Notion of Schism in the sense of the ancient
Church. Irenaeus Bishop of Lugdunum, who conversed with Polycarpus the Disciple
of St. John, may in reason be allowed to understand the Primitive and
Apostolic Notion of Schism, better than our Doctor at the distance of sixteen
hundred years. He in his Book Adversus Hereses, Lib. 4.
exhorts the Christian World to hearken only to those Priests, cap. 43.
who were in the Communion of the Catholic Church; and who those are, he there
describes, Quapropter eis, qui in Ecclesia sunt Presbyteris obaudire oported
iis, qui successionem habent ab Apostolis sicut ostendimus, qui cum Episcopatus
successione charisma veritatis certum secundum placitum Patris acceperunt --
Reliquos vero qui absistunt a principali successione, and quocunque loco
colliguntur, suspectos habere vel quasi Haereticos and malae sententiae, vel
quasi scindentes and elatos, and sibi placentes, aut rursus ut Hypocritas
quaestus gratia and vanae gloriae hoc operantes: Qui autem scindunt and
separant unitatem Ecclesiae, eandem quam Hieroboam poenam percipiunt a Deo.

Ignatius the second Bishop of Antioch in succession from St. Peter, (...).
Epad Philadelph.
in his Epistles ad Trallianos, ad Smyrnenses, and in those to the Philippians,
Ephesians and Philadelphians, frequently charges them to keep themselves in the
unity and communion of the Christian Church, by a regular obedience to the
Bishops, And exhorting to obey the Bishops, and Priests he tells them, (...).
and by communication with the Priests, who were set over them by the Authority
of Episcopal Order: and to disobey those Bishops and their Presbyters, and to
separate from them, is in those Epistles charged with Schism.

Ignat. Ep. ad Trall.
Athanasius brands Ischyras for a Schismatic, and justifies the charge from
this reason, that Ischyras did usurp a Ministerial Authority without a regular
Ordination from the Bishops of the Catholic Church, and gathered to himself a
distinct Congregation separate from the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of
Alexandria, in whose Province he lived.

St. Cyprian in his fortieth Epistle ad populum Carthaginensem de quinque
Presbyteris Schismaticis, exhorts them to have no communion with those who had
divided themselves from their Bishops; for he tells them in that Epistle, That
to be sine Episcopis, was to be extra Ecclesiam. And in his Book de Unitate, he
gives us this notion of Schism, Contemptis Episcopis and derelictis Dei
Sacerdotibus constituere aliud Altar, or Conventicula diversa constituere:
That it was Schism to contemn and forsake the Bishops, and Priests of God, and
to set up another Altar, or to settle distinct Conventicles. And this he
accounts so foul a crime, that he tells us in the same discourse, Talis,
etiamsi occisi in confessione fuerint, Macula ista nec sanguine abluitur,
inexpiabilis and gravis culpa discordiae nec passione purgatur, That Martyrdom
it self cannot expiate the guilt of Schisim. And when Maximus, Urbanus,
Sydonius and Macarius returned from the Novatian faction into the communion of
the Church, they express it thus, Episcopo nostro pacem fecimus, they had
reconciled themselves to the Bishop: and this was enough to assure St. Cyprian,
they had renounced their Schism, and were restored to the Churches communion. I
will end this with the assertion of St. Augustine, Epist. 42.
Radix Christianae societatis per seeds Apostolorum, and successiones
Episcoporum, certa per orbem propagatione diffunditur: i. e. the root or
foundation of unity or communion in the Christian Church, is founded in the
several Seats of the Apostles, and diffused through the Christian World, by the
certain propagation or succession of Bishops. Therefore in the judgment of St.
Augustine, all those persons, or societies that have divided themselves from
the Bishops and Priests of the Apostolic succession, are but wild plants, and
no branches of the Catholic stock. I could fill many Pages more with
Testimonies of the same nature; but such numerous Quotations would look like
Pedantick impertinence: and I doubt not, but those Authorities I have already
mentioned, will persuade you to believe, That a total separation from the
Orders and Government of Bishops, was constantly adjudg'd to be Schism by the
concurrent sentiments of the ancient Church.

And now Sir, having examined these Testimonies, I may proceed to sentence:
That seeing the Teachers of our Nonconforming Congregations in England were
never regularly Ordained to any Ministerial Function by the hands of the
Bishops (deriving their Authority from Apostolic succession) and seeing their
Leaders and their blind Proselytes have wholly withdrawn themselves, from the
Conduct and Government of Episcopal Authority, I shall therefore adventure to
pronounce them Schismatics, not only from the Church of England, but from the
whole Corporation of the Catholic Church. Therefore that which the Doctor so
Magisterially asserts at the end of his seventeenth Page is no Axiom of
Divinity; for I have already proved, that a man may be Schismatic from the
whole Catholic Church on earth without Heresy or Apostasy. The premises
being considered, will furnish us with an Answer to that passionate Harangue,
page 21. Do we not own Christ, his Gospel, the same points of faith, the same
acts of Worship, where is the Separation then? This St. Augustine tells us, was
the same Plea of the Donatists, and might have been urged by the Novatians, and
Schismatic Presbyters of Carthage, but it would not acquit them from Schism,
nor will it vindicate our English Sectaries.

Corah and his confederate Mutineers were neither Heretics nor Apostates, but
men of the same Creed with Moses and Aaron: their crime was the violating that
subordination which God had appointed, and not submitting themselves to the
Superior Authority of the Priesthood. And Sir, it may be worth your
observation, that this Plea of the Doctor, and that of the Hebrew Rebels have
the same sense; for just thus they plead, Numb. 16. 3. All the Congregation is
holy, every one of them: that is, in the Doctor's phrase, Do we not own Moses,
his Laws, the same points of faith, the same acts of Worship? But this
plausible plea would not prevail, nor mitigate the provocation; for God
punished one Schism with another, The earth rent, and swallowed them up, and
with open mouth taught the rest of the Church to keep Unity and Order, as well
as the profession of a true Religion. Therefore the Answer is very easy to the
Doctor's ruffling Question; Do we not own Christ, his Gospel, the same points
of faith, the same acts of Worship, where is the separation then? Why Sir, the
separation is in dividing from the communion of all the Bishops and Episcopal
Presbyters, who in a constant line succeeding the Apostles, have only a just
and regular Authority to govern and guide the Christian Church.

Page 34.
The Doctor in the beginning of page 34. tells us, That a controversy among
them of the same communion is the chief, if not the only notion of Schism that
the Scripture gives us. I confess, the word (...) Schism in its general notion
signifies any manner of separation or division; and therefore I do acknowledge,
that those dissentions that were within the bowels of the Apostolic and
Catholic Church were called Schisms, both in the Scripture, and in the
Writings of the ancient Fathers: but this does not hinder, but that the same
word may be used to signify a separation from the Catholic Church; for if a
wound in the body may be called a Schism, sure Amputation or the cutting off
from the body is the greatest rent and Schism in the World. For though there
were indeed divisions in the Church of Corinth, where some were for Paul, and
some for Apollos, and some for Cephas: this at the worst was but a faction or a
breach of charity, but it was not properly Schism in the highest sense of the
word; for they still settled themselves under the Government and Ministry of the
Apostles, or some Presbyters ordained by the hands of the Apostles. But those
Conventicles that crept into houses, and formed Assemblies distinct from the
communion of the Apostolic Church, those that heaped to themselves Teachers,
which, as the phrase imports, were not set over them by Apostolic Order and
Institution; those that despised Dominion, and sake evil of those Dignities
which did superintend the Government of the Church: These men St. Jude tell us,
were those that did separate themselves, that is, were Schismatics; and just
so are their Brethren the Sectaries of England.

Before I proceed to the next enquiry that concerns the Schism from the Church
of England, it will be necessary to state the right notion of the Catholic
Church according to the sense of the ancient Councils and Fathers.

The Doctor and his Accomplices are for Comprehension, and give us a very wide
notion of the Catholic Church; for they will have all men that profess the
name of Christ, though in some things Heretics and Schismatics too, yet to be
included within the boundaries of the Catholic Church. But I observe, the
Ancients would not endure this Comprehension; for they reckoned none to be in
the communion of the Catholic Church, but those who confessed the common faith
delivered to the Saints, and kept themselves under the Orders and Government of
the Bishops, who were the Apostles Successors: and therefore oft-times in
Councils and ancient Epistles we find this Superscription, To the Catholic
Church in Antioch, To the Catholic Church of Alexandria, To the Catholic
Church of Rome, etc. this still being used in contradistinction from the
Novatians, Arrians and Donatists, which the ancient Church looked upon as
Schismatics and extra Ecclesiam.

Now having advanced thus far, the way is prepared for the second enquiry,
Whether our Non-conformists are guilty of Schism from the Church of England?
And I doubt not but to prove the Affirmative.

The Church of England adhere to that Creed which was delivered by the
Apostles, professed by the ancient Primitive Church, and confirmed by the first
four General Councils; it has preserved the Unity of Government by a
succession of Bishops in the Apostolic line, as appears from the undoubted
Archives and Records of England: Therefore we are secured that it is in the
Unity of the Catholic Church, and a most excellent part of it.

Now as our Christianity obliges us to be members of that body of Christ the
Catholic Church: So the eternal reasons of Peace and Order bind us to
communicate with that part of the Catholic Church, in which our lot has
placed us, except it can manifestly appear, that that part is so corrupted that
we cannot communicate with it without evident hazard of our salvation. It were
an unpardonable disorder, for a Native of England dwelling in London, to
contemn the Laws of our Prince, and to govern himself by the Placaets of the
United Provinces: and it were as great a confusion, for those who live within
the Jurisdiction of the Church of England, to submit themselves to the Orders
and Government of Rome or Geneva. Before the Papal Usurpation of Universal
Monarchy, the Patriarchs of the Christian Church had their distinct Limits and
Jurisdictions: The Patriarch of Constantinople had his peculiar Primacy or
Regiment, and was not to intermeddle with the Province of Alexandria; and so
the Bishop of Rome had his peculiar Jurisdiction, and was allowed no inspection
over Constantinople, Antioch or Alexandria; and these distinct boundaries were
fixed by a Canon of the Council of Nice, and because it con^utes both the Papal
Supremacy and Puritanical Anarchy, I will give you the copy of that Canon.

(...) (...). that is, Let the ancient customs be in force; Let the Bishop of
Alexandria have the Jurisdiction of Egypt, Libya and Pentapolis, as likewise
the Bishop of Rome was accustomed to have in his Province, and so let the
Churches of Antioch and other Provinces keep their peculiar privileges. And so
the Christians dwelling under these distinct Patriarchates were obliged to a
respective obedience to their peculiar Provincial: and to divide themselves
from their proper Patriarch or Bishop was accounted Schism in the ancient
Church. Timothy being constituted Bishop of all the Diocese of Ephesus, the
Christians residing within that Precinct were obliged by the rules of Order to
submit themselves to his peculiar inspection, and it had been Schism to have
disobeyed him, or separated themselves from his Jurisdiction.

St. Ambrose observed this decorum himself, as he tells us by St. Augustine,
Aug. Ep. 113.
in an Epistle of his ad Januarium, Cum Romae sum jejuno Sabbato, cum hic sum
non jejuno: and so St. Augustine counsels Januarius, Sic etiam tu ad quam forte
Ecclesiam veneris, ejus morem serva; which plainly concludes, that Christian
peace and order requires, that we should conform to the Rites and Canons of
that Church, in whose Jurisdiction we live. The five Presbyters of Carthage
were by St. Cyprian sentenced for Schismatics, because being within the
Diocese of Carthage, and so under his inspection, they notwithstanding gathered
to themselves Assemblies, and exercised Ministerial Offices without his
Authority. And for the same reason Athanasius accused Ischyras of Schism, for
modelling a Congregation in Mareoles without any subjection or dependence upon
him the Bishop of Alexandria, unto whose Jurisdiction that Country belonged:
for he shows us his Title in these words, Tom. 1. p. 781. ad p. 802.
(...). i. e. All the Presbyters of this Province have their peculiar Cures, or
Parishes, but all the Churches of this Region are under the Jurisdiction of the
Bishop of Alexandria. And the very same thing Epiphanius tells us in his second
Book adversus Haereses, Epiphan. adv. Haeres. Tom. 2. p. 727.
(...), etc. That there were several Parochial Churches, in which the
Inhabitants might assemble with greater convenience; and these Congregations
were under the Ministry of peculiar Presbyters: but all these Presbyters and
their respective Churches were governed by the Superintendence of the
Archbishop of Alexandria: and this was the universal model of unity and order
in all other Provinces of the Catholic Church.

Now the Archbishops of Canterbury and York have as much Jurisdiction over the
Christians in England, as Athanasius had over the Province of Alexandria, or
St. Cyprian in the Diocese of Carthage: for beside the Right of
Church Government which their succession from the Apostles give them, they are
empowered to exercise their Jurisdiction by the Laws of our Christian Prince:
and therefore those Societies of Christians living under the Jurisdiction of
the Archbishops and Bishops of England, and yet do separate from their
communion and Government, are Schismatics from the Church of England. To
conclude this, if the Novatians and Donatists, if the five Presbyters of
Carthage, if Ischyras in Alexandria were Schismatics; if from the Ascension of
our Lord to his second Advent, there was, or can be a Schismatic; then the
Sectaries of England are Schismatics, not only from the Church of England, but
from the whole Catholic Church.

Having thus stated the ancient notion of Schism, and found it a henous
impiety, though our Non-conformists sport with it as an Ecclesiastical
Scarecrow; I shall next do them the justice to examine the Doctors Plea, and
see how well he vindicates them from the guilt of Schism.

First, He denies that there is any such creature as a National stated
governing Church of England. If the Doctor means by all these rumbling Epithets
of stated, National, governing, organical Church of England, that there is no
such distinct organical Church in England, that is, a separate body from the
Catholic Church, I am then of his opinion: But if he means, that the Bishops
of England have no power of Government over the Christians in England, it is a
very foul mistake, to speak in the modestest phrase: for I have already proved,
that the Archbishops and Bishops have as much Jurisdiction in their respective
Provinces and Dioceses of England, as any other Patriarchs and Bishops of the
Catholic Church ever had in theirs: and if the Act of Uniformity be a Law, I
am sure there is such an established being as a National Church.

Page 30.
In Page 30. his gravity drolls, and gives us a very merry Argument to prove
that there is no such creature as a National Church of England: for, says he,
Whosoever will erect a stated National governing Church in England, must find us an
Officer clothed with Authority to excommunicate from Michael' s Mount in
Cornwall, to Carlisle in Berwick. Now Sir, let this pass for a piece of wit,
though it is as wide from reason, as Cornwall from Berwick. What though the
Bishop of Antioch could not excommunicate from Antioch to Constantinople, and
from thence to the borders of Persia, must there therefore be no governing
Church in Greece? and might the Christians in Antioch by that Logic separate
themselves from the communion and jurisdiction of their proper Patriarchs
without Schism? If our Author could have proved, that there were any Provinces,
or Natives of England, that were de jure exempt from the Canons of this Church,
and the jurisdiction of the English Bishops, then there had been something of
argument: But if the Doctor for contumacy and disorder should be excommunicated
from Church of England in Berwick, I am sure without absolution, de jure he
could not communicate with any Assembly of the Church in England, though he
travailed from Berwick to Carlisle, and from thence to Mount Michael in
Cornwall: and this I fancy, does strongly conclude, That the Church of England
is such a part of the Catholic Church, which has a proper and peculiar
jurisdiction over all the Christians in this Kingdom.

Page 10. Sect. 12.
Our Doctor, page 10. sect. 12. owns it as a confessed principle, That every
individual member of the Church Catholic visible is bound in duty both to God
and his own soul, to join himself to some particular Society of Christians,
with which he may enjoy all the Ordinances of God, so as may be for his souls
advantage. Well then, why do they not communicate with the Church of
England,where all the Ordinances of God are observed and solemnized with as
much gravity and faithfulness as in any other part of the Catholic Church?

To this he answers page 11. That the business is so stated by the Act of
Uniformity, Page 11.
that they cannot communicate with us without doing what they judge to be
sinful.

There is nothing can justly be called sinful, but what transgresses some
manifest Law of God or Nature: and could the Doctor have proved, that any thing
practiced or enjoined by the Church of England, did violate any of those Divine
Rules, his Plea had been allowed, and his Party might vindicate their
Nonconformity. But to Transgress a plain Law of God, to disobey the Orders of
our Governors, and yet to give us no better reason for it, than to say, they
fancy the things are sinful, is so far from excusing, that it aggravates the
guilt. For, First, Their disobedience is an affront to their Governors, and
then the doing this only upon the account of their own judgment or fancy, is
an affront to God: for private conscience to usurp the Sovereignty of God, and
to lay such Divine Obligations upon the soul and mind, which God never imposed.
The nature and guilt of this disobedience is exactly represented by the story
of the young Prophet, 1 Kings 13. he was sent to prophecy against the Altar in
Bethel; now Jeroboam having cast off all the Priests and Levites of the
Aaronical line, and erected a new model of Religion, therefore that the young
Prophet might have no communion with so great a Schismatic, God charges him
expressly, Verse. 9. to eat no bread, nor drink water in that place: now an old
Prophet that dwelt in Bethel pretends a new Revelation, and that with such
cunning delusion, as he prevailed with the young Prophet to go back and dine
with him at Bethel; but that entertainment cost him his life, Verse 24. The
reason of this severity was very just and equitable; for God had given him an
express command not to eat in that place, and that charge was revealed to him
by some such manifest way of Divine Revelation, that he was as much
ascertained, it was the Word of the Lord, as he was assured of his own being:
And therefore he was justly punished for disobeying a plain command, and
harkening to a pretended Revelation, which was not personally revealed to him,
and of the truth of which he could not be so much secured, as he was of his
former Vision. Thus obedience to Governors in general, is as manifest a Law of
God as was ever given to the World, and we are in no particular to disobey
them, except we can produce another Divine Law of equal evidence and Authority
which prohibits our obedience in that particular; or else I believe from the
process of the former story, it is displeasing to God to transgress such a
plain certain Law, without a manifest prohibition from Heaven, but only out of
niceness of fancy or private judgment. And if the Church should part with all
those things which Dissenters judge to be sinful, there could be neither Church
nor Government: for we must throw off our Hoods and Surplice to gratify the
scrupulous Puritan; we must strip our selves stark-naked to satisfy the
Fanaticism of the Adamites; nay, we must part not only with Rites and
Ceremonies, but the whole Liturgy and Hierarchy of the Church, because some
fancy them to be Antichristian; nay, the Creed is not secure, we must expunge
the Article of Christ's Divinity to humor the Socinians; we must blot out the
Propitiation of Christ, the Doctrine of the Trinity, and the Resurrection of
the body, to gratify the Quakers: and so we must not only deface the front and
outside of the Temple, but even raze it to the ground, because it does not
please the eye of these men of Babel: nay, we must renounce our reason and our
senses too to satisfy the Papists in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and
so by this method, at length we must neither be men nor Christians.

But let us put the case at the worst, and suppose what these men fancy, were
really true; That there were some things enjoined by the Church, which were
really sinful; I confess this would be a difficult and unhappy circumstance,
but yet it would not justify a total separation, and the erecting of new
modeled Churches; for I have proved before, that we are bound by the eternal
reasons of Peace and Order to communicate with those Bishops, and that part of
the Catholic Church under which we live: and if it should so happen, that some
things evidently sinful were enjoined by this Church, then we might remove into
some other part of the Catholic Church, that were of a sounder constitution.
But if we continued within the Jurisdiction of this Church, I think we should
be obliged to communicate with it in Public Confession of Faith, in Devotions
and Sacraments, and as far as we could without manifest sin. We might with
peace and patience enjoy a pure conscience in our own family, but it could
never be lawful by any rule of Christianity to make a total separation, and to
set up another form of Church Government, in opposition to that under whose
Jurisdiction we live.

But Mr. H. in the Appendix has discovered a new Argument to vindicate the
Non-conformists in upholding Conventicles distinct from the Assemblies of the
Church of England: The sum of his new Invention amounts to thus much.

That necessity is laid upon them by Divine Law to preach the Gospel; Page 3,
4, 5, 6.
as for their communion with our Churches, it is but an humane establishment:
Now seeing they cannot preach in our Assemblies, the necessity of a Divine Law
obliges them to teach in Conventicles.

Now Sir, to encounter this Gigantick reason, we must enquire the truth of his
first Postulatum, Whether any such necessity be laid upon these men to preach
the Gospel?

Indeed I have met with a Geneva Divine, that stoutly believes, that necessity
was laid upon Cain to be a Murderer, and upon Judas to be a Traitor: Now I
confess, if this Divinity be true, they may be under the unavoidable fate of
Schism and Rebellion, and then we ought to pity and excuse them, and lay the
guilt in Heaven. But I will suppose Mr. H. to be too good and modest for to
accuse God, to acquit himself. And the necessity he pretends, is founded in
their call to the Ministry. Now Sir, there will be a necessity for us to
enquire the truth of this Divine Call: for the Parliament were a very Jewish
Sanhedrim to forbid these men to speak openly in the name of Jesus, if they
were certainly sent of God. But I shall ask them the same Question concerning
their Mission, that our Savior asked the Jews concerning John's Baptism, Was
it from Heaven, or of men? If they shall say from men, then they must show us
their orders from the hands of the Bishops, the Apostles Successors, who only
have Authority with Titus to ordain Elders or Priests in every City: If they
say from Heaven, they must then bring us very serious credible Witnesses to
assure us, that they were called by a voice from the clouds, as St. Paul was in
his way to Damascus: And yet if this were done, we live in such a Sceptick Age,
that men would not credit the Boast of Revelation without the credentials of a
Miracle. And I confess I cannot blame the Christian World for this suspecting
humor; for so many impostures and delusions have been imposed upon the World
by this pretense, that it is prudence not to be too credulous.

Now Sir, you may observe, that these fanciful Visions and Revelations have
strangely swelled these men; for they are no less in their own opinion, than
the great Apostles of Christ, and therefore with St. Paul, they cry out,
Necessity is laid upon us, and woe be unto us if we preach not the Gospel: that
is, Sir, That the Kingdom of England are still Jews and Barbarians, and except
these chief Apostles preach the Gospel, there is no hopes of their conversion
from Gentilism or Judaism. Nay, page 5, 6. he tells us, That there is such a
necessity for these men to preach in Conventicles, that the everlasting welfare
of thousands of men's souls depend upon it. Woe, woe to the King and Parliament,
that should dare to stop the mouths of these men, upon whose breath depends the
salvation of thousands of souls! Why Sir, this is far more mischievous, than
shutting up the Exchequer, breaking the East India Company, or spoiling all the
Trade of England.

But Sir, I hope this dreadful Harangue will not fright you, for all is but
noise and canting: for I dare assure you, the Execution of the Law will no way
hinder the advancement of the Gospel, nor hazard one soul in England: for
Christianity will be soberly preached in England, though all these men be
silenced. And besides, I should think by the principles of Calvinism, that the
salvation of souls were more fixed and fatal, than to depend upon the silence
or preaching of a few Nonconforming Ministers. You know Sir, the Decree of
peremptory Election was dated long before that Reprobate Act of Uniformity, and
therefore there is no fear of losing one of the elect, though these men be
struck dumb: and as for the Reprobates, all the Oratory of Dr. O. and Mr. H.
and the rest of those mighty men can never alter their sadder fate. And
therefore I think I may conclude from their own Divinity, that there is no
necessity laid upon them to preach the Gospel.

Page 4.
Mr. H. solemnly propounds this weighty Question, Which will be most for the
glory of God, either for the Nonconforming Teachers to preach the Gospel to
their meetings, or to keep the Union of their Parish Churches?

To which Question there is a very easy Answer; for no doubt, the God of order
is more glorified by Unity, Peace and Obedience to our Governors, than by
disorder and confusion. And therefore I shall conclude this by inverting the
Argument: They may live in the communion of the Church, without the least
hazard of their salvation; and necessity is laid upon them to obey their
Governors; and woe be unto them if they preach the Gospel in Conventicles, and
by walking disorderly, trouble the peace and order both of Church and State.

But there is one Plea more for this Schism or Separation, (call it which you
please) and that is cunningly insinuated in that famous definition of Schism by
Mr. Hales cited page 17. Schism is an unnecessary separation from that part of
the visible Church, of which we once were members. That their separation is
unnecessary, let the Doctor himself judge, who page 9. tells us, they differ
from us only in the insignificant fringes and laces of Forms and Ceremonies.
Now I fancy, it were a very unnecessary and undutiful thing, for a Son to
disown and desert his Mother, only because the fringe and lace of her garment
did not please his eye.

But the mystery lies in the last words of the distinction, A separation from
that part of the Church, of which we once were members. Now Sir, there are vast
numbers of persons in England who were never baptized by the Ministry of the
Church of England, or had any communion with her, and then by the judgment of
Mr. Hales cannot be charged with Schism or separation from her.

But this is already answered, for I have proved, that they are bound in duty
to live in communion with those Bishops and Priests, or that part of the
Catholic Church, under which they reside: and if they never were in the
communion of this Church, they have been the longer in disorder and
disobedience, and that is a very ill method of excusing the crime.

By this Sophistry Schism can only be the sin of the first generation: Novatus
and his contemporaries that first departed from the communion of the Catholic
Church, were indeed Schismatics, but then those who were baptized and educated
by that faction, were never in the communion of the Catholic Church, and so by
this argument were free from Schism, and so downwards from generation to
generation. Now this looks like Magic, for it teaches us an art how to split
the Church into a thousand pieces, and to continue this division for ever; and
yet in a little while there should be no disunion: for it is only the
adventure of the first Authors to break off from the Catholic Church, but then
as many as they propagate to the end of the world are no Schismatics, because
they never had any personal communion.

Now Sir, having asserted that the Unity of the Catholic Church consists not
only in the unity of faith, but in a succession of Bishops and Priests, and a
regular obedience to their inspection and conduct; give me leave to reflect and
consider what direful conclusions our Adversaries may draw from this notion.

First, This will be accused of too much kindness to the Church of Rome: for
they having continued their succession of Bishops from St. Peter, this will
acquit them from Schism, and place them within the body of the Catholic Church.

I hope Sir, it will not offend, if we be as kind to the Pope as we are to the
Devil, and allow him his due: No doubt, the Church of Rome is in the communion
of the Catholic Church, but yet this is no argument for any to desert the
Church of England, and remove to that of Rome; for our Apostolic Succession of
Bishops is as authentic as theirs, and our Doctrine more Pure, Primitive and
Catholic; and therefore it is irrational for the Romish Church to accuse us of
Schism: for whatever they can justly plead for their Unity, will equally
establish ours with the Catholic Church.

I cannot better represent the present State of the Catholic Church, than by
an allusion to the Jewish Temple: The Church of England, we are able to prove,
is the purest part of the Catholic Church, being most refined from error and
superstition, and therefore that may be resembled to the Sanctum Sanctorum; The
Greek Church, though something defiled, yet still preserving the Apostolic
faith and succession of Patriarchs and Presbyters, may be compared to the
Middle Temple; The Church of Rome, like the Outward a Court, is most profaned
with the Tables of the Money Changers, and defiled by abominable superstitions;
but yet though it be filthy, it is a part of the building, and within the Area
of the Temple: But for any to desert the Church of England, to communicate with
that of Rome, is such a frantic humor as for a man to quit the neatest
appartment, and exchange for the most sluttish room in the same house.

Secondly, That which will raise the greatest clamor is, That by this notion I
unchurch all the foreign Reformed Churches, who have no Bishops of the
Catholic line to govern them, and ordain their Ministers.

To this I answer, That if any of the foreign Churches have continued a
succession of Presbyters, who can derive their Origination from Episcopal
Ordination, it something lessens their disunion, and gives them a remote
alliance to the Catholic Church; yet this is but private charity, and will not
justify them from Schism by the Canons of the ancient Church. But if any of
them have a Ministry, which have no other Orders than their own Usurpation or
popular Election, I know not how to acquit them from being Schismatics from
the Catholic Church. And why do not the States of Holland send their
Professors from Leyden to London to receive Consecration from the hands of our
English Bishops, and so engraft themselves again into the unity of the
Catholic Church? this they might easily do, without being obliged to any
subscriptions to Papal power or innovations; if their omission of this arise
from a contempt and abhorrence of Episcopacy, I have no Apology for them,
neither would I be in the communion of those Churches for all the Bank of their
East India Company. If any of the foreign Churches be under such unhappy
circumstances, that they can justly plead a necessity for having no Bishops or
Priests of the Apostolic Succession, I have great compassion for them, and
question not but God accepts them: for I receive that as an indisputable Maxim,
That where there is an inevitable necessity, there can be no guilt, though the
fact it self be never so much irregular. But as for those Churches in general,
I have St. Paul's Charity, Those that are without let God judge.

Thirdly, Our squeamish* Sectaries are offended at the Hierarchy of England,
because it derives its succession from the Bishops of Rome. To which I have a
double Answer.

First, That I make not the Chair of Rome the sole Head, or Origin of this
Catholic succession: for the Episcopal or Apostolic power of Government and
Ordination was equally conferred upon all the Apostles by the general
commission of our High Priest Jesus: and therefore a succession of Bishops and
Priests from any of these Apostles, is enough to assert our unity with the
Catholic Church. You know the twelve Apostles are made the twelve
foundation-stones of the Christian Temple; and that part of the Church which in
a right line is built upon St. James, is as much in the unity and compact of
the building, as that which stands upon St. Peter.

Secondly, Let us grant it, that we claim our succession from the line of Rome,
this will no way prejudice the Episcopacy of England: I hope it was no
dishonor to the Holy Jesus, that there were some of his Genealogy that had no
very good fame in the World; it was sufficient, that by that line it was made
evident our Lord sprung from Judah: and it is enough for the Bishops of England
to make it evident, they sprung from the Apostles, and though some of their
line were men of impious lives, or erroneous opinions, that no way lessened
their power of propagation, nor invalidates the Authority of our succession.

Thus I have considered Schism as a separation from the Bishops and Priests of
the Apostolic line, and I see no reason to recant this notion. And therefore
the Appendixer is vastly mistaken, page 9. when he tells us, That if the
Parliament did legitimate their Meetings, there were an end of the Schism: for
they might indeed by a Law of Toleration acquit them from all the Temporal
penalties of a separation, but it would exceed all the Omnipotency of
Parliaments to discharge them from the guilt of Schism: for they must first
compel their Teachers to take Episcopal Orders, and bring in all the
Conventicles into the communion of the Catholic Church, and place them under
the Government of their proper Bishops, or else they would still be
Schismatics, non obstante Statuto.

Before I conclude, I will consider some grand Absurdities that will follow
from the denial of this notion.

First, The profound Fanatics in England clamor against the whole Hierarchy,
and will have the whole race of Archbishops and Bishops to be Antichristian.
Now Sir, I Will appeal to your judgment, if this be not blasphemy; for then all
the holy Bishops that assembled in the first four General Councils, that did
assert the truth of Christianity against Pagans, Jews and Heretics, and those
many Bishops of the ancient Church that headed the noble Army of Martyrs, must
be damned as limbs of Antichrist: Nay, I cannot see how to defend Timothy and
Titus from being Antichristian too; and if these Propagators of the Christian
Faith, were Antichristian, where shall we enquire for Christianity? Nay, this
were a sure foundation for Atheism; for how can it be reconciled to the
Providence of a God, or the care of Jesus, that he should plant a Kingdom upon
earth, with a promise of his presence and most careful providence, and yet to
suffer his own Kingdom to be enslaved under the usurpation of an Antichristian
yoke for sixteen hundred years together? if this were true, too many wise men
would conclude with the fool in the Psalmist, That there is no God.

Secondly, If this succession of Bishops and Presbyters be not necessary to
preserve our unity with the Catholic Church, then the Keys must be thrown
away, and excommunication is but an idle impertinence: for if there be not a
certain body or corporation of Christians known by a succession of power and
Priesthood from the Apostles, how can it be known, when a person is cast out of
the Church? for if the Christian Church be like a Wilderness, where every
family may pitch their Tent where they please, there is no use of Keys to so
wide a desert.

Thirdly, if this succession be not necessary, how can any rational man be ever
satisfied in the administration of Ministerial Offices, as Sacraments, and
Absolution, when there is no certain rule in the world by which he can
rationally be assured of the regular Authority of him that ministers.

To conclude this, if this notion of unity be disowned, then every Conventicle
is a true Church; and every man whom himself or the people fancy inspired must
be received for a Prophet; and God must lose one of his Titles, The God of
Order; and Confusion must be believed to be an Ordinance of Heaven.

Before I conclude, give me leave to reverse the Doctor, and make his Front the
Rear: (Sir, the phrase may be allowed,) for if I mistake not, the Author has
been a man of War, and understands very well the Martial Dialect.

The Harangue with which the Doctor prefaces his Plea, may justly be inverted.

It was doubtless one of the greatest infelicities that ever befell the whole
body of people in these three Nations, that when in the year 1662. Religion was
so happily settled in Faith, Worship and Government, according to the pattern of
the ancient Catholic Church in the first three Centuries, and though this
Religion was ratified by the very hand of God, and the dry bones revived by the
Miracle of an unexpected Restitution, that yet there should be amongst us so
many thousands of such perverse and sullen Tempers, as not to be persuaded into
the Churches communion neither by Law, Reason, nor Miracle.

I cannot discern the Doctors ingenuity in his second Section, Page 2.
where he originates the Act of Uniformity in the anger, ambition and
covetousness of Churchmen, and allows our Governors not one grain of Prudence
or Piety in the composure of that Law.

He first takes notice of the anger that rested in the bosom of Churchmen,
Page 2.
who had been sufferers. Methinks those men who had invaded the Rights and
Revenues of the Loyal Clergy should have been content with the public
remission and charity of the Act of Indemnity, and not expect a Miracle that
the Act of Oblivion should quite destroy the Church-mens memories: for these
ploughers had ploughed such deep furrows upon the Churches back, that it was
impossible such impressions should soon wear out. The Doves were driven from
their nest, and their feathers of Gold plucked off by those ravening Vultures,
and they were forced (in the Psalmists language) to lie among the pots. And yet
after all this, they must not so much as reflect upon all those rapines, nor
express any prudent caution against these Birds of prey, but they must
presently be accused of having too much gall.

His next charge is against the Zeal of Churchmen to continue some Bishops the
repute of Martyrs, Page 2.
who had suffered for the vigorous enforcing of some of the things now enjoined.

I observe, the Doctor very warily covers the Blood of Charles the First, but
dares dip his fingers in that of the Bishops; and yet I believe, the King as
well as the Bishop is left out from his Martyrologie. Had the Bishops imposed
such Rites and Innovations as had been inconsistent with the reverence of
Religion and the nature of Christianity; had they urged such Observances which
had never been practiced in the Catholic Church, nor required by the Church of
England: truly then the blood of Archbishop Laud should have no Rubric in my
Calendar, for then he had suffered as an evil doer. But when those things
required, were founded upon good reasons of Religion, the custom of the ancient
Church, and enjoined by the just Authority of this Nation, I think the
Archbishop who had the hard fate to fall in doing of his duty, may (in a sober
sense) be said to suffer for righteousness sake, and be allowed the honor of
some kind of Martyrdom. Sir, I do here declare my self an eternal enemy to that
Religion, which can consecrate Sacrilege, hallow Rebellion, and sanctify
Rapine and Injustice. Nor will I ever have any communion with those men, who
Canonize the most infamous Traitors and Murderers for Saints, and condemn the
best King and Bishop in the World for Malefactors: I don't see, but by the
Theorems of this Jewish Divinity, Barabbas might have been Sainted, and Christ
recorded for an Impostor.

The next accusation brought against Churchmen, is their desire of filthy
Lucre. I confess, covetousness is one of the greatest shames of humane Reason,
and that it is a most absurd impertinence to see Spiritual men to fond upon the
things of earth. But if that must be called a desire of filthy Lucre, when a
man perhaps a little too passionately desires and enjoyes his own just Rights
and Properties, then sure it was the foulest Lucre, for those men no invade the
Revenues of the Church, to which they had no Title, neither by the Law of God,
nor the Statutes of the Nation: Sure none but a Pharisee could have overseen so
vast a beam in his own eye, and taken such great notice of a little spot in his
Brothers.

The Acts of Uniformity and that against Private Meetings, Page 4.
are described as Severe and Tragic, Sect. 5.
as if they had been the Edicts of Nero or Dioclesian. I do believe, had the
very same Laws been by the Roman Emperors imposed upon the Catholic Church in
the first three hundred years, they would have made a Jubilee, and have been
celebrated by the ancient Christians with Hymns and Hallelujahs: The Sentiments
of these men differ so much from the judgment of the ancient Christians, as if
they were not of the same Religion. And Sir, you may remember some Ordinances
of Parliament that did more bloody execution, than all the Laws and Canons
Royal of England. Sure you have not forgot, when Loyalty to our Prince, and
faithfulness to the established Religion was damned for Malignancy; and the
Loyal Nobility, Gentry and Clergy of England were condemned to Axes and
Halters, Plunderings and Sequestrations, Prisons and Banishment. And yet all
these Tragic Scenes must have a silken curtain drawn over them, and must be
interpreted as expresses of holy zeal, and Rigor and Persecution charged only
upon the Acts of Uniformity, and that against Conventicles.

From page 3. to page 7. the Doctor labors to assert the great numbers of
Non-conformists, and insinuates, that the prudence of our Governors could
never have passed the Act of Uniformity, if they had not been misinformed,
that the numbers of Non-conformists were very inconsiderable.

I confess, in State Logic number is a weighty argument, and in Politics it
must be thought imprudence, to disoblige a numerous party, who are able to
affront their Governors, and cast away their cords from them; Cum plurimi
peccant impunes sunt: But whether the establishing parties and divisions by a
Law, do consist with the Piety of a Christian Prince, I shall leave to your
Judgment to enquire. But I see by the Doctor's Maxims of Prudence, if the
World run after the Beast, it is but the duty and wisdom of the Kings of the
Earth to fall down and worship him: and if the Arrian faction be great and
popular, it is Prudence in Constantius to Arrianize.

It is worth observing, how these men to serve their Interest can quit their
old impropriation of the little flock, and to make themselves formidable, will
appear as the Syrians, that cover the Land. But this Popish Argument of Number,
is never urged but upon design; for it is confessed, Multitude is no infallible
argument of truth, for Antichrist will out poll us.

He complains, Page 9.
that there is a vast number of Atheistical livers, that seldom or never resort
to Public worship, and yet these escape the Indictments of Law and Censures of
the Church; but all the arrows are made ready against the servants of the
Living God. Whether the Title of the Servants of God, which these men
appropriate to themselves; be not a Presumption, I shall leave to be examined
by Omniscience: But I am sure, they are guilty of some actions of so bad a
tincture, that may make the World justly suspect, they wear the Livery of
another Master.

But if there be a remisness of Government in England, or a connivance to
Athe^istical Separatists, it is our complaint and lamentation as well as
theirs. The Doctor in the same Section makes the number of the Atheists in
England not inferior to the Non-conformists: And then by the late insinuation
their number will likewise plead for Toleration, and it will not be prudence to
molest them. And where there are many Sectaries, it is no wonder there should
be as many Atheists. You know Sir, it was remarqued by a very observing
Gentleman, That there were more Atheists in the Seven Provinces, than in the
rest of Christendom: (we must now except England) and he gives us this reason
for his conjecture, That there were so many Religions, that there were great
numbers of men that were of none at all.

Sir, There are many impertinencies in that little Book, which I thought not
worthy the examination, and which your Judgment will easily answer from the
grounds of this discourse: Such is his branding Parish Churches for a Popish
invention, which any sober man would rather have thought to have been the
contrivance of Reason and convenience; for we find this invention elder than
the Pope; for they were founded in the Province of Alexandria in the days of
Athanasius, as Athanasius and Epiphanius inform us.

Such another impertinence is his tedious Harangue about Separation from
Parochial Organical Churches, which no way concern the constitution of the
Catholic Church, or the Church of England: for though deserting our Parish
Church in some circumstance may be a disorder, yet it is no Schism if we
communicate with any other regular Assembly of the same communion. Athanasius
does not accuse Ischyras of Schism, for separating from his Parochial
Congregation and Priest, but for erecting a Conventicle, and dividing from the
Bishop, and the whole Catholic Church in Alexandria.

As for Mr. H's Discourse about the Obligation of Humane Laws, I shall refer
him for an Answer to St. Paul and Bishop Sanderson; and when they are answered,
we must enquire further.

I take no notice of the Railery against Ceremonies. The necessity of them in
Public Worship* and the Authority of the Church in enjoining them is
substantially proved by Mr. Hooker, and lately by Mr. Falkner; and if their
Reasons will not prevail, I will not pretend to work a Miracle, or hope to open
the eyes of them, who are resolved to be blind.

Sir, I hope that these Papers will satisfy you, that these men are
Schismatics, and assure you that I am,

Sir, Your faithful Friend and Servant, R. C.

Honored Sir,
THere lately came to my hand the Works of Mr. Hales, Entitled Golden Remains.
The most Sacred of these Relics, is a little Tract of Schism, which you find
celebrated by the High and Mighty Transproser, and applauded by your Doctor of
Divinity, and is the famed Sanctuary of our dividing Parties. Therefore having
some Months since presented you with my thoughts concerning Schism, I thought
my self obliged to an impartial perusal of this Famous Tract, for fear I might
through weakness of judgment have imposed an error upon you and my self. I
found the Remains of Mr. Hales prefac'd with so vast an Encomium of the Author,
that I addressed my self to his Tract of Schism with a very awful reverence:
resolving to submit to the clearest Reasons, and not to be ashamed to be
convinced by a Person of that admired Acuteness. But having with the most
strict intention considered that Discourse, I find my notion of Schism left
untouched.

But because our Non-conformists so often Appeal to this Tractate, I resolved to
consider how far it could serve their Interest, and justify their Separation.

Page 2.
First therefore he informs us, That there are two things which serve to
complete a Schism.

1. The choice of a Bishop in opposition to the former. 2. The erecting of a
Church or Oratory for the dividing parties to meet in.
Now I acknowledge this notion of Schism to be both Ancient and Orthodox:
Schism being considered as a breach of charity, or a dissolving of that Bond of
Peace, which we are so often solemnly changed to preserve inviolate. And
without a great and evident necessity, this Dividing must be very displeasing
unto the Prince of Peace, who did command us to be One, even as He and the
Father are One. Of this nature was the Schism of the Arrians, Miletians and
Donatiss at their first dividing: They set up Altar against Altar, had Bishops
of their own party, and their peculiar Oratories, and would have no communion
with the Bishops or Assemblies of that standing part that always called
themselves the Catholic Church.

The Church of England by the title of long prescription and the establishment
of a Law, is the standing Church of this Nation, with which all the people of
this Kingdom are bound to communicate; But our Non-conformists have chosen to
themselves Pastors in opposition to the Bishops and Priests of the Church of
England, and have erected their distinct Congregations to confront our Church
Assemblies, and therefore by Mr. Hales's definition they are guilty of complete
Schism.

But Sir, it must be observed, that these men have run further than the
Arrians, Miletians and Donatists did at their first dividing: for though they
had so little charity, as for a matter of dispute, to divide from the communion
of the other part of the Church, yet they had so much Prudence, as they
preserved to themselves some Bishops and Priests who had received their
Consecration and Orders from the Catholic Church; and when their Bishops and
Priesthood were worn out, the Factions expired; for they were not arrived to
such a height of Fanaticism, as to think themselves a Church without the
Government and Priesthood of the Apostolic line. No, they were so sacred and
curious in this, that I find the Arrians cavilling at the Ordination of
Athanasius, as not being Catholic and Canonical; just as the Papists objected
against us the Naggs-head Consecration. And (by the way) that was the most
weighty and considerable attempt that ever Rome made upon the Church of
England: and could they clearly have invalidated and disannulled our succession
of Bishops and Priesthood, all the learning of England could not have proved us
a Catholic Church. But this Cavil was with demonstration confuted by that
elaborate Piece of Mr. Mason Archdeacon of Norfolk. Sir, I hope that the merit
of this Digression will beg its own pardon.

But to return to our English Sectaries according to Mr. Hales's notion, it
would be indeed a very unhappy Schism in the Church of England, for the Bishop
of Norwich and his Presbyters and Jurisdiction, to divide from the communion of
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and to set up a Church of the East Angles divided
from that of the West. But supposing this, there were yet left to us this
satisfaction, that we were still under the Government and Ministry of that
Bishop and Priesthood, of whose Consecration and Orders we were sufficiently
assured; and though this would be an unlucky Faction in the English Hierarchy,
yet it would be no Schism from the Catholic Church.

But our Separatists are run to a further distance; for they have not set up
Altar against Altar, or one Bishop in opposition to another, but have thrown
off all the Bishops and Priests of the Apostolic Succession, and have erected
a Synagogue against the Church; and set up a Lay-Elder in opposition to the
Bishop and Priest. And this is not only a disobedience against the Laws, and a
Schism from the established Church of England, but is a separation from the
Catholic Church. And seeing our Sectaries have no Priesthood, I believe their
Conventicles to be no more a Church, than a Club of Mechanics in a
Coffee-house. For though some of these Congregations may retain Imposition of
hands as a mockery of Ordination, yet the imposing of Layhands have no more
power to confer Priesthood, than I to have to constitute a Judge of Oyer and
Terminer.

Mr. Hales makes Schism and Sedition of a very resembling nature: Page 1.
He tells us, That Sedition is a Lay Schism, and Schism is an Ecclesiastical
Sedition. Now, it is true, it would be a great Sedition to set up a Prince of
the Blood in opposition to our Sovereign, who by long and Legal Investiture
has been possessed of Regal Supremacy: But it would be Sedition of a deeper
dye, to renounce all Allegiance to our Prince, and to cast off the whole Royal
Line, and to set up a Forreigner, or one who had no alliance to the Royal Blood.

Thus, if to set up one Bishop in opposition to another (though both be of the
same Apostolic succession) if this be a Schism and a great disorder, then
sure, for our Sectaries to cast off all the Bishops and Priests of the
Catholic Church, and to set up such Teachers and Governors, who have no
relation to the Sacerdotal Line, this must be (...) the outmost and most
Schismatical separation from the Catholic Church.

But Mr. Hales proceeds and gives us a distinction of Schism. There is a
Schism, where only one part is the Schismatic, for where the occasion is
necessary, there not he that separates, but he that is the cause of the
Separation is the Schismatic.

This shall be allowed to be Orthodox too: and when our Non-conformists can
demonstrate, that it is necessary for them to separate from the Church of
England, we will take off the Indictment, and absolve them from Schism. But
they must prove this necessity from weightier Topics than Fringe and Lace.
They must make it evident, that they cannot communicate with us, without
manifest dishonor to God, affront to Jesus and his holy Religion, and evident
hazard of their salvation. But this can never be proved, but from the New
Gospel of private Conscience, for I am sure the Church of England is so happily
constituted, that there is no Law nor Canon in the four Evangelists, or in the
Apostolic Acts or Epistles, that will justify a separation from it, much less
vote it to be necessary.

Secondly, Our Author tells us, That there is a Schism in which both parties
are the Schismatics; for where the occasion of Separation is unnecessary,
neither side can be excused from the guilt of Schism. An instance of this he
gives us in that great division between the Eastern and WesternChurches about
the Observation of Easter.

I confess I can make no Defense for the Churches of the East or West for that
uncharitable division upon the account of a different Ceremony; for sure the
several parts of the Catholic Church might have enjoyed their peculiar Rites
and usages, and yet preserved an entire peace and universal communion. I am of
St. Austin's mind, Totum hoc genus liberas habet observationes, Epist. 118.
nec Disciplina ulla est in his melior gravi prudentique Christiano, quam ut eo
modo agat quo agere viderit Ecclesiam ad quamcunque forte devenerit.

But how this Instance of the Paschal Schism should be improved to serve the
Interest of our English Sectaries, I can no way discern. He that can from hence
extract a Plea for our Non-conformists, must have greater skill in Theological
Chemistry, than I dare pretend to. For though this unhappy controversy
occasioned a breach of charity and communion, yet here was no departure from
the Catholic Church on either side, nor any violation of Order and Government;
for the Christians of the East observed the Canons and Customs of the Eastern
Church, and submitted themselves to the Government and Ministry of those
Bishops and Priests, in whose Jurisdiction they lived, and so likewise in the
West, vice versa. And would our Non-conformists learn but so much Order and
Obedience, there were an end of the Schism.

Thus I have considered the Theorems of our Admired Author, and I find no
mischief in them; but there are still behind such a Train of consequences, as
(in my opinion) are of very evil insinuation, and do no way merit to be
reckoned among his Golden Remains.

I cannot approve of his severe Censure upon the Ancient Church, upon the
account of the Paschal difference: for he interprets that Breach to be a just
judgment of God,(But then Sir, mark the Provocation) because(says he) that
through sloth and blind obedience, men examined not the things, which they were
taught: but like Beasts of Burden patiently couched down, and indifferently
underwent whatever their Superiors laid upon them.

I abhor the Barbarity of rifling Sepulchers, or disturbing the Ashes of the
Dead. But I wish our ingenious Author had invented some kinder Emblems for the
Ancient Christians, than Ass and Camel. For though they were so humble and
peaceable, as quietly to submit to the Orders of their Spiritual Governors,
yet they were not so tame as to truckle to an Idol, though commanded to couch
by Imperial Injunctions.

I will never plead for a brutish inadvertency, or a blind and unchristian
obedience to our Superiors. The Church provides by a Canon, that all
Christians should once be Catechumeni, instructed in the plain Fundamentals of
Faith and Piety; and therefore it is not intended, that men should be imposed
upon in matters that concern their common salvation, and there is great reason,
that in things of that moment men should be cautious and inquisitive. But I
believe that Apostolic Canon, Let all things be done in Decency and Order,
has left a great scope to the wisdom of our Superiors, to order the public
Administrations of Religion. And in institutions of this nature (the people
being secured of all the pure necessaries to salvation) I don't think they are
obliged to any further examination, their greatest duty in this case is a quiet
submission. The Gentile Christians of Antioch, knew themselves to be freed
from all Jewish or Levitical Observances, but yet when the Council at Jerusalem
for prudential Reasons and considerations enjoined them the Abstinence from
Blood and things offered to Idols, we don't read, that they inquired any
further, but quietly obeyed that Canon, and yet I hope those primitive
Christians deserved a better name and character than Beasts of Burden in
matters of this nature, I cannot yet discern the guilt or irreligion of a blind
obedience.

I could wish that all Christians would keep the common Faith, and practice the
plain Rules of Christian Religion, and these things being preserved entire, I
see no mischief if in other things we should leave our Superiors to govern,
and submit even with blind obedience, and not trouble our selves and the World
with nice and scrupulous examinations. Blind or unexamining obedience to our
Superiors, with those limitations I have stated, would so much assure the
peace and order of the Church, that if it were not a virtue, yet I am sure it
would be a lesser crime, than Pride, Schism or obstinate disobedience.

Our Author reflects again upon the Paschal Schism in these words,

We may plainly see the danger of our Appeal to Antiquity for Resolution in
controverted points of Faith, Page 3.
and how small Relief we are to expect from them; for if the Direction of the
chiefest Guides and Directors of the Church, did in a point so Trivial so
mainly fail them, can we without the imputation of great Grossness and Folly,
think so poor-spirited Persons competent Judges of the Questions now on foot
between the Churches? Pardon me, I know what temptation drew that note from me.

Now Sir you may perceive that the Author was very sensible, that there was
some such guilt in this passage, as would stand in need of pardon; And
therefore if you dare adventure the scandal of giving pardon to a man, after he
is dead, you may remit this guilty passion of Mr. Hales: for my part, I have
charity for him, because he tells us, that this expression was drawn from him,
by some vehement Temptation. And you know, that a very great Apostle under a
Temptation denied the Son of God; and if this Good man in such a Hurricane,
Renounced all the Fathers of the Church, this should plead for our compassion.

What that particular Temptation was that occasioned this Ecstasie, he was not
pleased to acquaint us, and therefore I cannot determine, but give me leave to
conjecture. I find Mr. Hales had the ill Destiny to be a member of the Belgic
Synod, and he informs us in his Epistles, that it was sometimes his Province,
to refute the Arguments of the Remonstrants, (Host absente.) Now perhaps,
observing that those poor-spirited Ancients, would not be press^d into the
States service, but were all of a different opinion from that Synod, who knows
but this unlucky contradiction, and his conversing too much with Dammannus,
might put him into an unwary heat, and make him Reprobate all Antiquity. Our
Church has so much Reverence for the Ancients, as in her public Articles to
own the Authority of the first four General Councils, and King James himself
would never impose upon us the Novel Decrees of Dort.

I confess Sir, ever since I understood Greek, I have had the Grossness and
Folly (as Mr. H. interprets it) to have more value for the Judgment of St.
Cyril of Jerusalem, St. Gregory Nazianzen and St. Chrysostom, than for the
opinion of Bogermanus, Sybrandus, Beza or Gomarus. I have been so silly as to
think the Ancient, Catholic Council of Nice (that was but three Centuries
removed from the Apostles) did merit more Authority and esteem in the Christian
Church, than that partial and Modern Assembly of Dort. And I cannot yet alter
my Persuasion. But I would gladly quit my self from those ugly imputations of
Grossness and Folly.

I must therefore examine the Arguments of Mr. Hales, by which he invalidates
the Authority of the Ancients.

First, He accuses them for Poor-spirited Persons. Indeed they never were so
daring as to be so bold with the Attributes of God, as the Dutch Professors
were in the Synod of Dort, or as Beza was in Geneva: but yet these
poor-spirited men had the Resolution to be Martyrs for the Name of Jesus; and
that Sir, I should think, is a very divine and noble piece of Gallantry.
Besides, some of them left to the World their Golden Remains, excellent
Monuments of their Pretty and Learning, as worthy as our Authors.

Secondly, But his great Argument against Appealing to the Judgment of the
Ancients, is their indiscretion about that trivial matter of the observation of
Easter.

The Churches of the East and West, were not without some plausible reasons,
for their different observance of that Festival, and though they will not
amount to a substantial Apology for that Controversy, yet they will something
help to lessen the vastness of the Indiscretion: for the Eastern Church had
been taught by the Apostles, an innocent compliance to the Jews in those
Quarters, that they might not scandal them by a sudden and total departure from
all the Mosaical Rites and Observances; and therefore the Christians in the
East governed them by St. Paul's Rule of complaisance, to the Jews they so far
became Jews, as to celebrate their Easter Festival, upon the fourteenth Month,
when the Jews observed their Paschal. And though I confess, that Reason was out
of force in two or three Centuries, yet Sir, you know, Custom has a Great
Empire upon wiser creatures, than Beasts of Burden: and therefore it was no
Prodigy of imprudence, nor any Divine Judgment, if they were so tenacious of
an Ancient custom, that had a very innocent and Apostolic Foundation. The
Western Church being at a great distance from Palestine, was never obliged to
that compliance to the Jews: But being left to their Christian Liberty, and
assured by an infallible Oracle, That our Lord arose from the Dead upon the
first day of the Week, therefore they judged it most apposite and rational, to
celebrate the Anniversary Feast of the Resurrection, upon a Dies Dominicus.

This appeared so reasonable to that excellent Prince Constantine the Great,
that with great Resolution he opposed the Jewish compliance of the Eastern
Christians, and in his General Epistle concerning the Transactions of the
Council of Nice, he disswades the Christian Church from that custom, Itaque
nihil vobis commune sit cum infestissima Judaeorum Turba -- Domini
Percussoribus. And besides his Imperial Ratification of the Canon of Nice, he
inforces a General Uniformity in the Observation of Easter, by a very plausible
Reason, Niceph. l. 8. c. 25. Lang. Int. (...)
in the same Epistle. -- Unam esse Catholicam suam Ecclesiam voluit, cujus
tametsi parts in multis variisque sunt dispersae locis, uno tamen spiritus,
hoc est, Divino Arbitrio fovetur. Consideret porro sanctitatis vestrae
solertia, quam grave sit and indecorum, per eosdem Dies, alios quidem jejuniis
intentos esse, alios vero vacare conviviis. All I design by this, is, to show
that there was so much Plausibility on each side, that there was something in
the case more than Trifle, and not such monstrous Grossness and Folly as our
Author represents.

But grant this Controversy to be trivial, and the Ancients indiscreet in the
manage of it, yet I cannot discern the Logic of his conclusion, that therefore
they are not to be appealed unto in any controversy of Religion.

The sense of this Argument amounts to thus much, Because the wisest and most
learned men, have sometimes their mistakes and indiscretions, therefore their
Judgment is never to be regarded in any matter of moment. I fancy the World
would find vast inconveniences by such a consequence.

Sir, I request you to lend me your Italian Boccaline, for the Conventions of
Parnassus have now as much Authority as the four first General Councils, and
sure there will not be so much Grossness and Folly, in Appealing to the
Sentence of Apollo, as in consulting the Judgment of the poor-spirited
Ancients. Pray search the Rolls of Parnassus, that we may know whether Apollo
have Recorded Bishop Jewel, and all the Champions of the Reformation for Fools
and Asses; for I observe they were all so impertinent* as in the controversy
with Rome to Appeal very often to the Judgment of the Ancient Fathers.

Learned Chamier in his (...) (for antiquity sake I have chosen the Hebrew
Title) disputing de usu Canonis, Tom. 1. Lib. 10. Cap. 5. Sect. 1.
censures his Romish Adversaries, for declining the Judgment of the Ancients
in that Controversy, Dissimulant Adversarii hanc tantam Antiquorum
Testimoniorum and copiam, and vehementiam: ut solent a solis Radiis oculos
avertere, quibus lippitudo est incommoda*

There are two Cases in which we Appeal to the old Catholic Fathers.

1. In Controversies of Faith, or the great Doctrines of Christian Religion. 2.
Concerning the Government, Custom and Discipline of the Ancient Church.
Now the great Dispute is, Whether we may appeal to their judgment in matters
of Faith. And here I will freely trust you with my Sentiments. My Belief of the
great Fundamentals and Doctrinals of Christianity is founded upon those Divine
Oracles of the Holy Scriptures: But my Persuasion is much helped and
established by the universal consent of the old Catholic Church in the same
Articles. For I consider, that the Ancients of the first four Centuries, lived
very nigh the time of the first Promulgation of Christianity, when the Sense of
the Apostolic Age, was yet fresh and early. And I am hugely confirmed by
observing, that the old Greek Fathers and Councils expounded the Creed just as
we do: for sure they must in reason be supposed to understand the Idiom of
their own Language, and therefore to interpret the Mysteries of the Gospel
better than we, who are so many Ages removed from the first Revelation, and are
but Foreigners to that Language in which the Gospel was writ.

There is still a controversy on foot in the Churches (to use the Phrase of
our Author) concerning the eternal Divinity of Jesus the Son of God, and the
Resurrection of the Flesh is still called in Question. Now though my Belief of
these two Articles, is primarily founded upon the Sacred Scriptures, yet that
which makes up my Plerophorie, is the authority of the Ancients. For though the
Sacred Writings appear very express in those two Articles, yet I have seen all
those Texts so cunningly evaded by the plausible interpretations of the
Socinians, that I confess it is great satisfaction to me, that the ancient
Catholic Church did in General Councils maintain those Articles and expound
the Holy Text in that sense which we receive. I was about to have concluded
this with an old sentence of Vincentius Lyrinensis; but I considered, that to
prove the authority of the Ancients, by an ancient Author, would be false
Logic, and a gross impertinence; and I am very shye of those ill-looking
imputations. Therefore I will end with the authority of the great Chamier, who
was but a Modern Divine, and of the Reformed Gallican Church, and I hope our
Appeal to him will be allowed.

Tom. 1. lib. 16. cap. 5. sect. 5.
In the controversy De Scripturae interpretatione,he discourses of the several
helps to a right interpretation of Scripture, and among the rest mentions the
judgment of the Ancients. Alter ordo, veterum est, atque eorum qui nostram
aetatem praecesserunt. Horum labores nemo pius dubitat, Deum extare voluisse,
ut qui viventes profuerunt Ecclesiae, mortus non sint inutiles. Juvat ergo: and
valde quidem juvat, sciscitari quid senserint olim boni Patres, tum de fidei
Articulis, tum de singulorum Scripturae locorum interpretatione; neque earum
Testimonium parvi faciendum multo minus rejiciendum absque graevissimd Ratione,
etsi non debeant fidei nostrae dominari.

This learned man was under no temptation as our Author was, and therefore
expresses his opinion of the Ancients with much Reason and Reverence: and
therefore if I have been guilty of Grossness and Folly in my appeal to
Antiquity, you see Sir, I have very Learned Fools to bear me company.

2. Our next Appeal to Antiquity is in the Questions concerning the ancient
Government and Discipline of the Catholic Church.

What authority have we, for Infant Baptism, the Lords Day, the dispensing the
Eucharist to Women, but the Authority and Practice of the Ancients?
Methinks there should be no dispute concerning the Equity or Reasonableness of
our Appeal in this case. For all Courts of Justice, in a Question concerning an
ancient custom or practice, do constantly pass sentence, according to the
Testimonies of the most aged men. And though we should grant, that the ancient
Fathers were not wise enough to be Judges, yet sure their very antiquity makes
them the most competent Witnesses of the Government and Practice of the Church,
in the first Ages of Christianity.

Sir, you see our House of Peers, when their Privileges were questioned by the
Commons, thought it the most rational Method to determine that controversy, by
an Appeal to ancient Presidents. And if our Protesting Lords would be as just
to the Church, as they are to their own Court, and allow the ancient Records of
the Catholic Church to be as Sacred, as the old Rolls of Parliament, they
would have obliged themselves never to alter Episcopal Government. For we can
show more numerous, and far more ancient Monuments to prove the Primitive and
continued Jurisdiction of Bishops, than their Lordships can produce, to assert
their peculiar Prerogatives.

But Sir, if you would more clearly understand this necessity or usefulness of
appealing to the Ancients, let me humbly offer this advice. I know your Temper
is serious and contemplative, but I advise you upon this special occasion to
compose your mind into an extraordinary Fixation; and when you are retired, and
your eyes shut, and your arms folded, Then think out of the World all Councils
and Fathers, Fancy we had no more notice of the Judgment or Practice of the
Ancients, than Origin had of his State of Pre-existence; Suppose this present
Age of the Church to have no Monument of Christian Antiquity, but the Gospels
and Epistles in Greek, and no skill in that Language, but what we learned from
Pagan Orators, Poets and Philosophers: And at my next Visit pray acquaint me
with the Result of your thoughts; Whether in those considerations you did not
fancy a strange Darkness upon the face of Christendom, and see a necessity of
a New Revelation to interpret the Old.

Our Author proceeds and tells us, He sees no Reason, why opinionum varietas
and opinantium unitas should be (...), why we might not differ in opinion, and
yet communicatein Sacris.

The honor of God and Religion have so much suffered by our Divisions, that I
wish with St. Paul, Romans 15. 6. That we might with one mind and with one mouth
Glorify God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. But since our controversies
in Religion are so far multiplied, that there is no hope the Christian World
should ever unite in one judgment, without the force of a Miracle, yet it
would be happy if all Christians would quietly enjoy their Differences of
Opinion, and be so far of one mind, as to go up together to the Temple to pray
and communicate with the Catholic Church in Sacris.

The Church of England retains no Sacraments, but those which have the manifest
Authority of Divine Institution. All the Prayers of this Church are immediately
directed to the Eternal God: and all presented in the Name of Jesus. We
Petition for nothing, but what the Religion of Jesus allows us to supplicate.
And therefore I see no reason why all the People of this Nation, who are not
Atheists and Antichristian, should not communicate with us in those confessed
Services of Prayers, Praises and Sacramentals.

And this is all that is required by that Tyrannical Act of Uniformity. And
therefore that great Popular Orator in his late Harangue to the House of Lords
has imposed a Fallacy upon us, For he passionately complains against the Law,
for devesting the People of their Properties, only because they cannot agree
with Churchmen in some uncertain Opinions of Religion.

I hope it will not amount to Scandalum Magnatum to say, that this is mere
Sophistry. For our Laws prosecute no man for difference of Opinion; no, so far
from this, that the very Act against Conventicles allows our Dissenters, not
only their different Opinions, but the quiet use and enjoyment of their several
Religions in their own Families; nay, it granted them a further Favor and
Liberty, that they might receive four or five more of the same dissenting
Brotherhood, to make the exercise more full and satisfying. Here was nothing
prohibited but noise and multitude. But they might notwithstanding that Law
have peaceably enjoyed their different Opinions and Property too (that great
Fundamental of State Religion.) The Church does not put the souls of men upon
the Rack, or command an exact consent to all her Public Articles; but indulges
a difference of Opinion: it only provides for the Beauty, Order and Solemnity
of Public Worship, by enjoining all the Christians of this Kingdom to
communicate with us in those common Sacra, that all sober Christians
acknowledge to be of universal obligation.

But here your Doctor would Rejoyn, that it is as far from Cornwall to Berwick,
as from Berwick to Cornwall, and demand a Reason, why we do not exercise as
much charity to others, as we expect to our selves, or why we should not with
as much Reason be obliged to communicate with their Assemblies, as to expect
them to be present at ours? For our Author was so kind to Dissenters, as he
tells us, He sees no Reason why we should not mix with those divided
Assemblies, where there was nothing done, but what True Piety and Devotion
would brook.

If I may credit my own conscience, I have a very serious love and veneration
for all True Piety and Devotion. But I am resolved to have no communion with
Conventicles, and will faithfully acquaint you with my Reasons for that Resolve.

First, My ears are not fitted for the unintelligible Rapsodies of
Enthusiastic Divinity. Nothing impresses upon me, but what my Reason and
Judgment can give a sober account of. And I am sure, there are many Assemblies
in England, called Religious Meetings, whose chiefest Devotions consist in
nothing but Froth and Groans (to borrow an odd phrase from our Author.)

Secondly, I will appeal from our Author, to Mr. Hales, who toward the end of
this Tract gives us a very Orthodox Definition of a Conventicle. A Conventicle
is a Congregation of Schismatics, or all Meetings upon unnecessary separation,
(and concludes) that it is not lawful, no not for Prayer, for Hearing, for
Conference, or for any other Religious Office whatsoever, for the People to
Assemble otherwise, than by Public Order is allowed.

Now since I can enjoy a communion with the Catholic Church, and all the
advantages of Christianity, without going to a Conventicle; I think it were
neither Piety nor Devotion for me to communicate with those Congregations,
which our Author grants to be unlawful Assemblies. Had I lived in the days of
Dioclefian, I would have been a member of the Ecclesia Subterranea, and have
assembled with the Catholic Christians in Caves and Grotto's, which necessity
had consecrated into Holy Places; But since it is my happy Lot to live in that
Age and Kingdom, where Christianity may be confessed above ground, since a just
Authority has opened our Churches, seeing I may offer all the Public
Devotions that God requires, in those Solemn Places which the Law appoints;
Since I can at the same time be both Devout toward God, and Obedient to my
Governors, I resolve I will have no communion with those Assemblies, which the
Law of the Nation, and the Canons of the Church make irregular. Sir, I assure
you, it adds some cheerfulness to my Public Devotions, that I can at the same
time, both give unto God, the things that are God's, and to Caesar, the things
that are Caesar's.

Thirdly, I resolve I will never be a member of our separate Congregations,
because in them I cannot be assured of my complete communion with the Catholic
Church, or the advantages of a Regular Priesthood.

I question not, but God may pardon without the Absolution of a Priest, and
give a man possession of eternal life, without the seal or title of a
Sacrament: but salvation is a matter of such vast importance, that I would
never adventure it upon extraordinary Methods* in concerns of Religion and
everlasting interest, I love to enjoy all the security, that God has given to
mankind. In that great Schism of Israel, some of the most sober and considering
Jews, were not satisfied with their communion in that new Church of Israel,
though it was established by the Law of Jeroboam, but returned to worship at
Jerusalem; yet the Tribes of Israel retained the same Creed with those of
Judah, and the Calves of Dan and Bethel were not designed for Idols, but set up
in imitation of the Cherubims in the Temple; but these wise men were
dissatisfied, because their Priests were not of the Aaronical Line, and had no
other Consecration or Authority, but what was derived from the Patents of
Jeroboam, and they could not be assured, that God would accept their Oblations
from the hands of those men, who had no Regular Priesthood. Now there is great
Reason to believe, that there should be as much order in the Kingdom of Jesus,
as there was in the Jewish Polity; and therefore I am assured both by Reason
and Sacred Oracles, that there is an Evangelical Priesthood, that has
succeeded that of Aaron; That there is a peculiar Order of men, who have
received this Priestly Authority, by a Regular Ordination from the Apostles
Successors. And I esteem these men according to St. Paul's Injunction, as the
Stewards of the manifold Mysteries of God, and the Ministers of Reconciliation:
and therefore (without an inevitable necessity) I will never live without the
advantage and satisfaction of their Ministerial Authority.

St. Chrysostom in his Discourse (...),highly magnifies the Office and
Authority of a Priest; for speaking of that order of men, he tells us, (...),
etc. That God has invested the Priests with such Authority, as he never
conferred upon Angels or Archangels. For to which of the Angels did he say at
any time, What ever ye bind on Earth, is bound in Heaven; and whose sins, ye
Remit, they are Remitted? For as the Father gave Power to the Son to Remit
sins, so the Son of God has committed the same Power to his Ministers on Earth.

I believe the Power of Absolution which was conferred upon the Christian
Priesthood, by the Commission of our Lord, is not so large, as the Pope would
extend it; nor yet so inconsiderable as the Puritan fancies it. I believe our
Savior did not trifle, when he granted that Charter to the Apostles, but sure
there is something in that Authority, that is solemn and momentous, and
whatever it be, I resolve to enjoy the benefit of it. And therefore I declare,
that I would sooner travel from London to Larissa, to communicate with the
Greek Church, where I might be assured of Priestly Authority, than walk from
Temple-Barr to Westminster, to join with a Lay-Conventicle. I know no Rule in
the World, that can rationally assure me of Ministerial Authority, but a
Sacerdotal succession from the Apostles.

As for the Pretension of Inspiration, it is no more than Mahomet and Manes,
and every Impostor have pretended. Their Argument from Gifts and
Qualifications, weighs nothing with me. A Jew under the Mosaical Economy,
might have hired an Hebrew Butcher, who might have slain his Lamb or Goat, and
have dressed it, and laid it upon an Altar with as much art and exactness, as
the eldest Priest in the Temple: but then it had been no Sacrifice, nor have
ever been accepted of God, as a Legal Atonement: no, it was the Priests
offering Sacrifice, Lev. 17. 5, 6.
that made them Peace Offerings; it was the Priests sprinkling the blood upon
the Altar of the Lord, and his burning the Fat, that was an essential Requisite
to render the Oblation a sweet savor unto the Lord. Angels and Archangels are
Wise, Zealous and Holy Spirits, but all their excellencies do not make them
Priests, though in another sense they are Ministering Spirits. To conclude this,
since I can no way be rationally secured of my Relation to Christ, or of my
participation of all the advantages of Christianity, but by a comm^nion with
the Catholic Church and its Ministerial Authority, I do therefore assure you,
that I have a greater value for my communion with the Priests and the Temple,
than for that adored Diana of English Property. And if any unhappy circumstance
should ever put me upon the experiment, I would desert this, to enjoy the other.

Sir, if ever the Christian World become wise and sober, this very
consideration would repair the Breaches of the Catholic Church, and prove the
final Ruin of Fanatic Conventicles.

Our Author passionately declaims against the Supremacy and Ambition of Bishops.

I confess, Pride and Ambition are greatly inconsistent with the humble nature
of Christianity, and are strange indecencies in Spiritual Governors: and I
will never make an Apology for Vice and Disorder. But this ought not to be
urged as a Reason for the extirpation of Episcopacy. Our Lord did not suspend
nor degrade his Apostles, because there was a strife among them, who should be
the greatest. Nor would it be just or charitable, to charge all Bishops with
these evil imputations. I observe one famous Instance of Humility in the Chair
of Rome, and that Sir, you know, is the most Principal Seat of Ambition.

Gregory Bishop of Rome, who in the year of our Lord 596. sent Augustina into
England to convert the Saxons, in his Epistle to Eulogius Bishop of
Alexandria,disowns the ambitious Title of Universal Supremacy: Indicare quoque
vestra Beatitudo studuit, jam se quibusdam non scribere superba vocabula, que
ex vanitatis radice prodierunt, and mihi loquitur dicens: sicut jussistis, Quod
verbunt jussionis peto a meo Auditu removere, qu^^scio quis sum, qui estis.
Loco enim mihi Fratres estis, moribus Patres, non ergo jussi, sed quae utilia
visa sunt, indicare curavi: -- and ecce in praefatione Epistolae quam ad me
ipsum qui prohibui direxistis, superbae Appellationes verbum, Universalem me
Papam dicentis, imprimere curastis. Quod peto dulcissima mihi fanctitas vestra
ultra non faciat: quia vobis subtrahitur quod alteri plus, quam ratio exigit,
praebetur. And we must not look upon this Modesty, as the Poor spirited* humor
of this single Bishop, for he assures us in the same Epistle, that it was the
constant humility of his Predecessors. -- Recedant verba quae vanitatem
inflant, and charitatem vulnerant, and quidem in Sancta Chalcedonensi Synodo
atque post a subsequentibus Patribus hoc Decessoribus meis oblatum vestra
sanctitas novit, sed tamen nullus eorum uti hoc unquam vocabulo voluit.

But Sir, our Author not only protests against the Ambition, but the Authority
of Bishops: for he tells us, They do but abuse themselves and others, that
would persuade us, that Bishops by Christ's institution, have any Superiority
over other men, than that of Reverence.

He grants, that there is a greater Reverence due to them, than to other men,
but how this should become a duty, without supposing a just superiority to
exact it, I cannot understand.

I will not here engage in the Controversy about the Divine Right of
Episcopacy. But I am sure the Apostles had a Superiority over the Seventy
Disciples by Christ's Institution, and I am certain that the Ancient Catholic
Church did esteem Bishops as the Apostles Successors. The first we meet with in
Ecclesiastical History that ever denied the Superiority of Bishops, was Aenius
a discontented Arian, and Epiphanius records him for a Heretic, and brands his
Opinion as a Diabolical Delusion.

Sir, there remains nothing more considerable in our Author, only the old
Puritan Cavil against all Pomp and Gestures, Garments and Music in Public
Worship. I confess, I dislike the gaudy Pageantry and numerous Ceremonies of
the Ordo Romanus, and I as much abhor the Rudeness of a Conventicle.

Sir, I have neither mind nor leisure to examine the Scruples of nicer fancies,
but I will propound these Queries, and reserve them for future consideration.

1. Whether the Governors of the Catholic Church have not as much Authority
to make Institutions in matters indifferent, as the Apostles? Whether the
Woman's Veil, or the Holy Kiss, were more Jure Divino, than the Surplice or Sign
of the Cross?

2. Whether a Pompous Superstition in Public Worship, be not more pardonable,
than a Rude Forlorness? Or, whether a Sancy Rudeness will not sooner introduce
Atheism, than the most Glorious Superstition?

3. Whether the awful Adorations of the Jews, the Glory of the Tabernacle and
the Temple, the Ornaments of the Priests, and the Music, were Leviticall, or
rather founded upon Moral Reasons?

4. Whether a Public Oratory or Church that is set apart for the more Solemn
Worship of the Eternal God, may not without Superstition be as Glorious and
Magnificent, as the Stadthouse in Holland? (except Imagery.) Whether a Respect
to God, will not as much justify one, as a Relation to the States, will
vindicate the other?

Sir, Whenever you please to command, I shall enquire for Resolution, in the
mean I rest,

Sir, Your Affectionate Friend and Servant, R. C.

FINIS.

