DIANA, Duchess of MANTVA: OR THE Persecuted Lover.

A ROMANCE.

Written by R. C. Gent.

Praestat otiosum esse quam nihil agere.

LONDON, Printed by T. H. and are to be sold by Henry Brom at the Gun in St.
Paul's Church Yard. 1679.

TO The Right Honorable the LADY ELIZABETH BRVCE.
MADAM,
ALthough Ambition may not only be allowed, but applauded, when in pursuit of
such designs as are really worthy; and attempted by actions altogether
Generous; Yet will as certainly be condemned, when by different ways it runs
too far unreined, without so much as an endeavor to check it. How criminal
then must that presumption appear, which is altogether unexcusable? And under
no less a guilt he must certainly lie, dares make an approach to so Sacred a
Shrine, with an offering so mean an unworthy.

But when I am most certain all that can be termed virtue is centred in your
Ladyships Breast, I cannot despair of having that particular one of mercy
extended to a conscious Offender; Assured of which, I must not doubt a
charitable construction from the world, confident none will wholly condemn what
appears in it, sheltred under your Ladyships protection.

However I must expect a just imputation on my ignorance, in describing no
better the character of One endowed with all accomplishments, in the person of
Frederick, and that of a Lady possessed with equal perfections, in Diana; when I
had so extraordinary Originals to Copy by, in your most Noble Lord, and
Excellent Self. But were my capacity much beyond what I could presume to wish,
it would be a vain attempt to pretend a description of what is so much beyond
expression. For should I make the least offer at a Panegerick, how large a
field must I wander in? since it would compose an entire History, to write the
Greatness and Nobility of your own Descent, and the Family you are allied to by
a happy Marriage; and how much more then would there be to add, in making the
shortest Repetition of those for ever to be Recorded Actions, both of Your Own,
and Your Lords truly Noble Ancestors; That it seems as if Heaven designed an
Union of whatever may be called Worthy, in that joyful Affinity. For as on the
one side your Ladyship is not only Heiress to the Fortunes, but Virtues of
those from whom you are descended; so I dare presume you think your self really
happy, in that most indulgent Possessor of your Affection, who gives already
sufficient Proof of inheriting that Great and True worth is Inherent to his
Blood.

Nor could less be expected where he had such an Example in his Noblest Father
to imitate, whose signal Loyalty to his Prince, Zeal to the true Protestant
Religion, and entire Love to his Country, have ever been the Guides and
Directors of all his Thoughts and Actions.

But unawares, (delighted with the Subject) I seem running into what my want of
Ability for the performance, must make me avoid; since the only design of this
humble Address, is to implore your Ladyships favorable acceptance of this
small Trifle; which obtained, will make it as fortunate, as the Writer happy,
if allowed the permission of owning himself.

MADAM, Your Ladyships most humble, most obedient, and most dutiful Servant,
ROWLAND CARLETON.

DIANA, Duchess of MANTVA: OR THE Persecuted Lover. PART I.
THE crimson blushes of Aurora had scarce given the world an intimation of that
glorious Luminary's approach which was to enlighten it, when there appeared
coming from a stately and magnificent Palace, so lovely a troop of Ladies, that
had there yet wanted any thing of day, the Stars might in modesty have retired
from a new sphere of brighter Constellations; among whom the Princess Diana's
beauty had luster enough to intimate the little want there was of a rising Sun.
She advanced at the head of this charming company, toward the verdant banks of
the celebrated Po, where a close walk of spreading limes seemed by
overshadowing the River where its motion was slowest, to convert the Crystal
streams into a Looking-glass of Emrald. The agreeableness of the place so
suitable to the Princesses melancholy, might have detained her longer in it,
had not the Barges waited to convey them to a little Island in the middle of
the River, which composed a Garden wherein Art and Nature had equally
contributed to captivate the Senses. But the fair Princess giving too much way
to a serious Reservedness, participated least of those delights that curious
Paradise of Flora was liberal in affording; making the earnest Endeavors of
all the Ladies fruitless, in seeking to remove from her breast that oppressive
Pensiveness she was ready to sink under. But that her contemplation might be
the more undisturbed; withdrawing to a shady Grotto watered with many
artificial Springs, and in the most retired part of the Garden; keeping no body
with her but one young Lady, who was happy in having merited her privacy; she
commanded the rest to pursue those Diversions her self desired to be a stranger
to. They had scarce walked the length of the first Ally when they were met by
several Lords and Gentlemen of the Court, who had followed in other Boats to
the Island, attended by an excellent Consort of Music, which they had brought
to divert the Princess in her retirement. They were beginning at a convenient
distance to make an essay of their skill, when they were interrupted by a
confused noise from the farther side of the River, of people crying out, to
seize, or kill the murderer. This unexpected disturbance not only hasted the
Ladies and Gentlemen toward that part from whence the noise came; but also drew
the Princess from her solitude, to learn the occasion of so much insolence as
they appeared guilty of who raised the disorder. And coming to the end of a
spacious walk which bounded on the Rivers side, they beheld with surprise, a
young man endeavoring with his utmost strength to force a swift Passage
through the water, from those who hastily pursued his Swimming, in two little
Barks; while a crowd of Peasants assaulted him from the land with showrs of
stones. A Boat was immediately commanded from the Garden to his assistance; and
the diligent Rowers so speedily obeyed the Princess command, that he was soon
rescued from the threatening danger, and brought to throw himself at Diana's
feet; who was no less surprised than the rest of the company, when he was known
to be Alexander, a noble Gentleman of Mantua, and one that had not long before
retired from her Court. Cesareo a principal Officer of her Household, and (long
before) the unhappy fugitives friend, begging Leave that he might retire to put
off his wet clothes, besought the Princess for his satisfaction, that some of
the Country men might appear before her to discover the cause of their pursuit,
and receive the Punishment due to the unworthy enemies of so considerable a
person. While Alexander was gone to the Gardners with some of his friends to
dry himself, a plain fellow was come over from the other side, who being
brought before the Princess, and commanded to give an account of the Uproar,
made this following relation:

If it shall please your Grace, I am an honest husbandman, and one of your
Tenants in that Town upon the top of the Hill beyond the River, where in sober
truth we work hard, and take pains for an indifferent livelihood, and to pay
our rent in good time. Now, and it like you, that Town does not all belong to
our Lady Duchess; for behind that Grove of Trees on the side of the Hill there
is as neat a House as one would wish to set foot in, with the daintiest
contrivances of Walks, and Arbours, and Gardens, that I had a hand in the
ordering some years ago: Now as to what I am to tell you concerning Alexander;
well he is a parless naughty man, it is now about a month ago that he came with
his new Wife, to take his pleasure during the spring at that house, which, as I
said, stands beyond the Grove, and he belike borrowed it of Lord Cesareo, who
lives here at the Court, for it is Cesareo's own house, only he being much his
friend was willing to lend it him for a while; and in verity the Lady Cynthia
his Wife, was one of the finest, handsomest, best natured young Gentlewomen
that e're was bred in Italy. Oh she was so courteous, as they say, to all us
poor Country folks, would so smile upon us, when we did any thing to make her
merry, and would talk so kindly to our Wives and Daughters, as if she had been
one of us her self. Now this good disposition among other things made Alexander
so dote upon her, that the like was never seen; and who would think it, she was
so well pleased with the recreations we made her, and with our way of living,
that sometimes she has laid aside her rich silks and jewels, to appear among us
in such plain russet as we make our apparel on: Well if I had not almost forgot
to tell you, there was another young Gentlewoman of her acquaintance that kept
her company e'ne as good natured as she her self; her name, as I remember, was
Mistress Porcia: But to tell you all and make few words, Alexander seemed to
love his Wife, as if she had been still to give her consent, and has been heard
to say he could take no pleasure any where out of her sight. But last night put
a sad end to all this joy; ay, last night, no longer ago, a little after it was
dark, when all the people in the Village were going to Bed, we were called out
into the street to hear the lamentablest Cries that ever pierced any Christians
ears; this sad noise coming as we guessed from Alexanders Grange, every body
made haste thither, to know what was the matter; and I my self being pretty
nimble, got thither one of the first, where all the doors were wide open, and
the servants running about half scared out of their wits; whereupon asking one
of them what ailed all that pudder; he told me with blubbered eyes, that his
Lady was dead, how that Alexander coming home when no body expected him, had
killed his Wife and conveyed away her body that none of them could find it; I
being willing to learn the whole truth, followed the man to another room, where
I saw, well it was a grievous spectacle, there lay Mistress Porcia as dead as a
Red-herring upon the floor, all over grimed with her own natural blood, and
hard by her a fine young Gentleman called Alfredo, shot into the head, with no
more life in him than the other; and it seems Alexander himself had cruelly
butchered them all: in sober earnest it was one of the pitifullest nights that
my eyes were ever open in: and to think that Alexander should do such a deed,
to kill those he seemed the very day before to love so well. Presently some
made haste to the City to acquaint the kindred of the poor dead creatures with
the ill news. While I, as your Highness Bailiff this year of the Village, and
as in duty bound by my place, raised the Towns folks, who were all got by that
time to Alexanders Grange, and dividing them into several companies, sent out
to search for the man had done so much wickedness; but the night was spent to
no purpose, and every body was about to go home again, when a workman going out
at daybreak about his business, had spied a gentleman-like-man going into a
little Cottage hard by the River; who telling me of it, I began to suspect
somewhat of the truth, hearing of a Gentleman up at that hour; so away I hasted
with my men to the place, and making no noise, beset the house. Alexander
seeing himself betrayed, for it was he, and no hopes left of escaping (well it
was a desperate thing) leapt out of a window, and without receiving any hurt,
got clear away from us all, and ran as hard as he could drive toward the
River; truly I think it was his best way to trust to his heels, for his hands
would have done little good against all us: we followed him still so close
that, would you think it, he threw himself into the River, and so escaped by
your help.

There appeared too much horror in the Country man's story, not to produce a
tender sense of grief in the breasts of all that heard it; every one bestowing
a several conjecture on what might induce the barbarous Alexander to commit so
strange a piece of cruelty; that which might (to those of his country) seem the
most probable incitement, was jealousy, yet they found no circumstance to
persuade them his Anger proceeded from that fatal Passion. Although the
incomparable Princess her self expressed a trouble not any thing inferior to the
rest for the unfortunate young women's severe destiny; however, before she would
make too great expressions of her resentment, desirous they might be just; she
sent an ancient Gentleman to the place where this sad Tragedy had been acted,
to inquire into all the particulars of it, and bring her a true account of what
had past since the preceding Evening; in the mean time committing Alexander
into straight custody, till he should be brought forth to stand or fall by a
legal trial.

Although the morning was by this time so far advanced, that the approaching
heat began to call Diana and her Retinue back again from the divertive garden
to her Palace: Yet whether apprehensive of a renewed disturbance from that
company she believed attended her return, of several Princes who had some time
resided at her Court in hopes of advancing that Passion, either her Beauty or
the greatness of her condition had made them discover the highest professions
of, or that she was desirous a little to alleviate her Thoughts, and gratify
her fair favorite, as she had promised, by imparting to her the cause of that
grief she thought impossible ever to be delivered from. She resolved a while
longer to defer her removal from a place so suitable to her disposition; and
leaving the rest of her train in the Walks, she returned with Nise to the
Grotto, from whence Alexanders adventure had lately called her; where making
the young Confident sit down by her, she resolved to endeavor the unloading
her breast of those afflictions she labored with, by letting Nise partake the
knowledge of her most secret Concerns, in relating those circumstances of her
life, which till then she had been ignorant of.

The History of Diana, Duchess of Mantua.
I Do believe, dear Nise, (said the melancholic Princess) it is not only thy
admiration, but that of all people; To see me yield to a Grief must appear very
unaccountable, since the occasion of it is altogether unknown, even to those
who think themselves best acquainted with all passages of my life; especially
at a time when in all appearance, fortune has nothing to add whereby my
condition might be more happy. But the assurance of thy affection and fidelity,
removes those scruples I might apprehend against the revealing what I must
needs allow a weakness; and incourages me with the less reluctance to make thee
acquainted with the affliction I struggle with, occasioned by an unfortunate
passion. The very mention of that word obliged the Duchess to turn her head
aside to conceal the Blushes, and dry those Tears that Remembrance and the
Confession of it had forced from her; but quickly recollecting her self, she
gratified her beloved Nise with a short Narration of the most remarkable
passages of her life. Although my Fathers Indulgence (proceeded the
incomparable Lady) was much inferior to his Severity, I am confident the whole
world will grant my Sorrow for the loss of him, was never exceeded by those who
bewailed the death of a most tender Parent. Yet two complete years being
expired since Heaven was pleased I should be deprived of him, the whole
Province may have reason to believe it is some other cause prevents my receiving
a full Satisfaction in the state Heaven has been pleased to allow me, so much
above others. And I must confess, did Ambition or Interest rule my mind, it
were unreasonable to wish for more than I am already Mistress of. My Father
left me not only to the possession of this flourishing Dukedom of Mantua, but
as great a Treasure to maintain my Royalty as any Prince in Italy can boast him
self Master of. Were the enjoyment of liberty delightful to me, so generally
sought after, and wished by those of our sex, above all other Blessings, how
happy might I esteem my self in the difference there is between a recluse life,
such as an awful Father confined me to, and that uncontrolled disposal of my
self I now enjoy. But alas! how little is the benefit I reap from these
advantages, while I lament the loss of what was justly much dearer to me than
all the Glories of established Sovereignty. I suppose you are not ignorant of
that disaster made such a noise in the Court about half a year before the death
of my Father; and much about the time yours placed you here with me; I mean the
murder of that most accomplished young Lord, Frederick of Bolonna; who was most
barbarously assassinated and thrown into the River as he returned one Evening
late from the Palace to his House.

That unhappy Gentleman's destiny (said the agreeable Nise, finding the Princess
with no small disturbance pause of the mention of so bloody a deed) filled all
the Court, not only with Pity but Astonishment, that a person admired and
beloved by all who knew him, should fall under so cruel a fate, in a place
where his obliging carriage and unequal virtues had procured him many friends,
but thought to have no enemy.

Most certain, (continued the afflicted Lady, having recovered her self a
little) none more deserved an universal admiration, or lived freer from being
hated by the most envious; but alas, had his Merits been less, his Life had
never been sacrificed to the cruel resentment of an unjustly offended Prince.
It Is now, Dear Nise, I must discover to you a Secret the whole world is to this
moment ignorant of. This unfortunate man, (by birth inferior to none, as
descended from a Branch of that Family was once adorned with the Crown of
Naples, and now enjoys the Throne of Sicily) Possessor of no inconsiderable
Estate and Title, and one whose worth transcended all the advantages could be
deduced from either; finding he was the free master of himself and fortune,
resolved for some years by travel from his native Country, to improve those
accomplishments, he thought he had only learnt the Theory of from his careful
Tutors. After some months spent in seeing the most celebrated parts of Europe,
he came into Italy, and visiting, (after a short abode at Rome,) the principal
Cities of this Country, he came hither, with intent to reside a while at my
Fathers Court. His excellent society, and generous behavior, soon made him to
be taken notice of, as the most considerable stranger had been seen at Mantua
for many years; and if his great endowments of mind, with an unaffected
gracefulness of carriage in all his actions, attended with a most complaisant
humility, procured him the Esteem and Respect of all virtuous men: His youth
adorned with a beauty more than natural to his sex, and his winning
Conversation purchased him, if not the Affection, at least the favorable
Opinion of all our Mantuan Ladies; and there were, (as I have been informed,)
very few, if any, whose affections were not preingaged, but would willingly
have been content to make him the disposer of their liberty. He was very
assiduous in attending at the Court, from the first night of his appearance
there, which chanced to be when my Father by a public celebration of his
birthday, allowed a more than usual freedom in his Palace. He was permitted to
dance with me, being looked upon as a stranger of quality; and then (as he
since told me,) he embraced those chains were relinquisht with his life: after
some weeks stay with us, the high Character every one gave of him, and those
Remarkes my Father himself had taken of his extraordinary parts, made him
desirous to retain so eminent a person always near him, by heaping continual
honors daily on him; insomuch that he was quickly beheld, not only one of the
greatest Officers of the Court, but the Dukes peculiar Favorite: and to oblige
him from any thoughts of returning to Sicily, the place of his Birth and
Fortunes, my Father designed a match for him with Roselinda, the only Daughter
of Count Theophilus, the most eminent man within his territories. But his
humility, (as was then believed,) made him, though with great acknowledgements
excuse the acceptance of what he declared himself too unworthy of deserving.
But his modesty served only to incite my Father with greater earnestness to
bring him to the acceptance of what he judged so advantageous for him; and
having acquainted the Old Count with his Desires, it was not only accepted of
by him, but he seemed overjoyed with the thoughts of having so accomplished a
Son-in-law, and one so highly in his Princes favor; so that all was in a
manner concluded before Frederick knew the Dukes resolutions of consummating
what he himself had very little inclination to. Roselinda had been bred up with
me as a companion from our Childhood, but the reserv'dness of her disposition
had kept me ignorant of those Concerns she was at last in gratitude obliged to
give me the knowledge of; which made me at first strangely wonder she could
harbor an aversion against a person like Frederick, believing there was not a
Lady about the Court did not envy her fortune. It Is true, when I first heard
the Dukes resolutions, I was not unwilling to resign Roselinda to a Husband so
well deserved her; though I must confess at that very time, whether (as I was
willing to believe) the particular kindness I had for her, made me loath
speedily to loose her; or whether it was the secret impulse of a growing
Inclination for him, I could not consent to be pleased with an overhasty
conclusion of their Marriage. But why should I endeavor to prolong the
declaration of what has occasioned all my misery; it is enough Dear Nise, that I
have told how much Frederick deserved, for you to guess I was not the only
unsensible person (of those had been strangers to Love until his appearance)
at Court; Alas I saw him, conversed sometimes with him in public, heard from
every one the praises of him, and was apt enough to believe what the most
affected could say in his behalf, short of flattery; when I considered my
Father a wise Prince gave that preference to him, a stranger and a youth,
before his own Subjects, and whom years had made fitter by experience for a
Princes Council. This at first produced no other effect in me but a particular
Esteem, which (with blushes let me own it) insensibly increast to a violent
passion; with what disturbance was my soul agitated when the day of his
intended Wedding drew near; I sighed, lamented to my self, and by my own
disorder, made a general one through the Court, although it was only attributed
to a melancholy I was always inclinable to; What shall I do miserable creature,
(would I say to my self) shall I wrong my own thoughts with letting them be
entertained with imaginations so unworthy of me; shall the Heiress to the
Dukedom of Mantua conceive an opinion prejudicial to her own quiet, for one so
much inferior to her? shall Diana wrong her self by an injurious Kindness for
a stranger; of whom she knows nothing more than what a partial report of his
worth has aquainted her with? No, no, fond Maid, let him Marry her he is
designed to, and banish him for ever from thy mind and sight. -- But alas how
can I do it, how can I tear from my breast an Inclination has taken so violent,
and deep possession of it? Or if I could obtain though with never so much
difficulty, a conquest over my self, why should I strive to do it? will I ever
love, or can I think to be always free, no, it is impossible; I have already
surrendered my heart to the most deserving man on earth. I do, I must love him,
and he is altogether worthy of it, were I Mistress of the greatest Empire the
Sun gives Light to. But Oh doting woman (would my tormenting thoughts reply) he
is destined to another, nor does he know, nay dares not imagine himself
esteemed by thee, or if he did, perhaps his freedom is not now to be disposed
of or were it resigned to thee, he dares not declare, nor can thou derogate
so much either from the greatness of thy Birth, or modesty of thy Sex, to let
him know it. With this perplexity was my mind tortured, during the preparation
for his Nuptials. There was not a young Lord about Mantua who did not more envy
Fredericks fortune in being destined to so fair a Bride, than for the advantage
he had over them in my Fathers Love; while he himself seemed least transported
with the expectation of those joys he was ready to be possessed of. I have
confessed Dear Nise, the Passion I had for him, and with a grief equal to it,
must let you know how it proved that gallant man's destruction. Finding it at
last in vain to struggle with Fate, I wished only an opportunity of letting him
know he was more than indifferent to me, pleased with the imagination that
Rosenlida had more of his Respect than Love. But my Fathers severe Caution kept
me estranged from the conversation of any but those of my own Sex, who were
kept near me either as Companions or Attendants, except at some peculiar times,
(while he himself was by,) he admitted to my presence some of the most
considerable persons about his Court, where I had permission to hear their
discourse without liberty of answering to any of them, but himself; as what he
thought became the modesty of a young Virgin, and his Daughter; only his new
Favorite had the allowance of speaking in public to me, and commanded to
entertain his Mistress before my face; a freedom, I was not much delighted
with, and what had never before been allowed to any one who received a Wife
from his Court. However I had thereby an opportunity of observing his behavior
toward her, in which I was not grieved to find there was more of a profound
Respect, than any appearance of a real Passion. I then began to use Roselinda
with a seeming endearment more than I had formerly done, and attempting when we
were alone to learn from her what progress Fredrick had made toward the
gaining her affections; I was not dissatisfied to understand neither the one
nor the other wished a Consummation of their Marriage, though neither durst
oppose the resolution of those that had an absolute Command over them: this
discovery served but to kindle that into a flame, which before burnt secretly
with a glowing fervor in my breast; I allowed Frederick altogether worthy of
me, and was willing to guess from her discourse that he had used more than a
common Respect in those occasions where my name had been mentioned between
them, nor could I avoid being so partial to my self, as to believe I had many
advantages besides that of my Birth over Roselinda, which might not have been
looked on with indifference by her intended Bridegroom. While I continued under
this hidden oppression, without the least appearance of hope to find a remedy,
and strove in vain to expel the thoughts of that bewitching man from my heart,
the Day appeared which was to be the eye of his Wedding, when I perceived
Roselinda grown more pensive than ever, as if she feared the approach of that
hour I imagined would have been fatal only to me; and being earnest (if
possible) to discover the cause of it, I took her apart with me into my Closet,
and conjured her by the Love and Respect she had always expressed to me, that the
Secret of her grief might be entrusted to one vowed her all the friendship and
kindness her condition was capable of receiving. My entreaties were so
prevalent that at last she confessed, (with a shower of tears,) the love of
Astolfo (whom you knew) made her rather wish for death than an eternal loss of
one so dear to her, and of whose affection she wanted no assurance; she let me
know the circumstances of her Passion with so much grief and tenderness, that
had I been less concerned then I was to prevent what she so much feared, I
should not have been able to deny her all the assistance possible in prolonging
her Marriage with Frederick, but when in vain we had consulted all ways that
had the least appearance of proving successful in doing it, she declared her
resolution of flying from her Father, and Country with Astolfo, rather than
infringe the Vows she had made him, and be sacrificed to one she could never
love; we both concluded no remedy could be expected any other way, although the
dangers and difficulties of that were too great to be hastily resolved on; and
though I cannot deny but I wished it, yet I could never bring my self to
encourage their being exposed either to the ill consequences of such a
voluntary Banishment, or the rage of a Prince and Father who would be equally
cruel in the punishment of them, should they ever again fall into his hands;
and at last my Compassion wrought so far upon me, that I persuaded her to a
resolution, (with anxiety enough,) that was to make us both miserable; to
submit to that of our Fathers, letting her know withal that if she was given
from one she so entirely loved, she at the same time robbed me of a man, that
were I at my own dispose, I should not think unworthy of my favor. She expressed
great acknowledgements for the confidence I had reposed in her, and left me
with a seeming resolution of submitting to the council I had given her of
Obedience, and I remained all that day overwhelmed with the disquiet so unhappy
a Resolve had thrown me into, without suffering my self to be seen by any body.
That evening a while after it was dark, I was acquainted that Roselinda with a
Kinswoman of hers, and stranger to the Court, begged admittance to me; with a
desire of acquainting me in private with something that very nearly concerned
me as much as her self. I wondered a little what should occasion so unexpected a
Visit from her, but more at the mention of that stranger was in her company,
and ordering them to be brought into my Closet, you will believe I was
strangely surprised to discover, notwithstanding the disguise, that Frederick
was the pretended relation she brought with her. So extraordinary a presumption
raised a disturbance in me, which she easily discovered by the frowns I
welcomed her and her audacious guess with, who immediately threw himself at my
feet, with all the languishing gestures of a violent Passion, but durst not
speak a word in his own Excuse, of a good while, his Conductor as much silenced
through the fear of having highly offended me. During his continuance in that
posture, a violent Combat between Love and Respect, had disordered all the
faculties of my soul; and had I given way to the first dictates of my
Resentment, I had called for guards to seize him, and delivered him up a prey
to the utmost rigor of my Father, who was but too nice in such circumstances
of honor, which his rudeness had violated. But when I began to yield to more
tender thoughts, I found it impossible for me to think of indangering the life
of one Heaven had decreed I must ever Love; and withal, induced by a Curiosity
not unnatural to our Sex, I was willing to understand the design of his
appearing before me in such a Dress, especially being brought in by one I
believed was the next morning to be his Wife. While my heart was agitated with
these considerations, still suspensive whether I should declare in favor of
one I loved, or condemn his presumption with an immediate banishment for ever
from my sight, he remained kneeling at my feet, not daring to speak a word,
until upon my making a sign to him to quit the posture he was in, not without
a violent compulsion of himself he said trembling; I acknowledge Divinest
Princess, my offense has justly merited death, and I am ready at your Command
to resign that life must not be worth preserving if you sentence it to a
dissolution. Whatever difficulty he found in uttering these words, mine would
have proved much greater in returning an answer, had not Roselinda prevented my
doing of it, who undertaking to say something for both their vindications,
after having a thousand times begged my forgiveness of a crime necessity had
compelled her to the commission of, finding I seemed attentive to what she was
about to speak, acquainted me that after her leaving the Palace in the morning,
not being able to resolve on what she had seemingly promised, and Astolfo
finding means to give her a private Visit, overcome by her Lovers tears and
persuasions, she had determined rather to give her life an Oblation to her
Fathers displeasure, than her hand to any one but him that had the engagement
both of that and her heart. In the mean time Frederick having resolutions not
much different from hers, sought to obtain a private conference with her, whose
admittance met with little obstruction in the family, as knowing him to be very
suddenly her Husband; and her own Maid ignorant of Astolpho's being there,
waited on him to her Chamber; where they were all sufficiently amazed at so
unexpected an Encounter of each other: And that finding it would be too
dangerous for her to conceal her thoughts any longer, she confessed to
Frederick the person he beheld there, was one to whom she afforded too great
proofs of her affection, ever to let it be bestowed upon any other; and that he
appeared so far from being displeased with her frank declaration in favor of
his Rival, that after a long obliging discourse, he offered to contribute what
lay in his power, toward the prevention of two Lovers being ruined, who were
determined rather to dye than admit of a separation. That at last not being
able to imagine any possibility of avoiding a forced marriage, if they
continued in Mantua, Astolfo had prevailed so far with her, as she consented to
fly with him both from her Friends and Country; but would not stir without my
allowance of it, and 'till she had taken a long farewell of me; that her Lover
being gone to provide Horses, and what else was necessary for their flight;
Frederick remaining alone with her had owned, that the Adoration he had for me
occasioned the indifference toward her, which appeared in his carriage from
the first mention of the Dukes intention to make her his Wife. And whether she
imagined in her self after that discovery I had made her of my Love, that it
might not be very displeasing to me, if I could discourse with him unobserved
by any Witnesses; or overcome, (as she endeavored to pretend) by the earnest
persuasions of that passionate man, she dressed him in some of her own Clothes,
(his youth and the comeliness of his person contributing to help the disguise,)
and brought him, untaken notice of by any, to accompany her to my Appartment.
It were needless for me to repeat the particulars of our Discourse, which
perhaps were but too tender on my side; therefore let it suffice that you know
Frederick having learned from her, as she owned, that he was not indifferent to
me; made so good Use of his discovery, and expressed his own Passion with so
endearing a tenderness, that I was induced to forgive Roselinda the betraying
of my thoughts, and granted permission to that Insinuating Lover, once more in
the like disguise to see me; after the disturbance was over, which we very well
knew Roselindaes departure would make in the Court. So taking my last farewell
of her, not without Tears at so fatal a departure, and my hearty Prayers for
her success; while I retired to consider what had past, and recollect my self
after so strange and bold an Adventure, they went back to her Fathers, that he
might change his dress for one more suitable for him. Where, as he informed me
afterward, having put on his own Clothes, and hearing the Count was returned
from the Court, he made him a Visit, as if newly come into the House for that
purpose only, and to wait on his intended Bride. The good Old man receiving him
with the welcome of a fond Father, sent for Roselinda to entertain him, and was
sufficiently rejoiced to find such an alteration in his Daughters Countenance,
as appearing more pleasant than he had observed her since the first proposal of
their Marriage. After a convenient stay Frederick took his leave, and the fond
Old Man retiring to Bed, Roselinda withdrew, to prepare for her intended
Journey. The next morning was attended with a Disorder not at all less than we
had imagined, when those who entered the Brides Chamber to dress her for her
Nuptials, found her missing, without any account to be learnt what was become
of her, more, than that Astolfo, long suspected as her Lover, was supposed to
have conveyed her away, having been seen on Horseback the night before about
Theophilus's House: Posts were dispatched forthwith to all parts, and an
Embargo laid on the Ships and Vessels in every Port within the Dukes
Territories: with large promises of Reward to whoever should discover them, and
Death threatened to the concealers of the Fugitives. But their utmost Endeavors
proved wholly unsuccessful, and those poor persecuted Lovers were never heard
of to this day; which gives me too much cause of fear that they came to some
unhappy end, since both her Father and mine (their only Enemies,) have been
long dead. I must confess I could not but be pleased to understand how every
considerable person about the Court came, as much to condole with Frederick for
the loss of his Mistress, as with Count Theophilus for that of an only
Daughter. The disappointed Bridegroom dissembling with so much cunning his
satisfaction, that there was none but concluded the Ravisher, (for so Astolfo
was termed,) would meet a rigorous destiny from his hands, if he ever fortuned
to be discovered. If this accident transported my Father to the height of rage
against Roselinda and her Lover, it contributed to settle Frederick more in his
favor than ever, using all the endearments imaginable to make him forget his
Loss, with assurance he would lose no occasion of gaining a Wife for him, more
rich and beautiful than her had been stole from him; little suspecting he had
not been deficient in doing that for himself. When all things began to be a
little quieted, Fredericks disturbance commenced in seeking ways how he might
privately see me, without being too much observed; His former disguise was
shelter enough from being known to any body; but who to pretend himself, was a
difficulty long a resolving, and two months past without his attainment of what
he so much longed for; till in the end, grown impatient of delay, he found out
Roselinda's Maid, who had been privy to her escape, and with large Gifts and
Promises believed he had secured her to be faithful both in assisting him, and
concealing his design. She, by his direction visiting one of my Women who had
not been long at Court, and scarce knew any body, told her a young Lady newly
arrived at Mantua in her way to Rome, was very ambitious of kissing my hand,
but desired it might be when I was most private, urging it for her Modesty, and
that being on a journey she was unprovided of those Ornaments a public
Appearance required. The Innocent Woman having promised to comply with the
Strangers request, came to beg my permission to introduce her, when I should be
alone. The sudden apprehension I had that Frederick was the Visitant, put me
into some disorder, considering the danger so rash a Venture exposed us both
to; but partly of my self inclinable to hear the renewed Vows of that sincere
Lover, and not willing to deny him a Favor he had my Promise of permitting,
assured by those silent expressions he made me understand in public, that the
delay his Visit had met with was no small Torment to him; I gave permission,
that in the Evening she should bring the Stranger Lady to me; which she did
without the least suspicion of his being other than what was pretended; while
one or two of my Women waited at some distance in the Room, I only discoursed
my passionate Counterfeit about her Country, and the design of her Travel; who
readily pretended a life not without some extraordinary adventures, but such as
though she would not deny me the knowledge of, yet were of that consequence as
not to be imparted to any one else. Whereupon willing to remove the restraint
he was in, I retired to my Closet with a seeming design to learn her Story. Ah
Nise! when he found himself at liberty to speak; had you beheld his joyfully
transported carriage, and heard those endearing supplications he made kneeling
at my Feet, you would have allowed his Love too sincere and tender, to be
rejected by one less partial than mine had made me, in what concerned that
Gallant man. I must confess the declaration of his Love this second time was
with that cautious respect and winning endearment, as made it impossible for me
to keep him longer ignorant of the Place he had in my Affection. I am sensible
the World would have condemned me for so hasty an owning my Inclination, though
it had approved him worthy of me: but alas, my restraint was such, that I could
never promise him nor my self a possibility of seeing him (where I might speak)
again, without the hazard of both our safeties. It would be needless to repeat
all he said to me in this Visit; and as to my self let it suffice I tell you,
his Conquest over me was such, that he took his Leave with an Assurance from me
that I would never yield my self a Wife to any but Frederick, though that could
not possibly be hoped while my Father lived. He was very desirous of seeing me
once more, in the same disguise, but there appeared so many dangerous
inconveniences in it, that we could not resolve when or how he might hope the
Fortune of another such Meeting. After this a Month past in which he only could
behold me in public while my Father was present, none presuming to come near
my Apartment but those my Father was pleased to bring with him when he came to
me, where Frederick was very Assiduous to let his Eyes and Looks acquaint me
with what his Tongue durst not mention. But both growing Impatient of brooking
such a constrained reservedness, without the opportunity of sometimes a more
free Converse, I took an occasion to let him know I would be the following
Evening in this Island, whither if he could privately convey himself, he should
meet me unattended in one of the Close Walks: you may be sure he was punctual
to the Assignment, and in this very Arbor it was we took an Eternal Farewell of
each other. While we were here he told me of Roselinda's Maids death, not
without suspicion of Poison, (the only person that knew he pretended to be
favored by me) but then we were apt to imagine it the effect of Theophilus's
Revenge, who might suspect her privy to the Escape of his Daughter; but that
miserable Wretch received her death as a reward of her Treachery to us. We had
not been here half an hour, when interrupted by more than an usual Noise, I
went out to one of the Walks from whence I could see the River, where I was
sufficiently affrighted to perceive my Father landing from his Barge at the
Garden-stairs. His coming was a thing so unusual, that fearing something
dangerous to us, I hasted to warn Frederick of concealing himself, while, in no
little Disorder, I past through the Walks to meet my Father as far as I could
from that part of the Garden; as soon as I came near him, methought there
appeared a seriousness in his Looks more than at other times, but concluding my
own fear raised that Imagination, I walked with him, endeavoring to behave my
self with as much unconcern'dness as my Fears would let me, which increased to
perceive his Curiosity carry him through every Walk in the Island, holding me
still by the Hand, without so much as speaking one Word; when he had taken a
full Survey of the Garden, he returned carrying me with him to the Palace,
where he assumed again his wonted Temper, and I thought all things had been as
secure as could be wished. But Oh Heavens! what was my Condition! what was my
Grief and Despair the next Morning! when being about to rise, one of my Women
told me, as a misfortune all were troubled at, that Frederick was the Night
before murdered, going from the Palace to his Lodgings; and that the Guard had
seen his body thrown into the River, not knowing who it was, 'till going to
seize the Quarrellers, who all made their escape, they found a Sword which was
known to be his, but himself could no where be heard of. I was immediately like
one Thunderstruck, and remained in my Bed with more appearance of having
followed him to Eternity, than of any Life remaining in me. All my Women being
sensibly afflicted at my Concern, began to blame her had so imprudently told me
what had occasioned it, concluding my Surprise and the Tenderness of my Nature
the sole cause of that grief I had expressed for the lamentable death of one my
Father so much valued; and coming a little to my self, I strove so far with my
Sorrows to confirm them in their belief, that not one of them surmized any
thing of the truth; and telling them I would not rise till my disturbance was a
little removed, they left me alone, to renew that Grief I could not have
suppressed much longer. It would be too tedious for me to relate all that my
Despair and Torment for his Loss made me utter. A thousand times I wished my
self his Companion in Death; But what gave me the most sensible distraction
was, through whose hatred he should have been so barbarously destroyed. He was
generally beloved by all that knew him, neither could I imagine, had my Father
been acquainted with his Love, he would have been so rigorous to a man he
himself esteemed above all others. But I will only let thee know, my sorrow
grew so violent by striving to suppress it, that it was attended with a Fever
which confined me some weeks to my Bed; during which, my Fathers Grief was in
appearance little inferior to that I languished under, seeming to use his
utmost endeavors to discover the Murderers. Nor was his Concern less for my
Indisposition, not owning that he was at all acquainted with the Cause of it.
About five months were past before I began to appear abroad, when I was afresh
assaulted by a fit of sickness which had seized on my Father, and which proved
in the end fatal to him. During near a month that he lay ill, I continually
attended at his Bedside, and discovered by his frequent expressions, though
darkly uttered, that an inward Disquiet of mind hindered any good effects which
Medicines might work toward the removing his distemper; and at last when he
found his death near approaching, commanding all to quit the Room but my self,
taking and pressing my hand, while a flood of Tears issued from his weak eyes:
Ah my Diana! (said he) with what comfort might I now have died, had not the
misery I am loaded with been procured by my own precipitated rage. Thou know
how much I prized the unfortunate Frederick and perhaps in time might not have
thought him unfit to be thy Husband. But oh dire discovery; Theophilus
examining his Daughters Maid about her flight, using both Promises and Threats,
extorted a confession from her, that you and Frederick were both privy to it;
and bringing her privately to me, I learnt, with sorrow, the Conferences that
unhappy man had with you in disguise, which was aggravated with such undoubted
circumstances, that I had no reason to doubt the truth of what she related; but
resolving to be thoroughly satisfied before I executed that rigor I thought to a
sin of so high a Nature, was due; I employed Theophilus to observe both your
actions; who, I must tell you, though I had forgiven the Maids Offense in
assisting Frederick to get to you, He would not that of aiding his Daughter in
her running away, but by a lingering Poison sent her to another world; and to be
revenged of the injury he was sensible Frederick had done him, continually
incited me to punish his insolence of pretending to your Love by such
clandestine ways as he had made use of; so that at last yielding to his
persuasions, being overcome by too nice a sense of Honor, I resolved, if I
ever discovered him to be again with you, that his Life should answer the
presumption; and that diligent man hearing of his going alone to the Island,
incited me to follow and take him there with you; which though I mist of
effecting, upon certain advice that he had m^t with you there, I was so
exasperated, that (though I dissembled my anger) resolutions of ruining him
began to possess my mind, and sending for Theophilus he so confirmed me in the
displeasure I had conceived against him, that I gave him leave to use him as an
enemy to his Prince, and assaulter of his honor. What followed (said he
weeping) thou too well know, and from the hour of his death I never received
one of consolation, wishing the Sword that pierced his Breast had been levelled
at my own; nor could I ever brook the sight of Theophilus after that fatal
night; which joined to the loss of his Daughter, and a sense of Guilt for the
innocent blood he had shed, struck him into so deep a Melancholy, that he
outlived my Dear Frederick but a few Weeks. Here he ended his Discourse,
accompanying that renewed Grief I was possessed with, at the knowledge of my
Fathers being the Murderer (as I looked on him) of the best man had ever lived.
But if his remembrance made me behold my Father with a growing displeasure, the
weakness of his Condition, and the real penitence he showed for what had been
allowed by him to be committed, made me turn all my Anger to a Lamentation,
becoming a dutiful Child to a dying Parent: he continued two days after he had
given me this account of Fredericks death, and then resigned his Soul to
Heaven, and his Dukedom to her who has enjoyed small satisfaction from that
Dignity since deprived of what would have been a happiness much more
considerable.

The afflicted Duchess making this sad end of her Narration, perceived by the
Tears of her beloved Nise that she had as equal a share in her Misfortunes as
if they had been the circumstances of her own Life. But if the compassionate
Nise accompanied the Conclusion of her Ladys History with the greatest
expressions of a real Grief for her Misfortunes: the fair afflicted Duchess
could not resist an unbounded Sorrow, at the remembrance of those disasters
seemed to deny any future comfort to her Life. They continued a great while
without disturbing one another in their pitiful Lamentations; and doubtless the
whole day had been spent by the sorrowful Diana in that sad Contemplation, if
her Favorite, recollecting her self, had not considered how late it was, and
how much Company attended the Dutchesses return to her Palace; and withal to
divert her thoughts from what she believed the remembrance of was so
prejudicial to her: She at last with much entreaty persuaded her to go back
from the Garden, endeavoring to conceal, as much as possible, the disorder she
was in, from all Beholders. At her arrival there, those Princes, who, attracted
by her Beauty and the greatness of her Fortune, resided at her Court, in hopes
that a happy Possessor of both, would be chose from among them; came to welcome
her Return from a place they wished she would take less pleasure in, since she
had required their desisting from following her thither at any time. Her
obliging goodness was not wanting in expressing a complaisance to them equal to
their quality; though none could promise himself any advancement in his Love
from one who desired to appear very averse from an intention of altering her
condition: and while they studied to outvy one another in Grandeur and State,
each striving to make himself more remarkable than the rest of his Rivals; the
sorrowful Duchess bestowed all the Leisure, business of her Government would
allow, on the cruel remembrance of her unhappy Lover, who though she knew long
since dead, had a share in her Breast much beyond what any Living One could
obtain.

The Messenger that was sent by the Duchess, to learn a more particular
account of Alexanders Massacre than what the Countryman had related, being
returned just as the Duchess was retiring from those Crowds had filled her
Palace upon her dining with the Princes in public, which sometimes she knew
not how to excuse, when requested by them; gave her an account of Alexanders
Cruelty, little different from what she had heard before; whose barbarous
severity so much incensed her, that she was about to give immediate Order to
have him committed to a public Execution, as his wickedness had in all
appearance justly deserved. But Cesario, his faithful Friend, being newly come
from the Prison where he was confined, and at the same time She was going to
pronounce Sentence; throwing himself at her Feet, he humbly besought her to
respite his Doom till she heard what his Inducements were to commit that Fact
he was to suffer for. But although he made Use of all the Arguments a generous
Friendship could store him with, they were not prevalent enough to obtain the
deferring that justice the Princess thought was not fit to be delaid, where the
guilt appeared so notorious; until the Stranger Princes joined their
intercession, withal urging, that his Punishment a while suspended would
satisfy her better than to wish it undone, if he should prove an object fitter
for Her Mercy than the Laws Rigor; which Cesario affirmed to be most certain.
So that at last her Compassion prevailing above her Severe Justice, she
returned with the Princes, and being seated with them on her sides, Cesario by
her command related the particulars of Alexanders Life, to that fatal Accident
had exposed it to so eminent danger.

The History of Alexander and Cynthia.
MAdam, what I shall acquaint your Highness with of that Unfortunate man is now
a Delinquent to your Laws, will, I question not, make him appear to you more
Unhappy than Wicked; especially if you will please to allow that one Nobly Born
ought not to be without a sense of Honor, and endeavor the Vindication of it,
when assaulted in the highest nature; but that you may be more fully informed
of it, and the real Worth of him I plead for, your Highness must give me
permission to begin with the first passages of his Life, and I believe you will
find something diverting and extraordinary in the Relation I shall make.

There are few can boast more advantages from a good Education than he is
Master of, in which his Father took all imaginable care to have his Endowments
equal to the considerable Rank his Birth had placed him in. After a convenient
time employed at home in those Studies were fit for him, he was sent abroad to
learn those Accomplishments the Theory alone is to be had from Books; but after
a few years employed in Travel, the Death of his Father called him Home, to the
possession of a large Inheritance; where his obliging carriage soon procured
the commendation of all the City, every one striving to be reckoned in the
number of his Friends; but an unexpected accident quickly after his return,
removed that tranquillity he had till then been attended with. A Formal young
Gallant of the City, very well attended, by chance passing through a Principal
Street, met Alexander at that time alone, who diverted by the sight of a Lady
looking from a Window, took not so much notice of the Complement that Gentleman
made him of his Hat in going by, as to return the like Civility; which being
looked on as a slighting rudeness, made the Gentleman turn back and give him
some upbraiding Language, which Alexander confident he had not deserved,
returned him such sharp Replies, that from words they came to make Use of their
Swords, whereby Alexander, being fallen upon by all that accompanied his
Opponent, received several wounds before the Company in the Street could get in
to part them; but at last a Crowd getting together, his Enemies shiftted for
themselves, while he not able to go far, slipped into the Porch of an adjacent
House, and so to the Yard, before those that were come in to separate them, had
laid hold of him. As he stood there looking about whither to go for some help,
finding his strength begin to fail by the loss of his blood, he perceived the
door of a Hall open, and leaning on his Sword went toward it, to get some of
the House to call a Surgeon to him; but he was scarce entered, when through
weakness and pain, he fell down in a Swoon. There happened to sit in the Hall a
young Lady, who shrieking at the sight of a man entering with a naked Sword, and
all over bloody, brought in the Servants, whose coming was very opportune for
the wounded stranger; soon after the Master of the House, and Father of the
young Lady, being advertised of what had happened, came down, and seeing the
condition he was in, Ordered him to be laid in a Bed, and sending for
Surgeons, with much pains they brought him to himself, when searching his
wounds, they judged his greatest danger was the loss of so much blood; however
he would have been carried home, but that the Surgeons said it might
endanger his life, and Octavio generously declared, he should not leave his
House, till he saw him in a better condition, since Providence had been pleased
to direct him thither. And his Care and Kindness, with his Surgeons
diligence, within few days raised him from his Bed, so that he resolved with
great acknowledgements to Octavio, to return again to his own House, for the
perfecting his Cure. But Octavio on the other side, persisted in his Noble
humor of not letting him stir till he was perfectly well, so that he was
compelled to stay longer than he desired at that time, being withal not a
little solicitous to hear what was become of his Adversary, whom he resolved to
call to a severe account for his baseness, as soon as his strength would
permit. One morning as he was busying himself with such Thoughts, his
Meditations were interrupted by a Charming Voice he heard at some distance,
accompanied by the sound of a Lute, played on by no mean Artist. His Curiosity
presently made him desire to learn who it was had given him so pleasing a
diversion. And leaving his own Chamber, he past through a large Gallery, at the
end of which he heard the delightful Music, as he guessed, from a Room that
opened to the place where he was; the Voice he knew to be a Woman's; and
imagined, as it really was, That Porcia, Octavio's Daughter, had ignorantly
given him that delightful entertainment; and being earnest, if possible, to
have a sight of the Person had drawn him thither, he went softly to the door,
which he saw was shut; and looking through the Keyhole, beheld a young Lady,
whose beauty he thought much transcended all that ever he had seen of Lovely
before, which was increased by the negligent posture he beheld her in, drying
some tears seemed to force a passage from her Languishing eyes. He had not long
contemplated on this lovely Object when seeing a Maid come in to her, whom he
knew to be the same assisted often near him during his sickness, and fearing
either to be heard, or that the door where he stood should be opened; the
caution of avoiding any thing might look like rudeness in a House where he was
so much Respected, made him retire back to his own Chamber, though not without
using a little compulsion to himself, in leaving a place he could have wished a
longer continuance in. After he had sometime contemplated on the Charms of that
fair Lady he had so unexpectedly seen, and who he was confident must be Porcia,
his Friends Daughter. Octavio came in to Visit and Accompany him at his Dinner,
it being about that time of the day; at the end of which, Phillis, (the same
who used to come to him, and her he had not long before seen in the Ladys
Chamber) came in, and presented him a Basket of curious Flowers, desiring he
would accept and value them as the first Fruits of the Spring in her Masters
Garden. He received the gift at first as a Complement of the Maids, for which
he thought the Return of a more considerable present would be expected, which
he could not then perform, Octavio being with him; but setting the Basket on a
Table, and thanking the Maids kindness, he continued to entertain Octavio,
being then less solicitous to leave him than before, which was not displeasing
to the good old Gentleman, who after a convenient time from Dinner, leaving
Alexander to repose himself he went to do the like in his own Chamber; as soon
as he was gone Alexander looking by chance on the Flowers, found them placed in
the Basket with so much Curiosity, as required him to look more attentively on
them, when he was surprised to find in a mixture of Gilliflowers and Jessamine
a Composition of these Words, It is enough to the Discreet. Although he
concluded it came from Porcia, both by the person that brought it, and having
seen in her Chamber, Flowers scattered on the Floor; yet he could not resolve
to believe himself so fortunate, to look on it as a Favor designed him, or an
encouragement to that Love he found began to take possession of his Breast;
However, willing to discover what the meaning might be, he resolved to return
an answer the same way; so that taking out all the Flowers, he put in the
bottom of the Basket a Letter filled with all the passionate Expressions a
growing Love could dictate to him, and laying the Flowers on the top in the
same order he received them, only altering the words; and that Evening Phillis
coming into his Chamber, after engaging her his by a considerable Present, he
prevailed with her to carry the Basket to her young Lady, who she confessed had
sent it to him: which she immediately did, and delivering it to Porcia she read
her own words varied to these, The Flowers conceal it; and meeting under them
with his Letter, she found his declaration of Love discovered with the greatest
respect and most aggravated endearment imaginable; which was not displeasing to
her, when Phillis assured her it might be believed real, giving her an account
of what she learnt from Alexander, of his having both seen and heard her at the
Gallery door. Whether it was Porcia's restraint made her more ready to receive
an impression of Love, or whether her own disposition was easily susceptible of
that passion; but as Alexander learnt afterward from her Maid, the Declaration
of his Love made an entire Conquest over that too-easie woman, who after having
several times read his Letter, said to her Confident, Phillis, Ah Heavens! what
Guess did my misfortunes bring into my Fathers House! Ah what Charms have thou
returned me under those guilty Flowers! Ah Phillis, Alexander has conquered my
Soul; I would fain be angry with my self for thinking on him, and with Him for
owning that he loves me; but he has done it with so winning and so respectful a
grace, that I must forgive him; Ay, to my perpetual Torment I must do more, I
must love that bewitching man: and I cannot avoid conjuring thee by all the
kindness thou have for me, to find out some means for him to speak with me
before he leaves our House. Her Maid promised her obedience to that difficult
Command, though ignorant how to bring it to pass by reason of Octavio's
cautious jealousy, who was a continual Sentinel over his Daughters actions;
but at last it was resolved, to bring him one Night to Porcia's Chamber when
the old Gentleman was a-bed, but the very day before, whether he had taken
notice of the Maids too often being with Alexander, or whether he thought him
now well enough to remove, he came to him, and told him a Chair was ready to
carry him home, and that he must consent to that reconcilement he was newly
come from concluding with his Enemy; the surprised Lover knowing not how
possibly to refuse either, was forced to go that afternoon from the House he
then heartily wished a longer residence in, but not able to find out any
tolerable Excuse, he obeyed Octavio's pleasure with all the acknowledgements
could be expressed for the great Favors and Kindness he had received from him,
and took his leave, disappointing both Porcia and himself of a meeting would
have been agreeable enough to them. Alexander remained some days after his
removal from Octavio's with the satisfaction of knowing now and then by a
Letter, his Affection was so far from being displeasing to her he had placed it
on, that she delighted in nothing more than the Conquest she believed she had
made over him, and he has confess't to me that he wished then for nothing more
than the full possession of her, which he had almost fixed his resolution of
demanding from her Father, not doubting of being approved by him for a
Son-in-Law. But fortune had otherwise decreed to dispose of him, though not
without the blemish of inconstancy. About that time Carlos returned from a long
Travel, to settle with a Family in Mantua, called thither by the same occasion
had brought Alexander some time before, upon the death of a Father. They
having, when abroad, traveled several journeys of pleasure together, where so
firm a friendship was contracted between them, that it was now an equal joy to
both, that in a more settled condition they should enjoy one another agreeable
Conversation. At no time could one be seen without the other, and Carlos was
always to be found in Alexanders House, or Alexander at that of Carlos, at
least that part of it he reserved for his own Apartment, there being some Rooms
he gave admittance to none into, where his fair Sister Cynthia was, by his
severe nicety, kept almost from the conversation of humane kind, not allowing
her to frequent so much as any place of Devotion, further than a little Oratory
within the House, where from behind a Gilded Lettice she heard a Priest, by
her Brothers order, assisting as a Chaplain to her; yet, whether such a
Restraint was natural to her, or that she would not oppose in any thing the
pleasure of Carlos, whom she esteemed a Parent as well as a Brother, her hours
met with Diversions among her Maids, which hindered them from being tedious to
her, while Carlos and Alexander employed theirs in those Gallantries were
suitable to their age, especially Alexanders consisted in the favorable
opportunity he had procured, by Phillis's contrivance, of Discoursing every
Evening with his Beloved Porcia, Carlos seldom leaving him alone in the night
exposed to those Dangers often attend Intrigues of that Nature; and he was at
last arrived to so full a satisfaction through the winning carriage of his
Mistress, that he determined out of hand to complete both their happinesses by
demanding Octavio's permission for the Consummation of their Marriage; But
having imparted the design to Carlos, whether upon any other ground, or only
not to be robbed of a Friend by seeing him retired to the Conversation of a
Wife, he endeavored to make him suspend the too hasty pursuit of what he was
then so earnest for. One day as the two Friends were walking in a Gallery of
Carlos, House, discoursing about Alexanders Concern, he cast his Eyes about the
Walls to take a Survey of several curious pieces of Limning Carlos had brought
with him from Rome, among which; he observed one Young Lady so beautiful, that
at the first glance he rather attributed such perfections as appeared Painted
there, to the goodness of the Workmans fancy, than a possibility that Nature
had, or could ever form an Original equal to it; but asking Carlos if there had
ever lived any thing like it, he told him it was a lively Copy of a Lady called
Laura, who was the object of his first Love in Rome. Such Beauty (replied
Alexander) might rather become the Adoration of a Divinity, than any one that
were Mortal, and I could almost accuse my Friend of Blasphemy if I thought he
had ever presumed to acquaint her with his Love, at least in any other terms
than such as your Prayers are offered up to Heaven. Carlos smiled at his sudden
Transport, telling him she was Mortal, and a Woman, and by consequence liable
to take the Impression of Love, and to be overcome; but finding him to persist
in an Extravagant admiration only of a Picture, he persuaded him into another
Room to forget what he had seen; but from that time Alexanders thoughts were so
wholly employed in contemplation of the Lovely Picture, that he was scarce ever
out of Carlos's House, or the Gallery, where the two Friends being together one
Afternoon, Alfredo, a near Relation of Porcia's came to visit them, his chief
Design being to engage Alexanders Mediation with Carlos, that he would bestow
his Sister Cynthia on him for a Wife, he having taken a deep Impression of
Love, from a sight of her in her return with her Brother, not long before, to
Mantua. Alexander would willingly have obliged Alfredo for his Couzens sake,
but knowing well the reserved temper of Carlos, he could not promise him any
hopes of Success; for although the Friendship between them was very great,
Carlos had never given him a sight of his Sister, or so much as mentioned her
being in the House; however, he satisfied the Lover of Cynthia at present, by
assuring him to employ all his Interest with her Brother to make him happy. But
Alexander himself in the mean time had resigned all his Tranquillity to the
imagined Beauty of Laura, not only owning it to his Friend, but with
Protestations, that if their Friendship did not withold him, he would
immediately visit Rome in search of this Lovely Creature, begging Carlos with
the greatest earnestness possible, to give him an historical account of his
Love, and the progression he had made with her. Carlos found himself at a loss
what to say; but at last, a little to gratify his perseverance to know
something, he told him in general, that he had not been hated by her, that he
had often found opportunities of seeing and Discoursing with her, but before he
could persuade her to a Resolution of making him happy, the death of his Father
had called him from Rome and the Person he loved; withal persuading Alexander
to mention her no more to him, lest it should incite those Thoughts he would
unwillingly harbor against a Friend; Alexander promised he would not, striving
to put it off with a jest, that what he had said was only to try the Constancy
of his Friends Love; and Carlos smiling, seemed to believe he had no other
design in it. So falling from that to other Discourse, Alexander spoke to him
in behalf of Alfredo for his Sister; but Carlos answered to that Demand, that
although he was well satisfied both of the Quality and Fortune of Alfredo, yet
he would Impose no Husband upon his Sister, but one she should her self approve
first, and that hearing Alfredo was then going a journey to Loretto, by the
time of his return he would know his Sisters sense, and accordingly answer his
Demand. This Journey of Alfredo's was to accompany his Uncle Octavio, and
Porcia, who went thither in performance of a Vow Octavio had made, while
Languishing under a Violent Distemper he had some time been recovered of. The
Night before their Departure Alexander took his leave of Porcia at the Window
they used to meet at, with a real sorrow on her part to be absented from him,
and a well expressed one on his, if the remembrance of Laura's Picture would
allow it to be sincere. But when she had been a few days absent, neither the
consideration of displeasing Carlos, nor the unaccountableness of this new
Passion, could deter him from resigning all his Fredom to the well-drawn Charms
of Laura's Picture, watching all Opportunities of being in the Gallery to
meditate on the Perfections appeared in that excellent Piece. One day, as he
was retired to his Contemplation, a Servant brought him word that a Woman close
Veiled desired to speak with him, who by his Command being brought up,
delivered a note into his hand, and told him she must wait his Answer to it;
breaking off the Seal he found it contained a summons from an unknown Lady, to
be directed by the Servant brought it to him, to a Window, at eight at Night,
where she desired a short Discourse with him. He obliged the Maid to stay where
she was, until the hour appointed, at which time going out, his concealed
Guide before, after having passed several Streets, she brought him to an Ally,
whose narrowness added to the obscurity of the Night, and leaving him under a
little Window opened into it from a large House, she took her Leave of him,
telling him she would let her Lady know that he attended her pleasure. He had
waited a short while after the Maids departure, when he perceived the Window
open, and heard one call softly to him. After his first Complements were over,
the person from the Window said: Had I not been convinced that the Generosity
of Alexander would not suffer him to disobey the assignation (...), I should
scarce have made this Trial of your obliging Disposition, but since the
repetition of many words ^s needless to one must beg of you what she hopes you
will not deny; the only inducement I can use to assure my self o^ your
compliance, is to let you know that your coming hither is to lay another
Obligation on Laura* besides that of having a respect more than ordinary for
her Picture, neither is it I alone am engaged to a favorable esteem for the
Gallant Alexander, but my Fair Friend and Companion Cynthia has set so great a
value on your Merits, that I doubt she is not far from an Inclination to the
worthy Master of them: and to acquaint you with the design of your being sent
for hither, it is both from her and my self, (if our Entreaties can prevail)
that you would be less Assiduous with Carlos in favor of your Friend Alfredo;
for be confident, Cynthia's thoughts are so far from approving his pretentions,
that if it be persisted in 'twill occasion that Difference between her and her
Brother, which she would most willingly avoid, and be troubled your
Intercession should occasion it; wherefore it lies upon you to deter Carlos
from allowing it any further progress, and reduce Alfredo to a resolution of
persisting no longer in a design will never prove successful. Alexander was so
surprised to hear the name of Laura, and transported with the imagination of
being so near her, that the pleasing disturbance it had put him in, would not
suffer a passage to his Words whereby he might form an Answer to what she had
required of him, more than with broken expressions to assure her he should
rejoice in that Obedience she required of him. So that giving her leisure to
recollect what she intended to a^quaint him with, she continued her Discourse,
saying: Now Generous Alexander, that I have obeyed the injun^^^o^ Cynthia laid
on me; believing you will admire to find me in her Company, and her Brothers
power, I must beg your patience to hear the occasion of it. Carlos has already
told you my Inclination had preferred him above all others, my Quality and the
place of my Birth you have learnt from him; but since his reservedness has kept
you ignorant of the occasion brought me to Mantua, and into his House, relying
on your secrecy, you shall be informed of the cause of it from Laura her self.
During the time of Carlos's abode in Rome, our Loves were grown reciprocal,
when he took that Journey with you, (soon after your first acquaintance) to
visit the most remarkable Places in Italy, leaving his Sister in a Convent she
had been bred in, until he should return; I heard afterward by him, that being
called home by the death of your Father, you took your Leave of one another in
Florence, he to come back to Rome, while you hasted to the City we are now in;
Carlos was come within a league of Rome without meeting any thing remarkable
after he left you, but then he saw coming toward him a Coach and six Horses,
driving with an unusual Speed, and before it came near him, turned out of the
High-Road, and stopped at a Wood-side, a convenient distance from it; believing
there was something extraordinary in what he had seen, his Curiosity made him
ride to the other side of the Grove, and quitting his Horse, he made a passage
through the Boughs till he came near the place where the Coach stood; from
whence he saw there had alighted two Gentlemen, who entering the Wood made a
stand in an open place very near that where the thickness of the Bushes had
concealed him, and heard one of them, with a disturbed tone, accost the other.
My Lord Albert, (said he) I have brought you hither to let you know you have
failed in that respect is due to our Friendship, since you could so much forget
my adoration was placed on that Lady, as to dare pursue the supplanting of it,
to advance your own. I confess my Lord Duke (replied the other) you was before
hand with me -- Laura was come thus far with her Discourse, when one coming
hastily to her from within, she started up, and only saying, farewell
Alexander, till to morrow this time, when I shall expect you in the same place,
She retired from the Window; and Alexander returned home strangely confused
within himself at so unthought of an adventure as he had met with. The joy of
having found a real Laura, quite banished from his thoughts the remembrance of
his once admirable Porcia, and if she did at any time possess them, he made
himself believe her Beauty had never made any firm Impression in his Mind, at
lest he allowed that Change excusable, he had not without some struggling
submitted to, and forced by a Beauty much preferrable to what he forsook;
confident she was not Mistress of less Charms than were given her by the
Painter, but rather would have allowed them excelling the Copy, if they should
appear equal to her Wit. He wished with a violent impatience the return of the
next Night, spending the remainder of that Night and the Day following in a
serious contemplation of his Unfortunate, yet in some Considerations Happy
Condition. What am I reduced to (would he say to himself) that I must either be
miserable by my own obstinacy, or offend in the highest nature the best of
Friends? shall I shun seeing her again, and learn to forget my captivity,
thereby confirming my constancy to Porcia, and fidelity to Carlos? No, no, it is
no longer in my Power, nor did I ever love till I beheld the resemblance of
Laura; I never had, nor can have a Passion but for her; Yet shall I betray my
Friend? yes, I must, I hope I have already supplanted him: nor can that be
termed a Treason which Merit occasions; alas! if I sought; how can my Tongue be
silent against the very impulse of my soul; I must rather perish fondly by
seeking Laura, than let Carlos owe me a silent fidelity. Carlos is guilty in so
far doubting my Loyalty to conceal her being here, but I will take him at his
word, let him be delighted with the remembrance of that Laura he left at Rome,
while I Triumph in the Love of Laura that is in Mantua. Fixed in this
resolution, he waited the following Evenings Approach with the impatience of
one that hopes a Blessing, which was no sooner come, but he made haste to the
appointed Window, and at the prefixed time found it opened by his Beloved Laura,
who told him he might now be secure from that Interruption had forced her the
night before to retire, which was the coming in of Carlos, who was now in Bed,
and Cynthia in her own Chamber asleep. Alexander beginning from her discourse
of Cynthia, took occasion highly to complain against the scrupulous humor of
Carlos, for being so reserved in concealing his Sister, that all the Friendship
between them had not made him deserve a sight of her: which restraint of his
has now engaged me in such a desire of procuring it (added he,) that though
only the gratifying my Curiosity is what I seek, yet unless you forbid it, it
shall be accomplished, if to the endangering a breach in our Friendship. To
assure you (answered Laura) I do not emulate the Merits of my Friend, you have
permission to endeavor what you mention, though on your part, the sight of so
many Charms may endanger the Constancy of the Firmest Lover; since there have
been in Rome and Mantua, those who allowed her worthy the greatest admiration:
Madam (replied the Amorous Alexander) although there were as commanding a power
in Cynthia's Beauty, as your Friendship affords it, that it is enough to see her
and be conquered; yet They must be reckoned free from that danger, who have
been blessed in seeing Laura, though but shadowed. I shall believe you resolute
(said she interrupting him) if you can behold her with indifference, whose Form
perhaps has been the particular care of Heaven in moulding; and before you
attempt seeing her, imagine you may encounter one much transcending whatever
you can imagine in Laura, who may be flattered too much in the Copy you have
seen: No, Fair Laura, (replied he) if you had not a sufficient assurance of
your own Charms, you would scarce have afforded those praises to your Friends,
which indifferent Beauties are shy of mentioning in another favor. Perhaps
(said she) it would not be displeasing to me, if Alexander were as much
captivated by Cynthia's Beauty, as he pretends to be by Laura's Picture. These
last words of Hers made him so doubtful what might be meant by them, that not
daring to attempt knowing more of her meaning, he changed his Discourse into a
desire that she would oblige him with the Conclusion of what she was the Night
before interrupted in. Which she seeming willing to do, being inminded by him
where she left off, continued, saying: After the Lords had retorted a few more
upbraiding Expressions on one another, they were both silent, to let their
Swords end the Dispute; the Duke only saying, since we both pretend our love to
be so great, that neither can relinquish his Hopes but with his Life, let the
survivor continue his, while the other's are buried with him. Carlos finding
himself so near, believed after he saw them both bleed, that he might without
wrong to eithers Honor, endeavor the conclusion of the Combat; and throwing
himself between them, not without much difficulty, he got them at such a
distance from each other, that he might have time to speak to them. Why, my
Lords (said he) should the Conquest of a Beauty cost the endangering two Lives
so Considerable? If the Ladies pleasure be still undecided, is it not more
conduceable to pretend in a way of Gallantry, whereby one may prove happy in
her Esteem, while the other will suffer little by the loss of a Lady whose
affections were not to be gained by him? I am satisfied replied Lord Albert
(who knew Carlos very well) to conform to the Proposition has been made, and
refer my Fortune to the Judgment of her I Adore, with promise to desist all
future pretenses, if rejected by her. The Duke at length was prevailed with, by
Carlos's Persuasions and Entreaties to do the like; so that having put a period
to their Dispute, they returned back to the Coach which waited at the outside
of the Wood, and took Carlos with them in it back to Rome. As they were in the
Coach together, the Duke gave Carlos an account of their Love, saying it was
placed on a Lady who was so nice and reserved, that neither of them had at any
time been happy in receiving a Smile from her, whereby their Passion might have
the encouragement of a bare hope, that they only had the equal satisfaction of
seeing her in the Church she usually resorted to, and both the day before
attempting to speak to her in her return, were prevented by one another, which
occasioned that quarrel he had found them engaged in; and telling them the
place of her Abode and Name, he was not a little disturbed in himself to hear
that it was I that had made them (though unknowingly) Enemies. That Evening
Carlos made me a visit, and after having with satisfaction enough to him,
welcomed his Return, he told me of the Adventure he had met with of the Duke
and Marquess upon my account; and in requital to him, withal to remove any
growing jealousy he might conceive, I acquainted him with the troublesome
assiduity they used to conquer me, each striving to outvy his Rival in Promises
equal to the greatness of their Quality, which I found in some Letters had been
clandestinely conveyed to me much against my will. Carlos not overpleased that
I should be exposed to the Courtship of two persons so eminent, and who had
resolved to pursue their wishes with the utmost diligence, persuaded me, since
I was without Parents, to be a Check to their Declaration of what would be very
prejudicial to my Credit, that I would leave the Aunt I lived with, and consent
to be a Companion of his Sister Cynthia's, and his Reasons I thought so
weighty, that without giving any account of the place I retired to, his Counsel
was followed by me; and in very few days after, Carlos resolving to return home
with his Sister, hearing of his Fathers death, our intimacy was grown so great,
that being too earnestly requested by her, I rather chose to visit Mantua than
lose her Company, thereby securing my self from two dangerous and potent
Pretenders against my Honor, for I could scarce believe either designed to
make a Wife of one whose Birth was so much inferior to their own; nor would I
ever venture abroad, during our stay in Rome, for fear of being discovered by
them, only once I was obliged to do it with Cynthia, when she went to take her
Leave at the Convent she had been bred up in from a Child, until her Brothers
coming took her from their Innocent Society; and then I narrowly mist being
known by my vigilant Searchers. But to keep you no longer in suspense, I shall
only tell you it is now three weeks since our arrival at Mantua, and hearing the
divertive company used to visit Carlos, Cynthia and I desiring privately to
hear how you men entertain one another, procured, under pretense of being lost,
a Master-Key belonging to Carlos, which would at any time give us entrance
where we might overhear your Discouse, which we did when you so undeservedly
applauded my Picture, and urged Carlos his bestowing Cynthia on your Friend
Alfredo, which she was so averse to, that wanting the confidence her self, she
prevailed with me in her name to entreat you would prevent her Brothers taking
any such resolution, which since you have promised, I will endeavor to bring
you where Cynthia her self shall return you the thanks are due to Alexanders
generosity; And after she had persuaded him to forget Laura for one more worthy
of his affection, she made him retire, with permission of visiting her another
Night. As Alexander was happy in the conversation of his adored Laura every
Evening; though he feared her too much engaged with his Friend, and that her
permitting him to discourse her was on Cynthia's account, he pleased himself
enough with being near her, though on any occasion, hoping in time, she might
be brought to approve that her self, she seemed then to pursue for another; and
every day his entertainment was in Carlos Chamber beholding her Picture. As he
was one Afternoon alone in it, he heard himself softly called, and turning
about could see no body, but at his Feet a Note; which at first he thought
fallen from himself, but opening it he perceived these Words,

-- Leoninda will expect you this Evening at the Garden-gate, and conduct you
to a Chamber in our Apartment, I have no time to add more. --

Alexander not doubting but the assignation was made by Laura, wished with
impatience for the times approach, more earnest to behold his Charming Laura,
than Carlos's Sister, whom he believed she designed to show him; and passing
the day with his Friend Carlos, as soon as ever it was dark, he went to the
Garden, where he found Leoninda ready to conduct him into the House, whither
being brought, she left him in a dark Room, while she went to give notice of
his being there: the Place was a good while silent, till at last hearing a Door
unlock, he advanced to meet his adored Laura; But how was he amazed to behold
entering, instead of her, Carlos, his injured Friend, with a Light in one Hand
and a drawn Sword in the other.

Just as Cesario was come to this part of his Relation, the Princess was
interrupted from farther Attention, by several Persons entering into the
Presence, in a manner something unusual; among which there was one, who by the
strangeness of his Dress appeared an African, who having been very earnest to
speak with the Duchess, was brought in by one of the Officers, upon his
pretense of having something extraordinary to communicate to her, which she
being acquainted with, commanded him, before Cesario proceeded in the story of
Alexander, to inform her what had urged him to be so solicitous of speaking to
her: who throwing himself at her feet told her that what he had to relate must
be to her self alone, unless absolutely enjoined the contrary by her: the
meanness of his Garb, and disorder of his Looks made those who were with the
Duchess think it unsafe to trust him in what he requested, and besought her to
let him be examined by some Officer who might give her an account of his
business; and one being called to that purpose, the poor Stranger, pressing so
near the Duchess, that he could not be overheard unless by Nise who stood by
her; Madam (said he) is it with your Highness permission that I must relate to
the person appointed, what concerns my dear Lord Fredericks memory. He had no
sooner mentioned that Name, but a sudden disorder appeared in the afflicted
Princess's Face, surprised to think that a Stranger should be acquainted with
what she thought a Secret to the whole world: and finding her disturbance
increase by her endeavors to suppress it, she rose hastily up, and taking Nise
by the Arm to support her, retired to her Closet, leaving all the company
amazed at her departure. She had not been long withdrawn, when a Lady came from
her to bring in the poor Stranger, who as soon as he saw none with her but
Nise, the rest having withdrawn to the further end of the Room, kneeling down
at a little distance, and with tears in his eyes; said to her, Madam, it has
pleased Providence at last to bring me where I can fulfill the injunction of my
unhappy Lord; who commanded me if he ended his days in the captivity we were
in, that if ever I should see Italy, I should acquaint your Highness with those
misfortunes happened to him after his being believed dead, and thrown into the
adjacent River. What, said the Duchess interrupting him, was it not Frederick
who was murdered and carried away by the Streams! Yes Madam (said he) it was my
Dear Master received all those wounds were intended him; but at that time
Heaven was pleased to spare his Life, though, as it has proved since, only to
let him go with more misfortunes to his Grave. That joy which the Duchess
began to receive at the mention of his being alive, was soon turned to her
wonted affliction at the Strangers last words; but a little recovering her
self, and earnest to know the particulars of Frederick's second death, as she
termed it, she desired him to give her an account of what she was ignorant of
concerning that unhappy man.

The History of Frederick, Astolfo and Roselinda.
IN the Relation your Highness commands me to make of my Masters adventures,
since you believed him killed at your Palace-Gates, I must necessarily acquaint
you with those of two persons once not unknown to your Highness, I mean Astolfo
and Roselinda, who fled from Mantua some time before my Master was forced from
thence.

The Duchess hearing their Names, desired him to omit nothing which might
concern a person so much esteemed by her, as Roselinda; and Fredericks Loyal
Servant perceiving she expected to know what he had to inform her of, began his
sad story.

Although it may seem presumptuous to say any thing to your Highness concerning
a Person so inconsiderable as my self, yet it may not be unnecessary to own the
particular favors my Noble Master was pleased to bestow upon me, in not
concealing his most secret thoughts from one he believed wholly devoted to his
service; when he was at Rome he engaged my Father Julian, whose Name I bear, to
let me attend him in those Travels he designed to make through most parts of
Europe, (which for my Improvement he yielded to) desiring I should learn what
experience I could abroad, before he settled me at home, where his Fortune was
considerable enough to bound a moderate Ambition, though much inferior to what
his Ancestors had enjoyed; but being forced to stay behind for the settlement
of some Affairs, I did not overtake my Master till he had been some time here
in Mantua, where I was overjoyed to find him in so high Favor with the Duke;
and after a few days, (congratulating his happiness in being designed the
Husband of Roselinda) he was pleased out of a confidence he had of my secrecy,
to tell me how little agreeable that match was to him. I need not repeat to
your Highness any thing which past in Mantua till the fatal Night was designed
for his destruction, when coming from the Palace, a little distance from whence
I waited his return, a sudden noise of Swords made me retire where I might be
less taken notice of, without imagining him concerned in that quarrel: till a
while after believing by their silence, all was over, I drew near enough to
hear one of the Guards say, although he be not wounded, his falling into the
River must be his death; another replying, I have found his Sword, which by as
much as I can discern in the dark, is rich enough to be owned by a Person of
Quality; growing a little suspicious by their words, and frighted at their
naming man thrown into the River, I adventured to ask the^ what the disturbance
was I had heard a little before which one of them telling me, and showing me
the Sword, I was half dead at the knowledge that it wa^ my Dear Masters; and
crying out it is Lord Fredericks, Lord Frederick is slain, I ran to that part of
the River where they told me he was thrown in, but being able to perceive
nothing, I followed the Current all Night, making the Banks echo to my Grief
for the loss of him, and the best part of the next day was spent in the same
manner, when toward Evening falling in among some Huts the Fishermen had set
up upon the Banks, one of them hearing what I was in search of, told me, that
being most of the Night Fishing upon the River, he had discerned something
carried down by the Stream come very near his Boat, and making toward it, took
up a man in a very rich Garb almost dead, which he thought had been occasioned
by his being tired with Swimming; but bringing him ashore to his Hut, he found
him all over bloody, and as he believed then quite dead: However the charitable
man, willing to give him what assistance he could, first rolling his body on a
Tub, which brought a great quantity of Water from him, and then laying him
wrapped in dry Woollen near a Fire, his heat began to return, and at length he
opened his Eyes, though without any sense or knowledge of what was done to him;
and removing him thence to a Bed, they bound up his wounds as well as they
could, till a Surgeon could be brought from the next Town, which the careful
Host went for, but at his return, he met some of his Comrades in a great
Fright, saying the Corsairs of Tunis had landed and carried off with them
several of their Companions Slaves, whom they had surprised in their Huts; that
as soon as their fear would give them leave, returning to their Huts, he mist
his wounded Guess, whom he imagined they had taken away in that condition,
encouraged by the rich Clothes lay by him, believing if he lived, such a booty
would afford a Ransom to requite the pains of curing him; but he was confident
the condition he had left him in, would not bear a remove without the loss of
his life, and he concluded him certainly dead. This second misfortune put me
quite beyond my consideration of reason, and I stayed that Night with my
Masters Host, consuming it in the consideration of what course I should take to
know what was become of him, whom I could not but hope to be still alive, since
he had escaped so miraculously from the River. I resolved to visit Tunis,
although I exposed my self to a certain slavery, which in a few days I
performed; having met with an English Ship was bound thither to Trade, I
embarked my self, and in less than a month after my Masters being carried
away, I was landed in that considerable City of Afric. It had been my Fathers
mischance, when young, to be taken and kept six years a slave in Tripoli,
during which time he had perfectly learnt the Arabic Language, and for a
diversion had taught me so much of it, that I could discourse indifferently
well in it, and it stood me so much in stead, that clothing my self in the
Moorish Garb, I was credited to be what I pretended my self, a Moor of Tetuan,
taken a slave by the Christians so young, that I had almost forgot my own
Language, and that having by my hard labor got enough to procure my ransom, I
was landed there in order to return to my own Country. So that being looked on
as an absolute Moor, I had as much opportunity as I could wish to inquire after
my dear Master, though a great while without any effect; till one day hearing
some Slaves talk of their Captivity, and inquiring from what part they had been
taken, one of them told me he was a Mantuan, brought over much about the time I
knew my Master was lost; and examining him more particularly of what other
Slaves were taken with him, I learnt, not without a transport of joy, that he
came thither in the same Vessel with my Master, that by the Moors care of his
wounds, both during their Voyage and ashore, he had been perfectly recovered,
and since was bought by the King of Tunis for a vast price: Upon this
intelligence I was so continually about the Seraglio, that at last I discovered
my dear Master in a Dress much different to what I was wont to behold him; he
was pleased to tell me my presence was not a little welcome to him, though he
looked shyly on me, fearing by my wearing a Turkish Habit, I had been turned
Renegado; till giving him an account of all I had done, his goodness but too
much acknowledged my love to him. For the first time we durst not be too long
together, lest my Disguise should grow suspected; and afterward when we met,
our Consultation was how possibly to procure his enlargement from a Master
never admitted a ransom for his Slaves: so that all our hopes must depend on
the Kings being procured to give him to some Courtier who would be willing to
see him exchanged for a considerable sum of money. During the time we were
taken up with these Considerations, there happened an occasion which I was
willing to lay hold of, as what might much conduce to my Lords enlargement. A
Noble man of Tunis, called Mahomad Alli, having a young Son whom he desired to
have instructed in Music, and hearing I had learnt a proficiency in that used
in Italy, during my Captivity, sent for m^^ making great offers of requital if
I would take upon me the teaching of his Son, which I willingly offered, and in
a few weeks gained the Fathers heart by the improvement his Son had made in the
Science I was thought a Master of. And being of himself a man more desirous of
knowledge than the generality of his Country men are, he took a great delight
in hearing me relate the Manners and Customs of Christendom; so that at last I
was grown so much in his favor as to be entrusted with the management of his
Affairs, and ordering his House in the City, when he went to divertise himself
at a Seat he had some miles out of Town, where he used often to be, as I
learnt, drawn thither by the love of a fair Christian Slave had been presented
him; and finding his good opinion of me so great, that he expressed a willingness
to do me any considerable kindness I could beg of him: One day when he was much
delighted to hear me play on the Harp, I told him among the Kings Slaves I had
met with a young man whom I knew in Italy, and whose Friends had been so
particularly kind in conducing to my deliverance from a long Captivity, that
the only thing I would beseech of him was, if possible, to get that Slave out
of the Kings hands, which he might beg for, not without hopes of success, and
give me leave as a grateful requital to him and his Friends to set him at
liberty; as soon as he heard what I desired of him, he blamed my modesty in
asking so small a Boon, and promised that very day to procure what I sought,
not doubting to speed in it. At the time he went to the Seraglio to procure my
Lords liberty, I went to acquaint him the good news of a freedom he might soon
expect: but all our joy was dissipated at Mahomads return, who told me, that
although my request was small, yet at that time impossible to be granted, for
the King having news of a Rebellion in the farthest part of his Dominions;
which being slighted at first, had given the Rebels time to carry all before
them; so that the King resolving to go in person with an Army against them, all
his Slaves were appointed for the journey, and that he himself being commanded
to attend the King in the expedition, resolved to entrust the Government and
Ordering of his Family to my care until his return. If I was grieved at the
certain prolongation of my Masters captivity, that concern was doubly
aggravated at the consideration of being separated from him so long a time as
that was like to be, if he should ever return. I used all the arguments I could
to persuade Mahomad I might accompany him, but in conclusion it was almost by a
forced license that I went, having declared, that if he thought me unworthy to
be near him where he might be exposed to continual dangers, as soon as ever he
was departed to the Army, I would return to my Native Country and Friends in
Tetuan. A few days after the King began his journey, finding at the Randezvous
he had appointed, a complete Army of thirty five thousand men, all well
appointed, besides the usual attendants on a Camp; he proceeded with short
journeys n t to harrase his men before they came up with the enemy, having
heard by those he had sent out that they seemed to expect him, and it was
believed would stand a Battle. I should pass over what concerns the Wars of
Tunis, without troubling your Highness to hear any thing of them, but that my
dear Master made a considerable character in that War; during our march I had
all the opportunity I could desire of seeing and discoursing with him; his
resolutions were to attempt the doing some remarkable action which might incite
the King to give him his liberty as a reward of it, and by his order I
prevailed with my kind Patron Mahomad, that he should be allowed Arms when he
came to the Battle, assuring him they would not be employed to the Kings
disadvantage. We began after a months slow march to approach so near the enemy,
that our Outguards had often Skirmishes; and we found their Army very strongly
encampt, having a great River on one side, and a large Wood covering the other:
the King setting down about a League from them, after a Nights refreshment of
his men, drew up his whole Army in Battalia, and so marched till we faced the
Enemy, believing they would lie close within their Intrenchments, but Albazin
the famous Rebel who commanded them, was as forward and earnest to decide all
by a Battle as the King could be: and before half the Morning was spent, both
Armies began to draw so near in a large Plain before Albazins Camp, that the
Archers could no longer be hindered from beginning the fight, but receiving that
word of command they were impatient for, a most bloody and obstinate fight
commenced, which was not decided without the loss of many thousand lives.
Albazins Army consisted of much an equal number with the Kings, but he had the
advantage of at least eight thousand Horse, though fewer in Foot. The King
behaved himself like a wise General and bold Soldier, charging where his men
were most pressed upon, but not being seconded by them with a like courage, his
success not only grew doubtful, but the Enemy making a fresh charge with a
strong body of Horse he kept in reserve from the beginning of the Battle; his
Right Wing was forced to give ground, having the misfortune to behold his Left
in a greater disorder, the Main Body only standing obstinately to it, being
engaged in a close fight where all other Arms but their Swords were grown
useless. Mahomad fighting near the King, I kept as close to my Master, who by
my Patrons procurement was allowed a Horse, and to enter the Battle, where his
great Actions were for some time obscured in the Crowd he fought amongst; but
upon Albazins fresh Charge, when our Horse began to give ground, he pressed
forward to the Front, and was got close up to the King, when he perceived him
surrounded by the Enemies Horse which Albazin led in Person; the Kings party
made so weak a resistance, that he already feared himself a Prisoner to his
rebellious Vassal; and my Master believing then was his time to dye gloriously
or merit his freedom, turning about to me, said, Now Julian believe I fight to
cut my self a passage into Italy, I fight in hopes of seeing Diana again, and
am assured of Victory in her Name. Ending those words he clapped Spurs to his
Horse, having a strong Javelin in his Hand, and pressing close to the King;
Sir, said he, you must still Conquer, Heaven cannot be propitious long to a
Rebel, against a lawful Prince. As he uttered these words, a Horseman of the
Enemy, whose Garb made him remarkable, had forced a way so near the King with a
party which followed him, that he was just seizing his Bridle, having called to
him to yield, when my Master clapped in between them, and thrust his Lance quite
through his body, the King having the satisfaction of seeing his Enemy tumble
from his Horse dead at his Feet; which action struck such a terror to his Foes,
and gave such new life to our fainting men, seeing that blow seconded by two or
three more which proved as fatal to those came in his reach, that as the one
began to take up from their eagerness of Victory, and the other rallied again,
not only making good their ground, but pressed after their Prince, who with my
Master by his side began to recover fresh hopes of retrieving the Battle on
that part. But if the face of Victory seemed to change where we were, it was
much otherwise in other places; for one acquainted the King that his Left Wing
was almost totally routed, and the main body shrinking under the Enemies force,
was likely soon to follow the example of their Companions. This sad
intelligence drove him quite into despair, making him cry out, what, what can
we do more, but save our selves by flight! Conquer, Conquer, said my Master;
have where your presence may reanimate your men, and be assured of Victory
here. The King took his counsel, only saying as he drew off, Heaven preserve
the life of my valiant Slave, and I shall not doubt of Victory. The King had
scarce left us when Albazin, angry to find such a stop put to his proceedings,
as my Master had given them, advanced before the rest of his men, and coming
near my Master; Slave, said he, since thy Courage is so great, be honored in
receiving thy death from Albazins hand; my Master replied not a word to him,
but receiving the strong charge of his Lance upon a little Target he had on
his left Arm, returned him such a thrust with his, as had almost thrown him
quite out of his Saddle; and turning his Horse short upon his Enemies Crupper,
made him feel the weight of his Scimitar before he had well recovered the shock
of his Spear. Albazin was a man of extraordinary courage, and being quite
Transported to meet such opposition from a Slave, flew at him with his
Scimitar, designing his next blow should decide the controversy; but being
intercepted by my Masters Shield, he only received a slight wound in his Arm,
and requited it with a larger in Albazins Shoulder; while the Warri^rs were
engaged in a single combat, all the Soldiers on both sides forbore Fighting,
to be Spectators of what the Event of it would be; each side conjecturing their
Fortune to depend on the Success of their Champion; and after a sharp Dispute,
both covered with Blood, and raised to the highest transports of Fury by the
resistance they met with, weary of further delay, they closed, and grappled one
another on Hors-back, each striving to pull his Adversary from his Saddle, and
at once spurring their Horses, both came to the Ground together, but my Master
happily falling uppermost, before Albazin could recover himself from the
disorder of a Fall with such a weight upon him, my Master drawing a short
Puniard from his Side, stabbed him to the Heart, and Leaping upon his Feet, as
a Trophy of his Victory, he pulled Albazins Green Turbat from his Head and
clapped it on his own; that Color being worn by the Rebel, as a Note of the
Sanctity he pretended to, having at first by a Religious Cheat, reduced all
those who were of his Party from their Loyalty. The death of their Leader
struck such a damp in the Hearts of our Enemies, that those who a little before
thought themselves Conquerors, after a weak Opposition, betook them to their
Heels; being pursued and slaughtered at Pleasure by our Men, who followed the
renowned Frederick, with a full assurance of an entire Victory; for the
Confirmation of which, meeting none in that part of the Field, but such as
offered their Throats to our Swords; He called to those who were nearest him,
telling them they had done nothing, till the day was as much secured in other
places as where they had then fought; and being answered, That lead where he
would, they were ready to dye by his Side, or Vanquish with him; having by this
time drove the scattered Wing of the Enemy quite out of the Field, he wheeled
about, and fell in upon the Rear of the main Body, finding them so much work
where they least expected it, that they soon desisted from further pressing
upon the King to defend themselves against the impetuosity of a fresh Charge;
but the Shouts of our Men crying out, The Rebel Albazin is dead, and an Officer
of ours, having after my Master left the Place where he fell, cut off his Head
and fixed it on the point of a Lance, brought it in sight of those were still
Fighting; which Spectacle was so amazing to them, that now desperate either of
success or safety, they were quickly reduced to the same condition their
Left-wing was in; and those of their Right, which had gained advantage enough
before, endeavored to save themselves by a hasty flight. There fell on the
Kings Side, above eight thousand Men, and most of the Officers who fought near
the King, had lost their Lives to secure his, which occasioned my Masters
having the sole leading of those with whom he recovered a lost Battle; the
Enemy left dead on the place near thirty thousand Men, the King putting all to
the Sword after they had thrown down their Arms. As soon as my Master came
where the King was alighting from his Horse, as he would have knelt down, he
took him in his Arms, calling him his deliverer and preserver both of his Crown
and Life, nor was there a Soldier in the Army, but attributed their Victory to
my Masters Courage. It will not be to my purpose to trouble your Highness with
any other circumstances past there, more than that all was reduced again to the
Kings obedience; and after four months absence we arrived safe again at Tunis:
my Master being recovered of his wounds, and grown in such esteem with the
King, that he was by all termed the favourite-Slave. One thing I had like to
have omited, that my friend Mahomad who held a considerable Charge in the Army,
was at the beginning of the Fight dangerously wounded and carried out of the
Field; but afterward he recovered, having been during his illness, so
carefully attended by me, that at our coming back to Tunis, he used me with
much greater kindness than before; But a few days after, a sad misfortune which
befell my Master, turned all our tranquillity into grief: The King having seen
the happy effects of his Valor, and keeping him continually near him, was
grown so delighted with his Conversation, that desirous to add Favors to those
he had bestowed, and for the future to deter my Master from ever urging him
again to restore him to his Liberty, set very earnestly upon him, to persuade
the alteration of his Religion; thereby putting himself into a condition to be
the Kings Son-in-Law, he having assured him, he desired no other Husband for
his only Daughter. You may judge, Madam, how much he was surprised at so strange
a Proposal; finding that as his own resolutions were sufficiently fixed, so the
denial would much disturb the King: And his absolute refusal, though with
modesty and acknowledgment enough, was so far from inducing the King to desist,
that he not only pressed it more and more every day, but set the Mufti upon him,
to endeavor the bringing him to their Belief, promising a vast reward to him
that should prove succesfull in it: and when all their Arguments and promises
could avail nothing, one of them found a way which had near ruined my Master;
for the King growing at last almost angry, to be refused that by a Slave, which
he thought deserved the Prayers of Princes to obtain, was satisfied with what
one of the Priests told him, that Frederick when he had slain Albazin, put on
his green Turbat, which color being sacred to their Prophet, the Christian who
is bold to profane it by the wearing, ought by their Laws, either to change
his Religion or expiate with his Blood the offense. The King by their means,
though with some reluctance, was persuaded to attempt him in that matter,
assured he would rather live the Son of a King, and Husband to a beautiful
Lady, than expose his Life for the sake of Religion: So that one morning as he
entered the Seraglio, a Guard seized him, and carried him away Prisoner to a
private part of it, where the Mufti made him the Proposal either of Life or
Death, which last, he firmly demanding, rather than his Belief should be so
much as questioned; they so incensed the King against him by those reproaches
he gave their Prophet, that at last his Life became in a great deal of danger;
and although the Execution was deferred, in hopes he might recant, yet he was
made a close Prisoner, with the threat of never being releast but on the terms
were made him. He continued a Prisoner for several months, without my being
able to see or send to him; having learned from Mahomad the condition he was
in, who very much blamed the King's ingratitude, having nothing to alledg for
his excuse, but that great influence the Mufti had over him, whom he knew to be
violent in what concerns any matter of their Sect. While my dear Master
remained in Prison, I was grown so melancholy, that Mahomad, who expressed much
trouble for it, took me along with him to his Country House to give me some
diversion; telling me he had an Italian Slave whose conversation he believed I
should be much delighted with, and as the highest token of his favor, promised
me a sight of his fair, but coy Mistress; on the way he entertained me with his
love of her, letting me know, that a Ship he sent out at his own charge, took
her among several other Captives on the Coast of Florence; and with her his
Italian, who was brought to him desperately wounded, having resisted while he
had strength to do it, those who assaulted him: that he kept his fair Slave
there least the noise of her Beauty might by the Mariners discourse of it, come
to the Kings Ear, and he should demand her; purposing by having her concealed
where no body knew of her, to tell the King, if he should ever inquire after
her, that she had been ransomed, resolving rather to part with his Life than
Love, although her obstinacy was such, that he had never been able to overcome
it, not having power to use force if she were possibly any other way to be won.
As soon as we were allighted at his House, where his Servants were ready to
receive him, I could scarce credit my Eyes, when I knew the Italian Slave he
talked of, to be Astolfo; Mahomad left me with him, and hasted himself to visit
his fair Mistress, (for so he always termed her.) Astolfo had seen me before in
Italy, but the Turkish habit I was in, kept me from being known to him, till
taking him aside from the other Slaves, I told him who I was, and how I came to
be in that dress; he was much rejoiced to see me, but more afflicted at the
knowledge of my Masters misfortunes. He told me how he came to fall into the
Moors hands, that having embarked on a Vessel bound for Tuscany, when he
thought himself safe, being got out of the Duke of Mantua's reach, they were
set upon by Pirates, when after the death of half their Men, and himself much
wounded, they were Boarded and taken; that the Moors at the Prayers of
Roselinda, whose Beauty they admired, dressed his wounds, and arriving at
Tunis, delivered them to Mahomad; who falling in love with his Wife, (for he
had married Roselinda in the Ship before they were taken) had kept them there
in the Country since their first arrival, not knowing that he was her Husband,
pretending he conducted her to Marry his Brother in Florence when they met his
Ship: and he confirmed to me what Mahomad had said, that he was both very kind
to him, and used Roselinda with much Respect. My Patron was as good as his
word, in showing me the disposer of his Liberty, whose Beauty was not at all
diminished since I saw her in Mantua, during my stay there. Astolfo and I had
often consultations how to procure their Liberty; which was impossible to be
attained any way, but by a private escape, and no hopes of doing that, while
Mahomad kept them in the Country; so that one day discoursing with him about
his Love, I said the only way to overcome her, was an assiduous perseverance,
which he could effect with more convenience if she was always near him in the
City, than by seeing her but seldom, which he did at that distance. My advice
had the success I desired, and within two days he removed her privately to
Tunis, taking Astolfo thither also; but not long after he quitted his Love with
his Life, being seized by a violent Feavour, which meeting with a corpulent
Body as he was of, soon took him away. I must confess his kindness to me had
been so particular, that I was sensibly concerned for the loss of him, and my
trouble aggravated, by wanting the only Friend I knew how to make any
application to. His Estate and Tuition of his Son was immediately taken into
the Kings dispose, Hamet his Brother being denied that Trust by the King; but
as a part of recompense, he granted him all his Brothers Slaves; and to remove
him further from him, where the Justice of his complaint for the wrong was done
him, would make the King ill thought off: He told him he must prepare to go his
Ambassador to the King of Granada in Spain; Hamet seemed pretty well satisfied
with so honorable an employment, and hastened his Voyage all he could. He was
not less taken with the Love of Roselinda than his Brother had been, knowing
she had never yielded to him, and resolved to take her, with the rest of his
Slaves into Spain; Astolfo was overjoyed with the hopes of going into Europe,
where he believed his escape more easy than from Tunis; but my Sorrow
increased with the Apprehension of my Masters danger, of whom I could hear
nothing more than that he was still alive under a strickt Confinement. But
walking one Evening toward the Seraglio, I was surprised with Joy, at the sight
of my dear Master, who met me a little distance from the Gate of it; we went
both to Mahomad's House, where I was permitted to stay, having his Goods in
Charge, till the King should remove them. My Master told me there, all that had
happened to him since his being Confined; and that the King not being able to
resolve the Death of one he loved so well, nor perceiving a possibility of
reducing him to what he wished, being in earnest solicited by the Mufti to take
away his Life, had him self privately visited him, and bringing him out of the
Prison, took his leave of him, bidding him go where he would, and telling him
he must accuse his own Obstinacy that hindered him from being as great as
himself. He told me he had newly left the King when I met him, and was resolved
with the first opportunity to visit Mantua, and throw himself at your Feet;
withal, very desirous of learning if possible, from whose hands he received
those wounds had occasioned all his future Misery. I told him of Hamets Voyage
into Spain, and of Astolfo and Roselinda being in his power, withal that he
had, earnestly desired me to accompany him in that Journey, which my Master was
so much pleased with, that he commanded me to look him out and accept of it,
and that he would pass as my Slave, till our Arrival in Spain; which he might
the better do, having never been seen by Hamet, who was newly come from a
Government he had been some years in, and my Master had been little acquainted
among the Mariners. At first, all things succeeded as well as we could wish,
having so prosperous a Voyage, that in twelve days we landed at Malaga; but as
soon as ever we came ashore Hamet seized on my Master as having run away from
the King, threatening me with Imprisonment for assisting him, but the true
incitement he had to it, was only his Covetousness, having been told by me that
my Slave was of a Noble Birth in his own Country. Hamet as soon as he had
settled those Affairs were necessary upon his first Landing, being to abide in
Malaga, till the King should send for his coming up to Granada, began to be as
sollicitous in his Love to Roselinda as severe against Frederick and Astolfo;
for my part, I had in a Disgust left him, and owning my self a Native of
Tetuan, which was opposite to us, he durst not offer that Violence, which
otherwise, I had doubtless felt at his hands. But we were all drove to the
highest Consternation of ill, when Roselinda acquainted her Husband, by a Note
she got conveyed to him, that Hamet no longer brooking her Denials, had
determined, if within two days, she did not resolve to comply with his Desires,
he would at the end of them, satisfy his Love by Force. Astolfo when Hamet was
gone to return the Governor a Visit, slipped out, and finding me, acquainted me
with it; telling me withal, that if in the Night there were any possibility of
getting out of the City, he could from a Window looked into the Garden of the
House, let down himself, his Wife and Frederick; and so from the Garden, could
easily get out into the Street; having won an Eunuch of Hamets, who had the
Charge of his House, to fly with them, upon a desire he had of becoming a
Christian. Although the difficulty of having a City Gate opened, was not easily
to be removed, believing so fair an opportunity would scarce offer again, I was
resolved to further it all I could. Alstolfo having told me that both my Master
and himself were resolved to expose their Lives to the utmost Peril, and rather
kill Hamet in his House, than let Roselinda be Ravished by him. The City of
Antiquera was at that time in the Power of the Spaniards, being but seven
Leagues from the Place where we were; so that if we could get forth untaken
notice of, having once entered the Mountains, the discovery of us (if pursued)
would be difficult, but how to find the way, created us most trouble, all being
Strangers in that Country; to which Astolfo answered, that Hamet having bought
a Spanish Slave, since his Arrival, they might easily take him with them, who
would doubtless serve as a Guide. I sent Astolfo back, desiring him to provide
all things ready against the next Night; and in the mean time I enquired out
who had the Charge of that Gate we purposed to pass, and finding him a young
Man, in whose Company I had been, where most People used to resort and Converse
together; as soon as I had found him, falling into Discourse of the difference
between Spain and Africa, he seemed to like the former, chiefly for the
Recreation he had in pursuing such Game as the Neighboring Mountains were
stored with; and hearing me declare my self a great lover of Hunting, he
presently invited me to go along with him the next Morning; and that in order
to it, we might go and lie the same Night at a House he had half a League out
of Town. I accepted the offer, for the Night following, saying I would bring a
Friend or two with me, so we parted till the next day; in the mean time, having
given notice to the rest to be ready two hours within Night. I would not be
seen by the young Moor till toward the Evening, when I believed he would expect
me ready to go; and then finding him at his Gate waiting only my coming to be
gone, I told him an unlookt-for business would forcibly detain me till some
time within Night, but if he would order the Gate to be opened for me and my
Friends, we would certainly be with him long before Morning; he was very
desirous of staying for me, but I pretending to accept no such Compliment,
persuaded him to set forward, first commanding the Guard to let me, and who
ever came with me, through at any time of the Night. After he was gone, I
waited at my Lodging till the time drew near, for my Master and his Companies
coming forth, and then finding the Backdoor of the Garden to Hamets House, at
the time I had appointed, came forth my Master, Astolfo, Roselinda, the Eunuch,
and the Slave, who had with Joy undertaken to be our Guide. As soon as I came
to the Gate, according to the Order had been given, they let us all forth
without asking any Question; and taking the Way our Guide directed, a little
after Midnight we reached the Mountains; as we were on the way, the Eunuch told
us, that Hamet coming early home, and visiting Roselinda, stayed no longer,
than to tell her, that the following Night she must either by force, or freely
yield, and so leaving her went to Bed, whom he locked in and then brought forth
all his Companions to me, whose Design of flying to the Christians he much
wondered at, till acquainted with my disguise. All that night we traveled
without meeting any Body, having reached about three Leagues, the ways being so
Rocky, that Roselinda could scarce climb the Hills with all the Assistance we
afforded her; and though we had got the advantage of the Suns Light, yet our
Journey all day was as tedious, being persuaded by our Guide to leave the Road
for fear of a pursuit; so that what with our going about, and making a way
through the Sedge of the Mountains, it was within an hour of Sunset when we came
to the utmost of the Hills, from whence we could discern a spacious Plain, and
a League from the Foot of the Mountain, on a rising Ground, that Christian
City, grown famous by holding out so long against the Moors, that the
Grandchildren of those who first shut up the Gates, at that time maintained the
Walls against their Enemies, having been besieged and blocked up near seventy
years. We made what possible have we could down into the Plain, hoping before
Night to enter our City of Refuge; but the difficulty of descending the craggy
Cliffs where there was no Path, took us up so much time that it was quite dark
when we recovered the bottom, of those asperous Mountains, and though we were
got into a Highway which our Guide told us, Lead to the City, yet fearing to
encounter any Party of Moors, who used to be abroad in the Night, we left the
Tract, and by the direction of our Spanish Captive, going almost half a mile
within the Plain, we came to the Foot of a large and steep Rock, which rose in
the middle of the Valley, being to be got up but on one side, the other making
a very high Precipice. At the bottom of this fatal Rock we thought it
convenient to Repose our selves as in a place of security, till the days
approach, when our Spaniard told us there would be no hazard of meeting any
Enemies, the Christians using to be abroad every Morning, to scour the Coast of
those Parties of Moors, who many times by the Nights shelter, have adventured
under their very Walls, either to Alarm them, or take up any they could find
straggling without their Lines. Fredericks loyal servant coming to this part of
his Relation, was interrupted by a crowd of Sighs forced a passage from his
Breast; but a little suppressing them, and drying the Tears from his Eyes, I
wish Madam (continued he) I might here conclude my Story, since what remains to
acquaint you with, I am confident will occasion no less trouble to you, than
pity for those unfortunate people whose Adventures you have heard.

The fair Duchess could not suppress her foreboding sorrow, to find how
unwilling he was to let her know any more; but striving with her self, and in a
manner expecting the worst, She desired he would leave nothing untold which
concerned any of that miserable Company; and leaning on Nise, with a
Handkerchief wet with Tears before her Eyes, she listened to the conclusion of
his History.

Since you must not be disobeyed (said the sorrowful Roman) I am to acquaint
your Highness, that we spent most part of the Night with satisfaction enough in
repeating our past Adventures, joyful that in a few hours we hoped to find our
selves in a place of safety, and the first dawn of the Morning was welcomed by
us all; at which time in a Road not far from the Rock, we heard the trampling
of Horses, and soon after, discovered a Party as we guessed, coming from the
City; Our Guide told us there was no doubt to be made, but they were Christians
come abroad to scour the Valley, this being just their time of going out; and
against the consent of us all, and before we were aware, he called out to them,
who to our Astonishment answered in Arabic, They are Christians! Seize them,
says a Moor, that at least I may have something to wreck my Revenge on; and
saying so, they advanced toward us. Immediately, finding the Danger we had
fallen into, by the unhappy Spaniards hasty speaking, he thought to make some
part of amends by telling us, that if we could climb to the top of the Rock,
our little Party would be sufficient to defend it against an Army for some
time, and that after it was Day, the Moors would not venture to stay so near
the City; we followed his Advice with a Diligence equal to our threatened
danger; and were ascended to a good height by that time our Enemies were got to
that part of it we had quitted. But oh Heavens! How great was our astonishment,
when not only by the Voice, but Day coming on, we knew the chief of our Enemies
to be the enraged Hamet; who as soon as he discovered who we were, and finding
us stand in a Posture to defend our selves with our Swords, and the loose
Stones we had picked up on the top of the Rock; He called out, Yield your
selves miserable Slaves, said he, and hope for the sake of that cruel Beauty
you would have robbed me of, to have your Lives spared; but if you offer at the
least resistance, expect Death with the utmost aggravation of Torments: But all
being resolved to defend our Lives to the last; he had no other Answer, but by
the Stones we threw at him; wherewith enraged, he commanded all his Men to a
light, who were about forty in number, and climb the Rock to take us; which
they did, leaving only enough to hold their Horses; those who were most bold to
get at us, were by the stones we threw, soon tumbled down again to their
Master; my Valiant Lord, with the two first Stones went from his hand,
depriving two of our Enemies of their Lives. This strange and unequal Combat
lasted above an hour, in which time, Hamets Men were reduced to half their
number; but on our side, the Eunuch and our Spanish Guide were both slain by
the Arrows were shot at us, and not one but had received a wound, or more. When
Hamet transported by the resistance we made, and at the loss of his Men; with
those were left, he assaulted us a-fresh, and when he had not above ten left
with him alive, gained the height of the Rock. My Dear Master with Astolfo by
his side, did Actions almost past belief; till wearied with so long a Dispute,
and grown faint for want of that Blood had gone from them through several wide
Passages were made in their Bodies, they were just ready to sink under an
unequal number of Enemies; when Astolfo despairing either of safety or Life,
retired and left him. I had endeavored from the beginning of the combat, to
appear not less concerned for maintaining our Liberty, than the rest had been;
but at that time weakened by the want of Blood had run from my several wounds,
I was fallen down, unable to give any further Assistance to our almost
vanquished Party, having only Life enough left to keep my Eyes open, that I
might see what would become of my dear Master; and I confess when I saw Astolfo
had left him alone against all our Enemies, I began to doubt with my self
whether his quitting the Combat was not an effect of fear; till I soon
perceived it was despair had drove him before his Death, to take a last farewell
of his Beloved Roselinda, who had remained offering up her Prayers for our
safeties from the beginning of the Fight. He ran to her with as much speed as
his weakness would permit; and taking her in his Arms, I could hear him faintly
say, farewell my most unfortunate Wife, since I cannot live for you, at least
give me the satisfaction of dying in your Arms; to which she answered; Oh my
Dearest Astolfo, be assured I can never quit thy Arms to be forced into those
of a barbarous Infidel; but since it is the pleasure of Heaven, that we must
dye, let it be in one another Arms, and let us thus entwined fly together to
Eternity. I could not hear their last words, but saw them haste to the top of
the Precipice, and embraced very close together, threw themselves down to the
bottom, where they ended their unhappy lives. Then casting my eyes toward the
place where my Master was fighting, I saw him fall dead in the midst of his
Enemies, which dreadful spectacle took away the remainder of my Spirits, and I
sunk down with some satisfaction that I should not outlive him. But how
strangely was I surprised, when coming to my self again, I was lying in a fair
Room, with two or three Servants waiting at the Bedside. I would gladly have
asked where I was, admiring to hear they spoke Spanish, but did not recover my
speech till the end of eight days. When I had got strength enough by their care
of my wounds to inquire how I came into that place, and wherein I deserved to
receive kindnesses, more than I could hope for among Strangers. One of them
told me, that I was in the Governors House of Antiquera, who would let no means
be omitted which might conduce to my recovery: I expressed my thanks for their
care of me with all the acknowledgment I could, but being more concerned for my
Master than my own welfare, I entreated them to let me know what happy accident
had brought me thither, and if they could, to inform me what was become of
those remained in the same condition I was in on the Rock. One of those
assisted near me was about satisfying my request, when he was interrupted by
the Governors coming in to make me a Visit; and being informed who he was, I
would have raised my self in the Bed to receive him, when he stepped to the side
of it, and hindered me, saying I was not in a Condition to use Ceremony, and
that he had deferred till then coming to see, that I might not be disturbed of
that Repose was so necessary for me; but that being told by the Chyrurgeons, I
might with safety be discoursed with, he was come to give me an account how I
fell into his hands; and setting down on a Chair by the Bed side he let me
know, that himself going out with a Party the Morning of our Combat, at a good
distance from the Rock he saw people on the top of it; but believing them some
of the Garrison were got up thither to descry if the Country were free from
those who almost every Night infested it, he kept on his way at an easy pace,
when one of his Company told him, he could discover naked Swords in their Hands
on the Rock, and guessed by their moving about, that it was a fight they were
engaged in; whereupon mending his pace, he came to the bottom of the Hill, just
as a Man and Woman, arm in arm, had thrown themselves from the top, and were
dashed in pieces almost hard by where he stood, and that while he was surveying
the dead bodies, his men had perceived some Moors holding a good number of
Horses on the other side of the Rock, and riding round, they saw those we had
left alive coming down, who finding themselves discovered would have retreated
up the Hill again, but were overtaken by his men, and encouraged by one who
seemed their Master, suffered themselves all to be cut in pieces rather than he
should be taken, himself ending his life in the same place amongst his men. He
added to me, that having dispatched the Moors, he climbed up to the top of the
Rock, to take a view of what had been done there, where he found a great many
dead Moors whom he commanded to be thrown into an adjacent Pit; but that upon
search of the bodies, finding about two or three of us, Medals, which declared
our profession to be Enemies of Mahomets Sect; he ordered our bodies to be
removed to the City, that we might receive the rites of Burial; but being laid
on a Table, I had been perceived to stir, so that they carried me to a Bed, and
after several applications, brought me out of the swound, the want of blood had
thrown me into; but that the rest had been interred together in the principal
Church. This certainty of my dear Masters death, reduced me into as ill a
condition as I had been found in on the Rock, so that it was the next Morning
before I could be brought to my senses again, when I would have torn the
Plasters from my Wounds to follow my lost Lord; but the good Governor being
in the Room, used so many persuasions to me, that at last I was satisfied to
wait the pleasure of Heaven, either in my death or recovery; which in a month
after proved the latter, so that I was become able to walk abroad; And would
have taken my leave of my Noble Host in order to return hither, resolving
afterward to retire into my own Country, that I might spend the rest of my
days in bewailing, without interruption, the loss of my unfortunate Master: but
the Generous Governor not only refused to let me stir, till I had recovered
some more strength, but withal, after he had heard from me the quality and
misfortunes of those he had interred, would have me stay to see their Obsequies
celebrated in a more splendid manner than what before had been done; so that
the week following I was conducted to the great Church, where a very fair
Monument was set up, with an Inscription relating the manner of their deaths;
were to lie in a Vault under it, and toward the bottom was engraven on a fair
Marble, these words, Let the White Rock in the^ ^^st of the Tale of Antiquera,
for ever after be called the Lovers Rock. After the Ceremonies ended, having
burnt several Perfumes to hinder the ill smell of those had been so long dead;
the bodies were taken up, and brought through the Church to be deposited in the
New Vault. As soon as I saw them bringing toward me, I went forward, desiring
their faces might be uncovered, that I might once more behold that of my
Master; but a fresh disturbance seized me when I beheld those of Roselinda,
Astolfo and the Spanish Slave, which were all that had been brought from the
Rock, as the Governor assured me, but my Dear Master was mising: so that
concluding he had been left among the Moors in the Pit on the top of the Rock,
I not only procured a Guard from the Governor to go thither in search of him,
but he would accompany me himself to that fatal place. As soon as we came there
he commanded the bodies to be dragged out, but could find none but such as we
knew to be Moors, both by their Clothes, and having no Hair on their Heads:
among the rest I found the wretched Eunuchs body, but not the least appearance
of any thing like my Masters: we searched every Corner both of the Rock and
adjacent Fields; but not being able to make any discovery, I returned back with
the Governor, though full of perplexity, yet not without some faint hopes,
that Heaven might by some Miracle have preserved so considerable a Life.

The fair Duchess who had listened to his Story more dead than alive, began a
little to recover herself, at this part of his Relation, which he continued
telling her, that after some few days longer abode at Antiquera, acquainting
the Governor with his design, he betook himself to his former disguise of a
Moors Habit, resolving to search all the Country under their jurisdiction, if
possible, to learn something of what was become of his Master; but (continued
he) after I had spent much time in a fruitless inquiry, concluding that Great
Man certainly lost, and that he might either be overlookt among the dead, or
have received a charitable Interment from some unknown hand: I withdrew my self
into the confines of Spain, and being come among the Christians again, I passed
for a Captive newly escaped from Bondage, but wanting money to alter: my Guarb,
and serve me for so long a journey, I was forced to remain in this Dress, in
which I have appeared before your Highness, to give an account of the death of
the best of men.

The sorrowful Julian made this sad end of his Relation; which the Duchess had
not been able to hear concluded without an aggravated affliction, and wringing
her Hands while a River of Tears flowed from her Eyes; Oh my Dear Nise (said
she) could Heaven preserve the Life of that Worthy Man to bring him to so
disasterous an end! Ye Gods, where was your justice! where was your care of
distressed Virtue, when he was suffered to fall by the violence of a Barbarous
Multitude! O Heaven! why did you not send the charitable Governor time enough
to prevent the ruin of so many Innocents! Her afflicted Favorite endeavored
all she could to divert that violent Grief she tormented her self with; but at
last wanting strength to complain longer, she wrung her by the Hand, and saying
with a faint Voice, I must follow my unhappy Lover to the other World, since I
am denied him in this; she sunk down in her Arms. Nise immediately called in
the rest of her Women, and desiring Julian to retire, they removed her into her
Bedchamber, and undrest her to give more freedom to her breath; but a great
part of the day was spent before she came to her self, and several others
before she would be seen by any one, but her Women and Julian, whom she
sometimes sent for to hear that repeated, which as often renewed her sorrow.
The faithful Roman, after some Weeks abode in her Court, where by her Order he
was supplied with every thing he could want, desired leave to return to his
Relations, whom he believed had concluded him dead, not having heard from him
in so many months, but she would by no means suffer him to leave her Court,
'till she had found out some way to recompense his Loyalty to his Master; so
that he was forced to satisfy himself with writing to Rome, while he attended
the Duchess commands in Mantua; whose indisposition and Melancholy had made
the Court change all its former splendour into sorrow and disturbance, none
knowing what had reduced her to that condition, but all looking on Julian with
unpleasant eyes, as supposed the messenger who had brought her the information
of what she was so greatly troubled at. Two months were passed in this
sorrowful manner, when one day as Julian was discoursing with some of the
Mantuan Lords, a foreign Merchant presented himself to them, desiring to know
if the Duchess would buy any choice Jewels, of which he had brought some store
to the Court: although they knew she would not be disturbed on any such
occasion, yet for the satisfaction of their own curiosity, they desired to see
them; and opening a small Casket, he exposed to their view some of the fairest
had ever been seen in those parts: Julian standing by, and accidentally casting
his eyes on them as the Merchant pulled them forth, perceiving among the rest a
rose of Diamonds, which he was confident he had seen before; and knowing if it
was the same, it would open in the middle, he inquired of the Merchant whether
it would or not, who affirmed the negative; but Julian taking it in his hand,
perceived the place where it was to part, and by the Merchants help, drawing
out a small pin of Gold, it parted asunder, which confirming him it was the
same he imagined; he told the Merchant he would adventure to desire one of the
Dutchesses women to show it her; so going directly to Nises Chamber, he desired
her to let him see the Duchess, who going with him to her Presence, as she lay
on her Bed, on his Knees he presented the Jewel to her: As soon as she had cast
her Eyes on it, Oh Heaven, (said she) this is the same I gave the unhappy
Frederick; and calling Nise to her, she opened it, and showed her under the
Gold the Diamonds were set in, her own Picture; and Julian assured her, that
his Master had that Jewel hanging in his Bosom the day before he was slain.
Immediately the Duchess commanded the Merchant should be brought in,
pretending she would divert her self with seeing his Jewels; but as soon as he
was come, Julian by her command, required of him how he came by that in the
Dutchesses hand; He with a great deal of plaineness and assurance told her,
that he bought it for a great sum of money of a Jew at Rome, and that the Jew
told him, he had it of a Moorish Pirate in Argiers, that he believed the Moor
had gotten it in some Prize he had met with at Sea; the Duchess seeming
satisfied with the Merchants truth, paid him the Price he demanded for it and
dismissed him. After he was gone, as she was busied in looking on the Jewel she
had once given as a Pledge of her Love to Frederick, turning it upward, her
Picture which was drawn on a little Gold Plate, dropped out, and taking it up,
she perceived on the backside of it some Letters as if scratched there by the
point of a Needle, and perusing them heedfully, not without a Transport of Joy,
she read these words, Fair Saint for thee I live, escapt the River and the
fatal Rock.

How happy had Frederick been, could he have beheld the alteration there
appeared in his adored Princesses face, at the imagination of his being still
alive: She gave Julian the Plate to read, not daring to credit her own Eyes,
who was not able to contain himself, but kneeling down by the Dutchesses Bed;
He lives, Madam, (said he,) my Dearest Lord has been preserved by the care of
Heaven; I implore your permission, that I may go immediately in search of him,
for I am resolved never to rest till I can find him, or learn some more certain
news of him. The Duchess approved very well of Julians forwardness; but when
she began a little to recollect her self, new apprehensions assaulted her.

It Is probable, (said she to him) Frederick might escape after the Combat on
the Rock, since his body could no where be found, but if the Merchant spoke
true, is it not very likely he died by the hands of those Pirates who sold this
Jewel, which I am confident he would never part with, but with his life.

Although Julian had the same fears, yet to keep the Duchess from giving way
to her melancholy, Madam (said he) it is without doubt there is much appearance
of my Masters being assaulted with fresh dangers, but since Heaven has been
pleased to deliver him twice, where it was beyond a mortal imagination to think
he did not perish; suffer us to hope the best, when we have cause to be assured
he lives, and can but doubt of his danger. Give me leave to put to Sea, and I
am almost confident, in a few months I shall be able to bring you some news of
him.

The Fair Diana, willing to comply with his desires, as he was to go, the next
day ordered a strong Vessel, well manned, and provided for a long Voyage to be
got ready, wherein such diligence was used, that in three days Julian took his
leave of Her, having the Command of the Ship given to him, and put to Sea with
a fair wind.

DIANA, Duchess of MANTVA: OR THE Persecuted Lover. PART II.
THE Duchess after this unexpected Intelligence, which Nise endeavored to
persuade her was more considerable than really it was, began to recover her
wonted temper, and appear abroad again, to the unspeakable joy of the whole
Court. One day when she seemed pleasanter than ordinary, being gone over to the
Island-Garden for her diversion, Cesario afflicted that his Friend Alexander
had been so long a Prisoner, addressing himself to Her on his knees, begged she
would give her self the trouble to know the conclusion of that story he had
formerly began; and then according to her own justice, either release or punish
the severe Husband of Cynthia; which the Duchess willing to hear, that by the
knowledge of another misfortunes, she might give some diversion to those
thoughts kept her own too fresh in her memory; she commanded him to rise and
finish his relation.

The Continuation of the History of Alexander and Cynthia.
YOur Highness may please to Remember (said Cesario) that when my Friends story
was interrupted by the coming of Julian, I had acquainted You, of his meeting,
instead of the expected Laura, his Friend Carlos with a Light, and drawn Sword.
Alexander was not less surprised at the encounter of his Friend, instead of
Mistress, in that threatening poisture, than disturbed with the apprehension of
being betrayed by those he thought he might with safety enough have relied on;
however not to exasperate his fair Laura, by exclaiming against her treachery,
(imagining she might be near enough to overhear him) nor to appear on the
otherside with a guilty fear where he was threatened, seeing Carlos set down the
Light on a Table, and come toward him, he drew his Sword, and advancing to
meet him; hold Carlos (said he, with a voice neither too mild, nor yet seeming
transported) since you want not courage, and have time enough to receive
Satisfaction for what you may imagine an Affront, or assault upon your Honor;
let me prevail with you before you proceed to the utmost pursuit of Revenge, to
hear what I hope you will allow, is but necessary you should be acquainted
with. At which words Carlos remaining in suspense, he said to him, I will not
pretend, worthy Friend, to excuse my self of a Crime I must needs appear guilty
of, in that you find me in this place; but if the real Truth may deserve
belief, do not out of a too nice sense of Honor refuse to Credit me. I know my
self a Criminal to come by a Clandestine way into your House, and to this
Apartment, but upon the word of your Friend, and a Gentleman, it was only the
effect of a Curiosity I could not resist, having prevailed with Leonida to
afford me only a sight of the Lovely Laura, she told me was here, but whom you
would neither own nor allow me to behold; I saw her Picture, and admired her
copied perfections, grown curious thereby, of obtaining the satisfaction to see
whether the Original was equal to what represented her -- Hold Alexander (said
Carlos interrupting him) in vain you endeavor by a feigned Story to check that
Revenge I am bound in Honor to pursue, against one I find concealed in my
Sisters Chamber at these hours; I am abused by a pretended Friend attempting
against Cynthia's Honor, nor shall the Evasion of an imagined Laura stop my
hand; but though I might with Justice enough prosecute the Chastisement where
the Crime was committed, yet that you may not complain of my wrong to
Hospitality, in making my own Walls witnesses of my Resentment; follow me to
the Park, and in the Field receive like what you are, the Punishment of your
Insolence; and ending these words, without giving him time to reply, he quitted
the Room. Alexander a while after, following, more desirous to recover his
Friendship, than hazard the Effusion of his Blood, he had so particular an
Esteem for; Carlos after he had left him, stayed so long in the House, that
Alexander was not only got to the place before him, but with some impatience,
waited near an hour, without perceiving him coming; when, the Night being very
dark, he discerned a Person draw toward him, without speaking a word, and
suspecting he purposed to fall upon him, held out his Sword to keep him off;
which not being perceived in the dark, his supposed Enemy run upon the point of
it, and falling down at his Feet, cried out with a shrill voice, Oh, I am
wounded! hold, hold Alexander, you have killed the unhappy Cynthia: At so
mournful a Voice, and the mention of Cynthia's Name, Alexander remained like
one Thunder-strook; but fearing every moment of his suspense hastened the
wretched Ladies Death, he ran in to her, and kneeling down, was about to search
where she had received the Wound; when by her want of Motion, he found her
either really Dead already, or in a Swoon through the want of Blood she had
lost, and the violence of her Fear.

Oh unfortunate Cynthia, (said he, bathing her cold Face with his Tears) What
severe impulse directed you hither, to dye by my accursed Hand? Oh Heavens! is
it possible that Beauty should not deserve your Care? or the Fates be more
propitious to an Excellence is only worthy of a Preeminence before all other
things!

His Affliction had drove him to the height of Exclamation if he had not
perceived her natural heat begin to possess the parts it had retired from; and
found by her Sighs and the panting of her Breasts, that she had more Strength
left than had her wound been Mortal she could have been Mistress of; but his
Joy to find her Life restored, was immediately checked by the consideration of
what he should do in Order to her safety. If he suffered her to lie long in
that Place, the continuance of her Bleeding and the cold serenes of the night
must certainly kill her; and on the other side, if he should quit it to carry
her to some House where she might receive help, Carlos missing him would impute
to Cowardice what was the height of Charity; neither was he more unresolved,
whether he should conveigh her: to her Brothers was unsafe, and to his own
House what would more highly irritate Carlos; but of a sudden, he took a
resolution different from whatever he had thought of before; and as loud as
ever he could force his Voice, called for Carlos to come to him; who had been a
good while searching about, when his Calls directed him to the place the Nights
Obscurity had made difficult for him to find. As soon as Alexander perceived
him coming, he left Cynthia, and going a little forward to meet him; Carlos
(said he) that bulk you see at the Foot of this spreading Oak, is the Body of
an unfortunate young Man, lies there mortally wounded. As I was coming hither,
I heard a noise of clashing Swords, and a Voice which cried out, Oh Heavens I
am dead, and immediately all was in its former silence! I came up to this place,
and found him ready to expire, whom I knew to be Son of a Gentleman, whose
quality is not inconsiderable. Carlos you are Discreet and Generous, consider
whether it were just to let him quite expire without affording what assistance
Pity demands, if he be yet capable of it; therefore I resolve to conveigh him
to the next House, and since I have now waited a while for you, it cannot seem
a disrespect to you; that I desire you would stay my coming back while I am
about an Act of so much Humanity (if you will not allow Piety) assuring you my
Return shall be as sudden as you can possibly expect. Carlos was too
Compassionate to deny so reasonable a request, and offered to Accompany and
Assist him in his Charitable Intention; which Alexander had much ado to
prevent, though at last he prevailed with him to stay, and going to the Foot of
the Tree, where it was too dark to know any Countenance, especially one Pale,
and in a deep Swoon, which Cynthia was again fallen into; Carlos himself
Assisted to Lift his own Sister into his Arms, he was come thither to Kill, for
having found him in her Chamber. Oh well deceived, too jealous Carlos: who
could have told thee what the Night concealed, how Fortune baffled thee, and a
Fiction deluded thee; Little did thou think thy Enemy Alexander was carrying
away thy too strictly observed Cynthia. He, whether it was some sudden impulse
of what was the Truth, or whether his noble Disposition would not suffer him to
be left idle, while his Enemy was employed in so pious an Action, followed him;
and let Alexander use all the Arguments he could invent for his stay, they
served but as so many persuasions to draw him forward, so that he, was forced
to keep on his way with the Lady on his Shoulders, though with the greatest
apprehensions of Disorder; he feared, what at another time he would with
Prayers have wished, that her fainted Spirits would return; for not knowing who
was near her, her Voice would have betrayed what Alexander endeavored so much
to conceal; but although there was little appearance of her coming to her self,
he was in no less Concern, how to dispose of Carlos when they came where Lights
would be produced. While his Mind was agitated with several considerations how
to free himself of his Companion, they got to the Towns end, when Alexander
pretending an adjacent House belonged to an acquaintance of his, desired Carlos
would seek for a Surgeon, while he disposed of the wounded Youth in his
Friends House; and as soon as Carlos was gone, knocking at the next door he
came at, having told his Assistant he should find him there; before any body
came down to let him in, he parted with all the have he could through two or
three of the Streets, to secure himself from meeting again with Cynthia's
already offended Brother; but then the fresh considerations how to dispose of
her, began to afflict him; if he carried her to his own house, the keeping her
there, would destroy his hopes of obtaining Laura, since Carlos could be no way
satisfied but by his marrying his Sister; and if he placed her at home, Carlos
must discover what happened; but at last, to secure his Love, and relying on
Laura's goodness, he determined to place her in her Brothers House, under
Laura's Care, who he believed might have her Cured without Carlos discovering
the real Cause of her indisposition; thus resolved, he hasted to the
Garden-door of Carlos's House; where a few hours before, he had entered to have
a sight of Laura, and finding it open, passed on to the first Room, where he
perceived his fair Charge begin to recover her Spirits, but not able to speak,
he called aloud for Laura and Leonida; but none answered, nor could he hear any
one stirring in the House; he soon imagined they were either fled from Carlos
displeasure, or gone out to employ some Friend to prevent the quarrel they knew
him engaged in; but finding these delays would be dangerous for Cynthia, and
accounting it barbarous to leave her there alone; he once more took her in his
Arms, and going back the same way he had entered, went directly to the House of
a discreet ancient Woman, whom he had confidence to rely on, having been the
Nurse of his tender Years; as soon as he came, he found a ready admittance, and
having acquainted the Charitable Ortensia in short, with the accident, he laid
his fair burden on his Nurses Bed, and taking a Light to see what condition she
was in; how was he surprised at the first glaunce he had of her Face; Oh Gods
cried he out, transported with Grief! What has my Guilty hand done; Laura is
dead, I have been the fatal Murderer of my adored Laura! But when he was going
on with his exclamations, Ortensia minded him, that if he would preserve her
Life he must have for a Surgeon; immediately he obeyed her, and after half
an hours Absence, returned with one whom he was acquainted with, and whose
secrecy he durst trust; by that time he came back, Ortensia and her Maid had
undressed the wounded Lady, and got her to Bed, and with the help of Water and
burning some things about her, brought her to her self; the Surgeon after
some inquiry, found she had only received a wound in her Arm, but by the loss
of Blood, through fear and the Violence she had undergone in being carried so
far, were the causes of her lying in so long a Swoon; as soon as her wound was
dressed, she was left to her Repose, Ortensia watching by her, and the skilful
Surgeon rejoiced Alexander with the assurance that her health would be
restored again in few days. The next Morning Alexander being permitted to Visit
her, found her in a much better condition, than he could have hoped in so short
a time; but his presence, and the consideration of where she was, made her
discover by her Blushes, and shame, the confusion she was in; which her
passionate Lover endeavored with his utmost persuasions to remove, assuring
her of all the Respect she could command from one whose Life was dedicated to
her Service; and after having at her request informed her of all that had past
since she received her unlucky wound, both of Carlos his accompanying Her to
the Town, and of his own carrying her home where both Cynthia and Leonida were
missing, he begged to learn from her why she had dissembled her own Name of
Laura, and deceived him with that of Carlos's Sister; but just as she was about
to speak, Ortensia came in, and told him, that his Servant Fabricio whom he had
sent for, was come, and must needs speak with him; he went out and presently
returned with a Letter in his hand, which having told his fair Mistress, was
sent by Carlos, at her entreaty he read it to her; wherein Carlos accused him
for a Coward, and unworthy the name of a Gentleman, to hide himself from his
just Resentment; telling him that after he could learn nothing of him at the
house where he promised to stay, he had returned and waited all night in the
Park; but since he did not appear, he summoned him to meet that Morning in the
same Place, if he would prevent being Posted a Coward in the Afternoon; and
that he might be satisfied with the wrongs were done by him, he had sent in the
Letter, the same Note was thrown by Alexander the day before in Carlos's
Chamber, which was the appointment of that Meeting he had interrupted by coming
Armed to him, which Carlos declared was his Sisters Hand, and Alexander had
unawares, given it him among other Papers he had of him; Alexander was afresh
confused at the reading his Letter, admiring why he should declare that
Cynthia's which he knew was thrown to him from Laura, but turning to the
Charming Lady, and seeing her smile, he begged her if possible, to clear those
Doubts and Mistakes he had so long lain under; which with a Charming sweetness
she did; telling him that the occasion of Carlos denying the Picture to be
hers, was an effect of his innate Jealousy, which she had continued, thereby
with more Caution being able to try the sincerity of his Love, and prevent her
Brothers suspicion of her; but that being assured of his worth, and the reality
of his Passion, she designed the night before, when he came to her, to clear
his Error, and give him leave to desire her Brothers approbation of their
Marriage; but finding as she was coming to meet him, her brother there before
her, and overhearing their appointment of a Duel in the Park, she had put on a
Suit of Boys Clothes lay by her, which her Maid had got, and wore sometimes to
divert her in private; and followed him to the Park, with a Resolution of
imploring him not to draw his Sword against her Brother, when by his unlucky
mistake, she had met that welcome he designed for Carlos; That the Story of the
Duke and Marquis in Rome, was what had in some part happened to her self, and
occasioned her Brothers Return from thence sooner than he was expected.
Alexander was as much delighted with the knowledge of his Beloved Laura's being
Carlos's Sister, as before he had been in disorder with the fear of her being
so; But not to detain your Highness too long in this part of their Adventures,
I shall only add, that in few days the careful Surgeon restored her to the
Health he had promised; and Alexander having gained her consent, procured a
Priest, and was privately Married to her, before he stirred out of Ortensia's
House, from the moment he had brought her thither. In the mean while, Carlos
ignorant of all that had past, missing his Sister from Home, and being able to
learn no News of his Enemy, whom he supposed had stole her; engaged all his
Friends to join with him in the Revenge he resolved to take upon all
Alexander's, and one Evening when I was there with many others, to consult what
course was best, whereby to have his injuries satisfied, a Messenger came in
and delivering him a Letter, told him that Alexander and his Sister desired the
Company of him and his Friends to Supper with them at Alexanders House; and
opening the Letter, found they were Married, and wanted only his Approbation of
what was done to complete their happiness; at first he could scarce give way to
his Resentment; but by his Friends persuasion, and the consideration both of
his new Brothers Birth, Fortune, and their ancient Friendship, we prevailed
with him to go; where, before the Company broke up, I was a joyful Witness of
their firm Reconcilement, each accusing and excusing one another, with mutual
endearments of Love and affection.

For some days after their Marriage and this Fortunate Reconcilement,
Alexanders Doors were continually crowded with Coaches of all the considerable
people about the Court, to wish Joy to the new married Pair, in one of which
Alfredo and Porcia being returned from Loretto, and coming by, inquired what
was the occasion of so much Concourse in that place; and being informed of it
by the first they examined, each looked on other, with no little disorder in
their Countenances; Alfredo exclaimed against Alexander as a false friend, who
had betrayed him for his own ends, and Porcia not without Tears, complained of
his ingratitude, and counterfeit Love, neither dissembling their Resentment,
nor the displeasure they had conceived against one they thought had equally
injured them both. But after a little stay they went on, not desirous to hear a
repetition of what created them so much trouble. Alfredo having left Porcia at
her Fathers House, retired to his own, each spending that night with a
sufficient inquietude, for what they had heard relating to Alexander; who the
next day hearing of Alfredo's Return, made him a visit, and by a full recital
of his adventures to him, endeavored to satisfy the former Lover of Cynthia,
how far he was from being his designed Rival, and of the impossiblity of acting
otherwise than he had done, when all circumstances were considered; which
Alfredo accepted of as an Excuse, more than could be required from him,
desiring only the continuance of his Friendship, which Alexander as willingly
promised; but if Alfredo was in appearance satisfied, and strove to conceal
that Love he could no longer publicly own, Porcia's thoughts were taken up
with a more fatal Passion, resolving to disturb, if possible, their tranquillity
who had deprived her of all she could expect or hope for. But as her
resolutions were extraordinary, she was as cautious in working them to the
event she designed; and having a ready and pleasing wit, besides several
accomplishments which were generally taking, as well skilled both in Music,
Singing and Dancing, she purposed to employ all her faculties to propogate her
wicked plot; and, to conceal all her malice under a specious show of kindness,
she daily visited the young Bride, and appearing reconciled to Alexander, who
rejoiced in finding no worse effect, of her displeasure, she so ingratiated her
self into the affection of the innocent Cynthia, that she thought no time well
spent when Alexander was absent, if it was not compensated by that of the
insinuating Porcia; they continued some time in agreeable conversation, during
which, Alfredo, both as a friend of Alexanders and Kinsman of Porcia's, came so
often to the House, that Alexander (though not capable of jealousy) began to
think his assiduity more than needful; but unwilling to take any notice of it,
he borrowed my Country House for a few days, and retired thither with his
beloved Wife, pretending to be a little at rest from the disturbances of the
Town, but indeed fairly to shake off Alfredo's company: Cynthia was very joyful
to be in any place where Alexander was with her, but imagining the Country
sports would rob her of his Company, she invited Porcia to be her Companion in
that Retirement, who as willingly accepted of it, having easily procured her
Fathers license to pass some days in so virtuous Company. But when they were
there, Alfredo continuing to be much in the Country, as he had been before in
the Town, under the notion of visiting his Cousen, Alexander was almost ready
to desire both him and his Kinswoman to return home, which he had certainly
done, if respect and fear of displeasing his Dear Cynthia had not withheld
him; but as close as he carried his disturbance at Alfredo's being there, the
subtle Porcia soon perceived it, and imagining her purpose grown ripe for
execution; one Afternoon finding Alexander alone in the Garden, went to him,
and appearing in a violent disorder, told him, she still continued that respect
for one had once been her Lover, that she could not brook his being injured
without a sensible affliction to her self; and after obliging him by her
interrupted expressions, to urge her the more earnestly to know what she had to
say, dubiously hinted that she could give him reasons why he ought not to be
too negligent of his reputation; Alexander at first believing she only
intimated what he had before thought, not to permit Alfredo's too often visits,
appeared sensible of her care in mentioning it to him; but pressing her to give
him some reasons of what had induced her to speak on that Subject; after she
had made him urge it several times, seeming with much reluctance to bring out
her words, she told him that Cynthia, forgetful of what was most tender in the
world, her Honor, had wronged him; Alexander enraged at so bold an accusation
of one he could not admit of an ill thought against in his Breast, falling into
a rage, drew his Dagger, as if resolved with her death, to expiate the Crime he
held her guilty of, in profaning his Wives reputation, but the very sight of it
was enough to make her fall spiritless at his Feet, and a little recollecting
himself, going to take her up, as he laid hold of her Arm, a note fell from her
Sleeve, which hastily taking up, he knew the hand had wrote it to be Cynthia's,
so that leaving her as she lay, he opened the Paper, and read with no less
disorder than he had put the Possessor of it into, these words:

Alexander goes to Morrow to Mantua for a day or two, so that you may safely
meet me in the same disguise you have formerly done.

Alexander read it over several times, and being fully convinced it was his
Wives writing, looking down on Porcia was sorry for the fright he had put her
into, and raising her up, in a little space brought her to her self again; who
seeming offended at his rashness, would have gone and left him, telling him his
threats were an ill requital, for what she had done, to preserve his Honor,
for which she was willing to expose her wicked Kinsman Alfredo to his
resentment, without consideration of her near alliance to him; but Alexander
holding her fast, begged a thousand pardons for what he had offered to do,
desiring her to consider, that his Love and confidence of of his Wife were
such, that he could not with patience hear she had injured him; and entreated
her to let him partake of all she knew concerning his then cruel Enemies; which
she cunningly did, telling him his Wives Maid had told her of their meeting
often in the disguise of Shepherds Habits, which he knew his Wife had of late
much affected to wear, and that he being to go to Mantua, she was employed to
send Alfredo that Note, and desired her to enclose that in a Letter to him, but
she abhorring to be assistant in so wicked and injurious a design, having found
him out, was resolved to expose all their lives to his just anger, rather than
his reputation should be blemished by their private wickedness. Alexanders
misfortune was such, that, too easily overcome by her subtle insinuation, and
looking on the Bill as a too evident proof of his Wives falsehood, raised to the
highest sense of indignation a man tender of his Honor could be, when he found
it assaulted, and as he believed irreparably stained, resolved their Lives
should in part expiate the wrong they had done him; but to make his cruelty
appear more like an act of justice, than the effect of a misguided rage, by her
council he determined to send Alfredo the Note; and pretending to prosecute his
journey would return in private to an appointed place where Porcia should meet,
and direct him where his Abusers were. With this resolution they departed from
the Garden, Porcia to pursue the effecting of her plot, and Alexander to lament
the misfortunes he was fallen into, Love, Grief, Rage and Jealousy combating
in his Breast; what am I reduced to, did he say to himself? (having retired to
give more scope to his grief, where there were no witnesses of it;) can I hate,
can I punish Cynthia, can I believe her innocence ever imagined a thought that
might wrong me? No, no, I love her, I adore her now she is my Wife more than
ever; Porcia is false, and would abuse me, Alfredo a Villain that would seduce
her, but cannot; I Will acquaint my Dear Cynthia with her accusation, and be
delighted to see her without disturbance clear her self from so vile an
imputation. But is not this Note her own writing? (would he say again,) does
she not appoint their meeting in a disguise, when I am absent? who knows, but
she formerly loved that Traitor Alfredo, when he sought to her Brother for her,
but was denied; she is but too apparently false; and, like the rest of her
dissembling Sex, under the greatest pretext of virtue, conceals most Devil:
Base, Infamous Cynthia, thou have wronged me, and shall dye for it, thy own
Hand condemns thee; nor is it the effect of Jealousy, but apparent Wrong thou
have committed; Nay, had thy wickedness arrived no farther than the very
writing such a Note to a man that is not thy Husband, it were a sin in him not
to be forgiven by Heaven, should he let it remain unpunished. With this fatal
determination he endeavored to strengthen himself against all the Approaches
more tender Thoughts made upon him, and strove to pass the remainder of that
tedious day, without the least appearance in his Countenance either of trouble
or disturbance; and toward Evening taking his leave of Cynthia and her
Companion, went away, as he pretended, to Mantua; but as soon as it was quite
dark he returned alone, and going into the Garden by a private door, concealed
himself in a little Summer House till the time of executing his Revenge should
come, being confirmed in it, by having met, as he went toward Mantua, Alfredo
in the disguise was appointed him, walking toward his Lodge. Porcia in the
mean time perceiving all things succeeded as she had desired, (for Alfredo,
deceived by her, did really believe his hopes of overcoming Cynthia were near
accomplished;) and having, after Alexanders departure, persuaded his Wife to
walk out and enjoy the pleasure of a cool Evenings Air, both dressed themselves
in the Habit of Shepherdesses at Porcia's request, who told her, that Alfredo
would be in the Field in the same Dress, and divert them with some Music,
which he did; and invited by his Cousen, waited on Cynthia back to her House
when it began to grow dark; as soon as she came to the Garden, Cynthia taking
her leave of him, with Excuses that she could not invite his stay all Night in
her Lords absence, she went in, and Porcia staying behind, directed him to
conceal himself in the Garden till it were time to carry him where he should be
Master of his wishes; and having disposed of him, she went to the Summer House
to Alexander, having before, to heighten his rage, so ordered it, that Alfredo
led Cynthia just under the Window as they came in, her self and Leonida
following at a distance, that Alexander might be more fully confirmed in the
truth of what she had told him: whom she found in a disorder suitable to what
she wished, telling him, that Cynthia was gone in to stay till all his Servants
were in Bed, and then she would come down to bring Alfredo out of the Garden to
her Chamber, but begged he would not show himself till she came again to him,
when she would carry him to the Room where he should catch them together; which
he promised, and dismissed her; but about half an hour after, grown impatient of
longer delay, he went out, and come almost to the Door of the House, just as he
saw a man and woman going into it, so that assured it was Afredo and his Wife,
not able longer to withold his fury, he run to them, and shot Alfredo with a
Pistol he had provided, seconding his blow with stabbing a dagger into
Cynthia's breast, whereby they both fell dead at his feet, without uttering a
word or dying groan; and not satisfied therewith, he hasted into the House, and
bestowed the same punishment on Leonida for her treachery; but neither designed
nor imagined he had done any hurt to Porcia, and afterward hearing of her
being wounded, concluded he had in the dark mistaken her for Leonida. Thus far,
continued Cesario, I have acquainted your Highness with the Adventures of my
unhappy Friend, to the time he found shelter at your feet, from the pursuit of
those Peasants would have apprehended him; but in the time has passed since,
there have many things happened, which I hope, will more encourage your Highness
to pardon him, and which Carlos his Wives Brother (who attends without) can
give a better account of, than has yet come to my knowledge.

The Duchess being told it was late, deferred hearing the conclusion of
Alexanders story till the next day; when she commanded he should be brought
before her, promising to sentence him, either with rigor or favor, as
Carlos's story should discover his guilt or innocence; and accordingly in the
morning, as soon as the Duchess appeared abroad, Cynthia's Brother was
commanded to her presence, who led a Lady veiled by the hand, which being a
thing not permitted in the Presence, it was commanded to be taken off, and the
Lady was known to be the supposed murdered Cynthia. As soon as the Duchess was
informed who she was, with a satisfaction to behold her living, whom she had
with pity condoled as innocently slain, she received her with more than a
common kindness; and being earnestly desirous to know how she had escaped her
Husbands misguided rage, Carlos, being commanded to give her an account of it,
after his dutiful submission to her, continued where Cesario had broke off.

Your Highness (said he, addressing himself to the Duchess) has been
acquainted with the rigor Alexander used to those he thought guilty of
blemishing his Honor. Porcias designs, and the circumstances I am now to
acquaint your Highness with, were learned from Leonida my Sisters Maid, who so
long survived the wound Alexander had given her, as to confess the wrong she
had done her Mistess, and begging her pardon, to advise her she would for a
while secure her self from an apparently well-grounded rage might prove fatal
to her: my Brother in-law that Night believing he had sufficiently chastised
the ruiners of his Honor, left the House, and retired into the adjacent
Fields, while my Sister, remaining secure in her Chamber from any apprehensions
of so bloody a Tragedy, hearing a Pistol go off, and the shrieks of her Maid,
when stabbed by Alexander, was at first surprised with so much fear, that she
had not boldness enough to stir from her Chamber; but at last venturing forth,
protected by her innocence, the first object she met with was Leonida bleeding
on the Floor; as soon as that unhappy Maid saw her Mistress with a Light in her
Hand, raising her self a little; Ah Madam (said she with a feeble voice) beware
of your incensed Husband, who designs your death for a crime you are most
innocent of: my Sister surprised with what she said, without offering to
retire, desired her to declare what had been the occasion of her lying in that
dreadful condition; Ah Madam! (said the dying Leonida) forgive my falsehood, and
let my crimes dye with me. You have formerly heard my Master had expressed some
kindness to Porcia, and that Alfredo adored your Beauty. When she returned with
her unhappy Cousen from Loretto, finding you were married to him she hoped
would have been her Husband, resolving, if possible, to recover him, she
insinuated her self into your affection, and promising Alfredo should marry me
if I would be assistant in propagating her design, she endeavored to raise
Alexanders jealousy to such a height, that sacrificing you to his resentment,
as a reward of her care to preserve his Honor, as soon as you were dead he
should in gratitude let her supply your place; and to effect it, she deceived
the overfond Alfredo, with a belief, that by her means you should be reduced to
gratify his wicked desires, obliging him to come disguised to the Village,
that malicious Peasants should not take notice of his assiduity, at the same
time deceiving you with a pretense that he came to court her, and me that all
tended to your ruin, and the making him my Husband; but in a long time being
able to ground no jealousy strong enough to possess Alexanders Breast with a
prejudice against one he so entirely loved; she cut her right hand on purpose,
and coming bleeding to you, as if done by mischance, she entreated you would
write a Note to him as from her, desiring he would come the next Night
disguised as he used to do; which as soon as you had done (as she her self told
me) she showed it to Alexander, and sent him another, by which means she
believed he had been instigated to so much cruelty, and had (mistaking her for
my Sister) given her a just reward of her treachery. Then begging she would for
a while secure her self from her Husbands fury, and grant her a remission of
her offense, she resigned her life. My Sister terrified and amazed, ran
immediately out, and wandering all Night in the Fields, came the next day to my
House, giving me an account of what had passed; I was resolved to endeavor a
sudden reconcilement, and to that purpose was sending in search of Alexander,
when my Friend Cesario came to me, and told me he was made a Prisoner by your
Highness order. My Sister, what with her grief and fright, was taken with so
violent a Feavour, that for many days her life was despaired of: and if she had
died I resolved to prosecute Alexander as her Murderer; but Heaven having been
pleased, after a tedious sickness to restore her health, and finding she
lamented the imprisonment of her Husband; I had long since brought her to
implore his life of your Highness, had not Cesario assured me your
indisposition denied any access to be had to You; and waiting his Directions, I
have now brought her to beg You would pardon his severity against those, who
either had, or really designed to offend him, and make her happy in being
restored to a Husband she so dotingly loves.

The Conclusion of Carlos story which was followed by Cynthia's begging for
Alexanders Life on her Knees, so sensibly touched the compassionate Duchess;
that she commanded the Prisoner to be sent for, and making Cynthia retire,
after the whole Story had been repeated to him, so as if his Wife were really
dead, and he had with Tears lamented his mistaken cruelty she, was brought
forth, and with an unexpressible joy received into his Arms, imploring a
thousand times her Pardon for his unjust suspicion, which she as easily granted
to one so much beloved by her. The Duchess delighted with their happy
reconcilement, commanded Alexander should be discharged from his Imprisonment,
allowing the Death of those he had slain, but a just punishment of their
wickedness. But if the happy pair lived together with all the tranquillity
imaginable; after two Months were expired from the time of Julians departure,
the Duchess began to entertain new fears of Fredericks being lost, and
directed by a violent impatience, she went every day to the Sea side, hoping
for a sight of the Vessel was to bring back the Messenger gone in search of her
persecuted Lover; One Morning after the Sea had raged two days before with a
violent Storm, the impetuosity of its Fury being then abated, as far as they
could discern, a Ship appeared making toward the Haven, and some hours after,
being come up fair with the Shore, it was known to be the same which Julian had
the command of. The Duchess being told of it, was about to order a Boat on
Board, when they discerned that of the Ship, put off to come to Land. If the
Princess was delighted with the expectation of seeing Julian again, hoping he
would be as good as his Word, never to return till he had learnt some News of
his Master; on the other side she was assaulted with fears, that he had only
sent back the Vessel, while he proceeded by Land in his earnest search; But
that disturbance was soon over, when she saw the Loyal Servant of Frederick
come to throw himself at her Feet, and as she imagined, with a Countenance
which fore-boded nothing of ill; as soon as he had paid his Duty to her, and
kissed her hand, having no longer patience to defer her inquiry: leaning on
Nise's Arm, she walked a little distance from the Company, and finding they
were out of hearing; What Julian (said she) have you been firm to your promise?
Shall I hear that your Lord is safe? Madam, (said the faithful Roman) I had no
more been happy in beholding your Highness and Mantua, if I could not tell you,
that by the Providence of Heaven, my dear Master lives, encompassed with as
much happiness as he is capable of while absented from your Presence, which you
will find by this Letter he commanded me to deliver to your own hand. The
Duchess in a transport of delight to hear of His Safety, a few hours before
she thought there was but too much cause to believe was dead; with an oblidging
smile, received the Letter from Julian, and having opened it, read these words,
FREDERICK To his Divine Princess, The Duchess of MANTVA.
Madam,
Amidst all the sufferings Heaven was pleased to destine me to, I found some
Alliviation, with the thoughts that I was not hated by my adored Princess,
until I created my self new Afflictions, after my Stars seemed to cease their
Persecutions. I own my self highly Guilty to suffer a Thought should enter my
breast, that you had forgot how blessed you had once made me; But I shall please
my self with the Belief, that you have Goodness enough to forgive One, would
not desire Life if denied the Title of your Servant; Julian will give you an
Account of whatever has happened to me since our Separation, and the
unavoidable necessity of my Stay here; but I hope Fortune will prove so
propitious, that in a few days you will behold at your Feet, your Adorer,

FREDERICK.




If the Duchess was not a little delighted with her Letter, she was as much
concerned to know what Crime Frederick accused himself of; and being impatient
to hear the Recital of his Adventures, she returned to the Palace, and retiring
to her Closet with Nise, sent for Julian in, who in Obedience to her Command,
made the following Relation of his Masters Life, from the time he was separated
from him in Spain.

The Continuation of the History of FREDERICK.
YOur Highness may please to remember, I told you of my seeing my master fall
dead, as I thought, among his Enemies on the Lovers Rock; How long he continued
deprived of his Senses, he could not well tell; But being in the ordinary dress
of a Slave, by what we could since conjecture, it was his Chance to be thrown
one of the Last into the Pit among the dead Moors by the Governor of
Antiquera's Order; and that by being taken up and stirred, his Spirits began to
be agitated, so that he came to open his Eyes again; when having a little
Recovered his Understanding, and hearing all quiet near him, he began to look
about, and found himself lying upon a heap of dead Bodies; after a great deal
of struggling, he made a shift to get out of the Pit, but not believing he had
Strength to walk where he might get help, and his wounds bleeding a fresh by
his straining, he sat down, patiently to resign his Life, while his thoughts
were employed in the contemplation of your Beauty, which he beheld in the
Picture, was brought hither afterward, by the stranger Merchant. But as he
declared to me, the sight of your Image before his Eyes, made him offer up his
Prayers to Heaven, that he might live once more to behold his adored Original,
and believing if his wounds were stopped from bleeding more, he might have
Strength left to get down the Rock, where some Passenger might see him; he
pulled the Wreath from a Turbant lay near him, and girt it about his wast as
strait as he could, finding he lost most Blood from a wound on his Side. In
that Posture he continued about an hour, when impatient of a hopeless delay,
not able to rise, he crawled to the descent of the Rock, and from thence
suffered himself to slide by degrees, till he was almost at the bottom; but
then he grew so weak, that he was not able to move himself a step farther, and
after he had remained so about half an hour, as the Sun was declining apace
toward the West, he saw at a distance a Party of about forty Horse, who were
Crossing about, as if they purposed to take a View of the Country, in Order to
some Design; he had not strength to call out, or if he had, they were at too
great a distance to be heard; and withal, confident they were Moors, he
imagined their discovery of him, would rather anticipate his Death, than be a
means of preserving his Life; so that he continued sitting on the ground when
he saw the Horsemen draw toward the Rock; and coming pretty near, one of the
Company Alighted with a seeming purpose to climb up to the top of it; but as he
looked about, seeing a Man all Bloody, he came to my Master, and asked him how
he had fallen into that Condition: who with a true deceit, thereby to encourage
their Assistance of him, answered with a faint Voice Arabic; in fighting with
Christians; as soon as the Moor heard what he said, turning back, he went to
the rest of the Company, and presently returned with two more; they asked him
seral questions; but finding he had not strength to speak, they took him up in
their Arms, and putting him upon a quiet Horse, with a Man behind to hold him
up, carried him away to a little Town about a League off, where one of the
Company, whose Profession it was, searched and dressed his wounds; telling him
withal, he should not be discouraged, for that none of them were Mortal; he
continued the next day and night in that little Village; but so weak that he
could not utter a word loud enough to be heard; and the Moors who had taken
care of him, being to depart, they procured a Cart to lay him on, and ordered
it to follow softly after them to Cordova, he that was the Surgeon staying
with him: there had past a week from the time of his being hurt, to that of
their Arrival at the City, and the next day after it, his wounds being in a
fair way of Cure, and his Spirits so much recovered, that he could, and was by
his Surgeon allowed to speak; the Chief of those who had delivered him from
the Rock, came to see him; and telling him he was Son to the General of
Cordova, and sent out to make some Discovery, which way Antiquera might be
assaulted, when he found him in that weak Condition at the Foot of the white
Rock, believing it was an extraordinary encounter had reduced him almost to his
end; That both out of Charity, and a desire to know how he came by his wounds,
he was induced to give Order that if possible, his Life should be preserved,
and now that there was some appearance of it, he desired in requital of his
kindness, that he would satisfy his Curiosity in what he demanded to know of
him. My Master was very willing to comply with his desire, having had time to
consider what Account was properest to give of his Misfortunes, so that after
returning him thanks with much acknowledgment of his kindness to him; I must
confess, noble Deliverer (said my Master) that I am descended of Christian
Parents, but having spent much time in Africa about Tunis, I may reckon my self
indebted to the Moors for part of my Education. I served that King some time in
his Wars with so much Success, that his goodness thought the greatest things he
could do for me, such as he had no reason to wish unbestowed; and being young,
and desirous to see a Country so much celebrated as this is, for the Wars
between you and the Christians. I took my leave of him and accompanied Hamet,
one of his principal Subjects, who came over hither on an Embassy from him. We
arrived some time since at Malaga, and that Morning you met me, having
traveled so far in to the Country, there was upon the Rock a sharp Dispute
between some Christians and Hamets Party, and there after several wounds, I
fell, remaining as dead for a long time; but coming to my self, I lay upon a
Heap of dead Bodies all of Hamets Party, but how he happened to be overcome, I
am able to give you no Account off. The Moor was much pleased with the short
Narrative my Master gave, and conjectured what was really true, that a Party
from Antiquera might have fallen on them, and either slain or made them all
Captives. After this, if my Master was used with a Charitable Civility before,
they now gave him Respect as the Favorite of a King, and great Soldier, being
visited by most of the considerable Men in that Court. And after six weeks, his
wounds being so well, that he was able to walk abroad, his Friend carried him
to wait on the King, having provided him Rich Garments of the Moorish Fashion.
He was very urgent to oblidge his continuance with him, and to have him accept
a Command in his Army against the Christians; which my Master not without
difficulty was excused from, urging the necessity of his Removal, to inquire
what was become of those he had accompanied from Tunis.

As soon as he was perfectly cured, though with regret of those he left, he
took his leave of Cordova, and being accommodated with Horses to Valencia,
there upon pretense of security to Travel, he got a Pass from the Christian
Garrisons, and being brought to the nearest, by Moors he had hired, making use
of his Pass for their Return, as soon as they were without the Walls, he made
the Governor a Visit, and discovered himself to be a Sicilian; and giving him a
Relation of some of his Adventures he so much obliged him, that he not only
made him his own Guess for some days he stayed there, (both to rest himself not
yet able to endure a long Journey and to change his Moorish Habit he then wore)
but supplied him with all things necessary both for his Journey and Voyage,
which was succesful enough, not only while he Traveled by Land, but for some
days after, he had put to Sea in a Vessel bound hither; one day as he was
sitting on the Deck, pleased with the hopes of being soon at Mantua, which the
Master promised him a sight of in two days, if the Wind continued fair; holding
your Picture in his hand, He with the point of a Knife engraved those words,
gave you the first Intelligence of his being alive. That Night the Wind was
fair and fresh, but in the Morning a general Fright seized all the Mariners,
when they beheld not a mile to windward of them, a large Ship, by whose Antiant
they knew her to be a Turkish Pirate of Algier; in less than an hour she came
close up with them, and commanding the Master to strike his sails and yield, No
persuasions of my Lords could prevail with them to stand on their defense, not
being above twenty in number, half Passengers, and in the Turks Ship near three
hundred Men: only the Master advised all his Passengers to throw away their
best Clothes, that their Ransomes might be the more moderate; which they all
did except my Lord, who though he stood with his Sword in his hand resolved to
sell his Life at as dear a rate as he could; yet as soon as they were Boarded,
overpowred with numbers, he was made a Captive among the rest, and stripped
both of all his Clothes, and what was dearest to him in the World, next your
self, the Picture was taken from him; the Turks as soon as they had searched
their Prize, taking all the Prisoners on Board their own Ship, sent the other
with some of their own Men, home to Algier, laden with all the Booty they had
taken; themselves keeping out at Sea for more purchase; ten days after their
Captivity, about noon the Turks espied a Sail and giving her Chase, found in a
short time, that she endeavored as much to get up with them, so that preparing
for a Fight, they shut up their Prisoners under Hatches, leaving only half a
dozen of the Lustiest on the Deck, to help them at their work in ordering the
Tackle, among which my Master happened to be one. The Ship which they had
discovered making them to be Turks, about an hour before Sunset, was come up so
near them, that on each side they began to make use of their great Shot, having
put abroad the Colors of Sicily: for they durst not adventure on either part
to Board, the Wind being very fresh and the Sea running as high. Now Madam, I
must acquaint you with a desperate Attempt of my always undaunted Lord, who
percieving a Ship of his own Country so near, and he engaged on the contrary
part, resolving either on death or Liberty, snatching up a Headpiece lay on the
Deck, he clapped it on, and half naked as the Turks had made him, leapt into the
Sea; with an intent to get on Board the Ship of his Countrymen; the Pirates
seeing him swiming in the Water, made severel Shots at him with their Arrows,
some of which were directed so well, that the Helmet preserved his Life, the
Waves being a sufficient Armor for the rest of his Body; and the Sicilians
perceiving what passed, used so much diligence to recover him on Board them,
that bearing up to him and throwing out a Rope, which he laid hold of, they got
him safe into their Vessel; The Fight continued some time after, till the Wind
increasing, and Night coming on, decided the Controversy; and the next Morning
they were out of sight of their Enemies. When they were at quiet from the
Turks, the Captain of the Sicilians hearing my Master was his Countryman, sent
for him into his Cabin, to examine who he was? but could learn nothing more,
than that he was descended of honest Parents in Messina, and had spent most of
his Time in Travel, having been several years in Captivity; but was in requital
of what he said, informed by the Captain, that the King of Sicily dying about
two Months before without Heirs, the Crown was descended to Count Frederick in
the right of his Mother, who was Niece to the deceased King; and that He guided
by a Youthful curiosity, had some years before left his Country to Travel, not
being then so much as the presumptive Heir to the Crown, the King having a Son
living who died in the flower of his Youth, two years before his Father; and
being further examined by my Master how the Government was at present managed,
he told him that by the Kings will, the Council had taken the Charge of all
affairs, until the Return of their Prince, having sent out several Ships to
all Ports of the Continent thereabouts to inquire if possible they could learn
any News of him, and that himself was abroad upon that Account; If my Master
was surprised with an unexpected Joy to find himself after being so happily
restored to his freedom, the expected Successor to a Crown, he declared to me
that the delight he received from such an alteration of his Condition, was
chiefly that he had a Present by it, not unworthy your Highness acceptance; but
to pursue my Discourse continued Julian, (finding how pleasing what he said was
to the Duchess) after the Captain of the Ship had fully satisfied him in all
circumstances which so nearly concerned him; but how can you expect (said my
Master) to find the Prince you are in search of, when by a long absence his
Contenance is not known to any of you; it is true, replied the Captain, neither
my self, nor any in this Ship know him, but should any but the true Prince
declare himself such, when he arrived in Sicily, there are enew who are
acquainted with him; then said my Master, as soon as you arrive in Sicily, be
assured you shall have a certain intelligence where he is. The Captain and all
his Company overjoyed at news so little expected, from that moment directed
their Coarse homewards, and being favored with a fair wind, in few days came
to an Anchor under the Walls of Messina; my Master all that while keeping
himself concealed; and going ashore with the Captain, they went together to
the Council, which upon their landing they heard was sitting; but before they
entered into the Palace, some of my Masters former acquaintance, seeing and
knowing him, immediately the news ran through the whole City, that their King
was returned; which being soon confirmed on all hands, never were acclamations
greater than the Sicilians expressed at that time. The Counsel the next day
resigned the Government into his hands, and not many after he was solemnly
Crowned: But that his happiness might not be too complete, while he was
solicitous in settling the affairs of State, that he might hasten his Voyage
hither to lay his Crown at your Feet; a sudden information deprived him of all
that joy he thought incapable of interruption; for a Ship arriving in the Port
from Mantua, the King commanded the Captain of her to attend him, that he might
inquire some news of your Highness; the ignorant Seaman told him, the common
Discourse of this place was, that your marriage would speedily be consummated
with the Prince of Mayorca, who a few days before his departure was arrived
there for the effecting of it. The occasion of this report, I presume, your
Highness knows was grounded upon the magnificent appearance of that Prince in
your Court, with hopes of accomplishing his design; but finding how averse you
was to the alteration of your condition, soon returned with disappointment to
his own Country. The information my Prince received from the deceived Captain;
was (as he told me) an affliction too sensible to be expressed; and he has
since condemned himself for being so weak as to upbraid you of inconstancy,
though he confessed, the reason you had to believe him long before dead, might
be a sufficient excuse for your making choice of so considerable a Prince to be
your Husband; however this disturbance, and the assurance of your being
another, made him negligent of sending to acquaint you, either that he was
living, or of the alteration Heaven was pleased to make in his condition; and
in this State I found his affairs when I arrived at Sicily; having after I
departed from your Highness spent a month at Sea, in a fruitless search; till
coming in sight of that Island, more out of a desire to see the Country had
given birth to my Lord, than any expectation of hearing any thing concerning
him, I put into the Harbor, and going ashore, I was informed by some persons
I met on the strand, what a general joy the Islanders were filled with upon the
return of their long absent King, who was Crowned a few days before; and being
offered by them to be brought to his presence, which I accepted; your Highness
may please to guess how much I was surprised to find my Master in the person of
their King: his goodness was always too great to me, to be forgotten by him, so
that I was scarce advanced half way in the presence, when he rose, and taking
(...) from my knee, in which posture I had put (...) my return with a kindness
much beyond what I could have expected for more eminent services than I had
ever been able to do for him; he asked of my deliverance from the Rock, and how
I had spent my time since; which having told him in Mantua for the most part, I
was not a little amazed, to perceive he took no notice of my words, or so much
as inquired whether you were living or no? And a while after taking me apart
from the Company; what, ( Julian, said he,) is my misery amidst all this
triumph, since the inconstant Diana could so soon forget me? And fetching a
deep sigh, by his silence gave me leave to speak; which I did, telling him, how
concerned you had been at the thoughts of his death, and that by a surmised
probability that he might still be living, You had sent me in search of him; at
which words he stopped my proceeding in what I would have said: How is it
possible (said he) that you can pretend to deceive me with the imagination,
that my life can be of any concern to her, who is now Wife to the Prince of
Majorca? Sir, replied I, presuming to interrupt him; what unhappy mistake has
given you an unnecessary disturbance? for that Prince you name, though it is
true he arrived at Mantua with hopes of being favored by the Princess, he
found her reception so cool, that after a short stay he returned disappointed
of his pretenses: she is still unmarried, and wishes nothing more than to hear
of your safety. The effect my discourse wrought on him, is beyond my capacity
to express. He took me in his Arms, embracing me a thousand times, and calling
me his Genius, his Good Angel. Is it possible Dear Julian? said he, that my
Princess is not married, and that she still retains a favorable thought of her
faithful Frederick. Oh! I must fly to her, and throw my self at her feet, to
beg pardon for my wicked suspicion of her goodness. With such Transports he
entertained himself for a long time; and in the conclusion, not able to brook
any delay, the same Evening he gave me a letter to your Highness, with order
that I should embarque that Night, and sail for Mantua, to assure you, that as
soon as ever he could get his Navy to Sea, he would come with it hither to lay
the Crown of Sicily at the Feet of his most adored Princess.

The satisfaction Julian gave the fair Duchess by his relation, was greater
than her modesty would express, even before those she had an entire confidence
in. But that Frederick might be received with all the Grandeur and State
imaginable, she suffered his coming to be published, and on what design; which
soon produced as great a joy in Mantua, as the Sicilians had expressed at the
arrival of their King. But amidst all these triumphant preparations, a sudden
accident, put all the Court into confusion. For Alvaro, the young Prince of
Majorca, being equally captivated with the Beauty and Fortune of Diana, and
perceiving that his public addresses were slighted by her, resolved to attempt
that by a treacherous force, which he was persuaded no assiduity or respect
would procure. So that although he appeared to take a solemn leave, both of the
Duchess and Mantua; yet having by considerable presents gained some of the
Court to assist him, he resolved to steal, and carry her forcibly with him to
Majorca; in order to which, as soon as the Ships had attended him to Mantua,
with that himself was on board of, were out of sight of the Town, he commanded
them to hover near the Coast without coming in sight, while himself stood in
again for land; and four nights after his departure, concealing his Ship in a
private Creek, he landed at a small Village about four Leagues from Mantua,
with those in his Company he thought needful for his design; and after having
stayed there till he could conveniently procure disguises for himself and those
were with him; he came privately to a Country House, a League from the Town,
which, a Mantuan, bribed by him, had procured for his concealment, resolving to
wait there for an opportunity of putting his plot in execution; where he was
detained much longer than he expected, being unable to offer at any thing so
long as the Duchess kept within her Palace, or seldom stirred out, and when
she did, only to the Seaside, with a retinue too great for him to attempt any
thing against. Thus he continued from the Time of Julians departure, till after
he was returned again; at last resolving to desist from his enterprise,
especially when the Vessel waited for him, not able to give any good account of
her long stay in so private a place as she was laid up in, received a command
to depart out of hand, unless she would be seized as being either a Spy or
Pirate. But when he was almost ready to depart, one of his gained Friends
assured him, that in one day more he might effect his design; which he found as
easy means for the execution of as he could wish; for the Duchess, going
every day abroad after Julians return, spending no Evening out of the pleasant
Island-Garden upon the River Po, where she usually retired with her Favorite
Nise and the Sicilian Kings Loyal Servant, to hear him repeat the adventures of
his Masters life. Alvaro having provided all things necessary for his purpose,
landed from a small Barque on the back side of the Garden, with six men well
armed in his Company, and wanting no direction, came to the very Arbor she was
retired to, without being discovered by any of her Attendants who waited on the
other side for her; and while two of his Servants assaulted Julian, who
endeavored to defend the Princess, himself with the rest carried her and Nise
by force into the Boat, and Rowing away with all the speed they could, landed
her where a Chariot waited their coming, and carrying them out of the Boat into
it, himself bearing them Company to prevent their leaping forth, drove away
with all the speed they could, for the Village near which the Ship lay. His two
men that fell upon Julian being left behind, were by those who came running in,
hearing the clashing of their Swords, and the Duchess and Nises shrieks, cut
to pieces; and although all possible diligence was used to pursue them, he had
got her aboard his Vessel, and was under sail by that time those who were come
after him reached the Village he had newly left; and immediately the Night
coming on, now secure of his prize, he went into the Cabin he had placed the
Duchess in, endeavoring to prevail with her for a pardon of that violence,
the height of Passion, as he pretended, had prompted him to: but for almost a
Week that they sailed, without meeting with any interruption in their Voyage,
he could obtain nothing from the afflicted Princess, but that she would rather
dye than yield to that compulsion he thought to establish his love by. During
which time, that the amorous Prince had no other enemy to encounter but Diana's
obstinate disdain; Her loyal Subjects were not idle, but fitted out all the
Ships were in the Port to pursue him; and the Sicilian King ignorant of this
new misfortune, was got to Sea with a Royal Fleet; when coming within two days
sail of Mantua, he met a Vessel was come out from thence, which gave him the
sad account of his Princesses Rape; upon which fatal intelligence, having
lamented her misfortune and his own, with all the expressions of a violent
grief: he altered his coarse, and stood away to Sea in chase of the detested
Ravisher of the Duchess, being assured by all circumstances he was the Prince
of Majorca. Who while the Seas were spread with Ships to discover him, employed
all his time in endeavoring to reconcile himself to the Duchess; whose just
indignation, she assured him could never be removed, but by his returning her
back to her own Country* which he made as much haste from as the winds would
give him leave; and nine days after his leaving Mantua, early in the Morning
the Captain of the Vessel called him upon the Deck to see his own Island,
promising to land him on it by Noon; but in less than an hour they were so
becalmed, that the Vessel made no way; and when they had got out their great
Oars, to supply with them the want of a Gale, at first an easy one began to
blow, but so exactly off the shore, that it drove them faster to Sea than their
Oars could work them toward the Land; and freshening upon them, before it was
dark they had again lost sight of the place, the Prince hoped by that time to
have been ashore at: all Night it blew so fresh, that they were almost
compelled to bear up before it; and the next day about Sunrise, they found
themselves chased by two Vessels which seemed to gain upon them. Alvaro who
feared all to be Enemies, to prevent their coming up with him, stood away with
the Wind, the Ships following his coarse, which they continued to do all day,
and a little before Night were come up so near, that they discovered them to be
Mantuans. The afflicted Duchess, hoped from the first of their coming in
sight, to find them her Delievers; but when she was told the Ships belonged to
her, or her Subjects, and doubtless abroad in persuit of her Ravisher; she
offered up her prayers to Heaven that they might reach the Ship she was in; but
finding the Night would be a means to lose them again, seeing Alvaro come into
the Cabin, she turned from the Window she was looking out at, and throwing her
self at his feet, with Tears implored him to restore her to her freedom,
assuring him she would forgive all he had hitherto done against her; But his
love was too great to forego a prize he now began to hope would be again
secured to him; and accordingly as soon as it was dark, commanding there should
be no Lights in the Ship, he altered the coarse he had run all day: and as he
expected, in the morning was out of sight of those had chased him the Day
before; the Wind continuing so high, that it almost blew a Storm; and finding
himself on the coast of Spain, near Alicant, both to wait the alteration of the
Wind, and to suffer the Duchess to refresh her self on shore, he stood in, and
that Afternoon came to an Anchor about a League above the Town. He landed his
fair Theft at a little Village, in a poor House he sent to provide for their
reception; first having obliged the Duchess and Nise to change their Clothes
for plainer ones he had provided formerly, himself in the habit of an ordinary
Seaman, never stirring out of their sight, or from the Door of the Room he kept
them shut up in, that they might not speak to any body. Alvaro had rested with
impatience almost a Week in the Village, before the storm had drove him to land
was over; when finding the Wind fair for his Voyage to Majorca, he brought the
Duchess toward Evening from the House he had concealed her in, to oblige her
to a second imbarcation; but as he was crossing the street of the Village
toward the Strand where his Boat was ready to receive them, he was obliged to
stop awhile to let several Coaches and Horsemen pass by, who were going
toward Alicant: and when he thought all gone, leading the Duchess by force to
the place where the Boat lay, just as he had lifted her into it, a Gentleman,
mounted on a graceful Adaluzian Horse, and followed by half a dozen Servants,
came to the Boatside, and asked with courtesy enough, what ship that was lay
off, whether they were going on board; but Alvaro, either disdaining an answer,
or fearful of any delay, commanded his men to thrust out the Boat without
taking any notice of the demand was made him; which incivility exasperating the
Spanish Gentleman, he drew his Sword, and riding to his Saddle-skirts into the
Water close to the Boat, he leapt from his Horse into it followed by his
Servants, telling the Seamen he would by force know, what they denied to his
civil request. The enraged Prince and his Company had put themselves in a
posture of defense, when the afflicted Duchess, whose violent grief had made
her till then silent, rising from the seat she was placed on, Sir (said she to
the injured Spaniard in Italian) if you will do a generous act, let your Sword
not only be employed to revenge the affront you have received, but to rescue a
miserable woman from the hands of a wicked ravisher. The Spaniard hearing her
speak, when he was ready to assault those were in the Boat, turned toward her
before he pressed any further; and as soon as she had desired his assistance,
without giving any other answer than by a respectful bow, he turned toward
Alvaro, saying to him; If this Lady be willing to go with you, for her sake I
shall forget the rudeness you have expressed toward me, but if it is by
compulsion you would force her away, I will either redeem her from your
violence, or resign my life in the attempt of it; and ending these words, he
stepped forward toward the Duchess, who encouraged by his generous declaration,
cried out, It Is by force, Noble Cavallier, I have been hurried from my own
Country, and had rather here end my miserable life than remain longer in the
power of that unworthy man, is now the disposer of my liberty; If her words
were an encouragement to the Stranger to persist in his design of freeing her,
they were no less an incitement to the violent Prince to get the Boat off by
force, since he found it would no other way be done, so that assaulting the
young Spaniard, who was prepared to receive him, and seconded by his men, a
fierce and unusual combat began in the Boat; the Fair Duchess in the mean
while, whether frighted by being so near the Combatants, or unwilling to lose
so fair an opportunity of escaping from Alvaro, leapt from the Boat, almost to
the shoulders in water, and followed by Nise, had waded to the Shore before she
was mist in the Boat by Alvaro; when calling aloud to her Deliverer to quit the
dispute he was engaged in, to prevent her being forced back by two Seamen
followed her from the Boat, she saw him throw himself into the water; and a
great crowd coming down to the shore from the Village; Alvaro to save himself
from being taken by them, thrust out to Sea, leaving not only the Princess and
Nise, but his two men for haste behind him. As soon as he was put off, and the
Seamen secured by the Company was come in, the valiant Spaniard, neither
minding, nor in a condition to pursue him, no other Boat being near, he got
safe on board, and soon after sailed to his own Country with discontent enough
to be so unexpectedly deprived of what he had adventured so much for the
possession of.

The Duchess finding her self at liberty, was about to return thanks to the
worthy procurer of it, when the young Spaniard addressing himself to Her and
Nise; Ladies (said he) I must needs account my self very happy if I have been
so fortunate to prevent any violence was intended against so much beauty; and
since your wet clothes require you should be conveyed to some place where you
may change them and repose your selves, I will adventure to request your
acceptance of what convenience my House will afford. To which obliging
invitation the Duchess was able to return no answer, being wholly ignorant of
the Spanish Language, more than by the affinity it had with her own, partly
understanding what he said; which being perceived by him, he repeated the same
words in Italian, and received an answer full of gratitude from the fairest
Lips in the world. While he was in discourse with her, a Servant told him the
Coaches had stopped, hearing of the quarrel he was fallen in, upon which notice,
taking the Duchess by the hand, and another Gentleman doing the same by Nise,
he desired they would make use of the convenience of them, to be carried to
Alicant, where he lived. Although the Italian Princess might have made some
scruples to commit her self to the Charge of a young Man and a Stranger, yet
what he had done in her Service, and not knowing how at that time otherwise to
dispose of her self, she accepted of his Invitation, and was much pleased with
it; when coming to one of the Coaches, her Rescuer committed her to the care of
three young Ladies were in it, one of which, he told her was his Wife, but they
were prevented from those compliments would necessarily have passed between
them, by Reason they could not understand what one another said; and at that
time he took no other Care, but to Order they should make what haste they could
to the City, that the strange Ladies might be shifted from their wet Clothes.
As soon as they came to his house, he waited on them to a rich apartment, and
committed the Care of them to several young Ladies who could scarce without
Envy behold their Beauties Eclipsed by her who seemed the chief of the two
Strangers; that night, being supplied with all things necessary, she was left
with Nise to rest her self, which she had want enough of, after so many unquiet
ones as she had spent since the time she was forced from Mantua. The next
Morning as soon as she was awake, the same Company came in to visit her, and
bringing Clothes for them to put on instead of their wet ones; as soon as she
was ready, her deliverer came to enquire after their Healths; and being invited
into her Chamber, after several Compliments, he begged the Knowledge from her
of what Accidents had reduced them to the Restraint he found them in; and from
the Duchess received a true Account of all her Adventures, only disguising her
Quality, by declaring her self the Daughter of a Rich Gentleman of Mantua, and
her Ravisher Son to one of equal Conditions. Felicius (which was the name of
the Spanesh Gentleman) entertained her for several days with all the respect
imaginable, till he could procure a safe passage for her into Italy; promising,
with her permission, not to leave her, till he had delivered her safe to her
Parents; and he was one Afternoon sufficiently satisfied with the Respects he
had shown her, when a Vessel coming into the Harbor with the Antiant of
Mantua, as the Duchess with several Ladies were walking with him on the Tarras
of his Garden, which overlookt the Road; She desired he would send a Servant to
the Ship, to inquire what News from her Country; and the Person that was
employed, meeting the Boat just as it Landed; and falling into Discourse with
him that seemed to Command the rest, and telling him that he was come from an
Italian Lady, who desired to enquire after her Relations in Mantua, invited him
to his Masters house, which being accepted by the Stranger, he was sufficiently
transported with Joy, to find it was the Duchess had sent for him; and by
paying his Duty to her on his Knees, surprised all the Company was with her, by
the consideration of the greatness of her Quality, whom they believed, and had
respected as a private person.

The stranger who was a Nobleman of Mantua, by her Command let her know, the
great trouble her Subjects were in, for the loss of her; that he was abroad in
the Ship he landed from, to search for her; and that the King of Sicily had
been at Majorca, but was certainly assured, that that Prince had never been in
the Island since his Voyage to Mantua, although all the Fleet went with him was
returned, except the Ship he was in, and that if the Duchess would give him
leave to return to Sea, he believed in a day or two he might fall in with the
Sicilian Fleet, and bring that King to attend her home. The Princess approved
very well of his motion, and accordingly, after he had by her order reposed
himself a while, he imbarqued and sailed again the same Evening.

Felicius as soon as the Duchess had made an end of speaking with the Italian
Lord, addressing himself to her, begged his own Pardon, and that of the rest of
the Company; thet she had not, through their Ignorance, of her Quality: been
entertained with that observance was due to her Birth and Dignity; which the
obliging Princess Answered, with assuring him that he had laid Engagements on
her much greater than she should ever know how to requite; and which she should
be forced to increase by troubling him a few days longer, till the Arrival of
those Ships must convey her to Italy; Felicius not only assured her how highly
he was honored in the name of her Host, but having acquainted all his
Relations, and the Magistrates of Alicant, Who resided in his House; She was
visited, and received the Compliments of all the considerable persons in the
City, having first by Felicius procurement been furnished with Rich Clothes
suitable to her State.

One Evening when most of the Company was retired having before observed the
great affection of Felicius to his Wife, and heard that before his Marriage,
many considerable Adventures had befallen him, and some of those Persons were
in his House; She expressed a desire of being acquainted with them, whose
Commands her generous Host not willing to disobey; though he could not hide his
disturbance, at the very thoughts of being to repeat so many misfortunes as he
had formerly undergone; after himself, and all the Company had taken seats by
her Order, making an humble Obeisance to the Duchess, and directing his
Discourse to her in a Language she understood, made this following Relation of
his Life.

The History of FELICIVS and NARCISSA.
SInce it is your Highnes's pleasure to adventure the Trial of your Patience,
with the hearing those Troubles some part of my Life was attended with, I will
beg leave to begin my Story, where I first began to feel the Persecutions of
Fortune, which was by the Death of an Indulgent Father; whose loss was no ways
compensated to me, by the enjoyment of a large Patrimony, I succeeded him in
the Possession of; insomuch that to give more freedom to my melancholy, I
removed from the disturbing noise of the City, and retired to a little Country
house not many Leagues from hence, with no other Company but one Friend called
Alvaro, and such Servants as were necessary for our Attendance; there employing
our time, chiefly in the Woods and Fields, where our Guns proved the only
Diversion we either had or sought after; my Friend indeed had before resigned
his Liberty to the Charms of a young Lady in this City, called Cassandra; but
to that time, Beauty had rather been unregarded than the occasion of any
disquiet to my Thoughts; till one day in pursuit of my Game, I happened alone
into a large Wood, some distance from my House, and quartering it from one side
to another, I was brought by a Track to a Brook side, which run through the
lower parts of it, where going to Refresh my self with a little water, I saw a
Woman extended on the Grass asleep, whose Garb I thought declared her no
Inhabitant of the Woods and Fields, her Face being turned from me, I was about
to retire without disturbing her Rest, but out of a Curiosity to see if her
Face was equal to the Excellency of her Shape; I stepped softly round, where I
beheld a Beauty, whose Charms without a long Combat, became the full disposers
of my Fredome; I stood a good while without Motion, contemplating those
perfections I beheld in her Person, till adventuring to kiss her Hand, as I
stooped to do it, by Accident my Gun went off as I held it; which hastily
awaking her, in a Fright she started up and was about to Retire; when
adventuring to lay hold on her Clothes to stop her, I implored her Pardon on my
Knees, for the disturbance I had accidentally given her, and the presumption I
seemed Guilty of in detaining her till I might hope her goodness would forgive
my Inadvertency; to which she returned an obliging Answer, and not able to
persuade her from leaving the place so soon, she hasted out of the Wood, and
following her at a little distance, I saw her enter a Garden belonging to a
fair House, adjoining to the Wood; the Door being immediately shut by a Woman
who seemed to have waited her coming. I presently found my self too much
Captivated, to retire without farther Knowledge of the Person had gained so
entire a Conquest over me; so that walking round the Walls of the Garden, I saw
a Man going toward the House, and asking him whose it was, he gave me no
little Concern when I heard from him, that it was the Retreat of my greatest
Enemy; for I must acquaint your Highness, that my Elder Brother in a Duel had
Slain a Son of Don Fernando, the Father of my adored fair One, who resolving to
admit no Satisfaction without a general Revenge, although my Brother died also
of his wounds, had withdrawn himself and Family, to that solitude, till an
oppertunity should offer of expressing his Resentment, having declared after he
heard of my Fathers Death, that while I lived, there still remained an Object
for his Vengeance, which could not be pacified by all the endeavors of the
most considerable persons in this City. He had then only one Son living, who
was absent at the Court to receive the Order of Calatrava; and a Daughter named
Narcissa, whom I immediately concluded to be the Person I had lately met with.
Full of disquiet with the imagination of my perverse Fortune, I went back into
the Wood, and not long after, meeting Alvaro I gave him an account of my
Adventure, and also of the irresistableness of the Passion she had inspired me
with. He was so wise to persuade me with strong Arguments to desist from a
pretension I could never hope to succeed in; and what would prove most
dangerous to my Life if pursued. But I found Love had inflamed me with so
violent a desire of obtaining what I wished to enjoy, that all his persuasions
to the contrary, were but as so many encouragements to me to proceed in the
enterprise; then it was I began to feel the effects my new Passion wrought in
me: I found it work with a violent force on my Senses, sometimes flattering my
Soul with imagined Transports; then growing more calm, it seemed to wrap me in
a Lethergy of so much forgetfulness, that I ceased to be any longer Master of
my Reason, but inclined to meet it as an easy Death, from an insinuating
Tyrant; this unintelligable effect, which may be called the distraction of the
wisest; compelled me to disregard the Council of my prudent Friend, who after
some days finding my resolutions unalterable, promised me his utmost
Assistance; and for several nights bore me Company to the Walls of my Enemies
house, which enclosed her to whom I was far from being one; where in a kind of
Serenade, I sung my griefs under the Windows on that side of the House, I had
learnt was her Apartment; this Course we followed several nights, till at last
being taken notice of, I had a caution brought me as we stood under the window,
by a Villager as I guest him, that one who did not hate me, advised, I should
avoid the exposing my Life to so imminent danger, as that place threatened me
with; although I could not guess from whom the Message should come, for that
time I observed the direction was given me, and retired, not being able to
learn any thing more from the person had brought it. But a day or two after,
resolving to find some way of letting Narcisa know more plainly my Love. In the
disguise of a Peasant I came a little before Sunset to the Garden, where
perceiving the Door half open, and adventuring to look in, I was so fortunate
to behold my fair Mistress sitting on the side of a Fountain with a Maid by
her; and Leriano whom I knew to be her Kinsman; I had waited but a little
while, delighted with the admiration of her Beauty, when I saw her rise, and
walking alone through several Allies in the Garden, came at last close to the
Door where I stood, and adventuring within it, I gave her a Letter I had
provided, telling her, it was from her Brother Celauro. She had scarce taken
the Paper from me, when I perceived by her Blushes, and the disorder she seemed
to be in, that I was known to her; but just as I was about to speak, her Cosen
coming that way after her, I was forced to retire from the Garden, and thence
entering the Wood where Alauro had waited for my return, I gave him an Account
of my success. After that day I had the opportunity of seeing her several others
at the Chapel of a Village not far from her Fathers house, always concealing
my self in a rustic Disguise, however not unknown to her, from whom I seldom
wanted the satisfaction of a smile, it being impossible for me to speak to her,
Don Fernando being always in sight; but upon what occasion I could then by no
means know, she was kept shut up within her house, for near two Months without
my being able to see her; which afterward I learnt was through her Fathers
jealousy finding she took more freedom among the innocent Villagers than his
scrupulous disposition would allow; upon so long a deprivation from her Sight,
I grew so Melancholy that overperswaded by my friend, I removed to seek some
Diversion in this City, whether I was no sooner come, but my Anxiety was
increased, by an Information I received that Lariano, who as a Kinsman, was
received in her Fathers house, had declared himself her Servant; and as was
believed, would by her Father be admitted, to a nearer Alliance; and as an
aggravation of this disturbance, it was added to me that Celauro her Brother
being returned succesful from Court, resided in this City, not only enquiring
after me, as an Enemy, but as was believed he had heard something of my
assiduity about his Fathers Country House in Disguise; these concerns joined to
the impossibility I thought there was of proving succesful in my Love, had
almost brought me to a resolution of quitting the City again, and spending some
time in Travel, to seek by absence a Cure for my Distemper, when Fortune was
pleased strangely to confirm me in a Resolution of indulging my Passion.

My Friend Alvaro, for whose sake I was contented to stay some days in Town, at
that time was happy in the Favors of his Mistress Cassandra, whom sometimes
visiting by night, I remained his Sentinel in the Street either to prevent, or
advise him of any approaching danger; several nights I had observed a Man hid
in his Cloak pass by me, with more Curiosity than I could well approve of;
though I still let him alone, to avoid the disturbance a Street-quarrel might
give my Friend and his Mistress; till at last grown weary of the observance he
took of me, I went toward him, who coming forwards to meet me; Cavalier (said
he, without giving me time to speak) if you have no business in this Street
where I see you often unimployed, you will do well not to be a hinderance of
another Design, wherefore I desire you to quit it either in Curtesy, or by
Necessity. Did not Necessity require my Presence (said I) in Courtesy I might
perhaps be induced to Retire, but am not to be frighted from a place I have
once fixed my self in; Then you must be beaten out, (replied he) at the same
time directing his Sword to my Breast, but receiving his Thrust upon a Buckler
I held out, mine proved so Fa^^^ as to lay him dead at my Feet; whereupon
finding the danger I was in, and seeing People approach from all Parts, upon
hearing the Cries of my wounded Adversary before he Expired; I hasted as fast
as I could, out of the Street, at the end of which, seeing some Officers enter,
I was forced to turn, not able to imagine any way whereby I might escape; till
coming close to the Wall of a Garden took up one part of the Street, not
without some difficulty I climbed to the top of it, and Leaped down into the
Garden, resolving to conceal my self there, till the Bustle in the Street was
over; in the mean time, walking along one of the Allies, at the end of it I
discovered a Light in a low Window, which coming nearer, I found was that of a
small Summer House, at the bottom of a Walk of Orange Trees; going softly
toward it, and the Casement being open, I perceived a Woman leaning on the
Table, with a written Paper before her, which after fetching a Sigh or two she
read so as I could overhear words to this effect:

This Morning, my Brother coming to our Lodge, prevailed with my Father to let
me bear Estella Company, while the Solemnity lasts; She will deliver this Paper
to you, and if possible, contrive some way for our having an Enterview, when
you will have the satisfaction, if it prove one to you, to know you are not
hated by me.

Just as she had made an end of Reading her Paper, rising up, by a glance of
her Face, I was surprised, to see my self so near my adored Narcissa, but
presently the Jealousy of thinking the Paper she had wrote, was designed for
some more happy Lover than my Self, not able longer to be silent; Is it
possible Madam (said I) that the sincerest Passion in the World is despised by
you? She was too much surprised at the Sight of me in that place, to be able to
return a word in Answer to my Complaint; but having recollected her self, after
giving me leave to express my Love with all the endearment I could. Had my
Thoughts (said she) been as indifferent toward you, as you imagine they are, I
had perhaps been free from the disquiets I have but too often met with since I
saw you in the Wood; yet do not presume too much upon the freedom of my
Confession, that I never beheld a Man I could allow more worthy than Felicius;
the Restraint I live in, may partly excuse the owning what is no more than a
just return to the firmness of your Love. And the Note you see here, was
designed for no other but your self, to let you know of my being in the City:
it is impossible to express the Joy her words infused in me; but not giving me
leave scarce to speak, she was earnest of knowing how I came into the Garden. I
told her of the Accident had made me seek shelter there, so that unwilling to
expose me to the danger, I was threatened with in the Street, She at last was
persuaded to conceal me in a Closet near her Chamber; but as I was following
her to it, we were suspended by a great Noise and Bustle in the House; and
hearing it was made by the Officers who came in search of me, not adventuring
to let me go farther into the House, by her direction I stepped into a little
Room near the Garden Door, which she Locked upon me and went away to learn the
occasion of the Families being up again. I continued there two hours without
the return of my Mistress, which began to Create new Fears in me. So that I
resolved to go out and make my escape the way I had come in; but feeling in the
dark for the Door, I met with one that had a Spring-Lock which opened into
another Room of the House, and adventuring forwards into it, seeing the
Reflection of a dim Light through the Crannies of another Door; I opened it
softly, and was amazed to behold in the middle of a large Hall, the Corpse of a
Man laid out, with the Mantle of the Order of Calatrava upon him. I was
doubtful whether it should be Celauro, or Estella's Brother (both being Knights
of the same Habit) whose house I had learned from Narcissa, it was she resided
then in. As I was standing in that suspense, this strange Accident had put me
in, I saw a Woman Lighting Narcissa and Estella into the Hall, so that fearful
of being seen, I made a shift to get back to my Prison, and shut my self up,
not being able to open the Door I came first in at, that I might have escaped
through the garden. The remainder of the Night, and all the next Morning, I
continued in my Confinement, more fearful of occasioning any Blemish to
Narcissa's Honor, by my appearance, than out of any apprehension of the Danger
my Life might be exposed to in the house of an Enemy; but about Noon all the
Doubts my mind was Agitated with, were removed, by seeing my Mistress enter the
Room, and shutting the Door upon her, after having some time given way to her
Tears. Ah Felicius (said she to me) how unlucky has your Hand been, in proving
the Occasion of that Grief fills the House we are in; Estela's Brother is dead,
and was brought in last night from the place where you told me a Man had fallen
by your Sword; the Officers of Justice have been ever since in Search of his
Murderer, which as hitherto I must hope will continue unsuccesful; for my
Brother has so devoted himself to Revenge his Death, that should You be known
for the Author of it, the Animosities of our Families would be renewed afresh,
and I must certainly for ever loose one I cannot hate. Her grief would let her
say no more, and I endeavored to dispel it with all the Arguments I could,
solemnly vowing, to employ the Life she preserved from the Violence of her
Friends, in a perpetual Adoration of her; which Assurance she requited, in
letting me know, Love had taken no weak possession of her Breast, and that I
could no way oblige her more, than in being careful of a Life was more than
indifferent to her; in Order to which she resolved I should continue where I
was till Night, and then advised me for some time to leave the City, I having
not appeared publicly in it for many days before; and having given me some
Fruit she brought with her, left me till an hour within night, when bearing me
Company to the farther side of the Garden, our separation likely to be long,
was sufficiently afflictive.

As soon as I found my self at Liberty, without farther delay, I left the City,
and by Daybreak reached my Country House in Peniaflor, having walked five
Leagues that Night; my Friend Alvaro was got thither before me, who told me,
that hearing the noise in the street was made upon the unhappy young Man's
Death, whom he concluded I had killed; and fearing if the adjacent houses
should be searched for the Murderer, his Mistris's Reputation would be as much
endangered as his own Person, he went out into the Street, and getting safe by
the Crowd called at my house, but learning nothing of me, he took Horse and
came to my Country House hoping to find me, having left his Servant Lisardo
behind to bring us word the next day what was discoursed in the City about the
Nights Rancounter. But several days past without our receiving any considerable
Information, and growing impatient, as Alvaro was to see Cassandra who had sent
for him, he went back to Alicant to make her a Visit, and returning two days
after, I learnt from him, that my Mistress was with all her Fathers Family, at
their Country House; but were very suddenly to remove to a house he had newly
bought in the City. The same Evening, no longer able to brook my tedious
deprivation from her, with Alvaro only in my Company we Rode to the Wood where
I had first seen her, and having assumed my ancient rustic Disguise; while my
Friend stayed with our Horses, I went toward Don Fernando's Lodge, and a
little from the Gate of it, saw her walking with her Brother and several other
Gentlemen, leaning on the Arm of her beloved Cousin Estela. Although I was
careful of approaching too near them, my adored Narcissa soon knew me, and as I
guessed by her Direction, Estela coming from her toward me; Shepherd (said
she with a low Voice) the lost Lamb you seek may be found near the Garden-door
about Midnight; and immediately turning back to her Company, I carelessly
withdrew; and finding Alvaro in the Wood where I left him, gave him an Account
of my Fortune. And resting our selves under a Tree, till the time was appointed
by Estela, we went together toward the Lodge, leaving our Horses tied in a
private place; as soon as I came to the Garden Door, finding it open, just as I
stepped in, my Mistress and Estela met me; who withdrawing a little way from us,
gave me all the freedom I could desire of assuring Narcissa, that nothing but
an insupportable Absence from her, could be an affliction to me: her kindness I
found was not at all lessened by it; and before we parted, I learned from her,
that a Marriage was suddenly designed between her Brother Celauro and Estela;
in Order to which, her Father was removing to live in Alicant; and withal, that
what I feared of her being designed for Leriano, was come to nothing, but that
we were to expect more trouble how to disappoint Grotillus, a worthy young
Gentleman, whose Addresses could not be more rejected by her, than they were
approved of by old Fernando; however, to prevent so long an absence for the
future, and that we might at leisure consult about the management of our
Affairs, she promised me to entertain an acquaintance with Cassandra, Alvaro's
Mistress, and by her to let me know how I should come to the Speech of her when
in Alicant; and telling me Estela was ignorant still of her Brothers Murderer,
she brought me to her, who promised the utmost of her Assistance, to procure by
our Marriage, the Conclusion of that Animosity had so long continued between
our Families; I expressed my Passion to One, and Acknowledgments to the Other,
with all the endearment I could; when called away by the Mornings Approach, we
took leave of one another, till we should meet the week following in Alicant;
and finding my Friend a little without the Door, we returned to our Horses, and
so back again to Peniaflor.

The week after, being removed to Town, I accompanied my Friend in a Visit he
made to Cassandra, who had expressed to him in a Letter a desire of seeing me,
and after the necessary Compliments, she gave me an Account of her having
visited Narcissa, who promised to return it in two days, when she desired me to
come with Alvaro, that I might have the opportunity of seeing her; I was very
punctual at the time, and enjoyed all the freedom of Discourse I could wish,
having prevailed so far with my Charming Mistress, that promising a second
Visit the week following, she consented I should procure a Priest privately to
contract us, which I urged as the only security could be given me against
Grotillus's Pretension; which accordingly being done, I received from her a
Master-key, which gave me entrance, not only into her Fathers Garden, but to
all parts of the House. I made Use of it several times, having learned the way
to her Chamber, where our mutual Satisfaction was too great to last long
undisturbed; although to secure it, I had writ to the Countess Policena (a
Widow, whose Title and Estate I was not only Heir to, but was always loved by
her as an only Son) giving her an Account of my Amors, and that I resolved to
shelter my self and Wife in Barcelona, under her Protection, till a
Reconcilement could be procured with Narcissa's Relations, which she so
willingly consented to, that we had fixed a day for our departure, when the most
unheard of accident in the world befell us.

Leriano, who once hoped to be the Husband of Narcissa finding himself
neglected by Don Ferdinand, who preferred Grotillus before him, pretended out
of discontent, a Voyage to Italy, which every one believed he had undertaken;
while in reality he remained concealed in Alicant. But the Night before that of
our intended flight, having conveyed my self privately to my Narcissa's
Chamber, we were so long debating which way our Removal might be effected with
most security, that at last tired with a discourse gave her so many
apprehensions, she fell asleep on the Bed as I was sitting by her; but had
reposed a very little while, when I heard the door of the Chamber softly
opened; I started immediately up from the Bed, and stepping round it, placed my
self at the Door I used to go down to the Garden by, resolving before I went
away, to listen, if possible I might learn, who visited my Wife at such
unseasonable hours. I heard the steps move toward the Bedside, just as
Narcissa waking and missing me; where are you my Lord Felicius (said she?) I am
not Felicius, ungrateful Maid, (answered the disturber of our quiet) I am none
of that happy man, makes your very dreams delightful, but the most miserable
one upon earth; one, your beauty has raised to so violent a Transport, that I
have entered this Room with a determination of leaving you before I quit it,
either enjoyed or dead. I am doubtful which of us was most amazed at the
hearing such a vile declaration, but while my disorder kept me immovable, who
are you wicked Villain (replied Narcissa) that durst profane this place with
your presence, or my Ears with the mention of such cursed resolutions; but
retire quickly, or my Cries shall bring that death you threaten, on your own
Head. Lovely Enemy (answered he, as I guessed laying hold on her) in vain you
deny that to my Entreaty, which my Force will accomplish. Loose me Traitor
(said she aloud) and throwing her self from the Bed, past just by the place
where I stood, my Enemy still having hold of her; whom discerning by that
little light the Stars afforded through the Window, I broke his hold, by two or
three stabs I gave him in the Breast with my Dagger, who falling at my feet,
cried out, Oh Narcissa, You and my love have slain me. I called presently to
her, but received no Answer, and considering the danger would attend my stay
till Don Fernando and his Family were up, I hasted down Stairs to the Garden,
the way I had come in at; but to add to my disturbance found the Door shut, and
a Key left in the Lock on the other side, so that mine would stand me in no
stead. I ran up Stairs again to find Narcissa, who I thought might convey me
out another way, but could meet nothing but fresh disorders; for by the Cries
of the man I had wounded, the whole Family was alarmed, and I heard people
hasting to the Room where I thought my self confined; believing then I must of
necessity fall a Victim to the fury of Don Fernando, I grew to so high a pitch
of Despair, that rather than fall into the hands of him and his Son, I stepped to
a Balcon Window of the Room, just as they were entering at the Door, with a
resolution of throwing my self precipitately from it; but as I laid hold of the
Rail to leap over, I happened to meet with the hook of a Silk-ladder hung down to
the Garden; although I lost no time in making Use of so opportune a convenience
to escape, I could not be so sudden but that Ferdinando entered the Room with
his Son and Servants, and perceiving me, made several shots at me; however I
reached safe to the ground, when I found my self assaulted by two men, from
whom I was forced to retire, having no Sword to defend my self, only a Buckler
which received the thrusts were made at me, and a Pistol, which being perceived
in my hand by a Dark-lanthorn one of them held, made them cautious in pressing
too earnestly upon me; while I retired with all the have I could to the
Garden-door, by good fortune I found it open, and as I went out, firing my
Pistol, it gave them so much disturbance, that I had time to make a safe
Retreat whither I would, though not without some wounds. I went directly to the
House of Don Pedro, the Father of Cassandra, my Friend Alvaro's Mistress, who
received me with much kindness, and the assurance that I should remain safe and
concealed while any danger threatened me; and during the time I continued so in
Don Pedro's House, my wounds were perfectly cured, and I learned that after Don
Ferdinand had seen the desperate way I took for my escape, commanding some of
his Servants to go down and pursue me, he himself turned back into the room,
called by the groans of the man I left wounded, whom he found to be Leriano my
Wives Kinsman. Ferdinand perceiving him still able to speak, inquired how he
came thither, and in that condition; to which he answered, that having been
rejected for a Husband to Narcissa, he pretended to travel, but lying concealed
still in Alicant, he procured such false Keys as gave him entrance to the
Garden, from whence he had climbed up to her Chamber by a silk Ladder, fixed to
the bars of her Window, resolving either by Persuasion, or Force to enjoy her,
thereby assured he should disappoint the hopes of his Rival Grotillus, but that
surprising her in her Bed and asleep, upon her waking she called out to
Felicius, whom he was confident, being then with her, had given him those
wounds would end his unfortunate life, and begging their forgiveness of a crime
he must expiate with it, resigned it with the blood issued from his wounds; and
scarce had he breathed his last, when they were disturbed with a fresh
aggravation to their trouble, which was, that Narcissa could not be found in
the House: while they were in this confusion, Grotillus came in, who being
informed of what Leriano had declared before his death, told them that himself
had seen me several Nights about the House, and determining to find out the
cause of my assiduity, was then in the street watching about the Garden-wall,
and had a little before discovered some body come out, who fled with so much
haste, that he could not possibly discover who it was; but returning to the
Garden door, and finding it open, he heard a noise in the House, and at the
same time discerned a man comeing down (by a Ladder, as he guessed) from the
Balcon, whom he purposed to apprehend, but pursuing him to the Street-door, his
Man was shot by him, and he made his Escape. By what Grotillus declared, and my
Cloak being found in the room, they were confirmed that I was the murderer of
Leriano, but the next day, and several after, if they were busy in searching
for me, assisted by the Officers of Justice: I was not less perplexed at the
information I received, that Narcissa could no where be heard of, and all the
diligence of a strict Search they made through the whole City proved
ineffectual toward the finding of her. At the first hearing of it I was glad
of her Escape, fearing her Fathers rigor; but when a careful and private
inquiry I made my self for several days, gave me as little satisfaction as Don
Fernando had received, It is not easy to express the sorrow I conceived for
her absence; which, at that time (being destined to troubles) was aggravated by
the intelligence I had from Cassandra, that my Friend Alvaro had been missing
ever since the fatal night of our miseries; and that both his nearest Friends
and Servants were wholly ignorant of the Cause of his retirement, or the Place
of it. I must confess that my first apprehensions were apt to impute his
departure to cowardice; which his fair Mistress joined with me also in, taxing
him with want of affection, to leave her so abruptly without making her the
confident of his design, or writing a word to excuse it ever since his
departure. But some days following, all our doubts were removed by a Letter
Lisardo brought me from the Countess Policena, (to whom I had wrote an account
of my cruel disaster,) by which I understood that my adored Narcissa, attended
by Alvaro, was arrived safe at her House; and the reason why I knew not of it
sooner, was, that she was ignorant where I had concealed my self, to write with
safety to me; but trusting to Lisardo's fidelity, had sent him to desire I
would without delay hasten my journey thither. This joyful news was too
pleasing to let me demur in the least what I should resolve on; so that however
satisfied with the diligence of revengeful Enemies to discover me, I took leave
of Cassandra the same Night, and in the disguise of a Peasant, (ordering
Lisardo to remain behind for an Intelligencer) I traveled by Night, lying
private all day, without adventuring into any public house, to avoid
discovery; and after having been three Nights on the road, grown weary with the
tediousness of so disorderly a journey, I went a little distance from the
track, and tying my Horse to a Tree, laid my self down under another, to take
some rest; where, wearied with the afflicting thoughts of the troubles had so
lately assaulted me, I fell asleep, but was soon awakened by a sudden noise I
heard just by me, and rising hastily up, I perceived by my side, a man extended
on the earth; but not finding him stir, I stooped to raise him up, when I soon
discerned he had resigned his life to some wounds (as I judged by the heat was
still in him) he had newly received. Immediately I listened to hear if there was
any body thereabouts who had been the Author of so unexpected a Tragedy; but
not perceiving any other noise than what the Wind made among the Leaves of the
Trees, I walked softly a foot down toward the Road, where I discerned a Coach,
and drawing near it, found the Horses hamstring'd, and no body in it, which
made me apprehend there had been greater violences committed, than that of the
slain man under the Tree; and harkening again with attention, I fancied to hear
a noise like people discoursing a little distance from the Highway. I walked
softly toward the place from whence the noise came, and sheltred by the Nights
obscurity, got undiscerned so near as to hear one say; Alvaro Felix must pardon
this error of my choler, which I imagined was not without justice: but if
apprehended otherwise, I am willing Isabella should determine concerning me,
whose Beauty was the sole occasion of this misfortune. Your mistake Grotillus
(answered one, who by the voice I knew to be a woman) was founded on the
affinity of two names, and be assured the resentment I have expressed must needs
cease to condemn you, when I am satisfied, that, not only the height of Love,
but pursuit of a just Revenge made you act toward me what you did, believing
your Cousin Narcissa was in the Coach, guarded by your Enemies Friends.

When I had overheard thus much, believing it a foolish temerity to stay
longer, so ill provided as I was, near a declared enemy, I returned softly back
to the place where I had left my Horse; and prosecuting my journey, without any
disturbance, arrived the following Evening safe at Valentia. The Noble and
Charitable Countess received me with an affectionate Welcome, but when I
inquired for Narcissa, she declared to know nothing more concerning her, than
what my Letter had given intelligence of. At first, I believed she only denied
her in jest, to give some allay to the joy I had expressed of being so near her;
and to remove the doubt, I showed her the Letter wherein she summoned me to
Valentia, but she convinced me her character had been counterfeited in it,
which so much afflicted me, that the very violence I did my self reduced me to
a Fever, which I struggled with several days. On one when I began to mend,
(during my illness having been attended as if an only Son to the Countess) a
Page acquainted me, that a young Gentleman a stranger, desired to speak with
me; I ordered him to be brought in, who after the usual complements, inquired
of me what was become of Alvaro and Narcissa; and being informed that neither
of them was, or had been in Valentia, fetching a deep sigh he swounded away by
my Bedside: I called immediately for somebody to his assistance, and by that
time they had brought him to himself again, looking heedfully on his face I
knew the disguised Youth to be Cassandra, my Friends Mistress: and being
perfectly recovered, when the Company was retired, after having given her an
account of my Adventures since I left Alicant, she requited it by telling me;
That the satisfaction she received by understanding from the Countesses Letter,
of Alvaro's being safe at Valentia, was converted to the highest affliction, by
a declaration she had from her Father, (instigated thereto by Estefania her
rigid Mother-in-Law) that in two days she must resolve to marry Mauritio, who
had long pretended to her, or profess her self a Nun in what Covent she should
make choice of. This resolution of her Parents obliged her to as hasty a
determination to prevent it, which all other ways appearing impossible, and
overcome by her love to Alvaro, she had in a disguise left both her Fathers
House and Country; and believing to find Alvaro with the Countess, had
adventured in Boys Clothes on so long a journey, to be protected by him from
her Fathers threatened violence.

I had traveled (said she to me, in continuing her Discourse) some days, when
toward evening withdrawing to an Inn in a small Town to pass the Night, having
got a Room the farthest from those were taken up by some Company in the House,
there came to the same place a Coach and six Horses, out of which alighted a
young Gentleman and two Women, one of which by the richness of her Garb seemed
to be attended on by the other, and coming all up Stairs entered into the very
Room I was retired to, the Gentleman desiring me in courtesy to resign it to
the Lady was with him, there being no other convenient one in the House empty,
which I seemed very willing to do, but desired I might not be exposed to the
notice of any body in the House, it importing me much to be concealed. And the
Gentleman taking some particular observation of me, after several discourses,
having upon his Inquiry told him of what place I was, he asked me if I had any
acquaintance with Alvaro Prada, I answered, that I not only knew him very well,
but was his Servant, and then traveled toward Valentia to meet him. He was
very glad at what I said, and assured me he was a most particular Friend to my
Alvaro, both having been formerly Students together in the University of
Valliadolid; the intimacy being contracted first between them on occasion of
the affinity of their Names, he being called Alvaro Felix; and then on a
journey to Valentia with his Wife, who was the Lady I saw with him, called
Isabella, the next day they obliged me to bear them company in their Coach to
Valentia; I must confess to you, that not only the extraordinary Beauty but the
shape and complexion of the Lady were so conformable to that of Narcissa, I
could scarce be satisfied within my self but she was the fair Companion I had
met with, which Alvaro Felix half confirmed to me, by intimating that he was
fully acquainted with the Adventures of Felicius. As we were traveling on the
Road, they took more particular notice of me than they had done before,
observing, as I guessed, my complexion to be fairer than is usual with men;
but whose notice I perceived to be greatest, was that of Jacinto, a servant of
Alvaro's, who pretending to be indisposed, they had taken into the Coach with
us, to make his journey more easy than it would have been on his Horse. We
traveled all day, resting only a little at Noon to refresh the Horses; and
about Sunset, the evening being very clear, Alvaro and his Lady alighted out of
the Coach, and we all refreshed our selves with what they had provided the
Night before: after which Isabella and her Husband returning to the Coach,
desired I would walk softly after it awhile with Jacinto, which we did till the
Night began to grow upon us, her Woman remaining with them in the Coach. As we
went softly on together Jacinto entertained me with a relation of the quality
of his Master, who he told me was a Sevilian born, and then going with his Wife
to visit her Friends in Valentia; but from that he fell into a Discourse much
less agreeable to me, telling me how like I was to a young Woman he had long
since applied his Addresses to. While I was accompanied by him with the
entertainment of hearing his Adventures with his Mistress (which at length I
began to be pleased with) supposing he did not in the least doubt but I was a
man, we quite lost sight of the Coach, and soon after it was out of hearing,
which beginning to disturb me, withal perceiving we had quite left the Road, I
stopped, telling him I would go no farther that way he led me; but being deceived
by his urging he knew where we were very well, and continuing that little Track
we were in, it would bring us before the Coach to a Country House they must of
necessity pass by; I not only yielded to his desire in going forward, but
having climbed with some difficulty up a rocky Hill, at his request sat down
with him to rest our selves; when taking me fast by the hand he told me I must
no longer deceive him with the suppositious name of Leonardo, since he was
fully convinced he had a Leonarda in his company; at first I endeavored by
smiling at his words to make a jest of the mistake I told him my tender Years
had occasioned; but he not satisfied therewith, proceeding from Argument to
Action, attempting to discover by force what I was so cautious of concealing;
at last in spite of my resistance, threw me all along on the ground, and as I
was struggling with him, it is true said he, my conjecture is true, and now my
Coy Mistress is in the power of her Adorer; just as he uttered those words, and
when I thought all my Resistance would prove ineffectual to the preservation of
my Honor, by chance I laid my hand on the Hilt of a Dagger he had by his Side,
and and having no other remedy to save my self by, I drew it, and with two
Stabs in his Side, made him desist from his wicked Design; I got up immediately
and fled from so fatal a place, leaving the rash young Man Groaning on the
Earth, which by what you have related to me, I guess was at the same time you
was retired into that Mountain; and he had strength enough to go so far as to
die near the place you was reposing in, which occasioned your meeting
afterward with Isabella's Coach, and learned abruptly the design of Grotillus,
but how they were reduced to the condition you found them in, I am wholly
ignorant of; for, traveling alone all that night, without hearing more of
them, I got safe hither.

This Account I received from Cassandra of her Journey, extolling her Courage
in the safeguard of her Honor. A day or two after Cassandra's coming to the
Countesses house, I received News from Lisardo, that Narcissa was supposed to
remain Concealed in her Fathers House; and soon after recovering perfectly my
Health, I left Valentia, in search of my Friend Alvaro, whom I believed to be
the Author of that Counterfeit Letter had brought me thither, and hoping to
find him somewhere about Alicant, I went directly to Denia where I heard some
Spanish Galleys lay, which were to touch at that place in their Voyage through
the Straits; but though my ill Fortune brought me thither two days after they
Sailed; upon Inquiry in the Town I learned several Circumstances which induced
me to believe one of the Galleys carried my Friend and a Lady in his Company to
Sevil. Upon this Intelligence, and being disappointed of a Passage by Sea, I
returned again to Valentia, and gave Cassandra an Account of what I had heard,
who understanding my Resolution of going to Sevil, not only to find Alvaro, but
to keep as far as I could from Alicant, where I was informed my Enemies lay, in
continual watch to destroy me; contrary to the Entreaties and persuasions both
of the Countess and my self, She would bear me Company in my Journey, which I
feared to oppose too much, lest as soon as I was gone, she should make such
another Venture as she had from Alicant. And not long after, having word sent
me that some Dutch Vessels were Arrived at Denia, bound to St. Lucar, I took my
leave of the Noble Policena, and having Cassandra with me in her Boys Clothes,
we went on Board, and the Wind being fair, as soon as our Captain had taken in
some Fresh Water, which he chiefly stopped there for, we set Sail, making the
best of our way toward the Straits Mouth. We had Sailed two days with an easy
Gale, and on the third, my Captain out of a Compliment, the Sea being very
smooth, would needs take me on Board with him to Dinner of another Ship in our
Company, which his Brother Commanded; I was not willing to refuse the kindness,
and leaving Cassandra in our Vessel was very handsomely Treated in the other,
where we were very Pleasant together, till rising from Table, and going on the
Deck, I perceived a strong North-East Wind which had risen since our coming
into that Ship, had separated us a great distance from our Company and the Sea
growing high, it was impossible for us to return on Board, where I had left
Cassandra; I was sensibly afflicted with the thoughts of leaving her alone
exposed to the rudeness of Seamen without a Captain, one night, fearing she
might be discovered; but my disturbance was redoubled, with finding the Storm
increase as the Night grew on, and the next Morning scarce supportable, when I
could behold nothing but Waves which ran Mountain high, having lost sight of
all the Ships were in our Company the day before. We continued eight and forty
hours struggling with the merciless Seas and Winds, at the end of which, no
longer able to resist the impetuosity of the Storm, our Leaky Ship was dashed
in pieces against a Rock not far from the Shore, when by the help of a broken
planck, I swam to Land, but scarce had set footing on it, and a little
recollected my self from the disturbance of having been so lately Shipwrackt;
when looking hastily about to see from what part several Arquebusses were shot,
which I heard, I saw a Man rolling down from the Top of a high Hill, whose
Steepness made it want little of a Precipice; and going toward him, when he
was quite at the Bottom, I found his Spirits dismayed, through the violent blows
he had received in his Fall. The Compassion I took of him, perceiving by his
Garb he was none of inferior Rank, made me careful to find if he had any Life
remaining; and unbuttoning his Coat to give more freedom to his Breath, in a
short time he began to stir; but how much was I surprised upon opening his
Bosom, to find hanging on a Scarlet Ribon the Order of Saint James, and with
it the Picture of my adored Narcissa; what my disturbance was at so unexpected
a Sight, may easily be guessed, and the weight of my Grief was so violent to
find another possessed of any thing related to her, that (over-weak before with
swimming, and wanting strength to resist that last Assault of Fortune,) I fell
down in a Swoon, by his Side I had been endeavoring to reduce from the same
Condition. Some time after, coming to my self, I found the Stranger Recovered,
from whom I received the Assistance I had before given him; and being invited
to a House, he told me he had not many Furlongs from thence, I accepted of his
kindness; and as we walked softly on together, gave him so fair an Account of
my Life, as to let him know, the Picture I found hanging on his Breast was more
disturbing to me than what I had suffered by being Cast away at Sea; to which
he was about to give me an Answer, when we were met by several of his Servants,
who expressed a great Surprise to find him Bloody and on Foot; whereupon he told
them a Company of Villains had assaulted him at unawares, and killing his Horse
under him, he saved his Life, by falling from a Precipice must in all
probability have ended it. We went softly after meeting them, to his
Country-Lodg; and as soon as we came in sight of it, another servant meeting
him delivered him a Letter, which after he had read, seeming pleased, he
delivered it to me to peruse, which as near as I can remember was to this
effect: Niquea to Don Enriquez.
It Is now, I hope, you will be satisfied how little reason there was for your
Imagination that I could forget the promise was once made you, especially for a
person so inconsiderable as Bernardo; But let it suffice, that his insolence is
chastised, and my reputation cleared to the World; Menandro will acquaint you
at large with all Circumstances, and I beseech you never more doubt the firm
constancy of

Yours, NIQUEA.




Having read the Letter, from what I gathered by it, I congratulated the
reconcilement I supposed it would make between him and his before suspected
Mistress; by which time coming to the door of his House, he conducted me to
repose, after so long a Fatigue as I had ungone, to a very fair Room, where I
passed the following night with disquiet enough; But the next Morning, as soon
as he thought it seasonable, coming into the Chamber where I lay, after such
Compliments as he thought due from the Master of a House to his Guess; he began
a Discourse whereby I perceived him desirous of knowing what was the occasion
of my being so much concerned at the sight of the Picture he wore on his
Breast; which he owned himself fully satisfied in, as soon as I told him my
Name was Felicius; and added, that he knew more of my Affairs, then perhaps had
yet come to my own knowledge; of which he promised to give me a full Account
from the time of my killing Loriano; and afterward would acquaint me how the
Picture came into his Possession, and by what means he learnt all the
Circumstances both of Narcissa's and Alvaro's Adventures, but entreated me
first to satisfy his Curiosity in hearing what had past with me since I left
Alicant; which I not only did, but recited to him most of those Passages of my
Life, which your Highness has had the trouble of hearing; and in Requital,
received from him this following Relation.

As near as I can conjecture, Felicius (said he) by what you have repeated of
the Adventure in Fernando's house, Narcissa escaped through the door you had
just removed from, to Execute that Justice on Leriano was due to his Insolence;
and being scarce awake, clapped it after her, which locked you in, leaving the
Key on the other side with which Leriano must have opened it, whereby yours
became useless; but by that time she got into the Garden hearing a noise through
all the house, and believing you must of necessity fall under her Fathers Rage,
with what Passion, Sighs and Tears did she lament the danger you was exposed
to! and knowing her own would not be less after your discovery in the house,
she ran to the Garden door, and got out in sight of Grotillus and his Man, who
were Witnesses of the have she made from a place of so many threatening Hazards.
She took strait down the first Street, being in a Night dress and without a
Veil; designing if possible, to find your House, which she was as ignorant of,
as unacquainted with the Streets of Alicant, but though she soon went a
contrary way to that she intended, her fortune was such that upon turning into
a narrow Street, a Man took notice of her Garb, and believing her a Woman in
distress, made a generous offer of his Assistance to secure her; which she
accepted of, desiring he would be her Guide to your house; the mention of which
place, making him take more particular notice of her, not without the greatest
amazement imaginable, he knew her to be Narcissa, and discovering himself to be
Alvaro, learned abruptly from her some part of the nights Disaster; so that
considering the imminence of the danger, he conveyed her to his own house,
and having secured her in a Chamber unseen by any body, he went to look you
out, first at your own house, but finding all quiet there, and that your
servants knew nothing where you was, he went on to Fernando's, where all being
in an uproar, and the Neighbors come in upon the noise of Leriano's Death,
crowding among the Company, untaken notice of, he received a general Account of
what had passed, and found you to be the person pitched upon for the Murderer;
so that considering the danger Narcissa was in, while at his House, which he
supposed would be one of the first searched for you, he being looked on by the
whole City as your most intimate Friend, hasting home as fast as he could,
without making any Disturbance, he got a Horse Sadled, and taking Narcissa
behind him, rode away directly to Peniaflor; but coming thither, and not being
able to raise any Body that might admit him into the House, and fearing any
stay near Alicant, he determined at once to put her in a place of safety, which
he thought Policena's House would be; from whence he determined either to
acquaint you with the place he had retreated to, or return privately to Alicant
in your search; so Riding out of the Village again, by daylight he had left it
some Leagues behind him, but fearing the High-Road too public, he quitted it,
and adventured to find the way through the great Forest; and at last having
concealed himself, and taken up for several nights among some Herds-men, whose
habitations were only little Huts, he reached Vanaroz a small Town on the Coast
about tenn Leagues from Valentia, whence a Boat being, soon after his Arrival,
ready to go off, his Horse quite tired out, and thinking the easiness of the
Passage would be a refreshing to Narcissa, they both embarked on it about
Sunset, with assurance from the Patron that they should Land next day before
Noon at Valencia; But the dawn of the Morning scarce appeared, when they were
boarded by a Turks Pinnace, and unable to resist, were carried to their Ship
which plied farther off at Sea, having sent their Boat close into Shore for
such Prize as they could Light on. It would be needless to repeat the
afflictions of Narcissa and your Friend; therefore let it suffice that I tell
you, the same day several Galleys coming in sight, Chased the Ship they were
in, and by the help of their Oars, there being little Wind, gained so fast upon
it, that the disconsolate Captives, perceiving by their Colors they belonged
to Spain, conceived joyful hopes of deliverance, which after a small resistance
of the Turks was accomplished. Alvaro presently removed his fair Charge on
Board the Admiral-Gally where he met his ancient Friend Alvaro Felix, who had
embarked with his Wife from Denia, and I guess occasioned your mistake in
believing him the other Alvaro, at that time Felix designed his Voyage for
Valentia, but afterward upon some advice he received altered it to Sevill. I
cannot omit one Passage which was by the two friends observed with admiration,
that Narcissa and Isabella were both in Shape and Feature so alike, that it was
not over easy to distinguish one from the other. But to proceed, I will only
tell you that they Landed at the first Port the Galleys touched at, unwilling
to be exposed longer at Sea; from whence Alvaro having writ to you, to the
Countess Policenas, an Account of what I have now related, he proceeded in
Company of Felix and the two Ladies to end their Journey by Land.

But now for a while, to make all more plain to you, I must digress from their
Story, to acquaint you with some Accidents relating to my self.

Enriquez in this part of his Discourse stopped a little, keeping me strangely
suspended with the Imagination how so many particulars of my concerns should
come to his Knowledge, till perceiving my impatience, and having told him
nothing could oblige me more than the Recital of his own Life he said to me.

My Descent is from the Ancient Family of Tortosa, by Birth a Sevilian, and the
Order I wear, bestowed on me when a Child, by my Fathers procurement. Having
spent some time at my Studies, I removed from the University to the Court; and
some Months after was by the urgency of business called home again, where I did
not long enjoy that Freedom I had preserved abroad, soon resigning all my
thoughts to the Contemplation of Niquea's Beauty, a young Lady of our City
whose perfections were not more Celebrated, than her disdainful Humor
disagreeable to all those, would gladly have professed themselves her Servants.
At first, unwilling to engage my self where I had small hopes of proving
succesful, I endeavored to banish the growing Passion from my heart; but
finding in a short time it had taken too deep Root to be removed, I gave way to
it, and became very assiduous in passing often by her house, and being in those
places, I had the least imagination of seeing her in; which was as soon
perceived by her, but my Respect procured only the advantage of finding her
coyness increased every day toward me, to that degree, would have quenched a
Flame had been less violent than mine. At length having by the power of large
gifts won her Maid, I prevailed with her to deliver a Letter from me to her
Lady, which was with so little success, that the presumption, as it was termed,
had like to have cost the loss of her place. And Niquea to free her self from
my farther importunity, soon after removed to a Country House of her Fathers,
some miles out of Town: resolving to wait there his return, from a Journey he
had some time before undertaken; but I was resolved however, not to desist from
my pretense, so that getting entertainment in a Farmers house not far from
hers, I spent many days in a Grove adjacent. seeking in vain for an opportunity
of seeing her or speaking with my confident Clavela; till one Evening I
fortuned to see her enter into the Grove with her Maid and an ancient Woman in
her Company, and after having walked round it, she sat down near the place I
had concealed my self in, least my sight should have made her return back; when
believing I must never hope a fitter oppertunity to tell her my grief, though
without much asurance, I rose up and went toward her, who perceiving me come,
started from the place where she sat, and returned as fast as she could to her
house; I began to be transported with the height of her disdain, and would have
overtaken her to complain of it, had not Clavela stepped to me, and advised the
contrary, withal telling me when it was dark she would speak with me from one
of the ground Windows of the house, where she would wait my coming. Neither
being able nor daring to press farther, I departed with satisfaction little
enough, though not without some hopes of finding Clavela my assistant. I was
punctual to the appointment she made me, but was scarce come within sight of
the House, when I was alarmed with a confused noise of people, crying out,
Fire, Fire! help Niquea, or she is lost! the flames have seized her Chamber!
You may imagine I was not slow to offer my assistance, and commanding the
Servant I had with me to follow, I ran to the door of the house which I found
open, and upon my first entrance, an ancient Gentlewoman ran to me, and drowned
in tears, begged I would afford my help to Niquea and her Maid who were
encompassed by those flames had already possessed most part of the House: I
scarce had patience to ask which way led to her Chamber, but securing my face
from the fire with my Cloak, I rushed into the middle of it, and gaining the
foot of the Stairs, felt my way up, not daring to remove my covering, which was
half burnt as well as my Clothes before I got quite up, when turning once or
twice as the walls guided me, I found my self got beyond the fire, and calling
aloud to those had been shut up by it; Clavela opening a door came out to me,
and following her back into her Ladies Chamber, I found her extended on the
floor in a swound, through the fright she had been in; but then my
apprehensions grew more violent than ever; to convey her forth by the way I
came was impossible, the fire still increasing upon the stairs; and other way I
could discern none, unless from the Window which was too high to let her down
from; but my careful Servant, though not hardy enough to follow me through the
House; being told where abouts her Chamber was, ran to the outside, and by that
time I had taken her up in my arms, he called out and told me I might get back
from the Window by a Ladder he had set up against it; so that breaking down the
Casement, I recovered the Yard with my adored charge, and carried her to the
little House had been my Habitation for some time: Clavela got her into my Bed
and I was returned again to my room before she came to her self; which when she
did, and was informed what I had done for her preservation, before I left her
for the remainder of that Night, I had some hopes, my little service would turn
all her former disdain into such favors as before I began wholly to despair
of. The next day she removed back to the City, the House after we left it being
wholly consumed by the fire; accepting of my Coach, I had sent for, to carry
her thither with her Aunt, who was the ancient woman I met the Night before,
and first desired my assistance for Niqueas preservation. I returned from the
Country with them, and found so happy an alteration in my condition, that they
both allowed of the daily visits I made them. Not long after her Father
returned from his journey, and being acquainted with what I had done for his
Daughters safety, treated me with all the endearment I could wish from my
Mistresses Father; but what was more delightful to me, was the correspondence
my Love received from one had heretofore been a stranger to all passions but
that of hatred; permitting me to visit her on all occasions, whereby we soon
came to a resolution of desiring her Father to permit the consummation of our
wishes by Marriage.

About this time arrived in our parts Alvaro and Narcissa, Felix and his fair
Wife, who being related to Niquea, we both had soon notice of their being near
us; and continually visiting one another, I learned from them so much of your
adventures as I have related to you, and Felix acquainting me with his late
Travels, told me the passage you discovered in part, of Grotillus and the
Coach, which was thus. After Felix had spoken to Jacinto and Cassandra to walk
softly after the Coath, it drove on near a League before he bethought himself
of taking them in, when perceiving the Night come on and very dark, he stopped
till they should overtake him, but soon after was set upon by a Squadron of
Horsemen, some presenting their charged Pistols at the doors of the Coach,
while others bound the Coach man and hamstringed the Horses; one of them
telling him as he tendered his life not to offer any resistance; to which he
answered, however valuable life was, he would expose his single one in defense
of the Lady was in his Company. But whatever he could do, overpowred by number,
they forced him and Isabella out of the Coach, some distance from the Road,
where they were met by a young Gentleman, who finding the mistake he owned his
men had been guilty of, begged their pardon a thousand times for the rudeness
they had received from them; endeavoring to excuse the usage they had met
with, by telling them his name was Grotillus, that he was suddenly to be
married to Narcissa, when you who was before a declared enemy of their Family
had stole her away, and having armed his servants was abroad in pursuit of his
Mistress, and her (termed) Ravisher, when one of his men told him, he had seen
Narcissa in a Coach, with one called Alvaro on the Road, which error he found
grounded on the likeness of two faces; what complements passed between them,
(continued Enriques) you heard your self, what remains to add is, that
Grotillus accompanying them to a neighbor Village, they stayed there that
Night, and the next Day he supplied them with Horses to pursue their journey,
which they did to Denia, and there receiving some unexpected news, Felix
returned by Sea to Sevil, meeting with Alvaro and Narcissa in a Turks prize, as
I have before told you. From Sevil they wrote you word again to Valentia of the
place they were in, waiting several days for your answer, but receiving none,
Isabella only staying behind, Felix Alvaro, and my self accompanied Narcissa
from Sevil, the next day I returned back, leaving them to pursue their journey
to Valentia.

Having proceeded thus far, at my request, Enriquez continued his own story;
telling me, that upon his coming back from bringing Narcissa on her way, he
received notice of the Duke of Medinas death at Saint Lucar, and being related
to him, was obliged to be there in order to attend at his Funeral, where being
detained some days, he was acquainted by a Letter from his Servant Menandro,
that Niquea was forthwith to be married to one Bernardo, a Gentleman who had no
other commendable quality but that of being very rich; and that not only the
Father, but she her self approved very well of the match. This intelligence,
(which I could not doubt being well assured both of the integrity and judgment
of the Writer) made me immediately return back by post, and alighting at my own
door without going in, hearing Menandro was abroad, I went directly to the
street where Niquea's Father lived; and full of horror found it crowded with
Coaches had brought Visitants, as I was told, to Alonso's House, to
congratulate his conclusion of a Match between his Daughter and Bernardo, which
was to be effected the next day. Transported with this advice, hiding my face
with my Cloak, I went into the House and up into a large Room, where at a
distance from the crowd I saw Niquea very richly dressed, sitting with all
appearance of mirth among her Relations, and soon after saw Bernardo brought
in, as in triumph by his; I was at first about to stab him in the midst of
them, overwhelmed with my choler, but believing the chastisement of her
falsehood would be greater to be sacrificed to such an inconsiderable wretch; I
retired back to my own House, and the same Night took Horse without any
Company, ordering my Servants to follow me to this place, with a resolution of
never more returning to Sevil: but before my departure I writ a Letter to
Niquea, upbraiding her ingratitude and falsehood. I have now been here three
days, and a while before we met, having rode out to divert my thoughts in the
fields, I saw a company of Peasants, as they appeared by their dress, coming
toward me; at first I took little notice of them, though they were all
masqued, but as soon as they came within distance, they made a volley of Shot
at me; one of which wounding my Horse, he sprung from the way and stumbling
upon a small hillock, came down with me, and getting up before I could free my
Feet from the Stirrups, drew me after him to the brow of the Hill, whence being
in a maze, I fell, rolling to the bottom, and came to your Feet before I stopped.

What satisfaction I received by Niqueas Letter you have already perceived. I
will conclude with informing you what I have since learnt from Menandro; A
letter was sent to Saint Lucar after that he wrote, which had eased me of all
the trouble I afterward felt, if it had come to my hands, but my ill fortune
brought me away before it came thither.

And now I must let you know, that before my going to Saint Lucar, Bernardo had
declared himself a Servant to Niquea, but was so slighted by her, and so little
taken notice of by me, looking on him to differ nothing from a Natural, that he
publicly boasted his pretenses; and one day after I was gone, being in company
where Some in derision to him, asked if his Mistress was as disdainful as ever?
he had the insolence to tell them, he had been possessed of as great favors from
her as the most passionate Lover could hope from an obliging Mistress, of
which, if need were, he could produce testimonies under her own hand; the
impudence wherewith he reported it, made some believe it was not altogether
false, and his declaration being discovered to Alonso, who was most desirous of
chastising his insolence, but had so much wisdom not to fall to extremities,
lest it might leave a blemish on his Daughters reputation; with intent to have
the satisfaction as public as the slander, he sent for Bernardo and required
him to receed from what he had said, and salve his Daughters credit by
Marriage; both which he joyfully offered, and made good the first, by owning in
all company that what he had said of her was out of envy, that another should
be more successful than himself, which he thought me; and Alonso, to clear all
misapprehensions urged his Daughter to conform with his desires of consummating
the Wedding, which she not only seemed willing to do, having other designs of
her own, but hastened the effecting of it; which was resolved on the day after I
retired hither from Sevil; and accordingly she went to the Church in a Bridal
dress, accompanied by all her Friends and Relations, whether he soon came with
the like ceremony, but when all was ready to be consummated before the
Principal of the whole City, she required he should again repeat what he had
before owned, that the report of having received Favors from her, was a
slander, which he repented of and begged her pardon for it; the joyful Lover
willingly complied with her demand, and as soon as he had done, she told him,
no inducement should ever persuade her to be his Wife, had used such
dishonorable means to gain her; and immediately turning about, thanked him for
so public a discovery of his baseness, and followed by her Friends, went
directly out of the Church; and he as sorrowfully home, after so notorious a
slight as she had put upon him, which gained her the general applause of the
whole City. Manandro coming home after I was gone, and hearing I had been in
Town, and was departed again with much disquiet, suspected his Letter to Saint
Lucar had been the occasion of it, and having after he had writ, been informed
by Clavela of her Ladys design, he found an opportunity of speaking with her
that Evening, and letting her know of my hasty arrival and retreat out of Town,
which both they and Niquea, when told of it, concluded to be occasioned by my
not receiving her Letters; she obliged him not to follow me till the next day,
when having completed her design, she sent me that Letter I have read to you;
and the Peasants who assaulted me, I am apt to think, were Bernardo and some of
his Friends disguised, by whom I might have been discovered when I was in
Alonso's House, and they attributing the cause of her severity to my sudden
appearing there, made them by so dishonorable an attempt seek to take away my
life.

Here Enriquez concluded his relation to me of the adventures he had met with
in his Love. And altogether impatient of visiting and reconciling himself to
his Mistress, for the unjust suspicion he had conceived of her falsehood,
desired I would excuse his immediate departure to Sevil, whither I prevailed
with him to let me bear him company, intending from thence without delay to
return back to Valentia, where I was once more confident of finding Narcissa
and my faithful Friend; but the consideration I had of appearing before him
till I could learn some news of his Dear Cassandra, made me resolve by the way
to spend some time in all the Seaports of the Andalusian Coast to inquire after
her; I had begun my journey the same Afternoon we arrived at Sevil, but by the
persuasion of Enriquez, deferred it till the next Morning, to walk then with
him to an Orange-Garden without the City, whether he was informed Niquea, with
several other Ladies, were gone to recreate themselves. In our way passing by
Saint Austins Covent, Enriquez knew a Coach that stood there to be Niqueas, and
believing her in the Church, hastened his pace thither; but as I followed him
with more leisure, I heard one call me by my name, and turning about saw a man
advance toward me with his drawn Sword, who scarce giving me time to get my
own in the same posture, fell upon me with a violent precipitation; and having
luckily put by his first passes, I cut at his head, which lay open to me, with
so much force, that meeting with the Hilt of his Sword which he hastily held up
to ward the blow, mine flew to pieces in my hand, but he was then so far from
desisting from the combat, that my life was in eminent danger, when a Young
man who was just come out of the Church, placed himself by my side, in a
posture to defend me; at the same time two Gentlemen more newly alighted from a
Coach, running in to part us; my adversary being ashamed of the advantage he
had made use of against me by the breaking of my Sword, would have retired
without being known, having till then his Face covered with his Hat pulled down
to his Eyes, and a part of his Cloak he held before it; but turning about and
treading on it, which hung down to the ground, he stumbled and his Hat fell
off, when I immediately knew him to be my mortal enemy Grotillus; it was then
in vain for either of us to pursue our quarrel, and on the contrary I went
toward him, and told him, I should never seek after, or wish any thing more,
than his Friendship; at first his Choler would not suffer him to give me an
Answer, and in the mean time about to speak to those had afforded me their
Assistance, how joyfully was I surprised to find my self in the Arms of my dear
Narcissa, and a little way from me, Alvaro with Cassandra by the hand, who was
the Youth first came in to second me in the quarrel; while we were in this
Posture, Enriquez having heard a noise, and missing Niquea in the Church, came
out to us; and being informed of all that had past, he went to Grotillus,
endeavoring to persuade him to the acceptance of that friendship I had
offered, but the sight of his Mistress so far aggravated his disgust, that no
Arguments could be used had any prevalence with him; till Alvaro giving a short
truce to the Joy he had in Cassandra's being found; went to him, and as I
remember, gave both him and the rest of us, an Account of the Alteration of our
Condition in these words.

Grotillus you are Noble and Generous, and will I am confident forget your
hatred, when you have heard what I shall now tell you; I went from this place
toward Valencia with Narcissa designing to deposite her in the House of the
Countess Policena, till we could Learn some News of Felicims; and began my
Journey from hence with her some days since, but after two that we had
Traveled, finding her by a sudden indisposition unfit to go farther; we stopped
at a Village twenty Leagues off, whether the same Evening a Stranger coming in
to Lodge, and hearing he came from Valencia, I went to him to inquire out of
Curiosity what News from those parts, who presently knew me, as I did him, to
be Lisardo my Friends Servant; he inquired of me whether I knew where Felicius
was? and having told him I was ignorant, but that Narcissa was in the house
with me, he desired to wait on her, and coming into the Room told us that
Felicius was now an Earl by the death of Policena, who had declared him her
Heir; and added that during her sickness hearing Narcissa's Father was in Town,
come thither in her search, she sent for him, and at last prevailed so far,
that he declared himself reconciled; and the Countess dying two days after, He
assisted as chief Mourner at her Obsequies in behalf of Felicius whom he owned
his Son; and the Ceremony being over, had sent him in search of those had been
so long missing, and under his displeasure; the Letters he brought delivering
to Narcissa, she opened, (which are here to justify the Truth of what I tell
you.) Upon this Information, we returned to Sevill, with purpose to stay there
till Fernando was acquainted where his daughter was; and having so luckily met;
it must be hoped by all, Grotillus will not alone continue that Enmity is
removed from the Breasts of all others.

Upon these words of Alvaro's which were as surprising to me as to Grotillus,
he took Narcissa by the hand and delivered her to me with all wishes of
happiness.

As to what concerns Cassandra, I need only acquaint your Highness the Ship she
was on Board arriving safe at Cadiz, she came the same day to Sevill, and
before entering into any house, met me at St. Austins engaged with Grotillus,
one passage I must not omit, which was the Letter at first brought me to
Valencia; Lisardo my Servant finding the grief I was in, by my ignorance of
what was become of Narcissa, forged the Letter to give me a present
satisfaction, and withal to hasten my departure from Alicant, where he knew me
in the midst of many Enemies, and afterward hearing nothing of me, he went to
Valencia, supposing it a place where he should soonest learn what was become of
me.

I have nothing more now to trouble your Highness with the hearing of, but to
add, that at the Entreaty of Enriquez, Narcissa and Cassandra stayed with his
Mistress, and Alvaro, Grotillus and my self at his House till the Celebration
of his Marriage; in the mean while, sending to Fernando to let him know where
we were; and that Ceremony over, Grotillus undertook the Conduct of us all
hither; where Alvaro's Marriage with Cassandra, and mine with Narcissa were
publicly Consumated a few days before the Arrival of your Highness in these
Parts.

The Duchess was so well pleased with the History of Felicius's Adventures,
that in congratulating their happy Union after so much trouble, she could not
be dissatisfied with the imagination, Her own Condition would soon in all
appearance be as well settled as that of those fortunate Lovers she was a Guess
to; but the fair young Countess finding her Lord had made an end of his
Relation, desired he would acquaint the Duchess and satisfy her self, in one
circumstance he had omitted, which she was concerned in; how Enriquez came by
that Picture of hers he had mentioned? which Felicius excusing his
forgetfulness of, did by telling them, it was not Narcissa's but a Picture of
Isabella, he accidentally found in a rich Cabinet Felix had presented to him,
and wore it that day to give a diversion to his thoughts from remembering any
more his then supposed false Niquea; and afterward meeting with Felix had
restored it to him.

At another time the Princess would have found as much satisfaction among such
obliging Company as she could have wished; But the impatience she was in for
the Ships return had sailed in search of Frederick, and to see Mantua again,
gave a great check to her present tranquillity. But a few days after her trouble
was removed by the Arrival not only of that but several other of her own Ships;
and the person she had sent out coming ashore, acquainted her that meeting
those Frigates were returned with him, he made the best of his way back, having
sent a light Vessel to Majorca to acquaint the King of Sicily where the
Duchess was, who sailed thither with a Resolution of laying wast the whole
Island, if that Prince did not deliver her back to him; she being generally
believed there in his power.

By that time the Duchess had received this short Account of his Voyage, all
the Principal Officers of the little Fleet were landed, and come to pay their
Duty to their Princess, and congratulate her safe delivery from the hands of a
violent Ravisher; whom she received with her accustomed goodness; and having
told Felicius as much before, acquainted them with her resolution of Sailing
the next day for Mantua, commanding to have all things ready for her departure
against that time; But if the Mantuan Princess was pleased with the suddenness
of her departure toward Italy after so long an absence, the generous Spaniards
who had enjoyed so much of her Company, could not but express themselves
troubled at the thoughts of loosing it, and had she not absolutely refused
their desire; Felicius and his Lady would have waited on her to Mantua.

The next morning having notice that all things were provided, and the Wind
fair; with a general trouble, she took leave of her obliging Friends, having
presented Narcissa with several rich Jewels, and accepted of a promise they
made to visit Her in Italy.

Fortune now weary of persecuting Her, after tenn days being at Sea, the Fleet
came in sight of Mantua, discerning a greater at the same time making in for
the Road, which they conjectured right to be the Sicilian Kings, and by that
time the Dutchesses Ship was come to an Anchor, they discovered the Royal
Standard of that King, displaid on the Topmast head of his Admiral-Frigat. The
News of Diana's Arrival being soon carried ashore, what acclamations of Joy
were sent forth by her Loyal Subjects! and how was the Shore Crowded with
people to see and welcome her home, after so unfortunate an absence! And while
this happy News delighted all on the Land; King Frederick entering the Harbor
with his Fleet, and knowing of the Dutchesses Arrival; hasted in a Barge on
Board her Ship, with an earnestness the firmest Passion in the World inspired
him with; as soon as ever he came into the Cabin, he threw himself at the Feet
of his Divine Princess, who no longer desirous to Conceal her Love; let him
know the satisfaction she received in beholding him safe from all those dangers
he had so long been Assaulted with. The happy Lovers, after a short stay on
Board; going into Rich Barges, were come off for them, Landed, and taking Coach
to the Palace, were Ecchoed thither with the Shouts of of a People transported
with the greatest satisfaction imaginable. But amidst this public rejoicing,
although the Sicilian King was happy not only in being near his Adored
Princess, but assured their Nuptials were deferred no longer than till all
things were ready for their Solemnity; he was impatient of brooking so tedious,
and as he thought unnecessary preparations; wishing the accomplishment of his
Hopes might be effected with less Ceremony, rather than admit any delay; which
was effected in so little a time as would have seemed long to none but a
wishing Lover. But the appointed day being at last come; the Duchess and
himself in a Garb suitable to the Eminence of their Degree, and the
satisfaction of their Minds, both the Court and City expressing by theirs, the
share they had in the Blessings of so happy a Union, attended the Royal pair to
the Temple, where the Blushing Duchess was delivered to him she allowed the
most deserving and constant Lover upon Earth.

The now truly happy King, staid some time after their Marriage in Mantua,
where having settled the Government, he conveyed his Queen in a Royal Fleet to
Sicily, being welcomed by his Subjects, not alone, with a Joy too great to be
expressed, but with a Triumph beyond what Rome it self could ever boast off;
where they both enjoyed a long and happy Sovereignty, leaving a Royal
Succession behind them, and always living with such endearment that the last
day of their Lives, seemed the first of their Loves.

FINIS.

