CONSIDERATIONS Requiring greater Care for Trade IN ENGLAND, AND SOME
Expedients Proposed.

LONDON: Printed for S. Crouch, over against the Exchange in Cornhil. 1695.

CONSIDERATIONS requiring greater Care for TRADE in ENGLAND, and some
Expedients Proposed.
IT IS very well known, that since the Discovery of the East and West Indies,
and increase of Navigation thereon, the state of Europe in general, and every
Nation in it in particular, is much altered, more especially in the course of
War; for whereas before it was supplied by Soldiers, either voluntary or bound
thereto by Tenure of Lands, who found their own Arms and Clothes, and for a
certain time Provisions; so that War was but of little Expense to the State,
and often decided by a Field-Battle (as that between Algiers and Tunis last
Year) whereupon the Men went every one home again to his own House; now we see
all corners of Europe crowded with listed, disciplined, and standing Armies in
Pay, which as it cannot be done without huge Funds of Money, and the Ancient
Demesnes of Princes not sufficing, Taxes are every where increased on the
Subject; to the end the Fountains of which may be kept open, as it is
reciprocally needful the State should by all means consult increase of Wealth
to the People, (no other ways supplied so well as by Home Manufacture and
Foreign Trade) accordingly a change of the Management of War in Europe is not
more obvious, than the Methods used to furnish necessary deniers for it in the
Subject: Therefore in this Age, not only Republics, but even the most Absolute
Monarchies, do sedulously court Improvement of their Wealth by Trade, witness
France and Sweden, Florence, nay, the Popedom; nor are we so to dread the
Monster Arbitrary Power, as to conceive the same Considerations that lead every
Man to proportion Burdens to the strength of his Animal, and yield a Pasture to
the Milch Kine, will not also cherish so much Mercy and Goodness in the worst
Princes, as not to extort more from their Subjects than they have any Means or
Ability to raise.

Nothing is more demonstrative than (point d'Argent, point de Suisse) no Money,
no Soldiers; and no greater obstruction to the Success of Arms than want of
Pay, besides the increasing use of Fortifications, Artillery, and Fire-Engines
is costly; wherefore that State which has most Money, may have most Men, and
will be most like to have her Enterprises succeed: Whoever thinks the Valor of
a few may counter-balance the Numbers of an Enemy, or that an unexperienced
Army can stand against a Veterane, will run mighty hazard of being deceived;
and though the English Ancient Victories in France were sufficient to breed in us
a conclusion of the former, yet now a change of the Discipline of Arms puts Men
under a nearer equality, so that whoever considers the course of our late and
present Wars, may observe the Agressor mostly to exceed in Number; besides War
now adays is not determined by Point of Honor, and Dint of Sword, so much as
by manifold Intrigues, wherein Gold has obtained the Reputation of a Virtue
Superlative.

As an Alteration of the state of War in Europe requires unusual Supplies of
Money from the Subject, it is as certain that the support of Estates in Peace
does now also call for Supplies much enhanc'd of those in former Ages, for
Demesnes, the Ancient support of Crowns, are generally embezelled, the Nature
and Form of Courts, the Course of Alliances, Intrigues, and Negotiations are
altered, Officers of all sorts multiplied, Frauds complicate and inveterate,
besides the accurrence of standing Troops. Wherefore I conclude some
extraordinary care is to be taken, that increase of Wealth in the Subjects may
enable them to bear such new Burdens; for if maintenance of the State require
increase of Revenue when the Subject's Purse is exhausted, as in the present
case of Denmark, it must needs make both King and People uneasy; and whatever
Country this happens in, will be exposed to danger of becoming a Prey to some
other.

To draw down a Consideration of the Premises to a nearer relation with
England, I take for granted Money is now more than ever the Nerve of War, and
Trade the great Minister of Wealth; and if every Nation in Europe be Armed at
all Points, that a Posture of Defense, even in Peace, is necessary to be
maintained by us; it is a greater Blessing than the unthankful People of England
esteem it, to have the Ocean for our Circumvallation and Barrier, which Fences
us against Surprise and Ravages, excuses the Charge and Terror of Garrisons and
Fortifications, and continues to us that Quiet, Liberty, and Security of former
Ages, all the rest of Christendom, more or less, have lost; nevertheless an
Island must have a Line also of moving Castles, Marine Force is so increased,
and all Maritim Nations provided for Invasion, that we ought to conclude our
selves no longer safe than our Naval Strength is superior, or at least equal
to that of our Neighbors.

To speak of Power at Sea, and the Advantages it gives Possessors of it, is a
very large Theme, and we need not go back to Tire, Athens, Carthage, Venice,
and the Barbarous Normans or Danes to enquire into her Wonders, our late and
more experienced Ages yield as fruitful Instances: Trade and Power at Sea are
productive one of another, the former indeed seems Naturally entitled to
Parental Honor, though she can no more slourish without Protection of
Authority, than the Royal Navy without her, so that a Discourse of them may run
as of one Interest. In the Invasions of the Romans, Saxons, Danes, and Normans,
this Isle was unequal to them in Ships at those Junctures, though at several
other times it was, and ever since the last has been upon the Offensive, and so
exempted from the Broils of Europe, more at leisure to become Umpire and
Balance of it; even since increase of Navigation we have (blessed be God) been
so happy as to maintain a Force at Sea, which has given Terror to other Nations
rather than Encouragement to Invade us; but should it ever arrive (which God
forbid) to have the Tables turned upon us, the ill Effects would be so much
greater as our Security from such Attempts has hitherto been, our Coasts being
easy of Access, and not so planted with Forts as those long accustomed to
Defense; and the Union of Scotland and Ireland, which wholly rely on us, does
not diminish but increase our necessity of Strength at Sea.

Before Discovery of the East and West Indies, there was little Traffic in the
Ocean, the Hans-Towns and Flemings had what was; but when Spain had of a sudden
by the Spoils of America, so over-topt the rest of Europe, as to make some fair
offers for the Universal Monarchy of it, other Nations became enquirers after
those Mines, and among them all, none made more Successful Advances to a
Participation with her than England; the History of Queen Elizabeth, and our
large Plantations give Evidence of it, and under that Illustrious Queen our
Navigation reached the West Indies and Muscovy; the Traffic of the Hans-Towns
was here extinguished, and our East India, Turkey (if not African) Companies had
their Foundations. How Navigation since has improved with us, the whole World
can Witness, and that we may continue to equal, or exceed every Nation on
Earth, is, if God permit, not improbable, our Stituation, Harbors,
Productions, Manufactures, Genius, Timber, and Nautick Skill affording all
Encouragements to hope it.

Every Country in measuring its own Strength, must taken in a Computation of
her Neighbor's to make a right Estimate thereof, and it is this Consideration
alone which can give Jealousy to our Honor and Welfare: The Neighbour-Nations
which can only affect us, either to Eclipse our Glory, disturb our Quiet, or
endanger our Safety, are France, Spain, Holland, Denmark, and Sweden; Spain,
Denmark, and Sweden are as yet unable to Enterprise on us, so that Holland and
France only fall under a watchful Consideration.

Holland (whose Seven Provinces are little more in extent than Yorkshire) is
well known to have received the Birth of her Commonwealth since increase of
Navigation, and is formed entirely to Encouragement of it; what Wealth,
Strength, and Consideration in Europe she has obtained by that means, needs no
Proof: Moreover the long Wars, wherein she first lift up her Head, and scarce
intermitted, with which she has been since exercised, have trained her to
Modern Discipline of Arms, and enured her Subjects to such Taxes, that about
30000 Soldiers, and between 30 and 40 Men of War are maintained by her in time
of Peace, and more than doubled in War without difficulty; Powerful Fleets, and
standing Armies, and established Funds for them, are things which ought to give
Jealousy; nevertheless increase of Wealth seems her chief aim, she has Enemies
at Land, her Government not composed for Foreign Conquests no more than the
Genius of the People, and England has many Advantages of her both for War and
Trade.

However I shall Remark here, that as Trade in England arose and has thriven,
chiefly through the Advantages of Nature, and Genius of her People; in Holland
it neither arose from the Productions of the Soil, as in Egypt and the
Baltic; or from the peculiar Manufactures of her People, as in France, and
some Towns in Germany; or from Accident, as in Spain and Portugal; or from mere
Necessity, as in Venice and Genoa; or from the Amaenity of her Clime, all four
Elements conspiring to thwart it; or from Situation, for when standing on the
same Platform with Flanders, she was infinitely out-stript by it; but plainly
from the Interest of Trade being interwoven with her Original Scheme of
Government: And it is from a steady pursuit of that Policy she has Triumphed
over Nature, and Envy of Crowned Heads, and lives like a Salamander in the
Flames of War, which consume all besides her. From this Example I crave leave
to infer, that the Bon-minn of a Government is more Productive of Commerce than
all Advantages of Nature.

Nevertheless, for Reasons abovementioned, Holland is not to be feared, in
comparison with France, the Scourge of this Age, which has a People Martial in
their Nature, or made so by Discipline of some Ages, and stands possessed of all
the Arts of War, and whose immoderate Success has justly alarmed all
Christendom, though we might sit unconcerned, were not her Naval Force also
proportionably increased. The Crown of France, Anno 1624. was not Owner of one
Ship, but hired of her own Subjects, and of England and Holland those she then
used to Assault Rochell. Cardinal Richlieu in that Juncture came to the
Management of Affairs, and observing thereon how France lay open to the Arms of
England, made it his principal care to provide against such an Inconvenience,
and so effectually, that Anno 1637. France set out her first Line of Battle,
containing above 50 Ships, and 20 Galleys, with which she recovered the Islands
of St. Margaret and Honorat near Thoulon, then possessed by the Spaniards; and
Anno 1642. Richlieu dying, left above an Hundred Ships and Galleys, with Stores
suitable, in the Royal Arsenals: how her Fleets have been increased since, to
the Terror of Italy, Spain, and all the Mediterranean Shores, let Histories
relate; I only observe, that England has been so far from forbidding her to
build Ships of War in the Ocean (as it is said Queen Elizabeth did to Henry the
Fourth) that we have been at least unconcerned Spectators, if not Contributors
to it; nevertheless we have little felt the Effects of a stupid Contempt of
that Formidable Growth till this War, wherein France has twice disputed even
Dominion of the Channel.

France was so unacquainted formerly with the Sea, that her Language wants a
proper term for the word, Fleet; and it appears, that though the Native Riches
and Extent of the Country might enable her Monarch to maintain a Royal Navy
without the subservience of an answerable Trade, yet that also was cultivated
by the care of Richlieu; for Rochel and the Cautionary Towns being subdued Anno
1630. the Protestants were for many Years indulged Liberty: And 'twas found
France had Materials of her own Growth for Building and Rigging Ships; from
1642, to Anno 1660, became a Parenthesis as to this matter, through the
Confusions of her present King's Minority, and a Civil War, but since that time
Plantations have been Established and Improved in the West Indies, an
East India Company formed by Royal Charter, with great Privileges, Fishery
encouraged, Harbors, Channels, and all Conveniences to Traffic cultivated,
Manufactures invented, and wonderfully improved, Customs on Port Trade above
all Taxes avoided, Courts of Merchants for deciding all Affairs of Commerce
established in most of her Great Cities; in fine, no Contemptible Trade has
been raised in the Mediterranean from Marseilles, and I question if Dunkirk is
more improved by Land in Fortifications, than by Sea in Traffic and Shipping
since 'twas ours.

Dominion of the British Seas, especially the Channel, is not only an undoubted
Prerogative and Right of the Crown of England, but the brightest Gem in it: To
the Nation it is a Wall of Brass, and the greatest Bulwark of our Religion,
Laws, and Properties; without which all other Provisions will be too short to
secure them: And should France ever obtain it, how heavy would the Yoke of our
Slavery be, or Conflict difficult to prevent it? Her Coast runs Parallel to
ours, her Armies are above 300000 Men, her Gentry Numerous and Warlike,
Pretensions she never wants to her Neighbors Possessions, nor Ambition, Reason
of State, or Envy of our Wealth, nor Thrist of Revenge for our Ancient Glories
over them; we may confidently aver, that the Miseries of this Island under the
Roman, Saxon, Dane, and Norman Invasions, and all their Ravages, Cruelties, and
Impositions, would be far exceeded by those the Tyranny of France would bring
with it, with more danger of continuance also: So much is said only to awaken
us from that profound Security, our former Victories over her, a flourishing
Power at Sea, Dominion of the Channel, and long Peace have nourished in us.

But to withdraw our Eyes from so black a Prospect, and be satisfied that the
Gracious God has cut out so much Work for France, there is no fear of that
Dilemma during this War; our Wealth accumulated by long Peace, good Condition
of the Navy Royal, and mighty Stock of Shipping for Trade at beginning of the
War, with a Powerful Consederacy by Land, Conjunction with Holland by Sea, and
Renowned Virtue of our King, cannot fail (under God) to secure from it: But
whereas Trade has extremely suffered, and our Losses in it been such, as must
have overwhelmed any other Nation, and which, unless better secured and
improved, will doubtless expire in few Years, our National Wealth, and Naval
Power must find much difficulty to survive, when Holland increased in the one,
and France in the other by our Spoils, shall become more Formidable to us.

Whereas Wealth is now the Measure of every Nation's Strength, more than the
Valor of its Natives, (the latter being enslaved, and only subservient to the
Goddess Money, as in the instance of Switzerland) and this War is much more
destructive to the Wealth of England, than to that of any other Country
concerned in it; it is a Consideration, which, though it ought not to lessen our
Devotion to so good a Cause, yet ought to excite us to furnish our selves with
the means of pursuing and more effectually promoting it, a Supply of Soldiers
being much easier found than Money; in like manner, whereas the Barrier of our
Island is a Naval Force, our Loss supposed of 2000 Ships, whereof near 1000
gained to the Enemy, the decay of our Native Timber, and inhancement in Price
of Foreign, the Transmigration of Trafick, and a Check upon the Bravery of our
Seamen, require us to retrieve all by double Diligence, since the strong
Confederacy now against France may in our particular future Exigence no Ways
be safely relied on.

Upon the whole, I know nothing so probable to reinstate England in her
Treasure exhausted, and Naval Strength perishing by this War, as some new
Securities and Encouragements to Commerce; if all that has been desired of the
Government had been consulted in its Favor, and our Losses came only from the
unavoidable stroke of Heaven, or usual Fate of Arms, it were Criminal, and
highly unworthy to Complain; but that the Cruisers and Convoys appointed by
King and Parliament, have been defective in their Duty, and that Complainants
have found little Regard or Redress from the Lords of our Admiralty, is too
notorious: This is said in relation only to Losses in the present War, but as
to new Securities and Advantages requirable to Redeem us from the Fatal
Consequences of those Losses, we must insist on former and long Grievances to
Trade, under which, though it has been able heretofore to struggle, yet there
are many Reasons to fear it cannot possibly for the future; which Reasons are
taken from a change of the Balance of Trade and Naval Power in Europe, which
this War has already, and must further produce.

Some Papers touching the Balance of Trade have been Printed, wherein is seen
how all Countries employ their study to render it Advantageous, in particular,
before this War it is plain how France for Twenty Years preceding had gradually
beaten out our Exportations thither, and turned the Balance vastly to her own
Advantage; several other Countries have done the like by us of late Years, in
particular, touching Woollen Cloth, generally now Fabrick'd by those who used
to be furnished hence; so as whoever will give himself the pains to enquire
into the Acquests other Nations have made upon our Trade, and then add the
dismal Effects of this War, will find no solid Grounds to expect that England
should recover her former Glory, Wealth, and Dominion at Sea, without some new
Advantages to Traffic from the Government; which if it had in any proportion
to what other Countries give (as already instanced) the God of Nature has so
bountifully supplied all furtherances, we should no doubt outstrip our Emulous
Neighbors, and perhaps outshine our Ancient Glories; for to Vindicate and
Entail our Dominion of the Seas, I account more desirable, than to sound our
Trumpets again in the Gates of the Louvre.

If a Man went about to enumerate Immunities and Advantages Holland gives
Trade, it would be said, he had an inclination to such a Government as that;
wherefore I here declare once for all, I no more envy Holland its Government
than I do France, and I prefer our Constitution before any other whatever; I
know nothing wherein it is so defective as in the Argument before us, and if
Navigation was more encouraged, no ways apprehend how the Royal Prerogative
would be invaded by it, any more than the Privileges of Parliament, or
Liberties of the People; nor would it be expected that a Monarchy abounding in
Territory, should pursue the Methods of Commerce in a Commonwealth, which has
nothing else to trust to, any more than that a Gentleman, who may Hunt every
day within his own Grounds, should put himself behind a Counter: If any say,
Commerce cannot be so consulted in a Monarchy as a Commonwealth, I see no
reason for such a Conclusion from the Nrture of the thing, and am not of that
mind; for though in former Ages Commonwealths have generally most abounded in
it, that has arose chiefly from their Situation, want of Terra firma, or some
other Accident, and does not amount to a Conclusion against Monarchy; for Trade
was in all Ages, till within little more than a Hundred Years past, counted a
contemptible thing, as it is still by some Mighty and Famous Kingdoms, and is
indeed but a Modern System of Politics, little descanted on by the greatest
Writers and Professors of that Science, and so not only out of the way of our
Domestic Studies, but esteemed unhappily descrepaut with them, though in those
Kingdoms wherein it has been cultivated, I do not see but Trade has slourish'd
by as hasty degrees as in any Commonwealths: I confess, where the Monarchy is
Absolute, there can be no Security for any thing; and unless the Prince's
Wisdom overrules and pursues the good of Trade, as a Maxim of State,
Merchandise must be more obnoxious to Rapine than Inheritances of Land; but
where the Will of the King is circumscribed by Laws, there is as much Security
as can be in a Commonwealth, and I can see no Obstacle to the Encouragement of
Trade, so the State conclude it her apparent Interest.

Under the House of Burgundy how did Commerce flourish at Antwerp and Bruges,
several Ages before the Rabid Fury of the Duke D' Alva? Never did Navigation
more Improve in any Country than ours under Queen Elizabeth, People were safe
in the increase of their Estates, and her Prerogative was neither Eclipsed, or
her Learning tarnish'd by it. France did not propound it a Care worthy of the
State till about Sixty Years ago; what stupendous Advances has she made? And
but for that Check given by the mistaken Politics of extirpating Protestants,
how much greater might they not have been? We might observe the same things of
Portugal, Florence, Sweden, and others; but whereas they have been only under
certain Princes, and at certain Periods, and followed by intervals of
Relaxation, besides that I suppose it no other Fate than has attended
Commonwealths which have past their Zenith, and declined, I will observe that
among the Princes of all those Nations before cited, the wisest and bravest
have given most Encouragement to Navigation and Commerce; and in the Periods
they have had their highest Ascendant, Navigation and Commerce have rather
contributed as a Cause, than followed as an Effect only. From all which
Instances I infer, there is nothing pertaining to the Essence of Monarchy,
which contradicts the Argument pleaded for.

As to England, if Navigation be the Source of her Wealth, and Wall of her
Defense, and after this War, will be the only means of maintaining such a Fleet
in readiness, as can continue the Blessings of Liberty derived from our
Ancestors, and will be to us a better Security than Fortifications, Garrisons,
and Armies, and will establish on our Island the Glory of being the Balance of
Europe; it is therefore concluded the greatest Interest we have to pursue, and
being no ways Injurious to Royalty, we may promise our selves from His Majesty,
who has already acquired Heroic Immortality in our Rescue from Fatal Miseries,
whatever is needful to preserve us from the like in futurity. And His Majesty's
Gracious Concessions to Scotland, in a late Act of Trade, are a particular
Pledge to us of his Royal Favor in any suitable Requests for England.

As I have referred the Reader already to several Books and Papers Printed of
Trade, to make some Computation of the Balance of it, so I must here to inform
himself of the particular Encumbrances on it; in general I beg leave to say,
that several Countries in Europe, nay, Monarchies, give more Encouragement, and
study the Advancement of it more, and if Traffic with us stand upon daily
increasing Disadvantages, in Comparison to other Nations, it is not like to
remain long with us; whether the Alteration of the Exchange lately to most
Foreign Parts, of near 20 per Cent. Prejudice to England, be not a sad Symptom
of her approaching Exit, I leave others to Judge, though if our own Naval Power
and Wealth were to be continued without her, that Consideration would have
nothing of dismal in it; it is plain His Most Excellent Majesty sees clearly a
Necessity of some new Provisions on this behalf, by that Gracious Proposal of
Laws for the Advancement of Trade, in his Speech to this Parliament, and for
the Subject in cases wherein the usual Methods are not adequate to new
Emergencies, there our proper Remedy must be sought in Parliament.

The several disadvantages of Trade are not hereby proposed to be insisted on,
our Parliament is too Numerous a Body to have Particulars Examined, Debated,
and Resolved; the generality of her Members unacquainted with Trade, the Houses
taken up with multiplicity of Business, besides a time of War is not seasonable
for such a Disquisition; howbeit some of her Grievances have already been
touched, and in part relieved by Parliament, as in the Act appropriating 43
Convoys or Cruisers for Ensurance of Traffic near our Coasts during the War;
but alas, there are most Conveniences in Port, and those who buy Places are not
over-officious to lose their Lives; whereas the same under Direction of the
Merchants might have saved probably above half our Losses. The Sum of what is
fit to be requested of our Representatives is, for the Considerations herein
before mentioned, and for as much as the Ancient Boroughs of the Kingdom have
desisted from the Original Scheme of sending Resident Members (and no doubt in
all regards, except Trade, more to the Kingdom's benefit) and it would be
Interruption to other urgent Affairs in the Sessions of Parliament to descend
into the detail of Merchantil, That An Act might Pass to Constitute A Council
of Merchants, Sedentary at London, and vested with Powers only adapted to
Improvement and Security of home Manufacture and Foreign Trade for the future.

Only the allowable Passion of Love to his Native Soil, and no particular Loss
at Sea, or Personal Interest in Traffic (the Author no whit concerned)
dictates these Lines, and he would rejoice as much to see the End consulted by
any other means as these here proposed. I find on the Restoration, King
Charles promised to erect a like Council, from his own Observation of the
wonderful Benefit of such in Foreign Parts, and need of it for the welfare of
Trade in England. In fine, the Committees at Whitehall, if composed of
Merchants, might have produced desired Effects: The proper work of this
proposed Council might be during War, to offer Directions to the Admiralty for
Assignation of the Convoys (as best Judges of the dangers of Ships) and
prescribe time of Sailing to our most distant Voyages. In Peace, to enquire
narrowly into the Balance of Trade with every Nation, to examine due making of
Manufactures, to draw up Results and Methods for Improvement of Navigation and
Commerce, and intend studiously the welfare of them in every regard; in some
cases to determine of themselves, in others to have recourse to the
Privy Council or Admiralty, in others to digest Matters for Information or
Sanction of Parliaments. All which may be easily contrived to the vast
emolument of the Kingdom, without intersering (I conceive) with any part of our
Constitution.

But if any love Contention, I think whoever seeks an Interest for the People
separate from that of the Crown, and those who desire one in the Crown
destructive to the People's, are equally Public Enemies; and I wish there was
in the Political the same Care, Sympathy, and Tenderness, as is in the Members
of a Natural Body. It would be easy to accumulate particular Advantages from
the Expedient mentioned, to the King and Parliament distinctly, besides the
general ones already quoted, and those peculiar to Tradesmen; but suppose the
Clergy and Nobility should not find herein any particular Interests, yet the
same Principles of Conscience and Honor which lead them in other things, will
direct to concur to the National in this; and since it comprehends equal
Provision for all Classes of Trade, I exhort those concerned not to bury
themselves so much in the welfare of their particular Companies, or Personal
Concerns, as to despise or neglect that of others and future Ages, no Man more
auspiciously consulting Private Wealth by other means, than by serving his
Generation, he may inward Peace, and future Blessedness.

Wherefore let a Bill be tendered this Parliament, with a Computation of Losses
to the Port of London since the War, as a Foundation of praying the above said
Remedy, and there is reason to hope Success, since it is no more than needs, to
set us on some tolerable Level with other Nations, and perpetuate Wealth and
Navigation, which are the Security of England, no more than right Reason
dictates that Merchants should direct in Affairs of Traffic, no more than the
Nature and End of Customs warrant to expect, no more than has been granted the
Scots in their last Session of Parliament, and His Majesty in his late Gracious
Speech to ours, invites to sue for; and God forbid our chief Interest for
preserving this Kingdom, should through our own default be lost under the best
King it has had some Hundred Years; for however invaluable Blessings otherwise
we enjoy under this Government, they are all lodged in the Vessel of the
Commonwealth, and must Shipwreck with it.

FINIS.
Some Books lately Printed.
AN Essay on the State of England, in Relation to its Trade, its Poor, and its
Taxes, for carrying on the War against France. By John Carry, Merchant in
Bristol.

A Letter from an English Merchant at Amsterdam, to his Friend at London,
concerning the Trade and Coin of England.

Sir Thomas Row's Speech at the Council Table, about the Alteration of the
Coin, in July 1640. With some Observations thereon.

Some Thoughts concerning the better Security of our Trade and Navigation, and
carrying on the War against France more Effectually: Humbly offered to
Consideration.

Some Remarks on a Report containing an Essay for the Amendment of the Silver
Coins. By Mr. William Lownds.

A New Discourse of Trade, wherein is recommended several Weighty Points
relating to Companies of Merchants, the Act of Navigation, Naturalization of
Strangers, and our Woollen Manufactures, the Balance of Trade, and the Nature
of Plantations, and their Consequences, in Relation to the Kingdom, are
seriously discussed. And some Proposals for Erecting a Court of Merchants for
determining Controversies relating to Maritine Affairs, and for a Law for
Transferring of Bills of Debt, are Humbly offered. The Second Edition. By Sir
Josiah Child.

De Jure Maritimo and Navali: Or, A Treatise of Affairs Maritine, and of
Commerce. In Three Books. The Fourth Edition. By Charles Molly.


