Titus Britannicus: AN ESSAY OF HISTORY ROYAL: IN THE Life and Reign OF HIS
Late SACRED MAJESTY, CHARLES II. Of Ever Blessed and Immortal Memory.

By AVRELIAN COOK, Gent.

-- Ut ameris, Amabilis esto.
Ovid. Majora Veris Monstra vix capiunt Fidem.

Senec. LONDON: Printed for James Partridg, Stationer to His Royal Highness,
George Hereditary Prince of Denmark, at the Post Office by Charing Cross. 1685.

To the most NOBLE, HONORABLE, REVEREND: WILLIAM Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, FRANCIS Lord Guilford, C. S. LAWRENCE Earl of Rochester, P. GEORGE
Marquess of Halifax, C. P. S. JAMES Duke of Ormond, S. R. D. CHRISTOPHER Duke
of Albemarle, HENRY Duke of New Castle, HENRY Duke of Beaufort, CHARLES
Marquess of Winchester, ROBERT Earl of Lindsey, S. A. C. HENRY Earl of
Arlington, C. R. D. AUBERY Earl of Oxford, THEOPHILUS Earl of Huntington, JOHN
Earl of Bridgwater, HENRY Earl of Peterborough, PHILIP Earl of Chesterfield,
Robert Earl of Sunderland, HENRY Earl of Clarendon, JOHN Earl of Bath, WILLIAM
Earl of Craven, ROBERT Earl of Ailesbury, JOHN Earl of Radnor, DANIEL Earl of
Nottingham, HENRY Earl of Middleton, THOMAS Vicount Falconberg, HENRY Lord
Bishop of London, GEORGE Lord Dartmouth, SIDNEY Lord Godolphin, Sir JOHN ERNLY,
Sir THOMAS CHICHELEY, Sir GEORGE JEFFERIES, and Sir LEOLINE JENKINS: The Lords
of His late Majesty's Privy Council.
My LORDS,
IT was a Custom much used by the Ancient Writers among the Greeks and Romans,
to Dedicate their Books to their most particular Friends, and sometimes to
Entitle and call them by their Friends Names. In our Age, wherein we either do,
or should imitate Antiquity in all commendable things, This laudable Custom is
either wholly laid aside, or practiced by so few, that they almost escape
Observance. If indeed this Method of Dedicating Books was changed into a
better, I should have no reason to complain, but rather to applaud the happy
Genius of our Times, for outshining the brightest days of Antiquity: But most
assuredly, we can find no causes for such Triumphs. The Dedications now made in
England and France (which two Countries in this Age, we may Parallel with the
forementioned Greece and Italy, upon the Score of Excellence in Wit, with
respect to the rest of Europe) Our Dedications, I say, are so full of nauseous
and fulsom Flatteries, and Most of 'em so generally made up of about a dozen
long Words, variously turned and dispersed; that for my part, I wonder how any
Man can proceed any further in a Book of such small hopes, but must needs lay
it down, and choose rather to go to Bounding-Stones with Augustus. Nay, this
crying Sin of the Nation is come to that pass, that even our Poets, who were
made and framed on purpose in such a Make, as only to lash Vice with the
severest Satyr, are yet most abominably guilty of this crime. When an excellent
Comedy has appeared on the Stage for some time, and perhaps done the Work of an
Hundred Homilies, in visiting and reclaiming Mankind from their evil* ways; it
comes forth in Print, and all is spoiled again by a wicked Dedication in the
beginning, which propagat^^ Atheism; so that no man can believe the Poet is
honest, and speaks his mind in the Play, while he talks so lewdly and
contradictorily in the Dedication: It was not so in Ben. Johnson's days.

What I have said of Epistles Dedicatory in general, may partly seem to hook my
self into the crowd of these numerous Transgressors, while I inscribe this Book
to your Great Names. But several Things I have to alledg for my self. First,
tho this Piece be not presented to any private Friend of its Author in
Emulation of the Ancients; yet as far as possibly, I have followed their Sacred
Rules and Canons, in a Work of this public Nature. For it is the Life of one
of the Greatest and Wisest Princes that ^ver Swayed the English, or any other
Scepter: And to whom could I better devote His Life, than to His Greatest and
Wisest Friends, (for such He always called His best Servants?) Ye are
concerned, MY LORDS, in every Page of this Book, and can witness what is here
related, to be true. No part of His Life, but wherein some of you have had a
share; In His Education, His Exile, His Sufferings, His Victories, His
Triumphs. And while I write his Life, in some measure I write Yours. For such
is the fate of Celsitude and honor, that Great Men (in some sense) do
frequently Dye before Sixty three: And to be sure, when a Prince falls, he does
not fall alone; but several Others have their Lives interchangeably writ with
his.

Besides, MY LORDS, being unable to find any Object nearer to him, than Your
selves, except his Majesty, (whom God long preserve) and the Family Royal; I
lay under an indispensable necessity of imploring your Lordships Patronage: For
such is my Veneration to the Blood of my Prince, that by no means can I be
persuaded to think the ensuing Papers fit for his most Sacred and Princely Eye,
or worthy a Royal Protection; and I am resolved to be as Innocent as I can, and
not offend One Prince, after having committed Treason against the Fame of
another. However, MY LORDS, tho this be not a Piece fit for a Kings Cabinet;
yet I hope this Image of our late Sovereigns Life will not be refused by Your
Lordships, since we love the Pictures of those Persons we admire, let 'em be
never so unfinisht, let them be drawn by what hand soever.

The other Thing which I proposed to my self in this Address, was the avoiding
Flattery; tho it may seem a very unnecessary Caution; since he that looks up to
such a Thick-set Conglobation, and (as it were) Galaxy of heavenly Virtues,
must easily infer, that they are too high for Flattery, and too bright to have
any luster added to them. With all the Tragical forces of Eloquence I might
here expatiate on the Topics of Grand Descent, of Titles and honors, of
Policy and Government, of Arms and Learning, of the Tent and the Closet: But it
is not my design to manage these common Subjects. And I beg leave of your
Lordships to say, That in the front of a Book consecrated to the fame of
CHARLES the II d, I think I should do an Injury to him, if I endeavored
professedly to write any other Panegyric but his; tho at the same time I must
needs include Your Lordships Praises. And herein I have determined to take a
View of the King himself, and not of his Deeds, (that Province I leave to his
history) and to set his personal Virtues, and not additional Actions before
your Eyes; for a bad man may do a praiseworthy thing, but a good man himself
can only be praised. Many Kings themselves do either hear or read their own
Commendations, and take care to see their own Glory settled before they dye: But
such kind of Annals usually is as mortal as their Subject, and as soon turns to
Ashes. No, His late Majesty's Praise shall not be Mercenary; The World after
his Death shall believe the King was the least Thing in him. And Posterity
shall know the happiness of England and this Age, when it shall see, we are not
silent of a good Prince after his Decease; for it is a sign, that there is as
good a One, or a better on the Throne.

And this Task I the more willingly undertake, MY LORDS, First, because it is
impossible for any man to want, or matter, or words, while he writes of him;
and it is a Subject, that even Dullness it self would Treat of wittily; And
secondly, because not only all Europe, but the whole World, and Posterity it
self, will join with me in his Praises. For the Outmost Rounds of the Earth
were acquainted with him; and he established our Commerce so universally, that
whatever Product was generated in any Country, seemed to be the Native of Ours;
and in every Season of the Year, we had a perpetual Autumn, Fruits arriving
from every part of this Globe. And as his Name will be laid up in the Libraries
of Asia, and men must hear his Praises by Interpreters; so likewise, our
Posterity, no doubt, will help us in praising him, who are at present too much
over-loaden with one burden, that of Grief for His inexpressible loss, to
undertake such another as that of celebrating him.

I shall not seek to fetch Encomiums from comparing him with his Ancestors, and
so try by lessening them, to amplify his Greatness: That is a trick, I do not
pretend to; let his fame stand at the expense of no man's else. For as all the
Talents and Virtues of his Forefathers, he in such wise united in himself, as
that not one of them was wanting while he lived; and as it is common for a
Prince to be better than his Predecessors, but to be better than all his
Predecessors belonged to him alone; so he that detracts from them, detracts
from him. And (for one instance) who dare sacrilegiously invade the Majesty of
CHARLES the 1st (in hopes to diminish it) who neither said, nor did, nor wrote,
nor begot any thing but what was Great?

So Divine a Prince, none was thought worthy by Heaven it self, immediately to
Succeed but he: And therefore, after that Nature had made several Trials in
Henry the Great's Daughter, for five Years space, toward the Production of
something perfect and absolute, she at length made this acceptable Present to
the World. As soon as Born, Heaven took notice of him, and eyed him with a
Star, appearing in defiance of the Sun at Noonday, either to note, That his
Life should be continued with Miracles, as it began with one; or that his Glory
should shine like a Star; or else to prove, That if it be questioned, whether
Sovereigns be given us by chance, or by the hand of the Almighty, it is here
manifest, that this Prince came from Heaven, and that there is a World of
difference put betwixt Kings supernaturally made by God, and those electively
made by Man.

In his Education afterward, he excelled in all those corporal Exercises, and
that growth of Body, for which Antiquity appointed the Sons of the Gods, and
Husbands of the Goddesses to be so Remarkable. And as the shape of his Body, so
the form of his mind was truly and universally Imperial: It had the command of
whatever Notion or Thing was presented to it, whether Divine or Humane, without
any foreign Explication; and as it were by Intuition, he saw the Ideas of all
things in his own breast.

In his first Years, he promised that Virtue which his Fathers and his own
Miseries gave him an early and a large Field to show to the World, and which he
kept entire and unshaken to the last; his Mind being still more and more
strengthened by difficulties. And (to speak a little freely, MY LORDS,) when Ye
remember him amid all his distresses, and the most insupportable strokes of
Fortune, unrepining, and not letting the least complaint escape from him, or
the least fear seize upon him; You must either fancy something in him above
Man, or that the gods themselves might learn of him one Virtue, that of
constancy and firmness of mind; For Seneca shows us, that Hercules himself (the
great and perfect Model of true Virtue and Valor) in his last Agonies did
complain, even to Desperation.

Adorned with such Virtues, who could not but love him? Even Sea-Rebels (as
rough and boisterous as their own Element) grow tenderhearted, and set their
Admiral on shore, delivering themselves up to him; and the Love of the Prince
prevails more with them, than the Piety of their King.

When in Exile, as with his Fame he had before filled other Nations, so now he
blessed 'em with his presence. By barbarous Rebels he was forced to venture the
Hospitality of Princes; yet the King of France was not afraid of abiding in the
French Kings Dominions. But whatever jealousies he might conceive of his own
safety; whatever bad news he received from England; how great soever were the
Progresses made by Cromwell, he thought this his greatest Unhappiness, that he
should have so many Calamitous Friends both at home and abroad.

His Restoration I can compare to nothing better, than that easy, delicious,
and jocund Temper of the Elements, of Heaven, the Air, and Sea, after a violent
and outrageous Tempest, or rather after the great Deluge of the World; at which
Time, he proved himself the Noah's Dove, that finding no Rest any where, was
received again into his own Ark, and brought a peaceable Olive-Leaf in his
Mouth. Which Revolution was the alone work of Providence and the General. For
nothing but an Almighty Power has Dominion over the minds of Men. He did not
leap on Shore with his Sword in his Hand, by way of Compulsion; but he was
saluted with the free and unanimous Voice of three great Nations. As he had no
other real Enemies but his own Country, so in this he appeared more than
Conqueror, that he vanquished the very minds of his enemies. Never was such a
Triumph seen at Rome. Others have rode on a Chariot with four white Horses, or
more arrogantly have been carried on Men's Shoulders; but he was brought in by
the hearts of Men. That Name which others get by conquered Nat^ons, he got by
repenting ones; and only by returning out of exile into his own Country (which
was exiled, when he was so) he looked in the Poets Language, Like Mars returning
from the Noble Chase
Of flying Nations through the Plains of Thrace.


At one time never was so much Joy heaped together in England. It seemed as if
all the Melancholy of the former years was purposely designed to introduce and
heighten the so extravagant gladness of that great Day, that some were ready to
wish for a Renovation of the Civil Wars, that they might have that day repeated
to them over again. Every man thought that himself received the shouts he gave;
and every subject fancied himself a Monarch. The sick imagine, they are
restored to health, by seeing his God-like Person: Some cry, they have lived
long enough: Others, Now they ought, rather, to live longer. Traitors
themselves drink the King's Health heartily: They admire him more, that he
would not, than that ever he should be in a possibility to revenge himself; and
that he should remember Injuries only to forgive them.

Let him ascend, and there was a due Majesty restored to the Throne, Authority
to the Laws, Reverence to inferior Magistrates, and the sacred Order of Bishops
to Religion, like a Treasure found from a Shipwreck, after many Years rouling
in a tempestuous Sea.

Thus terminating all public differences and confusions by Peace, he adorned
Peace it self with good Arts, which received both their Country with him, and
their Protection under him, by his opening the Temple of Janus, and that of the
Muses at the same time. For himself had as great a Knowledge in Letters as any
Prince in Christendom; and he most acurately understood Navigation, Astronomy,
and most parts of the Mathematics. An huge delight he took in conversing
freely with the most knowing Men in those pleasant and useful Studies: And he
endeavored to promote them (as much as possible) in others, by public
Endowments, and Liberal Rewards.

Besides this severer sort of Notices, he had a great insight into all those
softer Arts which become a private Gentleman. And in his Reign we may say, That
Wit did first reign here, and appeared upon the Stage as on a Throne: It was
scarcely more encouraged and environed with greater Pomp and Splendour at Rome,
under the peaceable Reign of Augustus after that long Civil War, wherein the
Sword would permit nothing else to be sharp, besides it self.

Tho he had as much Goodnature as would perhaps have served an Hundred other
Men (a Word peculiar to our English Tongue, and a Thing peculiar to this
Prince, as the Great Chancellor remarked), yet he was observed to take an
extreme delight in that Part of Poesy, which is not very famous for Good
Nature, I mean Satyr. Doubtless this sort of Writing, is the best and most
beneficial of all others, which the Poets follow; for it not only tells Mankind
of, but it chastises them for their Faults. And I wonder, that the Ancients,
when they bestowed so many several kinds of Poetry to the Favor and Influence
of so many Muses, they could not find in their hearts to allow one Goddess to
Satyr. But whatever unkindness it finds in Heaven, I am sure in our Age it has
found Protection upon earth, witness the great good Offices the French King
has done it in the Person of Boileau. For, that Prince is not like Alexander
of a Spanish stamp and Complexion, so wholly transported with the Giddiness of
Romantic Stories, as that he cannot dream of conquering the World without
having Homer for his Bedfellow; but what he reads is good sense, and honest
Nature, without any vain and extravagant additions. And this he does in
imitation of his Late Majesty (who was the oldest, and by consequence the most
exemplary Prince in the Christian World), tho under far worse Circumstances.
For the latter was much better capacitated through his extensive Knowledge in
Nature, and the Intricacies of Matter and Motion, as well as in all Polite
Learning: and I think, I should do no man an Injury, if I say, he understood
Butler the best in England.

How Good and Gracious a Master he was, You MY LORDS, can best declare; Ye knew
him the most searching Judge of Men, that held in his hands both rewards and
punishments: In the last indeed, he was very sparing; and the offending
Courtier was usually excused before hand, very seldom to be excused. The
Punishment, he thought, was sufficient in the very Vexation of the Delinquent.
Warily and by Degrees, his Rewards were distributed, that there might still be
a further Prospect in view by way of Encouragement; For nothing conduces more
to following Honors, than the former well administered: And never at one leap
was any supreme place conferred, unless for some Transcendent, and (as I may
call it) supernatural pi^ce of Loyalty. Our Noblesse he both preserved and
augmented; lest the condition of such should be worse, as deserved to have a
Noble Posterity, than of such as had Noble Ancestors. Not a Soldier was there,
that had received Wounds in his Service, but he counted, and rewarded them in
an ample manner: And thorough all succeeding Ages He will be a Benefactor as
well as an example to Soldiers at Chelsea; where as long as we shall have a
Country to Defend, or an Enemy to Combat, His Name will be evermore remembered,
for what is bestowed upon Posterity, ought to be Immortal.

You likewise, MY LORDS, can give the best Attestation to his Offices of
Privacy, and his great Virtues of Humility and Condescension, which yet had a
kind of Majestic Royalty with them. Ye remember him, when he was in Exile, and
as a private man, how he resembled a King; and how whilst a restored Monarch,
and in his most illustrious days, he seemed to be a private Citizen. That in
his greatest Prosperity he had not the least Haughtiness nor Elation of Mind;
but being secure of his own greatness, was not afraid of degrading himself into
the likeness of a Subject. Ye know, how much time he bestowed on the cares of
Empire, how much on the Duties of Devotion, Philosophy, and Virtue; how short
his Sleeps, and the unbendings of his mind were: A smart walk, a mouthful of
fresh Air, and a little ingenious raillery.

Such a Prince must needs be no less loved than admired: The Affection and
Reverence of his Subjects would stand him instead of terror. His own Virtue
would serve him for a Guard, and his Sword rather for Ornament than Defense.

But what Charms can withstand the Ingratitude and Malice of accursed and
diabolick Rebels? Against his Sacred Life we had a Salamanca-Plot, wherein the
Sufferers seemed to be more choqu'd at the Injustice of the Evidence, than at
the severity of the Sentence: They seemed to bear all magnanimously, and with
the bravery of Innocence. And with good reason might they do so, since they had
for a Co-partner in Dishonor (which to her was worse than Death) the most
Pious, and Virtuous Princess that England ever deserved to see. We had,
likewise, a most hellish Fanatic Conspiracy, the Discovery of which discovered
ALL. Then Heaven began to look kindly down upon us, and withdraw its Plagues,
especially that great Egyptian Darkness, wherewith we had been blinded: And the
Froggs and Vermin which were got into the Royal Bed-Chambers, found it high
time to recede. Then the Delatores began to fear as much as they were feared
before: And the Laws were now more dreaded than perjured Schismatics. Then
Sham-Magistrates put off their consulary Honors, and public Spoils; And the
King of England became first LORD OF LONDON: Which City, while he restrained
its Liberties, he rendered more free.

But here, MY LORDS, we come to a full point; and here ye must take your leave
of him. For when he had run thorough all the violences of a tumultuary Life,
when he had escaped all these dangers of impious and unreasonable men, when he
now had established His Throne in Safety, Peace and Righteousness, and (as we
may properly say) just now began to enjoy himself, and you him, behold! He is
taken away from you. Who can forbear complaining of the uncertain Estate and
frail Condition of human kind, when neither the most inestimable riches and
un-perishing Graces of the mind, nor the most enlarged Extremities of Glory and
Greatness, spreading on the one hand toward the Warlike Thunder, or on the
other toward the Peaceful Scepter, nor even the hearty and united Prayers of a
Virtuous People, could impart Efficacy enough to make one Person immortal, or
should be able to hinder the disunion of one Soul from a Body? That he who had
his youthful Years tried by the Austerity of a gloomy Fate, and had avoided so
many Parliamentary tricks laid ^or His Life, and being the true (...), did
almost Suffer Martyrdom with his Father; Who in that Fatal day of Worcester
differed only from the common Soldiers in courage and Eminence, rejoicing as
often as the Bullets grazed upon His Helmet or Buckler; Who in his Flight thence
(like another Ae^eas envelop'd in a Cloud by his Mother) passed through all the
amazing Maeanders of Providence, while Posterity shall come ^o see, and show
their Children the Cottage where he r^bb'd off his Martial Dust, and the
sacred Tree wherein he lay hid; That he who at his Restoration ^as styled the
English Titus, The ^elight of Mankind, and the on^^ Restorative to a Nation so
long oppressed by Civil War; who afterward reached the utmost Degrees of Fame by
staining the English Seas so often with his Victories, and increasing the
Armory in the Tower; That he, who was the Supreme Arbiter of Life and Death,
and Europe's Moderator, [who when moved, the World was moved, and when quiet,
it was still]; And who, if he had lived an hundred Years, the People would
never have been tired with his Government, should dye like one of us?

But let this be our Consolation, that when ordinary men dye, they dye; but
when a Good Prince expires, it is not his Death, but his immediate Apotheosis:
he presently flies to the Kingdom of Heaven, and there reigns for evermore
(as also here by his example) exchanging a Temporal for an Eternal Crown of
Glory. Lest therefore we should seem to repine at his happiness, let us no
longer think two Eyes too few to pay the Tribute of our Tears, and bedew his
Ashes withal; Let not every Subject weep, as if it were at his Fathers Funeral,
not only something of his own Accord, but more out of Instinct, and the command
of Nature; Let not this one Spectacle be as hideous and doleful as that of
Xerxes numerous Army; Let not the Maps of the whole Earth in proportion to the
dimensions of his Fame, be hung in Black; Let not that color be the Livery of
Men's Souls as well as their Bodies any longer; And let not the very Graces and
Joy it self weep any more; Neither let the expressions of our sorrow be as
abundant as our sorrovv it self: in regard he himself took the greatest care
imaginable in his Lifetime, that we should not lament his Death, and that he
should not be miss't; but has left us not only a Successor, but (in a manner)
the Partner and Companion of his Throne, and (which is above all) his Dearest
Friend; so that we have not lost, but only changed a Gracious Soyereign, in
whom we find so many God-like Perfections, that we shall never be tempted to
adore the Former, now since his translation, and pay Religious Worship to him,
instead of Allegiance.

And now, MY LORDS, what remains? But, That as nothing could have repaired our
ineffable Loss of CHARLES the II d, but the Succession of JAMES the II d, we
prostrate our selves at the feet of Almighty God, by whom Kings Reign;
imploring him, that it may be many Years, before we have the same occasion for
Grief; putting up our Vows for the Kings Health, and the Eternity of this
Empire, that he would grant him a long and a prosperous Reign over us; that
never his Breast may be sensible of any sigh unless it be at Devotion; nor his
Face know any Wrinkle or Contraction, unless like Thunder, to strike Traitors
and Exclusioners Dead; That his days may be upon Earth, as the days of Heaven:
That as he has been the Great Argument of Providence by escaping so many
Perils in War, Perils by Sea, and Perils by his own Countrymen; so he may
still remain the Great Mathusalem of Providence, and [that we may see that
CHARLES is not yet dead] still live to demonstrate, that Heaven is infinite in
its Mercies, and does embrace both him and it self in Eternal Circulations;
that without any new Disloyal, and discriminating times, he may at length arise
to that Pitch of Power, and continue in that height of Safety, Success, and
Glory, till Treason shall be looked upon as deplorable Madness, not for that it
is Wicked, but Desperate; And lastly, That by an uninterrupted series of
Tranquillity, his Happy Subjects may think him so happy, that if the Option was
given to any One of them, he would choose it as a better Condition to be King
JAMES his Subject, than to be Monarch of Another more large and Wealthy
Territories. I am,

MY LORDS, Your Lordships
March 19. 1684-85.
Being conscious to my self (Reader) of having too many Faults of my own to
answer for* in managing so great and glorious a Theme, I am mightily unwilling
to be responsible for those of the Printer's, occasioned by my Absence, and the
horrid Negligence of the Corrector: And therefore having taken notice of the
most material, I desire thee to correct them.

PAge 5. r. it is, p. 6. r. moderator, p. 8. l. 22, r. could, ib. l. 30. r. the
King was prevailed, etc. p. 10. l. 4. r. the King, ib. l. 17. dele they, ib. l.
23. r. But this, p. 11. r. Governor, p. 18. dele the, l. 14. r. Battles, so
that whilst, etc. ib. l. 29. r. he was advised, etc. p. 21, r. and, p. 28. r.
for free. p. 37. r. unless, p. 44. r. should, p. 45. l. 17. r. it. and l. 18.
r. in, p. 46. r. pretenses, p. 48. r. direction, p. 49. r. them, p. 50. r.
secluded, p. 51. r. them, l. 7. r. are, p. 52. d. should, p. 57. r. to his Son,
p. 60. d. part, p. 61. r. and, p. 79. r. was, p. 83. r. out of, p. 97. r.
whither, p. 107. r. were, p. 117. l. 22 r. employ, l. 28. r. none, p. 129. r.
Lastell, p. 147. r. Marquis, p. 162. r. an, p. 172. d. and, l. 25. r. George,
p. 173. r. Zanchy, Stamford, Leicester, Dellaware, p. 174. Morgan, p. 175. r.
Chester. p. 176. d. one, p. 180. d. to be, p. 187. r. ordering, p. 188. r.
directly. p. 191. d. they, p. 194. r. contrive, p. 198. r. discourse, l. 10. r.
effect, p. 200. r. them, p. 225. r. whom, p. 247. r. Six, p. 225. r.
resplendent, p. 263. r. beatissimo, p. 264. r. Generis, p. 299. r. places of
sev. p. 341. r. thereof were. p. 343. r. lived and died, p. 366. r. All this
very, etc. p. 415. r. should, p. 425. d. they, p. 443. r. very great, p. 484.
r. pretensive in it, p. 492. r. King-craft.

THE Publishers Advertisement TO THE READER.
THere is no question, but many at the first sight of the Title page will
Wonder, that so Sacred a Name should be there; and that the Life of so Great a
Prince should be pretended to be written in so little time. History (they will
say) is a Work of Time it self, as well as that part of it, called Biography,
which Treats of the Lives of Eminent and Great Men, and of Illustrious Heroes;
informing us in the Nature of Things, and of Duties, and Teaching us the great
Arts of Life and Death, which are no such easy and trivial matters, as to be
thrown over the left Shoulder. And what shall we say to the Confidence of this
Author, who, now in less than two Months space has huddled up the Life of the
greatest Monarch of the British Line, which perhaps is more difficult to be
wri^^^ than that of any of his Predecessor^, and would claim a Century, or at
lest as many Years, as it was acted in, to be absolutely and thoroughly
digested by the most reaching Genius, and most consummated Wit?

Wherefore, to satisfy thee, Reader, and thy Objection, I will tell and assure
thee, That the Author is partly (I do say) more acquainted with the great
difficulty as well as use of History in general; and that for his own Part,
This which thou have here, he has been long about these many years, and that
it is no Mushroom business springing up from a foggy. Brain in one Night, and
as likely to perish by another. It is a thoughtful Piece, no illegitimate Brat,
no Sham-extract Verbatim out of other Books, which thou have perhaps read and
paid for already. For I should be very loath (if I knew such a thing) to so be
unconscionable to impose upon thee.

But now perhaps from my Answer to the former Objection, thou will be ready to
raise another, and look upon my Author as no kind Wisher to his Prince, to go
and write his Life before his Demiss, which resembles a kind of an Expectation
of his Death, rather than the putting up any hearty Prayers for the Continuance
of his Life, as every good Subject ought to do.

In return to this, I am still of the Affirmitive side, and will again assure
thee, That he is a very Loyal and Worthy Gentlemen, and that thou will believe
me, as soon as thou have read his Book. And besides (to consider the thing in
it self) it is so far from being an Act that looks any ways Disloyal, to write a
Princes Life before his Decease, that on the other hand it is extremely Loyal
and Meritorious. As we see now in France, where an Annual Pension is settled
upon the Great Satyrist to write the Life of his Master, the French King.
Indeed, this I will add in my Authors behalf, that I have heard him say, he
never desired to live to finish his Book; but Addressed Heaven to the contrary;
hoping it might prove a Picture and Draught of the Kings Life only to the
middle. But since Heaven has thought fit to take our Gracious Prince to it
self, I prevailed with him to revise the whole Work, and make an addition to
such years as was wanting: Which being completed, I here present to the
Public View. For you may ghess, Reader, that when we Book sellers have got any
thing of this Nature, it is as severe a piece of Mortification and Self-denial
to keep it private, as it is for our Gallants to keep their Chambers the same
Day they have got a new Suit. Adieu.

A Table of the most Remarkable matters couch't in this Royal Story.
Anno a Virginis partu:
1630 KIng Charles the Second, born at St. James's. A Prodigious Star then
appearing at Midday. page 5 Baptized by Dr. Laud, Bishop of London. 7
Committed in his Infancy to the Countess of Dorsets care, then to the
Government of the Earl of New Castle, and the Tutorage of Dr. Duppa. Ibid. 1638
First called Prince of Wales by Order, not creation. 7. Accompanies his Royal
Father in Progresses. Ibid. Takes his Seat in Parliament. Ibid. Carries a
reprieving Message from the King to the Parliament about the Earl of Strafford.
8 1640 Goes with his Father into the North. 10 At York is made Captain of a
choice Guard of Loyal Nobles and Gentlemen. 11 1642 Gives the first proof of
his Bravery at Edghill-fight. 12 Committed at Oxford to the care of the
Marquess of Hartford. Chancellor of that University. 13 1644. Endeavors to
Heal the Differences 'twixt his Father and the Factious Diet. 15 A Match
proposed between him and the Infanta of Portugal. Ibid. 1646. Sails to the
Scilly Islands. 19 His Answer to the Parliaments swimming Invitation. Ibid.
Their barbarous Ordinance, that followed thereupon. 20 The manner how he
employed his time in those Islands. 21 His first Visit to France. ibid. Desires
leave to go into the French Army, but declines it upon his Fathers Prohibition.
22 Made Generalissimo by his Father. 23 The Scots tender of him. ibid. His
Answer to a Letter of theirs. 25 1648. He appears with some Forces in
Jersy-Isle. ibid. Grants Martial Commissions to several Persons of Honor. 26
Sets forth a Declaration. 27 The Kentish men rise in his behalf. 30 But are
worsted by Fairfax. 32 He Seizes some Merchants Ships* and attempts the Relief
of Deal-Castle. ibid. Colchester taken by Famine and Fairfax. 35 He retires
into Holland. ibid. His Letter to the King his Father. 36 The Treaty at the
Isle of Wight. ibid. Cromwell and the Armies proceedings with the Parliament, to
bring the King to a Trial. 37 An Ordinance past by the Commons for his Trial,
but opposed by the Lords. 39 The Juncto resolves to Try him without the Lords
consent. 40 The Princes behavior and pious Acting thereupon. 41 The King
accursedly Sentenced to be Beheaded. 42 His Sacred Memoirs and Papers of Advice
to his Son. 43 King Charles the first, most sacrilegiously Assassinated. 57
Prince Charles succeeds him. 59 The Juncto declare it High Treason to Proclaim
him. 60 Vote down the House of Lords. ibid. Appoint Judges and Justices. 62 The
People open their Eyes, and detest them. 63 King Charles the II. Proclaimed in
England. 64 Receives (at the Hague) the news of the Royal Martyrdom. 65 His
Comportment thereupon. 66 Sends Ambassadors to several Princes. 67 1649.
Proclaimed in Scotland by Penitent Rebels. 68 Passes through Flanders (where he
is highly Caressed and Regaled) into France. 72 The Scots invite him over. 74
Montross his deplorable Fate. ibid. The Kings Letter to the Scots. 75 His
shrewd Treaty with their Commissioners. 76 The English Juncto sit uneasy,
alarmed with the Scots Proceedings. ibid. Cromwell called out of Ireland and
made General. 81 The King Lands at the Spey in Scotland. 82 1650. Cromwell
Marches Northwards. ibid. The Scots at difference before among themselves,
thereupon Unite. 83 The King most Solemnly Crowned at Schone. 84 Raises an
Army, himself Personal Valor. 162 The Kings promotes a Peace between France
and Spain. 165 Goes Incognito to the place of Treaty. 166 The Duke of York
offered the Constableship of Castile. 169 1659. The King gives forth new
Commissions. 171 Sir George Booth Rises. 172 Is unfortunately defeated. 174 And
taken Prisoner. 175 The King at St. Malloes. 176 An Overture to try Monk. 177
Monks Brother sent into Scotland to him. 178 Monk undertakes the Kings
Restoration. 182 Sends his Brother to the Parliament. 184 A Prophetic Speech.
185 Monk prepares for England. 187 Whence Dr. Clergies comes to him. 189
Lambert sends Morgan into Scotland. 192 A Convention at Edenborough. ibid.
Monks Commissioners sign an Agreement. 193 The Rump sits again. 194 Invite Monk
to London, but distrust him. 195 The People address to him. 196 He desires the
Parliament to remove their Guards. 197 Was to have been sent to the Tower. 198
But goes to the Parliament. ibid. Made one of the Council of State. 199 Pulls
down the City-Gates. 201 Sends a Letter to the Rump. 202 Marches into the City.
203 The Rump dissemble their Indignation. 204 Employ their Adjutators. 205 A
Conference about the secluded Members. 206 Who are readmitted 207 Monk made
General. ibid. They discharge Booth. ibid. Dissolve themselves, and call a free
Parliment. 208 Appoint a Council of State. ibid. 1660. Greenvile introduced to
the General, by Morris. 210 Delivers him a Letter from the King. 211 The
General commends his Secrecy. 212 Desires him to acquaint the King with his
Resolution to Restore him. 213 Which was accordingly done at Brussels. 214 Monk
leaves his Reward to the Kings pleasure. 215 The King gives Greenvile a Warrant
for an Earldom. 216 Signs a Commission for Monks being General. 217 Removes
privately to Breda. ibid. Lambert escapes from the Tower, but is retaken by
Ingolsby. 218 The free Parliament meets. 219 Greenvile delivers the Kings
Letter to the General. 220 And his Letters and Declaration to the two Houses.
221 The Reverence expressed by the Commons at reading them, with Resolves
thereupon. 222 The Kings Letter delivered to General Mountague, and the Joy it
occasioned in the Fleet. 224 The Parliament Invites the King (...) 225 The
Commissioners arrive at Breda. ibid. The King Proclaimed. 226 The King prepares
for his Return. 228 Treated and presented by the Dutch. ibid. The S^ates Speech
to him ^^at parting. 229 He leaves Holland, with a glorious Fleet. 232 And
Arrives at Dover 234 The General meets him there. ibid. He goes to Canterbury.
235 To Chattham. 230 Is presented with an Address. ibid. Views the Army. ibid.
Comes to London. 237 Rides in Triumph through London. ibid. Is received by the
Parliament. 240 He thanks them for their Loyalty. ibid. He goes to the
Parliament house. 241 Chooses his Privy Council. 242 The Act of Oblivion* 243
The General mad^ Duke of Albemarle, etc. 245 Several others advanced. ibid
Resignation of Purchases. 246 Ambassadors congratulate his Restoration. ibid.
The Oblivion-Act comprehensive. 247 29th of May Annisary* ibid. The Army
Disbanded* ibid. The Kings Speech at the Adjournment. 248 Duke of Gloucester
dies. 349 The Kings care to settle the Church. ibid. Regicides brought to
Tryal^ 251 The Queen Mother comes into England. 252 Argile sent back to
Scotland. 253 Princess of Orange dies. 254 The healing Parliament dissolved.
ibid. Cromwels Carcass upon the Gallows. 255 The Fifth-Monarchy- men's
Adventure. 256 Preparations for the Kings Coronation 260 1661. Four Triumphal
Arches erected by the City. 261 The Order of his Cavalcade through the City.
268 The manner of his Crowning. 273 The Thunder that day, and the Censures
thereon. 279 He calls a fresh Parliament. 280 The Presbyterians stickle in
Elections. 282 He Rides in State to the Parliament which he acquaints with his
design of Marrying the Infanta of Portugal. 283 A Convocation of the Clergy.
284 The Act of Oblivion confirmed by that Parliament. 285 The Act for
Regulating Corporations. ibid. Pryn censured by the Parliament. 286 The Bishops
restored to their Peerage. ibid. The Lord- Munson and others censured. 287
Parliament adjourned by the King. ibid. The Duke of York Captain of the
Artillery Company. 288 Barbone and others secured. 289 The Kings Piety to the
memory of his Friends 290 The Quarrel between the French and Spanish
Ambassadors. 291 Harry Martyn no humble Servant to Proclamations. ibid. The
Duke of Ormond made Deputy of Ireland. ibid. Episcopacy restored in Scotland.
293 1662. A Fleet sent for the Queen, and a Garrison to Tangier. ibid. The
Agreeableness of the King and Queens Fortunes. 294 Her arrival at Portsmouth.
ibid. Queen of Bohemia dies. 295 The King married at Portsmouth. 296 The
African Potentates allarmed. 297 Tangier made a free Port. 298 The dreadful St.
Bartholomew. 299 Several Cities and Towns dismantl'd. ibid. Dunkirk returned to
the French. 300 Philips and others excuted for Plotting. 301 An Embassy out of
Russia. ibid. 1663. The Kings Progress into the West. 303 Oats and others
executed. 304 1664. The Parliament for War with the Dutch. ibid. The King fits
out two Fleets. 306 His Personal care and industry. 307 The Plague begins in
London. ibid. Prince Rupert at the Spithead. 310 The Dutch afraid to put to
Sea. ibid. An Embargo on Dutch Ships. 311 The Act for a Royal Aid 312 War
Proclaimed against Holland 313 1665. A General Fast enjoined 314 His Royal
Highness Lord High Admiral ibid The Dutch alarmed 315 Are Beaten 316 The
Sickness increasing in London 317 The King and Parliament at Oxford. 318 The
Duke of Albemarl left in London 320 A Fast kept on every Wednesday ibid. The
English Fleet upon the Coast of Holland 321 The Earl of Sandwich Attacques the
Dutch in Berghen ibid. France takes part with Holland 322 A Plot discovered
ibid. 1666. Prince Rupert and the Duke of Albemarle, Admirals 324 They fight
the Dutch 325 London in Ashes 327 The Kings great compassion in that distress
330 Various Opinions about that Fire ibid. The Kings Prudence and Care in its
Rebuilding 331 The first Invention of Ensuring houses from Fire 332 An Act of
Parliament for the Rebuilding of London ibid His Pious care for Rebuilding the
Churches 335 Sir Jonas More the first Rebuilder 336 A Prodigious Storm 337 A
Commotion in Scotland ibid. War with Denmark 338 A Treaty at Breda 339 The
Dutch spend a Summer in needless Preparations ibid. They come to Chattham 340
Peace concluded with Holland 341 1667. The Earl of Clarendon in disgrace 342
1669 Earl of Carlisle Ambassador to Sweden 343 Queenmother dies 344 The Duke of
Albemarle ibid. 1670 Designs to unite England and Scotland 345 Prince of
Tuscany in England ibid The Duchess of Orleans at Dover 346 Sir Thomas Allen
before Argeir 347 Sir Edward Spragg destroys three Men of War 348 1671 Blood
steals the Crown 349 The King takes a Sea-Progress 351 A stop upon the
Exchequer 352 Sir George Downing committed to the Tower 353 A Declaration of
Indulgence 354 Sir Robert Holms falls on the Dutch Smyrna Fleet ibid 1672 The
King declares War against the Dutch 355 He views the English and French Fleet
joining ibid His Royal Highness's name terrible to the Dutch 356 The States
remove to Amsterdam 357 The King Invites their Subjects into England ibid The
Duke of Buckingham, and the Earl of Arlington Ambassadors 358 Nimeguen taken
ibid 1673 the Dutch beaten 359 The King grants Peace to the Dutch 360 1677
Grows Jealous of the French Kings greatness 362 The Lady Mary married to the
Prince of Orange ibid The Kings Speech to the Parliament 363 France threatened
with a War 365 The King endeavors a general Peace 366 But provides for the
worst 367 His Speech to the Parliament ibid 1678 The Siege of Mons raised 359 A
peace concluded at Nimeguen ibid A hugeous strange Plot of Black Bills, and
Spanish pilgrims discovered by Titus Oats 371 The Lords Bellasis, Powis,
Peter's, and Arundel, sent to the Tower 3^2 Godfrey found murdered 373 The King
prevents the Parliament 375 His refusal to part with the Militia 376 Some tried
for the Plot ibid Some of the Parliament accuse each other 377 Sir Joseph
Williamson released by the King 378 The Long Parliament dissolved ibid The
Kings Letter to the Duke 379 The Duke goes into Flanders 380 The Kings Speech
to the new Parliament ibid 1679 They begin with the Earl of Danby 384 Who
surrenders him self ibid The Lords in the Tower Impeacht in Parliament 385 The
King dissolves his Privy Council, and constitutes a new one ibid. Shaftsbury
President 387 The Lords Answer to their Impeachments ibid. 1680 The Kings
proposal to the Parliament 388 Their Address to the King 389 The Bill of
Exclusion brought in ibid The two Houses differ about Danby's pardon and the
Trial of the Lords 390 The King Porogues them 392 The Bishop of St. Andrews,
most barbarous Muther* forerunner of a Scotch Rebellion ibid. Whence the name
of Whigs 393 The Parliament dissolved, and a new one called 394 Sir G. Wakeman
and others acquitted ibid. The King taken Sick at Windsor 395 Monmouth in
disgrace 397 A Declaration about him 398 He is banished 402 Dangerfields
discovery ibid The Duke of York goes into Scotl. 403 Saucy Petitions for the
Parliaments fitting 404 Forbidden by Proclamation ibid. Kings Speech to the
Parliament 405 The Duke returns out of Scotland 406 Sir Lionel Jenkins made
Secretary 407 Addresses of Abhorrence ibid. The Lord Shandios Ambassador to
Constantinople 408 A prodigious storm of Hail ibid The Parliament sits 409 Fall
foul upon Sir Robt. Can, and others ibid. Revive the Attempt of the Exclusion
Bill, which is bravely thrown out by the Lords 411 The Trial of the Lord
Stafford 412 The Blazing-star 413 The King presses the Parliament for supplys
ibid. The Address ibid. His Answer 414 Their Proceedings thereupon 415 They are
Prorogued 416 Their lewdly extravagant Votes ibid. Petitions about the Oxford
Parliament 417 The Country treats their Members 418 1681 The King goes to
Oxford 419 His Speech to the Parliament there ibid. Wi. Williams Speaker 421
Fitz-Harris his story 422, 25, 26, 27, 28. The Oxford-Parliament dissolved 423
A Declaration touching it 424 Doct. Pluncket 427 The Lord Howard committed to
the Tower 428 The Oxford-Plot 429 The Protestant Joyner ibid. His Royal
Highness High Commissioner in the Parliament of Scotland 430 An Act past there
about the Succession ibid. The King Favors the French Protestants 431
Shaftsbury saved by an Ignoramus 432 Esquire Thinn murdered 433 1682 The Royal
Passenger's miraculous deliverance 435 Sir John More Lord Mayor of London 436 A
Riot in the City about Sheriffs 437 Prince Rupert dies 442 The Earl of
Nottingham dies ibid Two remarkable and unusual Ambassadors ibid. 1683 Bantham
lost 444 An unpresidentable action ibid A Quo Warranto brought against the City
Charter 447 A Petition in reference to it 447 The Kings gracious Condescension
ibid Shaftsbury's Plot discovered 449 The King to have been killed at the Rye
451 Saved by an accidental Fire ibid. Keeling the first discoverer 452 The
Plotters taken ibid. Lord Gray Escapes 453 The Lord Russel, and Coll. Sidney
Beheaded, and others executed at Tyburn ibid. Holloway and Armstrong executed
454 A Declaration of Thanksgiving ibid. The difference between the two Plots
455 The Lady Ann Married to Prince George ibid. Judgment entered against the
Charter 456 Prichard Mayor by Commission ibid. The Factious Aldermen displaced
457 Monmouth submits himself 458 The great Frost 459 The Kings Charity 460
Vienna besieged ibid* Lord Landsdown' Valor at its (...) 46^ T^ng^er
demolish'^ ibid. Earl of Danby reliev^d ibid. The rest of the Lords out of the
Towe^ 462 684. Commissioners for Ecclesiastical affairs ibid. A Scandalum
Magnatum against Oats 463 His Royal Highnesses Patience 464 A Statue-peice of
the King in the Royal Exchange. ib^d. A Muster on Putney Heath 466 Several
tried 467 The Sodom Doctor Indicted 468 Danvers his Libel 469 (...) Scroop How
received to favor 470 The King (...) Fit 471 The manner of his lingering Death
472 The Solemnity of his ^uneral 475 His Person 481 His Justice 483 His
peaceable Inclination 486 His care of the Crown Prerogatives 488 His Prudence
and Conduct 491 His great Piety and Devotion ^94 His Travels 499 His Learning
^01 His Recreations 504 His Conjugal Affection^ 506 Epigraphe 509 A Prayer* for
the King 511
An Essay of HISTORY ROYAL In the LIFE and REIGN OF HIS Late Sacred MAJESTY
CHARLES the Second.
The Introduction.
HIstory, in all Ages, has not undeservedly been accounted the great Light and
Mistress of Humane Life; as it both pleasurably instructs, and most
efficaciously persuades all Ranks and Degrees of men, to their several
respective and proper Offices. For, in laying the Foundation of a Good Mind,
Examples have a peculiar force to move men to Virtue, and a much Greater, than
any bare Precepts whatsoever; since they have this excellence in them, that
they prove, what they recommend, possible to be done, and a Precept without an
Example adjoined to it, looks like a good Law never put into Execution. When
men read of an Excellent Virtue, they still carry away some Tincture from it,
whether they will or no, as if they had been in Conversation with it is
Possessor; And when they read of any deformity and vice, they have a natural
aversion for it, and will take care to avoid in themselves, what looks so ugly
in others.

Nor does History tend only to form men's manners, in order to an happy Life,
but it also exalts and enlarges their minds, while they take a prospect of all
Generations, that have been upon Earth before them. They seem to give Eternity
to themselves a Part ante, and to live as many years as they have read in
Chronicles. And, by this knowledge of the time past, they judge of the present,
and proceed to the foresight of the future: For the best Astrology in the
World is to be derived from History, and from the Consideration of those
Luminaries, that have moved in a Sphere above us, either in point of Time, or
of Place.

Which since we see to be the Proper ends and uses of History, without doubt
that History is highly to be esteemed, which does not consist so much of
Magnificent and Pompous things, as the Description of Wars, of Great Buildings,
and such matters as only bring an empty pleasure to the Reader, but which does
exhibit things useful and worthy his Imitation, and that will fill up his mind.
Upon this account the Lives of Eminent Men, writ with fidelity and truth, have
certainly the greatest use; since from thence we learn how to live well, to
moderate our passions, and govern our selves in the various Circumstances of
Life. But whereas we cannot live well, unles^ we live in Society, and all
Societies must have Rulers and Governors over them, or else we must all disband
and turn Barabbas's; there is (...) one Higher Degree of History whith we may
loo^ upon, as the most complete for Estimation, Pro^^ and Use: And that is a
Narration of the Live^ of Princes, representing (withal) every action bearing a
Relation and Analogy thereunto. And his kind cannot stand without the
forementioned Additionals (as I may Style them) and not Essentials of History,
as Arms, and Fortifications, and the like matters: Which though they do concern
no man in himself, as to point of Happiness, yet together with the great
Delight they bring along with them, they are mainly conducive to the welfare
of mankind in general, and the Knowledge of 'em is requisite to many particular
men, as immediately engaged in them, and is, likewise, universally Ornamental.

Which things being well weighed, I think I have got under my Pen, one of the
most profitable, as well as diverting Histories, the Sun ever yet saw acted: It
being the Life of a Prince, which may be an Example not only to public but
private men. For it affords us the knowledge of Heaven, and reads us a Lecture
of Piety, Justice, Patience, Fortitude, and Clemency: Which being virtues in a
Prince, have a singular Grace with 'em. It is not an account of the Robberies
of an Alexander, but a Register of Providential Bounties and Appointments;
beautified with the various Scenes and Landskips of Humane Life, to instruct
our Judgments, and amuse our Imagination. It teaches us the Arts of Unity and
Concord, and draws out the true lines of the English Government. It cures those
diseases of the mind, Insolence, self-conceit, and Ambition, and shows, that it
is the Subjects Interest as well as Duty, to obey.

These are all things but of Yesterdays standing, and very well known and
remembered; So that before hand, I need not make any Professions here of my
truth and sincerity, in the following Relation, it being not so easy to deceive
as to be refell'd in things, not in the least remote from our knowledge. This
indeed is all, I have the vanity to fear, that, if this Book should happen to
descend to Posterity, they will rather think it the Panegyric than History of
our late admirable Prince, because when I report nothing of him but what was
landable, they may ghess, that I have pretermitted, what was worthy
reprehension.

The most renowned and mighty Monarch CHARLES the Second, late King of England,
was in greatness of his Royal Descent, Superior to all the Princes in Europe,
being descended from our Royal Martyr Charles the good and great, and Henrietta
de Bourbon, Daughter to Henry the Great, the Fourth of that name, of France; By
descending from which two Royal Persons, he was related to all the Princes in
Europe, and had some of all the Bloud-Royal of the Christian World concentered
in his Princely Veins. By his Father, he derived in a lineal descent from all
the British, Saxon, Danish, Norman, and Scottish Kings of Great Britain, and
by his Mother from the Bourbons of France, the Austrians of Spain, the Medi^es
of Florence, etc. Being also allied to all or most of them, by his own, and the
Marriages of his Royal Brother our present most Glorious Monarch, his Aunt, his
Sisters, and his two Nieces, their Royal Highness Mary Princess of Orange, and
the Princess Ann of Denmark.

He was born at St. James's, May the 29th, 1630, it being the Birthday of St.
Augustine, who was sent by Gregory the great to our Ancestors the Saxons, and
was the first founder of the Archbishopric of Canterbury. At which time a new
Star appeared over the Pala^^ where he was born, which seemed from Heaven to
congratulate his Birth, by darting its promising Influence upon the place of
it, and displaying is officious Beams in the midst of that Air, wherein he
first drew breath, notwithstanding the strenuous opposition of the shining Sun*
which thing was generally looked upon as an Emblem of his future greatness and
glory: The Sun likewise, soon after, suffered an Eclipse, which was a sad
presage, as some even then divined, that his Glory should be for some time
eclipsed. His Royal Father, having in him obtained that blessing which he
desired above all things in the World, went to St. Paul's and there in a
public and solemn manner gave thanks to Almighty God from whose bounty he
received him.

He was baptized in the 27th of the following June, by Dr. Laud Bishop of
London. Abbot, who was then Archbishop of Canterbury, being under an
Irregularity, according to the decent and laudible Custom of the Church of
England, whereof he was then made a Son, that so ^he might hereafter be her
Supreme Head and Mediator; His Godfathers were his two Uncles Lewis 13. King of
France, and Frederick, Prince Elector Palatine of the Rhine, represented by the
Dukes of Hamilton and Richmond, who were then the two first Peers of the Realm
and his Godmother was the Queen Mother of France, represented by the Duchess
of Richmond.

He was committed in his Infancy to the indulgent Care, and pious Tuition of
the Countess of Dorset; and when his growing parts rendered him too masculine
for a Feminine Conduct, he was delivered to the Earl of Newcastle, under whose
Direction and Government he imbibed those Principles of Virtue, and desire of
Learning, which served as an Introduction to fit and prepare him for his
farther and more liberal Education, under the Learned Dr. Duppa, Dean of
Christ-Church, and Bishop of Chichester, by whose extraordinary Pains and
Industry his Great Soul was first seasoned with those Rudiments of Knowledge
and Learning, which afterward by his own observation and experience received so
vast an increase, and rendered him that sagacious and politic, as well as good
and gracious, King, which the whole series of his Reign discovered him to be.

About this time, by Order, not Creation, he was first called Prince of Wales,
Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, the Revenues belonging to each of them
being assigned him for the maintenance of his Court, the several Offices
whereof were pitched upon and appointed by the King his Father who, taking great
delight to see his Children about him, ordered the Prince to attend him in
several of his Progresses, and particularly in that to Oxford, where they were
entertained with the acting of the Royal Slave, which proved too prophetic of
both their approaching Calamities. During his abode there, his Discourse with
several Learned Doctors was so extraordinary, and above the common capacity of
his years, that it administered matter of amazement and wonder to the whole
University.

In the Parliament, which was called soon after, he took his place among the
Peers, who were now his equals, but were hereafter to become his Subjects, and
there he first tried how a Coronet would fit his Royal Head, before the death
of his Father called him to wear the Imperial Crown; and about this time he was
with great Solemnity installed Knight of the Garter, together with diverse of
the Nobility who were his Attendance, and received the same Honor with him.

But after all this a sad misfortune dampt the public Joy and threatened the
untimely setting of our Rising Sun, for in the year 39 he first brake his Arm
and was afterward afflicted with a Violent Fever and a small spice of the
Jaundice but it was not long before those Clouds of fear were dissipated by the
perfect recovery of his health.

Some unhappy misunderstandings beginning now to grow between his Father and
the Parliament who, knowing a King would do no wrong himself, resolved to call
some of his Council to an account for pretended miscarriages, among whom the
most Eminent was the Earl of Strafford, who first led the way, being by no
known Law, as that Judicious King, who was present at the Trial, declared
attainted of Treason, and the King prevailed upon by the Importunity of his
People, and a Letter from the Earl himself, (who rather chose to be made a
Sacrifice, than to hazard his Majesty's Affairs,) to sign a Warrant for his
Execution. But the King's tender Conscience, being extremely checked and
troubled for that unwilling consent, presently sent a Letter to the Peers,
which was written with his own Hand, to desire them to forbear, or at least
delay, the Execution of his Sentence, and, that it might be the more prevalent
with them, he sent it by the Prince, which was the first Public Business we
find him employed in, which, being a work of Mercy, proved so good an Omen of
his own Inclination, that it afterward became so predominant in him, as even to
rejoice over his exactest Justice, although he could not then prevail on the
behalf of that unfortunate Earl: And not long after we find him engaged in
another Public Business, being one of the Chief Assistants in the performing
the Solemnities of his Sisters Marriage with the Prince of Orange.

The fatal Breach between the King and Parliament growing still wider, and
hastening to an unnatural Rupture, he resolved, notwithstanding many of his
Nobles and Faithful Servants proffered their Service to curb any Insolences
that should be attempted on him, to remove himself some time from London,
hoping that thereby their Jealousies and Rumors would wast and perish; and
therefore commanded the Prince, together with his Queen, and some of his
Servants, to attend him at Greenwich, and from thence to Hampton Court, whither
some Commissioners being sent to him for a Pacification, they made their first
Application to the Prince, as the most proper Mediator between the King and his
two Houses of Parliament: So early was it, that he began to tread in the steps
and labor to imitate his Grandfather, in becoming a Peacemaker, which not
succeeding according to expectation, he accompanied his Father, together with
the present King to Theobalds, leaving the Rebels to fret themselves at their
escape, and from thence into the North, where he beheld a black Cloud begin to
gather which, though small in appearance, yet was big with that dismal Storm,
that in a short time spread it self over his Father, himself, and three
Nations: For the King, repairing to Hull, to take a view of that Magazine,
which his Treasure had purchased, and his Crown claimed as one of its Jura
Regalia, the Magistrate thereof bearing a Sword by a Power only derived from
him, without which Majesty it self is but a Solemn Trifle, and Authority but a
gilded Pageantry, He was by Sir John Hotham, who was sent thither by the
Parliament, denied Entrance, and forced to wait with the Prince and the Duke of
York at the Gate of that Garrison, and could at last prevail for nothing more,
but only his two Sons being admitted as Children, to see the Town; which when
they had done, they accompanied their Father to York, whom they now beheld
deprived of that which Gr. Tholosanus calls the chiefest Flower in a Prince's
Diadem, and disarmed of that Majesty which of right belonged to him, where the
Prince was by his Father made a Captain of a choice Guard of Loyal Nobles and
Gentlemen, who there repaired to him: For such was the Indulgent Care he had of
his Subjects, that he resolved they should hazard themselves no farther in the
defense of his Person, than he would hazard himself for the defense of their
Laws and Liberties; and that his Eldest Son, who was to succeed him in his
Crown and Dignity, should accompany them in all those Dangers to which they
should expose themselves. In which Quality he attended his Father, through the
several Stages he past, as a Partner with him in his Troubles, the greatest
whereof was, as himself declares in his incomparable (...), his unhappy
involving his Innocent Offspring in those Troubles, that deserved to have been
born to better Fortune.

At Edghill Fight, notwithstanding the tenderness of his years, he gave such
proof of his Valor and Courage, and was so little terrified with the horrid
noise of Guns, Drums and Trumpets, the prancing of Horses, and the clashing of
Swords, to which he had till then never been used, that the Earl of Lindsey,
who observed it, said to those about him, There is a Child born to end that War
we now begin. But the Battle being lost, he returned to his Father at Oxford,
where he was committed to the Care of his Kinsman, the Marquess of Hartford,
then Chancellor of that University, who provided him several Tutors in each
Language, Art and Science, wherein it concerned him as a Prince to be
acquainted; and he applied himself to his Studies with as much pain and
seriousness as the severest Gown-man in the place, his great Soul entertaining
nothing but deep thoughts, profound Maxims, and Intricate Mysteries, and he
would severely rebuke the unsavory Speeches that tortured his chaster Ears,
and condemn those Oaths and Curses which were too common among the vainer
Scholars; during which time he was visited with the Measels, the danger whereof
only served to teach us how to prize him the more for that hazard.

But the War between his Father and the Parliament still growing more fierce,
he once more left the University and took the Field, laying aside his Books,
that he might handle his Arms, and endeavored to signalize his Valor by
appearing in the Head of some Forces in the North, which were conducted by the
Earls of Cumberland and New Castle, wherein he was so successful at first, that
Victory seemed to wait on his Banner.

Shortly after he marched Westward, where by order from the Court he was
attended by such a Noble Retinue as was most suitable to the Grandeur of a
Prince of Wales, about which time he cast off his Ich Dien, and assumed his
State, setting up his Royal Court, and making choice of such Officers as were
most pleasing to him; about which although his Father took some exception, yet
he protested that he greatly admired the discretion of his choice in general,
having so brave and well ordered a Family that it was second to none, but his
Uncle Henrys; and King-ship was first exercised within the narrow compass of an
Household, (says Seldom,) which increasing to Cities, Kings were content to
Reign therein until those Cities, swelling into Nations, they enlarged the
bounds of their Sovereign Rule.

The King of Portugal, about this time, hoping to make an advantage of the
Kings necessity, offered several fair Proposals, suitable to his present
exigencies and troubles, which were ushered in by the offer of a Match between
his Daughter and the Prince, but for some reasons of State, his Father thought
not fit to accept the offer, but yet returned such an answer as held him in
suspense, being not willing either to gratify or displease him.

The Prince, in the mean while, was busily employing himself in endeavoring to
make up a much happier Match between his Father and the Parliament, by some
overtures of Peace which he made to Sir Thom. Fairfax, the Chief Commander of
the Parliament-Forces, but was disappointed therein, for Fairfax gave him to
unstand that those Proposals were fitter to be made to the Parliament, than to
him, who was only their Servant: Wherefore he, seeing that Fairfax would do
nothing himself toward a Peace, being resolved to try all possible means for
the settling this distracted Kingdom, desired leave for the Lord Hopton and
Culpeper to attend the King and mediaate with him for a treaty with the
Parliament, to which Fairfax answered that he would desire the Prince to
disband his Army, and promised that he would thereupon conduct him with Honor
to the Parliament, to which request he commanded the Lord Capel to make the
following Answer, viz.

Sir, His Highness did not believe that his overture, in engaging himself in
the Mediation of a Blessed Peace for this miserable Kingdom, would have brought
him an Inhibition to quit his duty to his Father, by dividing his Interest from
that of his Majesty's, or hereby he should render himself unworthy and
incapable of the fruit of that Peace, which he labored to obtain, and that of
his former propositions might be consented to, he hoped God would so bless his
sincere intentions and designs, as to make him a Blessed Instrument to preserve
this Kingdom from desolation, but if that were rejected he should give the
World no cause to believe that he would forfeit that Honor, which only could
preserve him in a capacity of doing that service, and should with patience
attend Gods pleasure, until his endeavors might be applied, with the
preservation of his Innocence.

During his abode in the Camp, he showed himself to be of such an Heroic
Temperature, that he enjoyed an equal Calm and Peace in the midst of all the
Confusions of War, and enjoyed his Learned Thoughts as quietly in the Tumults
of a Camp, as in the Retirements of a School. In the exercising of his Arms, he
did not wholly leave his Books, nor forget his Studies, especially of the
Mathematics, which, besides their general usefulness, as Refiners of the Mind,
were more than ordinarily necessary to him, to assist him in carrying on the
several Stratagems of War in Fortification, Sieges, Battles, etc. wherein he
was but little below his incomparable Father, in these things the exactest
Prince in Christendom.

But, not being able to accomplish that Reconciliation between his Father and
the Parliament which he designed, he returned again to Oxford, where he was
more successful in another undertaking of the like nature, viz. the reconciling
his two Cousins, Rupert and Maurice, to his Father, accounting it too hard to
entertain inward Broils, when outward Calamities were so heavy and pressing,
and that those who had Adversaries enough already, ought not to become each
others Enemies: nor did he only use his Interest with his Father, to be
reconciled to the two Princes, but even to his open and professed Enemies also,
notwithstanding the failure of his late undertakings, as appears by his Letters
to the Speaker of the House of Commons of December. 15, 26, and 29. and that of
Jan. 25, 17, 24. and several others. But, while he was speaking for Peace,
some, whose malice and interest had made implacable, and guilt rendered
desperate, were preparing for the Battle, (whilst this Prince of Peace was
negotiating for Peace, and in order thereunto prepared to raise the Trained
Bands of his Dukedom of Cornwall, by encouragement of his Royal presence,)
Fairfax and Cromwell fall with incredible fury upon his Army, commanded by the
Lord Hopton, at Torrington, and vanquished it: Which news being brought to him
at Launceston, he removed from thence to Pendennis, where continually receiving
some unhappy news, and unwelcome Messages pursuing each other, so fast as the
Waves do in a Storm, and coming as thick as the Messengers of Jobs calamity,
was advised to consult his own safety, and (since he could not by all his
suasions procure a pacification either by Art or Arguments, dint of Sword, or
strength of Reason,) preserve himself, the Kingdoms growing hope, for happier
days, wherein he might with more fortunate success apply his sovereign Balm to
heal the bleeding Breaches of the three dying Nations.

Whereupon he went from thence, attended by the Lords Goring and Culpepper, and
Sir Edw. Hide, to the Isle of Scilly, which still remained in the King's hands;
where he was no sooner arrived, but he received a solemn Invitation from the
Parliament in a seeming tender and dutiful way, to come to them, and remain in
such places as they should think convenient, and entertain such Attendants and
Counselors only as should be appointed by them. Upon receiving of which
Invitation, he advised with those about him, what was best to be done in that
case, and they returned the following Answer, viz.

That it became not him to do any thing in a matter of that concern, without
his Fathers privity, advice, and free consent; and therefore, before he could
satisfy the Honorable House, he desired a Pass might be granted to the L
Capel to go to the King at Oxford, to take his Advice, and hearken to his Royal
Pleasure, and make some overtures to him in order to a Peace. He desired
likewise the assistance of the Reverend Father in God, the Archbishop of
Armagh, whose deportment toward the Public was so moderate and inoffensive,
that even Jealousy it self entertained not the least suspicion of him.

But, through the ill Influence some persons had on Public Councils, there was
nothing done in either of those particulars, although, when Providence was pleased
to deprive him of Civil Comfort, and Secular Attendants, it had been but
charity to have supplied him with some faithful, good and able Chaplain, by
whose Piety, Learning and Prayers, he might be the better enabled to sustain
the want of all other Enjoyments. But they not only refused to gratify him in
that reasonable Request, but also by an Ordinance barred him from all future
converse with such Loyal Attendants, as would otherwise have willingly waited
on him there, to deceive the tediousness of that Solitude; so that those, who
would now adventure to repair to him, or supply their unhappy absence by the
civil correspondence of a Letter, were to die without mercy. During his abode
there, he spent a day or two in viewing the Isle of Gernsey, the only remainder
of our Rights to Normandy, to try if peradventure the persons, or the place,
would furnish him with the knowledge of any thing whereof he was a Stranger
before, and which he might observe for the future benefit of his Kingdom: For,
as he afterward wrote to the Lord Mayor and Common Council of London, he
neglected not any Maritime observations, which might be useful to English
Traffic, the slands commodiousness for Shipping and Trade, from the Eastern
parts to the West, in the middle way between St. Malo's, and the River Seine,
the capaciousness of its Harbor, together with the smaller Islands,
Alderneley, Lerke and Sarnia.

After this, he betook himself to France, to visit his Mother in that Court,
where he was received with all imaginable demonstrations of Joy, where, after
having received his Mothers Blessing, and the Complements of that Court, he
retired with her to the Louvre. But, his active disposition rendering him soon
weary of a tedious and easy Retirement, he desired leave of his Mother to go
with the Duke of Orleans into the Field that Summer in the Head of a French
Army, which then marched into Flanders against the Spaniards. The Queen wrote to
the King, to know his pleasure about it, but he absolutely refused it,
accounting it beneath the Princes of Great Britain to serve any, as those who
understood better how to command, than be commanded, in a Field, having
formerly had Kings and Emperors in pay under them; and in regard that our
homebred miseries afforded Employment so agreeable with his active spirit, that
he thought he ought not to spare himself for any dangerous engagements in
Foreign Quarrels, and therefore advised him to expect Instructions from him how
to dispose of himself more to his Kings, his Fathers, his own, and Countries
Service.

Whereupon, in obedience to his Royal Fathers command, he quitted his own
wishes, and waited for farther directions from the King. During which time, the
varieties of Airs, he had passed through, distempered his tender body, and
brought upon him an Aguish ^ever, which continued some weeks, until by the
goodness of God, the care of his Loyal Attendants, and the skill of his
Physicians, he was recovered to so good a temper, as to attend his Fathers
Affairs, according to those Instructions he received from him in an enclosed
Commission, which was then sent him to be Generalissimo of all the Loyal Forces
which had survived those late unhappy defects; that declared to the World, that
good and ill success are no infallible demonstrations of Innocence or Guilt,
since there is a just man that perishes in his Righteousness, and the wicked
sometime prosper in their wickedness.

The Kingdom of Scotland, tender of his Safety, Honor and Conscience, humbly
move his Father not to suffer him, who was their present hope and their future
happiness, to be exposed in his younger years, to such Foreign Temptations and
Dangers, as might have those unhappy Influences upon these Kingdoms that the
Child unborn might rue for, since Princes are so public, that within the Fate
of their own single persons are involved the concerns of whole Nations, (Rex
est publica pars major meliorque mei.) Whereupon the King wrote to him to wait
upon his Mother, and obey her dutifully in all things, Religion only excepted,
and that he should not stir any whither without his particular directions. But,
not satisfied therewith, they write to him themselves, by their Committee of
Estates, to invite him thither, protesting that none of the present Calamities,
except his Fathers distress and restraint, afflicted them so much as his
absence; and, seeing their Forces had at first entered England, to do their duty
to Religion, his Majesty, and himself, they humbly desired his Highness to
honor and countenance their Pious and Loyal Endeavors with his gracious
presence, and Royal Person, for whose Safety, Honor and Freedom they engaged
the public Faith of that Kingdom, which Invitation was signed by Craford and
Lindsey.

But he had learned, by too sad experience, what faithless Trustees they were
of Princes persons, and thought it dangerous for the Son to trust himself with
those who had betrayed his Father. Liberty being so much the desire of all men,
that it is not reason Princes should hazard Captivity, since all freeborn
Souls embrace a Freedom, though it be but to wander like forlorn Exiles in a
strange Land, rather than a Restraint upon their Persons, their Judgments and
their Consciences, within the Precincts of their own Palaces; wherefore he
intended to wait with patience till Providence might find out some way for his
return to his own Country, with more Safety and Honor, and sent the Earl of
Lauderdale back with this Answer to the States of Scotland, That their
Civility, which might well become the best Subjects, should, upon the first
opportunity, have that return from him, which might become the best of Princes.
And, in the mean time, in pursuance of those Instructions he had received from
his Father, he negotiated his Affairs in the French Court, where, by his
Mothers assistance, he prevailed for some thousands of pounds, to be advanced
by that Court, toward the furtherance of his Majesty's Affairs in Ireland, as
an Earnest of greater Assistance to be afforded hereafter.

Some remainders of his Cornish Forces now geting to a head, and others upon
order Marching to him out of Ireland, he met them in the Isle of Jersey, with
such Forces as he had procured beyond the Seas; where he possessed himself of
some Vessels which lay in the Island, and joined them to those which he had
brought with him out of France: the news whereof arriving at Westminster a
Letter is dispatched from the Parliament, and delivered him by Colonel Russel,
Governor of Guernzey, wherein they humbly desired that, for his Fathers, his
own, and for his three more than miserable Kingdoms sake, he would come among
his Fathers Subjects, offering thereupon to afford all that lay in their power
to give, or himself could expect to receive. But not daring to trust them, he
waved their Complement, and proceeded to manage his affairs by Sea and Land to
that advantage, if they had had their desired success, as might have enabled
the King in the approaching treaty, to stand upon such terms as conduced most
to his Honor, both as a Man, a Christian and a King. In order whereunto he
came attended by the Duke of York, Prince Rupert, the Lords Hopton, Wilmot,
Wil^oughby, Branford and Ruthen, and Sir Henry Palmer, with twenty Sail of
Ships toward Yarmouth, and landed there with 2000 Men, where the divided
multitude entertained him according to their various Inclinations, some with an
Hosanna, and others with a Crucify.

And as himself had taken care of his affairs at Sea, so he sent commissions to
several Persons of Honor and Trust, whom he commanded to take care of them by
Land, viz. Ormond, Inchequeen and Montgomery in Ireland, the Committee of State
and their Officers in Scotland, the Lords Goring and Capel in Essex and Kent;
Glenham and Langdale in the North; Hales, Lucas, Langhorn, Poyer, Owen,
Buckingham, and the Earls of Holland and Peterborough, in those places where
each of them resided; and Letters of correspondence past mutually between him
and the Scots, his Father and the City, in some whereof which were intercepted,
the City, the Lords, and some of the Commons declared themselves ready to
contribute all possible asistance for the composing of those unhappy
differences.

For whose encouragement he was graciously pleased to declare himself rather
the asserter of his Peoples Privileges than his own Rights, as though he
fought against his Subjects, not to make himself, but them, happy against their
wills; for in a Declaration which he then published, he Solemnly protested 1.
For the Establishment of Religion, according to his Fathers, agreement in the
26th of the preceding December 2. The performance of the said agreement and
pursuance of the concessions on the Kings part. 3. The restoring of the King to
a Personal Treaty. 4. The just Privileges of Parliament. 5. An Act of
Oblivion. 6. The liberty of the Subject, abolishing excise, contribution,
forfeit, quarter, etc. 7. Disbanding the Armies and settling of Peace. 8. The
Defense of the narrow Seas, the securing of ^rade, and the support of the Navy
and Seamen, was all he designed in his present undertakings. Which Gracious
Declaration he seconded with a Letter to the Lords, wherein he required 1* That
a Personal Treaty might be had in such place and manner as might consist with
the Kings Honor, Safety and Freedom, that so it might not be blemished with
any Face of restraint, 2. That Scotland might be included. 3. That in the mean
time there might be a cessation of Arms, and an orderly moderate subsistence,
mutually agreed on for the Forces on both sides to the Soldiers content, and
the Subjects ease: But such was their stubborn peevishness, that all his
concessions were slighted* and his endeavors came to nothing.

Wherefore seeing he could do nothing by fair means, he applied himself to
Force, and made several Honorable, but unsuccessful attempts, to reduce his
Rebellious Subjects to the obedience of their Sovereign. Poyer and Langhorn
reduce South Wales, raise a Thousand Men, keep Pembroke, Tenby and Chepstow,
beat Fleming and Horton, but soon after received a total rout at St. Fogins,
Tenby and Pembroke being surrendered, and Langhorn and Poyer forced to submit to
Mercy: in whose behalf he wrote to St. Thomas Fairfax from the Downs, where he
then lay with his Fleet, that they might have the usage and terms of Soldiers
of War, as those had who were taken by him. To which Letter the General
answered with all due respects to his Highness, that it was not in his power to
Act further, the Parliament having ordered their Trials, he dared not interpose
their Justice; but only pray for Mercy and Peace, subscribing himself his
Highness's Humble Servant. Sir John Owen likewise reduced North Wales to as
little purpose.

Nor had his affairs much better success in Surrey, Essex, Kent: And the City,
who having first petitioned and then fought for their own Peace, the Kings
Honor, Safety and Liberty, and the Kingdoms Establishment, were able to
accomplish nothing to purpose. The Kentish Men Rendezvouzed at Black Heath
under Sir Edw. Hales, who commanded them as General, Sir Geo. Lisley, and
others; offering a Parley to Sir Tho. Fairfax, to which he returned this Answer,
etc.

SIRS, I received a Message from you for a Pass, for some Gentlemen to come and
and Treat, according to an Order of Parliament, but know of no such Order of
theirs, or Authority of yours to appoint Commissioners for such a purpose; and
finding you and them in Arms against the Parliament, I cannot admit of a
Treaty; but if ye shall forthwith lay down your Arms, and return home, I doubt
not of the Parliaments mercy, to such as have been deluded into this Rebellion,
and their Exemplary Justice to the Chief Actors therein. Of which Answer having
satisfied the Prince, they did by directions from him make this Reply. 1. That
an universal and perpetual Dictate of Nature, even self-preservation, not to
invade others Rights, but to secure their own, had drawn them together. 2.
'Twas an undoubted Power over them ordained of God they did then obey, and so
did neither Tumult nor Rebel. 3. That Providence which had given them that
opportunity, they dare not neglect, nor could they lay down their Arms without
the forfeiture of their Reason, and their Honor; and that, as for the
uncertain mercy which he offered to the deluded many, whom he thought knew not
why they were come together, and the certain Justice he had threatened their
Leaders withal, he might assure himself there was but one Soul in that great
Body, which was therefore resolved to stand or fall together as one Man, being
not tempted with any hope, except that of returning to their ancient Rights,
Privileges, Governments and Settlements; and altogether incapable of any fear,
save only that of relapsing into their former slavery: And that the fair
managing of their business, was a sufficient demonstration of their
Inclinations to Peace, entreating him therefore rather to make the Country his
Friend than his Enemy.

The General being inexorable, and and they resolved, both Armies met at a
barricadoed Bridge, between the Heart^ and Graves-end, where both sides
strenuously disputed the Passage, till the Countrymen retired back into their
main Body, being overpowered by multitudes, rather than overcome by valor;
whereupon (notwithstanding they gained another Pass, which was disputed between
them and the Parliamentarians) they retired to Maidstone, which they stoutly
maintained against the first and second, but yielded upon a third Assault,
though with a great slaughter of their Enemies, who obtained that with great
loss, which they parted with not without extreme regret; whereupon Rochester is
quitted, and left to the mercy of the Enemy.

In the mean time their General, the Prince, lay in the Downs with his Fleet in
a very good condition, waiting for that supply of Land Forces, which his
Brother the Prince of Orange was industriously raising for his Service in
Holland, and seizing several Merchant Ships not to be released under 200000 l.
Intending his Subjects future gain by that present loss, by employing of it in
the defense of their Laws and Liberties: But understanding that the Castle of
Deal was in danger of being taken, he Landed some Forces for its Relief, who
were Vanquished almost as soon as Landed, a Rebellion seeming to have chained
the Goddess Fortune, (as the Trojans did of old) to its side. For it was so
deplorably successful, that whenever it met with Loyalty, it presently
vanquished it.

But, notwithstanding this loss, he would have hazarded himself for the relief
of Colchester, wherein Sir Charles Lucas and the Lord Capel with their
Essex-Forces were besieged, had he not been dissuaded by those about him, and
informed that Coll. Scroop had undertaken the relief of that City, with a
greater number of Men than was there under his Command, whereupon he desisted
from his intention and reserved his hitherto unblemished Reputation, to expect
a fairer opportunity: And still continued at Anchor in the Downs.

But Fairfax, whose actions were performed as soon as thought, and whose
designs did almost prevent his performances, carried on the Siege of Colchester
with so much strictness and resolution, that he very much striatned those
Valiant Worthies, who had somewhat weakly imprisoned themselves within a place
where they would be sooner tired than overcome, when it might have been more
discretion to have taken the Field, and there have improved their opportunity
of performing something to the Honor of their Master, and the good of their
Country, by the gleaning of those Loyal Subjects, who would have been
continually resorting to them, and the taking all advantages against their
Enemy, or at least they might have died Nobly and revenged. However they
resolved gallantly to defend the place to the last extremity, their Valor
being able to suffer whatsoever the Enemy without was able to reduce them to;
but Famine within became a more prevailing Adversary than Fairfax's Army; and
when Courage and Resolution would not yield to the one, Nature was forced to
stoop to the other. For their want of Provisions were so great, that Dogs and
Cats were accounted great Rarities, so that the Soldier thought it a Relief to
be employed where he was most probable to meet with death, as weary of the
lingering doom of departing by piece-meals, and dying daily. Yet they yielded
not the City, till they were informed of the Scots defeat at Preston, and that
the Navy was revolted from the Prince again, it being as unconstant as the
Wind, and as unstable as the Water that it sailed upon: And indeed what could
be expected, but that those, who were Traitors to their first, should be
unfaithful to their second, Master? And then those Desperado's resolved to make
a general Sally upon the Enemy; for since there now remained no Calamity
unsuffered, which they could possibly fear; they thought it was better to go
forth and meet their sudden doom, than wait for it within the Town; but the
Soldiers and Townsmen shrinking, they were forced to yield themselves to the
General, as Prisoners of War.

His brave and Warlike Attempts, for his Fathers Restoration, having thus
proved unsuccessful, he was forced to content himself with being unhappy, since
he had approved himself to be Loyal; and so he retired to the Hague in Holland,
where he resided with his Sister the Princess of Orange, to avoid the Treachery
of Cardinal Mazarine, who was dealt withal to trapan him, and had for that
purpose, as himself said, as much from those in England, as would maintain the
Queen and Princess, and defray all the incident Charges which they put that
Kingdom to: As also to avoid Suspicion, which the Parliament might have of him
during the time of the approaching Treaty. About which having heard some
uncertain Rumors, he wrote to his Father by the Lord Seymour for better
satisfaction, that so he might manage his Designs and Counsels suitable to his
Fathers Exigencies, as he expressed in his Letter, which was to this purpose.

SIR, Having no means to come to the knowledge of your Majesty's Affairs, but
such as I receive from the Prints, or (which is altogether as uncertain)
Reports, I have sent this Bearer Seymour to wait upon your Majesty, and to
bring me an account of it; and that I may also assure your Majesty, that I do
not only pray for your Majesty, according to my duty, but shall always be ready
to do all which shall be in my power, to deserve that Blessing which I now
humbly beg of your Majesty, etc.

And being now big with expectation of the joyful News of such a settled Peace,
as might be safe and honorable to his Majesty, and advantageous to the
Subject, he receives Information that the Treaty was begun, and so far
concluded, on such Reasonable Demands of the two Houses, and Royal Concessions
of his Majesty, as upon three days mature deliberation it was resolved, that
the King's Answer to the Propositions of both Houses, was a ground for them to
proceed upon, for the settlement of the Nation, with his Majesty's consent; Who
was in order thereunto to have been restored to the Freedom, Safety and Honor,
that became his place, he thereupon assured himself, that his Majesty having
now, in order to an accommodation, granted as much as modesty could ask, there
would undoubtedly follow a Peace and settlement of the Kingdom, with an
universal satisfaction, and that the happiness, and not the error of the
Government, were some Men's grievances, which proved but too true. For to such a
height wa^ the Malice and Impudence of Cromwe^ and some other Officers of the
Army, now grown, that they resolved to employ their Power against those that
gave it them, and to oppose themselves against the wished for Peace and
Settlement of the Kingdom; therefore finding that all the pretense of Authority
now failed them by the Parliaments Resolution to set the King at Liberty, they
now make use of plain Force, and boldly adventure to contradict the Resolves of
the Parliament it self, from whom they had first received their pretended
Commissions, and presume without Law first to imprison them in their own House,
and then to sequester as many of them as they please from coming thither.
Whereby, having patcht a Juncto of their own, which they still ridiculously
called by the name of Parliament, they renewed the Vote of Non-Addresses,
declare the Treaty at the Isle of Wight dishonorable and dangerous, and
therefore protest against it, and then proceeded to disarm the City and
Country, that so there might not be a Sword drawn for the good and Peace of the
Kingdom. Which obstacles being thus removed, the Army encouraged the Juncto
with a Remonstrance, wherein they proposed that the People should agree finally
to take away the Government by King, Lords and Commons, whereby they made good
those Charges which had formerly been made against the Parliament, and their
Army, and from which they had endeavored by so many Oaths and Protestations to
clear themselves. And that they should* in the name of the People, proceed
against all Malefactors, from the highest to the lowest, wherein they
impudently included, and chiefly aimed at, the King himself, who was in order
thereunto closely imprisoned, and deprived by them of the comfort of his Loyal
Attendants, and of the Honor of that State and Ceremony that was due to him.

But these were but essays toward, and beginnings of, Sorrows to that Pious,
though unfortunate King. First, It was moved in the House on the first of the
following January, that he might be tried as a Traitor: Which horrible, as well
as senseless, Vote was past into an ordinance, and sent to the House of Lords.
Upon which the Earl of Manchester, to his Eternal Honor, did declare that, in
regard the King was the chief of the three States in Parliament, he could not
possibly be a Traitor to the rest, since Treason always goes upward, and the
lowest only are capable of being Traitors to the highest. Which Speech the Earl
of Northumberland seconded by declaring his opinion, that suppose it was
without question, that the King was first in the War, yet they had neither Law,
Custom or President, to make that War Treason in his Majesty, and the Lord Say
affirmed that he knew not who should to say to Kings, Ye are unrighteous, or to
Princes, Ye are ungodly. And Kings (added Pembroke) they say can do no wrong,
much less can they be guilty of Treason, whereupon the Ordinance was
immediately thrown out of that Honorable House.

But the Juncto mad upon their ungodly and destructive project resolved
notwithstanding that the Persons, empowered therein to try the King, should
proceed accordingly, although the Lords consented not. Which unexpected News being
brought the Prince by Seymour, together with the Ordinance for his Fathers
Trial, he was thereby surprised with so much Passion and Amazement, to see
their Oaths of Allegiance, Covenants, Protestations, and Treaties for Peace,
conclude in Paricide and Murder, that he knew not how to contain himself, until
he began to consider with himself, that Passion must not be suffered to disturb
reason in such an exigency of affairs; wherein its consultations were to be
employed in the weighty business of saving a Father, a King, and three
Kingdoms; and that it became him therefore to give himself rather to discreet
Advice and Council, than to sullen grief: It being more Princely and Heroic,
to prevent the mischief, than either to be angry at it, or revenge it when it
was done. And in order thereunto he solicits Spain, France, Holland, and the
Scots, to interpose themselves in his Fathers behalf, who accordingly, by their
respective Ambassadors and Messengers, did mediate for his Life, offering
themselves, together with the English Peers, to become Pledges for him. But the
Barbarous Juncto were inexorable, their guilt having made them so desperate,
that they thought themselves no otherwise safe from former mischiefs committed
by them, but by perpetuating a far greater and unparalled wickedness, those
Monsters of Men hurrying his Majesty from the Isle of Wight, to bring him to
his Trial, as tho they had designed to explain, to the wandering World, the
meaning of that Riddle, which was contained in their pretense of defending him,
whilst they fought against him.

Being unjustly condemned by the pretended high Court of Justice, set up by the
Juncto for his Trial, to lose his sacred Head, he did upon the near approach of
his death take care, with good Hezekiah, to set his House in order, giving
charge concerning the same to the Dutch Ambassador, with whom he was as
private, as the rudeness of the Soldiers would permit him. For the most part
of the Saturday in the Afternoon, ordering him to carry his Blessing to his
Son, and deliver him such Instructions, as equally declare the greatness of our
loss in him, and our happiness in his Successor, whose actions were always
steered according to them, wherein he breathed more like an Angel than a Man,
or at least, as one then already entered upon the confines of Eternity, and
within view of Immortality and Perfection, as you may perceive by the
Instructions themselves, which are as follow.

Son, if these Papers with some others, wherein I have set down the private
reflections of my Conscience, and my most impartial thoughts, touching the
chief passages that have been most remarkable, or disputed, in my late
Troubles, come to your hands, to whom they are chiefly designed, they may be so
far useful to you, as to state your Judgment aright in what has passed,
whereof a pious use is the best that can be made, and they may give you some
Directions how to remedy the present, and prevent future Distempers.

This advantage of Wisdom you have above other Princes, that you have begun,
and now spent some years of discretion, in the the experience of Trouble, and
the exercise of Patience, wherein Piety and all other Virtues, both Moral and
Political, are commonly better planted to a thriving, as Trees set in Winter,
than in warmth and serenity of times, or amidst those delights which usually
attend Princes Courts in time of Peace and Plenty, which are prone either to
root up all Plants of true Virtue and Honor, or to be contented only with some
Leaves, or withering Formalities of them, without any real Fruit, such as tend
to the public good, for which Princes shall always remember they are born, and
by Providence designed. The Evidence of which different Education the Holy Writ
affords us in the contemplation of David and Rehoboam, the one prepared by many
Afflictions for a flourishing Kingdom, the other softened by the unparalleled
Prosperity of Solomon's Court; and so corrupted both for Peace, Honor and
Kingdom, by those Flatteries which are as inseparable from prosperous Princes,
as Flies are from Fruit, whom adversity, like cold Weather, drives away*

I had rather you should be Charles Le bon, than Le grand, good, than great: I
hope God has designed you to be both, having so early put you upon that
exercise of his Gifts and Graces bestowed upon you, which may best weed out all
vicious Inclinations, and dispose you to those princely* Endowments and
Employments which will most gain the love, and intend the welfare, of those
over whom God shall place you.

With God, the King of Kings, I would have you begin; the best Government, you
can attain to, is, to be subject to his Word and Spirit swaying in your heart.

Your Glory will be the advancement of God's Glory in the maintenance of true
Religion, and of the Churches good, and in the dispensation of Civil Justice
and Honor for the public good.

Piety will make you prosperous, or at least not miserable, whereby, in the
loss of all, you save a Soul, to which, as to a Creature, I see all these black
Lines of Affliction drawn.

This Cup we taste is God's Physic, having that in healthfulness, in wants and
pleasure.

I would have you, above all, well grounded in your Religion, according to the
best Profession of the Church of England, which I wish may be judiciously your
Religion, sealed by your Judgment and Reason, persevering i^ it as the nearest
to the Word of Go^ for Doctrine, and the Primitive Examples for Government,
with such amendment as I elsewhere expressed, and often offered, but in vain. A
fixation for Religion is necessary for your Souls and Kingdoms Peace.

The Devil of Rebellion can turn himself into such an Angel of Reformation, and
the Old Serpent can pretend such New Lights, that when some men's Consciences
accuse them for Sedition and Faction, they stop their mouth with the name and
noise of Religion. When Piety pleads for Peace and Patience, they cry out Zeal;
so that you must be settled, or you shall never want Temptations to destroy you
and yours. Men are so good at putting the best of Princes for the worst of
Designs, especially when Novelty prevails much, attended with Zeal for
Religion; and it is a good way to hide their own Deformities, by severe censures
upon other men's Opinions and Actions.

Abet no public Faction against your own and the Churches settled judgment,
least the advantage you gain in some Men's Hearts (who are prone to be of their
Kings Religion) be lost in others, who think themselves and their professions,
first despised and then Persecuted by you.

Either calmly remove the seeming differences and offenses by impartiality, or
order it so in point of power, that you need not fear, or flatter any, else you
are undone, so quickly will the Serpent devour the Dove. There is less Loyalty,
Justice, or Humanity in none than in Religious Rebels, whose Ambitious Policies
march under the Colors of Piety, with security and applause. You may hear from
them Jacobs Voice, but you shall feel they have Esaus Hands.

The Presbyterian Faction in England, while compliant with public order, was
inconsiderable in Church and S^ate: When discontents drove Men to sideing, as
ill humors fall to the disaffected part, so did all that affected Novelty,
adhere to that side as the most remarkable note of difference (then) in point
of Religion; all lesser Factions (until time and success had discovered to them
their several advantages) being officious Servants to Presbytery.

What may seem at first but an hand-breadth in Religion, by Seditious Spirits,
as by strong Winds, are soon made to cover and darken the whole Heavens, and
therefore must be suppressed or reformed.

Next to your care for Religion take care for Justice, according to the settled
Laws of these Kingdoms, which by an admirable temperament give very much to the
Subject, and yet reserve enough for any King, who owns his People as Subjects,
and not as Slaves.

Never charge your Head with such a Crown, as may oppress the whole Body, that
it cannot return any strength, honor or safety to the head.

Your Prerogative is best exercised in remitting, rather than exacting, the
just Vigor of the Laws.

I hope you will never think it safe for a King to gratify any Faction with the
perturbation of the Laws, in which is wrapped up the public interest, and the
good of the Community.

My Counsel and charge to you is, that (if it please God to restore you) you
seriously consider the former real, or objected miscarriages, which might
occasion my troubles, that you may avoid them.

Never repose so much upon any Man's single fidelity, and distraction, (in
managing affairs of Religion and Justice,) as to create in your self or others
a diffidence of your own judgment which will prove more faithful to your own,
and the Kingdoms, interest than any Man's.

Exasperate no Faction by the asperity of any Man's Passions, or humors
(employed by you) about differences in lesser matters, wherein a charitable
toleration dissipates that strength, whom rougher opposition fortifieth;
provided the differences amount not to an insolent opposition of Laws and
Governments, our Religion Established, as to the essentials of them.

Always keep up solid Piety, and those fundamental Truths which mend both the
hearts and lives of men, with impartial Favor and Justice.

Take heed that outward Circumstances of Religion devour not all the
Encouragements of Learning, Industry and Piety, but with an equal Eye, and
impartial Hand, distribute Favors and Rewards to all men, as you find for
their real goodness, both in abilities and fidelity, worthy or capable of them.
This will give you the hearts of the best and most too, who, though they be not
good themselves, yet are glad to see the severer ways of Virtue at any time
sweetened with Temporal Rewards.

Time will dissipate all Faction, when the rough^ Designs of some men shall
discover themselves, which were at first wrapped up under the smooth pretenses of
Religion, Reformation and Liberty. For, as the Wolf is not less cruel, so he
will be more justly hated when he shall appear no better than a Wolf under
Sheeps clothing. And, as for the secluded Train of the vulgar, who, in their
simplicity, follow those disguises, my charge and counsel to you is, That, as
you need no palliations for any Designs; so you study really to exceed (in true
and constant demonstrations of Goodness, Piety and Virtue toward the People)
even those men that make the greatest noise and ostentation of Religion. So you
shall neither fear any detection, as they do who have but the face and mask of
goodness, nor shall you frustrate the just expectation of your People, who
cannot in reason promise themselves so much good from any Subjects Novelty, as
from the goodness of their King. And when Factions are by God's Mercy, and your
Virtue, dissipated, the abused vulgar will then learn, that none are greater
Oppressors of their Estates, Liberties and Consciences, than those men that
entitle themselves, the Patrons and Vindicators of them, only under that
pretense, to usurp Power over them. Let no passion therefore betray you to any
study of revenge upon those, whose own sense and folly will sufficiently punish
in due time. But, as soon as the Forked Arrows of Factious Emulations is drawn
out, use all Princely Arts and Clemency to heal the Wounds, that the smart of
the Cure may not equal the smart of the Heart.

Wherever it shall be desired and accepted, offer Indemnity to so great a
latitude as may include all that can but suspect themselves to be any way
obnoxious to the Laws, as to remove all Jealousies, not out of strict Policy or
Necessity, but out of Christian Charity and Choice. For, be confident, (as I
am) that the most of all sides that have done amiss, have done so, not out of
malice, but through a misapprehension of things. And that therefore none will
be more Loyal to you, than those, who sensible of their Errors, and our
Injuries, will feel in their Souls most vehement motives of Repentance, and
earnest desires to make some reparations for their former defects.

As Your Quality sets you above any Duel with a Subject, so the Nobleness of
your Mind must raise you above the meditation of any Revenge upon the many that
have offended you. The more conscious you shall be to your own Merits upon your
People, the more prone you will be to expect all Love and Loyalty from them;
and by inflicting no punishment for former miscarriages, you will find more
inward complacency in pardoning of one, than in punishing a thousand. This I
write to you, not despairing of God's mercy, and my Subjects affections toward
you, both which I hope you will study to deserve, yet we cannot merit of God,
but by his own Mercy.

If God should see fit to restore me, and you after me, to those Enjoyments
which the Laws should have assigned to us, and no Subject without high degree
of guilt can divest us of, then may I have better opportunity, when I shall see
you in Peace, to let you freely understand the things that belong to God's
Glory, your own Honor, and the Kingdom's Peace. But if you never see my face
again, and God will have me buried in such a barbarous Imprisonment and
Obscurity, which the perfecting some men's Designs require, where in few men's
hearts, that love me, are permitted to exchange a word or look with me, I do
require and entreat you, as your Father, and your King, that you never suffer
your heart to receive the least check against, or dissatisfaction from, the
true Religion established in the Church of England; which upon trial I find to
be the best, as Christian and Reformed, keeping the middle way between the
pompous Superstition of Tyranny, and the meaness of Phanatick Anarchy.

Not but that (the draught being excellent as to the main, both for Doctrine
and Discipline,) some Lines, as in very good Figures, do peradventure need some
sweetning and polishing, which might here have easily been done by a safe and
gentle hand, if some men's precipitancy had not violently demanded such rude
alterations as would have quite destroyed all the beauty and proportion of the
whole.

The Scandal of the late Troubles, which some may object and urge to you
against the Protestant Religion established in England, is easily answered to
them, or your own thoughts Duel with a Subject, so the Nobleness of your Mind
must raise you above the meditation of any Revenge upon the many that have
offended you. The more conscious you shall be to your own Merits upon your
People, the more prone you will be to expect all Love and Loyalty from them;
and by inflicting no punishment for former miscarriages, you will find more
inward complacency in pardoning of one, than in punishing a thousand. This I
write to you, not despairing of God's mercy, and my Subjects affections toward
you, both which I hope you will study to deserve, yet we cannot merit of God,
but by his own Mercy.

If God should see fit to restore me, and you after me, to those Enjoyments
which the Laws should have assigned to us, and no Subject without high degree
of guilt can divest us of, then may I have better opportunity, when I shall see
you in Peace, to let you freely understand the things that belong to God's
Glory, your own Honor, and the Kingdom's Peace. But if you never see my face
again, and God will have me buried in such a barbarous Imprisonment and
Obscurity, which the perfecting some men's Designs require, where in few men's
hearts, that love me, are permitted to exchange a word or look with me, I do
require and entreat you, as your Father, and your King, that you never suffer
your heart to receive the least check against, or dissatisfaction from, the
true Religion established in the Church of England; which upon trial I find to
be the best, as Christian and Reformed, keeping the middle way between the
pompous Superstition of Tyranny, and the meaness of Phanatick Anarchy.

Not but that (the draught being excellent as to the main, both for Doctrine
and Discipline,) some Lines, as in very good Figures, do peradventure need some
sweetning and polishing, which might here have easily been done by a safe and
gentle hand, if some men's precipitancy had not violently demanded such rude
alterations as would have quite destroyed all the beauty and proportion of the
whole.

The Scandal of the late Troubles, which some may object and urge to you
against the Protestant Religion established in England, is easily answered to
them, or your own thoughts in this, that scarce any one who has been a
beginner, or an active prosecutor of this late War against the Church, the Laws
and me, either was, or is, a true lover, embracer, or practicer of the
Protestant Religion established in England, which neither gives such Rules, nor
ever before gave such Examples.

It Is true, some heretofore have had the boldness to present threatening
Petitions to their Princes and Parliaments, which others of the same Faction,
but worse Spirits, have now put in execution But let no counterfeit and
disorderly Zeal abate your value and esteem of true Piety; both of them are to
be known by their Fruits. The sweetness of the Vine and Fig Tree, is not to be
despised, though the Brambles and Thorns should pretend to bear Figgs and
Grapes, thereby to promote their Rule over the Trees. Nor would I have you to
entertain any aversation or dislike of Parliaments, which in their right
Constitution with Freedom and Honor, will never injure or diminish your
greatness, but rather be as the interchanging of Love, Loyalty, and Confidence
between the Prince and his People. The sad Effects of the Insolence of popular
Dictates, and tumultuary Impressions, in this Black Parliament, will make all
Parliaments after this, more cautious to preserve that Freedom and Honor which
belongs to such Assemblies, (when they have once shaken off that Yoke of vulgar
Encouragement,) since the Public Interest consists in the common good of
Prince and People.

Nothing can be more happy for all, than in fair, grave, and honorable ways to
contribute their counsels in common, enacting all things by public consent,
without either Tyranny or Tumults. And we must not starve our selves, because
some men have surfeited of wholesome food.

If neither I, nor you, be ever restored to our Rights, but God in his severest
Justice will punish my Subjects with continuance in their sin, and suffer them
to be deluded by the prosperity of their wickedness, I hope God will give me
and you that grace, which will teach and enable us to want, as well as to wear
a Crown; which is not worth the taking up or enjoying upon sordid,
dishonorable or irreligious terms. Do you always keep firm to the true
Principles of Piety, Virtue and Honor, and you shall never want a Kingdom.

It will be your honor to afford all respect, love and protection to your
Mother, who has many ways deserved well of me, especially in being a means to
bless me with so many hopeful Children, and being content with incomparable
magnanimity to suffer with me and them.

May you be an Anchor of hope to these weather-beaten Kingdoms, and your
Wisdom, Justice, Piety and Valor, a repairer of what the folly and wickedness
of some men have so far ruined, as to leave nothing entire to the Crown,
Nobility, Clergy or Commons, of Laws, Liberties, Estates, Order, Honor,
Conscience or Lives. Let those that love me find me (when I am gone) in your
presence and virtues. What good I intended, do you perform, when God shall put
it into your power. I pray God bless you, and establish your Kingdom in
Righteousness, your Soul in true Religion, and your Honor in the Love of God,
and your People. Farewell till we meet, if not on Earth, yet in Heaven.

The good King, having thus resigned himself, and all his Affairs, into the
hand of God, patiently submitted to his Cross; and in a way of renunciation, as
it were, and self-disposition of his Government, transferred and bequeathed the
Scepter, together with his Advice and Direction, for his wielding of it. He
applied himself wholly to the making preparation for his departing from an
earthly to a heavenly Kingdom, being assisted in his Piety and Devotion by Dr.
Juxon, Bishop of London. And being upon the fatal 30th of January brought upon
a Scaffold, erected before his own Palace of Whitehall, where he was
barbarously murdered by his own Rebellious Subjects, he delivered himself in
the following Speech.

Being not likely to be much heard, I could be silent, did not silence intimate
a submission to the guilt as well as to the punishment charged upon me. But in
my duty to my God and Country, to clear my self an Honest Man, a good King, and
a good Christian, I protest before God, to whom I must instantly give an
account, that (as may appear from the date of their Commissions and mine) I
begun not the War against the Parliament, nor intended I any incroachment upon
their Privileges, they began with me and the Militia, which they confessed was
mine, but thought it fit to have it from me, yet I charge not the guilt of
these unhappy troubles upon the two Houses, for I believe ill instruments
betwixt us was the cause of all this Bloodshed, however this Sentence is just
upon me, for an unjust Sentence permitted by me. What Christian I am this good
Man, (pointing to Dr. Juxon) and others that have been inwardly familiar with
me, and know me as well as my self, may bear witness. I die in Communion with
the Professors of the Reformed Religion, that has been Established in the
Church of England, in Queen Eliz. and my Fathers time of Blessed Memory, and in
Charity with all the World, forgiving the worst of mine Enemies, and praying
God that this be not laid to their Charge.

As a good King I advise my Subjects, not to ground your selves in Conquests
without a good cause, that you would give God, the King, and the People their
dues. You may give God his due, by the advice of a national Synod, freely
chosen and freely debating among themselves. How you may give the King his due,
the Law will instruct you, and the People have their due, when they have that
Government and those Laws, whereby their Lives and Goods are most their own. I
have delivered my Conscience. I pray God you take those courses that may be for
the Kingdoms and your own good.

Having finished this Speech and poured forth his Divine Soul to God in Prayer,
it was sent by death to him that gave it, where the great Assembly in Heaven
joyfully welcomed that Martyred King, and made room for Charles of Great
Britain.

The Life and Reign of Charles the first, being thus determined by this
untimely and fatal stroke, his Eldest Son, who likewise bore his Name,
immediately Succeeded him by the Title of Charles the Second; Who was the
Lawful and undoubted Heir, not only of all his Dominions, but also of his
admirable and Heavenly Virtues, being endowed with all those Qualifications,
which are requisite to, or could possibly be desired in a Prince, and under the
influence of whose happy Reign, these Nations might have enjoyed as much
happiness and felicity as their Hearts would wish, had not their own folly and
madness for a time prevented it. For no sooner had the Fatal Ax severed England
and her Liberties, by cutting off the Head of her King, but the Parliament (as
the Juncto still presumed to call themselves) the better to crush Monarchy, and
maintain what they had now so far prosecuted, issued forth a Proclamation that
none, under penalty of being deemed guilty of High Treason, should presume to
Proclaim, declare, publish or any way promote the Prince of Wales, Son to the
late King, or any other Person whatsoever to be King, or Chief Magistrate of
England, or of any part of the Dominions, or any part thereof, by Color of
Inheritance, Succession or Election, or any other claim or pretense whatsoever
without the free consent of the People in Parliament, and which Proclamation,
although not published till the 2 of February, yet was in part Proclaimed on the
very day of the Kings Murder.

And for the more ensuring and the better carrying on their Government with the
more plausibility, they publish an Act of State, for the alteration of Writs
wherein instead of King, the Name, Style and Test, and Custodes Libertatis
Angliae Anthoritate Parliamenti, should be used and no other: All Writs being
ordered to run so, and those concerned in the Law required to take notice
thereof, yet they provided that all Patents, granted by the late King, should
still stand in full force and virtue.

And having cast off the chief of those three Estates, by which the Nation had
been so long Governed, they think likewise of abolishing the second, that so
they might usurp the whole power into their own hands, in order whereunto
having first Voted that they would make no farther Addresses to them nor
receive any from them, they made an Ordinance for abolishing the House of
Lords, as dangerous and useless. And then having abolished the Ancient
Governments of this Kingdom they proceeded to the consideration of Establishing
another, but found it a work of so much intricacy that they could come to no
resolution, but only agreed in a Negative Voice that there should, for the
future, be no Government in England, either by King or House of Lords: and
thereupon ordered the old Great Seal to be broken, and a new one to be made,
which was delivered to the keeping of three Commissioners, viz Keeble, Whitlock
and Lisly, and considered of new Oaths to be adminstred to the Judges, who
thereupon met and upon debate six of them were contented to continue in their
Employments, provided the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom were not altered. For
whose satisfaction the Juncto, by their Declaration of the Ninth of February,
did assure them that they were fully resolved to maintain, and would uphold,
preserve and keep, the Fundamental Laws of this Nation, for and concerning the
preservation of the Laws, Properties and Liberties of the People, with all
things incident thereunto.

They proceeded likewise to appoint such Persons, as they thought would be most
firm to their Interest, to exercise the Offices of Justices of the Peace
throughout the Nation, and constituted a Council of State, consisting of about
forty in number, whereof five might be Lords. And finally, to secure all,
whereas they had before only repealed, they now abolish and make void, the
Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy.

But, notwithstanding all their endeavors to render themselves secure and firm
in their Government, yet the People began now to be generally discontented: And
those who had formerly affected them, growing sensible of the Inconveniences
that were like to ensue upon the cutting off of their Prince; beginning to
abhor their practices, there was a general Plot carried on against them in all
the Counties of England: Which obliged them to send Forces into most parts, to
awe them, and thereby the better to keep them in order. Notwithstanding which
Contrivances of theirs, to bar up the way to that Imperial Throne, which they
had impudently invaded, and parted into shares amongst themselves, there were
some who had Courage and Loyalty enough left them to assert the King's Right,
and their own Duty, in a Printed Proclamation thrown about the Streets. And to
convince the Juncto at Westminster, that all men would not be wheedled to run a
gadding after their Calves at Bethel, but that there were some still left, who
would tread in the old Path, and beaten Tract of Government, in the succession
of Charles the Second to the Crown of England, which Proclamation was as
follows.

We the Noblemen, Judges, Knights, Lawyers, Gentlemen, Ministers, Freeholders,
Merchants, Citizens, etc. and other Freemen of England, do, according to our
Allegiance and Covenant, by these presents, heartily, joyfully and unanimously,
acknowledge and proclaim the Illustrious Charles Prince of Wales next Heir of
the Blood Royal to his Father King Charles (whose late wicked and traitorous
Murder we do from our Souls abominate, and all Parties and Consenters
thereunto,) to be by hereditary Birthright, and lawful Succession; Rightful and
undoubted King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, and the Dominions
thereunto belonging. And that we will faithfully, constantly and sincerely, in
our several places and callings, defend and maintain His Royal Person, Crown
and Dignity, with our Estates, Lives, and last drop of our Blood, against all
Opposers thereof* whom we do hereby declare to be Traitors, and Enemies to His
Majesty, and His Kingdoms. In testimony whereof we have ordered, and caused to
be published, and proclaimed throughout all Countries and Corporations of this
Realm, the first day of February, and the first year of His Majesty's Reign.
God save King Charles the Second.

Which Proclamation, although without any Solemnity, or indeed open Appearance,
met with the same cheerful Reception, and inward Loyal Resolutions, as if Vent
had been given to a public manifestation of Duty and Joy by His Majesty's
present ascending the Throne: For it revived the hearts of his mourning and
disconsolate Subjects, to see the sure and certain Succession thereof asserted
and continued in the same most beloved and darling Name, the Eldest Branch, and
descended of their martyred Sovereign, in whose Ruins the Regicides thought to
have raked up, and buried all Claims and Just Titles to the Imperial Diadem of
these Kingdoms.

The said Outcries and lamentable Groans sent forth by all Loyal Subjects, at
the Loss of their Head, together with the Martyrs Instructions and his George,
(which were according to his Fathers desire sent him by the Dutch Ambassador,)
found him at the Hague in Holland, where he then kept his Court, and was first
saluted King; and the horror thereof so seized his great Soul with wonder and
astonishment, that it had certainly sunk under the weight of it, had not the
Religious Consideration, that he ought not to sorrow as one without hope,
buoyed up his Spirit; and Reason forbid him to cast away himself with grief,
who was then become the only hope of three Kingdoms. Generous Rage prompting
Princes to Revenge, rather than Despair, which was not to be accomplished by
weeping Eyes, but by wise Counsels, and valiant Performances.

Wherefore he bravely cheered up, and reassumed his wonted Courage, Comfort,
State and Majesty. And for the better managing of his Affairs, went soon after
to Paris, to solicit that Court to embrace his Interest, and afford him some
Assistance for the recovery of his Right, and the redressing his Subjects
miseries, by discountenancing the English Rebels, and furnishing him with that
competency of Money, Men, Arms and Ammunition, which might enable him not to
Invade his Country, but to encourage his own Subjects to rescue themselves from
a forced Slavery. But the French King being under Age, and Cardinal Mazarine,
who then governed the great Affairs of that Kingdom, being no Friend to this
banished and distressed King, but holding a correspondence with his rebellious
Subjects, he was able to procure no Assistance from thence. Whereupon he next
applied himself to Spain, whither he sent the Lord Cottington as his
Ambassador, who upon his arrival there, was confronted by a Competitor, viz.
Ascham, who called himself an Ambassador from the then New Majesty's of
England, until he was dispatched by some Switz. After which Cottington was
dismissed with this Answer; That were it any thing in the King of Spain's own
Dominion, which his Master of Great Britain had desired, it should have been
no sooner requested than granted: But being a Foreign Quarrel, he could not
interest himself therein, in regard it was not reasonable he should busy
himself in other men's matters, who had so many Irons in the fire himself.

But in the mean time, the Emperor, the Princes of Germany, the Kings of
Denmark and Sweden, being acquainted with the present circumstance of his
Affairs, by his several Ambassadors sent to each of them, they highly resented
his deplorable condition, and resolved his speedy assistance and supply. And
Holland, upon his Account, and the Interest of his Sister the Princess of
Orange, did upon terms agreed on between the late King and their Ambassador,
two days before his death, resolve not to vail to this younger Sisters State,
as they had been wont to do to the Kings of England; but by the Forlorn of some
private acts of Hostility begin that difference, which soon after brake out
into an open War. Nor was he altogether void of Assistance from England, being
underhand supplied with some Moneys by his Loyal Friends from thence.

But Scotland was more entirely at his Devotion, who having showed their sad
Resentment of his Fathers Death, by observing a Public Fast on that occasion,
on the 19th of February, and cheerfully promoted his Succession, by the Estates
of Parliament there assembled, a Proclamation was issued out for the solemn
proclaiming and declaring him to be their lawful King and Governor, which was
as follows.

His late Majesty being, contrary to the consent and protestation of this
Kingdom, removed by violent Death, we the Estates of the Parliament of the
Kingdom of Scotland, do unanimously, in Recognition of his Just Rights,
proclaim his Eldest Son Prince Charles, by the Providence of God, and undoubted
Succession, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, whom we are bound by the
National and Solemn League and Covenant to obey, maintain and defend with our
Lives and Goods, against all his Enemies. But before he be admitted to the
exercise of his Royal Power, he shall give satisfaction to these Kingdoms
touching the Security of Religion, the Unity o^ the two Kingdoms, and the Good
and Peace of this Kingdom, according to the National and Solemn League and
Covenant. God save the King.

Which Proclamation was for the better assuring the truth of their designed
Allegiance to the Crown, made in a most solemn manner at Edinburgh Cross, which
was hung with Tapestry, all the Parliament-Lords attending there in their
Robes, and the Chancellor himself reading the said Proclamation, and reciting
the Murder of his late Majesty to the King at Arms; the night being concluded
with all usual demonstrations of Joy and Gladness. Which being over, they sent
an Expostulatory Letter to those at Westminster, to give them an Account of
their proceedings, and require their concurrence therewith. In answer whereunto
they received Letters stuffed with flattery, and protestations of Amity and
Friendship, if they would desist from acting any farther therein, and acquiesce
and concur with their proceedings in England. But they, knowing that their
Countries Honor had been lost by the same Traitorous proffers, refused to
hearken to their overtures, protesting in their messages directed to Lenthal,
the Speaker, that they would not enter into any Treaty with them, nor own them,
unless they were a free Parliament consisting of both houses without any force
upon or seclusion of their members.

Wherefore having hereby made the English Parliament implacably their Enemies,
they endeavor to assure his Majesty to be their Friend, ordring Joseph Douglas
to repair forthwith to him at the Hague, and acquaint him with what they had
done, and were preparing to do. And presently after, sent several Commissioners
to treat with him, about his repairing to them, and entering upon the exercise
of his Kingly Office: Whereupon their Commissioners at London, having sent a
peremptory Paper to the Juncto, withdrew themselves privately from London,
intending to pass by Sea, for Scotland, but were intercepted at Graves-end, and
by a Guard conveyed thither by Land; an Envoy going likewise with them to the
Scottish Parliament, to know if they would justify the aforesaid Paper; who
beginning now to be more than ever enraged against the Rump, dismissed him
without any Answer, but prepared themselves for defense, intending to levy
17000 Foot, and 6000 Horse, against the return of their Commissioners, who
landing about the middle of the Summer, though they did not bring with them a
confirmation of the Agreement, yet gave certain hopes of it by a Treaty,
presently to be commenced, the King offering to perform whatsoever his Father
had promised for the settlement of Presbytery.

Upon which Encouragement the Lord Liberton was presently dispatched to wait
upon the King, who was then preparing for his return from the Hague, through
Flanders, into France, which he did on June 15 in company with his Sister, and
her Husband, the Prince of Orange in their Coach, and came early to Rotterdam,
where he was received by the B^rghers in their Arms and saluted in his passing
the Gates with the Artillery, Ringing of Bells and all other signs of Joy and
Honor, and Noblely treated by them. From whence he went to Dort, where he was
received in the same manner, and then to Breda, and then to Antwerp, where, by
order of the Archduke of Austria, he was met and entertained, with all
possible state and splendour, being presented likewise with a rich Chariot, with
eight Horses, suitable thereunto, and particularly welcomed by his former
Tutor, the Marquess of Newcastle (who had then fixed his Residence there, out of
respect to the great Civility which he received from that People, who had made
him Excise-free, and given him several other Immunities and Privileges.) And
from thence conducted to Brussels, where he was as royally entertained, and
with as much grandeur, as if he had been the King of Spain himself. And the
King did afterward acknowledge that Entertainment for the most sumptuous and
magnificent, and to have in it the most pleasing variety of any that he ever
met withal, during the whole time of his Exile. Which Amplitudes were observed
throughout his whole passage: For at his departure thence, the Duke of Lorrayn
gave him the like Entertainment, and conducted him on his way toward France,
where in Compaign, the French King, accompanied with the most and choicest of
his Nobility, did receive and welcome him with all the Testimonies of Affection
and Honor that became such a Prince, and afterward conveyed him in State to
St. Germains, where the Queen his Mother then resided.

So that although he was banished from his Throne, yet he wanted not a Kingdom
all men wherever he came, being so taken with his Virtues, that they seemed
willing to become his Subjects. Nor was his Court much inferior in numbers and
splendour, to those of other Princes, who were in the actual possession of their
Crowns. Toward the maintenance whereof, his Aunt the Duchess of Savoy assigned
him fifty thousand Crowns per Annum; several others contributing likewise
thereunto, according to their abilities.

He was very much solicited about this time by the Scottish Commissioners, to
repair to that Kingdom; but finding that the Conditions, upon which they were
willing to admit him, were such as he could not in honor accept of, especially
the parting with Montross, he resolved to steer another course, and therefore
grants a Commission to Montross to Levy what Forces he could beyond the Sea,
and with them go and join the Lord Seworth, Major Straughan, and others, who
had got to Head for the King without the Kirk, in the North of Scotland. But
they being routed before he came by Lisley, and himself, not long after his
Arrival, defeated by a Party of the Kirks Forces, and taken Prisoner, and most
ignominiously hanged at Edinburgh; he was, as it were, forced by the necessity
of his Affairs, to comply with their demands, which was so much the easier
done, in regard, that, about that time Montross was removed by an unfortunate
death. Wherefore he sent Sir Will. Fleming beforehand to complement the States;
he returned them his Answer in the following Letter, which he sent back by
Liberton.

We have received your Letter by Mr. Windram of Liberton, and graciously accept
your good affections toward us, your Resentment of our Condition, and our
Fathers Murder. And out of a gracious desire of a good understanding between us
and our Subjects of Scotland, for their Peace, Happiness and Comfort, we
command and desire you to send us Commissioners, sufficiently Authorized, to
treat and agree with us, about those things which concern the Interest of our
Subjects of Scotland, and our Interest in England, Scotland and Ireland, at
Breda, on the 5th of March. That all the World may know how sincerely we desire
Agreement, we have addressed these to you, under the Name and Title of
Committeee of Estates of our Kingdom of Scotland, and do expect you use this
Grace no otherwise for the prejudice of us and our Affairs, than for the
Treaty; and in order to it, Given at our Court in Jersey, Jan. 6. 1649. Charles
Rex. Another Letter to the same purpose, being likewise directed by him to the
Committee of the Kirk.

The Scots gladly received those Letters, and presently made choice of
Commissioners to repair to Holland, sufficiently instructed for the concluding
of a Treaty with the King, who arrived at Breda on the 16th of March, and were
on the 19th conducted by the L. Wentworth, Master of the Ceremonies, to their
Audience, when they delivered to His Majesty the following Propositions. 1.
That the Excommunicated should be forbid the Covenant. 2. That all the Acts of
Parliament be ratified, the Covenant taken, the Presbyterian Government
established and practiced in His Majesty's Family, and elsewhere; and that he
himself swear to it. 3. That all Civil matters might be determined by
subsequent Parliaments, and all Ecclesiastical matters by the general Kirk
assembled. Which Propositions of theirs being delivered, he distinguished the
Civil part of their Proposals, from those that concerned Ecclesiastical
matters, and told them, that as to what concerned Civil Affairs, he would
confirm all the Acts and Ordinances of the last Session of their Parliament:
And that all Affairs concerning that Kingdom should be transacted in a
Parliamentary way, as they had been in his Royal Father and Grandfathers time.
And that, as long as any person did stand excommunicated, he should be
incapable of any Office or place of trust in that Nation. And, as to what
concerned the Ecclesiastical matters, he told them, That the Covenant seemed
more proper for Subjects, than for a King, in regard Allegiance unto
Sovereignty was a considerable part of it. And that as to those parts of it,
wherein he thought himself concerned, he would, upon the word of a Prince, with
the limitation allowed in the Covenant, viz. as far as he did, or might in his
Conscience, according to the Word of God, endeavor in his place the
Reformation in Religion and Worship, in England, Scotland and Ireland. Assuring
them moreover, that he would allow the Scottish Nation a Liberty as large as he
enjoyed himself; And that in case the generality of the Scottish Nation
assembled in Parliament, would propose unto him the Presbyterian Government as
the way wherein that Nation would walk in fellowship with God, he would confirm
and establish it by his Royal Authority. And finally, That in order to his
making good those particulars, he would, with all convenient speed, repair to
his Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, desiring to be excused, if his Fathers, and
his own ancient and faithful Friends, who had constantly attended on him in all
his sufferings, should come along with him thither, since he could not, in
point of gratitude, discharge those from the Advantages of Loyalty, whose
faithfulness to him was so great, that no hazards whatsoever, could discharge
them from the Services, Employments and Dangers of it; telling them, he should
be a King in vain, if Allegiance in his Court were esteemed a fault that
deserved cashiering.

These Proposals and Answers were rationally debated by Commissioners on both
sides, the Scots standing very stiffly to their Principles, and the Kings
Commissioners resolved not to yield to all their demands, whereupon by an
influence which the English had upon some of the Commsssioners (for they had
their Active Agents both their and in Scotland, streneously endeavoring to
countermine the honest endeavors of all sides for pacification) the treaty was
like to break off as unhappily as by them it was thought to be begun, but by
the mediation of the States General, the Queen of Bohemia and the Prince of
Orange, it was reassumed, and brought to a Conclusion, upon the Covenant Terms
on the Kings part, with the forementioned limitation, it was the Religious part
of the Treaty which kept them at the greatest distance, and was the most
difficult to be agreed upon, controversies of that nature being ever the most
irreconcilable, the civil part ever quickly dispatched in regard he was of such
a condescending temper that conld contentedly quit much of his interest for the
Peace, and welfare of his People, but was unwilling to quit any of his
conscience, which he knew to be a far more weighty and sacred matter.

On the Scots side it was agreed that his Majesty should be admitted to the
Throne of Scotland, and his just Rights in that Kingdoms recovered by
Parliament, from the hands of those who had usurpt them, and that they should
assist his Majesty in bringing the Murderers of his Royal Father, to condign
punishment, restore him to the Kingdom of England, and the vindicating his
Right thereunto against the present Usurpers, etc.

The Treaty being thus finished, the Commissioners both of the Kirk and the
State were splendidly treated by the Prince of Orange, and highly honored by
his Majesty, after which they returned into Scotland, exceedingly satisfied in
their success and entertainment.

Nor were the Scots alone in their Endeavors at this time, to restore His
Majesty to his lost Dominions: For many of the Presbyterians in England, did
likewise, by their Agents at B^^da, engage all their Interest for the promotion
thereof. But Cromwell's Emissaries being so thick, that three could scarcely
meet together, but one of them would, in the end, prove his Spy, they were
betrayed, and their Designs came to nothing. Many eminent persons, especially
of their Ministers, being taken and brought to Trial, as Case, Jenkins,
Jackson, Love, and others; some whereof were executed, (upon the importunity of
Cromwell, who protested to the Juncto, that if they did not Justice in England,
he would not fight in Scotland,) viz. Love and Gibbons.

The Juncto were very much allarumed when they understood, that notwithstanding
all their Endeavors to the contrary, the Treaty at Breda is concluded. And
that among other things, the Scots had engaged to assist His Majesty to bring
them, and the Rebels of their Conspiracy, to condign pnnishment, and ^o recover
those Rights, which none but such Monsters as themselves would unjustly detain
from so great, and so good a Prince. Wherefore being deeply sensible of their
danger, they prepare for War, but whether it should be Offensive or Defensive,
was yet a question among them. But at last considering that, if there must be a
War, it had ever been a Maxim among the greatest Politicians, that it was most
prudent to make the Enemies Country the Seat of it. They resolved upon an
Offensive War, hoping that Scotland would quickly be weary of maintaining two
Armies, since it had so much ado to keep one. And that since they were informed
their Levies went on flowly, they thought that their Forces, which were already
on Foot, might easily go and surprise them, before they looked for them, or were
half ready to entertain them.

In order whereunto, Cromwell being called out of Ireland, was in great state
made Captain General of all their Forces, raised, or to be raised in England,
Scotland and Ireland. The Lord Fairfax, who had in him some sparks of Loyalty,
waving at once that Employment, and his own Commission; not as some imagine, to
avoid the hazard of that Expedition; for he was one that never turned his back
upon danger, but because he was unwilling any longer to be subservient to those
base and vile Designs, which he now began to abhor.

Whilst these preparations were making in England, the King removed from the
Hague to Diep in Normandy, and from thence to Scheveling; from whence, after a
dangerous Storm, and narrow escape of some English Vessels, which lay in wait
for him, he arrived safe at the Spey in the North of Scotland, which the
Parliament being informed of, they sent some Lords to receive and attend him
from thence to Edinburgh, where he is received by the Parliament and Committee
of Estates and Kirk, with infinite expressions of Fidelity and Affection; the
common people like so many Echoes to their Superiors; and the whole City
sounding nothing but Vive le Roy. But Cromwell, being advanced with his Army
into Scotland, and having been successful in some smaller Encounters, and given
them a total overthrow at Dunbar, they found themselves in a sad and perplexed
condition, having not only the Enemy raging in the bowels of that Kingdom; but
being extremely divided also amongst themselves; wherefore they now thought it
high time to unite among themselves. In order whereunto a general meeting was
appointed at St. Johnstons, which should consist of King, Lords and Commons,
and the Assembly of the Ministers, in which Assembly several Lords formerly in
favor with the Kirk, were admitted to Commands in the Army, and a Liberty to
sit in Parliament, as Hamilton, Lauderdale, and others. And Major General
Massey, formerly Governor of Gloucester for the Parliament, but afterward
reconciled to the King, was admitted to a Command in the Army. And as the
perfection of all the Kings Coronation was there resolved upon, so that now
their wounds began to heal, and their breaches to be made up again; and it was
generally hoped, that these Clouds of Division being blown over, a serene Sky
would immediately follow, and the Sun of Prosperity shine on their future
proceedings.

The Parliament of Scotland, in pursuance of those resolutions at St.
Johnstons, having dissolved themselves in order to the Kings Coronation, it was
performed on the first of January at Schone in as Solemn and Splendid manner,
as the exigency of the time could bear; his Majesty with a great Train of his
Nobles and others went first to the Kirk, where a Sermon was Preached by a
Scotch Minister whose name was Duglass, upon those words, then they brought out
the Kings Son, and put upon him the Crown, and gave him the Testimony, and made
him King, and Jehojadah and his Son Anointed him, saying, God save the King. 2 Chronicles. 23, 11. Joined to these words, and Jehojadah made a Covenant between all
the People, and between the King, that they should be the Lords People, v. 16.
Which Sermon being ended he was conducted from his Chair of State, which was
placed in the Kirk, to that erected for his Coronation, by the Lord High
Constable, and the Earl Marshal, where being placed he was Proclaimed King by
Herald King at Arms; and then clad with a Robe of State by the Lord
Chamberlain, and the Lord Steward. After which sitting he consented to the
National Covenant, the Solemn League, Covenant, Directory, and the Catechisms,
and promised upon his Royal word to perform them (so far as he understood them
to be agreeable to the Word of God,) in his own Family in his Kingdom of
Scotland, and in all his other Dominions, as soon as it should please God to
restore him thereunto: Which being done, the Coronation Oath was next read,
which was Enacted in the first Parliament of King James, and is as follows.

That His Majesty shall maintain that Religion, Discipline and Worship, that is
most agreeable to the Word of God, to the best Patrons of Reformation, and is
against all Heresy, Schism, Idolatry, Superstition and Profaneness, that he
should govern the Kingdom by Law and Equity, and that he should maintain the
just Rights of the Crown, and Privileges of the People.

After the reading of which Oath he declared with an audible Voice, that he did
promise, in the name of the great God who Lives for ever, that he would to the
uttermost of his Power, endeavor to do the things contained in that Oath.
Which done, Herald King at Arms went to the four corners of the Stage, and
demanded of the People four times, whether they were willing that Charles the
Second, Son and Heir of Charles the First, should be King over them, to which
the People answered, Long live King Charles, God Save the King. Then the
Marquess of Argile Presented him with the Royal Scepter, the Earl of Eglington
put on the Spurs, the Lord High Constable set the Crown upon his Head, and the
Earl Marshal having unsheathed the Sword, put it into his hand to defend the
Faith withal, which having held a while, he delivered it to the Earl of
Glencarn to be carried before him.

Then the Nobility, Gentry and Commons of the Kingdom, did as in the presence
of the Great God that Lives for ever swear Allegiance, Fealty and Obedience, to
him as to their Liege and Sovereign Lord; and the whole Ceremony was concluded,
by an Exhortation of the Minister to his Majesty, to the Nobility, to the
Clergy, and to the Commons, the sum and substance whereof, was in reference to
the Covenant, which they then looked upon as the Center from which every Line,
both of Sovereignty, and the Subjects Duty, was to be drawn in their respective
Circumstances. And for a power to perform what he then exhorted them to, the
assistance of God is invoked by prayer; who being Alpha and Omega, they made
him the first with whom they began, and the last with whom they finished. So
soon as the Crown was set upon his Head, he made a short, but pithy Speech to
the People, telling them, that he did esteem the Affections of his good People,
more than the Crowns of many Kingdoms, and should be ready, by God's
Assistance, to bestow his Life for their defense, wishing to live no longer
than he saw Religion and that Kingdom to flourish in all Happiness; with many
other expressions of like Love and Affection toward them.

The Ceremonies of the Coronation being ended, and a plentiful Entertainment
prepared, he sat down at one Table, and the Lords at another, many Caresses
and Testimonies of Joy reciprocally passing between them. And Dinner being
ended, they all returned to St. Johnstons, in the same Order and Pomp as they
came from thence to Schone^ Bonfires, Ringing of Bells, and the loud
Acclamations of the People, were sufficient demonstrations of the Public Joy
which the Scots were filled withal; and the great expectations they had of
Happiness and Felicity under the Influence of his mild and easy Government.

Having now obtained the actual possession of one of his Kingdoms; and being
reconciled to that Parliament, he was not in the least daunted by the late
Miscarriages, but as if he had been encouraged by his former Unhappiness, and
raised in mind like Anteus by his Fall, he proceeded to the raising of such an
Army, as might then have been rather wished for by the Affectionate, than
expected by the Reasonable. And indeed such was the Confluence of Faithful
Subjects, that continually resorted to him, and were resolved to carry on, and,
if possible, maintain an endangered, and an endangering Cause against the most
successful, and hitherto prevailing Interest, that he was in a little time
Master of a greater Army in the Field, than either his own hope, or his Enemies
guilty fear, could suspect. Wherefore he bravely appears himself in the
management of his own Affairs, as Generalissimo of that Army, which consisted
of two and twenty thousand fighting Men.

Nor was his care less employed about his Garrisons, than it was about those
Forces he had in the Field, knowing that it was prudence to provide for a
Retreat, though he expected a Conquest, and not neglect the providing a Refuge
in the worst of Dangers; whilst, according to Reason, he need to think of
nothing but Safety in the best of Victories. Wherefore to hasten the work, for
every minute of delay was then fatal, and cherish the dejected Vulgar, (who
were now somewhat discouraged by lying under the burden of a double Army,) with
the honor and pleasure of his gracious presence: He took a progress to view
the most considerable of them, and see them well fortified and furnished with
all necessary Provisions, encouraging the Engineers by his Bounty, and
directing and guiding them by his Skill.

But those vast Preparations were too formidable to his Enemies for them to
suffer 'em to go on without an Attempt, at least, to hinder and defeat them.
Wherefore, before the Levies were well completed, Cromwell makes hard toward
him, thinking each minute tedious that past without some Action. But the King
prudently declined joining Battle with him, until he might, if possible, draw
him, (who had a greedy desire of Fighting,) into some disadvantage, which he
was in a probability of doing soon after. For Cromwell, having commanded two
Regiments to pass over into a narrrow Island, hoping thereby to intercept his
passage, he sent against them five or six Regiments, under the Command of Major
General Brown, who had certainly cut them all in pieces, had not Cromwell
hastened thither with a supply in the very last minute of opportunity, whereby
he rescued his own Forces, and beat back Brown, although not without a
considerable loss on both sides. And, being flusht with those successful
beginnings, pursued his Advantage; and transporting his Army over Fife, marched
immediately unto St. Johnstons, which he took almost upon the first Summons.

Whereupon the King, who was not able to beat them back, thought it high time
to look about him. And, since Cromwell, that successful Rebel, had now gained
all on the other side Fife, took the Earl of Eglington Prisoner, possessed
himself of St. Johnstons, and grew every day more powerful, he resolved, with
all imaginable speed, to advance into England, expecting that the Justice and
Equity of his Cause, together with the long Tyranny exercised over them by the
Juncto, would incite his English Subjects to return to their Allegiance, and
join with him against theirs, as well as his Enemies. And knowing by
experience, that the Scots always expressed their Valor better in other
Countries, than at home, in their own; whereupon Cromwell re-crosses Frith, and
sends Lambert with a select Party of Horse and Dragoons, to fall upon the
King's Rear, himself following presently after with the Body of his Army. The
King entered England by the way of Carlisle; the Royal Army marching through the
Country with that Civility, and exact Obedience to Military Discipline, that,
as some affirm, the Country was not damaged sixpence by them. But whether it
were, that their former Villainies had left such a deep impression in the hearts
of the People; or that they were now dulled and besotted with Slavery, and with
Issachar's Ass, were content to couch under their Burdens, or that they were
overawed by an Armed Power, which is the most probable, few or none came in to
his Assistance, save only the Lord Howard's Son of Escrick, with one Troop of
Horse, notwithstanding his earnest Invitation.

The Juncto at Westminster hearing of the King's March, were exceedingly
terrified therewith, and presently raised all the Countries against him, and
declared it High Treason for any to assist him either with Men, or Money.

But the Earl of Darby, who was always Loyal both to him and his Father, not
fearing their Bugbear Threatening, brought him a supply of Two hundred and
fifty Foot, and Sixty Horse, out of the Isle of Man. He met with no opposition
till he came at Warrington in Lancashire, where some considerable Forces of the
Parliament were ready to cut down that Bridge, and dispute his Passage: But the
Scots falling on them, before they were aware, prevented the breaking down of
the Bridge, and by their Valor, forced their way over the Planks, and put the
Adversary to such a confused Retreat, that had it been pursued, as himself
would have had it, but was opposed by Lesly, it might have proved the Conquest
of all England; and that unhappy and miserable War might thereby have been
ended much sooner than it was.

From thence he marched toward Worcester, in such excellent Order, and with so
little Damage to the Country, that it looked more like a Progress with his
Nobles, than a March with an Army; which was a great demonstration of the
powerful Influence of his goodness and care, which could so easily frame
Rudeness it self to so smooth and even a temper, and form an unruly Camp into a
well managed and orderly Court.

In his way to Worcester he summoned Shrewsbury, by a Letter directed to
Colonel Mackworth, Governor thereof, which was wholly composed of bowels,
compassion and clemency, signifying to him, that being sensible of the injury
done; and now, for a long time, continued to him in the unjust Usurpation of
his Rights, and to his People, in the frequent and horrid breaches of their
Privileges, he was willing to do himself and them so much Right, as to
endeavor the Recovery of his and their Rights, which he, both by his peculiar
Inclination, and his Interest, was more willing to do by Peace and Reason, than
by War and Force, and therefore willed and required him to deliver up his
Charge, and thereby prevent all Violence, which he conjured him to do as he was
a Subject, a Christian, and a Gentleman. To which the Governor in a Reply,
directed by him to the Commander in Chief of the Scottish Forces then in
England, answered, That he could not, as a Christian, Gentleman, or Subject,
betray the Trust his Superiors had put him in, so far as to deliver that place
to any person without their consent.

Being come to Worcester, he made a a halt, and marched his Army into that City,
which was certainly a very great oversight, and proceeded from his suffering
himself to be unhappily prevailed upon (as his Father had too often been,) by
the light Reasons of others, more than by those that were far more weighty of
his own. For if he had marched directly to London, he had certainly been
successful, and would have surprised that great City, before they had been in a
condition to have defended themselves. On which, the whole Kingdom would
consequently have submitted to him. So that those, who advised him to stay at
Worcester, seem to have accounted a few days March too great a purchase for
three Kingdoms.

The Earl of Darby, who was left in Lancashire, to raise more Men in that, and
the adjacent Countries, being encountered by Lilburn, with his own, and the
General's Regiment, was overthrown and routed: So that he narrowly escaped with
some few only to the King at Worcester, who was now as closely coopt up in that
City, by a company of fortunate Rebels, as the King of France was at Agincourt,
by our brave King Henry; the whole Nation being about him, rather to swallow
him up by their multitudes, than conquer him by their Valor. To whom Cromwell
at last comes, as a Genius to quicken them to action, who had hitherto done
nothing but look on, and spirit their grave and slow approach into a fierce
Assault, and fatal Storm. The King, however, resolved to defend the City as
long as possible against his powerful Attaques. The first whereof was the
disputing of a Postage over the Severne, called Vpton-Bridge, by Lambert, which
had been utterly impossible for him to have gained, had not either Negligence
or Treachery, in those appointed by the King, to break it down, left one Plank
behind, which reached from Arch, to Arch, a small Party of Horse and Foot, sent
by him, under the Command of Fleetwood, to judge of the feasibleness of the
Attempt, finding a Plank left upon the Bridge, immediately dismounted, and
ventured over, securing themselves in a Church, on the other side; which Mosley
(who lay in Vpton, with about Two Hundred Horse, and Sixty Dragoons, in
abundance of Security, and without the least dread of an enemy) alarumed with
assaults, whilst in the mean time Lambert passed over a considerable Party of
Horse to their relief; upon which Mosley finding it was then in vain to fight,
made an honorable Retreat toward Worcester, himself still bringing up the
Rear, in which Service he was wounded by a shot in the head.

The Bridge being thus gained, was immediately repaired, and Lamberts Army past
all over, whilst Cromwell upon a Bridge of Boats, which he caused to be made
over the Severne, on the other side, marched over with the Army under his
Command, whereby the City of Worcester was very much strait'ned. There
happened, for a day or two after this, several small Engagements with very
doubtful success, until Victory hovering, as it were, between the equal rivals,
doubtful which head to Crown with Conquest, until Cromwell, rowsing up his
accustomed Spirit of dispatch, appeared at Red-Hill, and resolved to attack the
City on all sides, commanded Fleetwood to make the Attack on one side, whilst
he himself undertook to manage it on the other: Which the King perceiving, from
the top of the Church Steeple, where he then held a Council of War, the better
to discern the Posture of the Enemy; ordered some to draw out from St. John's,
to oppose Fleetwood, others being sent in the mean time to line the hedges in
Cromwell's way, who played their part so bravely, that Cromwell's Red-coats
were at first glad to retire, until reinforced with fresh Soldiers. But then
they were forced to retire, Whereupon the King himself marched with incredible
Resolution out of Sudbury Gate, with a good Train of horse and foot to oppose
Cromwell, whose invincible Lifeguard, which was therefore called Iron-sides,
because it was customary to them to conquer, were very much disordered, the
King performing such wonders as were almost above belief; exercising the part
both of a courageous General and a valiant Soldier, having his horse twice shot
under him, and rallying the disorderly Infantry, in his own Person, till they
were utterly lost by the negligence of Lesley, who sordidly suffered a brave
body of Horse to stand still, and look on the ruin of their King and
Countrymen, unrevenged, and as it were, patiently wait for their own.

The Field being now lost, he was forced to Retreat into the City, with the
loss of Duke Hamilton, Sir John Douglass, and several other persons of note;
being observed that he, like Caesar, did that day never bid his Soldiers go,
but come, and that as he went first into Field, so he returned the last from
it; being not without some difficulty, persuaded to retire, whereby it appeared
he was not Conquered, but Overpowered.

In vain did he ride among the dejected Soldiers, with his hat in his hand,
entreating them to stand to their Arms, and telling them, when he could not
prevail, that he had rather they would Shoot him, than keep him alive to see
the sad effects of that fatal day; for the Conquerors pursued the disorderly
Scots to the Town, with such fury, that they even tired themselves with
Slaughter and Execution, and became weary of Conquering, fighting now, not so
much against any other, as against the King himself, who was now become the
only care both of his Friends and Enemies: the one crying, Save the King, for
whom they were more concerned than for themselves, and the other crying out
with as much earnestness, Where is the King? as if he had been the only prize
they fought for.

About six in the Evening, seeing all irrecoverably lost, he Marched out at St.
Martin's Gate, leaving all things behind as a Prey to the Enemy; and indeed
they were well lost, since by their loss he redeemed himself: for he was no
sooner got out on one side, but the Enemy pressed in on the other to look for
him, and had certainly pursued and overtaken him, had they not been stopped by
the Royal spoil which was left behind, to the same purpose that Hippodame left
behind her the Golden Apples to tempt the Pursuer to stay the gathering them
up, and thereby save herself. And the Valor of some that still kept the Royal
Fort, to reduce whom, Cromwell commanded out some Cheshire Forces, who most of
them perished in the attempt, that County having never before lost so many
lives in such an unworthy Service; but having at last made himself Master of
it, the Defendants were all put to the Sword: whereupon the remainder of the
Soldiery craved Quarter, and had it rea^ily granted them, the Rebels being as
weary of killing as the Royalists were of being killed.

From this unfortunate Battle not above 300 Horse, and scarce any of the
Infantry, escaped, who were most of them either slain or taken, near 100
Prisoners of Quality; of which, the chief were Duke Hamilton, the Earls of
Shrewsbury, Darby, Cleveland, La^derdale, Rothes, Carnwath, Killy, and many
more: the number of the Prisoners in the whole, being said to be 10000,
together with whom, was taken the King's Standard, Coach and Horses, Collar of
SS's and Star-Cloth. Major General Massey, who escaped the Battle, not knowing
where to shelter himself, being grievously wounded, was forced to surrender
himself a Prisoner likewise to the Countess of Stamford, being secured by the
Lord Gray of Groby, her Son, by whom he was, after the recovery of his Wounds,
sent up to London, from whence, not long after, he made his escape. The news of
this Victory extremely rejoiced the Juncto, but the joy for their Victory was
some, what allayed by the King's escape.

Before he was got as far as Barbone's Bridge, which was not above half a Mile
from Worcester, he made several stands, facing about* and desiring the Duke of
Buckingham, the Lord Wilmot, and other of his Commanders, that they might rally
with those few Forces that were yet left him, and once more try the fortune of
War. But being come to the Bridge, a serious Consultation was held about it;
when perceiving many of the Troopers throwing off their Arms, and shifting for
themselves, their opinion was, that the day was so irrecoverably lost, that his
only business now, was to endeavor the saving of himself from those ravenous
Wolves and Regicides; whereupon he resolved, by the advice of his Council, to
March back again for Scotland: and in order thereunto, the Duke of Buckingham
demanded of the Lord Talbot, who was of that Country, if he could not Conduct
them in their way Northward, who thereupon answered, that he had in his Troop
one Walker, formerly a Scout-Master in those Parts, that knew the way very
well; who being accordingly called to be their Guide, he performed that duty
well enough for some Miles: but coming to Kinven Heath, not far from
Kiderminster, he was at a loss, and knew not which way to go. Whereupon the
King made a stand, and consulted with the Lords, whither he might with most
safety March to take some hours rest, being almost quite worn out and spent:
The Earl of Darby told him that, in his flight from Wiggan to Worcester* he had
met with a perfect honest Man, and a great convenience of concealment at
Boscobel House; whereupon he resolved to repair thither, and Mr. Charles
Gifford, who very well knew the way, was appointed to conduct him thither. When
they came near Stunbrigde, it was debated by them, whether they should march
through the Town or not; and being concluded in the affirmative, they resolved,
that those about the King's Person should speak nothing but French, thereby the
better to prevent the Discovery of his being there: Lesley having, with the
Scotch Horse, in the close of the Evening, taken a more direct way Northward by
New-Port, he was now left attended only by Buckingham, Darby, Lauderdale,
Talbot, Wilmot, and a few other Gentlemen, being in all not above sixty Horse.
At a House about a Mile beyond Stunbridge, he refreshed himself a little with
some small Beer and a crust of Bread, the House affording no better Provision;
and as he rode forward, he discoursed with Colonel Roscarrock, about the
convenience of Boscobel House, and the means of security, which he and the Earl
of Darby had found there. Gifford humbly proposing to carry him first to
White-Ladies, a House about half a Mile beyond Boscobel, belonging to one
Fitz-Herbert, where he might repose himself a while, and then take such farther
resolution as he and his Council should think fit: which was accordingly
resolved on. And being come thither, and knocking at the Door, George
Penderill, the youngest Brother of five, who were all severally instrumental in
Conducting and Preserving his Majesty; hearing some body knock at the Gate so
early, opened the Window, and seeing there Mr. Gifford and Francis Yates, who
was his Brother-in-law, he asked his Brother what news he brought from
Worcester, he replied, the King was defeated, and the Enemy in pursuit of him,
and therefore bid him make haste and let them in: But before he could get down,
the King, with most of the Lords, had entered the House, and got into the Hall,
whither the King's Horse was likewise brought. And having that night rode from
Worcester thither, which was about twenty six Miles, he was extreme hungry, and
very much tired with his long and hasty March: whereupon Gifford presently sent
for Richard Penderill, who lived near hand, at Hobbal-Grange, and William
Penderill from Boscobel. Richard came first, who was immediately sent back to
bring a suit of his Clothes for the King; and by that time he came with them,
William was come likewise, and both carried in to the King by the Earl of
Darby, who told William, that was the King, pointing to him, and that he must
have a care of him, and preserve him as he had done him; Gifford laying the
same charge on his Brother, which was exactly obeyed by both.

The King was advised, whilst the two Brothers were sent for, to rub his Hands
and Face with the Soot of the Chimney, the better to disguise him; and some
persons likewise disorderly cut off his locks of hair: and having taken off his
blue Ribbond, Buff-Coat, and other Princely Ornaments, and distributed what
Gold he had in his Pockets amongst his Servants, put on a course Canvas Shirt,
(which was borrowed of one Martyn,) which done he was to take upon him the Name
and Employment of a Woodman; and having, after the Company was dismissed, a
Bill brought him, he and Richard went out into the Wood: William went home, and
Humphry and George went out to scout, the better to discover if any of the
Parliament Forces approached that way: And it was not above an hour, that the
King had been in the Wood, before a Troop of the Enemies Horse came to
White-ladies, inquiring for the King. But being told by the Towns-folks, that
there was, about three hours before, a party of Horse come thither, and, as
they imagined, the King with them, but had made no stay; whereupon, inquiring
which way they went, they were so eager upon the pursuit, that they made no
farther search. The King had notice of this, by the two Brothers, who were
often straggling into the Town for Intelligence: however he staid all that day
in the Wood, sometimes lying on the Ground, and sometimes walking, it being so
rainy, that the thickest Tree therein was not able to keep him dry; and being
about Noon very hungry, Richard ordered his Sister, the Wife of the aforesaid
Yates, to provide him something to eat, and bring it into the Wood, which was
done accordingly; which was a Mess of Milk, mixed with Eggs and Sugar, in a
black earthen Dish: The King guessing it to be Milk and Apples, and saying,
that he loved it very well.

In the Evening he left the Wood, and went with Richard, Humphry, and George,
and Yates, to Richard's House, under the Name of William Jones, a Wood-cutter,
newly come thither for work; being forced to content himself with a Supper of
Bacon and Eggs, of which, after he had eaten a little, he asked Richard, if he
would not eat? who replying, Yes, Sir: he said, then you have a better stomach
than I; for you have eaten five times to day already. Being resolved to depart
that Night to Mrs. Woolf's House, at Madeley, Jane Penderil, the Mother of the
five Brethren came to see him; blessing God, that her Children were honored to
be the Instruments, as she hoped, of his safeguard and deliverance. At his
departure, they all took their leaves of him, (except Richard, who was to
conduct him thither) beseeching God to guide and bless him; and Yates freely
offered him Thirty Shillings, which was all he had; whereof he took Ten, and
bid him put up the rest.

As he went toward Madeley, he met with an ill favored Encounter at
Evelin-Mill, about two Miles from that place: The Miller (as it afterward
appeared, a Loyal Man, though they knew it not) had then in his House some
considerable persons of the King's Army, that had just then taken shelter
there, in their flight from Worcester; and being alarmed, by Richard's
unhappily permitting a Gate to clap, through which they passed, was upon his
watch, to spy if there was any danger, and boldly demanding, Who was there?
Richard fearing he had pursued them, quitted the usual way, in some have, and
waded through a little Brook, the King thereupon doing the like, following him
only by the rattling of his Leather Breeches, whereby they escaped the Innocent
Miller, who not knowing but that they were Enemies, was as glad that he was rid
of them.

When they came to Madeley, they found Mr.. Woolf's Family all in bed; but
Richard having knocked them up, and acquainted Mr. Woolf's Daughter, who came
first to the door, that the King was there, she immediately received them into
the House, where he refreshed himself for some time, but understanding the
Rebels kept several Guards upon the Severn, and fearing that some of their
Party (because many of them passed frequently through that Town) might Quarter
at the house, as he understood they had often done, he thought it unsafe to
lodge there, since they had no secret place for his concealment, but rather
chose to retire into a Barn near adjoining, as a place less liable to the
danger of a surprise, where he continued all the day following.

During his stay in that Place, he conferred with Mr. Woolf, about his intended
Journey into Wales, who sent a trusty Servant of his, to learn more
particularly the strength and number of those Guards upon the Severn; who
brought them word, that not only all the Bridges were secured, but the
Passage-Boats likewise seized on; so that it would not be safe for him to
prosecute his designed Journey into Wales: So that Woolf advised him rather to
repair to Boscobel-house, which he assured him was the most retired place, and
the fittest for his concealment in all those parts, and there stay till an
opportunity of a safer conveyance could be found out. According to which advice
he resolved to repair thither the night following; and in the mean time, his
Hands and Face not appearing sufficiently discolored, agreeable to his other
disguises, Woolf provided Walnut-tree Leaves, as the readiest expedient for
that purpose; and having boiled them, bathed his Hands and Face in the Water.

Toward the Evening he adventured to return again into the House, and having
refreshed himself, and being furnished with conveniences for his Journey,
which was conceived to be safest on foot, he departed about Eleven in the
Night, with Richard, who was his faithful Guide toward Boscobel, where they
arrived about Three next Morning: Being come near the House, Richard left him
in the Wood, whilst he went in to see that there were no Soldiers there, or
any other appearance of danger, where he found Col. Carless, who was one of the
last that fled from Worcester; whereby it was not without incredible difficulty
that he made his escape; and having concealed himself in Boscobel-Wood for some
time, was just then come thither, to get some relief of William Penderil, his
old acquaintance: And being told by Richard, that the King was without, he
presently went with him, where they found him sitting on the root of a Tree;
but being extraordinary glad to see the Colonel safe, came with him into the
House, where he fed very heartily on course Bread and Cheese, and a Posset,
which, as a rarity, was made for him by William's Wife, of thin Milk and small
Beer; And his Feet being extreme dirty, and very much galled with travel, he
was forced to wash them, and for want of Shoes to wear, whilst his own were
dried, they were forced to put some hot Embers into his own, to dry them a
little, whilst his Feet were a washing.

Being a little refreshed, he was persuaded by the Colonel, to go back into the
Wood, which he supposed was safer than the House, where the Colonel made choice
of a thick-leaved Oak, into which William and Richard helped them both up, and
brought them such Provisions as they could get, and a Cushion for the King to
sit on, whom the Colonel entreated, in regard that he had taken little or no
rest the two preceding nights, to seat himself as easily as he could, and then
rest his Royal head in his Lap, assuring him, that he would be so watchful,
that he need not fear the danger of falling; which he willingly accepted of,
and slumbred away some part of that day, bearing all these harships and
afflictions with a most incomparable patience. In the evening he returned to
the House, and was Conducted, by William, to the same place wherein Darby had
formerly been secured, which he liked so well, that he resolved, during his
stay there, to trust only to it, and go no more into the Royal Oak, as it was
thenceforward called, where he could not so much as sit at ease. And now,
supposing himself possessed of a hopeful security, he desired William to shave
him, and cut the hair of his head, as short on the top of his crown as the
Cizers would do it, only leaving some about the ears, according to the Country
mode; Carless, who stood by, told him, William was but a mean Barber: to which
he replied, he was no competent Judge of that, in regard he was never shaved
before. He bad William burn the hair, which was the only Command he was
disobedient to, during his whole attendance upon the King: for he reserved a
good part of it, and kept it as a civil Relick, with some whereof he afterward
pleasured several persons of Quality.

Humphry Penderil being, on the Saturday following, at Shefnil, whither he went
to pay some Taxes, to one Captain Broadeway; at whose House he met with a
certain Colonel of the Rebels, who was then newly come from Worcester in
pursuit of the King: and being informed that he had been at White-Ladies, and
that Humphry was a near Neighbor to the place, and had some Relations lived in
the House, he examined him strictly, laying before him the penalty of
concealing him, which was death without mercy, and the reward promised for the
discovering of him, which was 1000 l. certain pay. But so fixed was his Loyalty,
that neither fear of Punishment, nor hope of Reward, was able to tempt him to a
breach of that trust which the King had placed in him and his Relations; but he
pleaded ignorance, and so was dismissed: And at night acquainted the King with
the whole passage; at the relating whereof, and considering the price set upon
his head, he looked somewhat dismayed, as having trusted his Life in the hands
of such poor men, who might peradventure, for such a Sum as that, be perverted
from their fidelity; which Humphry perceiving, was extremely grieved with his
rashness, in acquainting the King so unadvisedly therewith: But Carless
assuring him, that although it was 100000 l. yet he would engage his Soul for
their honesty; and Humphry backing it with several solemn Protestations, he was
pretty well satisfied. That night Richard's Wife, whom he was pleased to call
his Dame Joan, provided some Chickens for his Supper, (a Dainty he had not
lately been acquainted with) and a little Bed put into the secret place for him
to lie on, some of the Brothers being by turns continually upon duty, watching
the several Avenues of the House, and the Road-way, thereby to prevent the
danger of a surprise.

After Supper, the Colonel asked him, What Meat he would please to have
provided for the Morrow, being Sunday? He told him, That he could wish they had
some Mutton, if it might be had; which was somewhat difficult, in regard it was
thought dangerous for William to go to any Market to buy it, since his
Neighbors all knew he used not to buy any such Meat for his own Diet, and so
it might have begot a suspicion in them, of his having strangers in his House;
But the Colonel, willing to satisfy his Sovereign's desire, early, on
Sunday-Morning, repaired to Mr. William Stanton's Sheep-Coat, who ren^ed some
of Boscobel-Ground, and having chosen out one of the best Sheep, struck him
with his Dagger, and ordered William to carry him home.

His Dormitory being none of the best, nor his Bed the easiest, he got up
pretty early on Sunday-Morning, and having, near the secret place where he lay,
the convenience of a Gallery to walk in, he was observed to spend some time in
his Devotions; and after his coming down into the Parlour, his Nose fell a
bleeding, which put them all into a great fright, till they were pacified by
his telling them, it often did so.

As soon as the Mutton was well cold, William cut it up, and bringing a Leg of
it into the Parlour, the King called for a Knife and a Trencher, and having cut
some of it into ^ollops, and pricked them with a Knive's point, called for a
Frying Pan, and very artificially cooked them himself, of which, when they were
ready, he eat very heartily; the Colonel in the mean time officiating as the
Under-Cook, (which he looked upon as a great Honor too,) making the Fire, and
turning the Collops in the Pan: Which Passage being, after their safe arrival
in France, called to mind, and merrily reflected upon, he proposed it as a
Problemetical Question, Whether Himself, or the Colonel, were the Master-Cook
at Boscobel? And the supremacy was judged of right to belong to him. The other
Brothers were, in the mean time* applied in their several stations, either
scouting abroad, to learn Intelligence, or upon some other necessary Service;
But it so pleased God, that, although the Soldiers had some Intelligence of his
Majesty's having been at White-ladies, and knew that he was gone thence* yet
they never searched the House, nor that of Boscobel.

He spent some part of that Lord's day in reading in a pleasant Arbor, he met
withal in Boscobel-Garden, planted upon a Mount, wherein there was a stone
Table, and Seats about it, which he very much commended for its retiredness:
And having understood by John Penderil, that the Lord Wilmot was at Mr.
Whitgrave's House, he sent him thither, to let him know, he was well, and would
come himself to Mosely that night: But when John came to Mosely, he was removed
from thence to Bently; at which he was very much troubled: but, however,
acquainted Whitgrave, and Mr. Huddleston, who was then there, that the King was
returned to Boscobel, and with the ill accommodation he had there; whereupon
they both resolved to go with him to Bently, where the Lord Wilmot appointed to
meet them and the King, in a little Grove of Trees, not far from Whitgrave's
House, about Twelve or One of the Clock that Night; and ordered John to return
again to Boscobel, and acquaint the King therewith: who having not yet
recovered his late foot Journey to Madeley, was not able, without a Horse, to
Travel to Mosely; wherefore it was concluded, that he should ride upon
Humphry's Mill-horse, (he being the Miller of White-ladies Mill) which was
taken up from grass, and not accoutred with rich Trappings, or such gaudy
Furniture as would have becom'd so great a King, but with a sorry old Saddle,
and a worse Bridle.

When he was ready to mount, Carless being so well known in that Country, that
his attendance would in all probability have proved rather a disservice than
any advantage to him, he humbly took his leave of him, heartily praying for his
constant preservation; with which excuse he was so well p^eas'd, that he
afterward gave him, by Letters Patent under the Great Seal of England, by the
Name of William Carlos, which in Spanish signifies, Charles, an honorable Coat
of Arms, bearing an Oak proper, in a Field Or; a Fess-Gules, charged with Three
Regal Crowns of the Second; and for his Crest, a Civice Crown, with a Sword and
Scepter cross Saltier-wise; with this Motto, Subditus fidelis Regis and Regni
salus.

Having parted with the Colonel, he rode toward Mosely, being led thither
through By-ways, although it was Midnight, by the five Brothers, who attended at
a convenient distance, each of them having a Pike-staff, or a Bill, on their
shoulders, and some of them Pistols in their Pockets; resolving, if they should
have been questioned, or encountered, by five or six Troopers only, to have
showed their Valor, in defending him, as well as their Fidelity, in concealing
of him: He had not rid far, before he began to complain of the Horse, being
never used to ride such kind of Beasts as that was, That it was the heaviest,
dull Jade, that he ever rode on: whereupon the owner replied, somewhat beyond
the usual notion of a Miller, My Liege, can you blame the Horse for going
heavily, when he had no less than the weight of thr^e Kingdoms on his back?
When they were come to Penford-Mill, which was within two Miles of Whitgrave's
House, his Guides desired him to alight, and walk the rest of the way, the
footpath being more secure and much nearer, which he consented too; and Humphry
and George being to return with the Horse; the rest waited on him, to his
Journey's end, but having forgot, upon parting, to take his leave of those that
went back, he hastily turned, and called them to him again, and said, My
Troubles make me forget my self; I thank you all: And so having given them his
Hand to kiss, he proceeded on his Journey.

Wilmot, according to his appointment; came to the meeting place, at his hour,
and was received by Whitgrave, and conveyed to his old Chamber, but was
extremely troubled, when he found the King was not there at his prefixed time;
which made him suspect the worst, and fear that some misfortune had befallen
him; wherefore he desired Whitgrave to repair again to the place of meeting,
where they had left Huddleston to attend the King's coming; who appearing there
about two hours after his appointed time was expired, they conducted him to the
House, where that disconsolate Lord had long expected him with great
solicitude: so soon as he saw him enter, he kneeled down, and embraced his
Knees; and in requital, the King kissed him on the Cheek, and demanded somewhat
earnestly of him, what was become of Buckingham, Cleveland, and others? to
which he answered, that he could give him no account, but hoped in general,
that they were safe. Then the Lord addressing himself to Whitgrave and
Huddleston, said, Though I have hitherto concealed the Name of my Friend, yet now
I adventure to tell you, That it is my Master, your Master, and the Master of
us all: Whereupon the King gave them his Hand to kiss, and told them, that he
had received such an account, from Wilmot, of their Fidelity, that he should
never forget it, desiring to see the secret place where he was to be concealed;
which having viewed, he liked it very well. And then returning into Wilmot's
Chamber, he sat down on the Beds side, and his Nose bleeding, he plucked out
of his Pocket a Handkerchief course and dirty, being suitable to the rest of
his Apparel, which was a Leather Doublet, a pair of green Breeches, and a
Jump-Coat, (as the Country called it) of the same green, a pair of his own
Stockings, with the tops cut off, because they were embroidered, a pair of old
Shoes, cut and slashed, to give ease to his Feet, an old, gray, greasy Hat,
without a lining, and a noggen Shirt, of the coursest Linen; his Face and
Hands likewise being answerable thereunto, made of a rusty complexion, by the
help of the Walnut-leaves. Huddleston observing the courseness of his Shirt was
very troublesome to him, and hindered his rest, desired know, if he would change
it? which he being willing to do, he furnished him with a flaxen one; and
pulling off his Shoes and Stockings, carefully dried his Feet, where he found
that somebody had innocently put white Paper next his Feet, which, with going
on foot from the place where he alight, to the house, was so roul'd between his
Stockings and his Skin, that it served rather to increase than assuage their
former soreness.

Whitgrave had by this time brought up some Biscuit, and a Bottle of Sack,
whereof the King having eat of the one, and drank of the other, and finding
himself a little refreshed, said merrily, I am now ready for another march; and
if it should please God once more, to place me in the head of but Eight or Ten
Thousand Men, of one mind, and resolved to fight, I should not doubt my being
able to drive those Rogues out of my Kingdoms. It being now toward break of
day, he was desirous to take a little sleep, in order whereunto a Palate was
carried into one of the secret places, where he lay down and composed himself
to rest, but slept not so well as his Host wished he might, in regard the place
was close and inconvenient; after he had lain some time in his hole, he got up,
and was pleased to take notice of, and very familiarly salute, Mrs. Whitgrave,
Mother to him who was the owner of the house; and having his place of retreat
still ready, he diverted himself now and then in a Closet over the Porch, from
whence he could see those who passed by on the Road.

Not thinking it convenient to continue long there, he dispatched John Penderil
to Col. Lane at Bently, with directions for him to send, or bring, the Lord
Wilmot's Horses that night, about Twelve or One of the Clock, to a Field near
adjoining to Whitgrave's House, in order to his putting in execution a
Resolution he had taken up, of going Westward, under the protection of Mrs.
Jane Lane's Pass, which she had procured for her self and her man, to Bristol,
it being most probable that the Rebels would pursue him only Northward, and not
at all suspect his going into the West.

In the Afternoon, on Monday, Whitgrave having notice, that some Soldiers were
in the neighborhood, intending to apprehend him, upon information that he had
been at Worcester-Fight; he first secured the King, who was then lain down upon
Huddleston's Bed, into his place of retreat; and then, leaving open all the
Chamber-doors, he went boldly down to the Soldiers, assuring them that he had
not been from home in a Fortnight before, with which Asseveration, and the
Testimony of his Neighbors, the Soldiers were so well satisfied, that they
departed without going up the stairs at all. The old Gentlewoman being told
that Afternoon, by a Countryman, who came to her house, that he heard the King
had, upon his retreat, beaten his Enemies at Warrington Bridge, and that there
were three Kings come in to his assistance: As soon as he was gone, she went up,
and related the story to his Majesty for his divertisement; who smiling
answered, surely they were the three Kings of Cullen come down from Heaven, for
he could not imagine what other Kings they should be; at which time, looking
out at the Closet Window, he saw two Soldiers passing by on the Road, telling
Huddleston that he knew one of them to be a Highlander, and of his own
Regiment, who little imagined his King and Colonel to be so near: and thereupon
entered into some discourse with him, about the particulars of the Battle at
Worcester, who told him, that his Counsels had been sooner discovered to the
Rebels than executed by his Loyal Subjects.

On Wednesday, about one in the morning, Lane himself brought the Horses to
conduct him to Wilmot, who went the day before to Lanes House at Bently. At his
departure from Whitgrave's, he acknowledged his gratuity by returning them many
thanks, giving them directions to repair to a Merchant in London, who should
have order to furnish them with Money and means to convey them beyond the Sea,
if their entertaining of him should happen to be discovered; promising
moreover, that if ever God should restore him to his Crown, he would not be
unmindful of their civilities. And so being furnished with a Cloak and Boots,
he went to a corner of the Orchard where Lane attended him, and went with him
to Bently, where, according to his intention, he took the opportunity of her
Pass, and rode before her to Bristol, the Lord Lord Wilmot attending him at a
distance. The King being somewhat indisposed in body, complained to Mistress
Lane that his Cloak wearied him; whereupon she desired her Father, who likewise
rode with them, to carry it for him: but she had not rode far, before she met
her Brother-in-law, who demanded, if her Father must carry her man's Cloak; she
replied, to wipe off all suspicion, that it was so big, that it often
endangered the throwing her down, or otherwise she would not have been so
uncivil. And no sooner was they rid of this danger, but they met with one far
greater; for being to pass through a Town, where a Troop of Horse was drawn up,
as if on purpose to oppose their passage, he began to fear the worst; but the
Captain was very civil, and taking them for honest Travelers, (as indeed they
were,) commanded his Troop to open to the Right and Left and give them free and
quiet passage.

To intermix so many Tragical stories with a little mirth, I cannot pass by an
accident which happened to him at Leigh, which, although surrounded with so
many misfortunes, made him laugh at the conceit of it. For being left there in
the Kitchen, under the notion of a Serving-man, the Maid entered into discourse
with him, inquiring where he was born, what trade he was, how long he had lived
with Mistress Lane, and several such Question, suitable to a Kitchen Maids
curiosity; to which he replied, he was born at Brumingham and was a N^ylors
Son. But the Jack being down, she desired him to wind it up; which task he
willingly undertook, but being unskilful therein, went the wrong way about it,
and was like to have spoiled the Jack: whereupon the Maid highly incensed, (it
being usual with Cooks to be of choleric dispositions,) vented her passion in
Billingsgate terms, asking him, Where he was bred? and telling him, he was the
most ignorant fellow she ever saw in her life, that could not tell how to wind
up a Jack, with other such kind of Language as came uppermost, which being
uttered with much vehemence, made him, notwithstanding his present condition,
walk out of the Room smiling.

This Gentleman having great resort to his House, he feared it might occasion a
discovery of his Person; he seigned himself sick of an Ague, and under that
pretense, kept his Chamber all day, and came down only at nights: and that his
Disease might appear real, he desired of the Butler a Glass of Wine, who
courteously invited him into the Cellar, and there forced him to drink two or
three Healths, one to his Majesty, and another to his Mother. But at length, by
something he observed in him, notwithstanding his Disguise, he suspected him to
be the King; and thereupon falling on his knees, begged his Pardon, and assured
him he would be faithful to him in whatsoever he should command him: of which
he took little or no notice, but having drunk off his Wine went away. Whereupon
the Butler's suspicion increasing, he went up and inquired of M. Lassel, who
though angry at the Butler's inquisitiveness, yet he demanded the reason of it;
and the Butler, whispering him in the ear, told him, he believed it was the
King: upon which unexpected accident, he sent for him up, and acquainted him
with the Butlers suspicion, who though he was displeased with his not having
acquainted him first with it, yet putting confidence in him, denied it not, and
afterward found him very instrumental in his conveyance through the Country.

Being desirous to free himself from all dangers of discovery, he was desirous
to hasten his putting out to Sea; but though there lay a little Bark there,
deemed very fit for that purpose, yet the Master would for no reward be
prevailed upon to transport a single Person: whereupon, unwilling to tempt
Providence too far, he resolved to go farther West, to a Noble Gentleman's House
whom he knew to be a trusty friend, being accompanied thither by Mr. Lassell
and Mrs. Lane, where he was concealed for about a week, and at last preparation
was made for his passage. But coming to the place where it was provided, he
chanced to dine with a Colonel of the Parliament Army; whereupon, fearing that
his embarking singly might raise some suspicion in him, he rather chose to lose
the benefit of his passage, than after so many Storms and Tempests to split
upon a Rock within sight of Harbor, and therefore returned to the place from
whence he came: from whence, after about three weeks longer concealment, he was
conveyed through by-ways to a Gentleman's House in Sussex, where having
continued some few days, and the heat of the search after him being now pretty
well over, he was at last furnished with a small Vessel which took him in at
Sharrem, a little Creek in that County, and Landed him near Havre-degrace in
Normandy. When the Skipper saw him he was a little daunted, for he presently
knew him, having seen him diverse times before; but having somewhat collected
himself, he said, since he had undertaken so good a work, he was resolved to
venture hanging rather than not perform it: to which the King replied, he need
not put himself upon that hazard, for, if he pleased, he should go along with
him, where he should not want as long as he was able to provide for him.

Hamilton, Darby, Lauderdale, Gifford and the rest, having thus disposed of the
King in a way of security, marched from White-Ladies Northward, by the way of
Newport, in hope to overtake or meet General Lesley with the main Body of the
Scotch Horse; but as soon as they were got into the Road, the Lord Leviston, who
commanded his Majesty's Lifeguard, overtook them, being pursued by a Party of
Rebels: whereupon the Lords, with their followers, faced about and repelled
them. But when they were got a little beyond Newport, some of Lilburn's
Regiment meeting them in the Front, and other Rebels from Worcester pursuing
them in the Rear, themselves and Horses being very much beaten out and tired,
Darby, Lauderdale, Gifford and some others, were taken and carried Prisoners
first to Whit-Church, and then to an Inn in Banbury, from whence Gifford found
means to escape. But Darby was conveyed to Westchester, and there tried by a
pretended Court Marshal, held by a Commission from Cromwell, grounded on an
execrable Rump Act, which traitorously pretended to prohibit all correspondence
with Charles Stuart, under penalty of High Treason, loss of Life and Estate; by
which he was condemned to lose his Life, notwithstanding his just Plea, that he
had Quarter granted him by Captain Edge, who took him Prisoner: and was shortly
after Executed at Bolton in Lancashire, in a most Barbarous and unhuman manner.

Lauderdale and others were conveyed first to the Tower, and afterward to
Windsor Castle, where they continued diverse years.

But whilst the Rebels were plundering those Noble Persons whom they had taken
Prisoners, the Duke, with Leviston, Blague, Darcey May and others, forsook the
Road, and betaking themselves to a by-way, got into Cessardine Woods, not far
from Newport, where they received some refreshment at a little obscure House;
and afterward by two honest Laborers, whom they met withal in an adjoining
Wood, and to whom they communicated the misery and distress which the fortune
of War had reduced them to, were directed to places of safety. The Duke, in
imitation of his Royal Master, quitting his Horse, and delivering his George,
which was given him by the Queen Mother, to Mr. May, who having preserved it in
several eminent dangers, restored it to him again in Holland; and changing
habit with one of the Workmen, he was, in that disguise, conveyed to the House
of one Mr. Haley, at Bistrop in Nottinghamshire: Leviston and the rest, all
quitted their Horses likewise, and severally shifted for themselves.

The King being safely Landed in Normandy, he went forthwith to Diepe, where he
provided himself with such necessaries as might serve him until he came to his
Mother in the French Court; who, so soon as they heard of his safe arrival,
sent several Persons of Quality to meet him with great Pomp, as became his
Person, who received him with much gladness, and very much rejoiced at his
safety, conveying him to Paris in the Duke of Orleans his own Coach; where he
found such a welcome as his Person and Worth deserved, and as great as that
Court could express for the safety of their best Allie: and by his Mother and
the two Dukes, with as great a joy as became them upon the receiving of him
whom they once thought had been lost and perished.

These Complements being once over, he pursued his interest in Holland, by the
mediation of his Sister the Princess of Orange, and his Aunt the Queen of
Bohemia, endeavoring to prevail with them, according to their former promises,
to undertake a War against the English Parliament, which they accordingly did:
but being not able to cope with the Valor of the English, nor prevail against
that success which seemed to be entailed to the Rump in all their undertakings,
they were unsuccessful therein, and it contributed very little toward the
promoting of his designs.

The King being once again excluded out of all his Dominions, they quickly
after reduced Corn-Castle in the Isle of Guernsey, the Isle of Man, and all
other places both in England, Scotland and Ireland, which stood out for him.

Which was no sooner done, but there happened a strange alteration in the Scene
of affairs in England; for Cromwell, whose ambition was now ripe, knowing that
he could not expect a fairer opportunity to Usurp that supreme Power which he
had so long been aspiring too, in regard every one began now to grow weary of
the base actions of the Rump, whose dilatory proceedings, and apparent
intentions of perpetuating themselves, rendered them hateful to all Mankind: he
entered into their House, attended by some of his principal Officers, where
having delivered diverse reasons why, he thought, that Parliament ought to be
Dissolved, and a period put to its sitting: He commanded them, (notwithstanding
they were his Masters, and from whom he derived his Commission,) immediately to
depart, which was done accordingly; for how unwilling soever they were to obey,
yet it was now out of their Power to dispute his Authority: so that those who
had murdered one King, and refused to restore a second, were turned out of
door, and deprived of all Authority and Power, by their own Servant. Whereat
the whole Nation rejoiced, and scarce a Man grieved for their Dissolution but
themselves, every one believing, that though the Nation might not peradventure
be bettered by that change, yet it was almost impossible it should be worse:
but however, Cromwell fearing that some might be discontented with his
Proceedings, Published a large and specious Declaration, showing his Reasons
for his Dissolving of them.

But his design being only to make himself great, he did not intend to give
relief, by taking away the tyranny, but by changing of it only; and therefore
instead of that Juncto which he pulled down, set up another of his own
arbitrary election, who knowing beforehand what they had to do, after having
sat a while, resigned up their power to him, who resolving to make the best of
that resignation, pretended that the whole Supreme Power and Authority of the
three Kingdoms, both Civil and Military, was thereby in course devolved upon
him, and thereupon calling a Council of Officers, to consult about settling the
Government; they resolved, after several debates, to have a Commonwealth in a
single person, and that person should be Oliver Cromwell, by the name and style
of Lord Protector, etc. He at first seemingly refused the Dignity, although it
was the only thing he aimed at; but being pressed by the Officers of the Army,
he consented to accept of it, and was installed with great pomp in the
Chancery-Court at Westminster Hall, and shortly after concluded a Peace with
the Dutch: He was afterward importuned by his Parliament, to exchange his Title
of Lord Protector, for that of King; which he refused, and chose rather to
continue the old.

The King, when he came into France, found that Court very much embroiled, on
the account of some mis-understandings between the Prince of Conde, and other
Princes of the Blood, and the Cardinal Mazarine, which he undertook to compose,
urging his own danger to the King, and advising him to beware how he provoked
his Subjects; and urging the King's power to the Princes of the Blood, whereby
he unhappily drew upon himself the jealousies of both parties; being suspected
by the Cardinal, to be for the Princes; and by them, to take part with him,
against their interest; which they were the more induced to believe, because he
withdrew the Lorrain Forces from their Service, and employed them to reduce
Ireland; knowing, that the winning that was the most probable way for the
obtaining of England; and promising, in recompense, to make that Duke, Duke of
Ireland; but they thought he only aimed at their disappointment: upon the
account of which misinterpretations of his peaceable design, in his endeavors
to reconcile them, he was forced to retire, for some time, to St. Germans, his
Mother being scarce able to stay at the Louvre, for the unreasonable and
causless clamours of the mistaken multitude; but when their heat and fury was
over, he returned thither again, where he staid for some time longer in great
esteem with that Court, until the subtle Cardinal began underhand to make a
Peace with Cromwell; and when he could not, by all the means he used, prevent
its taking effect, he retired toward Germany, knowing that the issue of it
would be a fair complementing of him out of their Dominions, and banishing of
him out of his very exile.

Upon his arrival in Germany, he is entertained by the Elector of Cologn; and
during his stay in that Court, he had an interview with the Queen of Sweden,
whom, as the Report went, he was to have married, had he not disliked her light
and Frenchified Deportment: In the interview, he thanked her for all those
civilities which she had for his sake showed to any of his Friends, and
particularly to Montross; to which she replied, their own and his worth
deserved no less. There was present at this interview, the King's two Brothers,
the Dukes of York and Gloucester; the latter whereof was sent for by him from
Paris, upon information, that his Mother had a design to put him into the
Jesuits College, and breed him up in the Popish Religion, to which he was
always an irreconcilable Enemy, and therefore would not permit his Brother to
be brought up in it.

And so pregnant an instance of his entire love to, and resolution to defend,
the Protestant Religion, professed in the Church of England, was his
proceedings in this Affair, even in those days when there was so little hopes
to see it ever restored again, that I think it worthy of a perpetual
remembrance, and therefore shall here insert the chief circumstances relating
to it.

Having designed to take the Duke of Gloucester with him into Germany, he was
prevailed upon, by the Queen, to leave him with her at Paris, promising, that
she would not permit any force to be put upon him, for the prevailing with him
to change his Religion, but that he should be attended by those Protestant
Servants which himself had placed about him, and have free liberty to resort to
the Public Service of the Church of England, at the King's Chapel, which was
then at Sir Richard Brown's house, whom he left as his Resident in Paris.

But not long after his departure, the Duke, under pretense of weaning him from
the company of some young French Gallants, who being in the same Academy, were
grown into a more familiar conversation with him than was thought convenient,
was removed to Abbot Mountague's house, at his Abbey near Pontoise, and after he
had been there a few days, Mr. Lovel, who was his Tutor, going to Paris for one
day only upon business designedly contrived, as was suspected, by the Abbot;
during his absence, he was vehemently pressed, by the Abbot, with all the
strongest Motives, Spiritual or Temporal, that he thought might prevail upon
him, to turn Roman Catholic; and having no Protestant near him at that time to
advise withal, but Mr. Griffin of his Bedchamber, a Gentleman about his own
age, both of them not being able to make much more than Thirty, he doubted not
but to prevail.

But notwithstanding the greenness of his years, such was his zeal for his
Religion, that after having made ingenious Replies to all the Abbots Arguments,
he told him, that he very much admired how he durst make that attempt upon him,
knowing that the Queen had engaged her word to the King, that no change of his
Religion should be endeavored; And telling him, that for his own part he was
resolved not to incurr the King's displeasure, by neglecting to observe his
Royal Command, whereby he expressly forbid him to listen to any Arguments which
should be used with him for the change of his Religion; And that as to the
specious Pretenses of making him a Cardinal, or procuring of him to be advanced
to the English Throne, he did with indignation and contempt, deride and reject
them, complaining withal of his being disingeniously dealt with, by his being
thus assaulted in the absence of his Tutor, whom the King had placed over him,
and who, he believed, could easily refute the strongest of his Arguments:
Which, upon his return, he did so fully, that it was thought convenient to
remove the Duke back again to Paris, where he was permitted to resort to the
King's Chapel, and enjoy the free exercise of his Religion for the present,
though it was not long that he did so; for after some little time, the Queen
owned the attempt done on him, to be with her own approbation, declaring, that
she could not but endeavor (notwithstanding her Promise to the King, that he
should not be forced) to have her Son showed the right way to Heaven, and to
have that way proposed to him, which she thought most requisite for the guiding
him thereunto: And that she might, notwithstanding that repulse, prevail upon
him by degrees, his Protestant Tutor was put from him, and himself hurried out
of Paris in great have, thereby to deprive him of the assistance of any
Protestant, and conveyed to Mr. Croft's house, but under the care of Abbot
Mountague, none of his Servants, but Griffin, being permitted to attend him.

The News whereof did deeply affect all the Loyal Protestant Exiles then in
Paris, but especially the Lord Hatton, who understanding how violently that
young Prince was persecuted for his Religion, he consulted with that famous
Confessor, for the Church of England, Dr. Cousins, then Dean of Peterborough
and Chaplain to his Majesty, and since the King's Restoration, Bishop of
Durham, who thereupon drew up what Arguments and Instructions he thought
convenient, to fortify the Duke in that violent assault: And knowing how
strictly he was guarded from the access of any Protestant, he being by his Lady
related to the Abbot, went to give him a visit; but his design was soon guessed
at, and though he obtained, for that time, access to the Duke, yet he was so
carefully watched, that it was not without much difficulty, that he
unperceived, conveyed to him the Instructions that he had prepared for him, and
was forced, for the future, to vary his stratagems, to procure farther Advices
to be from time to time delivered to him.

And so narrowly was the Duke eyed, by the Popish Spies set over him, and the
Priests, who were uncessantly torturing of him with their pressures to change
his Religion, that he had no opportunity to peruse any of those Papers sent
him; so that he was constrained to deliver them to Griffin, who in the Night,
as he lay in his Bedchamber, acquainted him what the scope and tendency of
them was; by the advantage whereof, through the assistance of almighty God, he
did so resolutely withstand all the violent shocks of his Persecutors, that
they thereupon resolved not only to remove Griffin, but to shut up the Duke in
the Jesuits College.

The King being informed of all those Proceedings, immediately used all
possible endeavors for his relief, and sent an expostulatory Letter to the
Queen his Mother, and laid his Commands on all the most eminent of his
Protestant Subjects there, to be to the utmost of their power aiding and
assisting to him in that great Distress; and sending another Letter likewise to
the Duke himself, which was attempted some days before he was removed to the
Jesuits College, to be delivered to him by Sir George Ratcliff; but though he
was admitted to his presence, yet he could find no opportunity to deliver him
the Letter with privacy, therefore left it with Griffin, to be conveyed to him.

In which Letter he reminded him of the strict Command that he had left with
him at his departure, to continue firm in his Religion; as also the vanity of
their Motives, the emptiness of their Promises, together with the last Charge
of their dead Father, which he solemnly gave him with the entail of his
Blessing annexed thereunto; telling him withal, that if he suffered himself to
be perverted in his Religion by any inticements whatsoever, or put himself into
the Jesuits College, he had then the last Letter, that ever he should receive
from him, and must never look to see his Face again.

As soon as the young Duke had, with an unexpressible joy, received this
Letter, he first, with all possible have, transcribed a Copy of it, and and
sent it immediately to the Queen, begging her leave to repair to Paris, both
upon the account of those Commands of the King and the Duke of York's being
then returned from the French Army. But the Queen, unwilling to desist from the
prosecuting what she had began, sent him word, she could not cease wishing his
so great and eternal good, as to change his Religion would be, to which she
would not force him; but yet advised him however, to hearken to what the Abbot
should farther deliver to him; which was, that he should at least be willing to
go to the Jesuits College, where he should have as much liberty in all things,
as himself could desire. It being still their resolution to have forced him
thither, if he refused, had it not been prevented by the arrival of the Duke of
Ormond, whom the King dispatched thither from Germany, with Letters and
Instructions, for the rescuing of him from his Popish adversaries; and had he
staid but four days longer, before his arrival at Paris, he had come too late,
in regard the Duke had certainly been within that time shut up in the College,
from whence there had been no possibility of retrieving him; For the French
Court had so zealously espoused that Affair, that he found himself necessitated
to make use of all the Prudence and Policy he was Master of, before he could
accomplish the business that he came about: but finding that it was not
altogether too late, he so effectually pursued those Instructions he received
from the King, that he procured the Duke's return to Paris, and liberty to
enjoy the free Exercise of his Religion: But no sooner did he come to the
French Court, to pay his respects to the Queen, but the Queen Mother of France,
and Cardinal Mazarine, pressed him with all the Allurements imaginable, to turn
Roman Catholic; telling him, that they looked upon him as a Child of France,
and that it was for his advantage, and the opportunity they should thereby have
of doing him the greater good, that induced them to move him thereunto; adding,
that since his Father was dead, he ought to obey his Mother's Commands in all
things. To which, observing the King's Instructions, not to engage in any
Dispute with them, he replied only in general terms, That he resolved to obey
his Mother as much as any Son could, or ought to do, and thereby dissengaged
himself from any farther pursuit at that time.

But all the allurements of the French Court, and the utmost severities used
toward him by his Mother, were not able in the least to shake his firmness in
his Religion; which the Queen with great indignation perceiving, some few days
after took him apart: and having, first, with all the sweetness imaginable,
declared to him, how great and tender those affections she had for him were,
and how much it grieved her, that very love it self should compel her to
proceed toward him with some seeming severity. She told him that, for his ease
sake, she would shorten the time of his Trial; and therefore, proposing to him,
all the good she aimed at in that design, the duty he owed her, and the
disability of the King to maintain him, she commanded him immediately to
withdraw into his Lodgings, and there give one hearing more to Abbot Mountague,
and after, having sequestered himself, for a while, from all manner of
diversion, to ponder seriously upon what she and he said to him, and that night
either bring or send her a full and final answer.

Whereupon the Duke, taking the advantage of the little interim of clearing the
Room, sent Griffin to the Marquess of Ormond, desiring him to repair to him
immediately, that he might advise with him, how he ought to deport himself, as
occasion should serve, in that intended privacy with his Mother and the Abbot.
But Griffin not presently finding the Marquess, the Abbot was there before him,
who having expaciated upon what the Queen had but briefly hinted, he pressed the
Duke for his final answer, which he refused to give, 'till he had first
consulted with the Marquess: whereupon the Abbot for the present withdrew,
desiring to be sent for so soon as he was come, telling him, that if it were
not in an hours time, he would return again, whether sent for or not. But it
was not long after his being withdrawn, that the Marquess came; and the Duke
having acquainted him with their Proposals, and demanded his advice and
directions therein, was quickly resolved what answer to make, but having been
so long harrassed, was desirous to take a little breath, and therefore
neglected to send presently to the Abbot, and went out of his Lodging, into the
Court, to divert himself: but no sooner was he gone than the Abbot came, and
missing him, sought up and down the Court for him, and having at last found
him, severely rebuked him for neglecting his Mothers command, and his
instructions, which was, seriously to ponderate what he had said, (...) for
neglecting to send for him according to appointment.

Well, Sir, said the Duke, I have seriously considered of all that has been
said to me, and my final answer thereunto is, I am resolved to continue firm in
my Religion. Then, replied the Abbot, I am commanded, from the Queen your
Mother, to tell you, that she charges you to see her face no more. At which
dismal expression, the Duke being not a little moved, begged with great
earnestness, that he might be permitted, at least, to implore her parting
blessing, till he could in time prevail for her pardon, but could not obtain
it, though he endeavored it again the next morning, (being Sunday, before she
went to her Devotions,) by the intercession of his Brother, the Duke of York,
who did, with great tenderness, compassionate his condition, and with great
earnestness move on his behalf. But the Queen proved inexorable, not only to
him, but to all others who spoke on his behalf; nor would she intimate her
pleasure to him by any other Person than the Abbot, who solicited him again,
aggravating the peril of his Mothers displeasure: and advising him, at that
instant, being the most proper time, as she was going to Mass at her Monastery,
to apply himself to her, assuring him, that she had those Proposals to make to
him, which would set his heart at rest, though, he said, he could not name
them. To which the Duke replied, if it were so, I could apply my self to her
well enough, for my heart can have no rest, except in the free exercise of my
Religion, but I fear her Propositions will not, I am sure yours never tended to
give me any ease or quiet; at which very instant, the Queen passed by in her
Coach toward her Nunnery: whereupon the Duke approached toward her, and
attempted to beg her Blessing, but was with great indignation rejected.
Whereat showing himself very much discomposed, the Abbot came up to him,
demanding what it was her Majesty had said to him, that had put him into so
great disorder; to which he briskly replied, what she said I may thank you for,
Sir, and therefore it is but reason, that what my Mother said to me, I should
say to you, Be sure I see your face no more, and so turned about and left him:
whereupon the Abbot calling after him, said, Whither are you going, good Sir?
To whom, looking over his shoulder, he answered, to Church, whither he
immediately repaired, with a sad and dejected countenance, which did much abate
the joy of the Congregation, who were much pleased to see him accompany his
Brother the Duke of York thither; but they partook with him in his sorrow, when
they understood that, after Sermon, he was to seek where to get a Dinner, for
which he must send to the Cooks, or fast, for there was a very strict
Prohibition given to all the Officers in his Mothers Court, that they should
not furnish him with any Provisions or necessaries.

That night, after Evening Prayer, he had hopes to enjoy one moment of
satisfaction, by conversing with his Sister the Princess Henrietta, afterward
Duchess of Orleans, during his Mothers absence; but as soon as the young
Princess heard the news of his designed adventure, she was so frighted into
shrieks and tears, that she cried out, Oh God, my Brother! Oh me, my Mother!
What? I am undone for ever: What shall I do?

Which as soon as the Duke heard, he retired, not being willing his dear Sister
should, by her kindness to him, purchase her Mothers displeasure. In this
disconsolate condition he went to his Lodging; when it was nine a Clock at
night, his Groom came to know what he should do with his Horses, for the Queens
Comptroller was come to him, with a charge, to remove them instantly: whereupon
the Groom pleaded, it was then too late, and that on the morrow it would be
time enough, but the Comptroller replied, he should then be put out of his
place ever the morning.

The next day the Sheets were taken off his Bed, finding therefore that he
could not be permitted to stay at the Palace-Royal, he thought, until he could
provide necessaries for his Journey into Germany, to retire to the House of Mr.
Crofts, (afterward Lord Crofts, near Paris; whereof the Queen hearing, she
checked Mr. Crofts for being willing to receive him, with which he acquainted
the Duke, but submits however to his pleasure.

In this strait the Duke betook himself to the advice of that faithful Servant
to his Family, and zealous Protestant, the Lord Hatton, by whose judicious
instructions, he had received much satisfaction in this his distressed
condition; who, so soon as the Duke had made known to him, that he was not only
turned out of his Mothers House, but that all persons, who had any dependency
upon her, were forbidden to receive or assist him: his Lordship told him, if
his Highness would please to honor his House with his presence, he should
there be received with all the dutiful regard that could be paid to him by so
ancient and faithfully devoted Servant of his Royal Family; And with an
Entertainment as suitable to his Quality, as the remains of that Fortune he had
spent in his Father's Service would afford.

But this the Duke, out of great modesty, at first declined, alleging the
great hazard, which he knew he would thereby run, of having his Estate again
sequestered in England, as well as by incurring the displeasure of the French
Court, endanger his being exiled that Kingdom, for his kindness to him, as he
had been that of England, for his Service to his Father; and, perhaps, be
endangered in his person too, by the fury of the Rabble, who might,
peradventure, be animated by some enraged Papist, for thus disappointing them,
of making a Proselyte of him as they boasted they had done, and given Public
Thanks for it in diverse of their Churches.

But his Lordship assured him, that as he had hitherto spent the greatest part
of his Life and Fortune in the Service of his Royal Family, and the defense of
the Protestant Religion, so he would willingly sacrifice the remainder of both
on so honorable an occasion as that; with which hearty invitation, he was so
pleased, that he took no farther thoughts whither to go, but concluded to
remain with him.

Being thus gone from the Palace-Royal, the Queen Mother of France came
immediately thither, to try once more, if she could prevail with him, to change
his Religion; and as soon as she came, sent her Son, the Duke of Anjou, to
visit him; who returned with the News, that he was not to be found: but as soon
as it was known where he was, she sent the Marquess of Plessis, to persuade him
to comply with his Mother's advice; For the effecting whereof, he exercised all
his Parts and Elocution, with the greatest earnestness; and affirming, that
since the death of his Father, the Queen his Mother, had sole Power and
Authority over him; disputing, whether the King his Brother, as his Sovereign,
had an equal right to dispose of him.

And the Discourse growing somewhat public, the Marquess of Ormond, and the
Lord Hatton, who were then likewise present, arguing in the Duke's defense; the
French Marquess finding himself over-match'd by their Reasons, in great passion
returned, without the success suspected at the Palace-Royal, where the French
Queen stayed very late, till he came back: whose Report, when both Queens
heard, they were then so fully satisfied in the Duke's firmness to his
Religion, that after that time, no considerable attempt was made on him, although
he continued for near two Months there; being nobly entertained all that time
by the Lord Hatton, until, through his and the Marquess of Ormond's interest,
Necessaries were provided for his going into Germany, to the King.

From the interview of the Queen of Sweden, which was held at a small Village
near Frankford, (at the same time when the Fair was there) he returned, with
great satisfaction, to Cologn, where he was welcomed with all imaginable
demonstrations of Joy, by the Magistrates and the whole City; where he had not
staid long, before the Duke of York came to him, being complemented away from
France, upon the conclusion of the Treaty with Cromwell, notwithstanding his
incomparable worth, discovered in the Court, and in the Camp; where he behaved
himself so well, that the Duke of Longueville was willing to have matched his
Daughter to him, although he was in exile; and the Marshal Turein commended him,
in the time of his sickness, to the French King, as the fittest person to be
Commander in chief of all his Forces.

And so desirable was his company ^^ong all Princes, that Don Lewis de (...),
and Don John of Austria migh^y importuned him to come over to ^^em in Flanders,
which invitation he ^^cepted of, and he repaired thither, (...) to promote his
own cause, and (...) King of Spains affairs; in order ^^reunto he commanded all
his ^^glish, Scotch and Irish Subjects in those ^^rts to be listed for his
Service, which ^^ounted to about three or four thou^^^d, besides the two
Regiments of (...) and Gloucester, and maintained a ^^^nstant correspondence
with his ^^iends in England, which Cromwell sus^^cted, but had no certain
knowledge ^^ereof, having now no Mannings in the ^^ngs Court to betray his
Majesty's se^^ets, wherefore he contrived a Plot, ^o which by his Emissaries he
ensna^^d the reverend Dr. Huet, Sir Henry (...) and others, and had them tried
^^fore a High Court of Justice, and ^^ndemned and executed for that pre^^ded
Conspiracy. But though he ^as represented to the City by Cromwell (...) be
twenty thousand strong, when he ^as acquainting them with the preten^^nded Plot
against him; yet he was not able to attempt any thing upon (...) own account,
in regard his Forces we^^ but inconsiderable for number, (...) therefore he
joined them with t^^ Spaniards, and at one attempt to (...) the Siege of
Dunkirk were defeat* and almost all slain, being deserted (...) the Spaniards,
who were not able to e^dure the hot charge that Cromwels S^^diers gave them,
notwithstanding (...) endeavors of the undaunted York (...) rally them, who
did Wond^^ with his own Regiment, putting (...) whole French and English Army
o^ to a disorder, and twice to a stand (...) his own Guard only, and some (...)
remnant of his overthrown Forces: (...) which defeat the Kings whole desi^^
being disappointed, he betook him^^ from his Arms to his Prayers, and a^pealed
from Earth to Heaven. Ho^ever he still remained in Flanders, (...) kept his
Court in Bruges, about (...) Leagues from Brussels. About this (...) Cromwell
being resolved to continue (...) Protectorship in his own Family, (...) the
matter so that his Parliam^^^ should earnestly Petition, solemnly ^^vise him to
name his Successor, (...) was the thing he chiefly desired, notwithstanding all
his former Oaths and Protestations against suffering the Nation to be ruled by
any single Person, which, when the King heard, he said to a Person of quality,
who was then by him, that Cromwell had certainly laid the best Foundation that
a short and troublesome reign could possibly admit of, at once to deprive him of
his just and rightful Dominions, and to settle his own Posterity in his unjust
and usurpt Authority. And when he received the news of his death, he showed an
admirable calmness and serenity of Spirit; Reason, Religion and Discretion
having such a powerful command over his passions, that though it seemed in all
probability to be a considerable step toward his Restoration, in regard his
most implacable as well as successful Enemy was now gone, yet he did not
discover any extraordinary symptoms of Joy.

But as that great alteration in England did change all the public Councels of
Europe in general, so did it likewise somewhat alter his: for, he now set up
new negotiations in most of the foreign Courts, that so he might not be
wanting to himself, whilst there were the most hopeful designs that had ever
yet been on foot in England for the promoting his Journeys. The new Protector
being looked upon as one weary of that power which was then desolv'd upon him,
in regard he knew himself to have as little ability to manage it, as he had
right to enjoy it; and was supposed not to have that implacable aversation to
the Royal Family, which his Father had always discovered. However, it was not
long before the Army thrust him from his Throne, and set up the Rump again,
which his Father had pulled down; after which there were so many alterations
and new forms of Government, that it is almost impossible to give the World a
particular account of them, every Week almost producing some new Model or
other; and there springing up some new Heads of that Hydra-Common-Wealth.

The King was not in the mean time idle, but laid out all his Interest and
Policy for the promoting his designs, and the procuring such supplies as might
encourage those Loyal Subjects that incessantly endeavored, by his
Restoration to restore their Native Country from the Paws of those Lions into
which it was fallen, and themselves to the Glorious Liberty of being ^^bject to
so great and good a Prince (...) although Holland offered fairly, (...) some
Princes with the Emperor of ^^rmany began now to pity forlorn ^^d exiled
Majesty, especially dwelling (...) a Prince of that worth, as he was ac^^unted
to be, by all those who had (...) happiness to know him; yet the ^^eatest hope
and expectation from any (...) those Foreign Affairs was, the peace ^^at was
then mediating by the Pope, be^^een the two Kingdoms of France and ^^ain,
managed by the two great Fa^^urites of each Kingdom, the Cardi^^l Mazarine and
the Count de Olivarez ^^on the Borders of St. Jean de Luz, which if it succeed,
must in all proba^^lity prove advantageous to his affairs, (...) regard both
Crowns could not upon ^^e conclusion of peace between them, ^estow their Forces
upon any service ^^at would render more to their honor ^^an that, of
endeavoring his Restau^^tion; although he rather desired to ^mploy their
Interest than their Arms, (...) intended to let England know what ^^ey might do
for him, rather then to ^ake them feel the effects of any thing ^one by them:
And although he expected (...) should have an Army ready to good the agreement;
yet he intende^ they should prevail more by their Reasons than their Forces.

The managing of this Treaty between the two Kingdoms, being a business that so
much concerned him (...) particular, as well as Europe in genera^ he
condescended to negotiate there^^ in his own person, notwithstanding (...) had
Residents in most Christian Kingdoms. And in order thereunto betoo^ himself
first to one Court, and then (...) another, (the Duke of York acco^^^ panying
him) incognito, being sensib^^ of the danger which might accrue (...) to his
cause and Person, upon the scr^ples of a solid interview, it being gen^rally
observed, the interviews of Princes are unhappy. And by the way, (...) he
passed through France, he gave a (...) sit to his Mother, intending before
(...) had undertook the negotiation of (...) public reconciliation between
(...) two Kingdoms, to practice a priva^^ one between himself and her, who ha^
declared herself very much disple^^^^ with him, upon the account of his
pr^ceedings in the business of the Duke (...) Gloucester; which having
accomplishe^ and finding that that Court did (...) give him the honor due to
his Person, nor an entertainment suitable to his expectations; He returned with
his Brother to Diep in Normandy, going thither by Post, with such have and
privacy, that some men's hopes and others fears imagined they were gone over
into England; an attempt at that time too dangerous for so wise and politic a
Prince to adventure on. From Diep he removed toward the Frontiers of Spain, by
the way of Roan, where he was nobly treated by Mr. Scot an English Merchant,
and entertained with a Sermon suitable to his present condition; and from
thence he went by post to Bajonne, accompanied by the Marquess of Ormond, and
so toward the two Ministers of State that were negotiating the Peace between
the two Crowns at St. Jon de Luz. The news of this approach did no sooner reach
Don Lewis's Lodgings, but he prepares to meet him with as much splendor, as if
our Sovereign had been his Majesty of Spain, or himself an English Subject; for
when he met him, he immediately alighting from his Horse, and kneeling (though
in a very dirty and inconvenient place) embraced and kissed his Majesty's
Knees, and walked before him bareheaded to the place he had ordered to be made
ready for him, which was the best Lodging the Town afforded; where the next day
he received a formal visit from that sly, close and reserved Politician
Cardinal Mazarine, whom he entertained with such a discreet wariness, as if he
designed to let him know (and those that saw him understood well enough
thereby) that he understood the walking Cabala almost as well as he did himself.

Never were any of his great affairs so well carried on as that was, which he
managed himself; for by the advantage of his own incomparable Prudence and sage
Experience, together with his powerful Majesty and Presence, he so far
prevailed in his negotiations there, that notwithstanding Lockharts close
applications in behalf of his Masters, he not only prevented any article that
was offered and pressed in favor of his rebellious adversaries of England, but
also procured himself to be included by Spain, as the most honorable Ally in
the intended Peace, and obtained a promise from both those Favorites, that
they would in pursuance of their Masters friendship with him, descended as soon
as possible, to treat of such particulars that might be proposed, as the most
suitable to the promoting of his Restoration, and consult what Counsels ought
to be taken, what Men, Money and other supplys their respective Masters should
afford, and how each should be employed for the greatest usefulness to his
Service. After which he was dismissed with as much Respect and Honor as he was
received.

Whilst this Treaty was managing by the two Favorites; the Duke of York was,
in consideration of his great worth, and the Service he had done for Spain,
offered the honor of being made Constable of Castile, and Lord high Admiral of
Spain, which he handsomely refused; that Prince having a peculiar way of denying
requests as pleasantly to some, as he grants them to others. And indeed it was
at that time prudence in him to wave any courtesy that might be proffered by
Spain, or any other Popish Court, least it might somewhat have retarded his
Brothers affairs in England, by rendering him suspected of too near compliance
with the Catholic Interest, and have rendered the attempts of those who were
there, endeavoring to clear both his and the Kings Integrity, and Constancy to
the reformed Religion? the better to prepare the way for their
Re-establishment, vain and fruitless, especially since their ^mplacable Enemies
made it their chief design and business to abuse the Credulous with false
surmizings, and unjust suspicions of their faithfulness to the Protestant
Religion and Interest, to which they had adhered with so much resolution and
constancy that neither smiles nor frowns, the prospect of the greatest
enjoyments, nor the fear of the heaviest sufferings; the highest Favors from
Rome, nor the basest Affronts from England, could tempt them to the least
thought of disloyalty to it.

The King having finished his negotiations at the Treaty of St. Jan de Luz to
his great satisfaction, returned with his Brother the Duke of York through
France to Brussels, only staying some short time at Carentia and Paris with the
Queen his Mother. And to make his advantage of these stirs and continual
alterations in the Government of England, sine the death of Cromwell, which
naturally tended toward the promoting his Restoration (whereby the Nation
could only be settled) notwithstanding they were all designed to prevent and
hinder it; he sent over diverse Commissions to diverse worthy and loyal
Persons, to raise Forces on his behalf, and otherwise to act as they saw
convenient for the promoting that grand design; by virtue of which Commissions,
a general Plot was laid for the raising of Forces in all the Countyes in
England, to declare for him. But some part of that business being entrusted to
the management of the Lady Howard, Daughter to the Earl of Barkshire, (who,
though loyal enough, yet being in regard of her Sex, incapable of secrecy) it
was soon discovered; and so London, which was the main place, secured, and the
most considerable Persons that were to have done any thing therein, were
disabled by imprisonment or otherwise; several Troops of Horse likewise
commanded into Kent and Surrey, and the raisi^g the Militia, hastened in every
County, so that no considerable party was able to appear any where, except in
Cheshire, where most of the Nobility and Gentry of that County and Lancashire
were up, under the command of Sir George Booth with whom and General Monk from
Scotland was to have joined, if they had not been so suddenly suppressed. And in
North Wales were most of the Inhabitants assembled together under the command
of Sir John Owen and Sir Thomas Midleton, who declared their just sense of the
grievances of that Commonwealth, whereof they were Members; and their
resolution to have the Laws, Liberties and Properties of the People established
by a free Parliament, which was all that was intended at that time by those
commissioned by his Majesty, in regard designs were to be discovered gradually,
and by piece meals only, as occasion and opportunity should require.

Notwithstanding the Rump had prevented most of those designed insurrections,
yet that of Sir George Booth, who was one of their secluded Members, appeared
very formidable, wherefore they resolve with all imaginable Speed to suppress
it; and in order thereunto, having first proclaimed Sir Thomas Booth, Sir
Thomas Middleton, Coll. Warren, and Major General Egerton, and all the rest of
their Adherents, Traitors to the Commonwealth, they commanded Lambert to march
with three Regiments of Horse, the like number of Foot, and some Dragoons to
reduce him and his Forces to their obedience, ordering some militia Forces and
some Regiments out of Ireland, under Zaachy and Axtell to join with him for his
assistance therein. Coll. Desbrough being likewise sent by them with the same
command, and some Forces into the West, to redeem Midleton, and a Proclamation
issued out against Mordant the Earl of Lichfield, Major General Brown, and
William Compton, Sir Thomas Levinthorp, and Mr. Fensher, the three last whereof
surrendering themselves within the time prefixed therein, the two first fled, and
the major General waiting another opportunity absconded himself at Stationers
Hall, where he was preserved by the faithful Secrecy of Captain Barrough. And
the Earl of Samford, who was likewise engaged in that business was taken at his
own house in Arms, and carried Prisoner to Lester, which was at that time the
condition of many other Loyal Gentlemen, the Earl of Oxford being committed
Prisoner to the Sergeant at Arms, the Lords Faulkland and Dellaneer to the
Tower, whither not long after was brought the Lords Faulconbridge, Bellasis,
Chesterfield, Castleton and Howard.

Lambert in his march toward the confines of Chester made no very great haste,
being desirous to make a lasting war of it, whereby he hoped to settle himself
the better in the affections of the Soldiers, and thereby tread the step that
Cromwell had done before him; however such methods were taken by his Masters,
that very few accessions of Strength came in to Sir George, more then what were
at first numbered, who nevertheless bravely resolved to abide the fortune of
battle, and justify the equity of their cause by the dint of Sword. In order
thereunto they drew up near Nantwich, (whether Lambert was advancing) in the
adjoining meadows, having the Rivers before them, and the Bridges strongly
guarded; but Lamberts Horse and Foot resolutely faling on together at the
Bridge, the post was soon gained, and the fight as quickly over, the chief
defense being made by Memorgan, a loyal and valiant Gentleman (who with some
Horse of his Troop) who presently died of his wounds. There were in the flight
about 3 hundred killed, and five hundred taken prisoners, among whom was most
of the Gentlemen and Officers. Lambert having obtained this victory, presently
advanced with his Army to Cheshire, (where Colonel Croxton still held out the
Castle) and had it presently delivered; from whence he advanced to Liverpool
which was yielded likewise by Coll Ireland, and so was Chink and Harding
Castles, whereby that whole design perished and came to nothing.

Sir George himself had made his escape out of the Field, and got away,
accompanied with four of his Servants only in disguise, but being discovered at
his Inn in Newport-pannel, was taken, and secured. One Gibbons who immediately
posted away to give the Rump an account of it, was highly rewarded for that
acceptable news, and so were two or three others, who were sent before from
Lambert with the particulars of the Cheshire defeat; when he was brought up to
London, Fleetwood was ordered to meet him with a guard at High-gate, and secure
him to the Tower, where he was the next day examined by Vane and Haz^erick as
to his design and accomplices, b^t such was his reservedness and resolution,
that notwithstanding their suspicion, that the restoring of the King was at the
bottom of it, in regard Monk was said to be privately engaged with him in the
same design. Ormond being reported to have been seen about that time at his
House at Dalkeith, that they could get nothing out of him.

When this design was about to be put in execution, the King withdrew himself
privately from Brussels, and lay privately upon the coast of Brittany about St.
Malloes, to take shipping for England, upon the first good event of those loyal
undertakings of his faithful Friends and Subjects; Kent or Essex being designed
for the place of his landing, one Turene the French General having engaged to
wait upon him, if he would command it; but the news of this unhappy defeat
reaching his Royal Ears, which had been too long accustomed to such unfortunate
and unsuccesful stories, he returned again to Brussels; resolving for the
present to give over the prosecuting of his Right by the sword, and attend the
good effects of the Treaty between France and Spain.

But being informed that affairs in England were as unsettled as before, and
that the Rump, and the Army wholly applied themselves to undermine and subvert
each other; he would not wholly desist from attempting to carry on his interest
there, by the help and assistance of his Friends. And therefore wisely
considering that Monk, who was then General in Scotland, had formerly been in
his Fathers Service, wherein he was taken Prisoner, and was thought to embrace
the Parliament interest, only because his Ransom was neglected, and that during
the whole time of his serving under them and the Protector, he had not
discovered any particular Spleen or Malice to his Person, but had in all things
carried himself as a Soldier of Fortune only, who fought for his pay; he
conceived there might be some probable hopes of gaining him to his side, if a
dexterous application was made to him, in regard he had not that guilt which
others had contracted, either by murdering of his Father, or the malignity they
had discovered against himself, to render him jealous and suspicious of him.
And therefore resolving as near as possible to make use of the most peaceable
and bloodless means to recover his lost Dominions, he ordered Sir John
Greenvile, who was one of those Commissioners that resided at London for his
service, to find out some way to treat secretly with him. But before Sir John
would proceed therein, he thought it convenient to inform him by whom, and in
what manner he had designed to do it, which he did in a Letter written in
Ciphers, and directed to Sir Edward Hide at Brussels, with whom only he was by
the Kings order to correspond; wherein he proposed the sending of Mr. Nicholas
Monk who was Minister of his own Parrish of Kelkhampton in Cornwell, a living
of about three hundred pound per Annum, which he had freely bestowed on him,
without any other design therein, than only to oblige him to serve his King and
Country whenever he had occasion to employ him in any thing that might tend to
both their Good, having even then an eye to the General in Scotland, to whom he
was Brother, which contrivance the King very well approved of, and left the
whole management of the business to his secrecy and discretion. Whereupon he
sent for Monk out of Cornwel^ and having first obliged him to secrecy,
accquainted him with the Kings Commission, to treat with his Brother, the
General, and his design of sending him into Scotland, to manage that treaty on
the Kings behalf, and gave him a Commission according to the Kings directions
(to offer his Brother, in case he would undertake that commendable and glorious
work of restoring the King to his Crown and Dignity) leave to set down his own
conditions, and assure him that the King had promised upon his Royal word to
perform them.

Monk being fraught with hopes and instructions, willingly undertook the happy
Embassy, embarquing himself immediately for Scotland, and having a prosperous
gale, arrived in a few days at Leith, and from thence to Dulkeith, where his
Brother the General resided. And that he might remove all suspicion of the
design of his coming, from those about the General, he pretended that the
intent of his voyage was only to fetch away his Daughter Mary, who at that time
lived there in the Generals Family, in order to the bestowing her in marriage
to her advantage, hoping that his Brother would make some con^iderable addition
to her Fortune. But the General being at his first arrival engaged in business,
could not entertain him himself, and therefore sent him under the conduct of an
highland Footboy, to his Chaplains Chamber, which was Dr. Price, who received
him with that Courtesy that became him, in regard of his relation to his
Master, and so soon as he had made him sit down, began to enquire what news he
had brought from England about Sir George Booth, and the rest of those loyal
Gentlemen that were engaged with him, to whom Monk made such replies as were
suitable to his several questions, and then having been assured before he left
England of the Dr's. faithfulness and loyalty, he adventured to acquaint him
with the design of his coming thither at that time, and desired his directions
how he might, to be with the greatest advantage to the Kings affairs, break
that business, and open his message from Sir John to the General, who thereupon
told him that his Brother would expect to be satisfied of his Secrecy, as well
as of his Fidelity, before he would engage himself in such a hazardous affair
as that was, since it was necessary that a business of that importance, should
sleep in as few Breasts as possible, and he might put himself, the General and
his whole negotiation into a very great hazard, should he rely too much upon
the Characters given him in England of the secret loyalty of any persons
amongst them, advising him therefore to make no more such rude and unadvised
communications of his Embassy, and to acquaint his Brother with his having
related it to him, assuring ^him for his encouragement, that he verily believed
that his Brother would willingly embrace any fair overture for the redeeming of
his Country from the slavery of the Army. His Wife who had always a great love
and veneration for the King, having prepared him to appear in his behalf, when
the first opportunity should offer it self, and the Soldiers, who troubled not
their heads much about Religion, and abbetting of parties, but only fought for
their pay, having a general love and esteem for him, as looking upon him to be
a good Soldier, and a discreet Commander, under whom they might safely engage;
he might at any time make himself a good party amongst them, when he should
judge it fit and safe to apppear.

Mr. Monk having in the Evening an oppportunity to keep private with his
Brother, acquainted him with the end of his coming, and the encouragement
proposed by Sir John, if he would undertake the work, assuring him that he had
seen the Kings Commission directed to Sir John for the impowring of him, to
make those offers, wherein he promised, upon the word of a King, to perform
them: Which upon mature deliberation he highly approved of, and the more,
because he understood that the Presbyterians and the Lord Fairfax would be
engaged with him; with whom he ever after maintained a private correspondence;
and therefore from that time took up a resolution to endeavor his Masters
Restoration; relying upon the Faith and Integrity of Sir John Greenvile, and
confiding in the Kings Word, as much as if he had actually received a
Commission from him, for he soon after told his Chaplain that he was resolved
to Commission the whole Scatch Nation against the English Parliament and Army,
rather than suffer himself to be taken or displaced by them; although he had at
time no other authority to do it by, then that airy commission conveyed unto
him by word of mouth from Sir John Greenvile, who had it in writing from the
King: And the happy success of that resolution was a great demonstration of the
Kings extraordinary prudence and discretion in pitching upon Monk as the
fittest person to bring about that blessed and glorious revolution; and the
wisdom of Sir John Greenvile in employing his Brother, rather than any other
Person, to manage that great and weighty Intreague.

And being informed that there was a supplication presented to the Rump by
Lambert, in the name of the Army under his command, for the bringing those to
punishment who had been actually engaged in, or offered any assistance to
Booth's Conspiracy, and for appointing a General over all their Forces in the
three Kingdoms; which inquisition had it been made, and a sequestration past
upon it, accrding to their expectation, would have yielded them more Wealth,
then all the former sales of Crown and Church Lands: He began to conclude with
himself, that he should have a fairer opportunity to put his resolutions in
practice, then he could have reasonably expected; for he easily foresaw what
was the design and intent of that supplication, and was so well pleased with
it, that he pleasantly told his Chaplain, that he perceived he should shortly
have a better Game to play, than he looked for when he first engaged himself in
the design; and that he knew Lambert to be of such a restless and aspiring
temper that he would not long suffer the Rump to sit in quiet at Westminster.

And therefore that he might the better make preparations for his future
designs, he immediately dispatched away his Brother to London in character of an
Envoy, to assure the Rump of his faithfulness and fidelity to them, and that he
was resolved to stand firm to their Interest and Authority against all
opposition whatsoever: And for the better wipeing away all suspicion of the
true intent and design of his Brothers coming, he sent his Daughter away with
him likewise.

No sooner had the General dismissed his Bother, but he received a visit from a
Scotch Noble Man, viz. the Earl of Nitsdale, who after some private discourse
with him, assured him that the King would be restored within the compass of a
very few months, without the shedding of one drop of Blood, or the hazard of a
cut Finger in the accomplishment thereof; and that he looked upon him as the
principle Instrument, by whose Wisdom and Conduct it was to be effected; which
prophettick discourse contributed very much toward his encouragment, to push
the business forward with the greater earnestness and speed.

Mr. Monk being safely arrived at London, repaired privately to Sir John
Greenvile, and gave him an account that he had delivered his message to the
General and imparted it to none else except his Chaplain only, but told him as
to the success of it, he could give him no account, being under an Oath of
secrecy. However Sir John thought that was sufficient, and therefore
immediately acquainted the King with it, who was so well satisfied therewith,
that he ordered him to wait an opportunity as soon as possible, to treat
personally with him, which he did not long after, and received a more full and
satisfactory account from him how, and in what manner he intended to proceed
therein. And for the discharging of this new Embassy to the Rump, he repaired
to Dr. Clergies, who was Brother in Law to him and the General, and Agent for
the Scotch and Irish Armies, to whom he was ordered by the General to impart
his message, to be delivered by him to the Parliament, wherewith they were so
highly pleased, that out of a Sense of the Generals supposed Fidelity, and to
require his offered kindness, (they made as it were an expiring vote of
revenge, when they saw they must be forced to yield to Lamberts ambition, and
have their usurpt Authority suffer a second Rape) wherein they constituted him
about the seventh part of a Generalissimo, which fell out very happily for the
promoting his great and generous design; for it was by Virtue of that power
that he seemed afterward to act and give forth Commissions.

And having received on the 7th of October the certain news that Lambert had by
the assistance of the Army, once more unhoused the Rump, he publicly protested
that he would not endure that unjust and arbitrary proceeding, and was resolved
therefore to reduce the Military power to the obedience of the Civil; and in
order thereunto presently entered the Stage against Lambert and his Armies
proceedings, (dispatching away the trusty adjutant Jeremy Smith, who was
afterward Knighted for his Fidelity) that afternoon to Edinburgh and Leith, to
secure those places, and under the march of such Troops of Horse on whose
Captains he could most rely; and having stopped the Packquet, which should have
gone that Night for England, he followed him the next day to Edinburgh, where
he reformed his Army, making Captain Morgan Lieftenant Colonel, and Captain
Nichols Major of his own Regiment, and the next day sent a party of Horse,
commanded by Captain Johnson, to secure Barwick, which he knew to be a place of
great importance to his new designs; which was done in the very nick of time,
for the Governor had no sooner clapped up his dissenting Officers, according to
the Generals directions, but Colonel Cobbit entered the Town, with instructions
and Authority to assert and defend their Interest, who being brought by Johnson
to the General, he sent him Prisoner to Edinburgh Castle; and having assured
the Soldiers to him, he dispatched three Letters into England, directed to
Fleetwood, Lambert and Lenthal, wherein he acquainted them with his resolution,
to restore these Kingdoms to the free exercise of their Laws and Liberties;
which expression had more included than was expressed in it, which was well
enough understood by the Lord Fairfax and some others, who were privy to the
design.

These Letters gave some intimation of hope to the Rump, that they should be a
second time restored to their Authority, and infinitely surprised Lambert and
the other Grandees of the Army, who did not expect to meet with any such
opposition, believing it diversely opposite to the interest of the Army in
general, for any one part of it to be divided against, and oppose the
proceedings of the rest; and that although there should be any amongst the
Soldiers who should love their Country better then their pay, and that Monk
should undertake to back them; yet they were assured by some of his Officers,
who were then at London, that his interest was too weak in Scotland, to make
head against them, however to make all sure, they sent Dr. Clergies and
Colonel Talbut to him, whom they entreated and conjured to use their utmost
endeavors to allay those sudden heats of his, which they affirmed had been
kindled by some unhappy mistakes of their proceedings; and assure him that he
and his army should suddenly receive a satisfactory account about them. But
that attempt signified little, for Talbut could not persuade him of the
sincerity of Lamberts Friendship, nor the reallity of his offered advantages;
and Clergies did but prevaricate with them that sent him, and informed the
General of the true state and condition of the English Army, who had but little
Money, and no means left of raising more, when that was spent, in regard the
Rump, who saw their doom hastening, had before they were turned out by Lambert,
voted it high Treason, to raise money out of Parliament, thereby covering their
spite and revenge, with the shadow of a pretended tenderness for their Countries
freedom. These were soon after followed by Captain Dean, Treasurer to the
English Army, who was sent by Fleetwood as a special messenger of his own, with
a very kind letter to the General, and an offer of what preferment in the Army
he would please to accept of, if he would concur with them, which he refused.
This messenger in his passage into Scotland, dispersed diverse papers, where he
endeavored to seduce Monk's Soldiers, by accusing their General of a design to
bring in Charles Stuart upon them, by his dividing the Army, and told the
General to his Face, as he sat at dinner with him, that Charles Stuart was at
the bottom of his design, upon which Dr. Price replied, no Mr. Treasurer, it is
you that will bring him in, for by your late actions you have more then
justified the late King, who demanded only the Members of the House of Commons,
but ye have dissolved a Parliament. And passing by one morning, as a Company of
Foot was drawing up, he told them them that Lord Lambert was coming upon them,
and that all Monks Army would suffice him for a Breakfast; to which he received
as blunt an answer, That Lambert had certainly a very good Stomach, if he could
eat Pikes and swallow Bullets.

Lambert who waited not for the return of the messenger, but advanced presently
toward the North, met with Monks Commissioners at York, and would have spared
a farther Journey, by assuring them that he had power from the Committee of
safety, and the general Council of Officers, to treat and conclude with them;
but they resisting upon the restoration of the Parliament to their former
power, they were dismissed, and so past forward to London, whereupon Major
General Morgan, who was secretly a well wisher to Monks designs but openly
professed a dislike of them, told Lambert; if he would send him into Scotland, he
did not doubt but he should be able to gain the General for him; which offer he
gladly accepted of, in hope that he would either by his friendship with Monk,
create a better understanding between them, or by his power and interest draw
off a part of the Scotch Army for himself, which he could have easily done, had
his dislike of the Generals declarations against the Armies proceedings, been
as real as it was feigned, his command there being next to Monks.

Morgan being arrived in Scotland, had the message slighted, but his Person
joyfully received of the General, who much wanted him, and soon employed him in
the most difficult service that yet remained unattempted, which was the
reforming of his Horse, dismounting dissaffected Troopers, and setting diverse
Foot Soldiers, of whose Fidelity they were well assured, on Horseback. In the
performance whereof, some prevented their being unhorst, by running from their
Colors, and others by conveying them over to the Enemy. So that having now
prepared all things in readiness, he ordered several of his Troops to march
toward the South of Scotland, intending to follow them himself with the Body of
his Army.

But before he left Edinburgh, he called a Convention of the Nobility and
Burghers, and laid before them the ground of his quarrel, requiring their
peaceable deportment, during his absence, and the payment of what they were in
arrear to him for his Army, which they readily consented to, and appointed some
of their number afterward to wait upon him at Barwick, to desire him to
furnish them with Arms, whereby they might be in a capacity to assist him in
opposing Lamberts invasion, which seemed equally to threaten both him and them;
but he wisely declined that request, and yet thinking it not safe to send them
away discontented, granted them some things which might contribute toward a
public peace without prejudice to his designs.

When he was got as far as Haddington, he received information that his
Commissioners, somewhat exceeding the ^imits of their Commissions, had
concluded a treaty with the Officers at London, upon conditions very unwelcom
and displeasing to him: The two chief whereof was, that the Kings Title should
be renounced, and a convention of Officers on both sides to meet by compact at
New Castle, to settle the Army, and advise about the modelling of a new
Government; whereupon (...) immediately posted back to Eden^urgh to consult
with his Counselors, and the Officers of his Army, and require their sense
about that agreement; the result whereof was, that they should refuse to
ratify that agreement, and demand a new treaty, upon pretense that some of
those Articles required a farther explanation; which being once known in
London, the Members of the Rump began to take heart again, and meet in secret
Caballs, to continue their own Restitution, in regard the General had engaged
with mighty protestations to adhere to them; so that the Committee of safety
perceiving themselves in a very unsafe and desolate condition; did with great
submission send for Lenthal the Speaker, and desire him with the rest of the
Members to return to the exercise of their trust, which they willingly accepted
of. The news whereof reaching Lambert at New Castle, he privately slipped away
from his Soldiers, and absconded himself; Colonel Wetham Governor of
Portsmouth having as well in respect to the General, as the Rump^ opened the
Gates of the Town to Hazelrick, Morley and Walton; three o^ the seven
Commissioners appointed by them for governing the Army. And the Fleet under
Lawson, and the Forces i^ Ireland having likewise declared for them, and had
the recovery of their power congratulated, and promises of defending it to the
utmost of his power made by Monk, who having thus restored them, they desired
speedily to march for London, foreseeing that he was otherwise resolved to come
without bidding; whereupon he advanced toward them, and was in his way thither
bravely entertained by the Lord Fairfax and several others, and at Morpeth
received a Letter from the Lord Mayor and common Council of London sent by
their Sword Bearer, to which he returned a pleasing though doubtful answer.

But notwithstanding all his solemn protestations of adhering to the
Parliaments interest, and the many complements he had thereupon received from
them, yet they were not well satisfied in the reality of his Intentions,
suspecting still that there was something else at the bottom of his
undertaking, and therefore sent Scot and Robinson to meet him at Harbrough,
that under pretense of congratulating with him, for the good success God had
given to his endeavors; they might the better pry into his Actions, and
discover somewhat if possible, of his future intentions, putting forth a
declaration at the same time, for the better settling themselves in the Favor
of the People, wherein they promised to perfect what they had begun, for the
settling of the Nation. But they being now too long used to their fair
pretenses, would be deluded by them no longer, but seeing they fell to their
old tyrannies, under a pretense of restoring them to their lost liberties;
began to rouse up themselves, and show their universal hatred and detestation
of their wicked and arbitrary proceedings, by a general application to Monk,
whom they looked upon as a person of a more free and English Spirit, beseeching
him in diverse addresses, which were presented to him in almost all the Towns he
past through, to assert their liberties, either by procuring a full and free
Parliament, or else the Restoration of the secluded Members of that which was
then sitting, and promising to stand by him in the maintenance and defense of
their freedom.

Being come to St. Albans, which was his last Stage, he sent Colonel Lidcot
without consulting Scot and Robinson (who had all along upon the Road, taken
upon them to give answers to the addresses presented to him, and for the better
observing his actions, and prying into his affairs, lodged in the same Inn with
him) to the Speaker, to desire that the Regiments who atended as Guards to the
Parliament, might be distributed into Country Quarters, to make way for his
coming to London; which was not without some difficulty obtained, although he
had hitherto carried himself with so much evenness, that he had given them no
reason to distrust him; and the whole Army, with which he was to enter the
Town, was somewhat inferior in number, to that which was to march out, and
leave their quarters to him: He entered the Town at Grayes Inn-Lane, the Bells
ringing every where for Joy, and as he past through Chancery Lane, ^he stopped at
the Rolls, before the Speakers Door, who being not returned from the House, he
marched forward toward White Hall, where his quarters were appointed to be, and
meeting the Speaker in the Strand, he allighted and complemented him after the
Soldiers Fashion. But before he had bin two days at his quarters, which were
the Princes Lodgings, he was entertained with a secret information that a Son
of Secretary Scot, who lodged at the House of one Sturdy in Russel-Sreet, had
upon discovery about the General, assured him that his power of commanding the
Army should be taken from him within a few days, and that he should be sent to
the Tower, and questioned for his Life; the only fact whereof was, to make him
the more circumspect and careful.

The next day he went to wait upon the House, and received their Solemn thanks
by their Speaker, for the great service he had done in restoring of them, but
because he took upon him to mind them of some thing, which he judged to be for
the public good, and acquaint them with the Addresses he received in every
place, on his way toward London for a free Parliament, or the Readmission of
the secluded Members, they Reflected upon him, as if he endeavored to impose
his own sense upon the parliament; but however they easily passed it over, and
seemed to be content, to impute it rather to his affection to their service,
than his distaste of their proceedings, and made him one of their Council of
State, who was to order and dispose of all their public affairs; but before he
was to take his place amongst them, he was to have, as well as the rest, an
Oath imposed upon him, to abjure the Royal Family; but that being absolutely
contrary to the Noble and Generous Designs of that brave Patriot of the Royal
Cause, and bold Adventurer for the interest of his injured Sovereign; he
opposed it as a thing altogether unreasonable, and by his influence upon
Colonel Morley procured it to be so warmly debated, that it fell to the
ground, and came to nothing.

The General resolving now to draw his business toward a conclusion, offered
himself to Scot, who had several times complained to him of the malignity of
the City of London, to abate their pride, and curb their insolency, as he
termed it; the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council of that City, having by
a public Vote declared, that they would pay no more Taxes and Contributions,
till the Parliament was filled up with equal Representatives of the People. A
few popular tumults from thence, had formely given the Government some
disturbances; but now the whole City encouraged by their hopes and expectations
from Monk, rebelled against their power, and Scot who was his greatest Enemy,
and had plotted his ruin, not being able to fadom the depth of his design in
that offer, and hoping at once to ruin both him and the City, prevailed with a
Parliament to send him thither, as well to bring the Citizens into subjection,
as to create a hatred and jealousy between him and the General, by his
executing that odious and detestable work, wherein they designed to employ him;
wherefore being on Tuseday night detained at the Council of State till two in
the Morning; he there received orders to march the next morning into the City,
to execute what was there reresolved on, which although contrary to his quiet
and peaceable disposition, yet having a direct tendency to promote his great
design, he willingly undertook it; and therefore in seeming obedience to their
commands, early in the Morning marched his Army into the City, and having ceased
on diverse of their Common Council and others who had rendered themselves
obnoxious to the Rump, and sent them to the Tower; he commanded his Soldiers to
dig up their posts, and break down their Gates and Port-Cullies, which the
amazed Citizens, who flockt about him, supposing it had been done to gratify
the Rump, durst not complain of, but with sighs and nods only, bid an eternal
farewell to their departing Liberty, as they supposed. And that the men at
Westminster might the better curb him, when they had thus made use of him to
curb the City, they past a bill for the Army to be governed by five
Commissioners, viz. Monk, Hazelrick, Morley, Walton and Allured, three whereof
were to be a Quorum.

Having thus performed the Task imposed on him in the City, he returned again
to White Hall, notwithstanding he was to have stayed for farther order from the
Rump, who had more business for him to have done there, and took it ill that he
tarried not till he had performed it; wherefore having assured the Tower by
means of Coll. Morley, who was then Lieutenant of it, and had offered to give
him the possession thereof; he sent a Letter to the Rump, first subscribed by
himself, and then by all the Officers of his Army in their order, the tenor
whereof was very peremptory, commanding them that they should by the Friday
following send forth Writs, to fill up all the vacant places in the House, and
when that was done, fix a time to terminate their own sitting, and give place
to another Parliament to succed them. Cromwell had outwitted and unhoused them
by a power at first derived from them; but Monk forced them to unhouse
themselves, and become their own executioners. And compelled them, by passing
an Act for their own dissolution, and the calling a new Parliament: He set the
first considerable, and the most discernable step toward the recalling their
banished Sovereign, whom they had for so many Years unjustly excluded from his
Throne. The Letter was sent by two Colonels, Coleberry and Lidcot; but the
General without staying for an Answer, immediately put himself into the Head of
his Army, and marched away into Finsbury Fields, requiring the Mayor to provide
him quarters for his Soldiers within the City, who knowing not the Breach
between Him and the Parliament, was somewhat astonished with the message, but
being soon informed of the end of his coming, by some Citizens, who had learnt
that news sooner than himself, he gladly complied with that demand, and invited
him to dinner at Guild Hall, where, in the afternoon were such a conference
held between him and the Mayor and Aldermen, that when he entered toward the
evening, at the head of his Army, he was welcomed by the Citizens as the
Restorer of his Countries Freedom, with ringing of Bells, the blazing of
Bonefires, and the distributing of Wine, and Money among his Soldiers; the loud
Shouts and Acclamations of the People, discovering their public joy, and the
Fume of roasted Rumps, which were burnt in every Bonefire, prognosticating the
downfall of their Legislative power.

The men at Westminster having closely debated on the Letter sent them by Monk,
thought it wisdom to dissemble the indignation they conceived for that Affront,
and gave him thanks for his joint care with them, for the good of the
Commonwealth; and to content him if possible, ordered a Committee to consider
what Lands were fitting to be conferred upon him; issuing out a Proclamation
likewise against Lambert, wherein he was required to surrender himself within
forty days on forfeiture of his Estate; and promising with all imaginable Speed
to send out Writs for a new Parliament; but resolved to tie up their hands by
previous engagements against the King, the House of Lords, and whatsoever else
they thought might prove injurious to them. And the Council of State invited
him afresh to take his place amongst them, urging that the necessity of affairs
required his presence there, and employing such means as they thought had the
greatest influence upon him, to persuade him to comply therewith: Nor did he at
first absolutely deny their request, but only denied the performance thereof,
that so he might keep them in suspense, the better to fix his Army, and prepare
them heartily to engage in his new designs, which he thought could not be
brought in one day to part with all their former Principles and Prejudices. But
although they still courted his return, yet fearing that he had designed
nothing less, they began to court those who who had formerly appeared against
them, and employed their adgitators in that Army; which was by Monks succesful
Artifice, dispersed into diverse parts of the Country, to whisper his Treason
against the Parliament, and his design to bring in Charles Stuart. Halzerick
was taxt by the General as the principle Author of that device; but he denied
it, and durst not adventure to Randesvouz his Country Army against Monks City
Forces. And the presses in the mean time were not idle, but produced many
infamous Libels against the King, wherein he was impudently abused, and charged
with many unjust Falsities, thereby to prevent the Peoples entertaining any
desires of his Restoration, but all would not do, the Country being now too
sensible of the gross abuses and cheats that had been been put upon the Nation
by such kind of Articles.

But however the General being willing to overcome them by Argument, as well as
force, easily consensented to a proposition presented by the Rump; that some of
them might meet a like number of the secluded Members, and argue the business
in his presence; which they did at Alderman Whale's his House, which was then
his head Quarters; and they having nothing to allege against the Readmission
(besides their love of Power) but their own safety, the sale of public Lands,
and such like things, which they feared would be disturbed by their
introduction. But the secluded Members having sufficiently answered these
objections, by protesting that they would disturb the properties and pretenses
of no Man, but amicably sit, and act for the good of their Country, till by
their dissolution they had made way for another Parliament. And the General
being fully satisfied in the justness of their Cause, left the City, and
returned again to White Hall, where those of the secluded Members, who were
then in Town, resorted to him, and after a short Speech made by him, were
conducted to Westminster, where they took their former places in the House of
Commons; some of the sitting Members, immediately upon their entrance, rising
up, and departing in discontent, crying out, Monk had betrayed them.

The General having now forced the Rump to admit the secluded Members, which
had been ever since forty eight forceably kept out of the House; they were no
sooner seated therein, but they immediately applied themselves to such kind of
work, as plainly discovered to all Intelligent and discerning Men, where those
things, which were then transacting, would terminate; for they presently
enlarged Monks Commission, making him General of all their Land Forces, and
constituted him joint General at Sea with Mountague, discharged Sir George
Booth, and others Committed on account of his rising, ordering the examination
of him and his Lady to be taken off the File and given to them; and released
all such as had been Imprisoned for Petitioning for a free Parliament, together
with the Members of the Common Council of London. And then having appointed a
free Parliament to meet in the April following, they Dissolved themselves,
appointing a Council of State to govern in the mean while, which consisted for
the most part of Honest and Loyal Gentlemen, viz. Arthur Annesly Lord
President, Peirpoint, Crew, Knightly, Popham, Morley, Cooper, Gerrard, St.
John, Widrington, Evelin, Waller, Onslow, Maynard, Lewis, Mountague, Handly,
Norton, Hollis, Temple, Tomson, Trevers, Holland, Poltis, Birch, Grimston,
Swinton, Weaver, Fairfax, Rossiter, and the Lord General, which Council was so
influenced by the General, that all their Proposals ran directly toward, and
naturally tended to swell the Royal Stream, and make Sovereignty, which had
suffered so long and fatal an Ebb, flow with that irresistible, but yet
innocent and harmless force, that like a swelling Sea, it bore down all before
it.

But Sir John Grinvile being (in regard he was a known Cavalier,) unable to
procure any private conference with Monk, who was so extraordinary wary and
cautious, that when Sr. John had spun out his Visit to an extraordinary length,
in expectation of the Room being clear, by the breaking up of the Company, yet
then knowing the reason of his long Attendance, he would immediately rise up
from his Chair, and say, Good night, Cousen, it is late; or by some such like
pretense, excuse himself, and leave the Room. He was not able to give the King
any farther account of the General's Intentions, and therefore growing
impatient of so many delays, he bethought himself at last of making his
Application to Mr. Morris, one of the ^ecluded Members, who was somewhat
related to the General; and had a more than ordinary Intimacy with him, that ^o
he might by his Mediation obtain the favor to discourse a little with him in
private, concerning something of great importance to him and the Nation.
Morris was easily prevailed upon to undertake the business, and immediately
repaired to the General, and acquainted him with Greenvil's desire; but he
still refused to have any secret converse with him, for fear notice should be
taken of it; yet ordered Morris to wait upon him, and try if he could inform
himself of the nature and quality of the business, giving him leave to assure
him, that he was authorized by him to receive his Message, how weighty and
secret soever it might be, and promise to return the Generals speedy Answer
thereunto. But Greevile resolving to treat with none but himself, refused the
Proposal, without giving him the least intimation of his business, telling him,
that it concerned none but the General himself, and that so nearly, that it
would admit of no longer delay. And if he still persisted in an obstinate
refusing to admit him a private Conference, he must then be necessitated to
acquaint him with it, wherever he met with him. Upon the Report whereof by
Morris, he was infinitely pleased, and therefore ordered Morris to give him
notice, that he would meet him at his Chamber sometime in the Evening of the
next day. Greenvile, according to appointment, repaired to Morrice's Chamber,
whither the General, upon intimation of his being there, came likewise soon
after. To whom, after some Complements, Greenvile declared, that he looked upon
himself as infinitely obliged to his Excellency for giving him that opportunity
of discharging himself of a Trust of great importance in relation to the King,
the General, and the whole Kingdom, which had been long deposited in his hands
by his Sovereign, adding, that he thought himself more happy in having that
good occasion of performing his duty, in obeying the Commands and promoting the
Interest of his Sovereign, than in any occurrence of his whole Life; presenting
him at the same time with a Letter directed to him from the King, and producing
another sent to himse^f, together with a Commission which he had received from
the King to treat with him about the business of his Restoration. Whereupon
the General suddenly stepped back, and holding the Paper in his hand, with a
kind of a forced frown, hastily demanded of him how he durst mention a thing of
that nature to him, without considering the danger he thereby run himself upon?
Greenvile replied, He had long since considered that matter, and duly weighed
the danger which attended an attempt of that nature; but the hazard, though
great, was not sufficient to deter him from the performance of his duty. And
that he was the more encouraged to adventure, by the Message which he was
pleased to send him by his Brother, before he left Scotland. Upon the mention
thereof, without making any reply, he presently approached toward him with a
more pleasing aspect, and embracing him in his Arms, said, Dear Cousen, I
return you my hearty thanks for the Prudence, Fidelity, Care and Constancy
wherewith you have managed this great Affair, and your resolute Secrecy
therein. For, could I have informed my self, that you had ever revealed it to
any person living, since you first acquainted my Brother therewith, I would
never have consented to treat with you about it, which now I shall most
willingly do, and with you, rather than any other, in regard you are so nearly
related to me, and I have received so many obligations both from you and your
Family. And then, having read the King's Letter, and the Commission, he added,
that he hoped the King would forgive what was past, according to the Contents
of his gracious Letter, assuring him, that his heart was ever faithful to him,
although he had never been in a condition to serve him until then, desiring Sir
John, that he would in his name assure His Majesty, that he was now not only
ready to obey his Commands, but to sacrifice his Life and Fortune in his
Service, calling Morris, who stood without as Doorkeeper, to bear witness of
that his solemn Protestation. Sir John desired him to send some Confident of
his own to the King, to treat and advise with him what was fit to be done for
the better carrying on their Design; to which he ^asily consented, but told
him, that that Confident must be himself, for he would not, as yet, adventure
to send any Letters to the King, for fear of the worst. And that, without them,
the King had no reason to give any Credit to a Messenger sent from him, but
might very well believe one whom himself had employed; wherefore at the next
Conference he received Instructions, with a Charge not to commit them to
Writing, till he came to the King at Brussels, and there to communicate them to
none but himself.

Greenvile managed this Negotiation with such Secrecy, and his Journey to
Brussels was so speedy and fortunate, that few knew of it before his arrival
there; and those who did, nay, that went in compan^ with him thither, had not
so much as the lea^^ suspicion what Errand it was he went on. The King having
intimation of his Arrival, went privately to his Lodgings, to whom Greenvile
related the Instructions he had received from Monk, which were readily
believed, although he brought nothing under the General's hand. The News
whereof was very acceptable, and highly welcome to the King, whose joy upon that
account was so much the greater, because the General required no Conditions of
Restraint to his Royal Power, and had left the Reward of his Service wholly to
his goodness, as appeared by what himself declared to Greenvile, upon the
receipt of a Letter sent him by some of his Friends in England, to acquaint him
with the great Service they had done His Majesty in prevailing with Monk,
(notwithstanding his being so absolute a Common-wealths-man, they knowing
nothing of his being pre-engaged by the King,) not to oppose his Return upon
his Fathers Concessions in the Isle of Wight; which Terms, though hard, and
consented to by his Father only in consideration of his necessity, yet they
be^ought His Majesty not to think hard of them now, lest his refusal might
exclude him longer from the Crown.

Little do they think in England, said the King, that the General and I are
upon so good Terms; and the truth is, I could hardly believe it my self, until
your Arrival with the happy News, The General's resolution to restore me to my
Crown and Kingdom, without Conditions, beyond our expectations here, or the
belief of all our Friends in England, except your self, who was employed in it.

The King having been informed by Greenvile, that Monk had declared he would
not tie him to any Terms of Reward, affirming, that he took more content in
doing His Majesty and his Country Service, than in the expectation of
greatness, pressed Greenvile to know what he should do for himself. But he,
according to the General's Example, nobly refused all Proposals of Reward for
that Service, in which he had been so eminently successful, till he should have
the happiness to see him at his Palace of Whitehall. But the King resolving nor
to send him back without a mark of his Royal Favor, secretly put into his
Pocket a Warrant under his Hand and Seal, for an English Earldom; and the
assurance of three thousand pounds per Annum, to be settled upon him and his
Heirs for ever, to support that Honor, with a promise moreover, to pay those
Debts which either he or his Father had contracted, by engaging themselves in
the Royal Cause.

The King, upon his receiving this Message from Monk, consulted with Sir Edward
Hide, whom he had then nominated for the Lord Chancellor, the Marquess of
Ormond, Secretary Nichols, and some others of his Confidents, Greenvile
likewise being present, what return he should make thereunto. In which Privy
Council there was a Commission drawn up and signed by the King, for the
constituting Monk Captain General of all his Landforces in the three Kingdoms,
and Public Di^patches framed and signed according to those Directions
Greenvile had brought from him. But the King, not thinking that place
convenient for the Treaty, removed with great speed and privacy to Breda, a
Town belonging to his Sister the Princess of Orange, being complemented at his
departure from Flanders by the Spanish Governor, and honorably conveyed on
his way way as far as Antwerp, from whence his Public Dispatches into England,
were dated. Greenvile, upon his return, besides the Generals Commission to be
Captain General of all the Forces then raised, or to be raised, brought him the
King's Seals and Signet, by which he was empowered to make a Secretary of
State, which Honor he conferred upon Morris, who was after the King's return
Knighted, and confirmed therein, in consideration of the Service he had done in
introducing Greenvile to the General's presence. And besides those Public
Letters, which he was to reserve to be communicated in due time, he brought a
Private one, directed to the General himself, written with the King's own Hand,
to which he returned an Answer by Mr. Bernard Greenvile, in regard his Brother
could not then be spared, the Parliament being just ready to fit, when he was
to present to both the Houses the King's Letters and Declaration; which Answer
was very welcome to the King, for that it brought him an assurance under the
General's own Hand, of his Resolution to adhere to him against all opposition
whatsoever.

About this time Lambert made his escape from the Tower, and endeavored to
make Parties, and draw Forces together, to oppose his Loyal and Generous
Designs, which he being informed of, acquainted the Council of State therewith,
and managed the business with so great Prudence, that timely ^care was taken to
suppress him, and that Attempt, which in it self threatened the contrary, was
made by his Wisdom to advance the King's Interest, and hasten his happy
Restoration. For Coll. Ingoldsby being sent against him and his Forces, which
^e had got together, forsaking him upon the Colonels approach, he betook
himself to flight, but being upon plowed Land, his Horse failed him; and
notwithstanding he had by his valor in many former Battles obtained the name
of Stout, he presently yielded himself, without drawing his Sword, or making
any other Defense, than only crying out twice, Pray my Lord, let me escape; for
what good will my Life or perpetual Imprisonment do you?

The time being now come for the meeting of a new Parliament, both Houses
repaired to St. Margarets Church, where Dr. Reynolds preached before them, and
after Sermon they repaired to their Houses: The Lords making choice of the Earl
of Manchester for their Speaker: And the Commons of Sir Harbottle Grimstone.
And having settled their Committees, and thereby prepared for their entrance
upon business, adjourned for some few days; in the interim whereof Greenvile
con^^lted with the General, at what time, and in what manner he should deliver
his Messages from the King to the several parties to whom they were directed.
That which was superscribed to the General himself, to be communicated by him
to the Army and Council of State, he thought fit to have delivered to him at
the Door of the Council Chamber. In order whereunto Greenvile repaired thither,
when the Council were sitting, and told Coll. Birch, who was one of the
Members, that he desired to speak with the General; who upon Birch's Intimation
came to the Door; and in the view of his Guards, who attended there, received
the Letters from Greenvile, without showing any other respect either to his
Person, or his Business, than only demanding of him if he would stay for an
Answer, and telling him, otherwise his Guards should secure him. And having
commanded them to look to him, went in to the Council, and communicated to them
the Letters; whereupon Birch being examined whether he knew any thing of the
matter, and protesting he was altogether ignorant both of the Gentleman, and
his Business, Greenvile was sent for i^ and examined by the President, from
whence those Letters came, whose they were, and how he came by them, (for they
had not yet proceeded to open and read them,) he answered, that ^he King His
Master gave them to him with his own Hand at Breda. Having ^hereby informed
themselves whence ^he Letters came, they deferred the open^ng of them until the
Parliament sat ^gain, and would have committed Green^ile, had not the General
told them, that (...) knew him very well, and would an^wer for his appearance
before the Par^^ament; which were no sooner sat, (...) he delivered his
Letters, with inclo^^d Declarations to both Houses, where^^ the King expressed
abundance of ^mpassion and tenderness to the Na^^on, which had been so long
harassed (...) a bloody and unnatural War, and pro^ised a free and general
Pardon to all, (...) should in forty days after the pub^^ation thereof, lay
hold upon that Grace, ^less such whom the Parliament should ^ink fit to be
excepted from the benefit ^^ereof. And that he would preserve (...) to the
uttermost of his power, (...) from all manner of Injuries in their ^^es and
Estates, and grant Liberty for ^^der Consciences, for such as dissented (...)
the Established Religion, provided ^^ey did not disturb the Peace of the
Nation. That as to Sales and Purchases, (...) would refer himself in all
matters to the Determinations of Parliament, and consent to any Act or Acts,
for the satisfyin^ the Arrears of the Army and Navy which should thenceforward
be receive^ into his Service, upon as good Pay an^ Conditions as they then
enjoyed. The like Letters and Declarations being (...) sent by the King, and
delivered to Gen^^ral Mon^ague, to be by him communi^^ted to the Fleet, and to
the Lord May^ and Common Council of London.

The King's Letters and Declarati^^ were received by the Parliament (...) such
an extraordinary Joy and Ven^^tion, that I want words wherewith (...) express
it; for, as if some strange (...) had suddenly seized upon their min^ every
man, at the Speaker's naming (...) King, rose up, and uncovering him^^^^
desired they might be immediately (...) which was no sooner done, but in
an^^tasie of joy, they suddenly drew the ^^^tain, and exposed the beautiful and
^^rious Scene to the open view of ^^^longing Spectators, wherein every (...)
might plainly behold the happy Issu^ all those various Transactions which (...)
till then been Riddles too mysterious for vulgar understandings to unfold, or
once imagine to what they tended, or where they would terminate. By the House
of Lords resolving that they did own and declare, that, according to the
Ancient and Fundamental Laws of England, the Government was, and ought to be by
Kings; and that a Committee of eight Lords should forthwith join with a
Committee of the Commons to consider of an Answer to the King's Letter and
Declaration. And by the House of Commons resolving likewise to appoint a
Committee to prepare an Answer to the King's Letter, and therein express their
great and joyful sense of his gracious offers, and to return him their humble
and hearty thanks for the same, and to assure him of their Loyalty and Duty.
And that they would give him a speedy Answer to his gracious Proposals.
Resolving moreover, that the sum of 50000 l. should be presented him from that
House, and 10000 l. to each of his Royal Brothers, the Dukes of York and
Gloucester. Which Resolves were no sooner reported in London, then the Citizens
were extremely transported with Joy. The harmony of Bells, and the flaming
Piles, which enlighted every Street, surrounded with incredible Shouts and
Acclamations, being sufficient demonstrations of the infinite Pleasure and
Satisfaction which every one took, in that no less strange than happy
Revolution. And the several Countries taking Allarm from London, contended
which should outvy the other in expressions of Loyalty and Joy. And General
Mountague having communicated to the Fleet the Letters he received from the
King and the Duke of York, together with those directed to the Parliament, they
unanimously declared their Resolution, to adhere to him, and to live and die in
his defense, humbly desiring the Generals to present the same to the King;
whereupon Mountague himself immediately fired a Gun, crying, God bless His
Majesty and the whole Fleet. Thereupon presently appeared in its pride and
glory with Pendants loose, Guns roaring, Caps flying, and Vive le Roys loudly
ecchoing from one Ships Company to another, which were answered by the great
Guns from Dale and Sandwich Castles; nor was this Joy confined to England, but
spread it self into Scotland and Ireland also.

And now the Parliament, longing for the King's presence amongst them, as the
Israelites did for the return of King David, drew up a Letter in answer to that
which they had received from him, superscribing it to the King's Most Excellent
Majesty; wherein they requested his speedy return to the exercise of his Kingly
Office, appointing Commissioners to go over to Holland, and attend him during
his stay there, and in his Voyage for England. There being six appointed for
the House of Lords, and twelve for the House of Commons, to which, upon the
Request of the Lord Mayor and Common Council of London, was added twenty on the
behalf of that City, who, having received their Instructions, set sail for
Holland, with several Frigots appointed by the Parliament to attend them; the
whole Fleet being likewise committed to the King's pleasure, the General
whereof had Orders from the Parliament to obey such Orders and Directions as he
should receive from His Majesty.

The Commissioners, upon their arrival at Breda, delivered their respective
Messages, with all imaginable reverence and veneration, according to the
Instructions they had received from their Principals, beseeching His Majesty,
in the name of his Parliament and People, to return to his Inheritance, and
reassume his Crown and Scepter, assuring him, that he should be infinitely
welcome to them without any Terms, which Invitation was gladly accepted, and
the Commissioners were received by him with a Grace and Port like himself, and
entertained with extraordinary Magnificence and Bounty.

The Parliament in the mean time proceeded to the Proclaiming of him, which was
performed with all that Joy, Splendour and Magnificence, that their Loyalty
could inspire; the Lord General, attended by all the Peers, the most Eminent of
the Commons, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, with the Trained Bands of London
assisting at the Ceremony: The Proclamation being, as follows, viz.

Although it can no way be doubted, but that his Majesty's Right and Title to
these Crowns and Kingdoms, is and was every way complete by the Death of his
Most Royal Father of Glorious Memory, without the Ceremony or Solemnity of a
Proclamation, yet since Proclamations in such cases have been always used, to
the end that all good Subjects might upon this occasion testify their Duty and
Respect; and since the Armed violence and other Calamities of many years last
past, have hitherto deprived us of any opportunity, wherein we might express
our Loyalty and Allegiance to his Majesty: We therefore the Lords and Commons
now Assembled in Parliament, together with the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and
Common Council of the City of London, and other Freemen of this Kingdom now
present, do according to our Duty and Allegiance, heartily, joyfully and
Unanimously acknowledge and Proclaim, that immediately upon the Decease of our
late Sovereign King Charles the First, the Imperial Crown of the Realm of
England, and all the Kingdoms, Dominions and Rights belonging to the same, did
by Inherent Birthright, and Lawful undoubted Succession, Descend and come to
his Most Excellent Majesty, King Charles the Second, as being Lineally, Justly
and Lawfully, next Heir of the Blood Royal of this Realm. And that by the
Goodness and Providence of Almighty God, he is of England, Scotland and
Ireland, the Most Potent, Mighty and Undoubted King, and thereunto we Most
Humbly and Faithfully do submit and oblige our selves, our Heirs and
Posterities for ever.

At the reading whereof, the whole City rang with the Sound of God Save, and
God Bless King Charles the Second; the Shouts and Acclamations of the crowding
multitudes being so extraordinary, that although all the Bells throughout the
City and Suburbs, were then Ringing, their Noise was not to be heard.

The King having now by his extraordinary Wisdom and Conduct, thus happily
contrived his return to his Crown and Kingdom, without the spilling of his
Subjects Blood, and having brought his Affairs to their desired Issue, prepared
to leave Holland, and after so long and tedious an Exile, returned to his
Harassed and almost ruined Realms, being upon his departure, Splendidly Treated
by the Dutch for a Fortnight together, with all the Pomp and Magnificence
imaginable, and presented with the Richest Bed and Furniture, together with
Tapestry for Hangings, Embossed with Gold and Silver, and adorned with
Pictures, that could be procured, and Highly Complemented by all the Foreign
Ministers then Resident there. For these Noble Entertainments, which together
with the Present of the Dutch, about one hundred Thousand Pounds, he gave the
States General and those of Holland, his Hearty Thanks in their Public
Assemblies, whither he went on Foot; and having taken his leave of them, and
commended to them the interest of his Sister, and his Nephew the Prince of
Orange, they delivered their sense of the present circumstance of Affairs, and
declared the greatness of that joy they conceived for his Miraculous
Restoration, in the following Speech.

If one may judge of the content which we have to see your Majesty depart from
our Province, by the satisfaction we had to possess you, we shall have no great
trouble to make it known to you; your Majesty might have observed in the
countenance of all our People, the Joy they had in their Hearts, to see a
Prince cherished of God, a Prince wholly miraculous, and a Prince that is
probable to make a part of their quietness and felicity, your Majesty shall see
presently all the Streets filled, all the ways covered, and all the Hills
laden with People, which will follow you even to the place of your
Embarquement, and would not leave you, if they had wherewith to pass them to
your Kingdom. Our Joy is common unto us with that of our Subjects, but as we
know better than they the inestimable value of the Treasure we possess, so we
are more sensible of this sad separation. It would be insupportable to us, Sir,
if we re-entred not into our selves, and consider not that it is the thing of
the World we most desired, and the greatest advantage also that we could wish
to your Majesty. We acquiess therein, because we know that this removal is no
less necessary for us, than glorious to your Majesty, and that it is not in your
Kingdom, that we must find the accomplishment of the Prayers we have made, and
make still for you and us, so shall we not fail to profit thence as well as
from the assurances which it has pleased you to give us of an immutable
affection toward this Republique. We render most humble thanks to your Majesty
for them, and particularly for the illustrious proof which it has pleased you
to give us thereof, by the Glorious visit wherewith you honored our Assembly.
We shall conserve the memory of it most dearly, and make the marks of that
goodness to pass to our last Posterity, to the end they may acknowledge it with
the same respect, with which we have received it. The appointment, wherein we
see your Majesty ready to take Horse for the pursuit of your Journey, forbids
us to enlarge our selves upon a subject which would never weary us, if we had
words conformable to our respectful sentiments: but we have no mind to increase
the just impatience which your Majesty shall have to see your self returned
into your Kingdom. We pray God, Sir, that it be quiet and happy, and that as he
has disposed the Hearts and Affections of your Subjects to acknowledge their
Sovereign and Lawful Prince, it will please him also to command the Winds and
Seas to expedite your Voyage; and that after you have arrived on your own
Coast, the same Prayers which we shall reiterate, you may enjoy in your Royal
Person, and in your Posterity for ever, all the Felicity and Prosperity, which
your Humble Servants shall wish unto your Majesty.

Having now taken his leave of his Friends in Holland. He set forward toward
England, in the midst of his two Brothers the Dukes of York and Gloucester on
Horseback, accompanied by Prince William of Nassau, the Admiral of Holland, the
Prince of Orange, and many Ladies of Quality in their Coaches, who attended him
all the way to the place where he Embarked, the Horse and the Regiments of the
Guards standing in Battalia, and the thundering of the Cannon being answered
with Peals of Music, conveyed the like mirth to the English Fleet, then riding
at Scheveling, the amazed Inhabitants flocking from all the adjacent parts, and
crowding to behold the unusual sight, whilst others posted themselves more
commodiously upon the Downs and Sand-Hills, from whence they might view the
Fleet, see the King Embarquing, and please themselves with beholding how he was
Entertained by the General at his first going on Board the Charles, which had
formerly been called the Naseby. so that it was a difficult thing to determine,
whether the Wonder of the Dutch, or the Joy of the English exceeded: He was
attended by his Aunt, his Sister, and some other Illustrious Persons on Board
in a Boat prepared for him by the States, whose Streamers and Flags had this
impress, Quo fas et fata, alluding to, Dieu et mon droit; but upon the approach
of a Brigandine sent from General Mountague to receive him, he entered therein,
and so went on Board the Charles, the Seamen at his Entrance seeming to be in
an ecstasy, for their being now actually possessed of their Beloved Prince.
After he had been some little while Entertained by the General, he returned to
the Poop, to view again, and take his last Farewell of those almost innumerable
multitudes that crowded on the Downs and Sand Hills of Scheveling, saying
merrily that he thought his own Subjects could scarce have more tenderness and
veneration for him, than those Strangers, in whose Affections he believed he
Reigned no less, than he was going to Reign in the Wills of the English. Much
ado he had to part with the Princess of Orange, whom many other considerations
besides that of Birch, had renders most dear to him, till at last the General
having all the Kings Retinue on Shipboard, caused the Anchors to be weighed,
and the Sails to be spread, and then with Tears and Embraces she left him, and
Rowed back again with the same Company to the Dutch Shore, and there lost sight
of her Brother and the Royal Fleet about the Evening.

No sooner was the Fleet under Sail, but the Cannon began to roar, giving
notice that the Lord of the Sea was in his Rightful Possession, which
thundering continued till Night. Next day they had little wind, but so much as
on Friday Morning they came within sight of Dover; whereupon an Express was
sent to the* General then at Canterbury, to hasten to Dover, which he did
accordingly; and about One of the Clock with a gallant Train came thither:
About three of the Clock in the Afternoon his Majesty landed at the Beach near
the Peer of Dover, with the Dukes and his Nobles. Every man now put themselves
into a posture to observe the meeting of the best of Kings and the most
deserving of all the British Subjects, then the King dignified him with a
George, which he put about his Necks with his own Hand, and the Garter was tied
on by the two Dukes: which Solemn and unexampled meeting, did together with the
joy thereof infuse a kind of fear, least the King and the General Congress
should fail in one part or other in affection or Ceremony; but when they met,
their Interview dispensed with all punctillio's, except the General, kneeling,
and the Kings kissing and embracing of him, to the most pleasing Satisfaction
both of Nobility and people.

These complements being over, he walked upon foot with the General under a
Canopy, a Chair of State being likewise carried by his Coach-side. The Mayor
and Aldermen of Dover, great numbers of Gentry, met him without the Town; and
after a short Speech presented him a rich Bible with Gold Clasps. Yet he stayed
not long there, but took Coach for Canterbury; and when he was got about two
Miles out of Town he left his Coach and Mounted on horseback, the Dukes riding
on his Right hand, and the General on the left. Bare, followed by Buckingham
and the rest of the Nobility and Gentry, and uncovered. In which posture they
came to Canterbury, where he was met and complemented by the Mayor, Aldermen
and Recorder of that City, who having presented him with a Gold Tankard,
conducted him to the Palace, where he stayed Saturday and Sunday, and departed
early on Monday morning for Rochester. And arriving there early that afternoon
went to Chattam, to see the Sovereign and other Ships of the Royal Navy, and
returned again in the evening to his Lodgings, where he was welcomed by an
Address from Gib. his Regiment delivered to him by the Colonel himself, which
was graciously accepted; and the next Morning being the 29th of May, which was
his Birthday, he set forward from Rochester, the Militia forces of Kent lining
the ways and the Maidens strowing herbs and Flowers, and adorning the houses
through all the streets he passed. And being come to Dartford, the Officers of
the Regiments of Horse presented him with an humble Address, wherein they
declared their readiness to Sacrifice their Lives in defense of his person and
Government: the Army being drawn up at Black Heath he there took a view of
them, and used many gracious expressions toward them, which were answered by
them with loud and joyful Acclamations; and the several Regiments being placed
in order, he advanced toward London, and came about one of the Clock to St.
Georges Fields, where the Lord Mayor and Aldermen who waited there in a Tent to
receive him, delivered him their Sword, which he re-delivered, and Knighted Sir
Thomas Allen who was then Mayor. After a short repast, he proceeded into London
through Southwark, and so from the Bridge to Temple Bar, the Streets being
Railed on one side with standings for the Liveries, and on the other with the
Trained bands, through which he passed in a splendid and Triumphant manner to
White Hall. A Troop of about 300 Gentlemen in Doublets of Cloth of Silver, led
by Major General Brown marched first, brandishing their Swords in token of
Triumph, being followed by another of the like number in Velvet Coats, with
their Footmen and Lacquies, in Purple Liveries: then marched the Troop led by
Coll. Robinson in Buff-Coats with Cloth of Silver sleeves and green Scarves,
followed by another in blew Liveryes and Silver Lace, their Colors being Red
fringed with Silver. Then marched a Troop with six Trumpets and seven Footmen
before them in Seagreen and Silver, their Colors being pinck fringed with
Silver; followed by another Troop whose Liveries were gray and blew, under the
Earl of Northampton, having 30 Footmen and Trumpets four, their Colors being
Sky, with Silver fringed. Then marched a Troop in Gray Liveries of about an
hundred and five, led by the Lord Goring, having six Trumpets and Colors of
Sky and Silver; followed by another of about Seventy. After these marched a
Troop of about three hundred Noblemen and Gentry led by Cleveland, followed by
another of about one hundred with black Colors, and after them marched a Troop
of about three hundred Horse, led by the Lord Mordant.

These being all past, two Trumpets with his Majesty's Arms advanced with the
Sheriffs Men, being about Seventy-two in number, in red Cloaks and Silver-Lace,
and carrying half Pikes. Then followed the Gentlemen that rode out of the
several Companies of London, with their respective Streamers, in Velvet Coats
and Gold Chains, every Company haing its Footmen with different Liveries, being
about six hundred. After them came a Kettle Drum and five Trumpets, followed by
twelve Ministers, then his Majesty's Lifeguard advanced, being led by Sir
Gilbert Gerrard, and Major Rascarrock, who were followed by the City Marshal
with eight Footmen, and the City Waits and Officers in order, and they by the
two Sheriffs, and all the Aldermen of London in their Scarlet Gowns and Rich
Trappings, attended with great numbers of Footmen in Red Coats laced with
Silver and Cloth of Gold. Then followed the Maces and Heralds in their Rich
Coats, the Lord Mayor bare, carrying the Sword, and the General and the Duke of
Buckingham bare also, after whom as the chiefest Ray of Luster to all this
Splendid Triumph, rode the King himself, between his two Royal Brothers, having
observed that order all along from the very first overture of his return. After
them marched a Troop bare with white Colors, then the Generals Lifeguard, and
another Troop of Gentry, and last of all marched five Regiments of the Army
Horse, with Back, Breast and Head-Pieces, which diversified the show with
delight and terror. This was the manner of his passing through London, for it
is impossible for the most florid and Ingenious Pen, to express those loud
Musical and Ravishing Notes of Acclamations, and Vive-le-Roy's which then
filled the Mouths and charmed the Ears of all his transported Subjects.

Being in this manner brought to White Hall, and the Lord Mayor and Citizens
having taken their leave of him, he went to the Banqueting House, where both
Houses of Parliament waited his Arrival, and received him with those
demonstrations of joy and expressions of Reverence and humility that became
them. The Speakers of each House in elegant Speeches acquainting him with the
felicity and happiness they conceived in that happy revolution, and the
pleasure they took to behold his return in safety, and thereby putting an end
to that Tyranny and Slavery which his Kingdoms had so long endured.

He thankt them for their expressions of love and Loyalty, and told them that
he was so disordered by his Journey, and with the noise still sounding in his
ears, which he nevertheless confessed to be pleasing to him, in regard it expressed
the affections of his People, that he was thereby unfit to make them such a
Reply as he desired; adding, that the greatest Satisfaction he took in that
change, was the finding his heart fully set to endeavor by all means the
Restoring the Nation to its freedom and happiness, which he hoped by the advice
of his Parliament to effect; assuring them that next to the honor of God from
whom principally he derived his restoration to his Crown, he would study the
welfare of his people, and not only approve himself a true Defender of the
Faith, but also a just Assertor of the Laws and Liberties of his Subjects. And
having taken leave of them, he retired to Supper, and soon after to his rest,
where it was time for him to find a sweet and sedate repose free from the
confused noise and clamours of War, wherewith he had been for twenty years
together strangely tossed upon the boistrous Waves of fickle and unconstant
Fortune.

On the Friday following, he went by Water in the Brigandine, which brought him
on board the Charles from Holland, to the house of Lords, the Yeomen of the
guard making a lane for him to pass through, and the Heralds at Arms in their
Rich Coats, the Maces and the Lord General bare-headed going before him. As
soon as he was seated, he commanded the Commons to attend him, and having in a
short, but elegant speech, pressed them to hasten the Act of oblivion, he signed
several Bills which they had made ready against that time for the Royal assent;
the First whereof was an Act for the confirmation of that Parliament; a second
for a Tax of seventy thousand pound per mensem for 3 Months, and a third for
the continuance of Process and Judicial proceedings. And then he returned to
White Hall, where he chose the Lords of his Privy Council, amongst whom were
several of the long Parliament, that had given sufficient, Testimony of their
sincere repentance, and their resolution to be Loyal for the future, and he
appointed Judges for the Benches and Courts of Judicature. Several Addresses
were likewise made to him from the Nobility and Gentry of all the Countries in
England, wherein they congratulated his Restitution to his Crown and Kingdom,
assuring him of their exceeding Joy and willingness to maintain his Royal
Person and Authority. Diverse persons that had been eminent for their service
and affection to him, were about that time also dignified with the honor of
Knighthood. And several men guilty of his Fathers murder, having made their
escape Beyond Sea, a Proclamation was Issued forth, wherein all those persons
who had ^ate, gave Judgment, or any way assisted in that horrid and detestable
fact, were commanded to surrender themselves within fourteen days to the
Speaker or Speakers of Parliament, to the Lord Mayor of London, or the Sheriff
of that County, wherein they then resided, forbidding all persons to conceal or
harbor them, under misprision of Treason; whereupon diverse submitted
themselves, and were secured in the Tower.

The Commons in drawing up the Act of Oblivion, ordered, that some others
besides those who had actually sat in Judgment upon the late King, should be
excepted out of it, viz. Broughton, Phelps, Cook, D^nby, and Hugh Peter's, which
so affrighted others who had a hand in that execrable murder, that Col. John
Hutchinson, a Member of that Parliament, and Coll. Fr^. Lussels presented their
Petition to them, wherein they confessed their guilt, and declared the artifices
which were used to draw them in, by which submission they obtained pardon upon
some small forfeitures only. But Peter's being shortly after taken in Southwark,
was clapped up into the Tower. And the Parliament not looking upon themselves,
nor the people of England, free from the guilt, nor safe from the punishment
which in those unhappy times they had contracted, unless they laid hold of the
Kings offer of Grace in his Declaration from Breda, did therefore resolved in a
full house, that they did in the name of themselves, and of all the Commons of
England, lay hold on the gracious pardon mentioned in that Declaration, with
reference to the exclusion of such as should be excepted in an Act of Pardon;
and they ordered a Declaration, that their Resolution should be drawn up, which
was done accordingly, and presented to the King by Denzell afterward Lord
Hollis; some of the most eminent in Office under the late Usurpers, having in
the mean while, to make sure of that Grace, gotten their particular pardons
exemplified under the great Seal of England: To prevent which trouble the King
was more than ordinary pressing for the speedy passing the Act of Oblivion;
taking care to express his grateful sentiments of the Loyalty, and services of
several Illustrious personages, that were principally instrumental in
accomplishing his Restoration, by dignifying them with Places and Titles of
honor. And to show how highly the Generals Loyalty had advanced him in his
good Opinion, he was dignified by him with the Titles of Duke of Albemarle,
Earl of Torrington, and Baron of Potheridge Beauchamp and Teyes, and had his
Temples deserv'dly incircl'd with a Ducal Coronet by the hand of his Majesty,
being thereby invested with the right of Peerage in all the three Kingdoms:
whose equal Felicity, and Honor* he had preferred before his own, and
therefore now most deservingly shared with them therein by his Investure in
those Dignities, which were completed on the 13th of the following July, by
his taking his place in the House of Lords, being attended by the Commons, and
introduced by the Duke of Buckingham. Montague was made Earl of Sandwich,
Ormond Earl of Brecknock, and Lord Steward of the Kings Household, the Earl of
Lindsey, Lord High Chamberlain, Manchester, L. Chamberlain of the Kings
Household, Southhampton, Lord High Treasurer, Greenvile, Earl of Bath, and Groom
of the Stole, Sir Frederick Cornwallis, Treasurer of the Kings Household, by an
old grant, and Sir John Berkley Controller.

Diverse rich Presents were now made to him from the several Cities and
Buroughs of the Kingdom in Gold and Plate, and the resignation of several
Feefarm Rents, which had been purchased from the Usurpers, the City of London
among the rest, with a Complement of their good Stewardship, rendered their
grant of new Perk in Surrey, and all the Rents accruing at Michaelmas Day, were
now secured from the late Purchasers of Crown and Church Laws, to the utter
disappointing of their unjust and covetous expectations from such base and
unwarrantable Penny-worths.

A Peace was now made and Proclaimed between us and Spain, and a Splendid
Embassy dispatched from Denmark to congratulate his happy Restauratian. The
Court of Soissons, who had Married Cardinal Mazarines Niece, being sent from
the French King on the same Errand, entering London with all the sumptuous, and
extraordinary Magnificence imaginable; and there was no Prince nor State in
Europe, but what sent an Ambassador thither to congratulate him upon that happy
and wonderful occasion.

And the Parliament having after many debates and disputes, alterations and
insertions, at last finished the long desired Act of Oblivion, which was
extraordinary comprehensive, and indulgent, (even to the regret of many injured
Loyalists, who found no better Argument to persuade their acquiescing therein,
than their unchangeable Loyalty to the King, whose special Act that was*) There
were no more excepted out of it, but only the Regicides and Murderers of the
late King, only Lambert, Vane, and twenty more were thereby reserved to such
forfeitures, as should be afterward declared by Parliament, the principal
whereof was Hazelrick, St. John Lenthal, the Speaker, Philip Nigh, Burton of
Tarmouth, and some Sequestrators Officers, and Major Generals of the Army,
among whom was Desbrough, Pine, Butler, Ireton, etc. They likewise past an Act
for the perpetual Anniversary Thanksgiving on the 29 of May, which was the day
both of his Birth and Restoration, and therefore deserved a perpetual
memorial, and to be made by a Parliamentary Canonization, the most auspicious
in the English Kallender: to both which he gave his Royal assent, and shortly
after, at their adjournment to another, for disbanding the Army, and paying off
the Navy; which, although they once threatened us with a perpetuating our
slavery, yet were now forced by the happy conjunction of his Fortune, with his
Wisdom and Goodness, after many models, to submit to its last desolation. And
the Commons having after the passing of their Bills, acquainted him that they
had nothing more to ask or offer at that time, but that if his Majesty's
occasions would permit, they might adjourn and go into their own Countries,
where they should endeavor to make his subjects sensible of their
extraordinary happiness in having such a King to Rule and Govern them; He
consented to it, telling them, that no man had longed with more impatience, to
have those Bills past, than he had done to pass them; in regard he looked upon
them as the Foundation of the Nations Peace and Security, and that he did very
willingly pardon all that were pardoned in the Act of Indemnity; but assuring
them withal, that for the time to come the same discretion and conscience which
had disposed him to the clemency that he had therein expressed, and was most
agreeable to his nature, would oblige him to all Rigor and Severity how
contrary soever it were to his Disposition, toward those who should not now
acquiesce, but continue to manifest their Sedition and dislike of the
Government, not knowing any more probable way to assure himself of his peoples
affections, than by rendering himself just, as well as kind to all.

The confluence of his felicities were about this time somewhat abated, and the
Joy of his Restoration somewhat allayed by the immature and much lamented
Death of his younger Brother Henry Duke of Gloucester, a Prince of such
extraordinary hopes, that my silence will be his best Commendation, since his
virtues far transcend the highest expressions of my Pen. He dyed of the
Smallpox, and was privately buried in Henry the 7th's Chapel: The Princess of
Orange soon after dispelling the grief which had been conceived upon the
account of his death by her Arrival from Holland, to Joy and Felicitate her
Brothers in the Recovery of their Rights.

About this time the King knowing that the Common wealth never thrives so well,
as when the Church and State are equally Interested in the Princes care,
applied himself to settle the Miter as well as the Crown, and provide for the
well ordering of Ecclesiastical affairs, as well as he had done for the Civil,
by reestablishing Episcopcay, and restoring the Bishops to their ancient Rights
and Privileges. So that the Ecclesiastical Regiment by Bishops recovered its
self by the Kings piety and prudence, near as soon, and in almost as Triumphant
a manner, as Monarchy it self, appointing Dr. Juxon, that ancient and excellent
Prelate, that had been in his Fathers Reign Bishop of London, and had assisted
him at the time of his death on the Scaffold, to the Arch-Bishopprick of
Canterbury, whose Translation was performed with great Solemnity. And not long
after several new Bishops chosen from among the eminent and valiant asserters
of the Church and Law^ of England, were consecrated in the Abbey at Westminster,
and all the Vacant Diocesses filled up with men of the greatest Learning and
Piety.

And now divine vengeance having with a sure, though a slow foot, traced the
Murderers of the Royal Martyr through several Mazes, at last overtake them. For
the Parliament having in detestation of their Crime, and to wipe away the stain
of that most accursed Pollution, given them up as Sacrifices to the Law, and
the Honor of their Country, the King ordered their Trial by a Commission of
Oyer and Terminer, to begin on the Ninth of October, that so his Justice might
appear equally as Respondent in the punishment of their Parricide, as his
Clemency, had done in the pardon of all other Crimes. They were all of them
convicted according to Law, the full benefit whereof was allowed them, (being
tried by a Jury of their Peers, against whom they had the liberty of excepting)
and Condemned to be Drawn, Hanged and Quartered: and Harrison, Carew, Scot,
Clement, Scrope, Jones, Peter's, Hacker, Axtell, and Cook, were Executed
accordingly. The last of whom acknowledged, that the Person of the Prince they
had Murdered, was beyond any Parallel, being most Virtuous, most Innocent, most
Religious; and that his Judges were for the most part mean and desparate
Persons, whose Hands were lifted up by Ambition, Sacrilege, Covetousness, and
success against the Life of that incomparable Prince, whose lamented and
barbarous death God would not suffer to go unrevenged. Their quarters were
disposed of to the several Gates, and most of their Heads set on Poles upon the
Bridge: but the rest of the Prisoners that had surrendered themselves on
Proclamation, were respited from Execution till the farther pleasure of the
Parliament was known, and after Sentence past upon them, remanded to the Tower,
from whence they came.

And, having now in some measure revenged his Fathers Death, his next respects
were due to his Mother, who being about that time come over from France, he
could not better welcome her to his Kingdoms, than by rendering his
Entertainments of her Innocent, and free from that horrible guilt which had
Divorced her from her Husband, and for so long a Tract of time estranged her
from his People, since he could neither with Justice nor civility have received
her here without satisfaction, and expectation of those Crimes, which had so
rudely driven her to seek her safety abroad. He brought her back to his Palace
at Whitehall on the Second of November, after she had been nineteen Years
absent from them, together with his Sister the Princess Henretta, who had not
been suffered to breath in English Air above two years after her Birth. This
meeting, after so tedious and desperate an absence, was very joyous, and the
Entertainment highly Magnificent.

The Marquess of Argile, upon the Kings Restoration, had the confidence,
[notwithstanding all the base Treasons he had covertly acted in that Kingdom,
since the Kings departure thence] to come up from Scotland, in hopes, by his
fair and specious pretenses, to obtain his pardon; and that the King, according
to his Gracious Inclination, would have past by those many undutiful and
Irreverend usages he had received from him, and the rest of his Associates
whilst he was there amongst them. But such was the general hatred and
detestation of that People (and especially the Nobility) against him, that he
was committed to the Tower, and from thence by Sea conveyed to Edenborough,
where his process was making ready. The Earl of Middleton, the Kings great
Commissioner for that Kingdom, following him thither about the end of December,
in order to his Trial, where he was convicted and Executed for those many
Treasons he had perpetrated against both Kings.

Death having tasted of the Bloud-Royal, by cutting off the Duke of Gloucester,
as though there were a circulation of the very same in every individual, and it
naturally ran in the same distemper, through a whole Family; the Infection by a
kind of Sympathy, in the same disease of the Smallpox, seized the vitals of
the Princess of Orange, and in spite of all art and remedy, hurried her to the
grave, leaving her Brother and the whole Court, filled with grief and sadness,
and her Son the young Prince, not above ten years and a month old, she was
privately buried by her Brother, in Henry the 7the Chapel.

And now the happy Parliament, which rendered it self deservedly Famous by
rebuilding the glorious structure of the English, Ancient and Renowned
Government, and assured the Foundation thereof, in the establishing the Throne
of their rightful Sovereign, came to its final period: But that no revolution
of time might obliterate or blot out the memory of those worthy and excellent
things done by it. The King, at the time of his dissolution, honored it by his
Royal Mouth, with the Epithet of the Healing Parliament, which will
undoubtedly recommend it to posterity, and ought always to provoke that great
assembly to an imitation of them, in their endeavor to heal and close the
breaches of the Nation.

On the 30th of January, the day on which his Father was murdered, he commanded
Cromwell, Ireton and Bradshaw, to be taken out of those sumptuous monuments,
which they had usurpt in their Death, as they had done the Throne in their
Lifetime, and drawn in a Cart from Westminster, to the Red Lion in Holborn,
and from thence on Sledges to Tyburn, where they were hanged, from ten of the
Clock till Sun set, and then cut down, and their Bodies buried in a deep hole
under the Gallows, their heads being cut off, and placed upon Westminster^Hall,
where they will continue the brand-marks of their posterity* and the expiatory
remains of their horrid and abominable Crimes.

About this time also, notwithstanding Overton, Courtney and other Fifth
Monarchy-men had been taken up and secured, yet those mad and hair-brained
People, still persisted in their designed Insurrection, which strange and
unheard of action, will afford the truest fight, and judgment of that Brainsick
Crew, since a handful of those wild People, presumed to attempt the whole City
of London. For having armed themselves, they came to St. Paul's in the dusk of
the evening, and having ordered and mustered their small party, placed
Sentinels, one whereof killed an innocent Person, as he was accidentally
passing by, for saying upon their demanding of him, who he was for, that he was
for God and King Charles; and having created great disturbance, they killed
some of the City Watch, and repulst a party of the Train-bands, that were sent
to charge them, and marched through Aldersgate, (which they forced the Constable
to open) to Cane-wood, where they lurkt for some time, with a resolution to
make another Insurrection in the City, till they were routed by a party of
Horse and Foot, and about thirty of them taken Prisoners, who being carried
before the General, (the King being at that time from London) was sent by him
to the Gate House; Notwithstanding which defeat, those who escaped, after they
had quitted the Wood, returned for London, with assurance of success in their
Hellish Enterprise. Venner, who was a Wine-Cooper by Trade, telling them in his
Sermon, which he Preached to stir them up, and encourage them therein; That he
was assured, No Weapon framed against them should prosper, nor a hair of their
heads perish; which their Impunity in their first attempt deluded them to
believe: And therefore, so soon as the Watches and Guards were removed: On
Wednesday morning they reinforced their first enterprise, appearing at
Thread-needle-Street, and giving an Alarm to the Trained-Bands, which was
appointed to watch all that day: A party of whom being sent against them, were
forced to retreat to their main Guard. Whereupon the whole Company marching in
a body toward them, they fled into Bishops-gate-Street, where happened a sharp
dispute between them, wherein two were killed, and as many taken; the like
number being killed and wounded of the Train'd-Bands. Their next appearance was
at Colledg-Hill, from whence they Marched up into Cheap Side, and so into
Wood-street: Venner himself with a Murrion on his head, and a Halbird in his
hand, being their chief Leader, where there was the fiercest action that
happened during the whole Insurrection; for they fought it out stoutly with two
Companies of the Trayned-Bands, and some of the Life-Guards Commanded by the
Duke of York, and the General, in very good Order and Discipline, putting them
at first to the retreat; till being overpowered, and Venner knocked down and
wounded, and Tufney and Cragg, two more of their principal Teachers; they began
to give ground, and soon after fled in great Confusion, dispersing themselves
several ways; but the greater of them went down Wood street toward
Cripple-gate, firing in their retreat at the Trained-Bands of Yellow, who
followed them in close pursuit; ten of them took into the Blew-Anchor Ale House
by the Postern, which they briskly maintained for some time; and when some of
the Yellow, having possessed themselves of the next adjoining House, broke down
some part of it, and fired in upon them, they notwithstanding desperately
refused to accept of Quarter: And when another File of Musketeers, firing
their way up stayrs, had shot down the door, and entered the Room upon them, six
of them being killed before, and one upon refusing quarter then knocked down and
afterward shot with a Musket, the rest being demanded, why they craved not
Quarter before, answered, That it was because they durst not, for fear lest
their own fellows would have shot them; to such a prodigious height had their
resolution and desperation carried them.

The whole number of those who made this last Insurrection amounted not to
about fifty Persons, twenty whereof were taken (besides those killed) who were
soon after brought to their Trial; at which it was proved, that Venner, Tufney
and Crag, had several times persuaded their Congregation, to take up Arms for
King JESUS against the Powers of the Earth, meaning thereby, the King, the Duke
of York, and the General; and that they were to have killed all that opposed
them; sixteen of them were found guilty, and Condemned to be drawn, hanged and
quartered; and eleven of them were executed accordingly, the other five being
repreived by the Kings Mercy.

And now, lest any of the scattered Rays of the Imperial Brightness and Glory
that belong to him, as a Monarch of Great Britain, France and Ireland, should
suffer a diminution, or be obscured by too long an interval, greater
preparations were made for the settling the Crown, (which alone of all the
Ensigns of Majesty had escapt the Usurpation of Cromwell, when he had
impudently assumed all the other Regalities of his Rightful King and Sovereign,
but could no way fit this Sacred Symbol of Majesty to his impious and aspiring
designation; although he had made the most holiest things, and even Scripture
it self to truckle thereunto) with all imaginable splendour, upon his head; a
Ceremony that serves not so much for an excess of Pomp, as a boundary of
Government, and was contrived at first, more out of profoundness of
State-Reason, than for the transient Glory of the Ceremony it self. In order
whereunto, the City of London Erected four Magnificent and tryumphal Arches;
the first whereof was in Leaden-hall-Street, after the Dorick order; on the
North side whereof on a Pedestal before the Arch, was placed a Woman
personating Rebellion, Mounted on a Hydra in a Crimson Robe torn in several
places, Snakes crawling on her habit, and in her hair; her Loins girt with
Serpents, a Crown of Fire on her head, a bloody Sword in one hand, and a
charming Rod in the other; being attended on by Confusion, represented in a
deformed shape, having on a Garment of several ill-matcht Colors, put on the
wrong way; on her Head Ruins of Castles and torn Crowns, and in her Hand,
broken and shattered Scepters. On the South Pedestal was a Representation of
Britains Monarchy, supported by Loyalty, with Women; Monarchy arrayed in a large
Purple Robe, adorned with Diadems and Scepters, and over that a loose Mantle
edged with blew and silver Fringe resembling Water; the Mapp of Great Britain
being drawn on it: Upon her head was the City of London; in her right hand
Edinburgh; in her left Dublin. Loyalty was all in white, with three Scepters in
her right hand, and three Crowns in her left.

The first Painting on the South side was a prospect of His Landing at Dover,
Ships at Sea, great Guns going off, one kneeling and kissing the Kings hand,
attended by many Soldiers both Horse and Foot, and great numbers of People
gazing above; and beneath this Motto, In Solido Rursus Fortuna Locavit,
alludeing to that of Virgil, thus Rendered. Fortune Reviving, tho she tumbled
down
Sporting, Restores again unto the Crown.


Above the Arch on the North and South-Sides, stood the Statues of James and
Charles the first, and between them somewhat higher, and just over the Arch,
that of the Restored King, with this Inscription. D. N. Carolo D. G.
Britanniarum Britannia



The Second, which was a Naval Representation, was erected in Cornhill near the
Royal Exchange; on the East side whereof two Stages were erected, on each side
of the Street one; in that on the South side, a person representing the River
of Thames; and on that on the North side, which was made like the upper deck of
a Ship, were three Seamen, whereof one was habited like a Boat-Swayn, and upon
the Shield or Table on the front of the Arch a Latin Inscription: the first
painting on the North side over the City Arms represented Neptune, with his
Trident advanced, with this Inscription: Neptuno Reduci.



On the South side opposite to Neptune, was Mars represented with his Spear
Inverted, having his Shield charged with a Gorgon, and by his knees this Motto,
Marti Pacifero.



Over the Arch, the Marriage of Them and Isis. The painting in the North side
over Neptune, represented the Exchange, with this Motto: Generalis Lapsi
Sarcire Ruinas.



The uppermost great Table in the fore ground represented Charles the first,
with the Prince his Son, who was the then Restored King, in his hand, viewing
the Sovereign of the Sea; the Prince Leaning ^n a Canon with this Inscription,
O Nimium dilecte Deo cui militat aequor,
Et conjurati veniunt ad Classica ventt.
For Thee O Jove's delight, the Seas engage,
And mustered Winds drawn up in battle Rage.


The third, which represented an Artificial building of two Stories, the one
after the Corinthian way of Architecture, the other after the Composit, with a
Latin Inscription upon a Shield, was Erected near Wood-street end, not far from
the place where the Cross formerly stood: In the spanderills of which Arch, two
Figures in Female habit, and a leaning posture, represented Peace; whose Shield
was charged with a Helmet, and Bees ^ssuing forth and going into it, with this
Motto: Pax bello Potior.



And Truth clothed in a thin habit; on her Shield, Times bringing Truth out of
a Cave, with this Motto: Tandem Emersit.



Over the great Painting upon the Arch of the Cupula, was Represented a large
Geryon with three heads Crowned: In his three right hands, a Lance, a Sword,
and a Scepter; in his ^hree left, the Escutcheons of England, Scotland and
Ireland, having before him the Kings Arms with three Imperial Crowns, and
beneath him in great Letters Concordia Insuperabilis.

The fourth Triumphant Arch, which represented the Garden of Plenty, and was of
two Stories, one after the Dorick Order, the other of the Jonick, was Erected
in Fleet Street near the turning into White-Friers, and had upon the great
Shield over the Arch, in Large Capitals, this Inscription, Ubertati AUG.
extincto belli Jani



Over the Postern on the South side of the entrance, was represented Bacchus
drawn in a Chariot by Leopards; his Mantle a Panthers skin, a Crown of Grapes
on his head, a Thyrsis with Ivy in his left hand, and underneath, Liber Pater.

The Painting over this represented a Vineyard, with Silenus* on his Ass, with
Satyrs dancing round about him in drunken and antic Postures* And on the North
side opposite to Bacchus, was represented Ceres drawn in a Chariot by winged
Dragons, and Crowned with Ears of Corn; having in her left hand Poppyes, and
in her right a blazing Torch; the Painting over her, being the description of
Harvest.

Ceres AUG.

And the King having created six Earls, as many Barons, and Sixty Eight
Knights of the Bath, to assist at that Ceremony, and appointed the 23d. of
April, which was St. Georges day, for the Consummating thereof, the Glory and
Splendour of it commenced the day before, when he past through the City to
White Hall, in a most Magnificent and Tryumphant manner; For the Streets being
all gravelled, and filled with a vast multitude of wondering Spectators, as well
out of the Country as the City, and some Forraigners who acknowledge themselves
never to have seen amongst all the great Magnificencies of the World, any that
came near, or equaled that; and even the Vaunting French were forced to
confess, that their Pomp of the late Marriage with the Infanta of Spain, upon
their Majesty's entrance into Paris, was far inferior in its State, Gallantry,
and Riches, unto that most Illustrious and dazelling Cavalcade, which proceeded
after this manner.

First went the Horse Guard of His Illustrious Brother the Duke of York, the
Messengers of the Kings Bedchamber, the Esquires and Knights of the Bath,
being One Hundred and thirty Six in number; The Knight Harbinger, the Sergeant
Porters, the Sewers of the Chamber, the Quarter Waiters, the Six Clerks of the
Chancery, the Clerks of the Signet, the Clerks of the Privy Seal, the Clerks of
the Council, the Clerks of the Parliament, the Clerks of the Crown, the
Chaplains in Ordinary bearing Dignities ten in number; the Kings Advocate and
the Remembrancer, the Kings Council at Law, the Master of Chancery, the King
Puisne Sergeants, the Kings Attorney and Sollicitors, the Kings Eldest
Sergeants, the Secretaries of the French and Latin Tongues, the Gentlemen
Ushers daily Waiters, the Sewers, Carvers, and Cup-bearers in Ordinary, the
Masters of standing Officers being no Counselors, viz. Of the Tents, Revels,
Ceremonies, Armory, Wardrobe, Ordinance, the Master of Requests, Chamberlain of
the Exchecquer, Barons of the Exchecquer, and Judges of the Law according to
their several Dignities, Trumpets, Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber, Knights of
the Bath, the Knights Marshal, the Treasurer of the Chamber, the Master of the
Jewel House, the Knights of the Privy Council, the Comptrollor, and the
Treasurer of the Kings-Household, two Trumpets and Sergeants; Trumpets, two
Pursivants at Arms, Barons Eldest Sons, Earls Youngest Sons, Viscounts Eldest
Sons, Marquesses Youngest Sons, Earls Eldest Sons; two Pursivants at Arms,
Viscounts and Dukes Eldest Sons, Marquesses Eldest Sons; two Heralds, Earls,
Earl Marshal, and Lord Chamberlain of the Household, Dukes Eldest Sons,
Sergeants at Arms on both sides; the Nobility, Clarencieux and Norroy, Lord
Treasurer, Lord Chancellor, Lord High-Steward, the Duke of Ormond, and two
persons representing the Duke^ of Normandy and Aquitain, Gentleman Usher,
Garter, Lord Mayor, (His Royal Highness, the Duke of York alone) the Lord High
Constable of England, which was the Earl of Northumberland, the Lord Great
Chamberlain of England, which was then the Earl Lindsey, and the Sword carried
by the Duke of Richmond.

Equeries and Footmen followed next, and about the King himself, Gentlemen and
Pensioners; without them, Master of the Horse, which was the Duke of Albemarle
leading a Spare Horse, the Vice-Chamberlain to the King, the Captain of the
Pensioners, the Captain of the Guard, the Guard, the Kings Life Guard,
Commanded by the Lord Gerrard, the Generals Life Guard by Sir Phillip Howard, a
Troop of Volunteers, Troop, and a Company of Foot by Sir John Robinson.

The way from the Tower to Aldgate, was guarded by the Hamblets, from thence to
Temple Bar by the Train-Bands on the one side, and by the Livery on the other,
with the Banners of each Company; the Windows were all along laid with Carpets
and the best Tapistry, Bands of Music in several places, and the Conduits
running with Wine. In St. Paul's Churchyard stood the Blewcoat-Boyes of
Christ-Church Hospital, one whereof in the Name of the rest, declared their joy
for his Majesty's wonderful Preservation and Restoration, Humbly beseeching
his Gracious Favor and Indulgence, according to the example of His Royal
Ancestors, and his Father of Blessed Memory. With which Speech he was well
pleased, and testified his being so, by his rewarding the Boy that spoke it.

In the Strand, and through Westminster, the ways were likewise gravelled and
railed, and guarded on both sides with the Trained-Bands of that City, and the
Kings two Regiments of Foot under the Command of Albemarl, and Colonel Russel,
and the Houses adorned with Carpets and Tapestry like those in London: When he
came through Temple Bar, the Head Bayliffe and High-Constable in Scarlet, met
and received him with loud Music, and alighting off their Horses, and kneeling
down, the Head Bailiff on behalf of the Dean and Chapter, City and Liberty,
signified their Joyful Reception of His Royal Person into that Liberty;
Declaring how much their happiness exceeded any other part of the Nations in
that their Sovereign Lord and King was come among them, and humbly desiring His
Majesty to continue his Grace and Favor to them, whereby they might still be
enabled to do His Majesty service.

Infinite and Innumerable were the Shouts and Acclamations from all parts as he
past along, to the no less Joy, than amazement of the Spectators: And the Pomp
of this Solemnity was so great, that it is vain to attempt the describing it;
it being not only unutterable, but almost Inconceivable; and many outlandish
Persons, who beheld it, admired how it was possible for the English, after such
horrible confusions, to appear in so rich and stately a manner. It is
incredible to think what costly Robes were worn that day, it being scarcely
discernable what their Cloaks were made of, for the Gold and Silver Laces and
Imbroidery that was laid on them, besides the inestimable treasures of
Diamonds, Pearls, and other Jewels, and the Rich Liveries of their Pages and
Footmen, some suits whereof were so very rich, that they amounted to near 1500
l.

In this order he arrived at White Hall, where having retired himself to
supper, and so to Rest; he came the next day, (which being St. Georges day, was
to consummate the Coronation,) from his privy Stairs to the Old Palace; where
in a Room behind the House of Lords, called the Prince's Lodgings, he stayed
till the Lords and the rest of his Train had Robed and Ranked themselves in
Westminster Hall, and, so soon as they were ready, descended the Stairs, that
went down into the Hall, and placed himself in a Throne, in the upper end
thereof; Then came the Dean and Prebends of Westminster in their Rich Copes,
each of them having a part of the Regalia, and delivered them to the Lord High
Constable; who delivered them to the Lord Great Chamberlain, and being by him
set on a Table, the King immediately distributed them, St. Edwards Staff to the
Earl of Sandwich, the Spurrs to Pembr^ke, the Sword called Curtana to Oxford,
the pointed Sword carried on the Right Hand of it to Shrewsbury, that carried
on the left to Derby, and the Sword of State to Manchester, the Scepter with
the Dove to Albemarle, the Orb with the Cross to Buckingham, St. Edwards Crown
to Ormond; and the Pattina and Challice to the Bishops of London and Exeter:
And having thus bestowed the Regalia, he set forward on foot much after the
same order, which was observed the day before, upon blew Cloth spread on the
ground from the Hall to his Chair in the Abbey, supported by the Bishops of Bath
and Durham, and having his Trayn carried up by the Lords Mandevill, Cavendish,
Ossery and Piercy, assisted by the Lord Viscount Mansfield Master of the Robes;
All the Peers with their Coronets in their hands, went up along with him till
he was placed in the Chair of State: Then the Bishop of London, on behalf of
the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury told the People, he did there present them
King Charles the Second, the Rightful Inheritor of the Crown of this Realm, and
demanded of all those that came thither that day to do their Homage, Service
and Bounden Duty, whether they were willing to do the same? Whereupon all the
Peers in their Parliament Robes, and People gave a shout testifying their
willingness: Then the King rising from his Chair, turned himself to the four
sides of the Throne, and speaking to the People, who again with loud
Acclamations signified their consent, all in one voice: After which the Choire
sung an Anthem; in the interim whereof, he went supported by the Bishops of
Bath and Durham, attended by the Dean of Westminster, to the steps before the
Communion Table; where upon Carpets and Cushions he offered a Pall and a piece
of Gold, and then removing to the right hand kneelled down during a short
Collect; then the Sermon began, being Preached by the Bishop of Worcester; which
ended, the Bishop of London on behalf of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
ask't Him, If He would be pleased to take the Oath, that was wont to be taken
by his Predecessors? Whereupon rising out of the Chair, He was led by His two
Supporters to the Communion Table, where he made a solemn Oath, to observe
those things he had before promised; and then returning to his Chair again,
kneeled at the Footstool, while the Hymn of the Holy Ghost was Singing.

Then he arose from his Devotion, and disrobed himself of his upper Garment;
and his under Garment being so contrived, that the Places to be Anointed might
be opened by undoing certain Loops: The Arch Bishop proceeded to that Ceremony;
after which the Coife was put on his head, and the Dalmatica, the Super-Tunica,
of Cloth of Gold, and the Tissue Buskins and Sandals of the same; And the
Spurrs being put on by the Peer that carried them; the Archbishop took the
Kings Sword, and laid it on the Communion Table, which after Prayer was
restored to him again, and girt on him by the Lord Great Chamberlain; then the
Armil and the Mantle or Open Pall was put on; after which the Archbishop
taking the Crown into his hands laid it on the Communion Table, and having
prayed took it up again, and set it on the Kings head; whereupon all the Peers
put on their Coronets and Caps, and the Choire Sung an Anthem; Then the
Archbishop took the Kings Ring, and having prayed put it on the fourth finger
of the Kings hand; after which the King took off his Sword, and offered it up,
which the Lord Great Chamberlain having redeemed, drew it out, and carried it
naked before him: Then the Archbishop delivered the Scepter with the Cross
into his Right, and the Rod with the Dove into his Left hand, and the King
kneeling blessed him; after which the King ascended His Throne Royal, attended
by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, where after Te Deum Sang, all the Peers
did their Homage Kissing his le^t Cheek, and afterward standing all round about
him, they every one in their order touched the Crown upon his head, promising
their readiness to support it to the utmost of their Power; and then proceeding
to the Communion, the King having received and offered, returned to his Throne
till Communion was ended; after which he went into St. Edwards Chapel, and
taking his Crown from his head, delivered it to the Bishop of London; who
having laid it upon the Communion Table, the King withdrew into a Traverse,
where the Lord Great Chamberlain disrobed him of St. Edwards Robes delivering
them to the Dean of Westminster, and arrayed him with those prepared for that
day; and then being conducted to the Communion Table in St. Edwards Chapel,
the Crown Imperial, provided for him to wear, was set up ^n his head: After
which, taking the Scepter and the Rod, and his Train being set in order before
him, he went up to the Throne, and so through the Choire and Body of the
Church, out at the West door to the Palace at Westminster, the Peers according
to their Rank going before him with their Coronets on, and in the great Hall,
(at the upper end whereof was a Table and Chair of State, raised upon an ascent
for the King, and below Tables for the Nobility, the Lord Mayor and Citizens,
the Officers at Arms, etc.) they were entertained with a Noble and Magnificent
dinner; after which he returned in his Barge to White Hall.

It is very observable, that altho^ it had rained for about a month before, yet
it pleased God, that not one drop fell upon this Splendid Triumph, which
appeared in its full Luster and Grandeur; but was no sooner over, and the King
and his Train sat down to Dinner, but it fell a Thundering, Lightning and
Raining, with the greatest Force, Vehemence and Noise, that was ever known at
that season of the Year; the Thunder and Lightning seeming, as it were, to
imitate the Fire and Noise of the Cannon, which then played from the Tower; it
being observed, that they exactly kept time with that loud Music; so that they
were easily distinguishable from each other; the Thunder and lightning still
intermitting between each firing of the Canons, as if they had waited to
receive and answer the Reciprocated and ecchoed Boation and Clashes of the
Guns; which was taken by the most Judicious and discerning part of Mankind for
a very auspicious and promising Omen, notwithstanding the mad Remnant of the
Rebellion would have had it paralled to Saul's Inauguration, without reflecting
upon the Season, or the Different case between the Ancient Kingly Right and
Descent in Christendom; and that new Title and Government in Jewry, which in
regard of the peculiar presence of God amongst them before, was a kind of
casting him off, and declaring they would not have him to Reign over them.

There was not only in London, but through the whole Kingdom great rejoicing
for the Kings Coronation, which was manifested by Feasting, and other Public
shows; as Trayning the several Bands of the Countries with the additional
Voluntary Gentry, in a new and gallant Cavalry; And so there was in Scotland
and Ireland, in each whereof there was likewise the same kind of Tryumphs, in
resemblance of this Magnificence.

And having with as much Brevity as possible glided through this Sphere of
Glory, in which the Ancient honor of the Government and Kingdom was refixt,
and given the World the full and complete View of that wonderful Revolution,
which will undoubtedly be the amazement of all succeeding Ages, each Luminary
being thereby placed and shining in their proper Orbs and degrees, the
Sovereign, Nobility, Clergy, Gentry and Commonalty, having by that blessed
change recovered their former and distinct Luster, and from being the scorn and
deris^on, were once again become the Envy of the World: I shall proceed to show
by what Rules and Methods, he managed the Government throughout his whole
Reign, and therein shall begin; First with his Calling a Parliament, with whom
he desired to meet and consult for the more effectual healing the Breaches,
uniting the Differences, and redintegrating the mutual Affections and
Endearments, which the unnaturalness and perverse malignity and divisions of
the late times had abrupted and hitherto discontinued.

When he dissolved that Parliament or Convention, which was sitting when he
came in; He promised the calling of a new one, and accordingly Issued out His
Writs soon after for their sitting down the Eighth of May; a little before
which several Musters had been made in England of the Militia, and a General
Train in Hide-Park, of all the Forces about London, both Horse and Foot;
Fifteen Regiments whereof he there took a view of. The chief Stickling in the
Election of Members for this Parliament, was between the Episcopal and
Presbyterian Parties; the Latter whereof notwithstanding their Numbers, found
themselves greatly mistaken in the suffrages of the Kingdom, when under no Awe,
nor distempered with a Frenzy, and a misguided Zeal; For although several Letters
were dispatched by the chief Ministers of that Persuasion to their
Correspondents, wherein they exhorted them to do their utmost in procuring such
persons to be Elected for Members of that Parliament, as were known to favor
their Discipline; yet that no part of the Government might be left unjustified
and unreared, the greater part of those, chosen for Members of the House of
Commons, were as well affected to the Restoration and Settlement of the Church,
as the former had been to the Restoration and Settlement of the Crown.

The Eighth of May being come, when they were to sit, according to the Splendid
Custom of opening those great Assemblies, He rode in State and Triumph from
White Hall to Westminster, being arrayed in his Royal Robes, and his Crown on
his head; and having placed himself on His Throne in the House of Peers,
commanded the Commons to attend him there, and in a most pleasant and obliging
manner, declared his great Content in meeting them, Telling them, that he was
very confident, that it would prove a happy Parliament, and acquainting them
with his design of his Marrying the Infanta of Portugal, which Match having
been proposed to his Privy Council, and highly approved of by them, he thought
none there present would willingly have him live and die a Batchellor: In
confidence whereof he had newly made and signed a Treaty with that King by his
Ambassador Don Francisco de Mello, who was then ready to depart with the said
Treaty, in which the Article of Marriage was inserted. The Kings Speech being
ended, and the Lord Chancellor Hide having given them a further account of the
Reasons, why they were called, and the happy Effects his Master expected from
their Sitting: The Commons made Choice of Sir Edward Turner the Dukes Attorney
General for their Speaker; who in his Speech upon his being presented to, and
accept^ of by the King, expressed the hopes of that House: That as His Majesty
had manifested his great Indulgence to their former, which was but his Adopted,
So he had a fuller Blessing for that present, which was his Natural Parliament,
being called by His immediate Writ. The Convocation of the English Clergy,
being all Eminent, Learned, and Pious Persons, met likewise on the Sixteenth of
that Month at Westminster; and a Parliament began about the same time in
Ireland.

The Parliament at the special instance, and desire of the King, who was
willing to give the highest demonstration of his Care and Resolution, for the
assuring to his Subjects whatsoever was contained and promised in His
Declaration from Breda, and the Act of Pardon, first began with an Act for the
Confirmation of the Act of Oblivion, which being done by the Free Parliament
not called by the Kings Writ, was thought by the Guilty not to be valid* and
secure enough to them; and that they might by a wise provision before hand,
prevent all Objections and Scruples which might otherwise have been raised upon
that account; They Ratified and Confirmed all the other Laws made therein, and
then proceeded to frame such new ones as were necessary for the better settling
and maintaining the Public Peace; wherein that for Regulating Corporations, as
the most necessary, had the Precedence, wherein Commissioners were Empowered to
displace all such as bore Offices, and were any way suspected to be ill-willers
to the Government and the Kings Authority, or should refuse the Oath of
Allegiance and Supremacy, or the Oath of Abjuration; which was indeed at that
time the only, or at least the chief Test of Loyalty, in regard they were
therein to renounce the Solemn League and Covenant, as unlawful in it self and
illegally imposed. But during the Houses Debate about that Bill, Mr. Prin, who
had always indulged himself the liberty of Quarrelling with every thing that
any way ran counter to his inclinations, could not refrain against the
Privilege of the House, whereof he was a Member, from publishing his Reasons
against the said Bill, affirming it was contrary to Magna Charta; but the
Commons having Commanded their Sergeant at Arms, to Seize the Printer, and Prin
owning himself to be the Author; he was brought to the Bar, and severely
rebuked by the Speaker; but upon his humble submission, and the House's
favorable reflection upon his great Endeavors for the Restitution of the
King; he was remitted the Censure and Punishment which he had incurred by that
oversight. And that they might show their respect and veneration to the
Prelacy, by relieving it from the Oppressions, and justifying of it from the
Calumnies and Reproaches of the late times, they Repealed the Act of the 1
Caroli. 7. which forbid the Bishops meddling in Civil affairs and debarred them
from their Privilege of Peerage in the House of Lords; to all which Honors
they were by this Repeal restored as fully as ever they had been before.

The free Parliament, having before their desolution, respitted the punishment
of several of the Regicides; the Parliament next reassumed the Consideration of
that matter, and having caused the Lord Manson, Sir Henry Mildmay and Mr.
Robert Wallop, to be brought to the Bar, declared their Estates to be
confiscated, and their Persons and Posterity degraded from all Titles and Arms
of Gentility; and that they should be carried back again to the Tower, and from
thence be drawn through the City of London to Tyburn on the 30th. of the
following January, and so back again with halters about their necks upon
Sledges, and after that, to suffer perpetual imprisonment. And having now done
as much as could be expected from them for the present, they were adjourned by
the King, who declared his great satisfaction in what they had done; and that
his confidence i^ them had not in the least deceived^ him. About which time the
Duke o^ York having been chosen Captain to the Artillery Company in London*
honored them with his Presence and led them in their Ground: And in the August
following, the Kings Solicitor, Sir Heneage Finch, being chosen Reader of the
Inner Temple, he was pleased to indulge him a Favor, never granted before by
any of his Royal Progenitors, to any of those famous Societies, accepting of an
invitation to dine with him in that Hall.

These endeavors of the Parliament to settle the Nation upon the Foundation of
a well-grounded and lasting Peace, by excluding from all Offices, as well
Sacred as Civil and Military, those that refused to take the aforesaid Oaths,
did highly urge the Discontented of the late Anarchy; whose anger suggested to
them some hopes of undoing all again: In order whereunto, they laid new designs
and Conspiracies, and had several meetings to consult about them; but their
designs proved Abortive, by a timely discovery, Barbone, Moyer, Salmon,
Wildman, Haynes, Ireton, and others were seized and Committed to safe custody.

The King out of a Noble and generous inclination to show Respect and
Veneration to the Memory of his Friends, when it was out of his power to reward
their Persons, and considering likewise that the Living are usually very much
taken with kindnesses expressed to the dead; did about this time give order for
the Re-interring those two Loyal Commanders Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George
Lisle, which was performed with abundance of splendour at Colchester; the place
which they had bravely defended for him, and where they were at its Reduction
basely shot to death; all the Gentry of those Parts, together with the
Townsmen in Arms and Mourning attending their Hearses: As he had done a
little before for the Earl of Montross in Scotland.

Count Coningsmark, who was sent hither from the Young King and Queen of
Sweden, being upon his departure, another more splendid Embassy was sent from
thence, at whose Reception near the Tower, a Fray or Conflict happened between
the French and Spanish Ambassadors, upon a Quarrel for Precedence, whose Coach
should follow next after that wherein the Swedish Ambassador rode: Both Parties
came prepared for the Encounter, but the French were basely worsted, and seven
or eight of them slain, which was like to have proved the ground of a new War
between those Crowns; the French King sending a Messenger to Madrid to demand
satisfaction: But at the entreaty of the new married Queen, and the Spanish
King consenting, that the French Ambassador should for the time to come have
the Precedence upon such occasions; the difference was composed: Now also
several Prisoners in the Tower, Regicides and others, were by reason of the
unwearied Practices of their Parties abroad, sent to several remote Castles and
Islands for securing the Peace.

The adjournment being expired, the Parliament met again, on the 20th. of
November, when the Lords Spiritual the Bishops, by virtue of the Act of Repeal
made in the former Session, took their places again in Parliament; which the
King was very much pleased to behold; and in his Speech to both Houses, did
Congratulate with them for their enjoyment of their former privileges, as a
Felicity he had much desired, to see accomplished in that goodly restored and
re-establisht Fabric of the Government; and the Regicides that came in upon
Proclamation, and were upon that account respited after Sentence to the
Pleasure of the Parliament, being brought to the Bar of the House of Lords, and
demanded what they had to say, Why Judgment should not pass upon them,
according to Sentence? pleaded the Proclamation: Harry Martyn adding, that he
never obeyed any Proclamation before; and therefore hoped he should not be then
hanged for taking the Kings word; whereupon they were remanded back again to
the Tower, till further Order. Ireland having been hitherto governed by three
Lords Justices: The Duke of Ormond having been a faithful Servant, and constant
Attender upon the King in all his Troubles, was now nominated Deputy of that
Kingdom; and Episcopacy, after it had been so long banished out of Scotland,
and so many Miseries and Confusions had befallen that Kingdom through the Fury
and Zeal of the Kirk, was reduced with all gladness and sufficient
testimonies, of a welcome reception, the four Bishops that had been a little
before Consecrated at Lambeth; restored, whereof Dr. James Sharp Archbishop
of St. Andrews, and Metropolitan of Scotland was one, who Consecrated others in
that Kingdom, the whole Order being defunct by the long Usurpation of the
Presbyterian Discipline.

A Fleet was at this time sent to fetch home the Queen from Portugal, and carry
Forces to Garrison Tangier, which being part of the Queens Dowry, was delivered
by them to Sir Richard Stayner, who with Five Hundred Men had taken possession
of it in his Masters behalf; and was to maintain it till the Earl of
Peterborough, who was nominated for Governor, should arrive; and the King
supposing her to be by this time at Sea, on her way for England, acquainted the
Parliament therewith, and desired that as a Complement to her, they would cause
the Streets and Highways of London, to be fitted and cleansed against Her
Reception.

This Royal Bride seems to have been fitted and predisposed by Heaven, for his
Princely Embraces; for besides being designed for him by her Father in the
beginning of the late Troubles, her Family had suffered a long Eclipse by the
interposition of the Spanish Monarchy for the space of near one hundred Years,
and had now newly recovered its Splendour by her Fathers assuming the Crown,
which was almost as miraculous a Revolution, and as strange a turn of
Providence, as that of our Captivity, by his recovery of his Dominions. On the
14th. of May, She arrived safe at Portsmouth, (in the Charles, which had
brought the King over to England) after a tedious and dangerous Voyage; the joy
whereof served to alleviate the grief, and wipe away the Tears occasioned by
the death of his Aunt, the Queen of Bohemia, who died a little before; having
lived to survive all the Misfortunes of her Family, which almost from the very
time of Her Marriage, in the Year One Thousand Six Hundred and Twelve, had
fallen very thick upon it. Her death was followed with a most violent and
Tempestuous Wind, whereby diverse Persons were killed, and much damage done, as
well in Foreign parts as in these Kingdoms, as if Heaven had designed thereby
to intimate to the World, that those Troubles and Calamities, suffered by that
Princess and the Royal Family, and by which most parts of Europe had been
tempested, were now all blown over, and was like her to rest in a perpetual
Repose. Several Bills which were ready for His Royal Assent detained him at
White Hall, somewhat longer then he was willing, had their weight and tendency
been of less importance, but in regard their being past into Acts, would set
the Nation right, where it was before the Troubles began, by providing remedies
against those mischiefs which had then unhinged the Kingdoms happiness; such as
the Forbidding armed or tumultuary Petitions, and ordering that not above
Twelve shall resort together at any time, to deliver Petitions to the King,
whereby they provided so far as Humane Wisdom could foresee against the like
dangers, by insensible degrees brought upon the Nation in the late Confusions:

But having once signed those Acts, and thereby furnished his Subjects with so
many good and wholesome Laws, as no Age of our Forefathers could ever boast of,
he posted away to Portsmouth, having sent the Bishop of London thither before
Him, who was to consummate the Sacred Rights of Marriage, which was performed
in private; and the Queen Conducted soon after by Him to Hampton Court; and
from thence to London in great Pomp and Splendor. The Parliament of Ireland,
having about that time, for the better defraying his necessary Charge given him
a subsidy of One Hundred and Twenty Thousand Pounds to be raised in two Years.

The Affrican Potentates, alarumed by the Arrival of the English, and terrified
by the Fame of those Warlike and Martial Achievements, began to fear, that if
they suffered them quietly to possess Tangier, they should thereby give them
encouragement to incroach farther upon them; which consideration drew thither
Gayland, a Warlike Prince, but then a Rebel against the Emperor of Fez and
Morocco, having usurpt part of his Dominions, who continued there about for
some time upon pretense of entering into a League of Friendship with them; but
meeting of a sudden, as he was ranging with his Horse (who are accounted the
swiftest in the World) with some of our Forces, who were forraging for
Provisions and Horse-meat; he surprised and defeated them; their manner of
Fighting being to take and leave as they find advantage, which they do with
very active and quick Force and Resolution; but the English were not long
before they requi^ed him, and revenged the injury upon some of his adventurous
Stragglers; after which he freely entered into, and finished a Treaty of Peace
with them: And the King not long after made it a free Port; and endowed it with
all the Privileges of a Merchant City, being very conveniently Situated for
Commerce and Trade, especially in regard of the Security thereof.

The great discourse and expectation at this time was, what the Presbyterians
would do after the Act of Uniformity was past; which provided, that by St.
Bartholomews day, their Ministers should renounce the Covenant, read Divine
Service and Common Prayer in Church Vestments, as the Surplise, which was the
main thing they pretended to ^cruple, or else forsake their Liv^^gs.

Many endeavors there had been ^^ed before to prevail with the Par^^ament for
some Tolleration; but ^ot being able to carry it there, they afterward applied
themselves to the King and His Council; but upon (...) full Debate of their
Petition, and ^s full a hearing of what they had ^o say; the business was laid
aside, ^n regard there was none present, who could answer and dispute their
pretenses, for the Superseding the express meaning of that Act. But the Bishop
of London, by his Prudence and foresight had provided Pious and able Ministers
to succeed them in their Cures; and for the better security of the public
Peace for times to come, the Commissioners for regulating Corporations, besides
the displacing such Officers as were ^ill affected, ordered the Walls of such
Towns and Cities, as had been the reception of, and maintained the late
Rebellion, to be demolished as examples and security to succeeding Ages, viz.
Gloucester, Coventry, Northampton, Taunton, and Leicester, which was done
accordingly.

And the Town of Dunkirk, which was taken from the Spaniards by Cromwell, and
had ever since been kept at a vast charge; was now also by the Advice of His
Council, in regard it had never been Annexed by Act of Parliament to the Crown
of England, returned to the French King, upon the valuable Consideration of
Five Hundred Thousand Pounds.

And there having been great talk, and long suspicion of a Plot, secretly
carried on against the Government, insomuch that the most part of that Summer
the Trained-Bands had watched every night; the design now appeared, being
carried on by Ludlow, Danvers, Lockyer, Strange, and others, for the
overthrowing of the Government; in order whereunto they were to have seized the
Tower, Deal-Castle, and other places of Strength; and were ^o have had the word
given them ^he night they were to have fallen ^n, which was the last of
October, by George Phillips a Sergeant in the Col^onels Company of the White
Regiment. But being discovered by ^ne of their number, they were ^any of them
taken, and by sufficient Witnesses Convicted of the Conspiracy, four whereof,
viz. Phil^ips, Tongue, Gibbs and Stubbs were Executed according to Sentence,
and ^he rest pardoned by the King, who ^lwayes loved to mix Mercy with his
Executions.

The Emperor of Russia about this ^ime sent hither a very Splendid Embassy, by
three of his Chief Princes, one whereof came some time before the other, and
had Audience of the King in Private at Hamp^on-Court; they were received in
greater State, than any Ambassadors ^ad been, that Arrived before them; ^he
whole Military Force of the City being in Arms, and several of the Companies in
their Liveries, and the Aldermen with their Gold Chains, riding before them.
They had about thirty Servants, that rode on Horseback with Hawks on their
fists, as Presents.

And being Conducted on the New-Years-Day following, to their Audience at
White Hall, they delivered their Presents, which were very rich, consisting of
Furs, Beavers, Ermins, and the like, together with Persian Carpets, three
Persian Horses, Arg^marick, and other Commodities of that Country, as Damasks,
Silks, and Embroderies, and a whole Ship load of Hemp; there were likewise of
the same nature, sent from the Empress to the Queen, and from the Prince of
Russia; all which were received with that affection and kindness, which the
King discovered upon all occasions toward that great and Potent Monarch.

The King having ordered the Earl of Rothes to succeed Middleton, as Chief
Commissioner in Scotland* went in the Vacation time on Progress Westward from
London to Bath, and from thence through Gloucestershire to Oxford, being
presented at Reading, and Newbury with Purses of Gold, and receiving wherever
he came, very high and Splendid Entertainments.

At Oxford, He was met half a Mile from the City, by the Doctors and Scholars
in their Formalities: and upon His entering the Subburbs by the Militia of that
City, through which he passed to his Lodgings.

During his stay there, he visited the Scholars, and was Nobly Enrertained:
But not long after His return, notwithstanding all those Provisions for peace,
he was informed of a Plot discovered in the North, to involve his Subjects in a
War again, which was to have begun first in Ireland, and so to have been
brought into England, and several of the Conspirators being taken, he sent down
a Commission to York in the midst of Winter to try them; Fifteen whereof were
found Guilty, the Chief of them was Captain Oats; and shortly after diverse
more were arraigned, the chief whereof were Cotton, Denham, and Atkins; some of
them were executed at York, some at Leeds, and some at other places; nor wanted
they some in London, to abett and favor their designs, by Libels and such
like Methods, for which a Printer was Apprehended, Tried and Execued, and
others pilloryed and Fined.

The Dutch having notwithstanding all their great pretenses of Love and
Friendship to the King, been guilty of many Injuries, and depredations to the
English Nation; the King and Parliament in the following Spring, took into
their Consideration, the many Complaints that were made against them; and both
Houses Petitioned the King to take a speedy and effectual course for the
redressing thereof, promising to assist him therein with their Lives and
Fortunes. But he always preferring Peace before War, when it may be had upon
Honorable Conditions resolved to see what he could do with them by fair means,
before he let things come to extremity, and therefore by his Agent there
demanded satisfaction for the injuries done by them: But that subtle people not
willing to return a speedy answer, resolved to send their own Ambassador into
England; which, as it was a way of answering more Magnificent, so it occasioned
the greater delay of time, which was the thing they chiefly aimed at, that so
they might be the better able to entertain War, when they had made provisions
for it: And he being sensible of their drift therein, thought it not convenient
for him to be altogether idle, and therefore resolved so to order his Affairs,
as to be in as good a readiness as they, whenever the War should commence. To
which end he required the City, to lend him One Hundred Thousand Pound,
referring them to the Lord Treasurer for Terms of Repayment; which Request was
received with such a dutiful compliance by the Common Council, that it was
presently granted, thereby acquitting themselves at once, both in point of
Loyalty and Prudence, by serving the KINGS present Necessity, and providing for
their own future Safety. This Money he employed in fitting out two considerable
Fleets: and intending to employ Sir John Lawson, who then blockt up Argier, and
some of the Ships under his Command therein, he commanded his Return for
England; Captain Allen being ordered to succeed him there; who brought these
Pirates into such distress, that shortly after they were forced to accept of
Peace upon terms advantageous enough for England.

The Dutch Ambassador propounding such conditions as were not to be accepted,
he sent back Sir George Downing thither, with full Instructions how to behave
himself toward them; who had upon his Arrival several Conferences with the
States, about Satisfaction for Damages received but could not prevail with them
to return a positive Answer to any thing he propounded, nor come to any terms
of Agreement: which they were the more willing to delay, in regard they
expected the speedy Arrival of a vast Treasure in several great Fleets of
Merchants Ships. But this being not unknown to him, and he being a Prince that
well enough understood, how strong the Nerve of War, Money, was, resolved to
way-lay those vast Masses of Wealth as they past homeward through his own
Channel, especially being informed by secret Intelligence, that they were
resolved in contempt of his Power to send their Guiney Preparations by Sea, and
that Opdam should convey them through the Channel. To which end and purpose,
that he might be beforehand with them in their preparations, he endeavored
with all imaginable speed and diligence to make his Navy ready, not sparing to
oversee and order things with indefatigable pains and industry in his own
Royal Person, which was abundantly answered by the success. For such was the
Alacrity of his Subjects when they saw him continually Traveling from place to
place, to forward the work, and see all things effectually and speedily
performed, encouraging them by his Presence; that the City at the very first
mention of it by the Earl of Manchester, [Chamberlain of His Household,]
supplied him with a second Loan of One Hundred Thousand Pounds.

By which means, while the Dutch flattered themselves with suppositions of his
want of Men and Money, and his being broken with the Calamities of the Raging
Pestilence (which happened about this time, and was the severest that ever was
known in England,) they were only forced to look on and with Envy behold his
Vigorous preparations, and see the Sea covered with such a Magnificent Navy, as
the Ocean had scarcely ever supported in any former Age. However having duly
considered the dangers of the Northern passage, they seemingly laid aside all
thoughts of going about by Scotland, and continued firm to their former
Resolution of forcing their passage though the Channel. In order whereunto,
having Re-victualled Opdams Fleet, they commanded him to hasten to Sea, with
the first Wind, and conduct the Guiney-Succors through the Channel, having
ordered some other Ships from the Vlie and Texel to Join with him, and sent a
Galliot before to give notice to their Director General, in Guinea of their
Proceedings therein. Which Resolution taken and carried on with so much Vigor,
most men Imagined to have been extorted from them by the exigency of their
present condition; for they had scattered many base contempts upon the King and
Subjects of England. Nor was the Issue of that Bravado, other than what their
Fears presented: For about the middle of October, Prince Rupert appeared at the
Spitt-Head with sixteen Sail of Ships, who was not long after joined by the
Duke, then Lord High Admiral of England, and the Earl of Sandwich; so that it
was a matter of the greatest difficulty and hazard for them to unlock the
narrow Seas. And great dispute there was amongst them, whether Opdam, who lay
with his Fleet in the Gore, should adventure out or no; but the Wind continuing
cross put an end to that dispute, and furnished them with a plausible excuse for
their not appearing at Sea upon so great disadvantages as they would in all
probability have met withal: However Prince Rupert kept the Sea with the
English Fleet to attend their Motion, and was rewarded by all or most of their
Bourdeaux Fleet falling into his hands, which with other Prizes taken that Year
by the English, amounted to about One Hundred Thirty Five.

There having been as yet no Public Declaration of War on either side; the
King still continued to Treat for Peace, with His Arms in His Hand, and ordered
Sir George Downing to press, in the heat of all that preparation and action,
for satisfaction of Damages: And finding that they were not like to be brought
to such terms as he expected, and knowing that it would mightily advance his
Credit, and strike Terror into his Enemies to be always before hand with them,
he caused an Embargo to be laid upon their Ships, with so much Secrecy, that
His Ambassador there had notice of it, at least eight days before the States,
that so he might give secret Intelligence to the English, and hasten their
departure; by which means, when their Embargo came, it found only two small
inconsiderable Vessels, and an Oyster Boat to seize. And the King acquainting
the Parliament (which met in November,) how unkindly he had been Treated by the
Dutch, and what preparations he had thereupon made for War, and telling them he
had out of his own Credit set forth a Navy, which he was sure would not decline
meeting with all the Power of the Dutch; for the Finishing where of, he had
borrowed so liberally out of his own stores, and of the City of London, that to
discharge the one, and replenish the other, would require little less then
Eight Hundred Thousand Pounds; They to demonstrate their Love and Affection to
their Sovereign, and how hearty they were in their Resolutions to support His
Honor, and their Countries Rights against Foreign Encroachments; gave him
more then thrice that Sum in an Act Entitled, An Act for granting a Royal
Aid of Twenty four Thousand Threescore and Seventeen Thousand and Five Hundred
Pounds. And finding that the Dutch did but trifle with him, in hopes of gaining
time, he resolved to forbear them no longer, and therefore in the February
following denounced War against them by a Public Declaration, prohibiting all
Manufactures coming from thence, and granting Letters of Reprizal to diverse of
his injured Subjects. And to increase his Fleet, a Peace being now made, both
with Gayland and the Algerines, he commanded his Ships in those parts to return
home, and with most indefatigable diligence Journeying himself from Port to
Port, to hasten his preparations and encourage the Seamen by his presence, he
got his Fleet ready to take the Sea by the 25th. of March, which did not a
little terrify the Hollander, who had been the Week before put into a very
great disorder and consternation upon the appearance only of a small part of
the English Navy under the Earl of Sandwich.

That his preparations for War might meet with their desired success, the
blessing of God, who is the Lord of Navies as well as of Hosts, was implored by
a general Fast enjoined by Proclamation, and observed with Reverence suitable
to the Solemnity of the occasion, which was answered with the happy Omens of
future Victory, from the fair success of smaller enterprises, three of their
Men of War being shortly after taken.

His Royal Highness the Duke of York, who as Lord High Admiral of England
commanded that Fleet, growing impatient of the Hollanders stay, resolved to
give them a visit upon their own Coast, and One Hundred and Fourteen Sail of
Ships made for the Texel, within five Leagues of which place he came to an
Anchor, where he took a full view of their Fleet, some of the smallest of his
Ships running within two Leagues of the Shore: and some few days after, he
showed himself before the Mouth of their Harbor; which gave them so great an
Allarum that they presently erected Beacons all along the Coasts to give notice
if he should make any attempt to Land. He stayed somewhat longer then he
intended, in hope to provoke them to come out and engage; but not suceeding
therein, he commanded seven of his Ships to sail in quest of a Fleet of
Merchantmen, who were then coming home from Bourdeaux, and had certainly
fallen into their hands, had not a great fogg which arose about that time
prevented it: however, ten of them were taken, and as many more at several
times afterward.

However the Dutch finding their Ambassadors in Swedeland and Denmark able to
effect little, meeting with Ceremonious entertainments, but no Assistance,
resolved to show their own strength; and their Navy appeared upon the Ocean in
all its Glory and Splendour, divided into seven Squadrons, being in all about
One Hundred and Three Men of War, Eleven Fireships, and seven Yatches: About
which time the English suffered some loss; for their Hamburgh Fleet desiring a
Convoy of the Duke, when he lay before the Texel, he sent them some Ships for
their Conduct and Security, with a Caution, that if they were not ready to
Sail within ten days, they should not after that time adventure to Sea; but
the ten days being over before they could get ready, and the Ketch ordered by
him to give them notice of his removal from the Texel missing them, they
adventured to Sea, contrary to his Instructions and Orders, and so fell into
the Enemies hands. But that loss was abundantly compensated by the Victory
which soon after ensued, wherein the Dutch lost eighteen of their best Ships
which were taken by the English, besides ten more which were sunk and burnt.
Which ill success caused many disorders and complaints among the Common People
in Holland; for the appeasing whereof, and the revenging themselves upon their
Officers, that were accused of Cowardice, or ill management in that Engagement,
they questioned several of them for their Lives, and caused three of their
Captains to be Executed at the Helder, two to have their Swords broken over
their heads, and the Vice Admiral Cortinaer to stand upon a Scaffold with a
Halter about his neck.

But the Joy of this Victory was somewhat allayed by the Sickness which now
began to grow very hot in London and its Subburbs; insomuch that the Queen
Mother, to avoid its Fury returned to France, being attended to the Kentish
Coast by the King, who having taken his leave of her, went on board the Royal
Charles, where he Knighted several Captains, that behaved themselves Valiantly
against the Dutch, and afterward visited most of the Flagg Ships, giving all
necessary directions for the repairing and refitting out the Fleet, and so
returned by Water to Greenwich; from thence to Hampton Court, and afterward to
Salisbury: But the Plague increasing in London, so that it was dangerous
returning thither, he repaired to Oxford, which proved so happy a Receptacle
for him, that notwithstanding the vast concourse of People which resorted to
his Court the approaching Parliament, and the Term which was likewise kept
there; the place Continued in health, and was not in the least visited with
that Distemper that then raged in London, and some other parts of the Kingdom.
At this place was made that Law which is commonly known by the name of the
Five-Mile Act, forbidding all such Dissenting Ministers as would not take the
Oath, and make the Declaration and Abhorrency therein provided, to live within
five Miles of any Corporation, thereby the better to prevent the spreading of
their Infection, and encrea^ing the number of their Proselites. The Oath and
Declaration, being as follows, viz.

J. A. B. Do Declare, That it is not Lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to
take up Arms against the King: And that I do abhor that Traitorous position of
taking Arms by his Authority against His Person by His Commission. Or those
that are Commissioned by Him in persuance of such Commission. And I do swear
that I will not at any time endeavor any alteration of Goaernment either in
Church or State.

But tho during the time of that Visitation, he removed His Court to Oxford,
yet for the security of that City, and that he might not be thought wholly to
withdraw his beams from her disconsolate Walls; He left there the Duke of
Albemarle, who in all the heat of the Distemper continued at White Hall, with a
Courage equal to his Dignity. And knowing that as the Affliction came from the
hand of Heaven, so none but the Almighty was able to mittigate or remove it, He
commanded by Proclamation a general Fast to be observed throughout the whole
Kingdom, for the confessing and bewailing those sins that had brought that
heavy Judgment upon the City, and by Prayers and Supplications implore the
Divine Goodness for the removal thereof; commanding his Bishops to direct and
Publish such forms of Prayer, as were most suitable not only for the Service of
that Particular day, but likewise of all the succeeding Wednesdays, so long as
the Contagion should last; having commanded that day in every week to be
observed as a Fast for the removal of that desolating distemper, according to
the Apostle's Rule, praying always and with all manner of Prayer.

The English Fleet having now repaired their Damages, and several of the Dutch
Prizes being fitted for Service, put to Sea again, and stood over for the
Holland-Coast; the alarm whereof brought back Bankert, who had been about
three Weeks at Sea with some of their Ships, and caused them to make de Ruyter,
after his long expected arrival from the West, Admiral of their Fleet. But the
Bishop of Munster's Drums (who then likewise threatened them with a War)
sounding in their Ears, almost as terribly as the English Cannon, made them
order a flying Army to the Frontiers, though with little satisfaction to the
fearful Inhabitants, who daily fled to the fortified Towns for their security.

In the mean while, the English Fleet, in three Squadrons, sailed toward
Norway; and the Earl of Sandwich having notice, that fifty Hollanders had
sheltred themselves in Berghen, sent a Squadron of twenty two Men of War, under
the Command of Tyddeman, to attack and fire them in the Harbor; which
Enterprise had proved very fatal, had not the Wind befriended them, and the
Dane permitted them to plant their Guns on shore, against the resolute English;
however, they received very great damages, and had many of their best Ships in
that Harbor dissabled; And the Earl himself meeting with a Convoy of theirs,
who had several Merchants, and some East India men in his Company, attacked
them with so much resolution, that notwithstanding the storminess of the
Weather did much favor them, yet he took Eight of their Men of War, two of
their best East India Ships, and twenty Sail of their Merchants; and some few
days after, the Fleet encountering with eighteen Sail of the Enemy, took the
greatest part of them, with above one thousand Prisoners. However, the French
King, supposing the Balance of Affairs not yet even enough, and affecting a
Sovereignty in the Mediterranean-Sea, not only continued his friendship to
them, but, in their behalf, declared War likewise against England, upon
pretense of succouring them, according to the Conditions of the Treaty in 1662;
which Declaration the King, who, although? he was as great a lover of Peace, as
any Prince in the World, yet being provoked, would not be behind hand with his
Enemies, soon returned with the like denunciation of War against him;
protesting, that he was resolved to prosecute that War against France, with his
utmost force by Land and Sea: And it was admirable to behold the cheerfulness
and alacrity wherewith the Maritine Countries offered him their Service, upon
their first receiving his Orders to put themselves into a posture of defense;
but being unwilling to continue them under the trouble and charge of a needless
Duty, he dismissed them for the present, and only ordered them to be ready, if
there was occasion.

The Pestilence being now pretty well abated, he returned again to London,
where he was joyfully received and welcomed by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen;
about which time eight persons, formerly Officers or Soldiers in the Rebellion,
were Indicted at the Old-Bayly, for conspiring the Death of the King, and the
Alteration of the Government; having, in his absence from the City, plotted the
surprisal of the Tower, killing the General, Robinson and Brown; and then,
according to their old levelling humor, to have declared for an equal division
of Lands: The better to effect which Design of theirs, the City was to have
been fired, the Portcullices to have been let down, to keep out all assistance,
and the Horse-guards to have been surprised in their Quarters; the Tower having
been viewed by them, and its surprisal ordered by Boats over the Moat, and so
to scale the Wall. One Alexander was the chief Conspirator, having distributed
several Sums of Money amongst them; and he told them, for their encouragement,
of several great ones, that sat continually in London, and issued out all
necessary Orders; which Counsel, he said, received their Directions from
another in Holland, who sat with the States: The third of September being
found, by a Scheme erected for that purpose, a lucky Day, a Planet then ruling,
whose direful effects, portended the downfall of Monarchy, was pitched upon for
the Attempt: They were found guilty of High Treason, and executed at Tyburn.

Prince Rupert, and the Duke of Albemarle, being made joint Generals at Sea,
for that Summer's Expedition, divided the Fleet; the Prince commanding the blew
Squadron, wherewith he sailed toward France, upon intimation that the French
were hasting to join the Dutch Fleet, and the Duke the other two, who meeting
the Hollanders, on Friday, about 4 or 5 Leagues from the North Foreland,
courageously attacked them, notwithstanding he had not above half their number,
bravely maintaining the Fight two days, and part of the third, when he had been
hardly put to it, had not the Prince, hearing the Guns, tacked about, and made
toward him. Upon his approach, de Ruyter sent out 30 stout Ships, to intercept
him, and prevent his joining the Duke; but avoiding them, he hastened forward,
and sent Albemarle word, that if he liked the design, he would keep the wind of
them, and engage the 30 Ships de Ruyter had sent against him; but the Duke not
liking his purpose, advised him rather to join the Fleet, which he did, and the
approaching night, soon after put an end to their farther proceedings. And the
next morning, so soon as it grew light, they perceived the Dutch to be fled,
and gotten almost out of sight, St. Georges Chanel having proved too dangerous
and stormy for them; but making all the sail they could, they pursued them, and
the Prince with his fresh Squadron, falling in with them, with an undaunted
courage and bravery, passed five several times through the whole Body of their
Fleet; so that not able longer to endure it, with all the sail they could make,
they began to run, and sheltred themselves in their shallows. But both Fleets
having repaired their damages, got out to Sea again, and meeting soon after,
begun a second Engagement, no less bloody than the former, both sides fighting
with all the Courage and Valor, that could be expected from the most
inveterate and enraged Enemies, de Ruyter resolving to revenge his lost
disgrace, and recover, if possible, his lost honor; and the Prince, to
maintain his former, by obtaining a second Victory; They began to fight about
Nine in the Morning, pouring Broad-sides upon each other, with such fury, that
the roaring Canon seemed to outvy the Thunder, and the Smoke clouded the Sun,
and rendered the Air more dark and dismal, than was black Monday. There might
have been seen the Heads of some, the Arms, Legs and Thighs, of others, shot
off; some divided in the middle with Chain-shot, breathing out their last in
anguish and pain, or burning in Fired Ships: whilst others, exposed to the
mercy of the Liquid Element, implored pity from their very Enemies, whom they
entreated to save their Lives, although with the loss of their Liberties. But
in the midst of all those deplorable miseries, the survivers fought with as
much resolution and fury as ever; their Courage and Valor being rather
heightened than daunted thereby: For which Victories, a solemn thanks giving was
observed throughout the whole Nation.

But to abate the joy of the English, London which had flourished throughout so
many Ages, and been accounted one of the goodliest Cities in the World, was
about this time destroyed, and burnt down to the ground, by a most dreadful
fire; which began on Sunday, September the ^econd, about two in the morning,
1666. a Year that, in regard of its agreement with the number of the Beast
mentioned in the Revelations, had filled all Men with great expectations of
some memorable accident that would fall out therein: many eminent Writers
having, with more confidence than truth, Predicted the fall of Antichrist, and
the utter ruin and desolation of Rome, which they affirmed to be the
Apocalyptical Babylon. It began at a Bakers House, in Pudding-Lane near new
Fishstreet, a place very close, and for the most part consisting of old Timber
Houses, which burned like so many pitched Barrels; whereby it spread it self
with such an impetuous and irresistible fury, that notwithstanding all
endeavors to extinguish it, it extended it self to all the several quarters of
the City, and by Wednesday night consumed that goodly Pile: The King and the
Duke, during all that time, riding from place to place, and by their personal
care and labor, encouraging all Men to attempt the putting a stop to its fury
and rage, which was at last happily performed at the Temple-Church, Pye-Corner,
Holborn-Bridg, Aldersgate, Cripplegate, at the Church in Fenchurch-street, at
Cloathworkers-Hall in Mincing-Lane, in the middle of Mark-Lane, the lower end
of Coleman-street, the upper end of Bishopsgate-street, and at the Tower-Dock.
But on Thursday in the evening, it unfortunately broke out again at the Temple,
by the accidental falling of some sparks upon a Pile of Timber Buildings, and
might have done much more harm, had not the Duke, who watched there in Person
all that night, and so encouraged the People with his presence, that by blowing
up the Houses about it, it was extinguished before day. It consumed, acc^^^ing
to the best computation of Surveyers* employed by the King for that purpose,
373 Acres of Buildings within the Walls, and more than 63 Acres without the
Walls, 87 Parish-Churches, six Consecrated Chapels, the Royal Exchange, the
Guild Hall, and many other stately Buildings belonging to the several
Companies, and, according to the best account, about 13000 and 200 Houses: the
total sum, of which loss, was valued at nine Millions, and nine hundred
thousand pound Sterling.

In so deplorable and amazing an accident, it is not difficult to imagine how
many Persons were constrained, in have and confusion, to remove their Goods
into the Fields, and take up their Lodgings in the open Air; which gave the
King (whose heart was ever open to compassionate the distress and miseries of
his Subjects) an opportunity of exercising his commiseration, by commanding the
Justices of the Peace to send Provisions into the Markets, and opening his
Sea-stores for the supplying of the poor and necessitous.

The Fire, happening at a time when England was engaged in a War with France
and Holland, was thought, by many, to be a treacherous Act contrived and
perpetrated by the French, which some were the more induced to believe, in
regard one Hubert, a melancholy Frenchman, confessed he did the fact, by putting
a Fire-ball into the House of the Baker where it began. And Oats, the
Discoverer of the Salamanca Plot, lays the guilt of that action, upon a knot of
Jesuits and Irish-men; who having laid the project long before, could not put
it in execution 'till that time: notwithstanding which [for we are not to
believe all that the Doctor has been pleased to swear] it is uncertain, to this
day, whether some casual accident, or the malice of those who envied the
happiness and grandeur of that City, were the immediate occasions of it. But
however it were, it was permitted by Heaven for a Punishment, of its Pride,
Luxury and Rebellion.

London being thus consumed and laid in Ashes, the grieved Inhabitants looked
upon its Rebuilding as so weighty and ponderous an undertaking, that they
despaired of ever living to see it begun, much less finished, and therefore
took Houses, in the out-parts, at vast Rents and Fines, and for a long term of
Years. Nor might their fears have been altogether groundless, had it happened
in a time less happy and fortunate: but living in a Reign of Wonders, they
found, contrary to all men's expectations, that it suddenly started up rather
than was gradually built, in far more splendor and beauty than ever it was
before. And that fire, wherein all their happiness seemed to have been for ever
buried, proved a real advantage, by reason of that provident care which was
thereupon taken by the King, to prevent such fatal accidents for the future, by
commanding all the buildings, which were for the most part before of Timber, to
be now made of Brick or Stone; and so contrived, that if a Fire happened in any
of them, it might be hemmed in, within the Walls of that particular House,
without indangering the adjoining Buildings, by putting the Inhabitants of each
Parish, and diverse principal Merchants and Gentlemen, that live in that City,
upon providing greater plenty of large and hand Engines, Buckets, and other
such like things necessary for the quenching of Fires; And by making Men more
expert in the methods of stopping the progress of any Fires that shall happen
for the future; and finally, by putting several ingenious Persons upon
contriving and setting up an Office, for the Ensuring of Houses from being
destroyed by fire for thirty one years, at five pence per pound for Brick
Houses, and ten pence per pound for Timber Houses, which is to be discounted by
way of purchase, and five years only paid down for eight; seven for twelve;
nine and one half for twenty one; eleven for thirty one years Insurance: so
that it is in reality but little more than three pence per pound for Brick
Houses, and six pence per pound for Timber Houses, only requiring ten pounds in
Money to be paid to the Insurers toward the defraying of their Charges in
Re-building the House so often as it shall happen to be burnt down, within the
term ensured. And because many Persons take Leases of Houses for different
terms of Years, they do not tie any Person to Insure for thirty one, but so
many Years only as themselves please, settling several Ground Rents, and making
other sufficient Provisions for the security of the Subscribers. This Office
they settled in Thredneedle-street, in the backside of the Royal Exchange, and
it is certainly one of the greatest designs that any Age has ever produced,
and will prove more universally advantageous than was at first believed, the
severe strokes falling more light on par^icular Persons now, than in former
Ages, in regard they are, by virtue of this contrivance, supported by a public
stock, and those whose houses escape, made by that means, to contribute toward
the repairing of those that are burned.

In order to the re-building London, the King, according to his accustomed
Wisdom, foreseeing it would otherwise be impossible to have it uniform, and
decide the Controversies which would arise about dividing the Ground belonging
to each House, and oblige the Repairers to build with Brick or Stone, provided
an Act of Parliament, for the settling all things in relation thereunto, and the
erecting a Court of Judicature, to judge and determine all Differences that
might arise between Party and Party; prohibiting in the mean time the hasty
building any public Edifices, and proclaiming a general Fast through England
and Wales, ordering the distresses of those who were ruined thereby to be then
recommended to the Charity of all well-disposed persons; and the Money so
gathered, to be afterward distributed by the hands of the Lord Mayor. The Act
was passed in the approaching Parliament; wherein, besides the provision for
the building the Houses of Brick or Stone, it was enacted, That the most
eminent Streets should be of a considerable breadth; and those toward the
Water-sides, wide enough to render Passages convenient; that a fair Wharf
should be left all along the River's-side, and no Houses built thereon, but at
a convenient distance appointed therein; none whereof were to be inhabited by
Dyers, Brewers, or Sugar-Bakers: And that an exact Survey should be made of the
Ruins, for the satisfaction of particular Interests, and a Model framed of the
whole Building, the better to understand if it were convenient for them to
appoint any alterations therein.

And to show his Pious Care for the Rebuilding of the Churches for the Service
of God, as well as Houses for his Subjects to dwell in, he recommended that
Work to the Charity and magnanimous Bounty of public spirited Persons; and for
an encouragement to others, promised to Rebuild the Custom-house, and Enlarge
it for the Benefit of Merchants, at his own Charge, which he afterward
performed, engaging to part with all his Right and Benefit arising from his own
Lands within the City; for the Public Good, and to remit the Duties arising
from Hearth-Money, to those who should Erect any New Buildings, according to
his Declaration, for Seven Years: And to demonstrate his Resolution to perform
whatsoever he had promised in his Declaration, commanded one Knight to be
committed to Prison, for presuming to Print certain Propositions for the
Rebuilding the City, with considerable Advantages to the Crown, which were
repugnant to his gracious Offers in that Declaration.

So that London being ashamed to lie longer smothered under Ashes, when all
those Provisions were made for its Resurrection, was by Sir Jonas Moore,
according to the appointed Model, first roused in Fleet Street; and from that
beginning, grew so hastily toward a perfection, that within the compass of a
few years, it outvyed all its ancient Glory and Splendor, and appeared far
more beautiful in its rise, than its fall had rendered it abject and desolate.

But the burning of London was not the only unhappy Accident that fell out in
that Year of Wonders; for the Fire, which had laid the City in Ashes, threatened
the Court with the like dissolation; for having, by the misfortune of a Candle
falling into the straw, violently seized upon the Horse-Guard, in the
Tilt-Yard, over against White Hall, it burned down the North-West part of that
Building, but being so close under the King's own eye, it was by timely help in
a little time mastered: And at a place called Welbourn, in Lincolnshire, after
a prodigious Thunder, with Hailstones of a more than ordinary bigness, there
followed such a Storm and Tempest, that its violence threw down most of the
Houses to the ground, tore up Trees by the Roots, and dispersing several Ricks
of Corn and Hay, passed to the next Village, called Willington, where it threw
down firm Houses, and going forward to Nanby, it fell so violently upon the
Church, that it dashed the Spire in pieces, and so tore and rent the Body of
the Church, that it almost levelled it with the ground. And that Scotland might
likewise bear a share in that Year's Calamities, a Seditious Zeal, having
inspired some Malcontents, with revenge against Sir James Turner, for
executing (too vigorously, as they pretended) the Laws against them, they
committed an insolent Riot upon his person, taking him out of his Bed, and
carrying him naked into the Marketplace, where they were hardly restrained
from cutting him in pieces, which Tumult was first raised by a small and an
inconsiderable Rabble, but in a short time increased to a Body of One thousand
six hundred Men, who marching toward Edinburgh, were encountered and defeated
near Glencarn, many of them being slain, and more taken; the Ringleaders
whereof were executed, and most of the rest pardoned.

But in the midst of all these unhappy Distractions, he did not neglect the
making all necessary Preparations for carrying on and maintaining his War with
Holland, France, and Denmark; the latter whereof was now entered into a League
offensive and defensive with the States of the United Provinces, upon pretense
of the Assault made upon the Dutch, in his Port of Berghen, although he had the
freedom of that Port frankly offered him by the King of Denmark himself, at a
time when he thought nothing of it; and that in order to the doing those very
Acts of Hostility, wherewith he was then unjustly reproached by that King, as
he declared in his Declaration of War against Denmark, published about that
time; And for a good Omen of his future success, he not long after his
Declaration of War, received News, that the Vice Admiral of Denmark was taken
by some of his Frigots, upon the Coast of Scotland.

However, the King of Sweden having become a Mediator for Peace, between him,
and the States General, and prevailed with him to condescend thereunto, and
appoint Breda for the place of Treaty; the Dutch, notwithstanding, busied
themselves in making Preparations for continuing the War, resolving to treat of
Peace, in a posture and condition to fight, if it succeeded not, and (he not
being ignorant of their intentions) to make him spend that Summer in needless
Expenses for War, and only keep himself upon his own guard. But we having
therefore but a small Fleet abroad, the Dutch, upon intimation thereof, got out
to Sea betimes, and finding no Enemy to resist them, made an attempt on Burnt
Island, but being beaten off with loss, they next attempted the Fort of
Sheerness, which being then a place of small force, was after a short, but
stout resistance, abandoned by Sir Edward Spragg, and so the Mouth of that
narrow River was left open to them: And being encouraged by this success, they
landed about three thousand men near Felton-Cliff, and with two thousand of
them adventured to make two Assaults upon Languard-Fort, but were beaten off,
and forced to retire in such haste, that they left their Scaling-Ladders behind
them, and had about one hundred and fifty slain upon the place; the other
thousand, which were left behind the Cliff, to secure their retreat, being
encountered by the Trained-bands, under the Command of the Earl of Suffolk, a
smart Skirmish passed between them, and continued till Ten at Night, when it
was renewed again by the return of the beaten Companies from the Fort; but the
English Horse not being able to come up, there was not that execution done upon
them, which otherwise might have been. However, the Dutch liked not that hot
Service well enough, to abide their coming, but as soon as their Boats were
afloat, embarked with all haste, and returned to their Ships, and sailing for
the Humber, they engaged a Squadron of the English, which they found there; but
being worsted, showed themselves before Portsmouth, and made some slight
Attempts in Devonshire, and Cornwall: And after de Ruyter, their Admiral had
been civily treated in the West, by the Earl of Bath, and Sir Jonathan
Trelawney, and received advice, that the Peace was concluded, they sailed back
for Holland.

This Peace was concluded at Breda, upon the twenty first of June, in the Year
1667. when the Articles were signed by the several Plenipotentiaries, and upon
the fourteenth of the following August, the Ratifications thereof interchanged,
the Mediators first bringing the Ratifications and other Instrustruments of the
Dutch, French and Danes, into the English Ambassadors Lodgings, and received
theirs in exchange: which done, the English Ambassadors went into the
apartments of the Dutch and their Allies, where they made and received the
Complements usual in such cases, and the Peace was thereupon immediately
Proclaimed before the Doors of the several Plenipotentiaries; and on the twenty
fourth of that Month at the Exchange, which was then kept at Gresham College,
and other places in London. But the Foundation of the Royal Exchange, in
Cornhil, being about that time appointed to be laid, the King was pleased to
show his readiness to countenance that Work, by being present at, and assisting
in the solemnity thereof, with his own Royal hands; as his Brother, the Duke of
York, did, shortly after, who laid the first stone of the second Pillar: which
Edifice was in a short time finished, and is now the most curious Fabric of
that kind in the whole World.

About this time, that wise and useful Statesman and Privy-Counsellor, Edward
Hide, Earl of Clarendon, and Lord High-Chancellor of England, who had always
behaved himself with abundance of Loyalty and Faithfulness to his Master, as
well before, as after his Restoration, falling into disgrace with the
Parliament, was forced to abscond; and leaving that Office, which he had so
long managed, with advantage to the King, and honor to himself, retired into
France, where he lived in a voluntary Exile 'till he died.

A sort of idle and licentious Persons, getting together in the Holy Days at
Easter, and pretending former custom, took the liberty to pull down some Houses
of bad repute, about the Suburbs of London, under the notion of Apprentices;
yet others being found guilty of it, four of them were apprehended, Tried,
Condemned and Executed, and two of their Heads set upon the Bridge for a terror
to others.

Having dispatched the Earl of Carlisle, as his Ambassador Extraordinary to the
Court of Sweden, with which King he always maintained a friendly
correspondence, he directed a Letter for the Earl, when he was at Copenhagen,
on his way to Sweden, to be by him delivered to the King of Denmark, in answer
to an obliging Letter he had a little before received from him; which Letter of
the King's, was so acceptable to the Dane, that upon the Earl's request, he
immediately dispatched orders to all his Ports and Towns of commerce,
especially those in Norway, for restoring the English to the same Freedom and
Privileges in Trading thither, as they had before the War. And the Earl, upon
his arrival in Sweden, presented that King with the George worn by the Knights
of the Garter; and after his having been entertained in that Court with all
imaginable respect, upon his Masters account, and dismissed with particular
marks of the King of Sweden's favor, and testimonies of the acceptableness of
his Embassy, he was, upon his return home, solemnly Installed in that Order at
Windsor.

While the King was diverting himself this Summer, with the Duke and others of
his Nobles, in the new Forest in Hampshire, he received the doleful tidings of
his Mothers death at Columbe, the thirty first of August, she being nobly
buried, in the December following, at St. Dennis. And to close the public
affairs of this Year, the restorer of the Crown to the King, and happiness to
the Kingdom, George Duke of Albemarle, and Lord General of all the Kings Land
Forces, exchanged his temporary Coronet for an Eternal Crown; and the King, as
a mark of Gratitude to the Father, sent his Garter to his Son and Successor,
the present Duke of Albemarle, whom he continued in many of his Honors and
Preferments, promising withal, that himself would take care of his Fathers
Funeral which he accordingly did: and after he had publicly lain in State at
Somerset House for some time, caused his Funeral to be solemnized with that
Pomp and Splendour, that, it is verily believed, no Subject was ever honored
with the like.

In the following Spring, the King having a great desire to unite Scotland and
England into one Kingdom, endeavored to have it accomplished, by procuring an
Act of Parliament, in order thereunto, and nominating Commissioners for each
Kingdom, to meet and treat about it: But they not being able to agree, it was
wholly laid aside, and came to nothing.

The King's Wisdom and Conduct being famed throughout all parts of the World,
like a second Solomon, drew to his Court several Foreign Princes, to see and
admire him; And about this time the Prince of Tuscany came upon the same
Errand, and was by him treated both at London and Windsor, with great Respect
and Splendor, and by several of his Nobles, in his Progress through England,
the chief Cities whereof he was desirous to take a view of; after which he
departed for Holland, and so returned into his own Country: where, not long
after, besides his splendid Entertainment of the Earl of Northumberland, in
acknowledgment of the King's Kindness and Affection expressed to him, when in
England, he built, and gave to the King, two very stout Galleys, for a guard of
the Coast about Tangier, which were of great importance to his Service in those
parts. But although the King was well pleased with this Princes visit, yet he
shortly after received a more welcome one from his Sister, the Duchess of
Orleans, who came to Dover, to pay him her last Visit, and was there
entertained by him with as much Affection and Bounty, as the time of her stay
(which was but short) would permit. Nor was her stay in this World much longer;
for soon after her return, she died suddenly, to his unexpressible grief.

The King being now at peace at home, employed his Naval Forces against the
Algerines, a People that never keep Peace longer than till they can have an
opportunity to break it: and they having taken some of our Merchants Ships, Sir
Thomas Allen was sent to revenge the Injury, who coming before the Town, they
desired a Treaty, offering to make restitution of what Money they had taken
from an English Ship, bound for the East Indies; but not agreeing to some other
Demands, he resolved to beat them into a compliance; and having seized a
Barque, laden with Corn, and a Brigantine, which rowed in the Harbor, in view
of the Town, departed to Tripoly; the Bassa of which place, sent him an
assurance of his readiness and resolution to preserve a Peace, and continue a
good Correspondence with his Master: And the Hampshire, Portsmouth, Jersey, and
Centurion Frigots, under the Command of Captain Beach, not long after meeting
with Seven of the Algerines, notwithstanding the least of them had Thirty eight
Guns, and were all full of Men, forced them to run their Ships on shore, which
were all burned, two by themselves, and the rest by the English: in which
Action most of their Men were lost, and Two hundred and fifty Christian
Captives redeemed. But Sir Thomas Allen, after having made many Attempts upon
those Pirates, whose Cowardice still shun the Fight, returned home, and left
Sir Edward Spragg to Command in his room; who meeting with Nine of their Men of
War, and three Merchantmen, near Bugia, they retired, upon his appearance,
under the shelter of the Castle, and put themselves into the best posture of
defense; but Spragg in the mean time attacked them with so much Valor and
Success, that he set most of them on fire; and those which escaped the flame,
fell into his hands, and were made Prizes of: And to complete the Victory,
Captain Beach brought him another Ship, which he had newly taken, of Forty
Guns, and Three hundred and fifty men. So that Spragg believing that this Loss
might dispose the Algerines to accept of Terms of Peace, made a speedy return
to his station, before that Port; whereupon, constrained by necessity, they
concluded a Peace, as honorable and advantageous as any we ever had with those
Rovers.

About this time a strange and odd kind of Action happened, which for its
unusualness, was the matter of much wonder and discourse: For one Thomas Blood,
commonly called Captain Blood, being discontented, upon pretense of an Estate,
detained from him in Ireland, and having a little before, with five persons in
his company, armed and mounted, seized the Duke of Ormond, as he was going
home, between St. James's and Clarendon-house, forcing him out of his Coach,
and attempting to have carried him away, had he not been rescued by others
coming in to his assistance, (a Fact which rendered him not more bold in the
undertaking, than the Duke memorable in forgiving:) But not being able to carry
off the Duke, he next adventured to attempt the Crown; In order whereunto, he
coming to the Keeper of the Jewel-house, and desiring to see the Crown and
Jewels; which being showed him, he gratified the Keeper more liberally than it
was usual for others to do in such cases; telling him, that he had some Friends
who were very desirous to see them, and that he would bring them the next
Morning. Accordingly he came with three others with him; and the old Gentleman,
being prepared by Bloud's liberality, gave them a ready admittance into the
Jewel-house; but their design being to take, and not to see, they gagged and
secured the Keeper; and then putting the Crown and Ball into two Baggs, which
they brought with them for that purpose, fairly walked away, and had certainly
carried them off, (having passed most of the Sentinels with them) had not the
Keeper's Son-in-law accidentally came by, and seeing the condition his Father
lay in, run out hastily, and cried to the Guards, to stop them. Whereupon fear
making them to mend their pace, they became the means of their own discovery;
and being thereupon suspected, and commanded to stand, they fired a Pistol at
the Sentinel; but others coming in to his assistance, two of them were seized,
and carried to White Hall, and after examination, sent Prisoners to the Tower,
where they had committed that bold Attempt.

The King now finding himself at leisure, resolved to look after the condition
of his Western Seaport Towns, and spend the Summer in a kind of Sea-Progress;
For going first to Portsmouth, he went in his Yacht to the Isle of Wight, and
took a view of most of the considerable Ports in that Island; from whence he
returned to Hurst-Castle, and from thence to Corfe-Castle, and having viewed,
and taken order for the furnishing those places with all necessary Provisions,
returned again to Portsmouth; and from thence, attended with five Frigots,
sailed to Dartmouth, Plymouth, and other places in those parts, knowing that
according to the ancient Proverb, the Master's eye quickens the Servant's
diligence.

Notwithstanding the many Losses sustained by the Dutch in their former War
with England, and the difficulty they met withal in attaining a Peace, yet they
took no care to preserve it, but by new Affronts laid a foundation for a second
War; and therefore the King having long concealed his just Displeasure against
them, resolved now to let them know his ill Resentments of their unworthy
Dealings toward him; Pursuant to which he declared in the following Spring,
That seeing his Neighbors were making great Preparations, both by Sea and
Land, He thought himself obliged to appear in such a posture as might best
secure his own Government, and his Peoples peace; to make such Preparations as
should be answerable to the preservation of both, which could not be done,
without fitting out a considerable Fleet against the approaching Spring; In
order whereunto, Money being at that time wanting, he was forced to put a stop
to the payment of any Money then brought in, or to be brought into the
Exchequer, for the space of one whole Year, declaring that nothing could have
moved him thereunto, but the looking upon his Government as unsafe, under the
threatening Preparations of the States General, and other neighboring Princes,
without appearing in the same posture: And that therefore seeing the necessity
was inevitable, some extraordinary course must be taken, until Money could be
otherwise procured.

However, before he would enter into War with them, he endeavored to bring
them to terms of Peace by the threatening of it; and therefore ordered Sir
George Downing, who was his Ambassador to the States, to be very urgent with
them on the Affair of the Flagg: which, notwithstanding it had ever been
accounted a Ceremony due to the Kings of England, as an acknowledgment of their
Sovereignty in the narrow Seas, had been for some time denied by them. But
having, by several Instances and Memorials, pressed for an Answer to his
Demands; and finding nothing but delays, and several personal affronts to him,
he returned, without Orders, for England, and was, for so doing, after a
private Examination by some Lords of the Council, and Report thereof made to
the King, Committed to the Tower for not observing the Orders sent him. At
which Proceedings of the States, the King being ^ustly enraged, resolved to
trifle with them no longer, but make them feel the effects of his Indignation.
And knowing that whilst he had Wars abroad, it was necessary to have Peace and
Union at home, he put forth a Declaration of Indulgence to all Dissenting
Persons, promising, notwithstanding that Indulgence, to maintain the Doctrine
and Discipline of the Church of England as it was then established.

Sir Robert Holmes Cruising with five of the King's Frigots near the Isle of
Wight, about the middle of March met with the Dutch Smyrna and Straight Fleet,
Convoyed by six of their men of War, and standing with them, gave them a Gun to
strike and lower their Flag; which they refusing, he poured a Broadside upon
them: whereupon, their Convoy coming up, the Fight began about two in the
afternoon, and continued until night, and the next morning was again renewed,
five of their richest Merchantmen being taken, their Reer-Admiral sunk, and
the rest made their escape for want of more assistance.

The first blow being thus given, the King denounced open War against them, by
Publishing his Declaration, wherein he gave the World an account of the Grounds
and Reasons of his Quarrel with them; which, together with the French Kings
preparations and proceedings toward them, in laying great Impositions upon
their Manufacture, which they foresaw tended to a rupture with them, they
fortifiing themselves with all imaginable speed and diligence, endeavored to
procure Allies abroad, and made the Prince of Orange their Captain General at
Land, and Admiral at Sea: And looking upon Maestricht, as the first place that
would in all probability be attacked by the French King, they repaired the
Fortifications thereof, and reinforced that City with Men and Provisions.

The King resolving to prosecute the War with all imaginable resolution and
vigor, provided for the security of his own Subjects, by allowing them
sufficient Convoys, and giving them liberty to make use of what Foreign
Mariners they could procure. And his Fleet being now ready to put to Sea, he
went to Rye to see them join with a Squadron of French Ships, which that King,
according to agreement, was to furnish him with, under the Command of the Count
d' Estree, Vice Admiral of France. And so soon as he was returned, the two
Fleets being now joined, stood over for the Coast of Holland, Commanded by His
present Majesty, then Duke of York, whose very name was terrible to the Dutch.
And on the twenty eighth of May meeting with the Enemies Fleet, about five
Leagues off the Wheelings, there ensued a very fierce and bloody Engagement,
both sides being emulous for Honor, and desirous of Victory, fighting with
extraordinary eagerness: But the night coming on, and the Dutch finding
themselves unable to bear up against the Valor of the English, stood toward
their own Coasts, and were pursued by the Duke, who resolved to have renewed
the Engagement the next morning, had not a Fog prevented, and favored their
securing themselves in their Shallows: The loss on the Dutch side was very
great, both as to Men and Ships, but on the part of the English, there was
little Damage, beside the loss of the Earl of Sandwich and the Royal James.

This loss at Sea was attended with many more on Land, the French King having
taken several of their Frontier Towns, which possessed them with such a
Consternation, that many of the wealthy Inhabitants forsook their Habitations,
resolving not to hazard their Persons and Estates in a Country falling into
the hands of a Victorious Foreigner; And the States not thinking themselves
secure enough at the Hague, removed to Amsterdam: and to impede the French
King's approach, cause^ the Sluices to be opened, and the Country be put under
Water, to the incredible Prejudice and Damage of the miserable Inhabitants.
Which Distraction of theirs, the King of England wisely improved, to the
strengthening himself and the weakening of them, by putting forth a seasonable
Declaration; wherein he promised, That if any of their Subjects, out of
affection to him or his Government, or to avoid the oppression they met with at
home, would take refuge in his Kingdom, they should be protected in their
Persons and Estates, and have an Act pass for their Naturalization, and that
such Ships as they brought with them should be accounted as English Built, and
enjoy the same Privileges and Immunities, as to Trade, Navigation and Customs,
as those of his own Subjects.

Yet, commiserating the deplorable condition into which the States were
reduced, and supposing their misfortunes had rendered them more humble, he sent
the Duke of Buckingham, and the Earl of Arlington, to try if they would at
length offer any reasonable terms of Peace; who were received, by the Common
People, with great joy and satisfaction, crying out, God bless the King of
England, and God bless the Prince of Orange, but the Devil take the States. But
their Pride being not sufficiently abated, the Ambassadors returned without
bringing them to any Conclusion; which, together with the French King's taking
Nimeguen, and the English Fleets appearing upon their Coasts, so enraged the
People, that they brake out into tumultuous Insurrections: and there was scarce
a Town in Holland, where they were not masterless. And therefore the States,
that they might appease them, commanded their Fleet to go out and beat the
English from their Harbors; which De Ruyter attempted with all the force that
Courage and Resolution could inspire him with: but finding himself overmatched,
was forced to retire with considerable loss. The Fleets having both repaired
the Damages of this Fight, hastened to try their fortune in a second
Engagement: which being as unsuccessful to the Dutch as the former, De Ruyter
stole away in the night: But having increased his Fleet, was not long before he
got to Sea again, and meeting about the middle of August with the English
Fleet, endeavored to get the Wind of them, which then blew North-East,
resolving, if possible, to redeem his lost reputation: but night coming on,
both Fleets came to an Anchor. The next day., the Fight began with the morning;
wherein the Dutch sustained a very great loss, and the greatest part of their
Fleet had in all probability been destroyed, and the contest about the Dominion
of the Narrow-Seas ended, had not the Cowardly French, who were then Masters of
the Wind, behaved themselves as though they had been sent thither only to be
spectators of the Bravery and Valor of the English: Whereupon, the
States General, finding they could no longer withstand the successful Arms of
that fortunate King, sued for Peace by their Ambassador, and had it granted, as
well out of Pity to them, as Jealousy of the French King's too growing
greatness, whose Progress they were now at leisure to oppose.

The King having now consented to admit the Hollanders to terms of Peace,
became a Mediator for the like accommodation between the Crown of France and
Spain, endeavoring by his Ambassador, the Lord Lockhart, to compose the
differences between them; and resolving, whether he succeeded in that Mediation
or not, to be no partaker with them in their Quarrels: and Commanded, by
Proclamation, that none of his Subjects should enter into the Service of any
Foreign Prince. And for the better securing of Trade to and from his Ports
(which was much disturbed by the Insolency of several Dutch, Spanish and French
Privateers, betwixt whom the War still continued) he Published a Proclamation,
wherein he declared, That all Ships, to what Party soever they belonged, should
be under his Protection, during their stay in any of his Ports or Harbors;
Commanding the Officers of his Navy, to use their utmost endeavors, to hinder
the Roving of any Private Men so near his Coast, as to give apprehension of
danger to Merchants. And that if a Man of War, of either Party, and one or more
Merchantmen of another, should come into any of his Ports, the Merchantmen
should sail out two Tides before the Man of War should be permitted to stir;
forbidding his Seamen to List themselves on Board any Foreign Man of War, or
other Ship designed for Traffic, or the Fishing-Trade without his License:
laying down several other Rules in Relation to the security of Trade, and the
Maintaining his Sovereignty in those Seas, which were punctually observed, and
thereby many Merchants and Traders preserved from being made prize of by their
Enemies. And that he might secure the Peace of his Kingdom for the future, as
well as for the present, he procured the Parliament to give him the sum of five
hundred eighty four thousand nine hundred and seventy eight Pounds, for the
speedy building thirty Ships of War, which he caused to be built so large and
substantial, that they cost him one hundred thousand Pounds more than they gave
him.

And now beginning to reflect upon the success of the French King's Arms; and
fearing lest the growing Greatness of that Monarch might too much obscure his
own Glory, and threaten the future Peace of his Kingdom, resolved with himself,
by entering into an Alliance with some Princes and States abroad, to put a stop
to his further Conquests in Flanders: And that the French might not think him
in jest only, he immediately applied himself to the raising of Forces, and in a
short time had a brave Army on Foot, ready to be transported into Flanders, and
Married his Niece, the Lady Mary (eldest Daughter to his only Brother the Duke
of York) to the Prince of Orange.

The Parliament having, at their last sitting, desired him to hasten his
entering into such Councils and Alliances as might save what remained of
Flanders from being devoured by the French; he acquainted them, at their next
Meeting, with what he had done, telling them, that he had made such an
agreement with Holland, and the rest of the Confederates, that if seconded by
plentiful supplies from them, and due care from the Spaniards for their own
Preservation, he doubted not but to restore such an Honorable Peace to
Christendom, as might not be in the Power of one Prince alone to disturb, which
he had endeavored by a fair Treaty: And was resolved, if that succeeded not,
to enter into an actual War with France, laying before them the expenses he had
been at already, and what sums of Money such a War would necessarily require.
And to remove all sorts of Jealousies, he had Married his Niece to the Prince
of Orange, thereby giving full assurance, never to suffer that Prince's
Interest to be ruined, if assisted by them as he ought to be to preserve it.

To Alarm the French King the more with a noise of War, the Parliament, made
several Addresses to the King; wherein they entreated him to enter into an
Actual War with that Crown, promising to stand by him with their Lives and
Fortunes to that end: And a Book was Published, Entitled, Christianissimus
Christianandus, wherein reasons were given for reducing the most Christian King
to a more Christian state in Europe. And finding that the French King still
went on in his Conquests, he sent some Regiments of his new raised Forces over
into Flanders, to secure the places of greatest consequence there, and
Commanded a Fast, on Wednesday the tenth of April, to be kept in London, and on
that day fortnight throughout the whole Kingdom, to implore the blessings of
Heaven on his undertakings. And the Parliament to assist him with Money, which
is the sinews of War, raised him a liberal sum by a Pole-Bill; and that they
might weaken the French as well as strengthen him, Prohibited French Wines, and
other things of the Growth and Manufactury of that Country, a contrivance that
would certainly have reduced him to terms of Moderation and Peace, had the rest
of the Confederates done the like, but for want of that, the design of the
Prohibition fell, and he received little or no damage thereby. However,
remembering how fatal the Arms of England had formerly been to France; and being
Thunder-strook with the Fame of the King's having in forty days raised an Army
of thirty thousand Men, and fitted out a Navy of ninety Ships, he durst not
adventure (notwithstanding his success in Flanders) to run the hazard of a War
with that Nation. To prevent which, he resolved to consent to a Peace with some
of the Confederates, hoping thereby to break the measures already taken by King
Charles, and therefore presently offered a separate Treaty with Holland; which
People, according to their usual (though unjust and base Custom, of serving
themselves and leaving their Confederates in the lurch) without acquainting the
King of England therewith, accepted of, and afterward concluded, upon
condition that he would give up Maestricht, and other places which he had taken
from them during the War. But besides their usual custom of waiting the first
opportunity of slipping their own necks out of the Collar, they being informed,
that the League Offensive and Defensive, which the King of England had entered
into with them, was not well understood at home, and had met with some
unfitting and very undeserved Reflections, and that the Parliament had taken up
a Resolution of giving no Money, till satisfaction was first had in some
Matters of Religion, and those Jealousies removed, which they had without all
ground taken up of his Proceedings, very much influenced their entrance into
that Treaty; concluding, that it was now vain to rely any longer upon England,
since England was no longer it self, by reason of those Divisions and
Misunderstandings between the King and his Parliament.

But the King, who was not ignorant of what the Dutch were doing, resolving to
save Flanders either by a War or Peace, persuaded the King of Spain, and the
rest of the Conferates to accept of the same Treaty with them, endeavoring to
procure a Cessation of Arms on all sides, during the time of the Treaty, the
better to make way for the desired Peace. However, considering the influence
that Peace would have upon England, was altogether uncertain, and knowing that
by his late Preparations and Alliances, he had provoked a mighty and a warlike
King, he thought it convenient to provide for his own security, if the worst
should happen, by keeping up his Army, and continuing his Fleet at Sea;
especially since that was the most probable means to make the French King
account it his interest to hasten the Peace, and procure to himself the more
advantageous Terms therein, telling his Parliament, which met soon after, That
although they would peradventure account the Peace he was endeavoring to
procure, as ill a bargain as War, because it cost them Money; yet if they
seriously considered, that Flanders might have, perhaps, been lost by that
time, he believed, they would give much greater Sums than all the Charge he he
had been at, amounted to, rather than the single Town of Ostend should be in
the French King's hands, and Forty or Fifty of his Ships of War in so good a
Haven, over against the Rivers mouth: adding, That he could not but be very
well pleased, to understand the Reputation he had gained abroad, by having in
so short a time raised so great an Army, and fitted out so brave a Fleet; and
hoped that they were so too, since it so much redounded to the Honor of the
English Nation, desiring them therefore, if they had any respect to their own
Welfare, and the Peace of Europe, or were willing he should pass any part of
his Life in quiet, and all the rest in confidence and quietness with them and
other future Parliaments, to take care for the maintaining Peace and Union at
home, and the settling the same Revenue he had the Christmas before, (some of
it being then fallen off) upon him for Life, and add 300000 l. per Annum
thereunto, to enable him to maintain the Navy and Ord'nance, and keep his Word
with the Prince of Orange, in the payment of 40000 l. as his Nieces Portion;
the first Payment whereof was then become due, and demanded by that Prince.

But the French King, notwithstanding the Cessation of Arms, endeavoring to
enlarge his Conquests, and possess himself of several considerable Towns, he
resolved to prevent him; and therefore commanded the Duke of Monmouth, who was
at that time General of all his Land Forces, and the Earl of Ossery to join the
Prince of Orange, and attempt the beating of him from the Siege of Mons, which
was then very much straightened by him, and would in all probability have been
lost within a few days: The French, who lay encamped between two Woods, the
right Wing posted at St. Dennis, and their left at Mamoy St. Pierre, with such
advantage, that besides the Woods, there was only a Precipice led to them,
which made them almost inaccessable, thought themselves secure; but the Cannon
playing briskly upon St. Dennis, and the valiant English, commanded by the Earl
of Ossery, fal^ing on with their accustomed Courage and Fury, soon forced the
Abbey, and compelled the French, posted there, to fly in great disorder to
their main body, many of them being slain in the dispute, which was very hot:
And the Duke of Luxenburgh, who was Commander there, as the French King's
General, notwithstanding he had upon their first approach, (on a presumption
that he lay encamped in a place which was impregnable) laughed at, and derided
the vain Attempt, as he imagined, of forcing his Camp; finding he had now to do
with the resolute English, and not the timorous Spaniards, or wary Germans,
dislodged in great confusion, leaving his slain and many wounded Men behind,
and the Tents standing as they were, to the Plunder of his victorious Enemies;
whereby the relieving of Mons, a work thought little less then impossible, was
easily performed, and the French King disappointed of his hopes: And had that
succeess been followed and improved, the French King would in all probability
have been reduced to great extremities, and have been glad to have accepted of
Peace upon any Conditions he could have gotten; but the Peace which he had,
upon the march of the English, hastily concluded a few days before at Nemeguen,
put a stop to all farther hostilities.

Things being brought to this happy conclusion abroad, new Stirs and Commotions
begin to appear at home; For one Titus Oats, who had received Education and
Orders in the Church of England, and was afterward (seemingly, or God knows
how) reconciled to the Church of Rome, going first into Flanders, and then into
Spain, ingratiated himself with the Jesuits and Priests in those parts, with a
design, as he afterward pretended, to discover what they were plotting against
England, returning about this time, informed the King of a Plot, carried on by
the Jesuits, and others of the Roman Catholic Religion, against his Person and
Life, the Protestant Religion, and the Government of the Kingdom; And that his
Information might appear the more plausible, and be the more readily believed,
he named diverse Persons of Quality engaged in the Design, and what Instruments
had been provided for his Assassination; affirming, that when he was once taken
off, the remaining part of the Work, was to have been carried on by Arms,
Foreign Assistance, and such other Expedients as they should have judged
necessary for the success of their Enterprise. Whether there was any truth at
all in this Relation, or how much there was, or whether the King at all
believed it, is none of my business to determine, since I design as an
Historian, only to relate matter of Fact; but certain it is, that many Troubles
and Combustions were occasioned thereby, and several great and threatening
Mischiefs have since fallen so thick upon these Kingdoms, that one has ever
trod upon the heels of another.

Upon this Information the Privy-Councel sat twice a day, to consider and
examine that Plot, and Sir George Wakeman, one of the Queen's Physicians, Mr.
Coleman, the Duchess of York's Secretary, Mr. Langhorn of the Temple, and
several others were committed close Prisoners; and the Lords Bellassis, Powis,
Peter's, Arundel of Warder, Castlemain, and Stafford, were secured in the Tower.
And the Parliament sitting soon after, the King told them in his Speech, That
he had been informed of a Design against his Person, carried on by the Papists,
whereof he should forbear to give his opinion, lest he should seem to say too
much, or too little, but would leave the matter wholly to the decision of the
Law, without prejudging the persons accused: But the strict inquiry into that
Matter having discovered many unwarrantable Practices of theirs, he thought he
had reason to look to 'em. Although this Plot, in all the parts of it, was a
complication of Mysteries, yet the greatest mystery of all seems to be the
business of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, who being a Justice of the Peace for
Middlesex, and a severe enemy to the Papists, as was generally supposed, took
the Depositions of Oats and Tongue, and was soon after found dead in a Ditch,
not far from Hampsted, with his Sword run through him, appearing to the
Coroners Inquest, to have been first strangled, before he was brought thither;
which was sworn by Bedloe, who came in upon the King's offer, in his
Proclamation, of 500 l. to any that would discover the manner of his death; and
Prance, who was apprehended by him, as he was attending in the Lobby of the
Lords House, to be done by the Papists.

The examination of this Plot, and the Murder of Godfrey, which they looked
upon as a sufficient confirmation of its truth and reality, employed the
Commons so assiduously, that they sat whole days to consult about it, without
stirring from Morning till it was late at Night; the product whereof was, a
Fast enjoined by Proclamation, throughout the Nation; the Minutes of that
House, forbid to be divulged; a Resolution entered by them in their Journal,
That it was their Opinion, upon the Evidence that had already appeared to that
House, there had been and was an execrable and hellish Design, contrived and
carried on by the Papists for assassinating the King, subverting the
Government, and destroying the Protestant Religion; a Proclamation, which
banished all the reputed Papists ten Miles from London and Westminster, except
Householders, who were obliged likewise to take the Oaths, or suffer the
Penalties inflicted by Law upon the refusers of them; and another for the
turning all Roman Catholics out of the Horse and Foot-Guards, wherein 20 l.
was promised to those who should discover any Officer or Soldier who had
formerly taken the Oaths and Test, and had since turned Papist.

But the Commons not yet satisfied, it was moved in that House, That an Address
should be made to the King, to remove the Duke of York from his Presence and
Councels, but he being informed of their intention, resolved to prevent them,
and endeavor to take them off from their unseasonable heat, by assuring them
of his steadfast Resolution to defend them in their just Rights and Privileges,
and comply with any reasonable offer they should make for the security of the
Protestant Religion; in order whereunto, he went the next day in his Robes to
the House of Peers, and having commanded the Commons to attend him, in a Speech
to both Houses, he gave them his hearty thanks for their extraordinary care,
for the preservation of his Life in that time of danger; telling them, that he
was as ready to join with them in all ways and means that might conduce to the
establishment and security of the Protestant Religion, as their own hearts
could wish, and that not only during his Life, but in future Ages, even to the
end of the World; and therefore was come thither at that time, to assure them
that whatsoever reasonable Bills they should at any time present to him, to be
passed into Laws, for the rendering them safe in the Reign of his Successor, so
as they tended not to impeach the Right of Succession, nor the Descent of the
Crown in the true Line, and so also as they did not restrain and limit the just
Rights and Power of the Throne, should find from him a ready concurrence: And
to demonstrate his reality therein, when he had about the latter end of that
Month a Bill presented to him, for the dissabling all Popish Members to sit in
either House of Parliament, he gave his Royal Assent thereunto, though at the
same time he refused another, which was for raising a third part of the Militia
to be in constant Arms for a time; telling them, that that were to put the
Militia out of his own power, which thing he would not do, no not for one hour;
but promised, if they would assist him with Money for that purpose, to raise
such a part of the Militia, as should secure the Peace of the Government and
his own Person.

And now several of those accused by Oats, and others, (for the Witnesses were
by this time increased) were brought to Trial before Sir William Scroggs, then
Lord Chief Justice of the Kings bench; And those that gave evidence against
them, being very positive in their Depositions, Coleman, Ireland, Pickering,
Groves, Whitebread, Fenwick, Langhorn, and diverse more, were at several times
condemned and executed; and so was William Staley, a Goldsmith's Son in
Covent Garden, for speaking dangerous words against the King's Life; and three
more, whose Names were Green, Berry, and Hill, upon the evidence of Bedloe and
Prance, for the Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, Prance affirming, he was
murdered in Somerset House, and that himself assisted in the murdring of him:
They every one died, denying what they were charged withal, and asserting their
innocence with all the Solemn Protestations imaginable, which was credited, or
disbelieved, according to peoples various inclinations. And now some Members of
Parliament began to accuse each other; Mr. Mountague, who had been a little
before Ambassador to the French King, carried up five Articles against the
Treasurer Danby; and Sir John Ernly, another of the Commons, accused Mountague,
of holding a correspondency with the Popes Nuncio at Paris, but for his good
service, in accusing Danby, that was overlooked, and a resolution taken to
proceed with severity against the Treasurer.

This Parliament, which first began on the 8th of May, in the year 1661. and
had now been continued, by several Prorogations and Adjournments, for 17 Years,
8 Months, and 17 Days, began to grow so presumptuous, that upon an Information,
that Sir Joseph Williamson, then Secretary of State, had counter-signed several
Commissions for Officers, who were Roman Recusants, with a Non obstante to the
Oaths and Test, they took the boldness to commit him prisoner to the Tower;
whereupon the King commanding them the next day to attend him in the
Banqueting House, briskly told them, That though they had committed his Servant,
without acquainting him, yet he would deal more freely with them, in
acquainting them with his intentions to release his Secretary; which he
immediately ordered to be done, and finding there was but little good to be
expected from their proceedings, he prorogued them on the 30th of December. and
on the 24th of the following January, dissolved them by Proclamation, and
called a new one, to sit on the 6th of the next March, issuing out Writs for
the speedy choosing of them.

From the Counsels and Debates of this new Parliament which met at the time
appointed, the King expected more felicity than he had met with from those of
the former; and therefore to prevent all occasions of disgust, and hinder them
from falling with the like heat upon his Brother, desired the Duke to retire
for some time beyond the Seas: for the Reasons expressed in the following Letter.

The King's Letter to His Royal Highness.
I Have already given You My resolves at large, why I think it fit You should
absent Your self for some time beyond the Seas: As I am truly sorry for the
occasion, so may You be sure I shall never desire it longer than it will be
absolutely necessary for Your Good and My Service. In the mean time, I think it
proper to give You under My Hand, that I expect this compliance from You, and
desire it may be as soon as conveniently You can. You may easily believe with
what trouble I write this to You, there being nothing I am more sensible of,
than the constant kindness You have ever had for Me: I hope you are as just to
Me, to be assured that no absence, nor any thing else, can ever change me from
being truly and kindly Yours.

(...)
and their advantage: Telling them moreover, that since his Neighbors were
making Naval Preparations, he thought it necessary still to maintain a Fleet at
Sea, and that it highly concerned them to provide a constant establishment for
the Navy: And concluding his Speech, with his earnest desires to have that
Parliament prove a Healing one, assuring them, that it was his constant
resolution to defend with his Life the Protestant Religion, and the Laws of the
Kingdom: and that he expected, in so doing, to be by them defended from the
Calumny, as well as danger, of those worst of Men, who endeavored to render
both Him and his Government odious to his People. Advising them likewise by his
Chancellor, the Earl of Nottingham, not to suffer their Zeal to outrun their
Discretion, lest by being too far transported with the fears of Popery, they
over-did their business, and by neglecting the opportunities of making sober
and lasting Provisions against it, render themselves the unhappy occasion of
making their own Counsels abortive.

The Commons, as soon as they were returned to their House, made choice of Mr.
Seymour for their Speaker, whom they looked upon as the fittest Person for that
employment, in regard he had officiated therein in the former Parliament; but
the King refusing to admit him, they chose Sergeant Gregory. And to convince
the World that they were Leavened with the same Principles, and resolved to
thwart the King's Designs for settling the Nations as much as the former had
done, begun where they ended, ordering a Committee to inquire into the manner
how Danby had sued out his Pardon which was granted him by the King, to secure
the Earl, for whom he had a particular affection, having always found him
faithful to his Interest, from all fear of Punishment for any pretended Crimes,
supposing, as well he might, that they would not dispute his Power of
Pardoning, since it was by the Law invested on him as one of the chiefest
Jewels of his Crown. But finding, upon search, that the Pardon was not entered
after its passing at the Secretaries Office, in any other Office, 'till it came
to the Lord Chancellor, and so dispatched in a private manner; They Resolve upon
an Address to the King, to represent to his Majesty the illegality and the
dangerous consequence of granting Pardons to any Persons who lay under an
Impeachment of the Commons, and desired the Lords, that he might be sequestered
from their House, and put into safe Custody: who accordingly ordered the Usher
of the Black Rod to take him, which he had done, had he not absented himself.
Whereupon, a Bill was ordered to be brought in, to Command his surrendering
himself by a certain day, or in default thereof, to stand attainted. And the
Lords having in the mean while passed a Bill for Banishing and disabling of
him, and sent it down to the Commons for their concurrence, it was rejected as
a Censure too favorable; and a Vote passed for an Address to the King, that he
would not permit him to reside in any of his Palaces of White Hall,
Somerset House or St. James's: and another Address to be made for a
Proclamation to apprehend him, and forbid all the King's Subjects to harbor or
conceal him. In the mean while, the Bill of Attainder was highly canvassed, at
several conferences, between the two Houses, 'till at length the Earl saved
them the labor of passing a Bill for his Attainder, by surrendering himself to
the Usher of the Black-Rod.

The Lords in the Tower were, at their first Imprisonment, found Guilty upon
special ^^dictments, by the Grand Jury of Middlesex, before special
Commissioners sitting at Westminster. But that way of proceeding being for some
Reasons waved, they were severally impeacht by the Commons, and their
Impeachment carried up to the Peers by Five Members of the House of Commons; to
which they gave in their Answers in person, all but Bellafis, who being ill of
the Gout, sent his in writing.

The King, to content the Faction, if possible, on the 2d of April declared his
pleasure to dissolve his Privy Council (with which they had showed themselves
displeased), and constitute a new one; which for the time to come should
consist of Thirty persons, Fifteen whereof were to be certain, viz. the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of London, the Lord Chancellor, one of the
Chief Justices, the Admiral, the Master of the Ordinance, the Treasurer, the
Chancellor of the Exchequer, the Privy Seal, the Master of the Horse, the Lord
Steward, the Lord Chamberlain of the Household, the Groom of the Stool, and the
Two Secretaries: And the rest to be Elective at his pleasure; Ten out of the
Nobility, and Five Commoners, besides such Princes of the Blood as should be at
Court, A Lord President, and a Secretary of Scotland. And according to that new
Model, as many of them as were in Court, met the next morning in the
Council Chamger, and were sworn Privy Counselors: The King going the same day
to the Parliament, acquainted the Two Houses with what he had done; and assured
them he was resolved in all weighty and important Affairs, next to his great
Council in Parliament, to be advised by that Privy Council. And it being his
custom, as it had been his Fathers before him, to take off some hot Spirits,
whose Parts and Abilities he judged might be improved to his own and the
Publicks advantage, by promoting them to some Place or Office of Trust, or
otherwise winning them to his Friendship, unless they were such whose Natures,
corrupted by their designs, had rendered obstinate and implacable, as the Earl
of Shaftsbury afterward appeared to be; he for the most part chose the other
Fifteen, which were to complete his Council, out of their number, and made
Shaftsbury Lord President of it.

The Parliament resolving to hasten the Trial of the Lords, Danby and
Bellaasis, appeared in person at the Bar of the Lords House; where the former
put in his Plea, and the other his Answer. And the next day Stafford, Arundel
and Powis, appeared there likewise; and having retracted their former Pleas,
which appeared insufficient to the Commons, they put in their further Answers.

And the King commanding the Commons to attend him in the House of Lords,
renewed the Assurances he had formerly given them, of his being ready to assent
to any Laws they should provide for the security of the Protestant Religion, so
that the Descent of the Crown in the Right Line, were not thereby defeated: And
that he was willing a provision should be made to distinguish a Popish from a
Protestant Successor; and limit the Authority of the former, if any such should
be, by providing that all Church-preferments should be conferred on Pious and
Learned Protestants: That the Parliament which should happen to be in being at
his own Death; or if none, the last that sat, should thereupon assemble
without any new Summons or Election: That during the Reign of any Popish
Successor, no Privy Councellor, or Judge of the Common Law, or Chancery, should
be put in, or displaced, but by consent of Parliament: That none should be
Justices of Peace but Protestants; and that the Lord Lieutenants, and Deputy
Lieutenants of Counties, and Officers in the Navy, should not be put in, nor
removed, but by the Authority of Parliament: Telling them, he conceived it hard
to invent any other Restraint to be put on a Popish Successor; Yet if any thing
did occur to their Wisdom, whereby their Religion and Liberties might be better
secured, he was ready to consent to it.

Whereupon the Commons, after they had several times adjourned the
consideration of this Speech, on the 11th of May, resolved, That they would
stand by His Majesty with their Lives and Fortunes: And that if he should come
by any violent Death, which they prayed God to avert, they would revenge it to
the utmost upon the Papists; According to which Vote an Address was drawn up,
and presented by them to the King, with this Variation in the form of words, We
shall be ready to revenge upon the Papists any violence offered by them to your
Sacred Majesty; which words were neither expressed nor intimated in their Vote,
although absolutely necessary and essential to the Justice of their designed
Revenge.

And without taking the least notice of the Resolution expressed in his Speech,
Not to suffer any alteration in the Descent to the Throne, brought in a Bill to
disable his Royal Highness to inherit the Imperial Crown of England; which
being put to the Vote, was carried in the Affirmative by One and Twenty Voices;
but being prorogued soon after, it proceeded no further.

In the mean while the Two Houses were very earnest in debating the methods,
whereby they should bring the Lords in the Tower to their Trials: And Danby
being demanded at the Bar of the Lords House, Whether he would rely on, and
abide by the Plea of his Pardon, returned for answer; That having been advised
by his Council, his Pardon was good in Law, he would insist upon his Plea; and
requested his Council might be heard: And the Lords acquainting the Commons
with his desire, instead of granting it, they in the Names of the Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses in Parliament, and all the Commons of England, demanded
Judgment against him upon the Impeachment, affirming his Pardon to be illegal
and void. However, the Lords appointed him a day to argue his Plea, and ordered
the Five Lords to be tried the Week after, and an Address to be made to the
King for the appointing a Lord Steward for their Trials. But the Commons not
satisfied with their proceedings, desired a Committee of both Houses might
consider of the most proper methods of proceeding upon Impeachments, according
to the usage of Parliament; but the Lords refused it, as contrary to the known
Rules and Orders of their House, which ever was, and ought to be tender in
matters relating to their Judicature. Whereupon the Commons resolved, That no
Commoner should presume to maintain the Validity of the Pardon pleaded by
Danby, without the leave of that House: And that the persons so doing, should
be accounted Betrayers of the Liberties of the Commons of England. Upon which
the Lords, to take away all occasion of disgust between the Two Houses, receded
from their former resolution, and appointed a Committee to treat with them: but
a difference arising in that joint Committee, about the Bishops Right to be
present at Trials in capital cases; the Lords affirming, they might stay till
the Court proceeded to the Vote of Guilty, or Not Guilty; and the Commons
denying it, the Bishops endeavored to find out a Medium which might satisfy
both; and therefore desired leave of the Lords to withdraw themselves from the
Trials, with liberty of entering their usual protestations. But this not
satisfying the Commons, they resolved not to proceed to the Trial of the Five
Lords, before Judgment given on Danby's Pardon; and to insist upon the Bishops
having no Right of Voting in capital Offenses; which made the King, who saw
that these heats took up their whole time, and prevented their entering upon
such Debates as more nearly concerned them, and would have conduced more toward
the settling of the Nation, thought it best to prorogue them, in hopes that in
their next meeting their Debates might be more happy and unanimous.

About this time the Faction ran higher in Scotland, and boiled into an open
R^bellion, which took its first beginning from the barbarous Murder of Dr.
Sharp, Archbishop of St. Andrews, and Primate of that Kindom, on the 3d of May,
1679. by a company of inve^^^ate Covenanters, as he was traveling from
Edenborough to his own Residence; who had born him an immor^al hatred, because
having formerly been one of their Party, he had revolted, as they termed his
honest Reformation: But appeared more visible toward the latter end of that
Month in the Western parts of Scotland, when a party of Rebels, well mounted
and armed, coming to Rugland, proclaimed the Covenant, burnt the following Acts
of Parliament, viz. Those which concerned the King's Supremacy, the
E^^^blishment of Episcopacy, the appointing the Anniversary of the 29th of May,
and the Recissory Act; by which all the Mock-Laws made in the late Anarchy,
were repealed: And published an insolent Declaration, full of Treason, and stuffed
with the very Spirit and Quintescence of Rebellion, inviting others to join
with them; which the Covenanters (commonly there called WHIGS; from whence the
Name was afterward brought into England, and applied to all the Dissenting
Party) accepted of, and flockt so fast to them, that their Army increased daily
to such a considerable number, that they became formidable. Whereupon the King
hastened away the Duke of Monmouth, as his Generalissimo, to suppress them;
which with the Assistance of the Loyal Gentry and Herritors of that Nation, he
easily performed in one Battle at Bothwell-Bridg: For having forced his passage
over the Bridge, and seized the only piece of Cannon they had, they fled toward
Hamilton-Park: And although they afterward rallied again, and Faced about, upon
the advantage of a rising ground, yet so soon as the Cannon began to play on
them, they all fled in disorder and confusion; Robert Hamilton, who was their
chief Commander, being one of the first. There were many of the Rebels killed
in the place, and several hundreds taken Prisoners, whereof some few were
Executed.

The King, who was willing to try all means to please and satisfy his people,
fearing the Animosities of that Parliament were too great to admit of a
Reconciliation, and would prevent their doing any thing which would tend to
his, or the Kingdoms benefit, on the 10th of July dissolved it by Proclamation,
and declared his Resolution to call a new one, which should sit on the 17th of
the following October.

In the mean while Sir George Wakeman, with Marshall, Rumley and Corker, three
Benedictine Monks, were tried before the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, for High
Treason, relating to the Plot: But the Evidence of Oats and Bedlow, beginning
now to be less credited than formerly, and the ferment of peoples fury being
somewhat abated, the Jury brought them in Not Guilty; and Wakeman was thereupon
discharged from his Imprisonment, as the other Three had likewise been, had
they not in their Defense upon their Trials, acknowledged themselves to be
Priests.

Wakeman's being thus acquitted, startled the Mobille, who expected all that
were accused of that Plot, should have been condemned of course, without
respect to the Truth or Falsehood of the Accusation. And the Faction endeavored
to improve their dissatisfaction into Rage and Sedition, by several scurrilous
Libels, wherein they accuse Scroggs of perverting Justice, and taking a Bribe
of several thousand Guinneas from the Spanish Ambassador, to save Wakeman's
Life; from which Aspersions he sufficiently cleared himself in a Speech which
he made in the Kings-Bench-Court, on the first day of the ensuing
Michaelmas-Term.

During this interval of Parliament, the King was violently taken ill of an
Ague at Windsor, insomuch, that his Life was thought to be in some danger:
Whereupon the Duke (as well to demonstrate his Affection to his Brother, as to
prevent the danger which, as things then stood, might peradventure have
happened to him in case the King should have died in his absence) came Post
from Flanders to Windsor. But Heaven designing to lengthen out his Life, till
he had reduced the great Affairs of the Nation to a better Settlement, and
could leave his Succession more safe and secure; it pleased God that he
recovered his Health soon after to the great Joy of all the whole Nation. And
the City to express the pleasure they took therein, sent the Lord Mayor, and
the Court of Aldermen, with a Train of thirty Coaches, and about a hundred
Horse, to Congratulate him upon his Recovery; and when he returned soon after
to White Hall, many Bonefires were made throughout the whole City, attended
with great Acclamations of Joy, and Expressions of Loyalty.

Whilst he lay Sick at Windsor, the Duke of Monmouth, who had been by the Kings
favor raised to as high a Station as a Subject was well capable of (being then
Lord General of all His Majesty's Land Forces, Master of the Horse, and Captain
of the Kings Life-Guards) not content with the Honors already heaped upon him;
but aspiring, as was thought (although without all Reason, in regard of his
Illegitimacy) to the Crown it self; endeavored to prevail with some great Men
at Court, to take part with his Interest; which being made known to the King by
the Earl of Oxford, who having for his eminent Loyalty, a considerable party of
Horse under his Command, commonly called the Lord of Oxfords Troop; was
importuned by Sir Thomas Armstrong (as was reported, either in direct terms, or
so as his meaning might easily be understood) to declare himself for Monmouth,
in case the King should dye. He conceived a just Indignation against him for
that bold and audacious Attempt, and discovered his incensed Majesty, by taking
away his Commission of Lord General, and soon after of his remaining places of
Captain of the Lifeguard, Master of the Horse, Governor of Hull, etc. And to
prevent Peoples being deluded by his Chime^ical Fictions, published a
Declaration, wherein having first taken notice of the great Industry and Malice
wherewith men of seditious and restless Spirits spread abroad a most false and
scandalous Report of a Marriage or Contract of Marriage at least, between Mrs.
Walters (who was that Dukes Mother) and him; designing thereby to fill the
minds of his loving Subjects with doubts and fears, and divide them if possible
into Parties, by bringing into question the clear and undoubted Right of his
true and lawful Heirs and Successors to the Crown; he did, to obviate the fatal
consequences* so dangerous and malicious a report might have in future times
upon the Peace of his Kingdoms, assure them, That having found a former Rumor
that there was a writing yet extant, and lately produced before several
Persons* whereby that Marriage or Contrac^ at least would appear, was not only
revived again, but improved also wit^ new Additions, by insinuating tha^
several Lords and others were yet living, who were pretended to b^^ present at
the Marriage; h^ had (notwithstanding, he knew fu^^ well it was impossible
there should b^ any truth in this Report, since no^^ thing in the World could
be more false and groundless, than the pretenc^ of such a Marriage or Contract
b^^tween him and the said Mrs. Walter^ alias Barlow) called before him, an^
caused to be Interogated in Council such Lords and other Persons, as the common
rumor surmised to have been present at the pretended Marriage, or to know
something of it, or of the said writing. And that, tho it then appeared to all
his Council upon their hearing the said Persons severally Interrogated, and
their denial to have been ever present at any such Marriage, or to know any
thing of it, or of any such writing; that the raising and spreading that
Report, which was so inconsistent with it self, was the effect of deep malice
in some few, and of loose and idle discourse in others; yet he thought it
requisite for the satisfying all in general, to publish a Declaration he had
made in the January was Twelvemonth, written with his own Hand, in the
following words.

There being a false and malicious Report, industriously spread abroad by some
who are neither Friends to me, or the Duke of Monmouth; as if I should have
been either Contracted or Married to his Mother; and tho I am confident that
this idle Story cannot have any effect in this Age; yet I thought it my Duty in
relation to the true Succession of this Crown, and that future Ages may not
have any pretense to give disturbance upon that Score, or any other of this
nature, to declare, as I do here Declare in the Presence of Almighty God, That
I never was Married, nor gave any Contract to any Woman whatsoever, but to my
Wife Queen Katharine, to whom I am now Married. In Witness whereof he had set
his Hand at White Hall, the 6th of January, 1678-79. In the Presence of the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the two Secretaries, Coventry and Williamson.

And assured them, that to strengthen that Declaration, he had in the March
following, made a more public and solemn Declaration to the same purpose in
his Privy Council written, likewise, with his own Hand, and had caused a true
Transcript thereof to be entered into the Council Book, which for the better
Confirmation he Signed with his own hand, and caused the Lords of the Privy
Council then present, to do so too, and had ordered the Original to be kept in
the Council Chest, where it still remains.

This Declaration was likewise inserted, as it was entered in the Council Books,
and was as follows.

For the avoiding of any Dispute which may happen in time to come, concerning
the Succession of the Crown; I do here Declare in the Presence of Almighty God,
That I never gave nor made any Contract of Marriage, nor was Married to any
Woman whatsoever, but to my present Wife Queen Katharine. White Hall the 3d day
of March, 167 ^/^. CHARLES R.

And that no^e might still remain doubtful, or question the Truth of his former
Declaration, he concluded that Declaration with the following Protestation.

And we do again upon this occasion call Almighty God to Witness, and declare
upon the Faith of a Christian, and the Word of a King, That there was never any
Marriage had or made between us, and the said Mrs. Walters, alias Barlow, the
Duke of Monmouths Mother, nor between Us and any Woman whatsever, our Royal
Consort Queen Katharine, that is, only excepted. Requiring and Commanding all
his Subjects of what degree soever, that they should not presume to utter or
publish any thing contrary to the Tenor of that Declaration at their Peril, and
upon pain of being proceeded against according to the utmost Severity and Rigor
of the Law.

Whereby all the groundless hopes of that Duke, and the idle and ridiculous
Expectations of many factious and designing Persons were wholly disappointed.
And he was moreover commanded by the King to depart the Land, which he did on
the 23d of September, and went over to Vtrecbt, but returned again privately
and without order, about the latter end of the next month.

About this time there was much discourse of a new Plot, and several Narratives
published about it, wherein the Papists, as was affirmed, had contrived to
charge the Presbyterians with a conspiracy against the Government; the chief
Discoverer whereof was one Dangerfield, who had formerly been a vile and
profligate Fellow, and was then newly got out of Newgate. Several Persons were
accused by him as Conspirators therein, the chief whereof was the Countess o^
Powis, Sir Robert Payton, Gadbury, and one Cellier, a Widwife, in whose house
Sir William Waller pretended to find some Papers that related to the
Conspiracy, from whence it was called the Meal-Tub Plot, and the Effigies of
the Pope in all his Pontificalibus, was on the Birthday of Queen Elizabeth,
which is the 17th of November, Burned with much more Pomp and Splendour than it
had been in former years (it having been a custom for several late years so to
do.) The Effigies of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey was carried on a Horse, with a
Bell-man to mind the people of his Murder; several Priests in Copes, with a
large silver Cross, six Jesuits, diverse Bishops, some in thin Lawn Sleeves, and
others with their Copes and Miters on, and six Cardinals going in procession
before him.

The King having according to his promise, called a new Parliament to meet on
the 17th of October, Prorogues it to the 26th of the following January; and
toward the latter end of November, the Duke of York went into Scotland, where
his Presence was very acceptable, and all Persons declared the great
satisfaction they took in having him amongst them.

The appointed time of the Parliaments sitting drawing near, great endeavors
were used for the procuring a multitude of Hands to Pe^itio^s, which were to be
presented to the King for his permitting the Parliament to Sit on the 26th of
January, according to the last pro^ogation; which petitioning being
unwarrantable and tumultuous, he ordered the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen
to take care for the preservation of his Honor, and the Peace and safety of
the City, and not suffer such Persons that should ^ign such Petitions, or go
about to get hands to them, to escape unpunished; and issued out a Proclamation
to forbid all such kind of petitioning; and another to declare his Resolution
for the farther prorogation to the 11th of November; notwithstanding which,
some resolutely went on with their petitioning; and not long after, one from
London, subscribed with many Thousand hands, and others from York, Essex,
Surrey, and Wiltshire, were presented to Him, which he received indeed; but
knowing that such kind of Petitions were rather Commands than Requests,
resolved not to gratify the unruly Petitioners, and therefore on the 26th of
January, when those Members who were in Town, met according to custom at the
Parliament House, he acquainted them, That when he declared in Council his
Intention of putting off the Parliament to a time so remote as November, it was
not without mature Consideration; and that he saw nothing which had happened
since in reference to the Affairs within the Kingdom, which gave him occasion
to alter or repent that Resolution; and that although he would in regard to the
present danger which threatened some of his Neighbors and Allies, appoint a day
for their meeting again in April, yet the Distractions and Jealousies at Home
were of such a nature, and had been so heightened and improved by the malice and
industry of ill men, that he was unalterably of an opinion, that a longer
interval would be absolutely necessary for compo^ing men's minds, in order to
which he feared the most proper Remedies would prove ineffectual without the
assistance of some farther time; and therefore resolved, that at their meeting
in April, there should be a farther prorogation unless the condition of his
Allies abroad, did then require their immediate assistance.

In the mean while Articles of high Misdemeanor were offered by way of
complaint to the King and Council against the Chief Justice Scroggs, by Oats
and Bedlow, to which he returned his Answer, and so the business fell. And in
Hillary Term Sir Thomas Gascoigne a Yorkshire Gentleman of 85 Years of Age was
arraigned at the Kings Bench Bar, on an Information of High Treason; the
Witnesses against him, being Balron, and Mowberry two of his own Servants; but
their Evidence being somewhat doubtful and improbable, he was acquitted.

The King opened the Year 80, (which was remarkable for many revolutions,
though all in the end concluded peaceable and well) with calling the Duke out
of Scotland, who was upon his arrival complemented by the Mayor, Aldermen,
Recorder, and Common Council of London: About which time also, Secretary
Coventry having resigned his office, the King made choice of Sir Lionel Jenkins
to succeed him, and on the 15th of April the King being absent at Newmarket,
ordered his Chancellor Finch by virtue of a Commission under the great Seal to
prorogue the Parliament to the 17th of May, from whence it was afterward
prorogued to the first of July.

And now several Countries which had been active in promoting petitions, began
to be ashamed and recant their Actions; the City of Westminster leading the
way, their Grand Jury by a public and formal act disowning the Action, and
charging it on certain factious persons unknown to them, which they desire Mr.
Withins, Steward of that Court, to represent in their Names to the King, which
he accordingly did, and received the Honor of Knighthood as a Reward of his
Loyalty. After which several such like addresses were directed from many of the
Counties; and that from Norfolk had a farther acknowledgment of their humble
thanks to the King for calling home the Duke. And the Lord Shandois having been
elected by the Turkey Company to go Ambassador to Constantinople, and desiring
the Kings approbation; the King (...) him, that having been concerned in
promoting petitions, which were ^^rogatory to his Prerogative, and tended to
sedition, he could not think him fit for his Favor; whereupon he humbly
acknowledged his fault to the King in Council, protesting ^^at he had been
misled and drawn into it, by being persuaded it was for his M^jesties Service;
but being now better informed, he abhorred and disowned all such Practices, and
humbly begging his Pardon, he as freely obtained it.

Upon the 18th of May so great a Storm of Hail fell in London and the adjacent
parts, that the like had not been seen in many Years before, the Stones being
of an extraordinary bigness, and very hard till they had lain a while, many of
them being as large as Pullets Eggs. One which I saw measured was somewhat more
than Nine Inches about; several Rooks in the Temple Garden being beaten down
and killed with them, and the Glass of many Sky-lights battered and broken to
pieces.

And now the Parliament which had been several times this Summer prorogued, met
on the 21st of October, according to ^he King's Declaration to them at their
meeting in April; to whom he declared, in a Speech to both Houses, That he had,
during that long prorogation, made Alliances with Holland and Spain, and
desired money of them for the relieving Tangier, the defense whereof had very
much exhausted his Treasure; and advising them not to meddle with the
Succession of the Crown, but proceed to the discovery of the Plot, and the
Trial of the Lords.

The Commons having chosen Mr. Williams, a Barrester of Grays Inn, and Recorder
of Chester, for their Speaker, to convince the World, that the King had not
without Reason deferred their sitting so long; and that neither he, nor the
Nation would have been losers if they had not sat then, fell to purging their
house, expelling Sir Robert Can, a Burgess for Bristol, for having said, there
was no other Plot but a Presbyterian one; and Sir Francis Withins, for having
declared himself an Abhorrer of the late tumultuous Petitions for the
Parliaments sitting. The former was committed by them to the Tower, and both
ordered to receive their Censure on their knees from the Speaker: Several other
Members were likewise declared guilty of the same Offense with Sir Francis
Withins. And not content with punishing their own Members, they take notice of
others, who were without their Walls, amongst whom Sir George Jeffries,
Recorder of London, one of the King's Sergeants at Law, and Chief Justice of
Chester, became the Object of their displeasure, and was Voted a Betrayer of
the Subjects Rights; and an Address was made to the King to remove him from all
public Affairs: and Impeachments Voted and drawn up against Sir Francis North,
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Sir William Scrogs, Chief Justice of the
King's Bench, Sir Thomas Jones, one of the puisny Judges of that Court, and Sir
Richard Weston, one of the Barons of the Exchequer, for several pretended
misdemeanors; that of Sir Francis North being the advising and drawing up of
the Proclamation against Petitions.

But not contenting themselves to deal with Subjects, they proceeded next to a
matter of a far greater concern: For on the 11th of November, notwithstanding
the King's desire at their opening, That they would not meddle with the
Succession; a Bill past in the House of Commons, entitled, An Act for securing
the Protestant Religion, by disabling James Duke of York from inheriting the
Imperial Crown of England and Ireland, and the Territories thereunto belonging:
which notwithstanding all the opposition made against it by the unbiassed and
Judicious Loyalists (who tho their Reasons were strongest, yet their number
were fewest) was carried up to the Peers by the Lord Russel, attended by almost
all the Commons, who gave a Hum at the delivery of it. The Lords having ordered
it, upon their departure, to be read, put it to the Vote, whether it should be
read a second time; which being carried in the Affirmative by Two Voices only,
after the second reading it was debated till Eleven a Clock at night, the King
being present all the while; and then thrown out of the House by a Majority of
about Thirty Voices; in which number were all the Bishops then present, to show
how careful the Prelacy is to promote Monarchy.

Soon after the Parliament proceeded to the Trial of William Lord Viscount
Stafford, which began in Westminster Hall on Tuesday the 30th of November; and
the Impeachment and Evidence upon the same were managed by a Committee of the
Commons; and the Witnesses against him were Oats, Turberville, and Dugdale.
The Lord Chancellor Finch was created Lord High Steward for the solemnity of
his Trial, which lasted a whole week; and being found Guilty by the Majority of
Four and Twenty Voices, he received Sentence on the 17th of December; and on
the 29th of that Month was beheaded on Tower Hill, protesting his Innocence
with his last breath; as all those had done who died for the Plot before him.
Some were so bold as to question the King's power to dispense with the Rigor of
the Sentence; and the unhappy Lord Russel was said to be one of them.

During these public Transactions, a large and prodigious flame of Light
appeared in the West: The Star from which the Blaze proceeded, was but small;
and when first discovered, seemed to be not much above the Horizon; but every
night after appeared somewhat higher in the beginning of the night, and
consequently set later, its luster and magnitude decreasing by degrees. Whether
this finger of the Almighty so visibly seen in the Heavens, portended good or
bad Events to the World in general, or England in particular, is a matter too
mysterious for me to unfold; and therefore shall I leave it till made more
plain by the Effects, which will be the best Commentatary thereon.

The King finding the Commons taken up with other business, without taking the
least care of providing him Money for the supplying his pressing wants, and the
relieving Tangier, then besieged by the Emperor of Morocco, recommended the
matter more seriously to them, in his Speech on the 15th of December: But all
the Answer he could obtain from them, was an Address, complaining of several
pretended Grievances, and refusing all supplies of Money for the Relief of
Tangier, or any other use, unless he would pass a Bill for the Exclusion of the
Duke; and to enable all Protestants to associate themselves for the security of
the Protestant Religion: which Address he answered by a message to the Commons,
wherein he let them know, That he had received their Address with all the
disposition they could wish to comply with their reasonable desires; but upon
perusal of it, he was sorry to see their thoughts so fixed on the Bill of
Exclusion, as to determine all other Remedies for the suppressing of it, to be
ineffectual; telling them, That he was confirmed in his Opinion against the
Bill by the Judgment of the Lords, in their rejecting it; advising them to
consider of all other means for preservation of the Protestant Religion, to
which they should have no Reason to doubt his concurrence; and urging them
again to make some speedy provision for the preservation of Tangier.

Upon the consideration of which Speech, they were so far from complying with
his reasonable desires, that they Resolved, as the Opinion of the House, That
there was no security for the Protestant Religion, the King's Life, or the well
Constituted and Established Government of this Kingdom, without the Bill of
Exclusion; and that to rely upon any other Remedy, were insufficient and
dangerous: That till such a Bill was past, they could give the King no supply
without danger to his Person, hazard to the Protestant Religion, and
unfaithfulness to those by whom they were trusted: And that all persons who
advised him in that Message to insist upon an Opinion against the
Exclusion-Bill, had given him pernicious Counsel, and were promoters of Popery,
and Enemies both to him and the Kingdom; naming Hallifax, Worcester, Clarendon,
Feversham, and Laurence Hide, Esquire against whom they Voted an Address to the
King, to remove them from all Offices of honor and profit, and from his
Councils and presence forever: Voting moreover, That whosoever shall Lend, or
cause to be Lent by way of Advance, any Money upon the branches of the King's
Revenue, arising by Custom, Excise, or Hearth-Money, should be adjudged to
hinder the sitting of Parliaments, and should be responsible for the same. But
their presumption running so high, the King resolved, by a Prorogation, to give
them time to cool themselves, which he did on the Monday following, being the
10th of July; when he past Two Bills, one about Irish Cattle, and the other for
burying in Woollen; the latter whereof proved very advantageous to the Nation
by the advance of Wool, which is accounted the most staple Commodity of this
Kingdom. The Commons, by some means or other, were informed of the King's
design of proroguing them; and therefore so soon as they were set that morning,
the very first thing they did, was to thunder out their Threatening Votes, That
whosoever advised the King to prorogue that Parliament, to any other purpose
than in order to the passing the Bill of Exclusion, should be looked upon as a
Betrayer of the King, the Protestant Religion, and the Kingdom of England, a
promoter of the French Interest, and a Pensioner to France.

And in a Common Council, assembled bout Two or Three days after in London, a
Petition was ordered to be drawn up, and presented to the King, wherein they
set forth, That the Parlia^^^t having convicted One of the Po^ish Lords, and
being about to convict the other Four; and having impeacht the Chief Justice,
and being about to impeach other Judges, and all in order to the preservation
of his Life, etc. they were much surprised to see it prorogued in the height of
their business: and that their only hope was, its being done with a design to
bring such Affairs about again, as were necessary to the settling the Nation:
Praying that they might therefore sit at the day appointed, and so continue
till they had effected the great Affairs before them. But before the 20th of
January arrived, to which they had been prorogued, the King declared them
dissolved by Proclamation, and intimated his pleasure to call another, to sit
on the 24th of March, at Oxford. After which a Petition was delivered him by
Essex, and some others of the popular Lords, for the altering his Resolution
for the Parliaments sitting at Oxford, upon pretense, That neither himself nor
they could be in safety there, but would be daily exposed to the Swords of the
Papists and their Adherents; whereby their Liberty of Speech would be
destroyed, and the Validity of their Acts and Proceedings left disputable.
Urging likewise the straitness of the place, which they affirmed was altogether
unfit for the entertaining such a concourse of persons as now followed every
Parliament: And that the Witnesses which were to give Evidence upon the Commons
Impeachment, were unable to bear the charges of that Journey, and unwilling to
trust themselves under the protection of a Parliament, which was it self under
the power of Guards and Soldiers; praying it might therefore sit at Westminster.

The Parliament which met at Oxford, was for the most part made up o^ Old
Members, which were chosen again for the same places for which they had served
before: And contrary to the ancient custom of their Treating the Country, the
Country now in many places Treated them; or at least, every man bore his own
charges. About Eight days before their sitting, the King having appointed
certain Companies of Foot, and several Troops of Horse to keep Guard in the
Mews during his absence, removed to Oxford, where he was received and presented
by the Mayor and Body of that City, at the Eastgate, and from thence attended
with great Acclamations, and all other demonstrations of Joy; and was the next
day waited on and complemented by the body of the University, who presented him
with a large Oxford-Bible, and the Queen with the Cuts belonging to the History
and Antiquity of the University; both richly bound.

Most of the Members, as well Commons as Lords, went thither, attended with a
numerous Train of Friends. At the opening of the Sessions, the King told them,
That the unwarrantable proceedings of the last House of Commons, was the only
Reason why he had dissolved them: And that ^s he would never use Arbitrary
Government himself, so he was Resolved never to suffer it in others. That
whosoever should calmly consider the proceedings in the last Parliament, might
perhaps wonder at his patience so long, rather than that he grew weary at last.
That it was as much his interest and care as theirs, to preserve the Liberty of
the Subject, since the Crown could not be safe when that was in danger: And
that neither Liberty nor Property could long subsist, when the just
Prerogatives of the Crown were invaded, or the Honor of the Government brought
low, and into disreputation: Assuring them, That he had called them so soon, to
show that the Irregularities of Parliaments should never make him out of love
with them: And that he thought the just care they ought to have of Religion,
should not be so managed and improved into unnecessary Fears, as to be made a
pretense for changing the Foundation of the Government: and therefore hoped the
Example of the former ill success which had attended such kind of Heats, would
dispose them to a better Temper, and prevent their laying so much weight upon
any One Expedient, as to refuse all others as ineffectual and to no purpose;
advising them to remember, that without the Safety and Dignity of the Monarchy,
neither Religion nor Property could be preserved, which was the Reason why he
had not, nor could not depart from what he had formerly so often declared
touching the Succession. But to remove all reasonable Fears which might arise
from the possibility of a Popish Successor's coming to the Crown, if means
could be found out, that in such a case the Administration of the Government
might remain in Protestant hands, he should be ready to hearken to any such
Expedient, whereby Religion might be preserved, and Monarchy not destroyed;
wishing them to provide for both, because they supported each other. And that
they would make the known Established Laws of the Land the Rules and Measures of
all their Votes; assuring them, that he wonld ever make them the Rules of his
Actions.

After the Speech, the Commons repaired to their House, and chose for their
Speaker, Williams, who had ^een Speaker of the last Westminster-Parliament. And
being informed upon the 26th, That the Lords had refused to proceed upon the
Impeachment of Edward Fitz-Harris (who having been seized upon the Information
of Everard, one of the Evidences about the Po^^sh Plot, and Sir William Waller,
for having framed an Impudent and Damnable Libel against the King and
Government, had in hopes of saving his Life by that means, confessed himself
Guilty of what he was charged with; and had the confidence to say, he was
employed by the King: pretending moreover to make several considerable
Discoveries about the Popish Plot; and accusing the Earl of Danby of having a
hand in the Murder of Godfrey; whereupon he was impeacht by the Commons of High
Treason, upon a pretense, that there were matters of too high a Nature in his
Trial to be managed in an Inferior Court)* and had directed, that he should be
proceeded against at the Common Law. They with the usual Hea^ wherewith the
Affairs of that House had been for some time managed, Vo^ted that Refusal of
the Lords, to be ^ Denial of Justice, a Violation of the Constitution of
Parliaments, an Ob^struction to the Discovery of the Plot, and of great danger
to His Ma^jesties Person, and the Protestant Reli^gion; And that for any
Inferior Court to proceed against him, or any other person impeacht by
Parliament, was an high Breach of the privileges of Parliaments. And
notwithstanding the many mischiefs that had always followed upon, and were the
Natural Consequences of such Attempts, on Monday following a Bill was brought
likewise into that Parliament against the Duke's Succession: And having been
read once, was ordered a second reading. Whereupon the King perceiving it would
be impossible for them to do any thing that might tend to the Honor and
Settlement of the Nation, whilst the Two Houses were so divided with Heats and
Animosities; and the Commons time wholly taken up in debating a matter that no
way concerned them, resolved to interpose his power for deciding the quarrel,
and convince them, That he would no longer endure to be trifled with and
affronted: And therefore having sent for the Commons to the House of Lords, he
told them, That to prevent the ill Effects he foresaw would follow upon the
Heats between them and the Lords, he had ordered the Chancellor to dissolve
them, which was done immediately, and the King returned the same night to
Windsor, and the next morning to White Hall. And knowing how industrious some
ill minded persons would be to improve that Dissolution for the misrepresenting
his Actions; to prevent his Subjects being deluded by their fair pretenses, and
bold, tho false Affirmations, he published a Declaration, wherein he acquainted
them with the Reasons which induced him to dissolve both that and the last
Westminster-Parliament: and assured them, That he was not however out of love
with Parliaments, notwithstanding the unwarrantable proceedings of the Two
former; but would frequently advise with them, as his great Council, in hopes
ere long to find his people in a better Temper.

As the dissolution of this Parliament was accounted by the more Intelligent a
very wise and politic Act, from whence he might expect many good effects; so
the consequence answered the Expectation: for now all the Weekly Intelligences,
and the factiou^ and scurrilous Libels, which the Pres^ had vomited out in
great Numbers whilst they expected impunity from the Parliament, were suppressed,
and easily busht into silence by an Order of Council.

Sir Francis Pemberton succeeding Scroggs in the Chief Justiceship, great
Expectation there was to see what would be done in the case of Fitz-Harris; but
all the Judges of England having met about it in the Exchequer-Chamber, they
resolved that they might notwithstanding the Impeachment and the Commons Vote,
proceed to try him: And the next day a Bill was preferred and found by the
Grand Jury of Middlesex, and thereupon he was on the last day of the Term
arraigned at the Bar of the King's Bench. But being Three several Times bid to
hold up his hand, he refused, insisting upon his impeachment in Parliament, and
his right to be tried before them; but being at last prevailed upon to hold up
his hand, and hear his Indictment read, which was for High Treason, expressed in
a certain Writing, called, The True English Man, full of most horrid
Expressions against the King, as if he had been a Conspirator in the Plot
against himself, and thereupon exciting the Nation to rise against him as one
man; he put in a dilatory Plea against the Jurisdiction of the Court;
alleging, that having been impeached by the Commons in Parliament, he could
not be tried there; but the Plea being not under Councils Hand, was refused.
However he had Time given him to consider whether he would stand by such a
Plea, in regard it might prove fatal to him, in case it should be overruled;
and Winnington, Williams, Pollixfen and Wallop were assigned him for Council
according to his desire, to argue the said point of Judicature the next
Wednesday, if he resolved to persist in his Plea; which he resolving to do on
Wednesday, was brought again to the Bar, attended with his Council, when the
Attorney General entered a Demurrer to his Plea, and Saturday Morning was
appointed for his Council to maintain his Plea by Argument, if they could; and
the Court having then heard what could be said on both sides, declared that
they meddled not at all with the Privilege of the House of Commons, or the
Jurisdiction of the Lords in Parliament, but only with the Form of the Plea;
and after the debate was over, the Chief Justice declared they would take a
convenient time to consider, before they would give their Judgment.

On the Wednesday following being brought again to the Bar, the Court declared
they had considered the Plea, and consulted with other Judges about it; and
were of opinion, it was insufficient; and was therefore overruled, and the
Prisoner ordered to plead over; Whereupon he pleaded Not guilty, and had till
the first Thursday in the next Term allowed him for his Trial.

In the mean while many Loyal Addresses flowed from all parts of the Nation
full of Congratulations and Thanks to the King for his late Declaration. And in
Trinity-Term, Dr. Oliver Plunket was Tried for High Treason, the Evidence
against him being all professed Papists, affirmed he was made Primate of Ireland
by the Pope at the French Kings Recommendation; and that he having thereupon
engaged to do that King all the Service he could, had actually levied amongst
his Popish Clergy great Sums of Money to introduce the French Dominion, and
extirpate the Protestants out of that Kingdom; upon which evidence he was found
Guilty, and was together with Fitz-harris, who received his Trial the next day,
executed at Tyburn on the first of the following July, protesting his
innocence, and praying for the King, Queen, and Duke.

Presently after the Trial of Fitz-Harris, his Wife and Maid accused the Lord
Howard of Escrick of contriving the Treasonable Libel for which he was
convicted, who was thereupon committed to the Tower: And in a Paper delivered
at his Execution to Dr. Haukins Minister of the Tower, for his Wife, he
confirmed that accusation, denying what he had formerly confessed about Danby and
the Plot; affirming he was drawn into that confession only through hopes of
saving his Life thereby. But a Bill of Indictment against Howard being
delivered on the last day of the Term to the Grand Jury of Edmunton Hundred,
sworn to by Fitz-harris's Wife, and Maid, and by some others, that Jury
pretending to be unsatisfied with the Evidence, would have indorsed it with an
Ignoramus, had not one of the Clerks of the Crown, who attended them, withdrawn
it from them, for which notwithstanding they were told by the Court, the Kings
Attorney might stop such proceedings as he saw occasion; they preferred a Bill
of Indictment against the Clerk to the Jury of Oswelston Hundred there
attending, for that pretended Misdemeanor.

The Reason why some Persons went so well attended to the Oxford Parliament
began now to appear; for about this time there was discovery made of a design
of seizing the Kings Person whilst he was there, and several factious People
were thereupon committed to the Tower, viz. Rouse, Haynes, White, College, and
the Earl of Shaftsbury, whose Papers were likewise seized. At the Sessions
which began soon after, he and Howard moved to be bailed, but the Judges told
them, it lay not in their power to bail out of the Tower.

At this Sessions, and Indictment of High Treason was preferred to the
Grand Jury of London against one of those lately committed to the Tower, whose
Name was College: But in regard he was a busy factious Fellow, and ever loved
to meddle most with that he least understood, and pass his ignorant censures
upon the great Affairs of State, He was the more commonly known by the Name of
the Protestant Joyner. But notwithstanding the Evidence against him was full
and clear, they returned an Ignoramus upon the Bill; whereupon part of the
Treasonable Words and Matters, for which he was there Indicted, being
transacted at Oxford whilst the Parliament sat there, the Cause was removed to
that Assizes; where he was before the Lord Chief Justice North tried upon the
same Evidence, and condemned and executed.

In a Parliament held at this time in Scotland, the Duke of York presided as
the Kings High Commissioner, and an Act was past which asserted the Right of
Succession to the Imperial Crown of Scotland; asserting it to be by inherent
right, and that the nature of the Monarchy was such, that by the fundamental
and unalterable Law of the Realm it transmitted and devolved by Lineal
Succession according to proximity of Blood; and that no difference in Religion,
no Law, nor Act of Parliament could alter or divert the Right of Succession of
the Crown to the nearest and lawful Heirs, and declaring it High Treason either
by Writing, Speaking, or any other way to endeavor the least Alteration
therein.

The French Protestants being greatly oppressed and persecuted by that King,
flockt into England in great multitudes, and were received by the King of
England with abundance of Kindness and affection, ordering that his Officers
and Magistrates should give them the same Countenance and Favor with his own
Subjects; assuring them he would take them into his Royal Protection, and grant
'em his Letters of Dennization; and promising to procure in the next Parliament
an Act for their Naturalization.

A special Commission of Oyer and Terminer being granted by him for the Trial
of Shaftsbury and others at the Old Bailey, the Bill of High Treason preferred
against Shaftsbury, notwithstanding the Evidence swore very full to the
Treason, was returned by the Grand Jury (the Foreman whereof was Sir Samuel
Barnardiston) Ignoramus, as a former Jury had done that of College. Whereupon
the people, whose Idol he was, gave a great Shout, and assaulted those who were
Witnesses against him with that violence, that the Sheriffs to prevent
mischief, were forced to guard them as far as the Savoy homeward. Bonfires were
that Night made by the Rabble almost in every Street; at one whereof Capt.
Griffith was knocked down, and wounded in the Head, for endeavoring to put it
out: And a rout of people marching down Warwick Lane, one whereof had his Sword
drawn, sometimes cried, No York, no Popish Successor, and then bawled out, a
Monmouth, a Shaftsbury, a Buckingham, till they were stopped by the Watch at
Ludgate.

But tho the factious Rabble were thus overjoyed at the acquittal of their
Idol; yet the sober and Loyal part of the Nation, had other sentiments about
it, and declared their Indignation in several Loyal Addresses against the most
Execrable and Traitorous designed Association, which was discovered in
Shaftsburys Closet, amongst his other papers, which threatened not the King
alone, but Monarchy it self.

In February, 1682, there happened a strange and Barbarous Murder, which for the
boldness of the Attempt, and the baseness of the manner wherein it was
perpetrated, is scarcely to be parellel'd in any History. For Thomas Thin of
Long-Leat Esquire, a Gentleman of an Estate of about 10000 l. per annum; having
privately married Elizabeth, Daughter and sole Heir of Jocelin Earl of
Northumberland, and Relict to Henry Earl of Ogle, Son and Heir apparent to the
Duke of Newcastle. And some of her Friends, who were not so well satisfied with
the Match as her Grandmother was, by whose means it was said to be made up,
having persuaded her, before ever her New Husband had bedded her, to withdraw
her self secretly into Holland, the Town was thereupon alarumed with the
approach of a mighty Suit in Law concerning the Validity of the Match, the best
Civilians being engaged on the one side or the other: And Count Conings^ark, a
German Lord, who had formerly endeavored to obtain her, came over again to
London in disguise, and one ^ratz, who had formerly been a Captain under him,
sent a Challenge to Thinn, with a Threat, That in case he refused to meet him
at the Time and Place appointed, he should be pistol'd. And finding, that
notwithstanding that Threat, he still slighted his Challenge, and refused to
hazard his Life against (he knew not whom, nor upon what ground of quarrel); he
with two more well mounted and armed, rode up to his Coach as he was passing
homeward near the Hay-market, and having stopped the Horses, another of those
desperate Villains, whose Name was George Borosky, a Polander, discharged a
Blunderbuss, or Musketoon at him, charged with six Bullets, which were all
lodged in his Belly; and then they setting Spurs to their Horses made their
escape; but the next Morning they were so closely sought after that they were
all three taken, and being brought to a Trial Trial before the
Lord-Chief-Justice Pemberton, were all three condemned and executed upon a
Gibbet erected near the place where they committed the Murder; and Borasky to
terrifi^ others from such barbarous Attempts^ was hung up in Chains between
(...) and London. The Count was likewis^ tried the same time as an accessory to
the Murder; but for want of sufficient Evidence was acquitted by the Jury.

A strange Accident happened not long after this, which had like to have proved
fatal to these Nations, by depriving them of the Inestimable Blessing which
they now enjoy; for his Royal Highness, the Duke of York, our Present
Sovereign, going about the beginning of May into Scotland to fetch home his
Duchess, whom he had left there at his last return, the Gloucester Frigot, in
which he sailed, unfortunately striking on the Lemon-ore in Yarmoth Road, was
lost with about an hundred men, and some Treasure. But Heaven designing the
Royal Passenger to be the occasion of many future Blessings to these Kingdoms,
and reserving him for a more honorable Funeral, he was miraculously preserved
by going off into a Yatch, which came up to his relief just before the Ship
sunk: And returning toward the latter end of that month with his Duchess and
the Lady Ann to Whitehall, the King and Queen came from Windsor to
congratulate his safe arrival, and express their Joy for his miraculous
preservation.

And the King, who went back again that Night to Windsor, was the next Day
taken very ill, occasioned as it was generally thought, by some cold taken the
day before; but upon bleeding, and the use of some other proper means, he
recovered his former health within a few days, to the great joy of his Subjects.

Sir John Moor, an Honest Loyal Gentleman, and an Addresser, coming this Year
to be Lord Mayor of London, which City was then somewhat distempered by reason
the Chair had for the Two preceding Years been enjoyed by Sir Robert Claton,
and Sir Patience Ward, who inclining to the Fanatic Party, had promoted such
Sheriffs and other Officers in that City, as were no way pleasing to the King,
(as appeared by the Answer he returned to the Message from Sir John to him, to
invite his Majesty to dine with him, and the City, on the day of his
Inauguration, viz. That he liked the Message, but not the Messengers, who were
the two Sheriffs, Pilkinton and Shute); and therefore having now the Power in
his Hand, as Chief Magistrate, he resolved to restore London to its Loyalty,
and leave it in a condition more to the Kings content, than he found it. And in
order thereunto, it being an ancient Custom for the Lord Mayor at a Feast kept
Yearly at the Bridg-house, to drink to him whom he designed to be one of the
Sheriff^ for the Year ensuing, he drank to Mr. Dudly North, Brother to the Lord
Keeper, and since Knighted. And on the 24th of June, which being Midsummer-day,
was customary for the Electing the Sheri^f of London; he summoned the several
Companies to appear at Guild Hall, and confirm North, and cause another
She^iff; but instead of proceeding according to the Ancient c^stom and method
of the City, ther^ appeared two parties; the Lord Mayor and his Party, and the
two Sheriffs and their Party, who refused to confirm North, and would have both
Sheriffs elected by Vote. After some co^test, it was agreed to be decided by
pol: But those who polled for the confirmation of North, and the Election of
Box, a Drugster in Cheapside, who was proposed by Moor for the other Sheriff,
being refused, and several men's Names entered for Papillion and Dubois, that
were put up by the Two Sheriffs, and their Party, who had no Right to Vote; the
Lord Mayor adjourned the Court by Proclamation, till the 27th; and so departed
out of the Hall, although not without some abuses by the disaffected party.

However, the Sheriffs would not obey the Adjournment, but upon pretense that
the business belonged properly to them, and not at all to the Mayor, went on
with their Poll till night. The next day being Sunday, admitted of no Action;
but on Monday morning, the King, who had been informed of all those Tumutuous
Proceedings, ordered the Lord Mayor, the Court of Aldermen, and the Two
Sheriffs to attend him at the Council Chamger; and after a full Examin^tion and
Hearing of all that could be said on both sides, committed the Sheriffs to the
Tower, for their Riotous Proceeding; whither they were car^ied through the City
in their own Coac^es. But having obtained a Habeas Cor^us, to be brought up to
the Kings-Be^ch-Bar, they were admitted Bail, having first pleaded Not Guilty
to an Information exhibited against them for a Tumultuous and Riotous Assembly,
in holding the Common Hall after it had been adjourned, and the Assembly
discharged.

The Sheriffs having thus obtained their Liberty, met again on the 5th of July;
and notwithstanding the Mayor, who was then sick, sent the Recorder to adjourn
the Common Hall to the 7th; yet they and the Multitude proceeded in the
Election, and declared their Choice of Papillion and Duboise. But some Disputes
arising when the Mayor and his party met on the 7th, according to the
Adjournment, about the Legality of that Adjournment, Four Lawyers were sent for
to the Court of Aldermen, to argue the Validity of the thing; but coming to no
Resolution, the Court was adjourned to the 14th of that Month. When the King,
designing, if possible, to set all things to rights, issued out an Order of
Council, wherein he commanded them, since all their Proceedings hitherto had
been irregular, to begin all Proceedings anew, and carry them on in the usual
manner, as they ought to have been upon Midsummerday. This Order was read in
the Common Hall; but opposed by the adverse Party with Noise and Clamor.
However, Moor declared North duly elected by him; and that he would Poll for
the other Three; viz. Box, Papillion, and Duboise: and thereupon caused Books
to be fitted with Three Columns only: But Pilkinton and Shute refusing to join
with him therein, went on by themselves, and poll'd for Four Heads, with a
Salvo Jure to their former Election. The next day the Mayor having caused his
Books to be cast up, and finding the Majority of Voices to be for Box, he
declared North and him to be Sheriffs. But Box refusing to serve, and paying in
his Fine according to Custom, the Mayor called another Common Hall on the 19th
of September, and proposed Peter Rich, Esquire to be chosen in his stead, who
having the Majority of Voices, and being declared Sheriff, the Mayor dissolved
the Court, and returned home. But the Two She^iffs, notwithstanding the Mayor's
dissolution, continued this Assembly as they had done the former; and demanding
of their own Party (the rest being departed with the Mayor), whether they would
abide by their former Choice for Papillion and Duboise, proceeded likewise to a
Poll; and having cast up their Books, declared them to be Sheriffs Elect.
Whereupon the Mayor acquainting the King with their Proceedings, he commanded
them to attend him in Council, where they were severely checked, and not dismissed
without giving sufficient Bail to answer to an Information which should be
exhibited against them for their unwarrantable proceedings.

But notwithstanding this ill success, they were not so discouraged as to
desist from the like practices for the future: For on Michaelmas-day, when the
Citizens met for the Election of a Mayor, they mustered up their utmost
strength, and appeared with as much Violence against Sir William Pritchard, the
next in course, as they had done against North and Box, setting up Gold and
Cornish against them, although Cornish had been Sheriff but the very year before.
However, Pritchard carried it by the Majority of Voices.

In this year died the Illustrious Prince Rupert, in the 63d year of his Age:
The Constableship of Windsor-Castle, which had been enjoyed by him for many
years, being after his Death conferred by the King on the Earl of Arundel. And
on the 18th of December died Hen^eage Earl of Nottingham, and Lord High
Chancellor of England, who had enjoyed that place ever since it was taken from
Shaftsbury, in the year -- 73. and was succeeded by Sir Francis North, Lord
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.

This year was very remarkable also for the Arrival of Two Extraordinary and
Famous Embassages from Two Princes never known to have sent any into England
before, one from the Emperor of Fez and Morocco (who in his Letter expressed much
Kindness, and a great Veneration to the King): His Name was Hamet Benhamet
Benhaddu Otter; a man of a Majestic Presence, and great Wisdom: His business
was about settling a Peace in relation to Tangier; and his Person and
Conversation was so pleasant and taking, that he was received and caressed with
more Honor and Respect, both by the King and his Nobles, than any Ambassador I
ever knew at Court: And so he was by both Universities, which he visited;
seeming to have an equal Esteem and Valuation for our Nation. Nor was there
ever any Ambassador before him so much admired by the common people, great
multitudes always attending before his House, which was near Katherine-street
in the Strand, to gaze upon, and wonder at the strange Garb worn by him and his
Attendants, one whereof was an English Renegado, formerly a Barber somewhere
about Temple bar; but being afterward a Soldier in Tangier, he ran away from
that Garrison to the Moors, and was by them highly advanced for his perfidious
directing them in their Wars against that Town.

The other Embassage was from the King of Bantham, in the East Indies, whose
business was about the East India Trade, who would have been as much admired as
the former, if he had come another time; but all men's Eyes were so generally
fixed upon the Morocco, that they were less minded than otherwise they would
have been. They brought the King several rich presents of Diamonds, and other
things of great value. But not long after their return, we received ill news
when we least expected it; For the Dutch having under pretense of assisting the
Rebel Prince, who was commonly called, The Young King of Bantham, against his
Father, the Old King, seized upon that Town, turned out the English whom they
found there, and seized on their Factory, to the great damage of the English
Nation.

On the 24th of April happened one of the most famous and extraordinary Exploits
that was ever known in London: For one Broom, Clerk of Skinners-Hall, and
Coroner of Landon, having a Latitat out of the King's Bench, in an Action upon
the Case, at the Suit of Papillion and Duboise, against the Lord Mayor, Sheriff
North, and several Loyal Aldermen; Upon acquainting them therewith, they all
submitted to his Arrest, and went with him, as Prisoners to Skinners-Hall,
where they remained till about midnight; Eight Companies of the Trained Bands
being raised by order of the Lieutenancy, upon that altogether new and unusual
attempt, to prevent Tumults. But one Fletcher, a Sergeant of the
Poultrey-Compter, having an Action of Debt, upon a Bond of 400. l. agaiust
Broom, who had the Week before promised to give Bail to it; but neglecting it,
and seeing him act so imperiously against the Chief Magistrate of the City,
took him into custody, and carried him forthwith to the Compter. The Mayor, and
his Fellow Prisoners, seeing Broom carried away by a Sergeant, demanded if
there were any in the house who had Orders to detain them; which being answered
in the Negative, they all peaceably departed to their several homes.

In the next Month was tried at Guild Hall, before the Lord Chief Justice
Saunders (Pemberton having been removed to the Common Pleas upon North's
receiving the Seal), the great Riot committed the year before at the Election
of Sheriffs, Fourteen being found Guilty thereof, and Fined.

And the better part of the City, both for Number and Quality, Resolved at a
Common Council, held on the 22d of that Month, That notwithstanding the Action
in which the Mayor was Arrested at the Suit of Papillion and Duboise, was said
to be prosecuted at the Instance of the Citizens of London, yet they to deliver
themselves and the said Citizens from that false imputation, did declare, they
were no way privy or consenting to that Action; and therefore did disown and
disapprove the same.

But the City having in the Judgment of Lawyers, forfeited their Charter by
several illegal proceedings, the King thought the best way to prevent such kind
of Tumults, which might be of ill consequence to the Nation in general for the
future, would be the taking that Forfeiture, that so by having the Charter
delivered up into his hands, they might by a more absolute dependence upon his
Goodness, be obliged to a stricter performance of their Allegiance, and take
the greater care to preserve the public peace and quiet. Whereupon he ordered
a Writ of Quo Warranto to go out against their Charter, which was grounded
chiefly on their illegal exacting of Tolls in their Markets, and their having
framed and printed a scandalous Petition, wherein the King is charged with
obstructing the Justice of the Nation by proroguing the last Parliament.

Whether these were sufficient grounds of seizing their Liberties, were argued
Pro and Con, first by the Solicitor General and the Recorder of the City, and
then by the Attorney General and Mr. Pollixfen. And Judge Jones (the Lord Chief
Justice being then sick) having summed up all the proceedings in a very
significant and solid Speech, gave Judgment upon it; and declared it to be the
unanimous Opinion of that Court, That the Liberties and Franchises of the City
of London should be seized into the King's hands. But Judgment was not entered
up, in regard the King had expressly commanded that should not be done till his
pleasure was further known.

The City now finding the King was in earnest, and that their Charter was
condemned by Law, began to think of humbling themselves at his feet, and sue
for Mercy: And therefore at a Common Council called for that purpose, a
Petition was ordered to be drawn up and presented to him at Windsor, where he
then was; in which they acknowledge their hearty and unfeigned sorrow for the
misgovernment of that City, which had occasioned the Quo Warranto to be brought
against them, and Judgment to be past thereupon: And thankfully acknowledged
his great Favor in not requiring Judgment to be immediately entered thereon; in
which distressed condition they humbly cast themselves at his Royal Feet,
imploring his Princely Compassion and Grace; begging his pardon for all
Offenses, with most solemn promises and assurances of constant Loyalty and
Obedience to him and his Successors, and of a Regular Administration of his
Government in that City for the future; humbly begging his Commands and
Directions therein. This Petition was carried and presented by the Mayor, and
several Loyal Aldermen and Citizens. Upon the Receipt whereof, the Lord Keeper,
by the King's Command, declared, That for the sakes of so many of the present
Magistrates, and other Eminent Citizens, who were of undoubted Loyalty and
Affection to his Service, he would show the City all the Favor they could
reasonably desire, if they would submit to such Regulations as he thought
necessary forth assuring the Loyalty, and preserving the Peace of that City;
viz. That no person should be admitted to be Mayor, Sheriff, Recorder, Common
Sergeant, Town Clerk, or Coroner of London, or Steward of Southwark, before
they were approved by him under his Sign Manual: And that after he had Twice
disapproved the Mayor whom they should present to him, he might, if he pleased,
nominate one himself: and so also for the Sheriff; the Election being
nevertheless to be still continued according to the ancient Customs and Usages
of the City, with some small Restrictions only then specified: which gracious
Offer was accepted by a Common Council assembled on the 20th of June; where the
Question being propounded, it was carried in the Affirmative by the Majority of
Eighteen Voices.

And now came to light one of the basest and vilest pieces of Treachery that
was ever hatched in the World; which seemed to point out and explain whereto the
Bill of Exclusion, and the Treacherous Association tended: For those Factious
and Designing Wretches having failed of accomplishing their Designs by those
specious pretenses, resolved to attempt that by force which they now found they
could not effect by Fraud: and therefore entered into a Damnable Plot and
Conspiracy to Murder the King and His Brother, and alter the Government. To
effect which, they had at several Treasonable Consultations, resolved to Levy
men, and make an Insurrection. For the management whereof they made choice of a
Council of Six, that were to direct and order the chief matters relating
thereunto; viz. the Duke of Monmouth, the Earl of Essex, the Lord Howard, the
Lord Russel, Mr. Hambden, and Colonel Sidney: Besides which, there was another
Council of more Inferior persons, whose business was to consult chiefly about
the Assassination of the King and the Duke.

The King and the Duke being both at Newmarket, they resolved to prevent their
ever coming to London again, by cutting them both off in their return: To which
end, West, by the appointment of the rest, had provided several Muskets, and
other Arms* which were to have been sent down to a House called the Rye,
inhabited by one Rumball, about three Miles beyond Hodsden, which was looked
upon as the most convenient place for that monstrous and hellish design, in
regard therewas by the house a narrow passage, through which the King usually
came, when he went to and from Newmarket; so that it would have been hard for
him to have escaped: But Heaven having preserved him from the many former
Attempts of Men of the like Principles, and disdaining that Hell should
frustrate its designed blessings to these Nations as well in the remainder of
his Reign, as in his next Successors, by cutting off its Principal Favorite,
resolved to render former Mercies the more complete and full, by adding a new
one to their Number, no less apparent and visible than his Preservation in the
Oak had been: And therefore a Fire which happened there, and consumed the
greatest part of the Town, forced him to return sooner than they expected, and
before they were ready for him; whereby they were disappointed of their
Barbarous Purpose, and not a little confounded at the Strangeness of the Thing,
which although it appeared at first sight to be purely accidental, yet afterward
was generally looked upon to fall out by the special designation of Divine
Providence.

But notwithstanding this remarkable disappointment, and the consternation
which at first seized them upon the news of it, they still went on with their
Plot, and consulted about some other Time and Place for their Assassination:
But before they could bring their distracted Counsels to any conclusion,
Providence spoiled their Plot: For, one of the Conspirators, whose Name was
Keeling, being convinced of the Wickedness of the design, through the care of
Heaven to prevent it, by the remarkable Fire at Newmarket, was so terrified,
that he could not rest till he had made a discovery of it: Whereupon West, a
Councellor of the Temple, was apprehended, and a Proclamation issued out for
the declaring Rumsey, Rumball, Nelthrop, Wade, Goodenough, Wallcot, Thompson,
Burton, and Hone, Traitors; offering 100 reward to any that should discover
them; and another against Monmouth, Gray, Armstrong, and Ferguson; Rumsey, the
Lord Russel, Essex, Colonel Sidney, Mr. Hambden, the Lord Howard, Walcot,
Rouse, Hone, and some others were taken, but the rest made their escape beyond
the Seas: The Lord Gray indeed was taken, but being after Examination by the
King and Council committed to the Tower, he found means to make his escape out
of the Coach, just as he came almost at the Tower Gate, having made Deering the
Messenger who had him in Charge, so drunk, (as it was reported) that he fell
fast asleep, and left him wholly unguarded.

The Lord Russel, and Colonel Sidney were beheaded; and Walcot, Rouse, and
Hone executed at Tyburn for this Plot. The Earl of Essex prevented the Hand of
Justice by cutting his own Throat; Mr. Hambden against whom there was but one
Evidence, was only indicted, and found guilty of a high Trespass and
Misdemeanor, and condemned in a Fine of 40000 l. to the King, to find Sureties
for his Good Behavior during Life, and to stand committed till that was paid
and done. The Lord Brandon, Major Wildman, Mr. Charlton, Mr. Trenchard, and
some others for want of sufficient Evidence, were first admitted to bail, and
afterward discharged: Mr. Wade and Sir Thomas Armstrong being both taken beyond
the Seas; the first at Mevis, and the other in Holland, were brought into
England, and condemned and executed upon an Outlawry.

The King to show his Sense of the Divine Goodness for his wonderful and
Gracious Preservation from that horrid Plot and Conspiracy, published a
Declaration for a solemn Day of Thanksgiving to Almighty God, to be celebrated
throughout the Kingdom on Sunday the 9th of September. commanding that
Declaration, which contained a short Narration of the Treasonable Conspiracy,
and the Persons concerned therein (some whereof were not mentioned in either of
the Proclamations) to be read on Sunday the 2d of September, as well as on the
Day of Thanksgiving, which was observed with great Seriousness and Devotion
throughout the whole Kingdom, every one looking upon himself to have a
particular Interest in the Benefit of that Preservation.

It is observable, that there was this remarkable difference between the two
Plots; all those who died for the first, protested their Innocence with their
last breath, denying that they had any knowledge of a Plot or Conspiracy carried
on against the King or the Government; and all those who died for the Second
did acknowledge something, tho they denied the greater part of what they were
accused of.

About this time the Lady Ann, Second Daughter to his Royal Highness the Duke
of York, was married to Prince George, Brother to the King of Denmark, the
Ceremony being performed by the Bishop of London in the Presence of the King,
Queen, Duke and Duchess, with most of the Great Persons about the Court; and
that Night was observed with great Joy and Splendour; and the next, (...) Bells
proclaimed the public Joy* which every one took for her being so happily
bestowed upon a Protestant and Religious Prince, who was afterward installed
Knight of the Garter at Windsor.

The Day for the Election of Sheriffs for London and Middlesex, which of course
used to be the 24th of June, was this Year adjourned to the 5th of September,
when the Livery-Men assembled at Guild Hall, without the least Hesitation
confirmed the Mayors choice of Peter Daniel, and chose to serve with him,
Francis Dashwood, Electing likewise Mr. Deputy Aleworth into the Office of
Chamberlain in the Room of Sir Thomas Player, who being one of the Rioters in
the last Years Proceedings, was then removed; and performing all the other
Elections of Bridg-master, Ale conner, etc. with the ancient Gravity and
Moderation; and a Choice of Mayor on Michaelmas-day was likewise adjourned for
six Days. But in the mean time, the King being highly displeased with the
Cities delays in signing the particulars formerly accepted of, and promised by
the Common Council, in Relation to the Charter, caused his Attorney to enter up
Judgment against it, and thereupon gave his commission to Sir William Prit^hard
to execute the Office of Lord Mayor of that City during pleasure; granting the
like Commissions also to the two New Sheriffs, Daniel and Dashwood, who were
thereupon sworn with the usual Oaths, and Mr. Jenner of the Inner Temple,
knighted at the same time by the Name of Sir Thomas Jenner, the Kings Recorder
of London.

On Sunday the 7th of October, the Mayor and Sheriffs appeared at Guild Hall
Chapel as formerly in their Gowns and Chains, but the Aldermen only in their
ordinary habits, being by virtue of that new Commission, only made Justices of
the Peace; eight of the Factious ones being left out, and their Number supplied
by as many Worthy and Loyal Gentlemen; viz. Sir Benjamin Newland, Sir Benjamin
Bathurst, Sir John Buckworth, Sheriff Dashwood, Charles Duncomb, Jacob Lucy,
Peter Palavazine, and Benjamin Thoroughgood. But on the 13th of that Month the
King sent them a new Commission, wherein he empowered them to act as Aldermen
in their several Wards, and accordingly diverse of them attended the Mayor the
next day to Chapel after their usual manner in Gowns and Chains; and the next
Week assembled a Court of Aldermen as formerly: And upon the 29th of October,
which is the Annual Day for swearing the Lord Mayor of London, the King having
appointed Sir Henry Tulse to execute that Office by Commission during his
pleasure; he was after the usual manner attended to Westminster by the
Companies, performing the accustomed Ceremonies in Westminster Hall, and making
the usual Cavalcade through London, but without any Pageants.

The Duke of Monmouth being accused as one of the Conspirators in the late
Plot, absconded, and lay concealed for some time; so as he could not be found
by all the search that was made for him: But having privately made his
Application to the King in an humble and submissive Letter, wherein he entirely
resigned himself to his Majesty's Disposal; the Duke thereupon went down to
Secretary Jenkins his Office, to whom he had voluntarily surrendered himself,
and upon showing himself very sensible of his Crime in suffering himself to be
drawn into a Conspiracy against the King and Government, and making a full
Declaration of it, and a particular Submission to his Royal Highness for his
misbehaviour toward him, he did upon the request and Mediation of the Duke
obtain his Pardon, and the Attorny-General was ordered to stop all further
Proceedings against him; But refusing afterward to make the promised
Discovery, or to sign what he had confessed, he fell again into the Kings High
Displeasure, and was thereupon banished the Court, and expelled the Royal
Presence.

About the middle of December this Year, began a very extraordinary Frost,
which lasted till the 5th of February; during which time the Thames was frozen
over with solid and contiguous Ice, with thousands of People walking thereon,
and whole streets of Booths built quite a cross, and shops of almost all manner
of Trades on each side, as in the high streets of London, and Coaches running
almost as thick as in Fleetstreet. The extremity of the Weather was such, that
great numbers of poor and indigent People, who at other times could but just
live, were now (in regard they could not follow their employment) brought into
great necessities, and many of them must have starved if the charity of others
had not relieved 'em; whereupon the King, who always loved to take all
opportunities to express his charity and affection to his Subjects, especially
those that were poor and indigent among them, granted his Letters Mandatory to
the Bishop of London to make a Collection in all Parishes in the City and
Suburbs for the Relief of many Thousand miserable Wretches, who would otherwise
have perished; and to encourage others to so needful a charity by his own
example, ordered several great Sums of Money to be issued out of his Treasury
for that Purpose. On the 23d of January, being the first day of Hillary Term,
the Lawyers went over the Ice to Westminster, and back again as familiarly as
on the Land, some on Foot, and others in Coaches; and there was for above a
fortnight together a Fair or Mart kept between the Temple, and that part of
Southwark which is opposite to it.

This Year Vienna the Imperial City of Germany, was closely besieged, and
greatly distressed by the Turks, who brought it to the very last extremity, but
were then beaten off, and forced to raise their siege, by the Blessing of God,
upon the Valor of the King of Poland, and the Duke of Lorrain; in which
Action, the Lord Landsdown, Eldest Son to the Earl of Bath, behaved himself
with so much Valor, that he was afterward, as a Reward of his Courage, created
a Count of the Sacred Empire.

And Tangier, having cost the King abundance of Treasure to defend it against
the Moors, and make the Mole there, he now resolved in regard the charges were
so very great, and the Expectation of Advantage very uncertain, to relinquish
it; and therefore ordered the Lord Dartmouth to repair thither wih about 20
sail of Ships, and demolish the Town, Castle, and Mole, choke up the Haven (to
render it useless to any who might otherwise have thought the Town worth
rebuilding) and bring off the Inhabitants, which was done accordingly.

About the middle of February, 1684. was the Earl of Danby, after a long and
tedious Imprisonment, admitted to Bail, by the Eminent and Loyal Sir George
Jeffrys, who succeeded Sir Edward Sanders in the Lord Chief Justiceship of
England, all the Judges of the King's Bench having first given their several
opinions about it, and delivered their Reasons why he ought to be bailed; and
the other four Lords (one of them, viz. Peter's, being dead sometime before,
having just before his Death, in a Letter to the King, denied upon his
Salvation, his being any way Guilty of what he stood accused of) being within
the like Reasons, were admitted to the like advantage; and so was the Earl of
Tyrone, who had been almost as long a Prisoner in the Gate House, as they had
been in the Tower.

The King having about the Year 81 appointed under him certain Deputies or
Commissioners of Ecclesiastical Offices; viz. The Archbishop of Canterbury,
the Bishop of London, the Lord Radnor, Hallifax, Hide, and Mr. Seymor; to whom
he delegated his Power to dispose of all such Ecclesiastical Preferments as
were within his immediate Patronage, was pleased this Year to revoke their
Commission, and take those preferments again into his own immediate disposal;
as likewise a commission formerly granted to several Persons to execute the
Office of Lord High Admiral of Eugland, which was now again fully enjoyed and
exercised by his Royal Highness.

Acts of Hostility being this Spring-fiercely pursued between the French and
Spaniards by Sea and Land, he commanded by Proclamation, that being at Amity
with both those Nations* the Peace should be kept inviolably by them, whilst
they were in any Roads, Creeks, and Ports of his Dominions, and that his
Commanders and Officers should oppose themselves against those who should
presume to assault any of the Ships of his Allies in any of his Roads or Places
under his Protection.

Oats the Salamanca Doctor, and Plot-Master-General, not content with having
falsely charged his Royal Highness, the Kings only Brother and Heir, with diverse
base and improbable Stories, as tho he had plotted with the Papists against the
King his Brother, suffered his Spleen to boil to such an exorbitant degree,
that he saucily and impudently abused him with base and scurrilous Language;
calling him Traitor, declaring, That he hoped to see him hanged, with diverse
horrid devilish, and abominable Expressions; The Dukes patience not being
easily provoked, bore long with him; but finding that forbearance did but
render him more bold, and increase his malignity, at last he brought his Action
of Scandalnm Magnatum against him, upon which he was arrested at the Amsterdam
Coffee-house on the backside of the Royal Exchange, and carried to Woodstreet
Compter, and from thence removed by Habeas Corpus to the Kings Bench; and
having let Judgment go in the next Term by default, a Writ of Enquiry was
issued out and executed before the Lord Chief Justice in the King's Bench Court,
when the Jury upon hearing the Evidence, to show their detestation of such an
unheard of impudence, gave 100000 Damages.

The Hambrough Company out of Gratitude for some great Favor received from the
King, did this Spring erect a most elaborate and curious Statue of him in Gray
Marble, in the very middle or Center of the Royal Exchange; cut by Mr. Grinlin
Gibbons (the most Famous Statuary that England ever produced; and equal, if not
superior to the best at this Time in Europe) in the Garb and Habit of a Roman
Caesar: It was placed upon a curious Pedestal made of the same Marble; upon
which was the following Inscription.

Carolo II Caesari Britanico Patriae Patri.

Regnum optimo, Clementissimo, Augustissimo CCCC jam prope Annos

The Council sitting on the 28th of May, at Hampton Court, as it used
frequently to do when he was at Windsor, as the most convenient place for his
coming to it, he told them that he thought it fit, and did intend his Brother
should be present at the Meetings of the Council, who accordingly took his Seat
that Day, and ever after during his Brothers Life.

And in October following, the King made a Review or Muster of his Landforces
upon Putney Heath, where there was a most gallant Military Appearance, the
Horse consisting of the Three Troops of Guards, the Granadeers, the Earl of
Oxford's Regiment of Horse, and the Lord Churchels Regiment of Dragoons, and
the Foot of two Battalians formed, and the Regiment of Guards, with their
Granadeers, one from the Coldstream Regiment of Guards and Granadeers, one from
the Earl of Dumbartons Regiment, and another from the Admiral Regiment with
their Granadeers; the whole Number of Horse and Foot, between 4000 and 5000,
being all exactly trained, and well clothed, most of the Horse marched in the
morning in Gallant Order through the Streets of London, and so over the Bridge
to Putney.

This Michaelmas Terms, several Factious Persons were convicted of speaking
scandalous and seditious Words against the Government; for which one Best,
commonly called the Protestant Hop-Merchant was fined 1000 l. and ordered to
stand in the Pillory thrice, and find security for his Good Behavior during
Life: And one Butler of Northamptonshire, for Presenting and Reading to the
Knights of the Shire (at the last Election for that County), a seditious Paper
of Address, was fined 500 Marks, and ordered to find Sureties for his Good
Behavior during Life: And Dalby and Nicholson, two Retainers to the Salamanca
Doctor, were ordered to stand in the Pillory for several false and scandalous
Speeches uttered by them: But the most remarkable of all, was the Business of
one Roswell a Conventicle-Preacher, about Redriff, who was this Term tried and
convicted of High Treason, in certain treasonable words spoken b^ him in his
Preachment, on the 14th of September: But some question arising about the Form
of his Indictment, which was argued by Council on both sides, the Court took
time to consider of their Judgment till the next Term, before which time Roswel
obtained the Kings Gracious Pardon, who ever loved to endear his Subjects by
Acts of Kindness, rather than to terrify them by Examples of Justice.

In this Term also was Oats indicted for Perjury, in relation to Irelands
being in London at the time sworn to by him at Irelands Trial; and being
brought up to the Kings Bench-Bar to hear his Indictment read, and pleading Not
guilty, his Trial was appointed the next Term; and at the Sessions, which
followed soon after at the Old Bailey, he was again Indicted upon a second
Indictment for Perjury, and upon pleading, Not Guilty, that was also appointed
to be Tried the next Term at the Kings Bench Court.

The Roads being now exrteamly infested with Robbers, the King ordered, for the
ease and safety of his Subjects, that all his Officers of Justice, and others,
should with their utmost diligence endeavor the apprehending of Highway men
and other Robbers, promising, That those who should apprehend any of them,
should have a reward of Ten Pounds for every Offender taken by them, and
delivered into Custody.

A little before Christmas, when the minds of men, in regard they were then to
celebrate the Commemoration of the Incarnation and Nativity of the Prince of
Peace, should have been wholly taken up with thoughts of Peace, the restless
and implacable Spirits of the factious and designing crew, that were not yet so
deprest as to be deprived of all hopes of reviving their Game, were
notwithstanding, otherwise employed; for about this time, they dispersed in a
secret and clandestine manner, a most wicked, false and treasonable Libel,
relating to the Death of the late Earl of Essex: Wherein they would have born
the World in hand, that he did not murder himself: Strict enquiry was made
after the Author, and several of the Books seized, but the Author could not be
discovered; only Henry Danvers, commonly called Colonel Danvers, an Anabaptist
by Profession, and a Principal Officer in the late Rebellious Army, was found
to be the Author of a certain Sheet, which was an abstract of that Libel,
wherein the very Q^intescence and Venom of it was crowded into a smaller
Compass; and a Warrant thereupon was sent out for his Apprehension; but being
an old cunning Fox, he fled upon the discovery, whereupon the King gave Public
Notice in the Gazette, That whosoever should apprehend him, and cause him to be
delivered into safe Custody, that he might be proceeded against according to
Law, for those dangerous and treasonable Practices, should have a reward of
100l. to be immediately paid by the Lords of the Treasury.

In the beginning of this Hillary Term, Sir Scroop How, one of the Knights of
the Shire for the County of Nottingham in the late Parliaments, appearing in
the Kings Bench to answer to an Information exhibited against him for Words
spoken against the King and his Brother, pleaded Guilty, confessing his
Offense, and with much sorrow cast himself upon the Kings and the Dukes Mercy;
whereupon being the next day introduced to them, he was after his humble
submission to them, and promises of future Loyalty and Obedience, received to
Grace; and being deeply affected with that unmerited favor, acknowledged that
he did in point of Gratitude for the Kings Goodness therein, owe him his Life
and Estate, and would for the future dedicate Both to the service of him, and
the Royal Family.

But Englands Glorious Sun of Happiness and Tranquillity, which had shined
bright and resplendent for near Five and Twenty Years together, must now suffer
a fatal Eclipse, and be for some few days wrapped up in Black and Mournful
Clouds, and have it is Glory totally, tho not finally obscured by the Lamented
and much Deplored Death of this happy and wonderful Monarch; for upon Monday
the second of February, he was suddenly taken with an Apoplectick Fit, which
was so violent, that in all probability he would never have revived again, had
not Doctor King, (who being one of his Physicians, was then present, having
been that morning with some others of the Kings Physicians to look upon a sore
Heel which he had for some time) immediately let him blood; by which and other
proper means afterward used he seemed to be in so fair a way of recovery, that
the Lords of the Council thought fit, for the preventing of false Reports, to
publish on Thursd^y, That some Hours after the Kings being first taken, an
amendment appeared, which wlth the Blessing of God improved by the Application
of proper and seasonable Remedies, was then so far advanced, that the
Physicians conceived him to be in a condition of safety, and that he would in a
few days be freed from his Distemper.

The People in diverse Places of the Country where it had been positively
reported he was dead, received this news of his Recovery with incredible joy,
expressed by the Ringing of Bells, and Bonfires; but in few days all was dampt
again by the certain and unwelcome news of his Death; For when neither the
endeavors of men, nor the invocations of Heaven could prevail, he expired on
Friday the Sixth of February, having lain all that time in abundance of pain
and misery, which he endured with incredible Patience, often lifting up his
hands and eyes to Heaven, and breathing forth the fervent desires o^ his Holy
and Pious Soul, in several Short but sweet and Pathetick Ejaculations. Kings in
respect of their Office are styled Gods in the Sacred Writ, and are, like him,
immortal, and therefore can never die; but their Persons being made of the same
mouldring Principles with the meanest of their Subjects, they must die like
men; and when the time appointed for their dissolution is come, it is
impossible either for men or Angels, Physic or Physicians to detain them
longer here; for they may with as much ease dissolve the Covenant of the Night
and Day, keep the Sea from flowing, and the Sun from shining, as preserve Kings
from being hurried, as well as the rest of mankind, to the place appointed for
all Living.

As no King was ever better beloved by his Subjects whilst living, so none ever
died more lamented than he; for an Universal grief possessed the minds of all
men, and like a Cloud suddenly spread it self over the whole Nation, upon the
arrival of that doleful Tidings. He died in the Fifty fourth Year of his Age,
after he had reigned Thirty six Years and some few days; leaving his Kingdom,
which he found almost ruined with a bloody and unnatural War, in a state of
Tranquillity and Peace; Which as it magnifies the happiness of his Subjects by
comparing their present felicity with their past Troubles, so it lays the
highest obligation imaginable upon them for ever to entertain the sacred Memory
of his Name with the greatest Love and Veneration* His red^cing a People
plnnged, and almost ^wallowed up in confusion, into a quiet not to be expected,
and scarcely to be hoped for, and asswaging by his incomparable Prudence a
Faction blown up into atempestuous flame more violent and deaf than either the
Winds or the Seas, rendered him the most Glorious and Admired Prince, and his
Subjects the most happy People in Christendom; and therefore in what Words, or
rather with what Deeds can they ever expect to express a Gratitude any way
equal to his merits? Statues of Marble, and tryumphal Arches may indeed be an
acknowledgment of our Veneration, but these are Trifles too mean to discharge
our debt, and therefore all true Englishmen shall raise him a more lasting
Monument, by entombing him in their Hearts, and expressing their love to their
Dead Sovereign, by their unfeigned Loyalty to their Living One, our present
Gracious King and Governor James the Second; who immediately upon his Death
succeeded to his Throne. For Nature is not more careful to prevent a
Dissolution of being, than the Constitution of England to prevent an
Inter-Regnum of Government; so that the same minute which seems to threaten the
involving our Isle in Darkness and Confusion, by the setting of one, really
revives our dying-hopes, and dispels our sable Clouds by the rising of another
Sun, for whom I shall pray as the Israelites did for King Solomon, That God, by
whom alone Kings reign, and have their Governments Crowned with Peace and
Felicity, may pour upon him the Blessings of Heaven in as great a measure as
upon his Royal Predecessor, and make his Throne greater than the Throne of our
late Sovereign Lord King Charles, and grant him long to Live and Reign over us
in Peace and Tranquillity.

His Funeral was privately Solemnized on the 14th of February, with as much
Decency and Splendour, as the greatness of the Sorrow for his Death would
permit; His Corpse being conveyed sometime before to the Painted Chamber in the
Palace at Westminster, was carried from thence to the Abby-Church, under a
Velvet Canopy, born by Gentlemen of the Privy-Chamber, the Pall being supported
by six Earls. The proceedings begun with the Servants of the Nobility, Their
Royal Highnesses, the King and Queen, the Queen Dowager and His own, after whom
followd the Barons, Bishops, and others of the Nobility, according to their
respective Degrees, together with the great Officers, and the Lord Archbishop
of Canterbury: His Royal Highness the Prince of Denmark was chief Mourner,
supported by the Dukes of Somerset and Beaufort, in the Collors of the Order,
as were all the rest of the Knights of the Garter then present; and his Train
born by the Lord Cornbury. The Assistants to the chief Mourner, were sixteen
Earls. The Crown and Cushion was carried by one of the Kings of Arms: The rest
of the Heralds and their Officers Attending and Directing the Ceremony, which
was closed with His Majesty's Band of Gentelmen-Pensioners, and the Yeomen of
the Guard.

As soon as they entered the Church, the Dean and Prebends of Westminster, with
the whole Quire met the Body, and went before it to Henry the Sevenths Chapel,
where it was interred in a Vault, under the East end of the South Isle.

THUS have I endeavored to present the World with a Brief draught of the Life
of this most Excellent King, from the Time of his Birt^, to the never-enough
lamented and most deplorable Murder of his Royal Father, and of his Reign from
that Time until the hour of His Death. And having now traced him through all
the stupendous Labyrinths, and wonderful Revolutions of His Life, to his
exchanging a Crown of Gold for one of Glory; I shall close my History with his
Character. A Character, which were I able therein to represent him to the Life,
and give him his Just and deserved Praise, would not be paralleled in Ancient,
and remain a Wonder to all succeeding Generations. But his Perfections were so
sublime and rare, that my Representatious of him will no more bear Proportion
to his real worth, than the twinkling Figure of the Sun shining in the Water
(wherein he views himself as in a Looking-Glass) is adequate to the Greatness
of that real body of Fire and Light, whereby he claims the Regency of Heaven.

This Monarch as to his Person, was of a tall and goodly Stature, and so
exactly formed, that the most curious and penetrating Eye, after the exactest
Scrutiny, could not discern the least Error in his Shape; his Countenance very
Majestical, His Person.
and the Visage of his Face, rather Grave than Severe, being very much softened
whenever he spoke. His Complexion somewhat dark, but much enlightened by the
brightness of his Eyes, that were quick and sparkling. His Hair, which before
he wore a Peruke, in great plenty, was of a shining black, not frizled, but
naturally Curling into large Rings, and very Ornamental. But as the Jewel is
more valuable than the Casket that contains it, so the perfections of his Mind
did much exceed those of his Body (if we can allow the same Man any
Pre-eminence over himself) in respect whereof he seemed to be a perfect Miracle
of Art and Nature, having in the Mysteries of Both, a most capacious and
profound Knowledge, or one of the best sort of Wonders, both in respect of his
Virtues and his Fortune; a Wonder to Wise men, who admired his vast Parts; a
Wonder to His Enemies, who admired at His Preservation from their Snares; a
Wonder to his Friends, that admired at the Adversity of his Fortune, and the
Patience wherewith he endured it; a Wonder to the World, which admired the
strangeness of His Restoration, and were astonished to see him,
(notwithstanding there was at that Time an Army on Foot, to keep him out, which
had been flushed with so many Victories, and (as it were) by Prescription was
able to beat the World, or at least had Courage and Confidence enough to
attempt it) return without spilling one drop of Blood, or having an Hand held
up against him to oppose his Entrance.

He had been himself a Sufferer, and had thereby learnt to Govern his Subjects
with Moderation. He had been in Misery, and that taught him to be Merciful. He
had been unjustly dealt with, and that made him the more careful to see right
done to all men, His Justice.
and measure his own Prerogative, and his Peoples Properties by the just
Dimension of his Laws; so that Justice was impartially administered throughout
his whole Reign, unless where himself was party, and there he would rather lose
his own Cause, than have his Subjects seem oppressed; nor was there ever known
so few Executions in so long a Reign. And truly when we (especially for the
first Eighteen Years after the Interregnum) consider his great. Mercy to
Traitors, it looks as if he designed not to spare himself, provided he could
but people again, or at least keep as full as possibly, a Nation, which had
been so monstrously emptied of men, by a long unnatural and sanguinary War. For
he was ever unwilling to inflict the least Severities upon his offending
Subjects, unless when necessity of State, or the nature of the Crime did bind
the hand of Mercy, and render Severity absolutely necessary, rather for the
public, than his own Secuirty.

He always professed to love and seek Peace, and prefer it before the Troubles
and Hazards of War; wherein he was like Solomon rather than David, and imitated
our Blessed Savior, who styles himself the Prince of Peace, ever bearing it in
his Princely mind, that when Christ came into the World, Peace was sang by the
Holy Angels, and when he made his Exit, Peace was the Legacy he bequeathed. Nor
can it be imagined, That his desire of Peace was the effect of softness or
fear; for he was both Active and Valiant: but he had a Conduct peculiar to
himself in bringing about his Purposes, His peaceable disposition.
and accomplishing his designs by the most easy and gentle means, and would do
that by Peace which others could not perform by War, and effect more by showing
his Sword, than others could do by using it: He knew the way to preserve and
obtain Peace, was sometimes to pretend an inclination to embrace War, and
therefore would, when provoked, make offers of the latter, till he had mended
the Conditions of the former. By which means he was more absolutely, and with
far less charge to his Subjects, the Arbitrator of Europe, than any of his
Predecessors had ever been, and could at his Pleasure dispense War and Peace,
where, and to whom, he pleased; which makes it the greater Wonder, That He who
was so great a Lover of Peace, should be so successful in War: for his Arms
were always fortunate, nor did he ever after his Restoration, know what a
miscarriage meant. The Two Rebellions in Scotland were ended by Victory, as if
raised industriously to increase the Fame of his Arms, which after so long an
interval of Peace, wanted exercising; and in his Wars with Holland, France,
Spain and Denmark, he was always sued to for peace, before he granted it; and
the French King did ever fear his Threatenings more than other Princes
performances.

In the exercising his Sovereignty, he consulted his own Judgment rather than
other men's Affections or Interests, and always reserved the disposal of his
Royal Favors to his own Will and Pleasure; and to avoid the fate of too many
Princes, who are ruled by their Favorites, and Governed by those whom they
themselves have raised, he never admitted any of his Nobles to so familiar an
intimacy with him, His care to maintain the Prerogatives of the Crown.
as to give others occasion to account them his Favorites: For although he had
many Noblemen about him, whom he greatly loved, and upon whose Advice and
Counsel he much relied, as Clarendon, Buckingham, Lauderdale, Danby, and
others; yet none of them could be properly called his Favorites, as Gaveston
and Spencer were the Favorites of Edward the Second; or the Duke of Norfolk of
Richard the Second: And although he would frequently acquaint his Parliaments with
his Intentions, and require their advice and assistance for the executing of
them, yet he would not endure they should be too positive or peremptory
therein, accounting that too great an Invasion of his Prerogative; and would
tell them, The Right of making and managing War and Peace, was invested in Him,
and if they thought he would depart from any part of that Right, they would
find themselves mistaken; for having the Reins of Government in his own hands,
he would have the same care to maintain them there, as he would have to
preserve his own Person.

His Prudence and Conduct in managing the great Affairs of his Kingdom was so
admirable and successful, that it is rather to be wondered at, than believed,
and he made so many good and wholesome Laws, every one whereof was grounded upon
the most searching Maxims of State for the Welfare and security of His Subjects
and the maintaining the prerogatives of the Crown, as no Age before him could
ever boast of, which begot in all men the greater Awe and Veneration of him;
and yet there is nothing more certain, than that his Reputation was as great
(if not greater) abroad than at home, His Prudence and Conduct.
tho perhaps not so well grounded: for Foreigners could not see at that
distance the passages of Affairs, nor discern by what Secret Councils he always
attained his own ends and disappointed the Expectation of his Enemies abroad,
and the Factions at Home, and were therefore forced to make their Judgment upon
the Issues and Success of them: No Prince ever had a Wiser Council than He, and
yet no Prince ever needed it less, for he was Himself a Counselor to his
Council, and was able to direct those of whom he asked advice. For he was as
well skilled in the Art of Kingship (as His Royal Grandfather was wont to term
it), and had as great an insight into, and understood as well the best Rules
and Methods of Government, as any Prince that ever swayed a Scepter; which
rendered him more capable of exercising his Kingly Office to the greatest
advantage of Himself, his Kingdom, and the Protestant Religion, and enabled Him
to govern His Subjects for so long a Tract of Time with so much exactness, that
by his Wise and Prudent Management he so poized all jarring and different
Interests, as to preserve the public Peace and Tranquillity of his Kingdom to
the very last Minute of His Life, notwithstanding the many restless Attempts of
unruly and designing Men, to disturb it; and left things in so good a posture
at his Death, that his most Illustrious Brother, and Royal and Lawful
Successor, ascended his Imperial Throne with as much Facility and Applause as
any of his Predecessors.

He loved so well to see his Subjects thrive, that he coveted not so much to
fill his Exchequer, as to reign over a Rich and Wealthy People; and thought
Money as well bestowed, when laid up in their Coffers, as when it filled his
own.

He was Religious toward God, as well as just toward man, and took care to
promote the Interest of the Church as well as the State. At His Restoration he
found the Church involved in Trouble, but left her possessed of Peace; he found
her robbed and spoiled, but left her Wealthy and Rich. Her Prelates He restored
to their Ancient Rights and Dignities, and filled Her Converts with Joy and
Gladness. His Religion and Piety.
He did not, like most Princes, make Religion an Artifice of State only, but
accounted it the Glory and Comfort of his Life: His Soul in His private
Devotion soared so high, that he seemed to be wholly swallowed up with the
Contemplation of the Holiness and Majesty of the God whom he adored, and with
whom he would plead in Prayer so earnestly, and with such Affection, as tho he
were resolved to take no denial. And one of the Presbyterian Ministers, who
attended the Commissioners (sent over by the Parliament) at Breda passing
accidentally by, when he was private in his Closet, he was so astonished at the
Ardency and Zeal wherewith he offered up his Sacrifices of Prayer and Praises
to Almighty God, that he suddenly clapped his hand upon his Heart, and with a
kind of Emotion of Spirit, cried out to those that were with him, We are not
worthy of such a King. And that which was the perfection of all, his piety and
zeal proceeded not so much from a desire to seem Religious, as from a solemn
Dedication of his great Soul to the Honor and Glory of his God, by whom alone
he knew Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice: Accounting himself (like
Theodosius the Emperor) more happy in being a servant of Christ than in his
being King of great Britain and Ireland. He was from his Infancy Eduducated in
the Protestant Religion, and Instructed by the Royal Martyr in the Doctrine and
Discipline of the Church of England. And yet he was not a Protestant so much by
Education as Choice, as appeared by his constant adhering to the Church of
England in the time of his unhappy Exile, when he was absolutely free to have
professed what Religion he pleased, and had so many Temptations (from the
baseness and villainy of his own Subjects, and the kindness of those Popish
Princes by whom he was entertained, and from whose Assistance he expected
relief against the unjust Oppression of those that had Usurped his Throne) to
embrace the Doctrine of the Church of Rome. And the reason why he so
strenuously endeavored to promote and maintain an Uniformity in Religion
through all his Dominions, was not so much to Justify his own Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical Causes, as thereby to strengthen the Protestant Interest,
knowing that the safety of England consisted chiefly in the Union of her
Inhabitants. So that his knowledge in the sacred Mysteries of Religion, was the
Crown and Glory of all his other Perfections; and the great end and design
whereat He aimed in all his other Studies, was the improving them to the Glory
of God, and the increasing in Himself the knowledge of more sublime and heavenly
things, wherein He so much excelled, that He might have said with King David, I
am wiser than all my Teachers. Knowing likewise that nothing obstructed the
growth of Piety, and the power of Godliness, more than the wasting those parts,
and spending that time in disputing about Forms, which ought wholly to be
employed in promoting Holiness of Life, and Sincerity of Heart.

He had, during his Exile, visited the Courts, and Traveled through the
Countries of the three greatest and most Potent Monarchs of Christendom, His
Travels.
viz. Germany, France, and Spain; and had by his Observation made himself
Master of what was excellent and worth learning in their Forms and Methods of
Government, and exactly informed himself what were the Excellencies, and what
the defects of each of them: And to the Admiration of those who had the
Happiness to converse with him, had by that means obtained an universal insight
into all the great and weighty Affairs of Europe, and understood by what
Principles they were first moved, and by what Counsels, and to what ends they
were afterward carried on; which tho he chiefly learned from themselves,
yet what he gathered from them all in General, was strange and surprising to
every one of them in particular, who greatly wondered at the Comprehensiveness
of his Knowledge: So that as he had by right of Nature, a Power of Empire over
the Bodies of one Part of Europe, He might seem by a Natural and acquired
right, to claim an Universal Monarchy over the Intellectual Powers, the Minds
and Wills of Mankind, in all the Parts of it besides.

He understood Spanish and Italian, and spoke and wrote French correctedly; was
well versed in Ancient and Modern History, and had read the choicest Pieces of
Politics and Divinity, and understood the fundamental Laws of England so well,
His skill in Arts and Sciences.
that he could readily answer the most difficult Queries, and resolve the
greatest Mysteries and Critical Niceties that were at any time started about
them; and had his mind so well furnished with the knowledge of Nature, and the
Reasons of Things, that He comprehended almost all kind of Arts which
contributed any Thing either to the Delight or Service of Mankind.

He understood the truest and best Method for Building of Ships; and could,
better than those who pretended themselves the greatest Craftsmasters therein,
direct the making them far more useful both for Strength and Sailing, than any
which had been formerly built; and was as well acquainted with Rigging and
Fitting forth a Fleet for Sea: He had great Skill in Guns, knew all that
belonged to their casting; and could tell upon first view, whether they were
mounted to do Execution, or not.

He was a great Lover of stately Buildings, and several Curious Edifices were
either built or repaired by Him: But his greatest Cost and Care in that kind
was laid out in Windsor-Castle, which he took more delight in, than in any
other of His Palaces. Nor were His Buildings all for Pomp, but some for
Charity; witness that Curious and Stately Fabric of Chelsey-Colledg for the
Entertainment of decayed Soldiers. He understood Navigation, Astronomy, and all
the parts of the Mathematics to such a Degree that he is supposed to have
attained a greater Perfection therein, than any Prince ever did before Him; and
took so much delight in those Pleasant and Useful Studies, that he endeavored,
as much as possible, the promoting them in others; Witness His Worthy Gift to
the Hospital of Christ-Church for the Annual breeding up a certain Number of
the most Ingenuous of their Children in the Mathematical Studies; and the
Liberal Rewards which were frequently bestowed by Him upon Ingenious Men, that
had any way contributed toward the making those Studies more easy and
delightful, or had been employed by him in any thing relating thereunto.

His Recreations, for the most part, were very stirring, and such as tended to
the making his Body more Robust and strong, His Recreations.
and maintaining it in Health (which he enjoyed to as great a degree as any
Prince in the World ever did), such as Riding, Hunting, Fishing, Tennis, and
the like. He loved Walking extremely, which he would do so fast, that his
Courtiers were sometimes forced to run, that so they might keep pace with him:
It being his constant Custom every morning when he was in Town, to Walk an hour
or more in St. James's Park; and he designed to have done so that very morning
he fell into his Fit. He took great pleasure likewise in Swimming, which he
could do incomparably well to the Pleasure and Admiration of those, that beheld
him. And indeed all his Recreations, as well as those public and private
Actions, which had a more direct tendency to the great concerns of his Life, as
a King, gave delight and satisfaction to those who communicated in the sight of
them: And his very Diversions were so serious and pleasing, that every part of
his time was thought to be well spent, and to deserve Commendation.

Never was Prince more loving and affectionate to his Queen than he; for he
ever resented Affronts offered to her, His Love and Affection to his Queen.
as ill as if they had been offered to himself; And was as tender of her Honor
as of his own. He was observed by the Courtiers to be more Rich and Splendid
upon her Birthday than upon his own, and to keep it with greater Joy and
Solemnity.

The vast Treasure of Learning and Knowledge which he had acquired by his long
Study and Experience, was richly set off and adorned by a curious, smooth, and
charming Eloquence, whereby he could readily express his Sentiments of things
in so good a Language, as that with a pleasing kind of Magic, it enchanted the
listening Ears of those that heard him, as sufficiently appeared by his Letters,
Declarations and Speeches.

And to conclude all, He was every way fitted, and made for Government, as well
as born to be a King; and was possessed of all those excellent Qualifications,
which were we to have had a liberty of choice, would certainly have constrained
us to have pitched upon him for our Sovereign. For the valor of Edward the 3d,
The Conduct of Henry the 5th, the Wisdom of the Seventh Henry, the Majesty of
his Great Son, the Learning of James the 1st, and the Justice and Piety of the
Royal Martyr, and (I had almost said) the Mercy of God himself, all met and
were conspicuous in him.

FINIS.
EPIGRAPHE.
Aevitati Deorum oriundus, Anglicani Nominis Aeternitatem Natus, Patriae fuit
Parens, Pius, Paciferus, and semper Augustus. Exilio, frendente Rebelli
Barbary, Magnanimus. Reducis Fortunae auspiciis, Albionum Fundator Imperii,
Mecaenas, Stator, Defensorque Fidius. Virtute Fortis, quam Pietate Clemens,
Amplificatam toto Orb dedit Remp. Sexto die Mensis Februarii, Regni sui
Tricesimo-Septimo Ineunte, Sospitatoris Nostri 1684. Brittones, Terram defuncto
Principi vovetis Levem, Diu vivat, strenue Precaminor. Negoti video dari.
Fatorum Seriem. Divi, quoniam non possum Ipsi!

A Prayer for the KING's Most Excellent Majesty taken out of the Liber Regalis.
GOd the unspeakeable Author of the World, Creator of Men, Governor of Empires,
and Establisher of all Kingdoms who out of ^he Loins of our Father Abraham
did choose a King that became the Savior of all Kings and Nations of the
Earth, Bless, we beseech thee, thy Faithful Servant, and our Dread Sovereign
Lord King JAMES with the Richest Blesssings of thy Grace: Establish him in the
Throne of His Kingdom by thy Mighty Aid and Prote^ion: Visit him as thou did
visit Moses in the Bush, Joshua in the Battle Gideon in the Field, and Samuel
in the Temple. Le^ the Dew of thine abundant Mercies fall upon his Head, and
give him the Blessing of David and Solomon: Be unto him an Helmet of Salvation
against the Face of His Enemies, and a strong Tower of Defense in the Time of
Adversity: Let his Reign be prosperous, and His Days many: Let Peace, Love, and
Holiness; let Justice and Truth, and all Christian Virtues flourish in His
Time: Let His People Serve Him with Honor and Obedience, and let Him so duly
serve thee here on Earth, that He may hereafter everlastingly Reign with thee
in Heaven, through Jesus Christ our Lord, AMEN.

THE END.

