Contemplations ON THE LOVE OF GOD, etc.

WITH A DEVOVT PRAYER Suitable thereunto.

God is Love.

1 John 4. 8. LONDON, Printed for Sam. Keble at the Turkshead in Fleet Street.
1699.

Contemplations ON THE LOVE of GOD, etc.
REligion is all Love, and Love is the whole of Religion; whoever loves as he
should, lives as he should. Love is the Perfection of Angels, the Happiness of
Heaven, the Duty and the Reward of Religion.

LOVE is the highest Progress that can be made in Religion, its utmost Advances
are Love; and the Difference betwixt Heaven and Earth, is only more Love. Love
will do and suffer all Things; 'twill make our Duty our Joy; 'twill mingle
Heaven with this Life, and make our Obedience choice; and ravish us with
Beauty, and inflame us with Desires after that which is best and fairest; and
draw our Souls up to Heaven, while our Bodies are grovelling here on Earth. Love
can it self engrave an Heaven in the Soul here on Earth, and enrich it with
unspeakable Joys; without Love we are dead, with it we are immortal, and in
Heaven, even before Death. Love will do and sufter all Things that are pleasing
to the infinitely Beloved; 'twill be pleased more with Sufferings than with
Happiness and Pleasure, when it believes that to be more pleasing to the
Beloved; and it is the infinitely Beloved from whence this Love comes, and who
bestows this best of Gifts, this Joy of Angels, this Beauty and Glory of Heaven
it self: From hence is the little Peace that is to be found on Earth, and those
many secret Paradises in the Soul of good Men; hence the Beauty and Order of
the Mind; hence the Agonies of a flaming and impatient Hope; hence the Ardors
of Faith, and the Evidence of Things not seen, but believed, by the Lover on
the Word of the Beloved; hence Victory and Triumph in Misery, or in Torments;
hence Hope against Hope; hence we trust in God, though he should slay us, and
are assured that our Redeemer lives, and ceases not to make intercession for
us; hence Temples, Altars, and Vows, and all the burning Solitary Loves of the
Ancient Hermits; and hence the holy Cities in the Deserts, and the Sacred
Crowds in the Wilderness; hence Anthony and Paul, and the Macharii Wonders;
hence Simeon, Moses, and Hillaryon to be had in everlasting Memory, and much
the holy St. Jerome, and the more excellent Cassianus, have endeavored it. From
Love is all the Happiness of both the Worlds; by it Death is smiling, and
cheerful as Life, and more desirable, as leading to the Sight of the so much
Beloved, from whom Life detained; if we loved much, we would do and suffer any
Thing for the Beloved; and to prove our Love, we should delight in
Difficulties, and court Hardships, and provoke the Enemies of God our Beloved.
It Is Love that conquers Sin, and pursues the Heights of Virtue, and the Purity
of Heaven, even in this Life; it is Love, assisted by the dear Beloved, that
resists unto Death, and in Tortures refuses Deliverance, that it may behold the
Face of the Beloved, and see the Face that burnt the Heart, and turned Love
into Martyrdom.

By Love we usually believe and receive whatsoever our Religion delivers to us,
as knowing it to be the Voice of the Beloved, who will not, who cannot deceive
us; but is our Light as well as our Life; our Way as well as our Friend; who
will guide us with his Love, and direct us by his Kindness, how to Love, and
what to Believe. By Love we cut off all Infidelity and Distrust, Obstinacy and
Pride, the Vanity of our own Judgment, and the opposing Humility of Faith, with
the Arrogance of Reason, and the Insolence of Discourse. Love makes us suffer
Chearsully whatsoever is sent for the Trial of our Love, and Rejoices at the
Occasion. Love is restless while it breathes on Earth, and is kept from its
Beloved, who is all its Joy, and all its Life, and all its Hope, and the very
Shots of the other Life; its greatest Pleasure, and its main Support. Love
instructs us in every Duty, and takes off the Difficulty, and inhances the
Reward; it gives Strength and Faith, Courage and Perseverance, and gives us a
large and charming Prospect of Heaven, though at so great a Distance; it
delights in Labors, and increases by Opposition; is never Tired, never Faints,
is never Overcome; still Hopes, still Rejoices, and still Perseveres to the
End. By Love we pray with Faith, and receive the Things asked for, because we
believe we should; and 'twas Love that made us believe: It makes us Sincere and
Constant, Humble and Generous, Kind and Good; and without it we are Obstinate
and Sullen, Untractable and Conceined, Dull and Confident, Presumptuous and
Unprofitable, Unhappy to our selves as well as others, Ungenerous, Unmanly,
without Religion, without Angels, without a God, lost to all the Comforts of
this Life, and the immortal Joys of that to come; Bastards instead of Heirs,
Oppressive and Uncharitable, Mean and Ambitious, Base yet Proud, Arrogant yet
Ignoble.

By Love we enter upon the Life of Angels, and taste the Joys of Heaven, and
burn in Charity with Cherubims, and grow above this mortal Life, and all its
little Concerns, and become Denizens of the new Jerusalem, the everlasting
City, and converse with the blessed and immortal Spirits; Flaming in Love like
them, still Praising, still Adoring: Triumphing with the Martyrs, Rejoicing
with the Confessors, Loving with the Angels, Panting with the Cherubims,
Singing with the Seraphims, Adoring with the Thrones, Ray'd with Love, Clad
with Glory, Exalted by Music, Raised by Hymns now greater than Crowns, and all
this World; earnest for the glorious Inheritance, and impatient for the fullness
of the Joy, we have already so largely talked of.

It Is Love that fills the Mind with charming Notions, and the brightest Images:
She is the Mistress of Concord, and Societies of Peace and Harmony, of real
Joys, and lasting Satisfactions; from Love are all the purest Notions of Virtue
and Worship, of Adoration and Obedience: She is the fairest Guide, and most
charming Friendship, and the wisest Instructor. By Love the World is ruled, and
Violence suppressed, and Government maintained, and Order is preserved, and
Kingdoms stand, and Commonwealths obeyed; for without Love, Laws would be of
little Strength, and Force and Malice would turn all into Confusion and
Anarchy, and fill the World with Murder and Rapine, Violence and Oppression,
Fury and Slaughter.

Love is the Way of the Perfect, and leads through the brightest Paths to
dazzling Glory, and inexpressible Bliss; which nothing in this World so nearly
resembles as Love, and perhaps it is only more Love that makes Heaven a happier
Abode than this dull Earth, that is overrun with Discourse and Malice, with
Rage and Revenge, with Folly and Violence, with Darkness and Disorder.

By Love we conquer all the Injuries and Calamities we meet with, and walk
prosperously on our Way, dissolving the Oppressor with Coals of Love, Returns
of Kindness, and Surprising Forgivenesses and Pardons, while he was meditating
a second Mischief, and a repeated though unprovoked Evil, takes a better Heart,
and a nobler Mind, and is melted into Love, and forced into a Friend.

By Love we not only bear our Trials but rejoice in them, as the Proofs of our
Love, and our further Endearment to the Beloved; as Arguments of our Sincerity,
and Opportunity to show how much we Love, and how violently; and how much we
are in Earnest, and how much we would Endure, rather than be divorced from him,
who came down from Heaven, and from all his Glory, to love us to Death.

By Love we die daily to this World, and seek after the more perfect Love of
the other; that our Breasts may burn like Angels, and the Apostles, while the
Prince of Love expounded the Scriptures; that we may arrive at his Sight who is
the Fairest among ten thousand; that we may dwell on perfect Beauty for ever,
and feignt with unmeasurable Love, and endless flaming Vows, to the Beloved of
our Souls; who draws us by all the strongest Charms of Beauty and of Love, to
live and die for him, to act and suffer every Thing, to seek nothing but the
pleasing him in whom our Love lives, moves, and has its Being; and is restless
till the Bars of Nature are broke, and the shining Way is laid open that leads
to the Fountain of Love and Beauty, to the Rapture of our Souls, and to
unspeakable Bliss and Charms, that are violent as Storms, and soft as Peace,
and Music, and Sleep, and last as long as the new Heavens.

It Is Love that makes all the Peace that is in the World, and cements
Friendship, and makes them stronger than Blood, and to act like Religion, and
has produced Men greater than Heroes, and all the fleated Histories of
Ancients, that delighted to abuse themselves and us, with Fables unworthy to be
told and heard by Men. Love does Things that desire no Histories, and are
greater than all History; and are well known in Heaven, and observed by Angels,
though unknown on Earth, and concealed from Men: It tries, and discovers, and
exposes the Hypocrite, but renowns the Sincere, and gives them Strength and
Perseverance, and inflames them with the brightest Passions, and Charms to the
noblest Actions, and strengthens them to the greatest Sufferings, fixing their
Hope, and confirming their Faith, and making it bright and flaming, as the
Mansions which no Eye has seen, but that of Faith; and pushes them on to the
noblest Undertaking, to attempt Things above Poetry, and beyond the Force of
human Power: And such the Martyrs often did, and such the glorious Confessors,
who raging with Love, and transported with the most violent and dearest
Affections, to the Father, Son, and Spirit, sought their beatifick Vision
through Racks and Fire, and mounted on Flames to Heaven.

It Is Love that furnishes Arguments to support our Spirits, when broken and
dispersed by a hard and unkind World, that has always treated Virtue hard, and
the Righteous with the Portion of Sinners; their Love guilds the Storm, and
pierces the Cloud with light; and, speaking like our Savior, rebukes the Wind,
and bids the Sea be still, and suffers not the Righteous to be as the Wicked;
but distinguishes 'em in the Calamity, and snatches 'em out of the Fire, in
which the Wicked are consumed to Ashes: But Love preserves its Martyrs, and its
Confessors, and if they die they live for ever, and are crowned for all their
Sufferings; and the exceeding great Reward drowns the Labor, and covers the
Martyrs with Psalms, and he is lost in Glory, and in Crowns, and shines forth
for ever, like the Sun in the Kingdom of the Father, and dies no more, but is
equal to the Angels, being born of the Resurrection.

By Love we become easy to our selves, and others too, and the harshness of our
Natures is worn off, and our very Blood is sweetened as well as our Spirits; by
it we dismiss our Humors, and our Pride, and all the Contentions that ensue
from thence, the Arrogance and Contempt, the great Opinion of our selves, and
the little Value for others; the haughty Melancholy, and unsociable Mien and
Carriage, that expects to be pleased in every Thing, and complies in nothing.

But Love is humble, and quiet as the Grave, and undisturbed as the upper
Region of the Air, that is never torn nor driven by Storms and Tempests; but is
Smooth and Even, as the Face of Heaven; it receives the Injury in Peace, and
revenges it with Kindness; its Contentions are those of rival Friendship, and
an ambitious Generosity; and as it receives every Injury with Patience, so is
careful to offer none; it has no Designs but to promote the Good of its
Neighbor, which it always studies, as its own; it is gentle, it is useful, it is
pitiful, it is helpful; rejoices not in Iniquity, but rejoices in the Truth;
bears with all Men, loves all Men, forgives all Men, obliges All.

By Love we bind the Furies of our Neighbor, and chain his Violence, and he is
spent in Vain, like an angry Wave against a Rock, and his Passion becomes as
insignificant as the airy Flame that floats upon the Face of the Waters, and he
only rages against his own Wisdom and Glory, and for a Time prefers that Rage
of a Beast, to the Order and Beauty of a Man, to the Glory and Empire of
Reason, and to the Peace of God that dwells with the peaceful Soul.

By Love we delight in our Duty toward God, and toward Man. By Love every
Thing is made easy, but nothing more so than our Duty, because nothing is more
capable; for in it is all our Interest, and our Happiness, and all our Hopes;
in it embark all our Labors, and our Sweat, and Treasure; and therefore
nothing can be dearer to us than our Duty, and our Sufferings, and our
Confessions, for his Name in whom we trust; who in all our Sorrows will feed us
with his Love, and enrich us with his Favor, and enable us with Crowns: He who
bids us fight, will teach us to fight, and show us how to conquer; and if we
die in his Favor there is Life, and at his Right Hand there are unutterable
Pleasures for evermore; Joys as violent as our Sufferings, and rending
Transports, and over-powring Consolations, that require an Enlargement of our
Souls to endure them, which else would burst with Torments of Delight, and
Agonies of Pleasure, and surious Bliss.

By Love we understand what in every Circumstance, and at all Times, is most
pleasing to the Beloved of our Souls; for nothing is more knowing than Love,
that knows all Things by communication with the Beloved, and informs the humble
Lover, who rejoices in every intimation of the Divine Will, and desires to
perform it with Ardor. Love will direct beyond all the Learning in the World,
which is never to be compared to Love, the brightest and highest Ornament of
the Soul; it is Paradise on Earth, it is earthly Heaven, it is sweetest Treasure,
it is golden Joy, and utmost Happiness, next to God, to himself; and God himself
is Love, and he who dwells in Love dwells in God, and he who dwells in
God must needs dwell in Heaven too.

Laus Deo.
A Prayer to God, Which the Christian Soul may make every Day, thereby to
declare the Sentiments which she desires to have at the point of Death. Wherein
are discovered the Acts of all the highest Virtues, and especially the Divine
Virtue of Contrition, and a perfect Love of God.
O My Lord, and my God, in that ununcertainty in which thou art pleased that I
should live, as well in relation to the Time and Place, as Manner of my Death;
I come to adore the Orders of thy Divine Providence, for what thou have
appointed from all Eternity: And not knowing what the Sentiments of my Soul may
be at that Hour, I do at present that which I desire should be done then, and I
humbly pray thee to accept and ratify against that time, what I declare and
protest at present.

I give thee thanks, O my Lord, and my God, at this Instant, instead of the
last Moment of my Life, when possibly being deprived both of Speech and Reason,
I may not be able either to speak or think of thee. I thank thee, First, for
giving me a Birth, and that I was not left without a Being. Secondly, That thou
were pleased that I should be born in a Place among Christians, and in a Time
when the Light of the Gospel is shining upon us, whereas thou might have
caused my Nativity to have happened in an Age of Darkness, and in a Country of
Infidels. Thirdly, That thou have regenerated me by Baptism, when thou might
let me have died in my Mothers Womb, as so many others have, before they could
receive it.

I adore thee, O my God, as the Original of my Life in Nature, as the Original
of my Generation by Grace, as the last end of my Soul, and as my last Felicity
in Glory! Thou art the first Verity, and I firmly believe what thou have said:
Thou art the Sovereign Fidelity, and I incessantly hope what thou have
promised: Thou art the Supreme Goodness, and I love only, and would love only,
that which thou art.

It Is thou, O my God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, One in Essence, and Three in
Persons, who have Created me by the Effect of thy Power, who have Redeemed me
by the Excess of thy Bounty, who have Sanctified me by the Infusion of thy
Grace, who have Guided me by the Conduct of thy Providence, and who have
Ordained me to the Participation of thy Glory.

For this end thou have admitted me into the Bosom of the Church thy Spouse,
there thou have illuminated my Soul with thy purest Lights, there thou have
unheld me with thy most Holy Graces, there thou have touched me with thy most
tender Motions, there thou have prepared for me thy most Venerable Sacraments,
there thou have Fed me with the Sacred Body of Jesus Christ, thy only Son my
Savior, and there thou have as often showered down upon my Soul the Gifts and
Graces of thy Divine Spirit.

O what Love! O what Benefactions! O what Condescentions! O what Favor! O what
Graces! O what Mercies have been vouchsafed to this poor Soul! That in return
for so many Blessings, (of which thou only know the Number and the Value)
has during the whole Course of its Life performed nothing but Impieties,
Infidelities, Ingratitude, Iniquities and Crimes, surpassing in Number the
Hairs of my Head, and Days of my Life.

But, O my Lord God, the more Shame belongs to me for having ofsended, the more
Glory is due to thee for pardoning my Offenses: And Sins without number, like
mine, require a Mercy without end, like thine.

And to such an inexhaustible Mercy I approach, repenting for having so long
offended thee, my Lord and my God, so lately known thee, and so little loved
thee.

Were I never to enjoy more Time than this Moment, I would employ it all in the
Love of thee, O Sovereign Goodness! Because thou art what thou art, and because
thou only do merit the Love and Adoration of all thy Creatures.

It Is for thy Sake alone, O eternal Love, who art ever Lovely, and never
sufficiently Beloved, that I detest all the Sins of my Life; because they are
contrary to thy adorable Sanctity* And I detest these Sins on the same Motive
that my Lord Jesus Christ detested them at his Agony in the Garden; and on the
same Motive on which thou, O my God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, One in
Essence, and Three in Persons, do detest them. And I humbly offer in
Reparation of that Outrage and Displeasure which mine Iniquities have done
thee, the Love and Obedience of my Blessed Savior Jesus Christ to atone for,
and supply the Defects of mine.

In expiation of these Iniquities of my Life, I accept of Death, as a Traitor
whom thou have most justly Condemned to die; I accept the Destruction of this
Body, which has been the Foundation of so many Intemperances, and the Subject
of so many Sins; I accept of the Destruction of my whole Being, in Homage to
that Sovereign Dominion which thou have over me; I accept of all Derelictions,
all Bitterness of Spirit, all Anguishes, all Pains, all Temptations, and all
Evils, (except only that of Sin and thy Displeasure) as all the Satisfaction
which I can pay thy Adorable Majesty.

Not being able to do more, I beseech thee, O my Lord, and my God, to remember
that I am the Work of thy Hands, the Purchase of thy Blood, the Conquest of thy
Cross, the Wages of thy Death, and the Effect of thy Love. To thy Death I unite
mine, and to thy Love I unite mine; protesting that I admit no Sentiments but
those which are agreeable to the Faith of the Catholic Church; and I disclaim,
O Lord, all hopes and dependence, but in thy Merits, Love, and Goodness.

If ever any Thing appears in my Actions contrary to this, I disavow it, I
renounce it. And I desire that the last Motion of my Heart may be a Motion of
Adoration to do thee Homage for my Being, since that very Being belongs more to
thee than to my self; O Father of Mercies, and God of all Comforts, under whose
Command are all the Powers of my Soul, make my Life to expire in an Act of
Love, raised by a clear Apprehension of thy Excellency and Goodness, and so
vigorously exerted toward thee, the great and proper Object of Love, that
being begun here it may continue to all Eternity.

It is true, O my God, that after all this my Fears are great, because my
Crimes are so, and thy Judgments very terrible. But it is also true that
notwithstanding all those Fears, yet my Hope is still greater, since thou art
merciful and apt to pardon; thy Mercy is transcendently Great, and thou do
Pardon without measure; thy Mercy is infinite, and thou do Pardon without
end; thou art all Mercy, and Mercy it self, and thou Pardonest all.

Full of this ravishing and most sweet Confidence which I have in thee, I hope
to see thy Blessings in the Land of the Living, where thou art the Resurrection
and the Life; and Adoring again thy Power that Created me, thy Goodness that
Redeemed me, thy Wisdom which has Enlightened me, thy Providence which has
Governed me, thy Mercy which has Forgiven me so many Sins. I Adore also thy
Justice; and I submit my self entirely to the Time by thee appointed for my
Judgment, with this Confidence and Trust, That thy Divine Goodness will not
then cast me off, but will it self answer for me to thy Justice, and that I
shall eternally sing of, and celebrate, thy Mercies World without end.

Amen.
FINIS.

