A True Copy of a DISPUTE Lately held at ROME, BETWEEN Father Conyer a Jesuit,
and Alexander Thompson a Church of England Man, and Barrister at Law,
concerning the PLOT.
Jesuit, WELL, Sir, you are willing, I suppose, to vindicate the Execution of
your Laws, in every particular, against those Roman Catholics, that were
sacrificed to your Countries Vengeance.


Protestant, I shall give you my Apprehensions thereof; but if my Vindication
be not Satisfactory, I will rather believe it to be my own Weakness, than the
Justice of your Cause.


Jes. I appeal to any man of Sense, whether there was any Probability, there
could be a design of taking off the King? That very Act would have alarmed the
People, and consequently have dashed the Design; for upon that Juncture, where
had we any Forces in readiness to espouse our Cause, and to alter that
Government, which could not be subverted, but by Sword? We could not expect any
Foreign Assistance to evade, before your Malitia were Embatteled; and to
believe that a Caball of some designing Heads could execute it, is Groundless.


Protest. As to the Fact it self, we know that it is nothing but what the
Principles of your Religion does enjoin you to; it is reckoned by your Church as
Meritorious, and is very consistent with your Conscience. Now, as to the
Probability, why this should be executed, 'twas very apparent; your Party had
Conspired to sham it upon the Presbyterians, and in order to that, you had
given Commissions, and disposed on Preferment to such and such men, as the
Discovery of the Meal-Tub-Plot does very clearly confirm; then where was the
need of an Army in readiness, when you might expect that Justice would be done
upon the Presbyterians, whilst you free from Suspicion, might unconcernedly
look on the Vertigo of the State? Besides, if in the end you had failed in
this, yet at present such a general Consternation had seized the Kingdom, that
you might easily expect some Foreign Auxiliaries, before the Discovery of your
Practices, and the Nation in a Military Posture; your Church does authorize and
justify the Actions of that Nature; and you have daring Clements, and zealous
Ravilliats, that think it their Duty to attempt them.


Jes. I confess that Mariana does endeavor to maintain that King-killing
Tenet, but it was damned as Pernicious and Unchristian by the Church: It Is also
objected against Bellarmine; but it was only inserted into his Volumns by an
unknown hand, as is apparent in the Original Copy. But to revert your Assertion
against your self, if Regicide be Authorized by our Church, and Heaven promised
as a Reward to the Actor, we have Clements in store, that would Assasinate
Majesty upon the first Summons or Command; we need not have contrived so many
several sorts of Death, and have ventured the Abortion of our Plot upon the
least Miscarriage. Do you think that Pickering would have had the Patience to
have waited for an opportunity so long in the Park, when he might easily have
had access to the King's Prescence, and might with a surer Fate, than an erring
Gun, have dispatched, and consequently m(...)d Heaven? He was unworthy of it, if
he durst not dye for it: The very Lashes he had upon the account of his
Negligence was worse than the Pains of Death; besides the Forfeiture of those
Masses that were promised him, upon the Performance.


Protest. Though your Religion does warrant Heaven to such as dare propagate
its Interest by such sinister Means, yet I do not perceive, that any of you are
so reserved from the Indulgence of the Flesh, as presently to quit your
Interest upon Earth, and yield your selves a Victime to appearing Death, if
your Contrivances could but prevent its present Execution; you could be content
to live a little here, rather than to purchase your Imaginary Happiness, by
embracing a Temporal and Bugbear Death. Johannes Acutus, one of your Order,
and one that entertained as great a Zeal for the Interest of his Church, as the
boldest Promoter of your all, and though he had a Warrant signed, for the
immediate Possession of Heaven, if he should accidentally be seized after the
Execution of his Design upon the Person of Count Ladowick of Nasshaw, yet his
mean and dastard Soul durst not publicly play the Russian, but omitted his
Opportunities, and was Lash't.


Jes. Our Talent of time is now so small, we must not employ it in Canvassing
this Point; let us omit the Opinions of our Church in this King-Killing Tenet,
and return to our particulars. Can you imagine, that a Design of this nature,
wherein no less than the Death of the KING, and the Alteration of GOVERNMENT
was endeavored, should be communicated to every Papist of any Note through the
Realm? (as the Depositions of the Evidence would persuade you) Or that Letters
should be sent, or Correspondence kept, in order to that, by the common Post?
Or, that Sir George Wakeman and Groves, etc. were to have so many Hundreds of
Pounds for their good Service, and adventure when four Gentlemen that were
privy to all the Proceedings, would Assassinate him for Fourscore? Or that any
of the Conspirators, which you believe to be such Profligate Villians, would
dye and be damned, when they might be prefered upon Confession? or being
conscious to themselves of the Truth of the Information, that they would not
endeavor to make an escape, but would skulk about to be ferreted out by
Justices of the Peace, prosecuted and hanged? Pray reconcile these.


Protest. Your first Supposition I answer thus, That although you had confided
in the generality of those of your Religion, yet you might believe the Oath of
Secrecy, you had imposed upon them, to be so Obligatory, as not to be violated
by either Fear or Interest.

Secondly, You argue an Improbability that so great a Design should be trusted
to the duty of the common Post; but 'twas apparent, you had so far provided,
that to prevent the ill consequence of a Miscarriage, you had contrived a
Character, which none but your Correspondent could apprehend.

Thirdly, It is no Argument against the Probability of the intended Regicide,
that the four Assassines were so reasonable in their agreement, it only argues
their great Zeal to your general Interest.

Fourthly, Although we should be so candid, as not to insist upon the Merit
your Church asignes to obstinacy of that Nature, yet some of you, for the very
fear of an Injury from their incensed Party, durst not betray the Cause by
Confession. Now, whereas they rather stood Trial, than attempted an escape upon
the first Discovery, it might be the Effects of their Impudence, rather than
Innocence; they might expect their Design would be shamed upon the Dissenters,
and so prevent that inconvenience to their future Conduct, that would have
attended their flight.

Finally, That you have endeavored this before, if we look back to the fifth
of November, we must believe; and why there is now more Simplicity and
Innocence in your Religion, is unaccountable: We had not only sufficient
Evidence, but other demonstrating Circumstances to persuade us of the Legality
of their Trials and Execution.


FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for John Bringhurst, at the Sign of the Book in
Grace-Churchstreet, near Cornhill, 1681.


