A CONSOLATORY EPISTLE TO D. T. O.

IN HIS Present Circumstances.

From a Member of the ASSOCIATION.

O Tite si quid ego adjuro curamve levasso
Ecquid erit pretii?
Ennius. LONDON, Printed for Walter Davis, in Amen Corner.

THE CONTENTS.
The Pulpit and Pillory combined in his Disgrace. A sham Justification of
himself to the Brethren. The Loss of his Ears, no Damage, no Disfigurement, no
Discredit to him, proved both by Arguments and Examples. The Pillory, a Type of
the Inquisition. Quaeries after his Doctorship. The Analogy between his Plot
and the Trojan Horse. A Caveat to him in the Conclusion.
A Consolatory Epistle TO D. T. O. In his present CIRCUMSTANCES.
Signior Doctore,
WHether a Knight of the Post in a Pulpit, or a Minister of the Gospel in a
Pillory, do make the better Figure; is a Question reserved for the gravity and
experience of your Doctor's Worship to determine on the great Collar-day of
your Instalment.

For then you will hold forth to a numerous Assembly of Brethren and Candidates
of the Order, who no doubt will convene on the Solemnity of that Festival.

And, since it is likely their Ears or Curiosity may itch after a Reason for
this unexpected Change of your Post in the State, it will behoove you to say
something, in the first place, to comfort and sweeten, I must not say, your
former Believers, but present Creditors, whose Zeal may be turned into Fury,
when (beholding your Condition) they shall be forced to take rotten Eggs for
their money.

Though a man would think little Oratory requisite to persuade those to any
thing, that you have hooked in already so far, and stand yet farther obliged,
not only to hear, but likewise implicitly to believe whatsoever you say.

Therefore, if you think them worthy of another quaint Sham, you may smoothly
insinuate unto them, That, being called of late to the Swearing-bench, on the
godly fanatic Conspiracy, you chose rather to pay down your Ears for a Fine,
than hold for a Witness against those Holy Martyrs of the Association.

While this passes on them, you may rest content with this Comfort of mind,
That the very same Providence which (like Mahomet's Pigeon) inspired you with
Plots, thinks it meet, your Table, your Attendants, your Liberty and Credit
being retrenched, your Ears should be so too, that all the ill things which men
take the freedom to speak of you now may not fall within the compass of your
hearing.

But, to say truth, it was to be expected, when once your extraordinary
Allowances came to be pared, that they would not give over till they pared to
the quick; for Policy and Reason of State has a long time required, that those
Sentinels or Out-guards to your Head, should be fixed to some Post, because even
your own Sacred Testimony implies, that they never stuck fast to their proper
Station, but (as if they had made Leather Wings of their Luggs) flew swifter
than Rumor to all parts of the World; nay, were so well at Command too, that,
while you stood in England or Flanders, you would whistle them off into France,
Spain, Rome, Constantinople, etc. where, like Batts fluttering in the dark,
they would bring you the Results of the closest Juncto's of Princes and States,
nay, even of the Conclave and Divan.

Now Ears of such general importance are not to be trusted to a common Subject,
for they may be of excellent use to the Government, and save the Nation the
Charge of sending Ministers abroad, by a parity of reason as the
Stentorophonical Tube would of maintaining Preachers at home.

All to be feared is, they may be intercepted, and changed in their return from
foreign Excursions, as they were heretofore; for either common sense is
mistaken, or yours have been counterfeit in some Jesuitical Councils you say
you overheard; unless with a Jesuitical Reservation too you mean by overhearing
that you heard something over and above what was spoken; and, if so, this
Cauterization is a necessary Trench to keep your Hearing within its due bounds,
and hinder its leaping the Pale with those straggling Outlyers.

Yet since your Ears are to be taken up for the Public use, your Trimmer
should be cautioned, in giving you a Cast of his Office, to wriggle his Knife,
as men do in carving of Brawn, or other Souse, that so what is cut off, and the
Stump which remains nicking like Tallies; they may be safely detached again
into the parts abroad, to bring back Intelligence, and without any hazard of
having for the future false Ears put upon us; yet this will not do if the
Parings of your Head, like those of a Holland Cheese, be thrown out among
common Rubbish.

But, could you have them in Commendum, they would be as good as a Benefice,
Doctor; for you might carry your Ears, like your Spectacles, in your Pocket,
and with their own Wax clap either on upon occasion like a Bias to the side of
your Head that you listen by, and so wind and screw your self into a Secret,
though never so closely blockt up; especially when you may, with the privilege
of an Eunuch, thrust in upon any man's privacy, being supposed to have left
your Luggs at the door.

Ah, Doctor, had you managed your Talent as other popular men have done theirs,
your Ears might have been taken off with a Pension instead of a Knife, but you
must make the best of your bargain as it is; and since it is necessary that, in
these Plotting times, some one should have the keeping of those Eaves droppers
of yours, you should put in for the Preference, if it were but for the sake of
the Brethren. For it is great Charity to lend them as often as a Brother of the
Order, in the absence of his own, shall have occasion for any, upon a Job of
Swearing; for men must live by their Vocation, and cannot work without Tools.

And in this late scarcity, though the Ears of any one Brother be virtually the
Ears of the Brethren in general, and to be used in common among them; yet you,
being Head of the Party, should most constantly wear them; and, being the most
likely to come into business, you will oftener have occasion to use them.

For as the Dutch, when they sail near the Wind, and must Traverse, to fetch a
certain Point, do use Leeboards (which are a species of Ears fastened outwardly
to each side of the Vessel,) so you, should you be cross examined to any
particular thing, and forced to lie now on one, and then on the other Tack, in
that case indeed (the Gale being against you) your Ears would not only be
decent, but necessary too as Leeboards to make good your Tripps. Though, were
you to go before it again, and only to tell a long Story to a favorable
Audience, they then would put you out of your right Trim, and every little
Whisper or Breeze that affected them, would make you alter your course.

But this being unlikely to happen without changing the scene to Association,
you need be in no pain; for, should that come about, you know a Committee of
them would be no more to seek in fitting you with a new Pair, than they were in
Dangerfield's case, whose Remnants they piec'd and eek'd out with a Vote, and
so he came into the Pit shorn and trimmed like a Cock of the Game; and having
acquitted himself with a National Applause, was put into the Bagg with you,
Bedlow, Dugdale and all the rest of the fighting Evidences.

But yet stay a little, as they equip you with Ears, they must furnish you with
Credit too, otherwise they expose the public Safety to more danger than ever.
For the Jesuits knowing our weak side would make their Attack on that where you
had your quarter, because, like the Knavish Pastor in the Fable, you have made
us so incredulous by former false Alarms, that you would cry out in vain when
the Wolf were upon the Flock indeed.

I proceed from the Topic of public Convenience, and its Opposite, to that of
Ornament, and Deformity, in your private Person, by this Politic Reducement.

First, then, as to the Scaffold whereon you are exposed, as it is a visible
Type of the Inquisition, where Popery reigns, so is it the proper station of
you, the Protomartyr or first suffering Witness of our last Refiners upon
Reformation; and therefore you should rejoice and exult rather than blush on so
glorious a Stage.

And were this indelible Character of your new Ordination set upon you in a
Country where Relics of Saints are held in veneration, your Ears, that have
shielded us from the Attempts of the Papists, would be laid up as Sacred, like
the Ancilia that, in Rome's first Superstition, were supposed to drop down from
Heaven for the Preservation of their Commonwealth.

Now, as to your own Dress or Trim, though, at first appearance, your Head, on
a Stall, like a Barber's Block, looks something bald and singular; yet, in
these times of Religious Innovation, the Authority of your example may as well
bring it into a Mode as Pyms cropping his Hair brought Roundheads into fashion.

Then will you with Rabby Busy, get loose from the Stocks, rejoice, etc. cry
out, The Malice of the Enemy has mocked it self; and the once Ruling Faction
in the City will put you in the Calendar with Sir Patience Ward, in whose
Representative head the Charter received its first wound, though in a little
time after it was it self brought to the Stake, and much of its superfluous
Parchment rescinded, like yours.

But were not Pryn, Burton and Bastwick triumphantly showed to the Mobile in
your very cut? Ay, and with more applause, I dare say, than Monsieur Candal
would have been in long Locks and Pantaloons; nay, they were cried up as
Patterns to the imitation of all good Patriots, and long Ears, in those days,
were exploded as much as long Horns, or long Hair, which being but vain
excrements, the Wiser part of Men even now do cut off, and hide, or wear in
Perriwigs.

May not you then, by the same Rule of Decency, wear a Cap with Ears, since
your Age (if not your Profession) allow it? especially when you may pretend,
that those outward excrescences, literally speaking, were but the Luggage of
your Invention, that, Cumbring its march with unnecessary digressions, you left
behind, for the same Reason that the Philosopher cut off his Doucets.

The Spaniards, who always fifth Honor to the fineness of a Punctilio, wear
Bigotero's, or Spur-leathers between their Nose and upper Lip, not only when
they have Beards, but when they have none, and a Man may more safely take a
Bear by the Tooth, than question his Mustachios: yet they seem half ashamed of
their Ears, by Combing all their hair on one side, to cover a moiety of them.
Do not the same Nation wear Spectacles too, when they see better without them,
to keep off the Malignity of Venomous objects? And shall a Doctor be ashamed to
wear Clasps to his hearing, to keep off the sound of bitter Truths, which
otherwise would give him the headache?

We read among the Mythologists, that when the Gods did punish the folly of
Midas, they exposed him with a pair of Asses Ears, to make him ridiculous. Why
the Argument holds in conversion, that as long Ears are a blemish, so short
Ears are a beauty; and, if so, the shorter the prettier.

Besides, this remark of the Law was necessary, to distinguish you in common
discourse, your Name being an equivocal word; and therefore a Man may be
banter'd half an hour together with a Jargon of Oats before he knows what it
means; but then if one explains himself, by adding, I intend that Oats that
had Ears, we know the Tree by the Fruit, without farther note, or comment. And
if any be so impertinent, as to ask you, why you have not your Ears still, you
may answer him proudly, with Cato, You had rather be asked why you have none,
than why you have any.

Ergo, Doctor, conclusum est, that this nimming of your Ears does not at all
entrench upon the Ornament, or Convenience of your Person, in any capacity
whatsoever.

Having hitherto been your Instructor, I must now become your Disciple, and
desire to be sincerely informed, what Science, or Faculty you took the Degree
of Doctor in, and this I ask, because I do not find that any Commence in
Physic at Salamanca; and our Divines here suppose you a Civilian, and our
Civilians take you for a Divine. Now, should you, like the Mountebank in the
Epigram, prove neither one nor the other, we must find some new Profession for
your Learned Doctorship: And truly, I always have fansy'd, that your Title of
Minister being not understood in that University in a Clerical sense, you
passed upon them for a Minister of State; and they being puzzled for the Style
of Dignities taken in that Mystery, made you a Doctor of State too: Nor did
they do you that Honor, I fear, upon a due examination of your parts, so much
as a curious Dissection of your Name, according to Subtle in the Alchymists,
proceeding with honest Nab; so the Anagram of Titus Otes, with the addition of
Doctor, was Gravely pronounced, Doctor esto Tutis: and this I the rather
believe, that I find in Spain two Sects of Physicians, one practicing upon
those only that enjoy perfect health, the other upon the infirm. Of the former
profession was Don Pedro Rezio Sancho Panca's Physician in his Government, and
in that I suppose you Commenced; for you did but Practice in your Calling, when
by Tampering with the Public Peace, you made so dangerous an Experiment of
late upon the wholesome Constitution of our Monarchy.

From the consideration of your Person, and Dignity, I descend to that of your
Plot, and am apt to believe, that though you Spun the Matter of it like a
Spider, out of your own Bowels, you Fashioned it after the Model of that Famous
Stalking Horse, by which the Greeks surprised Troy, and designed it for the
like purpose too. Which when honest Justice Laocoon (suspecting there was some
mischief in the Belly on it) would have thoroughly searched, or prob'd with his
Lance, he was Godfrey'd by two of Sinon the Jesuits Myrmidons, who coming out
of the River Simois, Anglice Thames, up to Somerset House, in the shape of
Water-Snakes, the one twisting it self about his Neck, Strangled him, while the
other with his Sting pierced him into the Body. Sinon nevertheless Swore, with
his usual Double Meanings, that the Horse was filled with nothing but Oats,
which they mistaking for Provender, were persuaded to break down their Walls,
and disband their Guards; when behold the very same Night that the
ill-contriv'd Machine was received into their Town, Old Oats, your Great
Ancestor, Sallied out of his Belly, in the head of the Lord knows how many of
those Black Bills (which, through many Descents, came into your Brain) and
having caught the poor Trojans napping, made the dismal Havoc intended by the
Association, which so long lay hid in the Belly of your Plot. And blind Homer,
in the Latitude of your construction, being an Eyewitness, has delivered down
to us in Iliads, which I presume is Greek, for a Poetical Narrative, according
to our Modern Style.

After all, Doctor, I conclude, you must sit down patiently with the loss of
your Ears, though it seem a hard case that the Law should make it so Penal, to
Clip the King's Coin, and yet provide no Remedy for those, who, bearing the
Image of his Creator, are daily served so. For, were there any Relief in
Westminster Hall, the late Barretor of Lincoln's Inn had doubtlesly brought an
Action on the Case; and yet yours being upon another point, it is worth a Fee
to know, whether the rasing of your Ears may not, by Implication, be rasing of
a Record, since yours, and others Hearsay, seems all we have to show for our
proceedings against those that have Suffered. Yet should it be so, the
Pillory-Barber may cunningly prevent the Indictment, by putting those Labels he
cuts off of your Ears on the File, in stead of the Post, though even that were
some Satisfaction.

In fine, Doctor, your head was too full of remote, and obscure Notions, to be
thoroughly understood, without Marginal Notes; and since the Commentator, by
his Rubricks, should be a Papists, that is, a Red-letter'd Man, he will
decipher your Character so very plain, that no Man of eyes, or understanding,
can hereafter mistake you.

Therefore do not you mistake your own Predicament, but (while you may) by a
fair Manifesto, or Counter Narrative, hang out a Flag to save your last stake,
your head; since it is justly to be feared, that your Enemies, by their regular
approaches, as breaking ground at a distance first, and throwing in that Bomb
of Scandalum Magnatum, then attacking your outworks, which straightened your
Liberty of Marching, and now storming the very Half-moons on your Counterscarp,
will not stop, till they are Masters of the Main Citadel too. And so adieu,
Doctor.

FINIS.

