THE PRINCIPLES Of the most Ancient and Modern PHILOSOPHY, CONCERNING God,
Christ, and the Creatures, viz. of Spirit and Matter in general* whereby may be
resolved all those Problems or Difficulties, which neither by the School nor
Common Modern Philosophy, nor by the Cartesian, Hobbesian, or Spinosian, could
be discussed.

BEING A little Treatise published since the Author's Death, translated out of
the English into Latin, with Annotations taken from the Ancient Philosophy of
the Hebrews; and now again made English.

By J. C. Medicinae Professor.

Printed in Latin at Amsterdam, by M. Brown, 1690. And Reprinted at London,
1692.

ADVERTISEMENT.
HAving the care of the Publication of this Piece committed to my Charge, I
thought, for the Good of the Public, to give them the knowledge of the
following Elixir, etc.

THE Elixir Proprietatis (so highly commended by the Renowned Paracelsus and
Helmont) it resists all Putrefaction of the Blood, strengthens the
Digestive Faculty. Its Excellent Virtues are prevalent in Curing of continual
Fevers, Quotidian and Tertian Agues, Small Pox, and Measles, or Swine Pox, with
other Pestilential Distempers; as also the Palsy, Apoplexy, Falling Sickness,
Asthma's, Tabes, or Consumption of the Lungs. Its Dose is from 10 to 20, 30, or
40 drops in a Glass of Sack. This Noble Elixir is Philosophically prepared, by
John Spire, Chymico Medicus, at four Shillings the Ounce. Who has, by his
Labor and Study in the Chemical Art, attained unto several secret Arcanums,
(not vulgarly known) particularly a Sovereign Remedy for the Gout. If any one
is desirous thereof, or the aforesaid Elixir Proprietatis, Let them apply
themselves to my Friend, Mr. Dorman Newman, at the King's Arms in the Poultry,
and the Author at his House in Horsty-down-Fairstreet, Southwark; or at his
Country House, at the upper end of Twitnam, near the Sign of the White-Hart, in
Middlesex.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader.
WE have (for thy sake) published this little Treatise, which was written not
many Years ago, by a certain English Countess, a Woman learned beyond her Sex,
being very well skilled in the Latin and Greek Tongues, and excellently well
versed in all kind of Philosophy; who when she had first taken in the
Principles of Carts, and seeing its defects, afterward by reading certain
Writings of very Ancient Philosophy, she observed so many things, that she
wrote these few Chapters for her own use; but in a very dull and small
Character; which being found after her Death is partly transcribed (for the
rest could scarcely be read) and published in Eatin, that thereby the whole
World might be in some sort benefitted, and so the same become of Public Good;
to the end that whosoever he be that worthily Esteems the Author, may
acknowledge true Philosophy, and so the more easily shun those Errors, which
are now, alas! too common.

Quibus tu fruere and vale. THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
Judicious Reader,
THOU may (peradventure) no less wonder at the strangeness of the Paradox,
than at the publication hereof in an English Dialect, and the rather because it
is no vulgar Theme, and consequently above the reach of vulgar Capacities, whom
(lest it should be more apt to distract than instruct) I should rather advise
to rest satisfied with what for the present they know, than either to covet or
condemn more than they do, or are capable to apprehend: Yet, by the way, let me
advise thee to suspend thy censures, (which at first view, it is probable, thou
may be subject to entertain,) as supposing the Doctrine herein asserted more
easily oppugnable than indeed it is) till thou have passed a serious
examination on all the particulars herein insisted upon: For Aliquando men's
cogitat quae ratio non probat. As to the Translation it self, as I hope none
but envious Critics will be offended thereat, so I shall endeavor, though
briefly, yet fully, to satisfy every impartial and unprejudiced Reader, both
as to the Circumstance, and principal Reason inducing me hereunto, which is as
follows. Being some time since in Holland, and in Conference with the renowned
F. M. B. van Helmont, then resident at Amsterdam, it so happened that I demanded
of the said Helmont, if he had published, or did intend to publish any new
Books of his own, or others Works, who presently directed we where I might
procure certain Books, published by his Order, which accordingly I did; two
whereof were extant in Latin, the other in Nether-Dutch; this being the Works
of an English Countess (after a brief perusal) I have endeavored to render
into an English Style, as familiar as the Language would conveniently admit,
without some abuse to the Author. One Reason that led me to it, was the earnest
request of a Friend; the other was, that I did not doubt but this little
Treatise might happen into the Hands of some ingenious and well-disposed
Persons, who (though not furnished with those artificial Helps and Advantages
that Learning usually affords; yet nevertheless being qualified by a natural
pregnancy of parts, by many serious Studies and deliberate Thoughts of this or
the like Nature) might be competent Judges of such Mysteries; or that it might
fortunately light into the Hands of such whose eminency of Learning, and
maturity of Judgment, might render them either willing to approve it, or able
to refute it, and that too with a better Salvo of Divine Attributes than is
done in this Treatise. Now, wishing thee the complete enjoyment of all Temporal
Blessings here, and the full fruition and possession of Eternal Happiness
hereafter, I conclude this present Epistle, and subscribe myself

Thine, in all real Service, J. C.

The Principles of the Ancient and Modern Philosophy: Concerning God, Christ,
and the Creature; that is, concerning Spirit, and Matter in General.
CHAP. I.
Concerning GOD, and his Attributes.
. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Of God and his Divine Attributes.. 6, 7. How a Trinity may be
conceived to be in God, according to the Scriptures; and yet without Offense to
Turks, Jews, or any other People; though we should omit the Terms of Three
distinct Persons, which are neither built upon Scripture or sound Reason.

. 1. GOD is a Spirit, Light, and Life, infinitely Wise, Good, Just, Mighty,
Omniscient, Omnipresent, Omnipotent, Creator and Maker of all things visible
and invisible. See Adumbratio Kabbalae Christianae, Chap. 2.. 2. -- 7. Kabbal.
denud. Tom. 2. Part 3.

. 2. IN God there is neither Time nor Change, nor Composition, nor Division of
Parts: He is wholly and universally one in himself, and of himself, without any
manner of Variety or Mixture: He has no manner of Darkness, or Corporiety in
him, and so consequently no kind of Form or Figure whatsoever. See Philosoph.
Kabbalistic. dissertatio. chapter 3. in Kabbal. denud. Tom. 1. Part 3.

. 3. HE is also in a proper and real sense, a Substance or Essence distinct
from his Creatures, although he is not divided, or separated from them; but
most strictly and in the highest degree intimately present in them all; yet so
as they are not parts of him, nor can be changed into him, nor he into them: He
is also in a true and proper sense a Creator of all Things, who does not only
give them their Form and Figure, but also Being, Life, Body, and whatsoever
else of Good* they have. See Kabbal. denud. Tom. 1. Part 2. Page 30. 332.

. 4. SEEING then that in him there is no Time, nor any Mutability, hence it is
that in him there can exist no new Knowledge or Will, but his Knowledge and
Will are Eternal, and without or above time. See Philosoph. Kabbalistic.
Dissertatio 3. Chapter 1. in Kabbal. denudat. Tom. 1. Part. 3. and ibid. Chapter 6.

. 5. LIKEWISE in God there can exist no Passion, which to speak properly comes
from his Creatures: For every Passion is something Temporal, and has its
Beginning, and end with Time.

. 6. IN God is an Idea, which is the Image of himself, or a Word existing
within him; which in Substance or Essence is one and the same with him, by
which he knows not only himself, but all other things, and according to which,
yea by which Idea or Word, all things were made and created.

. 7. BY the like Reason in God is a Spirit or Will which proceeds from him, and
yet as to Substance or Essence is something one with him, by which Creatures
receive their Being and Activity: For Creatures have their Being and Existence
simply and alone from him, because God would have them to be, whose Will is
according to Knowledge most infinite. And thus Wisdom and Will in God, are not
a certain Substance or Being distinct from him; but only distinct Manners or
Properties of one and the same Substance; and seeing this is that which some of
the Wisest and most Judicious Christians understand by the Word Trinity. If now
we should neglect that* Phrase of Three distinct Persons, which is a Stone of
Offense to Jews as well as Turks, and other People, and indeed in it self has
no sound Reason, nor can be any where found in Scripture; yet all would easily
agree in this point: For they cannot deny that God has Wisdom, and an
Essential Idea, and such a Word in himself by which he knows all things; and
when they grant he gives all Things their Being, they will be necessarily
forced to acknowledge that there is a Will in him, by which he can accomplish
and bring that into Act which was hid in the Idea, that is, can produce it, and
from thence make a distinct Essential Substance; and this alone is to create,
viz. the Essence of a Creature: Nevertheless the Idea alone does not give being
to the Creature; but the Will joined with the Idea, as when a Master Builder
conceives in his Mind the Idea of an House, he does not build that House by the
Idea alone, but the Will is joined with the Idea, and co-operates therewith.

Annotations on this first Chapter.
THE Ancient Hypothesis of the Hebrews, as to what pertains to the latter
Contents of this Chapter, is this:

1. Seeing God was of all the most exceeding great and infinite Light, and yet
the chiefest Good: For this Reason he would make Creatures to whom he might
communicate himself: But these could in no wise bear the exceeding greatness of
his Light: And hereunto belong those Scripture sayings, God dwells in an
inapproachable Light. No Man has seen God at any Time, etc.

2. He diminished therefore (for the sake of his Creatures) the highest Degree
of his most intense Light, that there might be room for his Creatures, from
whence Place immediately arose, as it were a certain Circular Vacuity or Space
of Worlds.

3. This Vacuum was not a mere Privation or Non ens, but a certain real
Position of Light, diminutively, which was the Soul of the Messiah, called by
the Hebrews, Adam Kadmon, which filled all that whole Space.

4. This Soul of the Messiah was united with that whole Light of the Divinity,
which remained within that Vacuum, in a more mild degree, that could be born,
and with it made up one Subject.

5. This Messiah (called (...), or Word, or First Begotten Son of God,) having
made a new Diminution of his Light, for the benefit of his Creatures, framed or
made within himself the whole Series or Orders of all Creatures.

6. To whom he might farther communicate the Light or Rays of his Divine
Nature, as the Objects of Contemplation and Love; which were the unitive Acts
of the Creator and Creatures; in which Union the Happiness of the Creatures did
consist.

7. Here therefore occurs the Trinity of Divine Representation: And the first
Conception is, that God is infinite, to be considered without and above
Production. Secondly, God is the same as in the Messiah. Thirdly, That God is
the same, as when with the Messiah in the Creatures fitted by the least degree
of Light to the perception of his Creatures. Hitherto belongs that Scripture,
saying, No ^lan has seen God at any time: the Son who is in the Bosom of the
Father has revealed him to us.

8. But it is common with the Hebrews to use the Term of Persons, yet so as
that by it they do not mean a singular Suppositum, but a Conception only, or
kind of Representation, or Method of Consideration. See Adumbratio Kabbal.
Christian. Chap. 23.

CHAP. II.
. 1. Although Creatures are not Coeternal with God; yet they had infinite
Times from the Beginning.. 2. So that no Number of Years, no not the greatest
that any created Intellect can conceive, can reach to their Beginning.. 3.
Creatures were in one sense from Eternity, and in another sense not from
Eternity.. 4. Infinity of Times is proved from the infinite Goodness of God..
5. It is an Essential Attribute of God to be a Creator.. 6. What Time is, and
how the same cannot be in God:

. 1. FORASMUCH as all Creatures are, and do exist simply, or alone from him;
because God willed them to be, whose Will is infinitely powerful, and whose
Commandment, without any Instrument or Instrumental Cause, is the only
Efficient to give Being unto his Creatures: Hence it necessarily follows,
seeing the Will of God is Eternal, or from Eternity, that Creation must
immediately follow the said Will, without any Interposition of Time: And though
it cannot be said, that Creatures considered in themselves, are Coeternal with
God; because after this rate Eternity and Time would be confounded together;
yet nevertheless the Creatures, and that Will which created then, are so
mutually present, and so immediately happen one after another; that nothing can
be said to come in between; even as if two Circles should immediately touch
each other: Neither can we assign any other Beginning to Creatures, but God
himself, and his Eternal Will, which is according to his Eternal Idea or
Wisdom. Hence it follows by Natural Consequence, that Times from the Creation
are Infinite, and without all Number, which no created Intellect can conceive:
How then can this be Finite or Measured, which had no other beginning but
Eternity it self.

. 2. BUT if any one will say, Times are Finite, then let us suppose the Measure
of them from the Beginning, to be about 6000 Years, (even as some do think that
the whole Age of this World, from the Beginning, is of no greater Extent,) or
with others (who think, that before this World, there was another invisible
World, from whence this visible World proceeded;) let us suppose the Duration
of this World to be 600000 Years, or any other Number of Years, as great as can
be by any Reason conceived: Now I demand whether it could be, that the World
was created before this time? If they deny it, they limit the Power of God to a
certain Number of Years; if they affirm it, they allow Time to be before all
time, which is a manifest Contradiction.

. 3. THESE things being premised it will be easy to Answer to that Question,
wherewith Numbers have been so exceedingly perplexed: Whether Creation was made
or could be made from Eternity, or from Everlasting? If by Eternity, and
Everlasting, they mean an Infinite Number of Times; in this sense Creation was
made from Everlasting: But if they mean such an Eternity, as God himself has,
so as to say, Creatures are Equal or Coeternal with God, and to have no
beginning of Time, this is false: For both Creatures and Times (which are
nothing else but successive Motions and Operations of Created Beings) had a
Beginning, which is God or the Eternal Will of God. And why should it seem
strange to any one that Times in their whole Collection or Universality, may be
said to be Infinite, when the least part of Time that can be conceived,
contains in it self a kind of Infinity? For as there is no Time so great, that
a greater cannot be conceived; so there is no time so small, but there may be a
less; for the sixtieth part of a Minute may be divided into sixty other parts,
and these again into others, and so ad infinitum.

. 4. BUT the Infiniteness of Times from the beginning of Creation may be
likewise demonstrated from the Goodness of God; For God is infinitely Good,
Loving, and Bountiful; yea, Goodness and Charity it self; an infinite Fountain,
and Father of Goodness, Charity, and Bounty. Now how can it be, that this
Fountain shall not always plentifully flow, and send from it self Living
Waters? And shall not this Ocean perpetually abound with its own Efflux to the
Production of Creatures, and that with a certain continual Stream? For the
Goodness of God in its own proper Nature is Communicative, and Multiplicative,
and seeing in him nothing is wanting, neither can any thing be added unto him,
by reason of his absolute fullness, and transcendent fertility: And also seeing
by the same reason he cannot multiply himself, which would be all one, as if we
should imagine there were more Gods than one, which is contradictory: Now it
necessarily follows, that he did give Being to his Creatures from everlasting,
or Times without Number; or else this Communicative Goodness of God, which is
his Essential Attribute, would be something Finite, and its Duration consist of
a certain Number of Years, than which nothing is more absurd.

. 5. IT is an Essential Attribute of God, to be a Creator, and so by
Consequence God ever was a Creator, and ever will be a Creator, because
otherwise he would be changed. And therefore Creatures ever were, and ever will
be; but the Eternity of Creatures is nothing else, but an Infinity of Times, in
which they ever were, and ever will be without end: Neither is this
Infiniteness of Times equal to the Infiniteness of God's Eternity; because the
Eternity of God himself, has no Times in it* nothing therein can be said to be
past, or to come, but the whole is always present: He is indeed in Times; but
not comprehended of them. Although the Hebrews seem to speak somewhat different
from this (as appears in Kabbal. denud. Tom. 1. Part 2. page 29, 30. and
Philosoph. Kabbal. dissertat. 3. Chapter 6, 7. in Kab. denud. Tom. 1. Part 3.) yet
they do not contradict this Opinion, because they allow an indefinite Duration
of Times. Confess. Adumbrat. Kabbal. Christian. Chapter 7.. 4, 5, 7. in Kabbal.
denud. Tom. 2. Tract. ult.

. 6. AND the reason hereof is manifest; because Time is nothing else but the
successive Motion or Operation of Creatures; which Motion or Operation, if it
should cease, Time would also cease, and the Creatures themselves would cease
with Time: Wherefore such is the Nature of every Creature, that it is in
Motion, or has a certain Motion, by means of which it advances forward, and
grows to a farther perfection. And seeing in God there is no successive Motion
or Operation to a farther perfection; because he is most absolutely perfect.
Hence there are no Times in God or his Eternity.

AND moreover, because there are no Parts in God, there are also no Times in
him* for all Times have their Parts, and are indeed infinitely divisible, as
before was said.

CHAP. III.
. 1. God is the most free Agent, and yet of all the most necessary.. 2.
Indifferency of Will, which the Schoolmen imagined to be in God, is a mere
Fiction.. 3. God created the World, not for any external necessity, but out of
the internal impulse of his Divine Goodness and Wisdom.. 4. Creatures were
created Infinite, and there are Worlds Infinite.. 5. The least Creature that we
can conceive has within it Infinite Creatures.. 6. Yet that does not make
Creatures equal with God.. 7. A refutation of those imaginary Spaces, which the
Schools did imagine to exist without the Creatures.. 8. Successive Motion has
no place in God.. 9. An Answer to the Objection.. 10. All Creatures are united
after a certain manner.

. 1. MOREOVER, if the aforementioned Attributes of God be duly considered, and
especially these two; to wit, his Wisdom and Goodness, that Indifferency of
Will, which the Schoolmen, and Philosophers falsely so called, have imagined to
be in God, will be utterly refuted, and wholly turned out of Doors; which also
they have improperly called Free Will; for although the Will of God be most
free, so that whatsoever he does in the behalf of his Creatures, he does freely
without any external Violence, Compulsion, or any Cause coming from them:
Whatsoever he does, he does of his own accord: Yet that Indifference of acting,
or not acting, can by no means be said to be in God* because this were an
Imperfection, and would make God like corruptible Creatures; for this
Indifference of Will is the Foundation of all Change, and Corruptibility in
Creatures; so that there would be no evil in Creatures if they were not
changeable. Therefore, if the same should be supposed to be in God, he must be
supposed to be changeable, and so would be like corruptible Man, who often does
a thing out of his mere pleasure, not out of a true and solid Reason, or the
guidance of Wisdom; in which he is like to those Cruel Tyrants which are in the
World, who act many things out of their mere Will or Pleasure, relying on their
Power, so that they can render no other Reason for what they do, than that it
is their mere Pleasure; whereas any good Man of them that acts, or is about to
act, can render a suitable reason for it; and that because he knows and
understands that true Goodness and Wisdom has required him to do it, wherefore
he Wills that it be effected, because it is just, so that if he should not do
it he would neglect his Duty.

. 2. FOR true Justice or Goodness has in it self no Latitude or Indifference;
but is like unto a certain right line, drawn from one point to another, where
it cannot be said two or more Lines can be indifferently drawn between two
Points, and yet all right Lines; because there can be but one that is a right
Line, and the rest will be crooked or bending, and that more or less as they
depart, or are distant from that one right Line, abovementioned: Whence it is
manifest, this Indifference of Will has no place in God, by reason it is an
Imperfection; who though he be the most free Agent, yet he is also above all
the most necessary Agent; so that it is impossible that he should not do,
whatsoever he does in or for his Creatures; Seeing his Infinite Wisdom,
Goodness, and Justice, is a Law unto him, which he cannot Transgress.
Philosoph. Kabbal. dissertat. 3. Cap. 6, 7. in Kabbal. denud. Tom. 1. Part. 3.

. 3. HENCE therefore it evidently follows, that it was not indifferent to God,
whether he would give Being to his Creatures or no; but he made them out of a
certain internal impulse of his Divine Wisdom and Goodness, and so he created
the World or Creatures as soon as he could: For this is the Nature of a
necessary Agent, to do whatsoever it can; therefore seeing he could create the
World or Creatures in Infinite Times, before 6000 Years, or before 60000 Years,
or 600000, etc. Hence it follows he has done it; For God can entirely do that
which implies no contradiction; but this does not imply a contradiction, if the
Worlds or Creatures be said to have been or existed in Infinite Times, before
this Moment; even as they are Infinite Times after this Moment: If there be no
contradiction in the latter, there is also no contradiction in the former.

. 4. THESE Attributes duly considered, it follows, that Creatures were created
in Infinite Numbers, or that there is an Infinity of Worlds or Creatures made
of God: For seeing God is infinitely powerful, there can be no Number of
Creatures so great, that he cannot always make more: And because, as is already
proved, he does whatsoever he can do; certainly his Will, Goodness, and Bounty,
is as large and extensive as his Power; whence it manifestly follows, that
Creatures are Infinite, and created in Infinite Manners; so that they cannot be
limited or bounded with any Number or Measure: For Example; Let us suppose the
whole Universality of Creatures to be a Circle, whose Semi-diameter shall
contain so many Diameters of the Earth, as there are Grains of Dust, or Sand,
in the whole Globe of the Earth; and if the same should be divided into Atoms,
so small that 100000 of them could be contained in one grain of Poppy-seed: Now
who can deny, but the Infinite Power of God, could have made this Number
greater, and yet still greater, even to an Infinite Multiplication? Seeing it
is more easy to this Infinite Power, to multiply the real Beings of Creatures,
than for a skilful Arithmetician to make any Number greater and greater, which
can never be so great, but that it may be (by Addition or Multiplication)
increased ad infinitum: And farther, seeing it is already demonstrated, that
God is a necessary Agent, and does whatsoever he can do: It must needs be, that
he does multiply, and yet still continues to multiply and augment the Essences
of Creatures, ad infinitum. Concerning Infinity see Philosoph. Kabbal. Dissert.
1. Cap. 6. Dissert. 3. C. 1. in Kabbal. denud. Tom. 1. Part. 3. Whence
Creatures are rather termed Indefinite than Infinite.

. 5. ALSO by the like Reason is proved, that not only the whole Body or System
of Creatures considered together, is Infinite, or contains in it self a kind of
Infinity; but also that every Creature, even the least that we can discern with
our Eyes, or conceive in our Minds, has therein such an Infinity of Parts, or
rather entire Creatures, that they cannot be numbered; even as it cannot be
denied, that God can place one Creature within another, so he can place two as
well as one, and four as well as two, so also eight as well as four, so that he
could multiply them without end, always placing the less within the greater.
And seeing no Creature can be so small, that there cannot be always a less; so
no Creature is so great that there cannot be always a greater: Now it follows,
that in the least Creature there may exist, or be comprehended Infinite
Creatures, which may be all of them Bodies, and after a sort, in regard of
themselves, impenetrable one of another. As to those Creatures which are
Spirits, and can penetrate each other, in every created Spirit, there may be
some Infinity of Spirits, all which Spirits may be of equal extension, as well
with the aforesaid Spirit, as they are one with another; for in this case those
Spirits are more Subtle and Ethereal, which penetrate the Gross and more
Corporeal, whence here can be no want of Room, that one must be constrained to
give place to another. Of the Nature of Bodies and Spirits, more shall be said
in its proper place, this being sufficient to demonstrate, that in every
Creature, whether the same be a Spirit or a Body, there is an Infinity of
Creatures, each whereof contains an Infinity, and again each of these, and so
ad infinitum.

. 6. ALL these do greatly extol and set forth the great Power and Goodness of
God, for that his Eternity is clearly seen by the Works of his Hands; yea in
every Creature that he has made: Nor can it be objected, we make Creatures
equal with God; for as one Infinite may be greater than another, so God is
still Infinitely greater than all his Creatures, and that without any
comparison. And thus indeed the Invisible Things of God are clearly seen, as
they are understood by, or in those things, which are made; for by how much the
greater and more Magnificent the Works are, by so much the more is the
Greatness of the Workman seen: Therefore those who teach, that the whole Number
of Creatures is Finite, and consists of so many Individuals as may be numbered;
and that the whole Body of the Universe takes up just so many Acres or Miles,
or Diameters of the Earth, according to Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity,
consider so great Majesty with too low and unbeseeming a Conception; and so
that God which they fancy to themselves, is not the true God, but an Idol of
their own Imagination, whom they confine to so narrow an Habitation, as a few
little Bees shut up within the limits of an Hive, containing the measure of a
few Inches: for what else is that World, which they suppose, in respect of that
truly great and Universal World above described?

. 7. BUT if they say, they do not shut up God within this Finite Universe, but
do imagine him to exist in Infinite imaginary Spaces, as well without as within
it. To this may be answered, If those Spaces are merely imaginary; certainly
then they are nothing but Foolish Fictions of the Brain; but if they are real
Beings, what can they be but Creatures of God? Besides, either God Works in
those Spaces, or he does not: if he does not, then God is not there; for
wheresoever he is, there he works; seeing this is his Nature, that he must so
act, as it is the Nature of Fire to burn, or of the Sun to shine: For so God
perpetually works; and his Work is to Create, or give Being to Creatures,
according to that Eternal Idea or Wisdom which is in him. According to the
Hebrews, God is Infinite, whom they call Aensoph; for that he is said to exist
without the Space of the World, because the Creature could not contain the
Immensity of his Light. See what is said in Annotations on the First Chapter.
Neither is he said to exist in imaginary Spaces, because no place plainly
agrees with God; but he may be said to operate there by his simple activity:
But whatsoever is wrought in, and by the way of the Creatures, is done by the
Messiah, who is not so Immense as Aens^ph himself.

. 8. BUT this continual Action or Operation of God, as it is in him, or
proceeds from him, or has respect unto him, is one only continual Act or
Command of his Will, neither has Time or Succession in it; nor first, nor
latter; but is together, and always present with God; so that nothing of him is
either past or to come, because he has not parts: But so far as he appears or
terminates in Creatures, he has Time and Succession of parts: And though this
may seem very difficult to be comprehended, yet it can be sufficiently evinced
by sound reason: And will not this plain and common Example following, a little
help our Understanding herein? Suppose a great Circle or Wheel to be moved by a
Center, whereas the Center always remains in one place, even as some do think
the Sun after this manner to be moved about his Center (by some Angel or Spirit
remaining in the Center) within the space of so many days. Now albeit the
Center moves the whole Wheel, and causes a great and continual Motion in the
same; yet that always rests, neither is it in the least moved: How much more
then is the same in God, who is the First Mover in all his Creatures, according
to all their true and appointed Motions, yet he is not moved of them? But that
in him which has an Analogy or Agreement with the Motions or Operations of
Creatures, is the Government of his Will, which (to speak properly) is not
Motion, because every Motion is successive, and cannot have place in God, as is
above demonstrated.

. 9. BUT against what we have delivered (that the least Creature conceivable,
has in it Infinite Creatures; so that the least Particle of Body or Matter may
be Infinite ways extended, and divided into parts less, and yet still lesser,
and lesser) some may frame this following Objection. That which is actually
divisible, so far as an actual division can any ways be made, is divisible into
parts indiscerpible; but Matter or Body (to wit, that Matter that is entire or
compound) is actually divisible so far as an actual division can any ways be
made, therefore, etc. I Answer, this Argument labors under that fallacy which
Logicians call Compositiones non Componendorum, which is a Conjunction of
Words, or Terms, that imply a contradiction or absurdity, and that appears in
this Term, actually divisible, which signifies one and the same thing to be
divided, and not to be divided; for Actually denotes Division, and Divisible
not Division, but only a capacity to be divided, which is as absurd and
contradictory, as if one should say visibly blind, or sensibly insensible, or
livingly dead; but if by the Terms Actually Divisible, they do not mean two,
but only one thing, to wit, that it is either really divided, or only
divisible, we shall easily discover the Fallacy: For, First, if by Actually
Divisible, they mean nothing else but that which is divided, in this sense I
grant the Major, to wit, that that which is really divided, so far as an actual
division can any ways be made, is divisible into parts indiscerpible; but by
the same reason the Minor is false, viz. that Matter is divided so far as an
Actual Division can possibly be made. But, Secondly, if by that which they call
Actually Divisible, they mean a thing only divisible, or in which there is a
power or capacity to be so divided: Now I deny the Major, to wit, That that
which is divisible, so far as division can be made, is divisible into parts
indiscerpible; and besides in this sense, that proposition is merely
Tautological, and a needless repetition of the same thing, just as this would
be; whatsoever can be removed out of its place, in as much as it can be
removed, may be removed to some certain distance; but London or Rome may be
removed out of their place, in as much as they may be removed, Ergo, etc. By
the same way of Argument may be proved, that the Soul of Man consists of a
Finite Number of Years only, in which it does exist, or has a Being, and
consequently that it is Mortal, and has an end; to wit, thus, that whose Time
or Duration is actually divisible, so far as an actual division can possibly be
made, shall have an end, and is divisible into a Finite Number of Years; but
the Time or Duration of the Soul is actually divisible, so far as an actual
division can possibly be made, Ergo, etc. But if it be denied, that the Time of
the Soul (if it should come to such a division of Years) shall then have an
end; but that it is possible for it to reassume another Time after this First,
and so ad infinitum. Now, I say the same, which is, that Matter if it should
come to such a division, may indeed have an end of that division; but yet may
admit of another division after this First, and so ad infinitum. And here is to
be noted, when I say the least Particle of Body, or Matter so called, may be
always divided into parts, less, ad infinitum; so that no actual division can
be made in any Matter, which is not always farther divisible, or capable to be
divided into less parts, and that without end; yet I would not hereby
determine, what the Absolute Power of God will or can do; as some do vainly and
grossly dispute; but only hint what the Power of God probably may do, or will
do, so far as he operates in and with his Creatures, to wit, in as much as in
all Productions, and Generations, as also in all Resolutions and Divisions, in
the Nature of Bodies, or the Creature, he never divides nor never can divide
any Body into such small parts, that each of these is not always capable of a
farther division; for the Body of no Creature can ever be reduced into its
least parts; yea, into such that it cannot be reduced back again, either by the
most subtle operation of any Creature, or created Power: And this Answer may
suffice to our present purpose: For God makes no division in any Body or
Matter, but so far as he co-operates with the Creatures, and therefore he never
reduces Creatures into their least parts; because then all Motion and Operation
in Creatures would cease; (for it is the Nature of all Motion to wear and
divide a thing into subtiler parts;) for to do this would be contrary to the
Wisdom and Goodness of God; for if all Motion and Operation should cease in any
particular Creature, that Creature would be altogether unprofitable and useless
in the Creation, and so would be no better than if it were a mere non ens, or
nothing. But as was said before, God cannot do that which is contrary to his
Wisdom and Goodness, or any of his Attributes. [Mathematical Division of
Things, is never made in Minima; but Things may be Physically divided into
their least parts; as when Concrete Matter is so far divided that it departs
into Physical Monades, as it was in the first State of its Materiality.
Concerning the Production of Matter, see Kab. denud. Tom. 1. Part 2. page 310.
following; and Tom. 2. the last Tract, page 28. Numb. 4, 5. then it is again
fit to resume its Activity, and become a Spirit, as it happens in our Meats.]

. 10. MOREOVER the consideration of this Infinite Divisibility of every thing,
into parts always less, is no unnecessary or unprofitable Theory, but a thing
of very great moment; viz. that thereby may be understood the Reasons and
Causes of Things; and how all Creatures from the highest to the lowest are
inseparably united one with another, by means of Subtiler Parts interceding or
coming in between, which are the Emanations of one Creature into another, by
which also they act one upon another at the greatest distance; and this is the
Foundation of all Sympathy and Antipathy which happens in Creatures: And if
these things be well understood of any one, he may easily see into the most
secret and hidden Causes of Things, which ignorant Men call occult Qualities.

CHAP. IV.
1. Whether God Created all Creatures together, orin Succession of time.. 2.
That in the Man Christ all things consist, and have their Being.. 3. That
Christ according to his Humanity, is the First Born of all Creatures.. 4. But
no Creature can ever reach so far as to be equal with him.

. 1. FROM what has been already said, it is easy to Answer to that intricate
Question, viz. Whether God Created all Creatures together, or one after
another? If the Word Create has respect to God himself, or the Internal
Command of his Will, it is made altogether; but if unto Creatures that is done
successively; for as it is the Nature, and Essential Attribute of God to be
unchangeable, and without succession; so the Nature of Creatures is to be
changeable and successive: But if the Word Create respects the Universals,
Seeds, and Principles of all Things which (in subordination to God, who is the
Principal Beginning of all Things) are, as it were Springs and Fountains from
whence Creatures did flow in the order of their succession; so it may be said
all Creatures were Created together, and especially if regard be had to the
Messiah, or Christ, who is the First Begotten of all Creatures, by whom all
Things are said to be made; as John declares it, and Paul expressly affirms,
that by Jesus Christ all Things were made, both visible and invisible.

. 2. JESUS CHRIST also signifies whole Christ, who is God and Man, as he is
God, he is called (...) the Essential Word of the Father, as he is Man (...),
the Word expressed or brought forth, the perfect, and substantial Image of that
Word which is in God, and eternally, or for ever united with him; so that this
is its Vehicle and Organ, as the Body is in respect of the Soul; of which Word
brought forth, which is the Wisdom of God, mention is made in diverse places, as
well of the New as of the Old Testament, as Prove. 8. 22. 31. and Prove. 3. 19.
Psalm. 33. 6. Psalm. 22. 2. Psalm. 110. p. 1. Joh. 11. 1, 2, 3, etc. Ephesians. 3. 9.
Col. 1. 15, 16, 17. Which place, viz. of Col. 1. 15, 16, 17 contains in it an
Explication of the former, to wit, that by Son, by Word or Wisdom, or by any of
his Attributes, God is not simply and nakedly understood: for how can any of
his Attributes be called the invisible Image of God, seeing this is equally as
invisible as himself, whence Image denotes something that is brought into
visibility, and which after a peculiar manner reveals and represents the
invisible God more than any Creature.

. 3. AND for the same reason he is called of Paul, in the place above cited,
the First Begotten of all Creatures, wherein is signified the relation he has
to Creatures, which were all in their Primitive State, as it were Sons of God;
whereas he is the First Begotten of all those Sons, who (as I may so say) are
as it were the Sons of this First Begotten Son of God. And therefore in him all
Things are said to consist or have their Existence; for that they did arise
from him as Branches from the Root, yet so as that they still remain in him
after a certain manner.

. 4. NOT as though they were equal to him, or of the same Nature with him,
because then none of them could ever have degenerated, and been changed from
Good into Evil; wherefore, they are of a Nature far inferior, in respect of the
First Begotten; so that, to speak properly, they can never be changed into him,
nor he into the Father. The highest pitch they can reach unto is this, that is
to become more like unto him, as the Scripture declares: Whence our Sonship
(who are but mere Creatures) is called Adoption.

CHAP. V.
. 1. That the Ancient Cabbalists acknowledged such a First Begotten Son of God,
whom they called the Heavenly Adam, the First Adam, and great Priest.. 2. That
Christ is a Medium between God, and all Creatures.. 3. That there is such a
middle Being, is as demonstrable from the Principles of sound reason, as that
there is a God.. 4. That God is immediately present, as well in Christ, as in
all Creatures.. 5. That Christ is unchangeable unto Evil, and changeable unto
Good; and so partakes both of Divinity and Creaturality, and also of Eternity
and Time.. 6. That neither Christ, nor those that are perfectly united with
him, are Subject to the Laws of Time, inasmuch as it denotes the Destruction of
Things.. 7. In what sense we are said to depart out of Time, and to climb above
it into a higher Region.

ALTHOUGH we have already, in the aforegoing Chapter, spoken a few things
concerning the Son of God, who is the First Begotten of all Creatures; yet more
remains to be said of this matter* very necessary for the right understanding
of what follows; to which purpose we have here designed a peculiar Chapter.

. 1. BY the Son of God, the First Begotten of all Creatures, whom we Christians
do call by the Name of Jesus Christ, according to the Scriptures, as is above
declared, not only is meant his Divinity, but also his Humanity, in Eternal
Union with the Divinity; that is, as his Heavenly Humanity was united with the
Divinity before the World was, and so by consequence before he came in the
Flesh. Of whom the Ancient Cabbalists have delivered many things, viz.
concerning the Son of God, how he was created, and of his Existence in the
Order of Nature, before all Creatures; also that all receive Benediction and
Sanctification in him, and by him, whom also in their Writings they call the
Heavenly Adam, Adam Kadmon, or First Man, the Great Priest, Husband, or Spouse
of the Church, as Philo Judaeus calls the First Begotten Son of God.

. 2. THIS Son of God, the First Begotten of all Creatures, to wit, this
Heavenly Adam, and Great Priest, as the Jewish Doctors call him, is properly a
Medium between God and the Creatures. And that there is such a Middle Being, is
as ^^^onstrable as that there is a God; wh^r^ is meant such a Being, which in
its own Nature is indeed less than God, and yet greater and more excellent than
all other Creatures; whence also for his Excellency he is properly called the
Son of God. Concerning this Son of God, who is called by the Jews, Adam Kadmon,
more may be seen in Kabbal. denudat. Tom. 1. Part. 1. p. 28, 30. Part. 2. p.
33. following, 37 following. Part 3. p. 31. unto the 64. p. 37, -- 78, etc. And
Kabb. denud. Tom. 2. Part 2. p. 244. And Tract. ult. p. 6, 7. -- 26.

. 3. IN order to this Demonstration we must first consider the Nature or Being
of God, the chiesest Being; and then the Nature and Essence of Creatures, which
are to be compared one with another, whence this middle Nature will immediately
discover it self to us. The Nature and Essence of God, as is shown in the
preceding Chapters, is altogether unchangeable, which not only the Holy
Scriptures, but also the Strength of Reason which God has endued our Minds
with, sufficiently declares; For if there should be any Mutability in God, it
must needs tend to some higher degree or measure of Goodness, and then he would
not be the Chiefest Good, which is contradictory; for if any thing advances to
a greater degree of Goodness, this wholly comes to pass by reason of some
greater Being, of whose Virtue and Influence it does participate: But there is
no greater Being than God, and so by consequence he is no way meliorated, nor
can become better than he is, much less decrease, which would argue an
Imperfection; therefore it is manifest that God, or the Chiefest Being, is
altogether unchangeable. Now seeing the Nature of Creatures is really distinct
from the Nature of God, so that there are some Attributes of God, which are
incommunicable to Creatures, among which is reckoned Immutability: Hence it
necessarily follows that Creatures are changeable, or else they would be God
himself: Moreover also daily experience teaches us that Creatures are
changeable, and do continually vary from one State unto another: But there is a
twofold Mutability, the one whereof has a Power in it of changing it self
either unto Good or Evil; and this is common to all Creatures, but not to the
First Begotten of all Creatures; the other is only a Power to, proceed from
Goodness to Goodness. Here is therefore a threefold Classis or rank of Beings:
The First whereof is that which is wholly unchangeable: The Second changeable
only to Good* so that that which in its own Nature is Good, may become yet
better: The Third is that which though it was in its own Nature indeed Good;
yet could be indifferently changed, as well into Good, as from Good into Evil.
The first and last of these are Extremes; and the second is a Natural Medium
between them, by which the Extremes are united, and this Medium partakes of
both Extremes, and therefore is the most convenient and proper Medium; for it
partakes of the one Extreme, viz. Mutability, to wit, from Good to a greater
degree or measure of Goodness, and of the other Extreme, viz. that it is
altogether unchangeable from Good into Evil; and such a Medium was necessarily
required in the very Nature of Things; for otherwise there would remain a Chasm
or Gap, and one Extreme would be united with another, without a Medium, which
is impossible, and repugnant to the Nature of Things, as appears in the whole
Course of the Universe. By the Immutability of the Messiah, here we must
understand that which is Moral, not that which is Natural. There be some who
object, Christ was tempted in vain, if he was naturally unchangeable. See
Matthew. 4. 3. 17, 18. Chap. 4. 15. There are also more Arguments, merely
Philosophical; of which in Philosophia Kabbal. (Kabbal. denud. Tom. 1. Part 3.
Dissert. 2. Chap. 1.) 13. are urged to prove that from the First Beginning,
there slowed forth only one thing begun and perfected* which is also confirmed
by the Authority of Ancient and Modern Philosophers, together with an Answer to
the Objections made on the contrary.

. 4. THIS Middle Being is not to be understood in so gross a manner, as if it
stood in a Middle Place, between two Extremes, as the Trunk of the Body is
between the Head and Feet; but is a Medium in respect of its Nature, as Silver
is between Tinn and Gold, or Water between Air and Earth, which are but gross
Comparisons in regard of the thing it self; neither can any one suppose the Son
to be such a Medium between God and the Creatures, as though God was not
immediately present in all his Creatures, and immediately filled all things;
for he immediately operates in all things in a proper sense: But this is to be
understood of that Union and Communion which Creatures have with God; so that
although God immediately operates in all things, yet he uses this Medium as an
Instrument, by which he co-operates in his Creatures; because it is, in regard
of its Nature, more near unto them; and yet because he is more excellent than
all other Productions, which we call Creatures, and that too in his own Nature.
Hence it is, he is deservedly called the First Begotten of all Creatures, and
the Son of God, rather than a Creature of God; and his Production is rather a
Generation, or Emanation from God, than Creation, if the Word be taken in a
strict sense; although, according to the larger sense and use of this Word, he
may be said to be created or formed, as the Scripture somewhere speaks of
him: But if the thing it self be duly understood, it is needless to contend
about Words: Yet nevertheless a Man's Son is rather said to be begotten of him,
than made or created by him. Of an House, or a Ship, built or made by a Man, we
do not say it is his Son, but his Work; because his Son is the Living Image and
Similitude of himself, which cannot be said of an House or a Ship: So this
first Production of God, ad extra, or, to without, is more fitly and properly
termed his Son than a Creature; because this is the Living Image of himself,
and is greater, and more excellent than all Creatures. Now it follows that the
Son himself must be immediately present in all these, that he may bless and
benefit them. And seeing he is that true Medium, between God and the Creatures,
he must needs exist within them, that so by his Operation he may stir them up
to a Union with him: And seeing he is the most excellent Production of God,
made ad extra, or, to without, and the most perfect and express Image of him,
he must needs be like unto God in all his Attributes, which without
contradiction may be said to be communicated to him; and so by consequence he
must necessarily be Omnipresent: Besides, if he were not present in all
Creatures, there would wholly remain a Chasma, or wide Gap, between God, and
the Creatures where he was not, which is absurd.

. 5. MOREOVER, as he is Partaker of the Immutability of God, and the Mutability
of Creatures, and so a Medium between that, which is altogether unchangeable,
and that which is altogether changeable, as partaking of both; so also he may
be said to be a Partaker of Eternity (which is proper to God) and Time, (which
is proper to Creatures;) and albeit it be said in the precedent Chapters, that
nothing interceded between Eternity and Time, or between the Creatures, and the
Will of God which created them. Time and Creatures are there to be taken in a
larger sense, viz. with respect to all the Productions of God, made ad extra:
So that this Middle Being is as well there comprehended as the rest: Neither
can we conceive this Middle Being to be before Creatures in Time, but only in
the order of Nature; so that indeed nothing of Time strictly taken happened
between the Creatures, and the All-Creating Power and Will of God that created
them.

. 6. BUT if by Time, according to the common signification of the Word, we
understand a succedaneous increase or decrease of Things, according to which
they grow and increase unto a certain pitch or period, and then again fail from
it, until they die or are changed into another State or Condition of Life; in
this sense it may be positively affirmed, that neither this Middle Being, or
any Creature perfectly united with the same, are subject to Time, or the Laws
thereof; for the Laws of Time reach but unto a certain Period or Age; and when
that Period is completed, then those things which are subject to Time decay
and are consumed, and so die and are changed into quite another Species of
Things, according to that old Saying of the Poet. Tempus edax rerum, tuque
invidiosa vetustas
Omnia destruis.
Which may be thus Englished. Thus spiteful Age, and Time that eats up Things,
All Things consumes, and to Destruction brings.


And for this Reason Time is divided into Four Parts, according to the Age of a
Man living in this World, which is Infancy, Youth, Manhood, and Old Age, even
until Death; so that all things which are bounded with Time, are subject unto
Death and Corruption, or are changed into another Species of things, as we see
Water changed into Stones, Stones into Earth, and Earth into Trees, and Trees
into Animals or Living Creatures: But in this most excellent Middle Being is
neither Decay or Corruption; nor to speak properly has Death any place in him:
He is a most powerful and effectual Balsam, which can preserve all things from
Death and Corruption, which are joined to him or united with him; so that here
all things are perpetually new, springing up fresh and green; here is perpetual
Youth without Old Age; and here is the Perfection of Old Age, to wit, great
increase of Wisdom and Experience without any imperfection of Age. But when
Christ came in the Flesh, and in that Body which he bare with him from Heaven;
(for every created Spirit has a certain Vehicle, either Terrestrial, Aereal,
or Ethereal, as this was:) He took upon him somewhat of our Nature, and by
consequence the Nature of all Things, (because the Nature of Man has in it the
Nature of all Creatures, whence also he is called the Microcosm;) which Nature
having assumed in Flesh and Blood, he sanctified, that by that he might
sanctify all Things, and so was as that little Leaven that changed the whole
Lump. He descended then within Time, and for a certain space or period, of his
own accord subjected himself to the Laws of Time, so as to endure great
Torments, even Death it self; but Death did not long detain him, for the Third
Day he rose again, and this was the end of all his Sufferings, even of his
Death and Burial, viz. that he might Heal, Cure, and Redeem his Creatures from
Death and Corruption, which came upon them by the Fall, and so at length hereby
put an end to Times and elevate the Creatures above Times to himself, where he
abides, who is the same yesterday, today, henceforth, and for ever, without
Decay, Death, or Corruption. In like manner, in his Spiritual and Internal
Appearance in Man, whereby he purposes to Save, Heal, and Redeem the Soul, he
does as it were, after a certain manner, subject himself to a kind of Death and
Passion; and so for a certain space submits himself to the Laws of Time, that
he might elevate the Souls of Men above Time, and Corruptibility to himself,
wherein they receive Blessing, and grow from one degree of Goodness and Virtue
unto another, in insinitum.

. 7. BY the same Reason, those who are come unto a perfect Union with Christ,
are mounted up into a Region or Sphere of perfect Tranquillity, where nothing is
seen or perceived to move or compel; for although there exist the most swift
and vehement Motions; yet nevertheless because the same do so uniformly, so
equally, and harmoniously move without the least contrariety or disorder, they
seem altogether to rest, whereof many Examples may be given in External Things:
For indeed there are two kinds of Motion, which to our bodily sight seem to
want Motion, viz. that which is exceeding quick and speedy, and that which is
exceeding slow; so that the middle sort is only discernable by us. Now under
Time, and the Laws thereof, may be comprehended not only the Earth, and Earthly
Things; but also the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and all the visible part of the
World, together with more that is invisible: So that after a long Tract of
Time, all those Things may be plainly changed into quite another Species of
Things, and that by the same order and course of Divine Operation which God
has placed in all Creatures, as a Law o^ Justice, whereby in his Divine Wisdom
he has purposed to reward every Creature according to its Works: So now this
may suffice to have been said concerning that most excellent Middle Being; of
whom upon occasion farther mention may be made in the subsequent Pages.

CHAP. VI.
. 1. That all Creatures in their own Nature are changeable.. 2. How far this
Mutability may extend it self, whether unto the Beings of Things, or unto the
manner of their Existence.. 3. That they are only Changeable in manner of
Existence, and not in Essence.. 4. That there are but Three Kinds of Beings
essentially distinct one from the other, viz. God the highest, Christ the
medium, and the Creature the lowest.. 5. That this Distinction is very
necessary, and keeps us from falling into Extremes on either Hand, whereof the
one is Ranterism, and the other gross Ignorance, by which the Glory of the
Divine Attributes is obscured and darkened.. 6. An Example hereof.. 7. The
Justice of God most gloriously appears in the Transmutation of Things out of
one Species into another.. 8. That when the Spirit of a Man, through Impiety,
shall change it self into the Qualities and Conditions of a Beast, it is but
Justice in God, that the said brutish Spirit should enter into the Body of a
Beast, and there for a certain time be punished.. 9. How many and diverse are
the depraved and wicked Opinions concerning God, and how he is conceived to be
in Men by those corrupt Opinions.. 10. Why the old World was destroyed by
Water, and why this is to be destroyed by Fire, and that all Punishments are
Medicinal.. 11. That every Creature is composed of Body and Spirit, and how
every Creature has in it more Bodies, and so likewise more Spirits, under one
general governing Spirit, which has the command over the rest.

. 1. THAT all Creatures in their own Nature are changeable, the distinction
between God and Creatures, duly considered, evidently evinces, and the same is
by daily experience confirmed. Now if any Creature be in its own Nature
changeable, it has this Mutability, as it is a Creature, and consequently all
Creatures will have the same, according to that Rule: Whatsoever agrees to any
thing as placed under this or that Species, agrees to all comprehended under
the same Species; but Mutability agrees to a Creature (which is the most
general Name of that Species, under which all Creatures are comprehended,) and
from thence it is manifest; for otherwise there would be no distinction between
God and Creatures: For if any Creature were of it self, and in its own Nature
unchangeable, that Creature would be God, because Immutability is one of his
incommunicable Attributes.

. 2. NOW let us consider how far this Mutability may reach, or be extended;
and, First, whether one Individual can be changed into another of the same or a
different Species? This, I say, is impossible; for then the very Essences of
Things would be changed, which would make a great confusion, not only in the
Creatures, but in the Wisdom of God, which made all Things: As for Example: If
this Man could be changed into that, viz. Paul into Judas, or Judas into Paul,
then he that sinned would not be punished for his sin, but another in his
stead, who was both Virtuous and Innocent; so then a Good Man would not receive
the reward of his Virtue, but a Vicious Man in his stead: But if we suppose one
good Man to be changed into another, as Paul into Peter, and Peter into Paul,
Paul would not receive his own proper Reward, but Peter's; nor Peter his, but
Paul's, which would be a confusion, and unbecoming the Wisdom of God. Moreover,
if the very individual Essences of Things could be changed one into another, it
would follow, Creatures were not true in themselves; and so we could not be
assured, nor have any certain knowledge of any thing; and then all the inbred
Notions and Dictates of Truth, which Men generally find in themselves, would be
false, and by consequence the Conclusions drawn from thence; for every true
Science, or certainty of Knowledge, depends upon the Truth of the Objects,
which are commonly called Veritates Objectivae, or Objective Truths: If
therefore these Objective Truths should be changed the one into the other,
certainly the Truth of the Propositions depending thereon would be changed
also; and so no Proposition could be unchangeably true, no not the most clear
and obvious as these are; the whole is greater than its part, and two halves
make a whole.

. 3. THE Second Thing to be considered, is, Whether one Species of Things can
be changed into another? Where we must diligently observe after what manner the
Species of Things are distinguished one from another; for there be many Species
of Things, which are commonly so called, and yet in Substance or Essence differ
not one from another, but in certain Manners or Properties, and when those
Modes or Properties are changed, that thing is said to have changed its
Species: Now whether or no this be not a certain manner of Existence, and not
the Essence or Being of the Thing it self that is so changed? As when Water
indeed is not changed, but remains the same, and cold coagulates it, which
before was fluid: When Water is changed into a Stone, certainly there is no
reason, why we should here suppose a greater change of its Substance, than in
the former Example of Water turned into Ice. And again when a Stone is changed
into soft and tender Earth, here is made no change of its Substance; and so in
all other Mutations which we observe in Things, the Substance or Essence always
remains the same, and there is only a change of Modus or Manner; so that when a
Thing ceases to be after this manner, it then begins to be after another
manner. And indeed the same Reasons do prove, that one Species essentially or
substantially distinct from another, cannot be changed into another, even as
one Individual cannot be changed into another: For the Species of Things are
nothing else but Individuals digested, or comprehended, under one general Idea
of the Mind, or common Term of speaking: As a Man, inasmuch as he is a Species,
comprehends under him all the Individuals of Men; and a Horse is a Species,
comprehending every individual Horse. Now if one Man cannot be changed into
another, much less can this Man be changed into another Individual of a
differing Species: For Example: If Alexander cannot be changed into Darius, he
cannot be changed into his own Horse Bucephalus.

. 4. IN order to know how far the Mutations of Things can reach, we must
examine how many Species of Things there be, which as to Substance or Essence
are distinct one from another; and if we diligently inquire thereinto, we shall
find only Three, as before was said, viz. God, Christ, and the Creatures, and
that these Three in respect of Essence, are really distinct one from another,
is already proved; but there can be no Reason alleged to prove, that there is
any Fourth kind of Being distinct from the other Three; yea, a Fourth kind of
Being seems wholly superfluous: And because all the Phenomenon in the whole
Universe may be sufficiently resolved into these Three beforementioned, as
into their proper and original Causes, there is no necessity to acknowledge any
other, according to this Rule: (Which if rightly understood, it is most true
and certain) Beings are not to be multiplied without necessity; for seeing the
Three beforementioned remove all the Specifical Differences in Substance, which
possibly can be conceived in our Minds; and so by these alone is that vast and
infinite possibility of Things filled up: How then can there be room or place
found for a Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, or Seventh Being? And that it is performed by
these Three is already before demonstrated; to wit, that whatsoever can be in
any wise called a Being, the same is either wholly unchangeable, and such is
God the Supreme Being, or is wholly changeable, viz. to good, or evil, and such
is the creature or lowest being, or that which is partly unchangeable, viz. in
respect of Evil, or partly changeable, to wit, in respect of Good; by which is
understood Christ, the Son of God; that Middle Being between God and the
Creatures; into what Classis or Rank therefore shall we bring a certain Fourth,
Fifth, Sixth, or Seventh Being, etc. which is neither wholly changeable, nor
wholly unchangeable; nor partly changeable, nor partly unchangeable: Besides,
he that supposes a certain Fourth Being, essentially or substantially distinct
from the three beforementioned, overthrows that most excellent Order we find
in the universality of Things, to wit, that there is not only one Medium
between God and the Creatures, but two, three, four, five, six, or as many as
can be supposed between first and latter. Moreover, it is very consentaneous to
sound Reason, and so also to the Order of Things, that as God is but One,
neither has he two, three, or more distinct Substances in him; and Christ but
one Christ, neither has in him more distinct Substances, inasmuch as he is the
Heavenly Man, and very First Adam; so likewise the Creature, or whole Creation,
is but one only Substance or Essence in Specie, although it comprehends many
Individuals placed in their subordinate Species, and indeed in Manner, but not
in Substance or Essence distinct one from another. And so that which Paul
speaks concerning Man, may in like manner be understood of all Creatures,
(who in their Original State were a certian Species of Man so called for their
Excellencies, as hereafter shall be shown;) to wit, that God made all Nations,
or Armies of Creatures, out of one Blood: And certainly here the reason of both
is the same; for as God made all Nations out of one Blood, to the end they
might love each other, and stand in a mutual Sympathy, and help each other; so
has he implanted a certain Universal Sympathy and mutual Love in Creatures, as
being all Members of one Body, and (as I may so say) Brethren, having one
common Father, to wit, God in Christ, or the Word made Flesh; and so also one
Mother, viz. that Substance or Essence alone, out of which they proceeded, and
whereof they are real Parts and Members; and albeit Sin has in a wonderful
Manner impaired this Love and Sympathy, yet it has not destroyed it.

. 5. THOSE Three distinct Beings, beforementioned, being granted, and no more,
which are wholly inconvertible the one into the other, we shall tread in a
secure path, in the midway of Truth, leaving those grand Errors and Consusions
about Entity, both on the Right Hand and the Left: For, First, there are some,
who teach, that there is but one Being of all Things, whereof the Creatures are
real and proper Parts, and these confound God and the Creatures together, as
though both were but one single Essence; so that Sin and Devils would be
nothing else but Parts, or at least Modifications of that Divine Being, from
whence do arise very dangerous Consequences. Although I would not have it
mis-interpreted to those who are unwarily fallen into this Opinion; yet I would
warn the Reader, that he may the better consider whereunto such Principles
tend, and avoid their absurdity. There are others again who allow only two
Species of Things, viz. God the Supreme Being, wholly unchangeable; and the
Creature the lowest Being, wholly changeable; but these do not duly consider
that excellent Order by us above described, which is apparent in all Things;
because else peradventure they would have taken notice, that besides these Two
Extremes, there is a certain Medium, which is partaker of both, and this is
Jesus that Christ, whom not only the wiser sort of the Jews, but also some
among the Gentiles so called, have acknowledged, viz. maintaining that there is
such a Medium, which they called by diverse Names, as Logos, the Son of God, the
First Begotten of God, Mind, Wisdom, Heavenly Adam, etc. So that some also do
call him the Eternal Medium: Which Things, if duly considered, may not a little
conduce to the propagation and furthering of the true Faith, and Christian
Religion, among the Jews, as well as Turks, and other Infidel Nations; that is
to say, if it appears we are able to prove that there is a Mediator between God
and Man; yea, between God and all Creatures, by as solid Reasons as those are,
which prove God to be a Creator: And so they that believe on that, may be said
truly to believe on Christ Jesus, though they should not as yet have known, or
been convicted, that he came in the Flesh: For if they yield to the former,
they will undoubtedly be forced (if ingenious) whether they will or no, to
grant the latter. Others there are, who do as it were infinitely multiply the
Specifical Beings of Things, in their distinct Essences and Essential
Attributes; which wholly subverts that excellent Order of Things, and greatly
obscures and darkens the Glory of the Divine Attributes, so that it cannot
shine forth in its due Splendour and Brightness in the Creatures: For so every
Creature is so exceeding straightly bounded, and strictly included and imprisoned
within the narrow limits of its own Species, that the Mutability of Creatures
is wholly taken away: Neither can any Creature variously exercise any greater
participation of Divine Goodness, or be advanced or promoted to any farther
perfection.

. 6. ALL which we shall demonstrate by one or two Examples: And, First, let us
take an Horse, which is a Creature endued with diverse degrees of perfection by
his Creator, as not only strength of Body, but (as I may so say) a certain kind
of knowledge, how he ought to serve his Master, and moreover also Love, Fear,
Courage, Memory, and diverse other Qualities which are in Man: which also we may
observe in a Dog, and many other Animals: Seeing therefore the Divine Power,
Goodness, and Wisdom, has created every Creature good; and indeed so, that it
might by continual augmentations (in its Mutability) be advanced to a greater
degree of Goodness, ad infinitum, whereby the Glory of those Attributes do more
and more shine forth: And seeing such is the Nature of every Creature, that it
is always in Motion or Operation, which does most certainly tend unto an higher
degree of Goodness, as the Reward and Fruit of its Labor; unless the Creatures
hinder that good by a voluntary Transgression, and abuse of that indifferency
of Will which God placed in them in their Creation. Now I demand, unto what
higher perfection and degree of Goodness, the Being or Essence of an Horse does
or may attain after he has done good service for his Master, and so performed
his Duty, and what is proper for such a Creature? Is a Horse then a mere
Fabric or dead Matter? or has he a Spirit in him, having Knowledge, Sense,
and Love, and diverse other Faculties and Properties of a Spirit? if he has,
which cannot be denied, what becomes of this Spirit when the Horse dies? if it
be said it passes into Life, and takes upon it another Body of an Horse, so
that it becomes a Horse as before, which Horse may be stronger and fairer, and
of a more excellent Spirit than before. Very well! But if he shall die, two,
three, or four times, etc. shall he always remain a Horse, though he be still
better, and more excellent, by how much the oftener his Spirit revolves. Now I
demand, whether the Spirit of an Horse has in it such infinite perfection,
that a Horse may always become better and better ad infinitum, and yet so as to
remain a Horse? For as the common received Opinion is, this visible Earth shall
not always remain in the same State, which may be confirmed by undeniable
Reasons: Now it necessarily follows, that the continual Generation of Animals
in these gross Bodies shall cease also; for if the Earth shall take on it
another Form, neither any longer bring forth Grass, Horses and other Animals
shall cease to be such as they were before: And seeing they want their proper
Aliment, they cannot remain in the same Species* yet nevertheless they are not
annihilated, as may be easily conceived; for how can any thing be annihilated,
seeing the Goodness of God toward his Creatures always remains the same; and
the conservation or continuation of Creatures is a continued Creation, as is
generally granted, and already before demonstrated, that God is a perpetual
Creator; and as he is the most free, so also the most necessary Agent: But if
it be denied, that the Earth is unchangeable, as before was said, then it will
come to pass that Horses and other Animals, according to their proportion, will
be in like manner changed with the Earth, and the Earth according to the same
proportion, will again produce or yield them Aliment or Food agreeable to their
changed condition; then I demand, Whether they shall always remain in the same
Species under such a change? Or, whether there will not be some difference
between that State and this As for Example: There is between a Cow and a Horse,
which is commonly granted to be Specifical. Again, I ask whether the Species of
Creatures do so infinitely one excel another, that an Individual of one
particular Species may still go forward in perfection, and approach nearer unto
another Species; but yet never reach so far as to be changed into that Species?
As for instance: An Horse in diverse Qualities and Perfections draws near unto
the Nature and Species of a Man, and that more than many other Creatures; Is
therefore the Nature of a Man distant from the Nature of an Horse, by Infinite
Degrees, or by Finite only? If by Finite, then certainly a Horse may in length
of Time be in some measure changed into a Man, (I mean his Spirit; as for his
Body that is a thing evident:) If infinitely distant; then unto any Man, even
one of the vilest and basest Nature and Disposition, may be attributed a
certain Infinite Excellence in Act, such as only agrees to God and Christ, but
to no Creature; for the highest Excellence of a Creature is to be Infinite
only, in potentia, not in actu; that is, to be still in a possibility of
attaining a greater Perfection and Excellence, ad infinitum, though in can
never reach this Infinite; for how far soever any Finite Being may proceed, yet
that is still Finite, although there be no limits to its progression: As for
Example: If we could ever come to the least Minute of Eternity, or the like
part of Infinite Duration, that would not be Infinite, but Finite: Neither do
we herein contradict what is delivered in the Third Chapter, of the
Infiniteness of Creatures; for it is not meant of their Infinite Goodness and
Excellence, but in respect only of Multitude and Magnitude; so that the one
cannot be numbered, nor the other measured, by the comprehension of any created
Intellect: Yet the Individuals of Creatures, are always but Finitely good, and
Finitely distant, quoad Species, or as to Species; and only potentially
Infinite; that is, always capable of farther perfection without end. As if
there should be supposed a certain Ladder, which should be infinitely long,
containing Infinite Steps, yet those Steps are not infinitely distant one from
another, otherwise there could be no ascension nor descension made thereon; for
Steps (in this Example) signify the various Species of Things, which cannot be
infinitely distant one from another, or from those which are next unto them;
yea, daily experience teaches us, that the Species of diverse Things are
changed, one into another, as Earth into Water, and Water into Air, and Air
into Fire or Ether; and the contrary, as Fire into Air, and Air into Water,
etc. which yet are distinct Species of Things; and so also Stones are changed
into Metals, and one Metal into another; but least some should say these are
only naked Bodies and have no Spirit, we shall observe the same not only in
Vegetables, but also in Animals, like as Barley and Wheat are convertible the
one into the other, and are in very deed often so changed, which is well enough
known to Housekeepers in many Provinces, and especially in Hungary, where if
Barley be sown Wheat springs up instead thereof; but in other places more
barren, and especially in Rocky Places, such as are found in Germany, if Wheat
be sown, Barley comes up, and Ba^ley in other places becomes mere Grass: And
in Animals, Worms are changed into Flies, and Beasts, and Fishes that feed on
Beasts, and Fishes of a different kind, do change them into their own Nature,
and Species: And does not also a corrupted Nature, or the Body of Earth and
Water, produce Animals without any previous Seed of those Animals? And in the
Creation of this World, did not the Waters at the Command of God, produce Birds
and Fishes? And did not the Earth also at the same Command bring forth Beasts
and Creeping Things; which for that Cause were real and proper Parts of the
Earth and Waters? And as they had their Bodies from the Earth, so likewise they
had their Spirits or Souls from the same; for the Earth brought forth Living
Souls, as the Hebrew Text speaks, but not mere Corporeal Figures, wanting
Life and Soul; wherefore there is a very remarkable difference between Humane
Creatures and Brutes: Of Man it is said, God made him after his own Image, and
breathed into him the Breath of Life, and he became a Living Soul; so that from
hence Man received his Life, that principal part of him, (by which he is become
a Man,) which is really distinct from that Divine Soul or Spirit which God
breathed into him.

And seeing the Body of Man was made out of the Earth, which (as is proved) had
therein diverse Spirits, and gave Spirits to all Brute Beasts; then unto Man, no
doubt, she committed the best and most excellent Spirits whom he was to
contain; but all these Spirits were of a far inferior Species, in regard of
the Spirit of Man, which he received from above, and not from the Earth: And
the Spirit of Man ought to have Dominion over these Spirits, (which were all
but Earthly,) so as to subdue them to himself, and exalt them to an higher
degree, (viz.) into his own proper Nature, and that would have been his true
Increase and Multiplication; for all this he suffered the Earthly Spirits
existing within him, to get Dominion over him, and so became like them;
wherefore it is said, Earth thou art, and unto Earth thou shall return, which
has no less a Spiritual than a Literal Signification.

. 7. NOW we see how gloriously the Justice of God appears in this Transmutation
of Things out of one Species into another; and that there is a certain Justice
which operates not only in Men and Angels, but in all Creatures, is most
certain; and he that does not observe the same may be said to be utterly Blind:
For this Justice appears as well in the Ascension of Creatures, as in their
Descension; that is, when they are changed into the better, and when into the
worse; when into the better, this Justice distributes to them the Reward and
Fruit of their Good Deeds; when into the worse, the same punishes them with due
Punishments, according to the Nature and Degree of the Transgression. And the
same Justice has given a Law to all Creatures, and written the same on their
Natures; and every Creature whatsoever, that transgresses this Law, is
punished for it: But that Creature that observes and keeps it, has this
Reward, viz, to become better. So under the Law which God gave to the Jews, if
a Beast killed a Man, that Beast was to be slain; and the Life of Man is said
to be required at the Hand of every Beast, Genesis 9. 5. And if any one had to do
with a Beast, not only the Man, but the Beast, was to be slain; so not only the
Woman and her Husband did receive Sentence and Punishment from God after their
Transgression, but the Serpent also, which was the brutish part in Man, which
he took from the Earth. God has also put the same instinct of Justice in Man,
toward Beasts and Trees of the Field; for whosoever he be that is a good and
just Man, the same loves his Beasts that serve him, and takes care of them
that they have their Food and Rest, and what else is wanting to them; and this
he does not do only for his own profit, but out of a Principle of true Justice;
for should he be so cruel to them as to require their Labor, and yet deny them
their necessary Food, then certainly he transgresses that Law which God has
written on his Heart; and if he kills any of them, only to fulfill his own
pleasure, he acts unjustly, and the same measure will again be measured unto
him; so likewise a Man that has a certain Fruitful Tree in his Orchard, that
prospers well, he dungs and cleanses the same, that it may wax better and
better; but if it be barren, and incumbers the ground, then he heweth it down
with an Ax, and burns it with Fire. And so here is a certain Justice in all
these, as in all the Transmutation of Things from one Species into another,
whether it be by ascending from the Ignobler or Baser unto the Nobler, or by
descending into the contrary, there may be found the same Justice: For Example:
Is it not just and equitable, if a Man on Earth lives a pure and Holy Life,
like unto the Heavenly Angels, that he should be exalted to an Angelical
Dignity after Death, and be like unto them, over whom also the Angels rejoice?
But if a Man here on Earth lives so wickedly and perversely, that he is more
like a Devil raised from Hell than any other Creature, if he dies in such a
State without Repentance, Shall not the same Justice tumble him down to Hell?
and shall not such deservedly become like Devils, even as those who led an
Angelical Life are made equal with the Angels? But if a Man has neither lived
an Angelical nor Diabolical, but a Brutish, or at leastwise an Animal or
Sensual Life on Earth; so that his Spirit is more like the Spirit of a Beast
than any other thing: Shall not the same Justice most justly cause, that as he
is become a Brute, as to his Spirit; whilst he has left the Dominion of his
more excellent Part, to that Brutish Part and Spirit within him, that he also
(at least, as to his External Form, in bodily Figure) should be changed into
that Species of Beasts, to whom he was inwardly most like, in Qualities and
Conditions of Mind? And seeing this Brutal Spirit is now become Superior and
Predominant in him, and holds the other Captive, is it not very probable, when
such a Man dies, that the very same Brutish Spirit shall still have Dominion in
him, and carry the Human Soul with it whithersoever it pleases, and compel it
to be subservient unto it? And when the said Brutish Spirit returns again into
some Body, and has now Dominion over that Body, so that its Plastic Faculty
has the Liberty of forming a Body, after its own Idea and Inclination, (which
before, in the Humane Body, it had not;) it necessarily follows, that the Body,
which this Vital Spirit forms, will be Brutal, and not Humane; for the Brutal
Spirit cannot produce and form any other Figure: Because its Plastic Faculty
is governed of its Imagination, which it does most strongly imagine to its
self, or conceive its own proper Image; which therefore the External Body is
necessarily forced to assume.

. 8. HEREIN the Justice of God marvellously appears, whilst he assigns to every
Kind and Degree of Transgression its due and proper Punishment; neither does he
sentence every Sin and Transgression to Hellfire, and the Punishment due unto
Devils; for Christ has taught the contrary, in that Parable, where he shows
the Third Degree only is Doomed to Infernal Punishment, (viz.) if one say to
his Brother: Thou Fool!

What can be here objected against the Justice of God? If it be said it does
too much lessen and disparage the Dignity and Nobility of Humane Nature, to
suppose the same with respect to Body and Soul, convertible into the Nature of
a Brute. To this I Answer, according to the common Maxim, Corruption optimi fit
pessima, The best Things by Corruption become the worst: For seeing Man by his
voluntary Transgression has so exceedingly polluted and brought down his own
Nature (which was so Noble) into a far worse State and Condition, that the same
could wax as vile and base in Spirit as the most unclean Beast or Animal; so
that he is become as subject to Earthly Concupiscences and Desires, as any
Beast; yea, is become worse than any Beast: What Injustice will this be, if God
should also compel him to bear that Image outwardly in his Body, into the which
he has inwardly transformed himself? Or, which think thou is the worst
Degeneration, to bear the Image of a Beast in Spirit, or in Body? Certainly,
every one will say, to be like a Beast in Spirit is far the greatest
Degeneration; and there is not one, who is endued with true Nobility of Mind,
who will not confess, that, to be like a Beast inwardly, is worse than to be
like the same outwardly; for to be one with him in Spirit, is far worse than to
be one with him in External Form and Figure of Body: But if any one shall say
this Punishment is too little for such a Man, who has lived all his Days a
Brutish Life, if after Death he shall only return to the State or Condition of
some Beast; let such know, that the most just Creator and Maker of all Things
is wiser than he, and knows best what Punishment is due unto every particular
Sin; who has also so most justly and wisely disposed all Things, that no Man
that lives carnally, and after the manner of Beasts, can enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven; and so also the Doctrine of Christ expressly informs us, that all
Sins are not to be punished with the pains of Hell: And that where the Treasure
is, there is the Heart also, and the Spirit of Man: Also if a Man is joined or
united with any Things, that then he becomes unum quid, or one with the same;
and that he that cleaves to the Lord is one with him in Spirit; and he that
cleaves to a Harlot is one Flesh with her. Why then does not he that cleaves to
a Beast, by the same reason, become one with a Beast? And so in all other
cases: For to whom any one yields himself in obedience, the same is his Master,
so far as he obeys him; as the Scripture says. Moreover also it is said, With
what measure soever ye mete, the same shall be meted unto you: As if it should
have said, All Kinds and Degrees of Sin, have their proper Punishments, and all
these Punishments tend to the Creatures Advantage; so that Grace prevails over
Judgment, and Judgment is turned into Victory to the Salvation and Restoration
of the Creature: For seeing the Grace of God is extended over all his Works,
Why should we think God a more severe and rigid Master to his Creatures than
indeed he is? Seeing this does wonderfully obscure and darken the Glory of the
Divine Attributes; neither does it beget a Love toward God, and an Admiration
of his Goodness and Justice in the Hearts of Men, as it ought to be; but the
plain contrary.

. 9. FOR that common Notion of the Justice of God, that every Sin, how small
soever it be, shall be punished with Hell Fire, and that without all end,
begets in Men an horrible Idea or Conception concerning God; to wit, as though
he were a cruel Tyrant toward all his Creatures rather than a Gracious Father:
But if the lovely Image of God was more known unto Men, such as indeed he is,
and manifests himself in all his Dispensations to his Creatures; and if our
Souls could inwardly feel and taste him, viz. as he is Charity and Goodness it
self, and as he inwardly reveals himself, by the Light and Spirit of Christ
Jesus our Lord, in the Hearts of Men; then indeed, and not till then, would Men
come to Love God above all things, and acknowledge him to be, beyond all, the
most Lovely, Just, and Merciful, who may not punish all Sinners with an equal
Punishment.

. 10. AND moreover also, Why did he drown the old World with Water, and has
purposed to destroy this with Fire? Such as was that of Sodom: but that he
would show, that for diverskinds of Sin, diverse sorts of Punishment are to be
inflicted: And that the old World was indeed wicked, but that which is to be
destroyed with fire is worse, which for that reason will have the greater
Judgment.

But the different nature of these transgressions, for which those different
punishments are prepared, seem to consist in this; that the sins of the old
World were more brutish and carnal, as the word of God does seem to point out,
when he says, My Spirit shall not always strive with Man; because he is become
Flesh; that is, he is become perfectly Brutish or Bestial, by obeying the
desires of the Flesh: So that unless this Generation had been cut off, all
Mankind (except Noah and his Family) in the succeeding Generation, would have
become Bestial, which Evil God would prevent, by drowning them with the Waters,
that by this Punishment they might be reduced from the Brutish Nature to the
Nature of Men: But the Sins of this World, which like Sodom is to be destroyed
with Fire, se^^^ their own Nature, to be more like the Sins of Devils, than any
thing else, (viz.) by reason of Craft, Deceit, Malice, Hostility, and Cruelty;
and therefore their proper Punishment is Fire, which also is the Original
Principle of those Noble Spirits so greatly degenerated; and so they ought
deservedly by the same to be restored and regenerated: For what is Fire, but a
certain kind of imperfect Ethereal Substance shut up in combustible Bodies? as
we observe the same still to mount upwards, and by reason of its notable
thinness immediately to vanish: From which Ethereal Substance, as well Angels
as Men, have their Original, quoad Spiritus, or, as to their Spirits; as the
Brutal Nature has its Original from Water. But as all the Punishments, God
inflicts on his Creatures, have some proportion with their Sins; so all these
Punishments (the worst not excepted) do tend to their Good and Restoration, and
so are Medicinal, that by them these diseased Creatures may be cured and
restored to a better condition than before they enjoyed.

. 11. NOW therefore let us examine, how every Creature is composed, and how the
parts of its composition may be converted the one into the other; for that they
have originally one and the same Essence, or Being.

In every visible Creature there is a Body and a Spirit, or Principium magis
Activum, and magis Passivum, or, more Active and more Passive Principle, which
may fitly be termed Male and Female, by reason of that Analogy a Husband has
with his Wife. For as the ordinary Generation of Men requires a Conjunction and
Cooperation of Male and Female; so also all Generations and Productions
whatsoever they be, require an Union, and conformable Operation of those Two
Principles, to wit, Spirit and Body; but the Spirit is an Eye or Light
beholding its own proper Image, and the Body is a Tenebrosity or Darkness
receiving that Image, when the Spirit looks thereinto, as when one sees himself
in a Looking-Glass; for certainly he cannot so behold himself in the
Transparent Air, nor in any Diaphanous Body, because the reflection of an Image
requires a certain opacity or darkness, which we call a Body: Yet to be a Body
is not an Essential Property of any Thing; as neither is it a Property of any
Thing to be dark; for nothing is so dark that it cannot be made Light; yea, the
Darkness it self may become Light, as the Light which is created may be turned
into Darkness, as the Words of Christ do fully evince, when he says, If the
Light which is in thee be darkness, etc. where he means the Eye or Spirit which
is in the Body, which beholds the Image of any Thing: Therefore as every
Spirit has need of a Body, that it may receive and reflect its Image, so also
it requires a Body to retain the same; for every Body has this retentive
Nature, either more or less in it self; and by how much the perfecter a Body
is, that is, more perfectly mixed, so much the more retentive is it, and so
Water is more retentive than Air, and Earth of some Things is more retentive
than Water.

But the Seed of a Female Creature, by reason of its so perfect mixture; for
that it is the purest Extraction of the whole Body, has in it a notable
retention: And in this Seed, as a Body, the Male Seed, which is the Image and
Spirit of the Male, is received and retained, together with other Spirits which
are in the Female; and therefore whatsoever Spirit is then strongest, and has
the strongest Image or Idea in the Seed, whether it be the Masculine or the
Feminine, or any other Spirit from either of these received from without, tha^
Spirit is predominant in the Seed, and forms the Body, as near as may be, after
its own Image, and so every Creature receives his External Form. And after the
same manner also, the Internal Productions of the Mind, viz. Thoughts are
generated, which according to their Kind are true Creatures, and have a true
Substance, proper to themselves, being all our Internal Children, and all of
them Male and Female, that is, they have Body and Spirit; for if they had not a
Body, they could not be retained, nor could we reflect on our own proper
Thoughts; for every reflection is made by a certain Tenebrosity or Darkness,
and this is a Body; so the Memory requires a Body, to retain the Spirit of the
Thing thought on, otherwise it would vanish as the Image in a Glass, which
presently vanishes, the Object being removed. And so likewise, when we remember
any Body, we see his Image in us, which is a Spirit that proceeded from him,
whilst we beheld him from without; which Image or Spirit is retained in
Somebody, which is the Seed of our Brain, and thence is made a certain
Spiritual Generation in us: And so every Spirit has its Body, and every Body
its Spirit; and as the Body, sc. of a Man or Beast, is nothing else but an
innumerable multitude of Bodies, compacted together into one, and disposed into
a certain order; so likewise the Spirit of a Man, or Beast, is a certain
innumerable multitude of Spirits united together in the said Body, which have
their Order and Government so, that there is one Captain, or Chief Governor,
another a Lieutenant, and another has a certain kind of Government under him,
and so through the whole, as it is wont to be in an Army of Soldiers; wherefore
the Creatures are called Armies, and God the God of Hosts, as the Devil which
possessed the Man was called Legion, because there were many of them; so that
every Man; yea, every Creature, consists of many Spirits and Bodies; (many of
these Spirits which exist in Man) are called by the Hebrews, Nizzuzoth, or
Sparks. See in Kabbal. denud. Tom. 2. Part 2. Tract. de revolutionibus
animarum, Cap. 2. and seq. p. 256, 268, etc.) And indeed every Body is a
Spirit, and nothing else, neither differs any thing from a Spirit, but in that
it is more dark; therefore by how much the thicker and grosser it is become, so
much the more remote is it from the degree of a Spirit, so that this
distinction is only modal and gradual, not essential or substantial.

CHAP. VII.
. 1. That every Body may be turned into a Spirit, and a Spirit into a Body;
because the distinction between Body and Spirit is only in Modo, not in
Essentia: The reason hereof is taken, first, from the Order of Things
abovesaid, which consists only in Three. And that the worst of Creatures; yea,
the most cursed Devils, after many and long-continued Torments, shall at length
return to a State of Goodness. Moreover, that all this hardness and grossness
of Bodies, came from a certain Fall, which therefore shall in time return to a
state of softness and subtilty.. 2. The Second Reason is drawn from the Divine
Attributes, whereof some are communicable to his Creatures.. 3. The Third
Reason, is drawn from the love which the Spirits have to their Bodies.. 4. That
to be penetrable and indiscerpible is as truly attributed to Bodies, as to
Spirits* and to be impenetrable and disce^pible agrees as well to Spirits as to
Bodies; for that the difference is Gradual and not Essential; And that no
Creature, or Created Spirit, can be intimately present in any Creature, because
Intrinsic Presence only pertains to God and Christ; and therefore that
Philosophical Penetration of Created Spirits, in regard of Bodies, is a mere
Scholastic Fiction.

NOW that I may more clearly demonstrate, that every Body is a certain Spirit
or Life in its own Nature, and that the same is a certain intelligent
Principle, having knowledge, Sense, Love, Desire, Joy, and Grief; as it is this
or that way affected; and by consequence has Activity and Motion, per se; so
that it can remove it self whithersoever it desires to be* I say, in its own
Nature, wherein it was originally created, and as it shall be again, when it
shall be reduced to its primitive State, and delivered from that Confusion and
Vanity, to which it is subject by reason of Sin. I shall produce these
following Reasons. (Of the Nature of Matter and Spirit, more may be seen in
Kabbal, denud. Tom. 1. Part 2. p. 308. unto. p. 312. and Tom. 2. Treatise ult.
page 6. 28, 29, 32.)

. 1. THE first hereof shall be from the Order of Things, beforementioned,
which I have already proved to be but Three; to wit, God the Supreme or
Chiefest, Christ the Medium or Middle, and the Creature the lowest in Order;
which Creature is but one Essence or Substance, as to Nature or Essence, as is
above demonstrated, so that it only differs secundum modos existendi; or,
according to the manners of existence; among which one is Corporiety; whereof
also there are many degrees; so that a Thing may more or less approach to, or
recede from the State and Condition of a Body or a Spirit; but because a Spirit
(between these two) is more excellent in the Natural Order of Things, and by
how much the more a Creature is a Spirit, (if at least wise it does not any
otherwise degenerate) so much the nearer it approaches to God, who is the
chiefest Spirit. Hence a Body may always be more and more Spiritual, ad
infinitum; because God who is the First and Supreme Spirit is Infinite, and
does not nor cannot partake of the least Corporiety; whence such is the Nature
of a Creature, unless it degenerates, that it always draws nearer and nearer
unto God in likeness: But because there is no Being, which is every way
contrary to God, (Viz. there is no Being, which is infinitely and unchangeably
Evil, as God is infinitely and unchangeably Good; nothing infinitely Dark, as
God is infinitely Light; nor any thing infinitely a Body, having nothing of
Spirit, as God is infinitely a Spirit, having nothing of Body;) hence it is
manifest that no Creature can become more and more a Body, ad infinitum,
although the same may become more and more a Spirit, ad infinitum; and nothing
can become infinitely more dark, though it may become infinitely more light: By
the same reason nothing can be Evil ad infinitum, although it may become more
and more Good ad infinitum: And so indeed, in the very Nature of Things, there
are limits or bounds to Evil; but none unto Good. And after the same manner,
every degree of Sin or Evil has its Punishment, Grief, and Chastisement
annexed to it, in the very Nature of the Thing, by which the Evil is again
changed into Good; which Punishment or Correction, though it be not presently
perceived of the Creature, when it Sins, yet is reserved in those very Sins
which the same commits, and in its due time will appear; and then every Sin
will have its Punishment, and so the Pain and Chastisement will be felt of the
Creature, and by that the Creature will be again restored unto its former State
of Goodness, in which it was created, and from which it cannot fall or slide
any more; because by its great Chastisement it has acquired a greater Strength
and Perfection; and so is ascended so far above that indifferency of Will,
which before it had to Good or Evil, that it Wills only that which is Good,
neither is any more capable to Will any Evil. See Kabbal. denud. Tom. 2. Tract.
ult. p. 61.. 9. p. 69.. 21. and 70.. 5. and ibid. Tract. 2. p. 157.

And hence may be inferred, that all the Creatures of God, which heretofore
degenerated and fell from their primitive Goodness, must after certain periods
be converted and restored, not only to as good, but unto a better State than
that was in which they were created: For Divine Operation cannot cease: And
hence it is the Nature of every Creature to be still in Motion, and always to
change either from Good to Good, or from Good into Evil, or from Evil again
into Good; and because it cannot proceed infinitely to Evil, for that there is
no Infinite Example thereof, hence it must necessarily return or slide into
Eternal Silence, which is contrary to the Nature of it. But if it be said, it
goes into Eternal Torments, I Answer, If by Eternal thou meanest an
Infiniteness of Ages, which shall never cease, that is impossible; because
every Pain and Torment excites or stirs up an operating Spirit and Life in
every thing which suffers; as we observe by continued Experience, and Reason
teaches us, that of necessity it must be so; because through Pain, and the
enduring thereof, every kind of crassitude or grossness in Spirit or Body
contracted is attenuated, and so the Spirit captivated or detained in that
grossness or crassitude is set at Liberty, and made more Spiritual, and
consequently more Active and Operative, through suffering. Now seeing a
Creature cannot proceed infinitely to Evil, nor slide down into Inactivity or
Silence, nor yet also into mere Eternal Passion, it incontestably follows, that
it must at length return unto Good; and by how much the greater its Sufferings
are, so much the sooner shall it return and be restored. And so we see how a
Thing (the same Substance still remaining) may be marvellously changed in
respect of the manners of its Existence; so that a certain Holy and Blessed
Spirit, or Angel of Light, could by his voluntary Action, become a Wicked and
Cursed Spirit of Darkness; which Change, or Metamorphosis, certainly is as
great as if a Spirit were changed into a Body. And if it be here demanded,
Whether those Spirits became more Corporeal by their Transgression, than they
were in their Primitive State before they fell? I answer, Yes; but because, as
I have already shown, that a Spirit is capable of Corporiety, Secundum majus
and minus, or more and less; although not infinitely, yet in many degrees.
Hence it is, they could remain for many Ages, and have nothing of such a
Corporeal Crassitude, as Things in this visible. World have, such as are hard
Stones, or Metals, or the Bodies of Men and Women: For certainly the Bodies of
the worst Spirits have not such a Crassltude as any visible Body, and yet all
that grossness of visible Bodies came from the Fall of Spirits from their First
State: And so the Spirits after long and various periods, could contract this
grossness to themselves, although they could not together, and at one and the
same time fall into an universal grossness, so that the whole Body of any
fallen Spirit should be in all its parts equally gross; but some parts become
grosser and grosser* and the other Corporeal Parts of this Spirit (which are
its immediate Vehicle, and wherewith it is most intimately united) retain a
certain Tenuity or Subtilty, without which the Spirit could not be so moveable
and active as otherwise it would; and with these subtiler and more tenuious
Parts of the Body, the principal Spirit (together with its ministering Spirits,
so many of them as it can possibly gather together) departs out of those
thicker Parts of the Body, which it leaves as so many cadaverous Bodies, which
are no longer fit to serve the said Spirits in those Operations which they
exercise in their present State.

And we may observe this departure of the subtiler and stronger Spirits, out of
the harder and grosser parts of the Body, into the more soft and tenu^ous, in a
certain Spirituous Liquor, which is congealed with great cold, where the
stronger Spirits (forsaking the harder Parts which are outward, and chiefly
exposed to the cold) do gather themselves into the middle Part of the Body,
which is always subtle and thin, so that one only drop of that Liquor (which
is not congealed, but remains still liquid in the innermost Part of the
congealed Body) has in it the augmented force of all those Parts which are
congealed; so that here is a two fold grossness and hardness of Bodies, the one
palpable and visible to our External Senses; the other invisible and
impalpable, which nevertheless is as gross as the other, yea, often grosser and
harder, which may be truly perceived by the Internal Senses, although the
External Senses may be insensible thereof; for the invisible and impalpable
grossness or hardness is that which is proper to those Bodies, which are so
small, that our External Senses cannot perceive them, when nevertheless they
are really exceeding hard, yea, harder than any Flint or Metal, which we can
handle with our Hands. And out of these hard and small Bodies, visible Waters
are for the most part composed, although they appear to us very soft, fluid,
and tenuious, by reason of the great Plenty of certain other subtle Bodies
which continually agitate, and move the said hard Particles; so that Water
seems to our gross Senses to be one thing Homogeneal, Simple, and Uniform,
although it consists of many Heterogeneous and Dissimilar or differing Parts,
more than many other Bodies; and many of these Parts are exceeding hard and
stony, whence proceeds Gravel, bubbling sorth, and all other little Sands and
Stones, which have their Original and Birth from the Waters springing from the
bottom of the Earth; and when those little Stones, or stony Particles of Water,
grow into visible Sand and Stones, the same after some time do again lose this
hardness, and become more soft and tenuious, than when they belonged to the
Waters; for Stones do rot, and are converted into soft Earth, and out of this
proceed Animals; so also Stones putrefying, do often become Water again; but
this Water is of another Species than the former, for one is petrefying, the
other mollifying; as it is observed that from one Mountain in Helvetia two
Kinds of Water flow, one whereof being drunken breeds the Stone, and the other
is a proper remedy against it; so that one Water is changed into a Stone, and
the other Water proceeds from that Stone, whilst it is in Corruption, and so it
alters and loses its former hardness: And so from what has been said may the
better be understood, how the Heart and Spirit of a Wicked Man may be said to
be hard and stony; because indeed his Spirit has in it a real hardness, such
as is found in those little stony Particles of certain Waters; when on the
contrary the Spirits of good Men are soft and tender; which internal softness
and hardness of Spirits, we may also really feel, and every Good Man does as
sensibly perceive the same, as the external hardness of gross Bodies is
discerned by the outward touch; but such who are dead in their Sins, have not
this sense of the hardness or softness of Good or Evil Spirits; and therefore
they call these only Metaphorical Speeches, when indeed the Things are really
so in a proper sense, and that without any Figure.

. 2. THE Second Reason, that created Spirits are convertible into Bodies, and
Bodies into Spirits, I shall deduce from a serious and due consideration of the
Divine Attributes; from which, as from a Treasury of Instructions, may be
manifested the Truth of all Things: For seeing God is infinitely Good, and
communicates his Goodness infinite ways to his Creatures; so that there is no
Creature which does not receive something of his Goodness, and that very
largely: And seeing the Goodness of God is a living Goodness, which has Life,
Power, Love, and Knowledge in it, which he communicates to his Creatures, How
can it be, that any dead Thing should proceed from him, or be created by him,
such as is mere Body or Matter, according to their Hypothesis, who affirm, that
the same is wholly inconvertible, to any degree of Life or Knowledge? It is
truly said of one that God made not Death, and it is as true, that he made no
dead Thing: For how can a dead Thing depend of him, who is infinitely Life and
Charity? Or how can any Creature receive so vile and diminutive an Essence from
him, (who is so infinitely Liberal and Good,) that should partake nothing of
Life or Knowledge, nor ever be able to aspire to it, no not in the least
degree? Has not God created all his Creatures for this end, that in him they
might be Blessed* and enjoy his Divine Goodness, in their several States and
Conditions? But how can this be without Life or sense? Or how can any Thing,
that wants Life, enjoy Divine Goodness? But we shall urge this Argument a
little farther, The Divine Attributes are commonly and rightly distinguished,
into communicable, and incommunicable; the incommunicable are, that God is a
Being, subsisting by himself, Independent, Unchangeable, absolutely Infinite,
and most Perfect: The communicable are, that he is a Spirit, Life, and Light,
that he is Good, Holy, Just, Wise, etc. But now there are none of these
communicable Attributes, which are not living, yea Life it self: And because
every Creature has a Communication with God in some of his Attributes, now I
demand, In what Attribute dead Matter has it, or a Body that is incapable of
Life and Sense for ever? If it be said, It agrees with God in Entity, or that
it is an Essence, I Answer, In God there is no dead Being, whereof he is or can
be Partaker: Whence, therefore, shall this have its dead Essence? Moreover the
Entity or Being of a Thing is not properly an Attribute thereof; but an
Attribute is properly, tale quid, or something that is predicated or affirmed
of that Being: Now what Attributes or Perfections can be attributed to dead
Matter, which do analogically Answer to those which are in God? If we
diligently enquire thereinto, we shall find none at all; for all his Attributes
are living; yea, Life it self. Moreover, seeing the Creatures of God, so far as
they are Creatures, ought necessarily in some things to resemble their Creator,
now I demand, in what dead Matter is like unto God? If they say again in naked
Entity, I Answer, There is none such in God or his Creatures: And so it is a
mere non ens, or nothing.

But as touching the other Attributes of Matter, viz. Impenetrability*
Figurability, and Mobility; certainly none of these have any place in God, and
so are not of his communicable Attributes; but rather Essential Differences or
Attributes of Diversity, whereby the Creature, as such, is distinguished from
God; as also Mutability is of the Number of those differential Attributes,
whence it cannot be said that Mutability is of the communicable Attributes of
God: And in like manner, Impenetrability, Figurability, and Mobility, do not
pertain unto the communicable Attributes of God; but to those only in which the
Creatures differ from him. And seeing dead Matter does not partake of any of
the communicable Attributes of God, we must certainly conclude, that the same
is a mere non ens, or nothing, a false Fiction or Chimaera, and so a thing
impossible. If they say, it has a Metaphysical Goodness and Truth, even as
every Being is Good and True: Again; I demand, What is that Goodness and Truth?
For if it has no participation with any of the communicable Attributes of God,
it will be neither Good nor True, and so a mere Fiction, as before was said.
Moreover, seeing it cannot be said, wherein dead Matter does any way partake of
Divine Goodness, much less can it be shown, how it may be capable always to
acquire a greater Perfection, ad infinitum, which is the Nature of all
Creatures, viz. to increase, and infinitely advance toward a farther
Perfection as is before demonstrated. But what farther progress in Goodness or
Perfection has a dead Matter? Because after it has suffered Infinite Changes
of Motion and Figure it is constrained always to remain dead, as before; and if
Motion and Figure contribute nothing to the receiving of Life, then certainly
this is made never the better; nay, is not in the least degree promoted in
Goodness: For suppose this dead Matter had undergone all Forms, and been
transmuted into all Kinds of Figures, even the most regular and exact: What
does this profit this Matter or Body, because it wants all Life and Sense? So
let us suppose the same to have undergone Infinite Kinds of Motion, from
slowness to swiftness; Wherein, therefore, is it better, by the way of its
Intrinsecal Melioration? For the Argument speaks of Intrinsecal Melioration,
which is such a Melioration as the Nature of the Thing it self requires, and
which is performed thereby; but a mere dead Body, or Matter, requires no kind
of Motion or Figure; nor, in it self, is perfected more by one Motion, or
Figure, than by another* for it is alike indifferent to all Motions and Figures
whatsoever, and by consequence is not perfected or bettered by any of them. And
then what advantage will it have from all these helps, if it always remain a
dead and impassible Thing.

. 3. MY Third Reason is drawn from the great Love and Desire that the Spirits
or Souls have toward Bodies, and especially toward those with which they are
united, and in which they have their Habitation: But now the Foundation of all
Love or Desire, whereby one Thing is carried unto another, stands in this, That
either they are of the same Nature and Substance with them, or like unto them,
or both; or that one has its Being from the other, whereof we have an Example
in all living Creatures which bring forth their young; and in like manner also
in Men, how they love that which is born of them: For so also even Wicked Men
and Women (if they are notextremely perverse, and void of Parental Love) do
Love their Children, and cherish them with a Natural Affection, the cause
whereof certainly is this, That their Children are of the same Nature and
Substance, viz. as though they were Parts of them; and if they are like them,
either in Body, Spirit, or Manners, hereby their Love is the more increased: So
also we observe that Animals of one Species love one another more than those
that are of a different Species; whence also Cattle of one Kind feed together;
Birds of a Kind flock together; and Fishes of a Kind swim together; and so Men
rather converse with Men than with any other Creatures: But besides this
particular Love, there remains yet something of Universal Love in all
Creatures, one toward another, setting aside that great confusion which has
fallen out since, by reason of Transgression; which certainly must proceed from
the same Foundation, viz. in regard of their First Substance and Essence, they
were all one and the same Thing, and as it were Parts and Members of one Body.
Moreover, in every Species of Animals, we see how the Male and Female Love one
another, and in all their Propagations (which are not Monstrous, and contrary
to Nature) they respect each other; and that proceeds not only from the unity
of Nature, but also by reason of a certain eminent similitude or likeness
between them. And both these Foundations of Love between a Man and a Woman, are
expressly mentioned in Genesis; but that which Adam spoke concerning his Wife,
This is Bone of my Bone, and Flesh of my Flesh, etc. pertains unto the Unity of
Nature; for she was taken out of him, and was a part of him, and therefore he
loved her. Moreover also, concerning Similitude, it is said, there was no Help
found for him, or before his Face, as it is in the Hebrew, (i. e.) among all
Creatures he saw not his like, with whom he would converse, until Eve was made
for him. But there is yet another cause of Love, when Beings, that love each
other, are not one Substance, but one gave Being to the other, and is the
proper and real cause thereof. And so it is in the case between God and
Creatures; for he gave to all, Being, Life, and Motion; and therefore he loves
all Creatures; neither can he not love them; yea, at the same time when he
seems to hate and be angry with them, this his Anger, and what proceeds
therefrom, viz. Punishments and Judgments, turns to their Good, because he
perceives they have need of them. So, on the contrary, the Creatures which
have not wholly degenerated, and lost all sense of God, do love him; and this
is a certain Divine Law, and Instinct, which he put in all rational Creatures,
that they might love him, which is the fulfilling of the whole Law: But those
Creatures which draw most near unto God in similitude or likeness, do love him
the more, and are the more loved of him. But if it be thought there is another
principal cause of Love, to wit, Goodness, which is the most vehement or
powerful Magnet thereof, whence also God is above all the most to be loved;
because he is the best; which Goodness is in some measure in Creatures, either
really or apparently; wherefore such are loved of their Fellow Creatures: I
Answer: It must be granted indeed, that Goodness is a great, yea the greatest
Cause of Love, and the proper Object of it; but this Goodness is not a distinct
Cause from those before laid down, but is comprehended in them. Wherefore do we
call a Thing Good? But because it either really or apparently pleases us, for
the unity it has with us, or which we have with it: Hence it comes to pass,
that Good Men love Good Men, and not otherwise; for Good Men cannot love Evil,
nor Evil Men Good Men as such; for there is no greater similitude than between
Good and Good: For the reason why we call or esteem a Thing Good, is this, that
it benefits us, and that we are made Partakers of its Goodness, and so here the
First Cause of Similitude is still Militant: So likewise, when one Thing gives
being to another, as when God and Christ give Being to Creatures (as from whom
have every true Essence proceeded,) here is in like manner a certain
Similitude; for it is impossible that the Creatures should not in some Things
be like their Creator, and agree with him in some Attributes or Perfections.

This being supposed a Touchstone, we shall now return to our subject matter,
(i. e.) to examine, whether Spirits and Bodies are of one Nature and Substance,
and so convertible one into another? Therefore, I demand, What is the reason,
That the Spirit or Soul so loves the Body wherewith it is united, and so
unwillingly departs out of it, that it has been manifestly notorious, the Souls
of some have attended on, and been subject to their Bodies, after the Body was
dead, until it was corrupted, and dissolved into dust. That the Spirit or Soul
gave a distinct Being to the Body, or the Body to the Spirit, cannot be the
reason of this Love; for that were Creation in a strict sense; but this (viz.)
to give Being unto Things agrees only to God and Christ; therefore that
necessarily comes to pass by reason of that similitude they have one with
another, or some Affinity in their Natures: Or, if it be said, there is a
certain Goodness in the Body, which moves the Spirit to love it, certainly this
Goodness must necessarily answer to something in the Soul which is like it,
otherwise it could not be carried unto it; yea, let them inform us what that
Goodness in the Body is, for which the Soul does so servently love it? or in
what Attributes or Perfections a Body is like a Spirit; if a Body is nothing
but a dead Trunk, and a certain Mass which is altogether incapable of any
degree of Life, and Perfection? if they say a Body agrees with a Spirit Ratione
entis, or in respect of Being; that is to say; as this has Being so that has
the same; this is already refuted in the former Argument; for if this Being
has no Attributes or Perfections wherein it may agree with the Being of a
Spirit, then it is only a mere Fiction; for God created no Naked Ens, or Being,
which should be a mere Being, and have no Attributes that may be predicated of
it; besides also, Ens is only a Logical Notion or Term, which Logicians do call
Genus generalissimum, or the most General Kind, which in the naked and
abstracted Notion of it, is not in the Things themselves, but only in the
Conception or Humane Intellect. And therefore every true Being is a certain
single Nature, whereof may be affirmed such and such Attributes: Now what are
those Attributes of Body, wherein it resembles a Spirit? Let us examine the
principal Attributes of Body, as distinct from a Spirit, according to their
Opinion, who so much dispute, that Body and Spirit are so infinitely distant in
Nature, that one can never become the other: The Attributes are these, That a
Body is impenetrable of all other Bodies, so that the parts thereof cannot
penetrate each other; but there is another Attribute of Body, viz. to be
discerpible or divisible into parts: But the Attributes of Spirit (as they
define it) are penetrability and indiscerpibility, so that one Spirit can
penetrate another; also, that a thousand Spirits can stand together one within
another, and yet possess no more Space than one Spirit, Moreover, that a Spirit
is so simple, and one in it self, that it cannot be rent asunder, or actually
divided into separate parts. If now the Attributes of Body and Spirit are
compared together, they are so far from being like one another, or having any
Analogy of Nature (in which nevertheless the true Foundation of Love and Unity
does consist, as before was said,) that they are plainly contrary; yea, nothing
in the whole World can be conceived ^o contrary to any Thing, as Body and
Spirit, in the opinion of these Men. For here is a pure and absolute
contrariety in all their Attributes; because Penetrability and Impenetrability
are more contrary one to another than black and white, or hot and cold: For
that which is black may become white, and that which is hot may become cold:
But (as they say) that which is impenetrable cannot be made penetrable; yea,
God and Creatures do not so infinitely differ in Essence one from another; as
these Doctors make Body to differ from Spirit: For there are many Attributes,
in which God and the Creatures agree together; but we can find none, wherein a
Body can any way agree with a Spirit, and by consequence, nor with God, who is
the chiefest and purest of Spirits; wherefore it can be no Creature, but a mere
Nonentity or Fiction: But as Body and Spirit are contrary in the Attributes of
Penetrability and Impenetrability; so are they no less contrary in
Discerpibility and Indiscerpibility: But if they allege, that Body and Spirit
do agree in some Attributes, as Extension, Mobility, and Figurability; so that
Spirit has Extension, and can reach from one place to another, and also can
move it self from place to place, and form it self into whatsoever Figure it
pleases, in which cases it agrees with a Body, and a Body with it: To this I
Answer: Supposing the first, that a Spirit can be extended (which yet many of
them deny, yea most, who teach that Body and Spirit are essentially distinct)
yet the Extension of Body and Spirit, as they understand it, do wonderfully
differ; for the Extension of Body is always impenetrable; yea, to be extended,
and impenetrable, as pertaining to Body, is only one real Attribute proposed in
two Mental and Logical Notions, or ways of speaking; for what is Extension,
unless the Body (wheresoever it is) be impenetrable of its own proper parts?
But remove this Attribute of Impenetrability from a Body, and it cannot be
conceived any longer, as extended. Moreover also, the Extension of Body and
Spirit, according to their Notion, infinitely differ; for whatsoever Extension
a Body has, the same is so necessary and essential to it, that it is
impossible for it to be more or less extended; when nevertheless a Spirit may
be more or less extended, as they affirm; and seeing to be moveable and
figurable, are only consequential Attributes of Extension, (for that a Spirit
is far otherwise moveable and figurable than a Body, because a Spirit can move
and form it self as a Body cannot:) The same Reason which is good against the
one is good against the other also.

. 4. BUT, Secondly, How can they prove Impenetrability is an Essential
Attribute of Body; or that Penetrability is an Essential Attribute of Spirit?
Why may not Body be more or less impenetrable, and Spirit more or less
penetrable, as it may, and indeed does happen in all other Attributes? For, ex.
gr. some Body may be more or less heavy or light, condensed or rarefied, solid
or liquid, hot or cold; then why may it not also be more or less penetrable, or
impenetrable? If it be said, that in all those other Mutations we always
observe, that a Body remains impenetrable, as Iron when it is heat red-hot, yet
remains still impenetrable: I Answer, I grant it may remain impenetrable of any
other Body of equal thickness; yet may, and is entirely penetrated of a more
subtle Body, sc. of the Fire which has entered into it, and penetrated all its
parts, whereby it is made so soft; and if the Fire be stronger, begins wholly to
melt. But if, against this, they Object, that the ingress of Fire into the
Iron, is not penetration in a Philosophical Sense, nor as they understand it,
viz. as though the Fire and Iron did possess but one place, and so the one
could be intrinsecally present in the other; because it is manifest to the
contrary, that Iron (if it be made candent or glowing hot) it swells and
acquireth a greater Bulk, than when it is cold; and as it waxes cold again, it
returns to its former dimension. To this I Answer: If they mean such a
Penetration, which we call Intrinseck Presence, viz. that one Homogeneal
Substance should enter into another, both being of equal Dimensions, and yet
the bulk or quantity not increased, that seems wholly irrational: And it would
be a mere impossibility and contradiction to grant such an intimate Presence in
Creatures, which only agrees unto God and Christ as Creators, whose Prerogative
it is to be intrinsecally present in Creatures; whereas no Creature can have
that Intrinseck Presence in its Fellow Creature, because then it would cease to
be a Creature, and obtain one of the incommunicable Attributes of God and
Christ, which is Intrinseck Presence. This (I say) is primarily to be
attributed to God, and secondarily to Christ, in as much as he is Medium quid,
or a certain Medium between God and Creatures, and who as he is Partaker of
Mutability and Immutability, of Eternity and Time; so he may be said to be
Partaker of Body and Spirit, and consequently of Place and Extension: For, in
as much as his Body is of another Substance than the Bodies of all other
Creatures, (as of whom he is the nearest Beginning to God,) it may be truly
said, he is intrinsecally present in them, and yet not so as to be confounded
with them. For to suppose one Creature intrinsecally present in another, so as
to be mingled and most perfectly united with it, and yet its Quantity or
Extension not increased, that confounds the Creatures, and makes two or more
to be but one: Yea, according to this Hypothesis, it may be said the whole
Creation is reducible into the quantity of the least Grain or Dust, because
every part would be supposed to penetrate another, and no greater extension
follow than of one Part. But if it be said, that only proves that Spirits may
be reduced into so small a space but not Bodies: Because Bodies are
Impenetrable. I Answer, This is but a begging of the question, because they
have not yet proved that Body and Spirit are distinct Substances; which, unless
they are, it follows that one Nature is not more penetrable than the other,
according to their sense. And indeed it seems very consentaneous to Reason,
that as Times are each of them so extended into their due Measures and
Extensions, that they cannot exceed those Bounds, and so cannot be
intrinsecally present one with another; as (ex. gr.) the First Day of the Week
cannot be present with the Second Day of the same Week; nor the First Hour of
the Day with the Second; neither is the First Minute of an Hour present with
the Second Minute thereof; because such is the Nature and Essence of Time, that
it is successive, and has parts extra parts, or parts, one without another.
When nevertheless God is really and intrinsecally present in all Times, and is
not changed, which cannot be said of the Creature, sc. that that is present in
all or more Times, and not changed; for the Creature is perpetually changed
with Times, seeing Times are nothing else but the Motion or Change of the
Creature from one State or Condition into another. And as it is in the case of
Time, and Creatures which are in Time, so also in the case of Place, Bulk, or
Quantity; for as in God there is no Time, so also in him there is no Bulk or
Corporeal Quantity; but in Creatures there is both Time and Corporeal Quantity;
because otherwise they would be either God, or Nothing, which is impossible.
For whatsoever Quantity, Bulk, or Extension any Creature has, it retains the
same, as something which is of its own Essence; as it is the Essence of Time to
consist of more parts, and those again of more, and so ad infinitum: For it may
be easily conceived how a less Time is in a greater, ex. gr. how so many
Minutes are in an Hour, and so many Hours in a Day; and one Hour does
immediately touch the next, but cannot be present in it, the same is to be
understood of the Creatures, in regard of their Quantity or Bulk; for indeed
one Creature may immediately touch another, but cannot be present in all its
parts, but only a less may be in a greater, and a subtiler in a grosser; and
this is more properly Penetration which agrees to Bodies as well as Spirits; as
some Body, that is less gross may penetrate another that is more gross; but two
Bodies of an equal thickness cannot penetrate each other: The same may be said
of Spirits which have their degrees of more or less grossness, as Bodies have:
Neither is there any other difference between Body and Spirit, (if Body be not
taken in their sense, who teach that it is a Thing merely Dead, and void of
Life, or a Capacity thereof; but in a proper sense: sc. that it is an excellent
Creature having Life and Sense, which either actually or potentially agrees to
it) but this that a Body is the grosser part of a thing, and Spirit the
subtiler, whence also Spirit has it is name from the Air, which is the most
subtle Nature in this visible World. In Kabbal. denud. Tom. 2. Tract. ult. p.
6.. 13. Spirit is rather defined, a central Nature, having a Faculty to send
forth a Sphere full of Light and to enlarge or contract the same, which
properly seems to be Aristotle's (...), and ibid. p. 28.. 4. Matter is defined:
A naked Center, or a Point wanting Eradiation, which Aristotle understood by
Privation: Whence we must conclude, that the Impenetrability of these Creatures
is to be understood of their Centres: For the Hebrew Word, (...), which
signifies a Spirit, signifies also Air; and because Air has a very swift
Motion, all swiftness of Motion is imputed to the Spirit in the moved Body:
Hence out of Popular Ignorance, when in certain Bodies they perceived no
Motion, they termed them Dead, wanting both Life and Spirit: But indeed there
is no where any such Body that has not Motion, and by consequence Life and
Spirit. Therefore every Creature has its due Quantity or Extension, which it
cannot exceed, and wherein also it cannot be diminished.

Neither does this hinder, that we observe, how some very small Body may be
extended into a Space a Thousand times greater than it had; even as Gunpowder,
if it be set on Fire does marvellously extend it self; for all this Extension
is made by Division of Parts into Parts, still less and less, which indeed do
not fill all that Space so great as it seems, when in the mean while each part
has neither greater nor lesser Extension than it had before. Supposing this,
it must be concluded that all Creatural Spirits, which are present in Bodies,
are either in the Pores of the said Bodies, or in certain Concavities made
there, as Moles make in the Earth; or else they cause the said Bodies to be
puffed up, and acquire a greater Extension; as when Fire copiously enters Iron,
it notably puffs up and extends the same: And although this Turgescency, or
puffing up of Bodies, cannot be always observed by our External Senses; yet it
cannot therefore be denied: For it is possible, that a certain Body may
considerably grow or increase in its dimensions, and become entirely greater,
and yet this increase of Magnitude may shun all outward Observation; yea, it
may be so subtle that it cannot be expressed by Numbers; ex. gr. let us
suppose some Body, whose Solidity or Cube may contain 64 Parts, and another
whose Solidity contains 100, where the root of the former Body whose Cube is 64
is 4; so that the side of that Body contains four Longitudes of the Parts so
divided; but the side or root of the other Body, whose Cube is 100, can be
expressed by no Number; for it is greater than 4, and less than 5, and no
Fraction can determine the same: Therefore Bodies (as was said) may be
considerably swollen or puffed up, (if more Spirits or subtiler Bodies enter into
them,) and yet so as that our gross Senses may judge them not at all greater.
Now that we may come to the other Attribute, which is said to be of Body but
not of Spirit, viz. Discerpibility; if they understand it so; that one only
Body, even the least that can be conceived (if any such Body can be conceived)
may be divided; that is certainly impossible; for it is a contradiction in
terms, and supposes every the least Body to be discerpible into lesser Parts.
But if Body be taken individually only for one single Body, that is
indiscerpible; and that which we call the Discerpibility of Body means only
this, sc. that we may divide one Body from another, by placing some Third Body
between them; and according to this sense Spirits are no less discerpible than
Bodies; for although one single Spirit cannot become two or more Spirits, yet
more Spirits co-existing in one Body, are no less separable one from another
than Bodies; for however Bodies or Spirits may be divided or separated one from
another in the whole Universe, yet they still remain united in this separation;
seeing the whole Creation is still but one Substance or Entity, neither is
there a Vacuum in it; How then can any thing be separated from it self? I mean,
from that which is its proper Nature, as considered Originally, or in its
Beginning, or First Being? But as there is a General Unity of all Creatures one
with another, so that none can be separated from his Fellow Creatures; so there
is a more special and particular Unity between the Parts of one particular
Species: As when the Body is divided, or torn asunder, and the Members removed
one from another unto a certain distance, so long as these Members are not
corrupted, and changed into another Species, they still send certain subtle
Particles one to another, and to the Body from whence they came, and the Body
sends the like unto them, (which we call Spirits, and Bodies, or Spirits, for
they are either,) by means whereof the Parts and Members so apparently
separated, still retain a certain real Unity and Sympathy, as is manifest from
sundry Examples; and especially the two following: The First of which is this:
A certain Man wanting a Nose, ordered one to be made for him out of the Flesh
of another Man, which being vitally agglutinated, (as a Scion or Graft is
united with the Trunk of the Tree into which it is put;) when the other Man
died, and his Body corrupted, this Nose was likewise corrupted, and fell from
the Body of this living Man. The Second Example is of a Man whose Leg was cut
off; which Leg being removed some considerable distance from the rest of the
Body, when a certain Surgeon cut it, this Man complained of Pains, and
showed in what part the said Leg was wounded, which manifestly proves that
there is a certain Union of Parts, though separated at a great distance one
from another: And so also Individuals of one Species, or such who have a
singular Affinity in Specie, have a Union one with another, although locally
distant, which is yet more manifest in Humane Kind: For if two Men entirely
love one another, they are by this love so united, that no distance of place
can divide or separate them; for they are present (one with another) in Spirit;
so that there passes a continual Efflux, or Emanation of Spirits, from the one
to the other, whereby they are bound together, and united as with Chains: And
so whatsoever a Man loves, whether it be Man or Beast, whether a Tree, or
whether Silver or Gold, he is united with the same, and his Spirit passes into
that very Thing; and here is to be observed, that though the Spirit of Man is
commonly spoken in the Singular, as* though it were but one Thing; yet the said
Spirit is a certain composition of more, yea innumerable Spirits; as the Body
is a composition of more Bodies, and has a certain Order and Government in all
its Parts, much more the Spirit which is a great Army of Spirits, wherein there
are distinct Offices under one governing Spirit. And so from hence it appears
that Impenetrability and Indiscerpibility, are not more Essential Attributes of
Body, than of Spirit; because in one sense they agree unto either, in another
sense unto neither.

But against this Infiniteness of Spirits in every Spirit, and Infiniteness of
Bodies in every Body, may be objected that Saying: God made all Things in
Number, Weight, and Measure; wherefore there cannot be an infinite multitude of
Spirits in one Man, nor an innumerable multitude of Bodies in one Body? But I
Answer that the infiniteness or innumerability of Spirits, and Bodies is only
to be understood in respect of the Creatures understanding* so that they cannot
be numbered, nor the outward Extension of Body and Spirit (that may happen in
them) be measured by the knowledge of any Creature. But that God has perfectly
known the Number and Measure of all Creatures is freely granted. And if God
made all Things in Number, Weight, and Measure; then certainly every Creature
will have its Number, Weight, and Measure; and by consequence we cannot say of
any Creature, that it is but one single Thing, because it is a Number, and
Number is a multitude, or more than one; and indeed the Nature of a Creature is
such, that the same cannot be merely one single Thing, in case it ought to act
or do something, and so enjoy that Goodness which is prepared for it by its
Creator: For (ex. gr.) let us suppose but one Atom to be separated from its
Fellow Creatures, What can that do to perfect it self, or make it self greater
or better? What can it see, hear, taste, or feel, either from within or
without? It cannot have internal Motion; because every Motion has at least two
Terms or Extremes, viz. Terminus a quo, and Terminus ad quem; or, the Term from
which, and the Term to which: And seeing this is but one Atom or Center,
certainly it cannot have any Motion within it self, e Termino a quo, and ad
quem; and consequently, seeing it cannot hear, see, taste, or feel, ab intra,
or, from within, it cannot have it from other Creatures, ab extra, or, from
without; for if it ought to see, hear, feel, or taste any other Creature, it is
required to receive the Image of this Creature within it self, which it cannot
do, because it is an Atom, and an Atom is so small that it can receive nothing
within it: For as the Organs of the external Senses are composed of more parts;
so also are the Organs of the internal, and consequently all Knowledge requires
variety or multitude, which is the Subject or Receptacle of it: I mean all
Creatural Knowledge, where Knowledge is received or excited from known Things
or Objects, (whereas the Knowledge of God is not received or excited by
Creatures, but is originally in and from himself.) Seeing, therefore, the
Objects of our Knowledge are various, and every Object sends its Image into us,
and that Image is a real Being, it follows we have many Images in us, which
cannot be all received in an Atom, but have need of their distinct Places in
us, in their distinct Forms and Figures; otherwise there would not only follow
a confusion, but many Things would be present one with another without any
Extension, which is repugnant to the Nature of a Creature. And although the
Objects of our Knowledge are many; as for Example, I am manifold, who receive
so many Images from those Objects; yet from thence it does not follow, because
I who know something am manifold, that therefore I ought to behold one Object
as if it was many, so that seeing one Man I should see many; for when many Men
see one Man they do not behold him as many Men, but as one Man only: So when I
look up and behold something with both my Eyes (unless peradventure there be
any confusion in my sight) they do not seem to me as two, but one; and if I
could behold something with ten thousand Eyes, as I do with two, certainly that
Thing, whether an Horse or a Man, would not seem otherwise to me than one
alone. Hence appears to us a great distinction between God and Creatures; for
he is One, and this is his Perfection, that he has need of nothing without
him: But a Creature, because it needs the assistance of its Fellow Creatures,
ought to be manifold, that it may receive this assistance; for that which
receives something is nourished by the same, and so becomes a part of it, and
therefore it is no more one but many, and so many indeed as there are Things
received, and yet of a greater multiplicity; therefore there is a certain
Society or Fellowship among Creatures in giving and receiving, whereby they
mutually subsist one by another, so that one cannot live without another; for
what Creature in the whole World can be found that has no need of its
Fellow Creature? Certainly none; therefore by consequence every Creature which
has Life, Sense, or Motion, ought to be a Number, or a Multiplicity; yea, a
Number without Number, or Infinite in respect of any created Intellect. But if
it be said, ought not the Central or governing Spirit to be but one only Atom;
for otherwise how can it be called a Center, and the chief Spirit, having
Dominion over the rest? I Answer in the Negative: For this Center it self, or
chief, and governing Spirit, is manifold, for the Reasons before alleged; but
it is called a Center, because all the other Spirits concur to it, as Lines
from all parts of the Circumference do meet at the Center, and do again depart
out or proceed therefrom; and indeed the unity of the Spirits that compose or
make up this Center, or governing Spirit, is more firm and tenacious, than that
of all the other Spirits; which are, as it were, the Angels or Ministering
Spirits of their Prince or Captain; yea, in Man this Unity is so great, that
nothing can dissolve it, (although the Unity of the greatest Plenty of
Ministering Spirits, which belong not to the composition of this Center) may be
dissolved: Hence it comes to pass that the Soul of every Man shall remain an
entire everlasting Soul, or be of endless duration, that it may receive the
proper Fruit of its labor, and that the Universal Law of Justice (which is
written on every Thing) does require, which is as a most strong and
indissolvable Band to preserve this Unity: For what is more congruous with this
Infinite Justice and Wisdom than this, That they who have joined together, and
consented to work either Good or Evil, shall together receive their due Reward
and Punishment, which cannot be if they should be dissipated or separated one
from another; and the same reason does prove, that the Central Spirits of all
other Creatures remain indissolvable; and that although new Central Spirits are
continually formed in the Production of Things; yet no Central Spirit is
dissolved, but farther promoted, or at least diminished, according to the
present dignity or indignity, capacity or incapacity thereof.

CHAP. VIII.
. 1. That Spirit and Body, as they are Creatures, differ not essentially, is
farther proved by three other Reasons: And a Fourth is drawn from that intimate
Bond or Union between Body and Spirit.. 2. That would be altogether an unfit
comparison, to go about to illustrate the manner how the Soul moves the Body by
an Example of God moving his Creatures.. 3. The Union and Sympathy of Soul and
Body may be easily demonstrated; as also how the Soul moves the Body from the
aforesaid Principle; that Spirit is Body, and Body Spirit.. 4. A Fifth Argument
is taken from Earth and Water, which continually produces Animals of diverse
Kinds out of putrified or corrupted Matter.. 5. How a gross Body may be changed
into Spirit, and become as it were the Mother of Spirits; where an Example is
laid down of our Corporal Aliment, which by various Transmutations in the Body
is changed into Animal Spirits, and from these into Subtiler, and more
Spiritual.. 6. Of the good or bad Angels of Men, which are properly the Angels
of a Man, and proceed from him as Branches from the Root.. 7. A sixth and last
Argument is drawn from certain places of Scripture.

. 1. TO prove that Spirit and Body differ not essentially, but gradually, I
shall deduce my Fourth Argument from the intiment Band or Union, which
intercedes between Bodies and Spirits, by means whereof the Spirits have
Dominion over the Bodies with which they are united, that they move them from
one place to another, and use them as Instruments in their various Operations.
For if Spirit and Body are so contrary one to another, so that a Spirit is only
Life, or a living and sensible Substance, but a Body a certain Mass merely
dead; a Spirit penetrable and indiscerpible, but a Body impenetrable and
discerpible, which are all contrary Attributes: What (I pray you) is that which
does so join or unite them together? Or, what are those Links or Chains,
whereby they have so firm a connection, and that for so long a space of Time?
Moreover also, when the Spirit or Soul is separated from the Body, so that it
has no longer Dominion or Power over it to move it as it had before, What is
the cause of this separation? If it be said, that the vital agreement, the Soul
has to the Body, is the cause of the said Union, and that the Body being
corrupted that vital Agreement cease. I Answer, We must first enquire, in
what this vital Agreement does consist; for if they cannot tell us wherein it
does consist, they only trisle with empty Words, which give a sound but want a
signification: For certainly in that sense which they take Body and Spirit in,
there is no Agreement at all between them; for a Body is always a dead Thing,
void of Life and sense, no less when the Spirit is in it, than when it is gone
out of it: Hence there is no Agreement at all between them; and if there is any
Agreement, that certainly will remain the same, both when the Body is found,
and when it is corrupted. If they deny this, because a Spirit requires an
organized Body, by means whereof it performs its vital Acts of the external
Senses; moves and transports the Body from place to place; which Organical
Action ceases when the Body is corrupted. Certainly by this the difficulty is
never the better solved. For why does the Spirit require such an organized
Body? ex. gr. Why does it require a Corporeal Eye so wonderfully formed and
organized, that I can see by it? Why does it need a Corporeal Light, to see
Corporeal Objects? Or, why is it requisite, that the Image of the Object should
be sent to it, through the Eye, that it may see it? If the same were entirely
nothing but a Spirit, and no way Corporeal, Why does it need so many several
Corporeal Organs, so far different from the Nature of it? Furthermore, how can
a Spirit move its Body, or any of its Members, if a Spirit (as they affirm) is
of such a Nature, that no part of its Body can in the least resist it, even as
one Body is wont to resist another, when it is moved by it, by reason of its
Impenetrability? For if a Spirit could so easily penetrate all Bodies,
Wherefore does it not leave the Body behind it, when it is moved from place to
place, seeing it can so easily pass out without the least resistance? For
certainly this is the cause of all Motions which we see in the World, where one
Thing moves another, viz. because both are impenetrable in the sense aforesaid:
For were it not for this Impenetrability one Creature could not move another,
because this would not oppose that, nor at all resist it; an Example whereof we
have in the Sails of a Ship* by which the Wind drives the Ship, and that so
much the more vehemently, by how much the fewer holes, vents, and passages, the
same finds in the Sails against which it drives: When on the contrary, if
instead of Sails Nets were expanded, through which the Wind would have a freer
passage; certainly by these the Ship would be but little moved, although it
blew with great violence: Hence we see how this Impenetrability causes
resistance, and this makes Motion. But if there were no Impenetrability, as in
the case of Body and Spirit, then there could be no resistance, and by
consequence the Spirit could make no motion in the Body.

. 2. AND if it be objected, That God is altogether incorporeal and
intrinsecally present in all Bodies, and yet does move Bodies whethersoever he
pleases, and is the First Mover of all Things* and yet nothing is impenetrable
to him: I Answer, This Motion by which God moves a Body, does wonderfully
differ from that manner by which the Soul moves the Body; for the Will of God
which gave Being to Bodies, gave them Motion also, so that Motion it self is of
God, by whose Will all Motion happens: For as a Creature cannot give Being to
it self, so neither can it move it self; for in him we Live, Move, and have our
Being; so that Motion and Essence come from the same cause, sc. God the
Creator, who remains immovable in himself; neither is he carried from place to
place, because he is equally present every where, and gives Being to Creatures:
But the case is far different, when the Soul moves the Body; for the Soul is
not the Author of Motion, but only determines it to this or that particular
Thing: And the Soul it self is moved, together with the Body, from place to
place; and if the Body be imprisoned, or held in Chains, it cannot free or
deliver it self out of Prison or out of Chains: Wherefore it would be a very
unfit comparison, if one should go about to illustrate that Motion the Soul
makes in the Body, by an Example of God moving his Creatures; yea, so great is
the difference, as if a Man should go to demonstrate how a Carpenter builds a
Ship, or an House, by an Example of God creating the first Matter or Substance,
wherein certainly there is as great a disparity or disproportion; for God gave
Being to Creatures, but a Carpenter does not give Being to the Wood whereof he
builds a Ship.

But no Man can think, because I have said, All Motion of Creatures is of God,
that therefore he is, or can be the Author, or Cause of Sin: For although the
moving Power be of God, yet Sin is not in the least of God, but of the
Creature, who has abused this Power, and determined to some other end than it
ought: So that Sin is (...), or an inordinate determination of Motion, or the
power of moving from its due place, state, or condition unto some other, as, v.
g. a Ship is moved by the Wind, but governed by the Mariner, that it goes to
this or that place; where the Mariner is not the Author or Cause of the Wind;
but the Wind blowing, he makes either a good or a bad use of the same, whereby
he either brings the Ship to the place intended, and so is commended; or else
so manages her that she suffers Shipwreck, for which he is blamed, and worthy
of Punishment.

Moreover, Why is the Spirit or Soul so passible in corporal Pains? For if when
it is united with the Body, it has nothing of Corporeity, or a bodily Nature,
Why is it grieved or wounded when the Body is wounded, which is quite of a
different Nature? For seeing the Soul can so easily penetrate the Body, How can
any Corporeal Thing hurt it? If it be said, the Body only feels the pain, but
not the Soul; this is contrary to their own Principles, because they affirm,
that the Body has neither Life nor Sense: But if it be granted, that the Soul
is of one Nature and Substance with the Body, although it is many degrees more
excellent in regard of Life and Spirituality, as also in swiftness of Motion,
and Penetrability, and diverse other Perfections; then all the aforesaid
difficulties will vanish, and it will be easily conceived, how the Body and
Soul are united together, and how the Soul moves the Body, and suffers by it or
with it. What the Opinion of the Hebrews is appears from a place in Kabbal.
denud. Tom. 1. Part. 3. Dissert. 8. Cap. 13. p. 171. seq.

. 3. FOR we may easily understand how one Body is united with another, by that
true agreement that one has with another in its own Nature; and so the most
subtle and Spiritual Body may be united with a Body that is very gross and
thick, sc. by means of certain Bodies, partaking of subtilty and grossness,
according to diverse degrees, consisting between two Extremes, and these middle
Bodies are indeed the Links and Chains, by which the Soul, which is so subtle
and Spiritual, is conjoined with a Body so gross; which middle Spirits (if they
cease, or are absent) the Union is broken or dissolved; so from the same
Foundation we may easily understand, how the Soul moves the Body, viz. as one
subtle Body can move another gross and thick Body: And seeing Body it self is
a sensible Life, or an intellectual Substance, it is no less clearly
conspicuous, how one Body can wound, or grieve, or gratify, or please another;
because Things of one, or alike Nature, can easily affect each other: And to
this Argument may be reduced the like difficulties, viz. how Spirits move
Spirits; and how some Spirits strive and contend with other Spirits; also
concerning the Unity, Concord, and Friendship, which good Spirits reverence
among themselves; for if all Spirits could be intrinsecally present one with
another, How could they dispute or contend about place? And how can one expel
or drive out another? and yet that there is such an expulsion and conflict of
Spirits, and especially of the Good against the Evil, some few who have been
acquainted with their own Hearts have experimentally known. If it be said, the
Spirit of God and Christ are intrinsecally present in all Things, contends
with, and makes War against the Devil, and his Spirit, in the Heart of Man. I
Answer, That this is also a very unfit similitude, (viz.) when God and
Creatures are compared in their Operations: For his Ways are infinitely
Superior to ours; yet nevertheless in this case also here remains a strong
Objection. For the Spirits of God and Christ, when they strive against the
Devil, and the Evil Spirits in the Heart of Man, do unite themselves with
certain good Spirits, whom they have sanctified and prepared for this Union;
and by these, as a Vehicle, or Triumphant Chariot, they contend against and
encounter those Malignant and Wicked Spirits: And in as much as these Evil
Spirits contend against those Good Spirits in the Heart of Man, they contend
against God and Christ; and these Good Spirits are the Spirits of this faithful
and pious Man, who is become Good, when as before he was Evil: For God and
Christ do help every pious Man to prevail over the Evil Spirits in this
Conflict, but suffers the Wicked and Unfaithful to be captivated and overcome;
for God helps none but those that fear, love, and obey him, and trust in his
Power, Goodness, and Truth; for with such he is united, and the good Spirits of
such Men are as so many Swords and Darts, whereby those dark and unclean
Spirits are wounded and repulsed. But if it be demanded how the Soul of Man can
be united with God, though it were in a State of the highest Purity; because he
is a mere Spirit; but the Soul even in its greatest Purity always partakes of
Corporeity? I Answer, It is done by Jesus Christ, who is the true and proper
Medium between both; for Christ and the Soul may be united without a Medium, by
reason of that great Affinity and Similitude between them, which those Doctors
cannot demonstrate between Spirit and Body, who say they are of a Nature so
contrary one to another.

. 4. I shall draw a Fifth Argument from what we observe in all visible Bodies,
as in Earth, Water, Stones, Wood, etc. What abundance of Spirits is in all
these things? For Earth and Water continually produce Animals, as they has
done from the beginning; so that a Pool filled with Water may produce Fishes,
though none were ever put there to increase or breed; and seeing that all other
Things do more originally proceed from Earth and Water, it necessarily follows,
that the Spirits of all Animals were in the Water; and therefore it is said in
Genesis, that the Spirit of God moved upon the Face of the Waters, viz. that
from hence he might produce whatsoever was afterward created.

. 5. BUT if it be said, this Argument does not prove that all Spirits are
Bodies, but that all Bodies have in them the Spirits of all Animals, so that
every Body has a Spirit in it, and likewise a Spirit and Body; and although
they are thus united, yet they still remain different in Nature one from
another, and so cannot be changed one into another. To this I Answer, if every
Body, even the least, has in it the Spirits of all Animals, and other Things;
even as matter is said to have in it all Forms: Now I demand, Whether a Body
has actually all those Spirits in it, or potentially only? If actually, How is
it possible that so many Spirits essentially distinct from Body, can actually
exist in their distinct Essences in so small a Body, (even in the least that
can be conceived,) unless it be by intrinseck Presence, which is not
communicable to any Creature, as is already proved: For if all kinds of Spirits
are in any, even the least Body, How comes it to pass, that such an Animal is
produced of this Body, and not another? Yea, how comes it to pass that all kind
of Animals are not immediately produced out of one and the same Body? which
experience denies; for we see that Nature keeps her order in all her
Operations; whence one Animal is formed of another, and one Species proceeds
from another; as well when it ascends to a farther Perfection, as when it
descends to a viler State and Condition: But if they say, all Spirits are
contained in any Body, not actually in their distinct Essences, but only
potentially as they term it; then it must be granted, that the Body and all
those Spirits are one and the same thing; that is, that a Body may be turned
into them; as when we say Wood is potentially Fire, that is, can be turned into
Fire; Water is potentially Air, that is, may be changed into Air.

Moreover, if Spirits and Bodies are so inseparably united, that no Body can be
without a Spirit, yea, not without many Spirits; this is certainly a great
Argument, that they are of one Original Nature and Substance, otherwise we
could not* conceive, why in so various and wonderful dissolutions, and
separation of Things, they should not at length be separted one from another,
as we see the subtiler Things may be separated from the grosser? But whence is
it, that when a Body is at length corrupted, out of this Corruption another
Species of Things is generated? So out of Earth and Water corrupted, proceed
Animals; yea, Stones if they putrefie or rot, pass into Animals: So Dung, or
other putrefied Matter, generates Animals, all which have Spirits: But how does
Corruption or Dissolution of Body tend to a new Generation, and that indeed of
Animals? If it be said the Spirits of those Animals are as it were loosed from
their Bonds, and set at Liberty by this dissolution, and that then they can
form or fashion to themselves a new Body, out of the aforesaid Matter, by
virtue of their Plastic Faculty: Unto this I reply, How did the Primitive Body
so hold it Captive? Was it because it was so hard and thick? If so, it will be
manifest that those Spirits are nothing else but subtle Bodies, because
hardness and density of Body could imprison them, that they could not pass out;
for if a Spirit could as easily penetrate the hardest Body, as the softest and
most fluid, it could as easily pass out of the one as the other, nor would
there be need of Death and Corruption to a new Life or Generation; therefore
this kind of Captivity of Spirits in some kind of hard Bodies, and their
deliverance therefrom, when the Bodies become soft, affords us a manifest
Argument, that Spirit and Body are originally of one Nature and Substance, and
that a Body is nothing but a fixed and condensed Spirit, and a Spirit nothing
but a subtle and volatile Body.

And here is to be noted, that in all hard Bodies, as in Stones, whether common
or precious; and so also in Metals, Herbs, Trees, and Animals; yea, in all
Humane Bodies, there don't only exist many Spirits (which are as it were
imprisoned in those gross Bodies, and united with them, and therefore cannot
flow forth, or fly out into other Bodies, until they have passed Death or
Dissolution;) but also many other very subtle Spirits, which continually flow
from them, and which by reason of their subtilty, the hardness of the Body (in
which they lay hid) cannot detain; and these Spirits are the more subtle
Productions, or the Sutures of the grosser Spirits detained in the Body; for
although these are detained therein, yet they are not idle in their Prison, but
their Bodies are as it were Shops for them to work out those subtiler Spirits,
which afterward flow out in colors, sounds, odours, tastes, and diverse other
Powers and Virtues; whence the gross Body, and the Spirits therein contained,
are as it were the Mother of those subtiler Spirits, who take the place of
Children; for Nature still works to a farther perfection of subtilty and
spirituality; even as this is the most natural Property of all Motion and
Operation: For all Motion wears and divides, and so renders a Thing subtle and
spiritual. Even thus in Man's Body, the Meat and Drink is first changed into
Chyle, then into Blood, afterward into Spirits, which are nothing else but
Blood brought to perfection; and these Spirits, whether good or bad, still
advance to a greater subtilty or spirituality, and by those Spirits which come
from the Blood, we see, hear, smell, taste, feel, and think, yea meditate,
love, hate, and do all things whatsoever we do; and from hence also comes the
Seed, by which Humane Kind is propagated; and hence especially proceeds the
Voice and Speech of Man, which is full of Spirits (formed in the Heart) either
Good or Evil, as Christ has taught; That out of the Plenty of the Heart the
Mouth speaks, and that a Good Man out of the Good Treasure of his Heart
brings forth Good Things, etc. Also that which goes into a Man does not
defile him, but that which proceeds out of him; for in like manner as they
proceed from him, so shall they again return into him.

. 6. AND these are the proper Angels, or Ministering Spirits of a Man, (although
there are other Angels also, as well Good as Evil, which come unto Men:) Of
which Angels Christ speaks, where he speaks of those little Ones that
believe on him: Their Angels (says he) always behold the Face of my Heavenly
Father. Which are the Angels of those Believers, who become, as it were, like
little Infants.

. 7. MY sixth and last Argument I shall deduce from certain Texts of Scripture,
as well of the Old as New Testament, which do prove in plain and express Words,
that all Things have Life, and do really live in some degree or measure. Acts
17. 27. It is said, He gives Life to all Things. Again, 1 Timothy 6. 13. of God
it is said, That he quickens all Things. And Luke 20. 38. he is not called, The
God of the Dead, but of the Living, (which though principally meant of Men, yet
it is generally to be understood of all other Creatures,) viz. he is the God of
all those Things which have their Regeneration and Resurrection in their kind,
no less then Man has in his Kind: For Death is not the Annihilation of these
Things; but a change from one kind and degree of Life to another; wherefore
also the Apostle proves, and illustrates the Resurrection of the Dead by a
Grain of Wheat, which being fallen into the ground, dies, and rises again
exceeding fruitful.

CHAP. IX.
. 1. The Philosophers (so called) of all Sects, have generally laid an ill
Foundation to their Philosophy; and therefore the whole Structure must needs
fall.. 2. The Philosophy here treated on is not Cartesian.. 3. Nor the
Philosophy of Hobbs and Spinosa, (falsely so feigned,) but diametrically
opposite to them.. 4. That they who have attempted to refute Hobbs and Spinosa,
have given them too much advantage.. 5. This Philosophy is the strongest to
refute Hobbs and Spinosa, but after another method.. 6. We understand here
quite another thing by Body and Matter, than Hobbs understood; and which Hobbs,
and Spinosa, never saw, otherwise than in a Dream.. 7. Life is as really and
properly an Attribute of Body, as Figure.. 8. Figure and Life are distinct, but
not contrary Attributes of one and the same thing.. 9. Mechanical Motion and
Action^ or Perfection of Life, distinguishes Things.

. 1. FROM what has been lately said, and from diverse Reasons alleged, That
Spirit and Body are originally in their first Substance but one and that same
thing, it evidently appears that the Philosophers (so called) which have taught
otherwise, whether Ancient or Modern, have generally erred and laid an ill
Foundation in the very beginning, whence the whole House and Superstructure is
so feeble, and indeed so unprofitable, that the whole Edifice and Building must
in time decay, from which absurd Foundation have arose very many gross and
dangerous Errors, not only in Philosophy, but also in Divinity (so called) to
the great damage of Mankind, hindrance of true Piety, and contempt of God's
most Glorious Name, as will easily appear, as well from what has been already
said, as from what shall be said in this Chapter.

. 2. AND none can Object, That all this Philosophy is no other than that of des
Carts, or Hobbs under a new Mask. For, First, as touching the Cartesian
Philosophy, this says that every Body is a mere dead Mass, not only void of
all kind of Life and Sense, but utterly incapable thereof to all Eternity; this
grand Error also is to be imputed to all those who affirm Body and Spirit to
be contrary Things, and inconvertible one into another, so as to deny a Body
all Life and Sense; which is quite contrary to the grounds of this our
Philosophy. Wherefore it is so far from being a Cartesian Principle, under a
new Mask, that it may be truly said it is Anti-Cartesian, in regard of their
Fundamental Principles; although it cannot be denied that Carts taught many
excellent and ingenious Things concerning the Mechanical part of Natural
Operations, and how all Natural Motions proceed according to Rules and Laws
Mechanical, even as indeed Nature her self, i. e. the Creature, has an
excellent Mechanical Skill and Wisdom in it self, (given it from God, who is
the Fountain of all Wisdom,) by which it operates: But yet in Nature, and her
Operations, they are far more than merely Mechanical; and the same is not a
mere Organical Body, like a Clock, wherein there is not a vital Principle of
Motion; but a living Body, having Life and Sense, which Body is far more
sublime than a mere Mechanism, or Mechanical Motion.

. 3. BUT, Secondly, as to what pertains to Hobbs's Opinion, this is yet more
contrary to this our Philosophy, than that of Carts; for Carts acknowledged
God to be plainly Immaterial, and an Incorporeal Spirit. Hobbs affirms God
himself to be Material and Corporeal; yea, nothing else but Matter and Body,
and so confounds God and the Creatures in their Essences, and denies that there
is any Essential Distinction between them. These and many more the worst of
Consequences are the Dictates of Hobbs's Philosophy; to which may be added that
of Spinosa; for this Spinosa also confounds God and the Creatures together, and
makes but one Being of both; all which are diametrically opposite to the
Philosophy here delivered by us.

. 4. BUT the false and feeble Principles of some who have undertaken to refute
the Philosophy of Hobbs and Spinosa, so called, have given them a greater
advantage against themselves; so that they have not only in effect, not refuted
them, but more exposed themselves to Contempt and Laughter.

But if it be Objected, That this our Philosophy seems, at least, very like
that of Hobbs, because he taught that all Creatures were originally one
Substance, from the lowest and most ignoble, to the highest and noblest; from
the smallest Worm, Insect, or Fly, unto the most Glorious Angel; yea, from the
least Dust or Sand, unto the most excellent of all Creatures; and then this,
that every Creature is Material and Corporeal; yea, Matter and Body it self;
and by consequence the most Noble Actions thereof, are either Material and
Corporeal, or after a certain Corporeal manner. Now I Answer to the First, I
grant that all Creatures are originally one Substance, from the lowest to the
highest, and consequently convertible or changeable, from one of their Natures
into another; and although Hobbs says the same, yet that is no prejudice to
the Truth of it, as neither are other parts of that Philosophy where Hobbs
affirms something that is true, therefore an Hobbism, or an Opinion of Hobbs
alone.

. 5. MOREOVER, this Principle is so far from defending them in their Errors,
that nothing is so strong to refute them, ex. gr. The Hobbists argue, all
Things are one, because we see that all visible Things may be changed one into
another; yea, that all visible Things may be changed into invisible, as when
Water is made Air, and Wood being burnt (for the greatest part) is changed into
a certain invisible Substance, which is so subtle, that it escapes all
observation of our Senses; add to which, that all invisible Things may become
visible, as when Water proceeds from Air, etc. and hence he concludes, nothing
is so low that it cannot attain to sublimity.

But now that we may Answer to this Argument, his Adversaries generally deny
the Antecedent, and on the contrary affirm that no Spicies of Things is
convertible into another: And when Wood is burnt, many say that the Wood is
composed of two Substances; to wit, Matter and Form, and that the Matter
remains the same, but the Form of the Wood is destroyed or annihilated, and a
new Form of Fire is produced in this Matter; so that according to them, here is
a continual Annihilation of real Substances and Productions of new Ones in this
World: But this is so frivolous, that many others deny that, in the case of
Wood, changed into Fire, and afterward into Smoke and Ashes* yet they still
persist in the same Error in other Transmutations, as when Wood is changed
into an Animal, as we often see that of rotten Wood; yea, Dung also, living
Creatures are generated: But if they deny here, that the Wood is changed into
an Animal, and say that Wood is nothing but Matter; but Matter has not Life,
nor a capacity to Life or Sense; and therefore this Animal which has Life and
Sense, ought to have the same from elsewhere, and must have a Spirit or Soul in
it, that is not a part of its Body, neither does proceed from it, but is sent
^^^^er.

But if it be demanded of them, from whence this Spirit is sent, and who
sends it? Also why a Spirit of this Species is sent, and not of another; here
they are at a stand, and yield themselves to their Adversaries.

Therefore this our Philosophy before laid down, more strongly conduces to the
refutation of the Hobbesian and Spinosian Philosophy, viz. that all Kinds of
Creatures may be changed one into another, that the lowest may become the
highest, and the highest (as considered originally in its own proper Nature)
may become the lowest, sc. according to that Course and Succession which Divine
Wisdom has ordained, that one Change may succeed another in a certain order;
so that A must be first turned into B, before it can be turned into C, which
must be turned into C, before it can be changed into D, etc.

But we deny the Consequence, viz. that God and Creatures are one Substance.

For in all Transmutations of Creatures from one Species into another, as from
a Stone into Earth, and from Earth into Grass, and from Grass to a Sheep, and
from a Sheep into Humane Flesh, and from Humane Flesh into the most servile
Spirits of Man, and from these into his noblest Spirits; but there can never be
a Progression or Ascension made unto God, who is the chiefest of all Beings,
and whose Nature still infinitely excels a Creature placed in his highest
Perfection; for the Nature of God is every way unchangeable, so that it does
not admit of the least Shadow of a Change: But the Nature of a Creature is to
be changeable.

. 6. SECONDLY, If it be said, by way of Objection, that according to this
Philosophy, every Creature is Material and Corporeal; yea, Body and Matter it
self, as Hobbs teaches. Now I Answer, That by Material and Corporeal, as also
by Matter and Body, here the thing is far otherwise understood, than Hobbs
understood it, and which was never discovered to Hobbs or Carts, otherwise
than in a Dream: For what do they understand by Matter and Body? Or, What
Attributes do they ascribe to them? None, certainly, but these following as are
Extension and Impenetrability, which nevertheless are but one Attribute; to
which also may be referred Figurability and Mobility. But, suppose, these are
distinct Attributes, certainly this profits nothing, nor will ever help us to
understand what that excellent Substance is, which they call Body and Matter;
for they have never proceeded beyond the Husk or Shell, nor ever reached the
Kernel, they only touch the Superficies, never discerning the Center, they were
plainly ignorant of the noblest and most excellent Attributes of that Substance
which they call Body and Matter, and understood nothing of them, But if it be
demanded, what are those more excellent Attributes? I Answer, these following,
Spirit, or Life, and Light, under which I comprehend, a capacity of all kind of
Feeling, Sense, and Knowledge, Love, Joy, and Fruition, and all kind of Power
and Virtue, which the noblest Creatures have or can have; so that even the
vilest and most contemptible Creature; yea, Dust and Sand, may be capable of
all those Perfections, sc. through various and succedaneous Transmutations from
the one into the other; which according to the Natural Order of Things, require
long Periods of Time for their Consummation, although the absolute Power of God
(if it had pleased him) could have accelerated or hastened all Things, and
effected it in one moment: But this Wisdom of God saw it to be more expedient,
that all Things should proceed in their Natural Order and Course; so that after
this manner, that Fertility or Fruitfulness, which he has endued every Being
with, may appear, and the Creatures have Time by Working still to promote
themselves to a greater Perfection, as the Instruments of Divine Wisdom,
Goodness and Power, which operates in, and with them; for therein the Creature
has the greater Joy, when it possesses what it has, as the Fruit of its own
labor.

But this capacity of the aforementioned Perfections is quite a distinct
Attribute from Life, and Understanding, or Knowledge, quite distinct from the
former, viz. Extension and Figure; and so also a Vital Action is plainly
distinct from Local, or Mechanical Motion, although it is not nor cannot be
separated from it, but still uses the same at least, as its Instrument, in all
its concourse with the Creatures.

. 7. I SAY, Life and Figure are distinct Attributes of one Substance, and as
one and the same Body may be transmuted into all Kinds of Figures; and as the
perfecter Figure comprehends that which is more imperfect; so one and the same
Body may be transmuted from one degree of Life to another more perfect, which
always comprehends in it the inferior. We have an Example of Figure in a
Triangular Prisme, which is the first Figure of all right lined solid Bodies,
whereinto a Body is convertible; and from this into a Cube, which is a
perfecter Figure, and comprehends in it a Prisme; from a Cube it may be turned
into a more perfect Figure, which comes nearer to a Globe, and from this into
another, which is yet nearer; and so it ascends from one Figure, more
imperfect, to another more perfect, ad infinitum; for here are no bounds; nor
can it be said, this Body cannot be changed into a perfecter Figure: But the
meaning is, that that Body consists of plain right lines; and this is always
changeable into a perfecter Figure, and yet can never reach to the perfection
of a Globe, although it always approaches nearer unto it; the case is the same
in diverse degrees of Life, which have indeed a beginning, but no end; so that
the Creature is always capable of a farther and perfecter degree of Life, ad
infinitum, and yet can never attain to be equal with God; for he is still
infinitely more perfect than a Creature, in its highest Elevation or
Perfection, even as a Globe is the most perfect of all other Figures, unto
which none can approach.

. 8. AND thus Life and Figure are distinct, but not contrary Attributes of one
and the same Substance, and Figure serves the Operations of Life, as we see in
the Body of Man or Beast, how the Figure of the Eye serves the Sight; the
Figure of the Ear, the Hearing; the Figure of the Mouth, Teeth, Lips, and
Tongue, serve the Speech; the Figure of the Hands and Fingers serve to Work;
the Figure of the Feet to Walk; and so the Figures of all the other Members
have their use, and very much conduce to the Vital Operations, which the Spirit
performs in these Members; Yea the Figure of the whole Body is more commodious
for the proper Operations of Human Life, than any other Figure whatsoever is,
or could be made; So that Life and Figure consist very well together in one
Body, or Substance, where Figure is an Instrument of Life, without which no
Vital Operation can be performed.

. 9. LIKEWISE, Local and Mechanical Motion (i. e.) the carrying of Body from
place to place, is a Manner or Operation distinct from Action or Vital
Operation, although they are inseparable, so that a Vital Action can in no wise
be without all Local Motion, because this is the Instrument thereof. So the Eye
cannot see, unless Light enter it, which is a Motion, and stirs up a Vital
Action in the Eye, which is Seeing; and so in all other Vital Operations in the
whole Body. But an Action of Life is a far Nobler and Diviner manner of
Operation than Local Motion; and yet both agree to one Substance, and consist
well together; for as the Eye receives the Light into it self, from the Object
which it sees from without; so also it sends the same Light to the Object, and
in this Spirit and Life is a Vital Action, uniting the Object and Sight
together.

Wherefore Hobbs, and all others who side with him, grievously err, whilst
they teach that Sense and Knowledge is no other than a re-action of Corporeal
Particles one upon another, where, by re-action, he means no other than Local
and Mechanical* Motion. But indeed Sense and Knowledge is a Thing far more
Noble and Divine, than any Local or Mechanical, Motion of any Particles
whatsoever; for it is the Motion or Action of Life, which uses the other as its
Instrument, whose Service consists herein; that is, to stir up a Vital Action
in the Subject or Percipient; and can like Local Motion be transmitted through
diverse Bodies, although very far distant asunder, which therefore are united,
and that without any new Transition of Body or Matter, ex. gr. a Beam of Wood
of an exceeding great length, is moved by one Extreme from the North to the
South, the other Extreme will necessarily be moved also; and the Action is
transmitted through the whole Beam, without any Particles of Matter sent hither
to promote Motion, from one Extreme to the other; because the Beam it self is
sufficient to transmit the said Motion: After the same manner also, a Vital
Action can proceed together with Local Motion from one thing to another, and
that too at a great distance, where there is an apt and fit Medium to transmit
it, and here we may observe a kind of Divine Spirituality or Subtilty in every
Motion, and so in every Action of Life, which no created Body or Substance is
capable of, viz. by Intrinsecal Presence, which (as before is proved) agrees to
no created Substance; and yet agrees to every Motion or Action whatsoever: For
Motion or Action is not a certain Matter or Substance, but only a manner of its
Being; and therefore is intrinsecally present in the Subject, whereof there is
a Modus, or Manner, and can pass from Body to Body, at a great distance, if it
finds a fit Medium to transmit it; and by how much the stronger the Motion is,
so much the farther it reaches; so when a Stone is cast into standing Waters,
it causes a Motion every way from the Center to the Circumference, forming
Circles still greater and greater at a great distance, by how much longer the
time is, till at length it vanishes from our sight; and then without doubt, it
makes yet more invisible Circles for a longer space of Time, which our dull
Senses cannot apprehend, and this Motion is transmitted from the Center to the
Circumference, not conveyed thither by any Body or Substance, carrying this
Motion with it from the Stone. And as the External Light also, seeing it is an
Action or Motion stirred up by some illuminate Body, may be transmitted through
Glass, Crystal, or any other transparent Body, without out any Substance,
Body, or Matter, conveyed from that illuminate Body from whence the said
Action proceeded, not that I would deny that abundance of subtle Matter
continually flows from all illuminate Bodies, so that the whole Substance of a
burning Candle is spent in such Emanations: And this has in it that Motion or
Action, which we call Light; but this Motion or Action may be increased, v. g.
by Crystal, where those subtle Emanations of Bodies may be restrained, that
they cannot pass out at least in such abundance, as may be sufficient to
communicate the whole Light: But seeing Crystal (which does so easily transmit
the Light) is so hard and solid, How can it receive so many Bodies, and
transmit them so easily through it, when other Bodies, neither so hard nor
solid, do let or resist it? for Wood is neither so hard nor solid as Crystal,
and yet Crystal is transparent, but Wood not; and certainly Wood is more
porous than Crystal, because it is less solid, and consequently the Light does
not enter by the Pores of the Crystal, but through the very Substance of it;
and yet so as not to adhere to it, or make any turgescency or increase of
Quantity, but by a certain intrinseck presence, because it is not a Body or
Substance, but a mere Action or Motion. Now Crystal is a fitter Medium to
receive this Motion, which we call Light, than Wood is; and hence it is, that
it pervades or passes through that and not this; and as there is a great
diversity of the Motion and Operation of Bodies, so every Motion requires its
proper Medium to transmit the same. Therefore it is manifest, that Motion may be
transmitted through diverse Bodies, by another kind of penetration, than any
Body or Matter (how subtle soever it be) is able to make; to wit, by
intrinseck Presence. And if mere Local or Mechanical Motion can do that, then
certainly a Vital Action (which is a nobler kind of Motion) can do the same;
and if it can penetrate those Bodies, it passes through by intrinseck
Presence, then it may in one moment be transmitted from one Body to another, or
rather require no time at all, I mean Motion or Action it self requires not the
least time for its transmission, although it is impossible but that the Body,
wherein the Motion is carried from place to place, ought to have some time,
either greater or lesser, according to the quality of Body and vehemence of
Motion which carries it.

And therefore we see how every Motion and Action, considered in the Abstract,
has a wonderful subtilty or spirituality in it, beyond all created Substances
whatsoever, so that neither Time nor Place can limit the same; and yet they are
nothing else but Modes or Manners of created Substances, viz. their Strength,
Power, and Virtue, whereby they are extendible into great Substances, beyond
what the Substance it self can make. And so we may distinguish Extension into
Material and Virtual, which twofold Extension every Creature has; Material
Extension is that which Matter, Body, or Substance has, as considered without
all Motion or Action; and this Extension (to speak properly) is neither greater
or lesser, because it would still remain the same. A Virtual Extension is a
Motion or Action which a Creature has, whether immediately given from God, or
immediately received from its Fellow Creature. That which is immediately given
of God (from whom also it has its Being,) and which is the natural and proper
effect of its Essence, is in ^ more proper way of speaking, a proper Motion of
the Creature, proceeding from the innermost parts thereof; and therefore may be
called Internal Motion, as distinguished from External, which is only from
another; and therefore in respect thereof may be called Foreign; and when the
said External Motion endeavors to carry a Body, or any Thing, to a place
whereunto it has properly no natural inclination, then it is preternatural and
violent; as when a Stone is thrown up into the Air, which Motion being
preternatural and violent, is plainly Local and Mechanical, and no way vital,
because it does not proceed from the Life of the Thing so moved: But every
Motion, proceeding from the proper Life and Will of the Creature, is vital; and
this I call a Motion of Life, which is not plainly Local and Mechanical as the
other, but has in it a Life, and Vital Virtue, and this is the Virtual
Extension of a Creature, which is either greater or lesser, according to that
kind or degree of Life wherewith the Creature is endued, for when a Creature
arrives at a Nobler Kind and Degree of Life, then does it receive the greater
Power and Virtue to move it self, and transmit its vital Motions to the
greatest distance.

But how Motion or Action may be transmitted from one Body to another, is with
many a matter of great debate; because it is not a Body or Substance; and if it
be only Motion of Body, how Motion can pass properly with its own subject into
another, because the very being of Modus, or Manner, consist herein, viz. to*
exist or be inherent in its own Body: The Answer to this Objection, which
seems to me best, is this, That Motion is not propagated from one Body to
another by Local Motion, because Motion it self is not moved, but only moves
the Body in which it is; for if Motion could be propagated by Local Motion,
this Motion would be propagated of another, and this again of another, and so
ad infinitum; which is absurd. Therefore the manner of the said propagation is
(as it were) by real Production or Creation; so that as God and Christ can only
create the Substance of a Thing, when as no Creature can Create or give Being
to any Substance, no not as an Instrument; so a Creature, not of it self, but
in subordination to God, as his Instrument may give existence to Motion and
vital Action, and so the Motion in one Creature may produce Motion in another:
And this is all a Creature can do toward the moving it self or its Fellow
Creatures, as being the Instrument of God, by which Motions a new Substance is
not created, but only new Species of Things, so that Creatures may be
multiplied in their Kinds, whilst one acts upon, and moves another; and this is
the whole Work of the Creature, or Creation, as the Instrument of God; but if
it moves against his Will, whose Instrument it is, then it Sins, and is
punished for it: But God (as before was said) is not the cause of Sin; for when
a Creature Sins, he abuses the Power God has granted him; and so the Creature
is culpable, and God entirely free from every spot or blemish hereof. If
therefore we apply those things which have been already spoken, concerning the
Attributes of a Body, viz. that it has not only Quantity and Figure, but Life
also; and is not only locally and mechanically but vitally moveable, and can
transmit its vital Action whithersoever it pleases, provided it has a Medium
aptly disposed, and if it has none it can extend it self by the subtle
Emanation of its parts, which is the fittest and most proper Medium of it, to
receive and transmit its vital Action. Hereby it will be easy to Answer to all
the Arguments* whereby some endeavor to prove that a Body is altogether
incapable of Sense and Knowledge; and it may be easily demonstrated, after what
manner some certain Body may gradually advance to that Perfection, as not only
to be capable of such Sense and Knowledge as Brutes have, but of any kind of
Perfection whatsoever may happen in any Man or Angel; and so we may be able to
understand the Words of Christ, that of Stones God is able to raise up Children
to Abraham, without flying to some strained Metaphor; and if any one should
deny this Omnipotence of God, viz. that God is able of Stones to raise up
Children to Abraham; that certainly would be the greatest Presumption.

FINIS.

