A General Epistle: CONTAINING Wholesome Admonition and Advice to Friends in
IRELAND, and elsewhere.
By Thomas Carleton.
DEar and well-beloved Friends, Brethren and Sisters who are in some Measure
gathered by the Arm of God's Power, and have known the blessed Appearance of
Life and Salvation, to you is the Salutation of my unfeigned Love, and in the
Fellowship of God's Everlasting Light do I tenderly greet you all; and for the
clearing of my Spirit, of that which for some time has been upon me, do I
communicate these Lines, in the true Simplicity of my Heart, dearly desiring
all that love the Lord Jesus Christ, To keep low and near the Lord, and wait to
feel God's living Power in your Hearts, unto which we were turned or exhorted
from the Beginning; for, in the Light of the Lord, I see there is a Necessity
for it: For, unless the Sense of God's living Power be felt, Profession is
vain, and Meetings are not made profitable; for the Mysteries of Life and
Salvation, and of true Christianity, consist not only in any Profession, Name
or Notion, of this or that Principle, Article or Creed, formed or received in
the Minds of M^n or Women, but in a living Enjoyment and Possession of the
Power and Spirit of Christ Jesus, the Author and Finisher of the living saying
Faith. So my dear Friends, all wait to feel the Operation of that Power in
every Heart and Soul, to subdue all to God, and to work all into submission and
real obedience to the heavenly Will and Mind of Christ Jesus, who is come a
Light into the World, that all men through him might believe; here is the
unchangeable standing Rule, which every one is to measure themselves by; and he
or she that is measured or squared by this, is as polished Stones for God's
spiritual House; and he or she that is not sqaared by this, are not fit to be
Members of God's Building: so all having the Measuring line in your hearts, let
Judgment be laid to it, and so try all things, words, works, behaviors, and
the Intent of all, and from what ground and soirit it does proceed: and this
unchangeable everlasting Rule all keep to it, and build by it, so shall you be
justified with it in the Day of Trial; so all things done by this unchangeable
everting Rule (the Law of the Spirit of Life) this keeps clean and pure, and
sets free of all Mud and Confusion, Sin and Iniquity, and things that bring
death and darkness over the Soul and Understanding; and so cloud the Testimony:
So let every man and woman (by this standing Rule) examine themselves, and so
let them eat, speak or act, as the Lord shall persuade them; and wherein any
one doubts, and is not clear in what he or she undertaketh, let such forbear,
and wait in quietness till the Lord clear their way: So all take heed, and keep
to the Rule; for in the Lord's Light we see Light, and have Clearness, and
Freedom, and Peace; but going from the Light, without Rule, without Guide, the
Vail comes over, Darkness gathers in, Confusion and Trouble, then Peace comes
to be lost: So you that have known in any measure the work of Regeneration and
of the New Fi^th through the working of God's Spirit and Power in your Hearts,
by which some unclean spirits have been cast out, keep to the Power still, and
beware of letting in the unclean spirit again, for if you do, the latter end
will be worse then the beginning. And lean not to the World's Wisdom, beware of
that spirit I advise all; for by that wisdom God is not known; and if once the
Sense and enjoyment of God be lost, then man and woman is in a woeful state,
without God in the World; so keep out of the world's spirit I entreat you all,
and live as Fools to it, and all its ways, fashions and customs; for in the
Lord I see a great Snare at this day, and too many that make Profession of
Truth are like to be split upon that Rock. So dear Friends, live loose to the
world, and all the glories of it, and seek to be wise in that which is not of
this world, that you may be loved of God; and so dwell in that which can bear
the revilings and reproaches of this world, and the contradiction of sinners,
as our Lord Jesus Christ has lest us an Example: So beware of looking back to
Egypt's Glory again, to see any beauty or comlines in that dark Land; for, from
the Lord I see a Temptation attending God's spiritual Israel in this day, as
surely as ever it attended Israel after the Flesh, and many are too prone to
desire the pleasures of Egypt again (though the best of them be bondage, as
many to their Sorrow have found) yea, too many there be that cannot bear trials
and reproaches, and the way of the Cross and self-denial, but think it long,
and wearisom, and hard, as they did in the days of old, and so are too ready
to murmur and repine, and lust in their hearts after this World's glory again,
and join to its fashions and customs again, and so set up Idols again, as they
did whose Carcases fell in the Wilderness, with whom the Lord was displeased:
So beware of letting in that spirit of distrust, unbelief and rebellion against
God, and his pure Witness in your Consciences, and beware of building that
which was once destroyed, or licking up that which was once vomited, or
entertaining of that which was once cast out, or owning that which was once
denied, either in words, in works, in behavior, in apparel, in doctrine or
faith: has Truth in you condemned for all idle, vain profane, wicked, unsound
and unsavory words, and brought you into a Form of needful, true and sound
words? keep to it still: has Truth condemned all idle, proud, profane, wicked
and ungodly actions; and all empty, airy, foolish, wanton, lustful, proud,
self-willed and men-pleasing behaviors, and brought you into Moderation,
Gravity, Plainness, Reallity and Truth in Life and Conversation? keep to it
still: has Truth condemned for decking and adorning the Body with vain,
superfluous, proud, needless, worldly, eye-taking Toys in Apparel, and led
you into plain, profitable, decent needful, things? keep to it still: and
fashion not your selves like unto the world, nor learn any of their Manners nor
of the Breeding of that Egyptian-Spirit, which keeps the Seed in Bondage, and
oppresses the Just in the particular and in the general; so from the Lord I
advise you all, and warn you all that are parents, to watch over your Children,
and bring them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord, and beware you
breed them not up in the World's manners nor customs, nor in Pride, Lightness
and Vanity, nor in things that puff up and lead away their Minds from under the
Cross of Christ Jesus, but rather breed them up in Humility, Lowliness and Self
denial, and in the Fear of the Lord, which is the Beginning of true Wisdom and
gate of Virtue; and so endeavor to train them up in the right way to life, and
lay a good Foundation in them while they are young, and then both you and they
may expect a Blessing from the Lord which is better then all. So away with all
Manners and Breeding, and Education that is out of the Fear of God; for you
your selves know, the first Nature in it self is too inclinable to be taken
with the Manners and Customs of the Egyptian Spirit, and to take pleasure and
conceit itself, and be puffed up with and in those things that lead from God,
without nursing and encouraging thereunto; so keep all low in Meekness and
Self-denial, that God's Fear may be timely planted in their Hearts, and the
Principles of Life and Peace they may be instructed in, as you your selves have
learned them of the Lord, that so the loving kindness and gentle dealings of
God toward us, we may tell of them to our Children, and they to another
Generation; so all learning the Way of the Cross and Selfdenyal, that Will that
is carnal and earthly will be mortified and slain, and the Spirit of the World
and the Customs thereof will be crucified to you all, and you all unto it, and
then, how can they that are crucified to the world live any longer therein? and
so spiritual Men and spiritual Women, Sons and Daughters of the incorruptible
Seed, begotten again by the Power and Spirit of Christ Jesus, and so dead to
the world's Spirit, Ways, Customs, Manners, Traditions, Ordinances and
Worships, all in the Fall and Degeneration from God, and every one living up to
this, being guided by God's Wisdom, keep their Testimony clear and unviolated
in the Sight of God and Men. So stand true Witnesses for God, and be faithful,
or full of Faith in the Lord; believe in him, love him above all, and trust him
with all, Wife and Children, Estate and Life; and take heed of giving Offense,
or of causing Truth to suffer in its Esteem; for God has glorified it, and
will glorify it; and Woe from the Lord is to them that cause Truth to be ev^l
spoken of, that brings a Blot upon their Testimony, and so marreth the Visage
and Countenance of Truth in the particular, or in the general. And dear Friends
stand living Witnesses for God's Truth, and be not cowardly, but valiant, as
Soldiers of Christ Jesus, and stand up against all the Works and Workers of
Iniquity, against all Hirelings and false Shepherds, against the grand
Oppression of Tithes, with the abolished Ceremonies and Ordinances of the first
Covenant, and Jews outwardly, which Antichrist and the Deceivers that are gone
into the World (having lost the Power) would innovate and set up again, among
the Gentiles or Jews inward, contrary to the Institution of God; and stand up
against all Swearing, and that which leads to Swearing, and against Lying or
Stealing, and against Fighting or Killing (since our Kingdom is not of the
World) and against Fornication, Adultery, Whoredom, Lasciviousness, Luxury, and
all manner of Unclearness, the Sins of this World, which are so vile they are
scarce fit to be spoken of, or named amongst the Saints; so as becomes
Warriors for God, and the everlasting Gospel of Christ Jesus, stand clear of
them all, and against them all, and then there will be no need of Shifts and
Excuses, and crooked Reasons in the fallen wisdom, to hide or cover any one with.
And my dear Friends, let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay be Nay, and keep to the
form of Sound Words in all your Communications, Bargains and Dealings one with
another, and also with them that are without, that so you may honor the Lord,
and honor his Truth, and convince all with whom you have to do that truth and
righteousness lives in you, and you live in it; this is the glory of all
profession. And be not forward and rash in words and promises; for some there
are, yea, too many, that make profession of Truth and true Religion, and yet
know not a Bridle for the Tongue; and the Apostle laid, such men's Religion was
vain; ye^, and too many there are, that are hasty to promise, and slow to
perform, and then shuffle to excuse themselves (as Eve did) where no Excuse can
properly bear in the Truth; so beware of it, I desire you all; for this was one
express Token the Apostle laid down of the falling away; therefore be careful
to make absolute Promises, and be as careful, quick and forward to perform,
when promised, and that keep, Truth clear, and answers the Expectations of all,
and preaches to all with whom we have to do, and hereby the Saints reached
God's Witness in one another in the beginning, so keep to it still, and every
one speak the Truth from his heart without dissimulation, and learn not the
sleighty words and cunning evasions of the deceitful spirits of this world,
which darken knowledge, thereby to drive Bargains to accomplish self ends and
covetous designs; for such things (though never so fairly glossed) are
inconsistent with the innocence and naked simplicity of our Gospel neither is
Truth honored by such deceitful coverings: so all Friends, keep clear of such
things, and be plain-hearted with all men; for no coverings will hide or avail
in this bright lightsome day, but that of God's eternal Spirit, which will
stand over all, and darkness cannot comprehend it; but going from the Light and
Spirit of God, into the fallen deceit^ul wisdom, then the world comprehends,
and sounds, and bottoms all suck, and so Truth suffers in the particular, and
in the general; so the Law of the Spirit of Life, which we profess, is beyond
all Laws, and a Rule beyond all Rules, and reaches further to the ordering and
guiding of all those that are resolved and given up to it, in Obedience, then
all Laws, Precepts, Canons or Injunctions that are outward whatsoever; so the
Righteousness that is God's, which Christ-Jesus is the Author of, is beyond
all, and exceeds all the Righteousness of other Professions, Scribes or
Pharisees; whereby its plain every Righteousness does not enter, nor is
accepted of God, but only that which exceeds the Scribes and Pharisees, which
Christ works in all his by the Operation of his eternal Spirit. So my dear
Friends, wait to feel it, and the effectual Works of it brought forth in you
all, which to feel is more then words, that your Faith may stand in it, and in
a living Enjoyment of it; for that man or woman that does not feel it, and the
efficacy and virtue of it, they bring forth from a strange Vine, which Christ
Jesus will not own; and all take heed, and keep low in God's Fear. And you my
Friends, that are rich in this World, or have much of the Creat on of God, Do
you watch and take heed; for there is a Snare, and that none of the least,
which attends that state also; and if the Lord has increased your store, set
not your hearts upon them, nor trust to them; for he that trusts to his
Riches, shall fall; for as one said, They are not forever, but sometimes make
themselves Wings, and fly away: so be not lifted up with them, but eye the
Lord, and posses as though you possessed not and labor to be rich toward God,
and rich in good Works; and remember poor afflicted Joseph, and be ready to do
good, and to communicate, as said the Apostle, and keep your Hearts single and
loose to those things, and so in God's Wisdom you will see your Way and
Service, and the End and Use of all. And all you Young Men and Women, that are
single and unmarryed, you have an Opportunity to serve the Lord; do you keep
low, and beware of being entangled or brought in Bondage by youthful Lusts; for
thereby many have lost a good condition with God and brought themselves to
Sorrow and Woe, both in this Life and that which is to come: And above all, take
heed of joining Affinity with strange Nations, and such as know not God, (...)
obey the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; for this was f^rbidden Israel after
the flesh, Deuteronomy 7 3, 4. and for their Disobedience herein, God's anger was
kindled against them, and they were carried away captive many years; which made
Ezra, the Servant of the Lord, rent his Garments, and pluck his Hair off his
Head and Beard, and mourn before the Lord, till he and the Elders of Israel
resolved to put away their Strange Wives, Ez 9, 10. chap. And Esau by marrying
the Daughters of Heth, so grieved his Father and Mother, that Rebecca
complained, she was weary of her Life, Genesis 27.46. And Paul advised, not so be
unequally yoaked together, Believers with Unbelievers, knowing there could be
no Union between Light and Darkness, nor the Temple of God and Idols, etc. so
keep your Hearts single to God, and wait in God's Wisdom to overcome the Wicked
One in your own particulars, and seek to be married to the Lord first, and
joined to the Lord by his eternal Spirit, which brings into Unity, and keeps
Chastity in Mind and Spirit unto him: and observe the Advice of the Apostle,
who said, The Unmarried cared for the things of the Lord, how he or she might
please the Lord; but the married for the things of this World, how he or she
might please Wife or Husband: So all be watchful, and mind your Places and
Callings in Christ Jesus: but if any one (in the Fear and Wisdom of God) do see
it their way to marry, let such seek God's Counsel, and be not hasty, but wait
in it, that he or she may enjoy a Wife or a Husband in the Peace and Love of
God, and to be joined one by his eternal Spirit, and then Meet helps and a
Blessing one to another, and then the Marriage is honorable, and the Bed
undefiled; so all keep clean, and live up to God in all things, in all States
and Conditions, in your Places and Callings whereunto God has called you, that
the Lord may take pleasure to do you good, and to multiply his Blessings upon
you, that the Issues of Life and Peace may abound, and run through all, and
rest upon all your Hearts and Souls as the Dew of Hermon. And the God of Peace
and Love preserve us all in his Peace and Love, and carry us through all by the
Arm of his Eternal Power, and guide us all in his heavenly Wisdom, to the
Praise, Glory and Renown of his Everlasting Name, who is God alone, blessed
forever and for evermore.

Your Friend and Brother in the Obedience of Truth Tho. Carleton.
Written the 13th of the 7th Month, 1676.

