^SECOND PART, OF THE Most Pleasant and Delightful HISTORY OF Reynard the Fox.
Containing Much Matter of Pleasure and Content. WRITTEN For the Delight of
Young Men, Pleasure of the Aged, and Profit of all.

To which is added many Excellent Morals.

Here read the Fox, his Nature, and his Art,
Who in this Story acts the greatest Part.
Him here you find advanced highly, and
In this his Grandeur for a time to stand;
Till he aspiring further, Treachery
Contrived, and did for his Treason die.
LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Edward Brewster, at the Sign of the Crane in St.
Paul's Church yard, 1672.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
IT is well known that public Works necessarily undergo a public Censure; and
how diligently careful soever any Man is, who exposes this or that to the view
of all, he shall meet with praise or dispaise, more frequently according to the
understanding or affection of the Censurer, than according to the worth or
invalidity of what he presents. Therefore since I beg not the Patronage of any,
nor would I by any Man be misunderstood, and so causlesly censured, as an
impertinent Writer: I have to the subsequent Work (which I was minded to have
committed to the Press without Marginal Notes) added a Moral, or Exposition of
my own; in doing which, I hope no Man will be so disingenious as to wrest my
words to a sense contrary to my true and proper intent.

I, in the following History, aim not at the reproach or slander of any Man or
Men whatsoever; but do only desire thy Content and Recreation with delight and
profit. Farewell.

Read and peruse this Little Book, when care
And pensive thoughts to be expelled are.
THE CONTENTS.
HOw the King and Reynard the Fox consulted together about choosing a chief
Prelate, in the place of Bellin the Ram, and how Isegrim the Wolf was chosen,
etc. Chap. 1. How the Fox advised the Wolf and his Children to wear Bellin's
Gown, and the Clothing of Bellin's Kindred. Chap. 2. How the Fox communed with
the King about Isegrim's Doubt, and thereupon Sir Isegrim was sent for to
Court, etc. Chap. 3. How the Bear and Cat conspired Sir Isegrim's Death etc.
Chap. 4. Of the Assembly of the Commons, etc. Chapter 5. How the King feasted his
Nobles. Chap. 6. Of the Discourse between the King and Reynard about the
advancement of the Bear and Cat, etc. Chap. 7. How the Fox, Bear and Cat, were
honored, etc. Chap. 8. How the Wolf went to Malepardus, to discourse with his
Cousin Reynard, etc. Chap. 9. How the Fox behaved himself in his Office, and of
two Causes decided by him. Chap. 10. How the Fox liberally bestowed what he
got, etc. Chap. 11. How Bitelas the Ape, informed Reynard of what passed at a
Meeting of the Lords. Chapter 12. Of the Discourse between the Fox and Wolf, and of
another Meeting of the Lords. Chap. 13. Of their last Meeting, and how they
determined to surprise the King, and Court, etc. Chap. 14. How Sir Firrapel the
Libard, and his Cousin Slylook revealed their Treason to the King. Chapter 15. How
the Forces of the Lords met at the place appointed, etc. and how the Traitors
were surprised. Chap. 16. How the Fox consulting with Bitelas the Ape, returned
to his own Castle, etc. Chap. 17. How the Fox was pursued, etc. Chap. 18. The
Examination of Traitors and Prisoners taken, etc. Chap. 19. How the Fox and his
Soldiers made Incursions, etc. Chap. 20. The King Summons the Fox to surrender
his Castle, etc. Chap. 21. The Fox assaults the Kings Camp in the Night, etc.
Chap. 22. The King proclaims all Traitors that assist Reynard, etc. Chap. 23.
How the Fox's Castle was stormed, and all but himself killed, and he taken
alive. Chapter 24. Of the Dissolution of the Kings Army, and how the Fox was
carried Prisoner to the Court. Chapter 25. The Fox examined. Chap. 26. His
Confession and Execution, as also of all the other Traitors, etc. Chap. 27. How
the King and the Nobles ruminated the Fox's Confession. Chap. 28. How the King
made Proclamation, no Beast should walk disguised, etc. Chap. 29. How the King
caused three of the Ram's Kindred to be brought before him, etc. Chap. 30. How
the Wolves were suddenly ruined. Chap. 31. How the King distributed the Wealth
of the Wolves among the Commons, and then openly showed his love to Bellin's
Kindred, etc. Chap. 32.
THE SECOND PART Of the Pleasant and Delightful HISTORY OF Reynard the FOX.
CHAP. I.
How the King and Reynard the Fox consulted together about choosing a chief
Prelate in the place of Be^^in the Ram, who (as you heard in the former Part)
was convicted of the murder of Keyward the Hare (though falsely), and so put to
Death, and how Iseg^im the Wolf was made chief Prelate, etc. The Fox and be
reconciled.

NOW after the Fox his Vidory against Isegrim the Wolf, he was not only
honored by the King and all his Subjects with the Title of Lord Reynard, ^^t
el^e grew very inward and familiar with the King himself, insomuch as none
could ^e admitted to any private conference with his Majesty, unless he first
made way by the favor of the Lord Reynard.

This did not a little disturb Sir Isegrim the Wolf, Sir Bruin the Bear, Sir
Tibert the Cat, and many others who mortally hated Reynard. But his height
seemed to be far beyond and above their malice; which although he well knew, he
dissembled all he could; and least adverse fortune should again eclipse his
Greatness, and so expose him to the mercy of his Enemies, which he knew would
be but little, he plotted and ^evised with himself, which way he might win
their favor and make them more fast friends so himself, then they had been
Enemies. To accomplish this, his subtle wit could find out no better way t^an
to endeavor their promotion, as near, as might be with safety to his own
Grandeu^; for he was not ignorant, that if their advancement should come by his
means, all malice and inveterate hatred would be turned into love; and he
himself should be most firmly rivited in hi^ Greatness and Honor. Therefore,
he united on the King with all diligence, but conceals his intent for some
time, until once on a day, the King being disposed to hunt, commanded the Lord
Reynard to attend him; who very r^^dily obeying, hunted with the King until
dinner time; but when the King had ^^n^^, (...) Reynard also after him: The
King (in a (...) ly yo^ ^r^) sitting on a green B^nk, held down his head, but
sp^ke not at all; Reynard, seeing the King sit ^^^s defected, most dread
Sovereign, how is it, that your Majesty, who even now was cheerful and in
health, dining ^s heartily as any Prince in Christend^m, is become so sad and
Disco^^^^te suddenly? Oh, said the King, my trusty friend Reynard, when I
consider the State of my Realm how discomposed it is, how great the hatred and
malice of my Subjects is one against another, especially of my Lords against
you, whom I love so dearly, and see not which way to gratify them, without
displeasing you, I ^^nn^^ ch^^^ but be sorrowful and defected. To this, the Fox
repl^^ (being glad at his heart that opportunity was Every subtle Politii^n
makes not an occasion for the accomplishing his end^, but waite^ till occasion
be offered; as is here seen by the Fox, who would not di^cover his great, till
he saw a sit opportunity present it self.
offered to ^ffect his before intended design), most mighty Prince, I am your
Vassal, therefore let not your Majesty stick to displease and ruin me, so that
thereby your peace and content may be procured. Hereat the King looking
somewhat more chear^ully, said; Why Reynard d^st then in earnest love me so
well, as to be content to be ^^ined for my advantage. Yea, my Lord, said
Reynard, I would willingly ^^y down my life, if your Majesty think it will be
your interest. By these words the Fox had ^o possessed the King with a f^^m
conceit of his Loyalty, as he thought it better to let (...) discentented
Nobles expiate their malice by length of time, then to attempt the putting ^n
end thereto to the ^^^^^ice of so faithful a friend; neverless, knowing the
(...) ^^l^^y of his friend Reynard, said to him in this manner. L^^d Reynard, I
pr^y the^ t^ll me, can^t not thou ^^^^^e so^^ ^^ay to ^^^t^^e (...)
discontented Nobles without thy own injury, or my prejudice. To this the Fox
answers (bowing his Body very Low), Mighty Sir, undoubtedly the matter your
Majesty speaks of, may be so effected, as to bring no inconveniency on me, nor
any disc^mmodity to your self, but a benefit rather, and a continual peace,
content, and satisfaction to all your most loyal Subjects. At this, the King
assuming his wonted cheerfulness again, asked, which way can you bring this to
pass, so, as all parties may be pleased, and I my self, nor you my friend incur
any blemish, since they have been so degraded, and slighted by us and you, as
now we cannot well repair their loss of honor and credit with us and our
Subjects; or whom the Prince disregards, the Commons will not esteem? It is
true Sir, replied the Fox, but the way I intend to take, shall give a testimony
of your Majesty's Royal Love, Favor and Goodness, to all your Subjects in
general, in winking at, and not taking notice of the errors and flips of some
of the chief, and always of your Majesty's ancient Nobility; for so doing you
will eternize your Name to posterity; and I also, when dead and gone, shall be
commended as a Loyal Subject, forgetting anger and revenge of those, by whom I
have been so grossly abused. To this, the King said, if your wisdom judges the
matter feasible and honorable also, propound what is to be done, and I will
proceed by your advice. Worthy Sir, said the Fox, it is not unknown to you,
that since the death of Bellin your Chaplain, there has been none to officiate
in the Priests office, because in him his whole family was extinct by a Law,
which confiscated all his Generation to be a prey to the Bear and the Wolf for
ever. And among all your Majesty's Subjects, there is not any one more learned,
or more fit (though he has been my mortal foe, which I freely forgive), then
is Sir Isegrim the Wolf; for to my knowledge he has been a Student in several
Universities, and in law-practises is not a little ekilled, besides he has
sat in the Chair of Physic also; so that, as I said before, he is most fit to
be Bellin's successor, which will he a great honor and profit also to him, if
your Majesty will be pleased to add the title of Lord chief Prelate, and to
admit no Priests under him, but what are of his Family. To this the King
replies, stay Reynard, how shall this be, since Sir Isegrim is so generally
feared and hated of the Commons, that instead of coming to hear him, they will
all run away with might and m^in. It is very wisely thought on, Mighty Sir,
said the Fox: but for this we have a remedy; so soon as he is chosen chief
Prelate, he must put on Bellin's furred Gown, which he used always to wear;
then the Commons will be no more afraid of him. Ha, Reynard, said the King,
here is a slip in your Politics, it were better that he should put on Bellin's
furr Gown before he is chosen. Certes, quoth the For Princes have great
forecast than their Subjects. Yet I doubt, if any one desire him to put it on
first, he will take it as a mockery, unless he be assured of the place and
honor intended him. That he shall be, said the King, for I will send for him
while you are present, and I will endeavor a reconciliation between him and
you, and then propose the matter to him. Mighty Sir, said the Fox, if you
propose not the matter first, as being my Request to your Majesty on his
behalf, all endeavor of reconciliation will be fruitless; for he will be sure
to revile me, and that in such wise, as I fear will further provoke your
Majesty's displeasure against him, and so the wished end not be answered. Go to
then said the King, I will send for him, Sir Bruin, and all the Noble^; and
then in a sull Council we will consult about the matter, in which Council you
shall speak for me and your self, as you shall judge most convenient: for in
this meeting of Nobles only (without the Commons), Sir Isegrim needs not be
spoke to, about Bellin's Gown, but may take his place among us with his own
Garments he is want to wear. At this the Fox making humble obeisance to the
King; said, Mighty Prince, your wisdom far exceeds our conceivings, that are of
the vulgar sert. Therefore, we all should acknowledge that you are not set over
us for naught, but to guide and inform, as well as to rule and govern; with
many more such flattering speeches he courts the King Treacherous Subjects
fl^^tter Princes most.
for the accomplishing his own subtle ends, as you shall hear anon. The next
day, the King sent Sir Firapel the Libard to summon all the Nobles to meet at
his Royal Palace early in the morning following. According to this Summons they
came. Now when they were come to the place appointed for that meeting, the King
and Sir Reynard came bath together among them: for they were together almost
all the night before. First of all the King in friendly manner salutes Sir
Isegrim the Wolf, and Sir Bruin the Bear, selling them he wondered they were
such strangers, and should have been glad to have seen them ere that time. This
favorable and loving entertainment from the King, raised up in them a fresh
remembrance of their grievances, hoping now they had a seasonable opportunity
to make their come plaints, and find redress accordingly. But when the King
perceived their intention, which could not but be known, by those so often
spightful f^owns upon Sir Reynard cast from them both, which the King himself
had observed; be begins thus: Loving friends, the intent of this days meeting
is not to determine differences between party and party, nor is it to redress
private grievances; therefore of them I would have no mention made at this
time; but a more weighty metter is now in hand, which concerns us all, and this
is the business of Religion, touching which we have all been too remiss. When
the Bear and Wolf heard this, they bowed themselves and sat. down. So when all
were sat, the King spoke to Sir Reynard, calling him Cousin, and said, Cousin
Reynard, our pleasure is, that you declare to the Assembly our full intention
concerning this business. Reynard, bowing very low to the King first, afterward
to the Assembly, eg in to speak thus.

Worthy Lords, and Subjects of the most-puissant King of Beast, be it known
unto you, that our Mighty Prince, here present, did for several good Causes (as
espe^idly for Murder by himself confessed) deprive Bellin the Ram both of Life
and Dignity, confiscating his whole Family to be a prey to Sir Bruin the noble
Bear, and Sir Isegrim the learned Wolf, and this confiscation of body and goods
to continue from generation to generation, and to descend to the families and
Lineages of the said Sir Bruin, and Sir Isegrim for ever, and longer if
possible, By means of this, we (with grief be it spoken), are wholly destitute
of a Priest, or any to officiate in Bellin's office, and are like to co^in^^
so, if some speedy c^^e be not taken. Ther^f^^^ ^^e High and Mighty King of
Beasts, our L^r^ and Ma^^er, having Princely cute and affection toward all his
Subjects in general, and to you his Nobles in a special manner, has thought
good to call this Assembly at this time, and with your advice, and consent, to
make choice of some one, that shall be judged most fit for the Priests Office;
and when you here have chosen the Person, his Majesty will present him to be
approved by a general Assembly of the Commons, whom he will summon together
very speedily for that purpose. Having spoken this, he sat down. Then the King
said; I approving of all my Cousin Reynard has said, do heartily with that out
of you may be chosen an able and fit person, rather than from among the
Commons; for should one of the common sort be advanced to so high a dignity; it
is very questionable, whether he would know how to demean himself, etc.
therefore I would have you to proceed to your choice of one from amongst your
selves. After this, for a little space the whole company were silent, and sat
looking one upon another, yet not without musing, and imagining on whom this so
noble office would fall; each wishing he might be the person; the Wolf and Bear
especially supposed they might have the office, the Bear because the Lord
Reynard (whom he hated) had styled him The hopes of honor and profit pacifieth
the minds fo malicious persons; especially where their advancement is procured
by such, as they mortally hated.
Noble; the Wolf, because he was termed Learned, undoudtedly believed he should
be chosen: so the wrath and choler of both was somewhat abated, and Sir Bruin
first stood up and said: Most mighty King, we your Loyal Subjects cannot but
acknowledge your Majesty's undoubted care and zeal for the well being of all
your liege people, therefore must needs greatly approve of your high and noble
intention, so amply and plainly delivered by the noble Lord Reynard. Next spoke
Sir Firrapel the Libard, and said, The Office intended to be conferred this day
is Noble, and the person fit for the management thereof should be honest, wise,
and also learned; therefore I hope it will be conferred on such a one, and on
no other. For my part I know my own incapacity, therefore do not in the least
desire it; but were I fit for it, I would choose it above all dignities in the
world. Then the King said to Sir Isegrim, how is it Sir Isegrim, that you are
so silent, I am informed by my Cousin Reynard, that you are a great Scholar,
very wise and learned in Law, Divinity, and Physic, therefore I hoped you
would have proffered to take on you this great charge, which I, my Cousin
Reynard, and all my Nobles (I suppose) will freely confer on you, and on no
other. Now the Wolf, greedy enough of honor, By the Wolf here is denoted
greedy and unsatiable men.
perceiving, that by the Lord Reynard's means he was likely to be greatly
honored stood up, and after obeisance made, thus spoke:

Most puissant King, the cause of my silence was not, because I was unwilling
to undergo any charge or trouble for the good of your Majesty and whole
Kingdom, but because I was ashamed of the discord that had been between my Lord
Reynard, my self, and some other of your Loyal Subjects, about matters not
worthy to be mentioned in so noble an Auditory; for that cause only was I
silent. We, said the King, remit and forgive all that has passed between my
Lord Reynard, Sir Bruin, your self, or any other, and will have no more mention
made thereof. My Lord Reynard has highly commended you to me, which surely no
enemy would do. He has also praised Sir Bruin so, as I will not forget to
honor him also. And for Sir Tibert, because he is swift of foot, and fit for
employment, also politic and subtle, I (as soon as opportunity serves) will
think of some office, wherein he may benefit himself, and please me.

With these words they were all highly contented; the Wolf gave his hand to the
Fox in token of friendship; the Bear and Cat also shook hands with the Fox.
After these Ceremonies were passed, they all sat down. And by a General Vote,
Sir Isegrim was chose chief Prelate.

CHAP. II.
How the Fox advised the Wolf and his Children to wear Bellin's Gown, and the
clothing of Bellin's kindred.

THe Fox and Wolf being thus reconciled, held a counsel together how they might
strengthen each other in the power they had thus obtained. The Fox begun his
discourse in this manner: My most dear Uncle, I remembering the wrong I did you
more than once, and now by the Kings favor, having an opportunity to
recompense you, and my Cousin Bruin, but you especially, I think I have done it
to purpose. You have indeed, good Cousin, replied the Wolf, and I and mine
shall always acknowledge our selves beholding to you, not only for the time
present, but ever after during life. But how I shall pass the censure of the
commons I cannot tell. Tush, said the Fox, let me alone for that, do but follow
my advice and all shall be well: your advice Cousin, said the Wolf, that I will
as long as I have breath. Well then, quoth the Fox, do thus; first of all, trim
your self handsomely, then take Bellin's furr Gown, and make it as fit to your
body, as is possible, that head ears, and all may be covered; having done this,
those Beasts which before hated and fled from you will now follow, love, and
adore you, especially if you under that garment conceal your Covetous Persons
are easily persuaded to disguise themselves, and to dissemble their churlish
natures, for effecting honor and pr^fit.
own churlish nature; pardon me Uncle, that I speak so. Good Cousin, said Sir
Isegrim, think not that I will take offense, where I am to take advice. Well
then, if it be so said the Fox, I will proceed further; I beseach you good
Uncle, as you love your self and me, show not your teeth at any time, when you
are among the (...) in the day time, in the night use your liberty, Provision
must be had You speak wisely says the Wolf, I could never have thought of all
this; but good Cousin tell me what I shall do, when I come to say mass, the
hoarsness of my voice will bewray me. O good Uncle, said the Fox, are you so
weak, as not to find an excuse for that? tell them, to whom you are to read;
that you have gotten a grievous cold. I but Cousin, said the Wolf, that excuse
will serve but once. Ah Uncle, said Reynard, if you mean to thrive in your
office, you must not stick to lie apace. Besides you being chief, need not
appear above once a year, your children, and the youngest of your kindred have
not so ho^rse a voice as you; when they grow old, they must read but seldom,
but now being young they will stand you in good stead, if they be exactly
clothed with the Gowns of Bellin's kindred; otherwise Uncle all is nothing
worth: and be sure to give them the same advice I now give you, that is, not to
show their teeth in the ray time, etc. Indeed Uncle, I wonder you should think
the excuse of saying you have a cold, will not hold water; do you not well
know, that the Ram's Kindred have colds often, and cough much. It is true good
Cousin, said the Wolf, I well remember it, for when I went to hunt for any of
them in the night, I usually was directed to the place where they were by their
coughing. Well then said Reynard, I hope Uncle you own my Counsel as right and
good. Yes with all my heart Cousin, said Isegrim: but now I think of it, you
spoke of my Children and Kindred; I perceive not as yet that any thing was said
of them by the King and Lords at this last counsel. Uncle, said Reynard, you
seem to be very serupilous, and to doubt where there is no cause; know you not
that every Captain puts who he will in place under him, and why not every chief
Prelate? Blame me not good Cousin, said Isegrim, for I fear the Commons, so
soon as they hear my name, will all cry out, Not Isegrim, not Isegrim. Well
Uncle, said the Fox, if that be your suspicion we will seek some way to avoid
what you most fear. I my self will hasten to the King, and acquaint him what
has passed between us, as also with this most material cause of fear: and when
I have communed with him for some time, I will request him to send for you,
then do you be sure to come (with Bellin's Gown exactly fitted to your Body)
into the Kings Presence, and doubt not but the success shall answer your
desire. In the mean while, let us both go home to our R^pasts, and early in the
Morning I purpose to go to the King; do you wait in readiness at home, till you
are sent for. So the Fox returned to his Castle, and the Wolf to his own house.

CHAP. III.
How the Fox communed with the King, touching Sir Isegrim's doubt, and
thereupon Sir Isegrim was sent for to Court, and created Earl of Pitwood.

EArly in the morning the Fox came to Court, and being suddenly admitted, after
obeisance made, he said, Hail my Sovereign Lord. The King seeing him, looked
pleasantly upon him, and said, what are you and your Uncle good Friends? Yes,
said the Fox, I humbly thank your Majesty, all malice and rancor is laid aside;
and all the evening last. I was instructing him how he should behave himself in
this high Office your Majesty has conferred upon him. You did well Reynard,
said the King; but did you mind him of wearing Bellin's fur Gown? Yes noble
Sir, said the Fox and he is so far resolved of it, that I judge ere this he has
fitted the Gown to his own body. If so, says the King, it is well; then there
is no doubt but he will be well liked of. I have given commandment already,
that the heads of all the families of the Commons be summoned to appear here,
after the third day, now next coming. Therefore I would h^ve Sir Isegrim be
re^^^ at the time appointed Then the Fox said, ready he will be to be sure; and
^f he observe all that I advised him to, w^^^ ^^doubtedly gain the Commons to
be on his side. N^^e^heless there is one thing which troubles him, and m^k^s me
suspi^i^us also, and that is, lest when your Maj^^^ shall present him by the
name of Sir Isegrim, which name ^ll the Commons know, they immediately (not
mi^^ing his Garment or Person) cry out, No Isegrim ^o Isegrim It Is true
Reynard, said the King, this is a considerable matter, and I wish I could
remedy the some. Sir, s^id the Fox, you may very well; for if your Majesty be
pleased to honor him with the title of Count, it matters not of how mean a
place, he shall bear the name of that place, and not his own name any longer.
Well then said the King, I will do so; here is a Wood, not far from this place
near his own house, and it is called Pitwood, that Wood I will settle upon him
and his heirs for ever, and he shall be created E^cl of Pitwood. Therefore send
for him immediately to come before us. Then Reynard stepping forth called to
Sir Tibert, who waited in the Court, and commanded him to go presently, and
bring Sir Isegrim to the Kings presence; Sir Tibert ran speedily to the House,
and when he had entered the House and saw Sir Isegrim, he knew him not, until he
had more strictly observed his countenance and disage, then he knew him, and
said; Certes, I knew you not Sir in this new fashioned Gown; the King has sent
to speak with you presently So away went the Wolf and Tibert the Cat to the
Court. When they came there, Reynard the Fox came forth, and conducted his
Uncle into the Kings presence, and said; here most noble Prince is your lately
made chief Prelate, is he not very trim and neat? Yes, Cousin Reynard, said the
King, I like him passing well; but had you not told me how he was dressed. I
should scarcely have known him; sure his beard is shaved, or else he seems
younger than when we saw him last. Mighty Sir, said the Fox, I advised him to
trim himself thus, judging it most convenient; besides I have given him other
particular Instructions, which I hope he will observe. Then the King turning to
Sir Isegrim said, assuredly Sir Isegrim you have found our Cousin Reynard to be
your most faithful friend, not only by advising you what to do, but also by
informing us, how to assure and confirm that honor on you, which we and our
Lords have bestowed so freely on your self and on no other; and that is, by
conferring a further title of honor; that so your name (so dreadful to the
Commons), may be laid aside, and your other Title (being unknown to them), find
acceptance and applause with them all. The Wolf hearing this, bowed so low, as
his mouth touched the ground, then raising himself a little, he began to speak
in this manner:

Most puissant King, how infinitely am I obliged to your Majesty, and to the
noble Lord Reynard here present; and that in a time, when I least of all
expected any favor from your self, and less from him (whom I hated, therefore
I here before your Majesty beg his pardon), of whose loyalty your Majesty has
undoubtedly had sufficient testimony, otherwise your Princely wisdom could not
have embraced one, rendered so vile by me, and other of your Subjects, for which
I here again humbly beg your Majesty's pardon. Sir Isegrim, Sir Isegrim, you
are already pardoned, said the King, therefore rise up (for Sir Isegrim had
prostrated himself on the ground), and hearken to what I shall further say. I
have not only pardoned you already, but I do now also, besides the honor of
chief Prelate, confer on you the Earldom of Pitwood, which Wood you undoubtedly
know, for it lies near your Manston House; that Wood I give to you, your heirs,
and successors for ever; and after the name of that Wood, so shall you be
called ever after, and your old name Isegrim, shall be no more mentioned, but
your title shall run thus: Count of Pitwood, Lord Paramount; and for brevity
sake, you shall be called, Lord Pitwood. When the King had ended his speech,
Isegrim (almost ready to leap out of his skin for joy) knew not what to say;
but bowing himself with great reverence to the King and the Fox, he in all
humility acknowledged the Kings immense bounty toward him, and the Foxes great
love he would never forget; besides he added, that in the exercise of his
Function, he would study nothing so much as the Kings interest; and that of his
own profit he would be always least mindful, with many other such like
protestations; yet in all these he lied egregiously, as you shall hear anon:

CHAP. IV.
How the Bear and the Cat offended at the great Honors of Sir Isegrim,
conspired his death; and how the Fox pacified them till the great Assembly of
the Commons was over.

When the rumor of the Wolf's great Preferments was spread among the Nobles,
Sir Bruin the Bear, and Sir Tibert the Cat hearing thereof, stomacked the
matter not a little. And therefore reasoned among themselves thus; How much is
this Caitiff the greatest murderer of all Beasts, advanced to Honor above us!
if we suffer him to abide in this height, we must necessarily be his Vassals:
besides, how great soever our grievances be, we can never find redress because
the Fox his great friend is the Kings only Favorite; so that every way we are
like to suffer, not only by himself, but also by the Fox, who is now so much
his Intimate, as he can crush us at pleasure; and when we would complain, the
Fox perhaps will take our Petition, but the King shall never see it. Having
thus reasoned, they sat silent for some time, until at length the Cat, with a
courage undaunted, thus spoke. Noble Sir Bruin, you are mighty, and I am
crafty; it is not to be doubted, but if you and I agree together, we may acquit
our selves of this burden. Well said Cousin Tibert, quoth the Bear; if you can
propose the way, I will endeavor to follow your proposal. Why Sir, said the
Cat, the way I would have you take, is this, go unto Sir Isegrim, and
congratulate his happy advancement, expressing as great joy and affection as is
possible then invite him to your Castle to dinner, and when he has dinned (for
I know he will eat so long, as until he is scarce able to stir) invite him to
walk (telling him it is for his health) out into the Forest, where when you
have him in a convenient place, fall upon him and tare him to pieces. Oh, Sir
Tibert, said the Bear, I am fraid to set upon him alone, for he is devilish
fierce, and for all that I know may kill me. Good Uncle, said the Cat, fear him
not, I will follow close after you, and when you have got him down, I will tare
out his throat I Will warrant you. Well then, said the Bear, if you will be as
good as your word, follow me, I will go to Sir Isegrim presently. So they both
hasted, and got to the Wolfs house in a short space. When they were thither
Evil men once advanced, are mortally hated of their friends, because they also
see no ho hopes of sharing with them in honor and profit; but if once they see
a probability of their own advancement, they flatter, and basely crouch to
those, whom they just before would have killed, as appears by this Chapter.
come, they found the Lord Reynard and Sir Isegrim together; for they were
discoursing about several weighty matters. The Fox observing the countenance of
these two Guests to be filled with hatred, howsoever they covered the same with
a dissembled cheerfulness; began to speak to them in this manner: Noble
Friends, had I not been engaged here with my Lord Pitwood (for so his Majesty
will have him called ever after) I had ere this time sent for you to acquaint
you with his Majesty's royal intention concerning you both; for so soon as this
great Convention is over, which now will be (as you very well know) the next
day after to morrow, our puissant King royally intends to honor you Sir Bruin
with the Earldom of the Forests, an honor which the greatest of Subjects must
needs hold himself well contented with. And for you Sir Tibert, he intends to
make you Steward of his house; and if that like you not, he purposes to
command the Earl of Pitwood, here present, to admit you for his principal
Secretary, a place of unspeakable profit undoubtedly. When the Bear and the Cat
heard such mountains of Honor and Profit were like to fall in their Laps, and
that so suddenly; their countenances and intentions were quite altered, and
they with all due reverence saluted and honored the Lord Pitwood, calling him
the honourble Lord chief Prelate; and for the Lord Reynard, they told his
Lordship they should never be able sufficiently to trumpet out his Praises, who
had so highly promoted his Enemies in an extraordinary manner. After this they
took their leaves, and departed far more second than they came.

CHAP. V.
Of the Assembly of the Commons, ^^d what passed there.

THe Bear and Cat being thus pacifled, as you have heard, by the hopes of so
great preserment, nothing could let the intentions of Reynard the Fox, in
advancing his Uncle Isegrim, lately styled Earl of Pitwood; therefore he, now
fully assured of accomplishing his end, and of the further advancement of his
own Grandeur, rested well contented till the morning appeared, which ushered in
the day on which the general Assembly was to be held. Then early before the Sun
was fully risen, he hastens to Court, not forgetting to call upon his Uncle to
be ready to come with his Lineage before the King and Nobles; but his Uncle was
ready are he could come to his House, yet all his Lineage (according to
Reynards advice) were not come together; therefore the Fox said, Dearest Uncle,
I am glad to see you and yours in so good forwardness, I hope we shall see your
whole Family together by and by. I will go first to Court, do you come after as
soon as you can. So Reynard delayed not but went immediately to the Court, and
saluted the King in these words, Most Puissant, most Heroic, and most mighty
Prince, I your Vassal, and most loyal Subject, thought my self above all others
most obliged to salute your Majesty first in the morning of so happy and
glorious a day, as this is like to be. Well Reynard, said the King, you are
not come before you are welcome. How is it you brought not your Uncle and his
Family, according as you told me you would. My Lord, said the Fox, my Uncle is
ready, but all his Lineage were not come together; nevertheless, I am assured
they will wait upon your Highness presently. Whilst he was speaking this, Sir
Tibert the Cat called to the Fox and said, My Lord, here is the Lord Pitwood
come with a great Train of such Gallants as I never in all my life saw the
like. So the Fox stepping forth, took his Uncle by the hand, and led him into
the Presence Chamber; and when he had, by the Kings order, placed him in a seat
of State made for the purpose, he called in all his Lineage, who as they came in
one by one made reverend obeisance to the King, and stood round about their
Father's Seat. Then the King said, my Lord Pitwood, you are welcome, I am glad
to see you so decently, and all yours here so exactly, fitted with these Gowns
of Bellin and his K^^vred; assuredly you are greatly obliged to our Cousin
Reynard for his so witty invention. It is so, mighty Sir, said the Wolf
(standing up, and bowing his Head very low) I and my whole Family h^^e present
do acknowledge his great favor, and next unto the continual yielding of our
Homage and Fealty to your Royal Majesty most due, we shall ever own him as our
principal Patron, the Preserver of our Honor, and good Name, among your
Majesty's Subjects in general. By this time Sir Bruin the Bear, and all the
other Nobles were come. All of them applauded the Habit and Gestures of the
Wolf and his Lineage. And indeed they looked so demure, that the King and all
his Disguises and presences of sanctity do often deceive.
Nobles (except the Fox only) were almost thoroughly persuaded they had put on
Bellin's Nature with his Garment. So they being all highly contented, after a
short Banquet, went forth to the Commons, who were gathered together in great
multitudes in a large Meadow nigh unto the Palace. Now among that huge
concourse were several of Bellin's Kindred incognito, and very many of his
Friends, yet they durst not be known to be such, for fear of danger. No sooner
did the Commons see the King and his Nobles walking toward them but they all
shouted, and cried out aloud, All hail our noble King. An happy presage, noble
Sir, said the Fox to the King. But when the Lord Pitwood and his Lineage came
forward, clothed all in the Garments of Bellin and his Kindred, they were all
amazed, some said (pointing The common people generally are affected with
novelties, and look more on the Habit and Gestures, then into the nature and
condition, of such as are recommended to them.
to the Lord Pitwood) that was Bellin's Son, see you not what a comely proper
person he is? Others said, nay surely it cannot be so, but we rather judge it
some Outlandish Beast, come as an Ambassador to our King; for look you, said
they, how many Attendants he has, all clothed in the same Libery he himself
wears. But the Friends of Bellin said one to another, we wish it be not Isegrim
the Wolf and his Retinue, all grand Enemies to our friend Bellin and his
posterity. Nevertheless, Bellin's kindred were all silent, for they knew him
well enough, but durst not say so much. Now as soon as the King himself,
Reynard the Fox, Pitwood the Wolf, and his Retinue, were ascended a Scaffold
purposely made, the place could contain no more, therefore all the Nobles took
their places as near the Scaffold as possible; only Sir Bruin the Bear, an^^ir
Firrapel the Libbard were for that day Marshals of the Field, and so had no
certain palce; also Grimbard the Brock was made Crier of the Court, and that he
might the better be heard (his voice being not very good) was thrust up, upon
the Scaffold, though there he stood in little ease. Thus all things being
ordered, as well as was possible among so many Beasts; the King gave a sign for
silence, by laying his hand upon his mouth; then the Brock (according as he had
been before instructed) by three O yes's, commanded silence upon pain of
imprisonment. Silence being made, The King rose up, and bowing his head a
little, began to speak thus. My Friends and Subjects, I called you together
this day, about an exceeding weighty matter. It is not unknown to many of you,
that we removed and displaced, and for a known and notorious Murder, put to
death our late Chaplain Bellin the Ram, and condemned his posterity for ever.
Since which time I have not only been without a Chaplain, but you also have
been destitute of Teachers, because all my Chaplain's kindred were also
displaced and condemned for his enormous Crime. Therefore to remedy this
Grievance, we with the advice and consent of our Lords here present, have made
choice of a very worthy and highly learned person now standing next our own
person, of whose integrity and worth we have had sufficient and bery ample
Experience. This person with his whole Lineage we recommend to you to be
Priests for you and all our liege People throughout our Dominions. Having said
this, he sat him down

Then Reynard the Fox, rose up, and after he had with a great show of
courtesy, bowed himself to the Assembly, he began to speak thus. Worthy Sirs,
his Majesty our Royal King, taking care of the well-being of all his Subjects
in general, could not without grief think of the sad and deplorable state you
all have been left in since the Death ( The true Emblem of an Hypocrite.
grieves me to speak it!) of Bellin, and downfall of his Posterity; therefore
he in his Princely wisdom for Princes certainly are far wiser then their
Subjects) has thought of a most excellent expedient to prevent the enormities
you were too-too apt to run into, for want of Teachers and Guides to direct you
better: Therefore he advised with this incomparably learned Lord Pitwood,
requesting as far as beseems the Majesty of a King to request him, for the
good of himself and all his liege people, to improve his great Learning to the
general good of us all. This Noble Lord, was so far from excusing himself, and
avoiding, or shunning this burden some office, as he readily and cheerfully
accepts of the same, and not only so, but also promises to engage all his
Lineage (little less learned than himself) in the same Offices and Employments.
We the Lords, being then all present and setting in Council by his Majesty's
command, seeing his great readiness and alacrity, and also knowing how
conducent it would be to the well being of all, could not choose, but (by our
joint consent) vote him to be the Lord chief Prelate throughout all his
Majesty's Dominions. Thus was he, not without mature deliberation, chosen by
us, and the choice confirmed by the King himself.

Before he had ended these words, there was heard a rumor among the multitude,
which at length grew louder and louder. Mistakes in a multitude, do sometimes
give opportunity to the Judicious, of making their minds known.
Then the Fox feared some one or other had descried the false mask he (with his
greatest cunning) had put upon the business. But, after silence was commanded,
it proved not altogether so. For among those who stood furthest from the
Scaffold, there were some who asked, what Lord that was that then spoke? which
question made the greatest part of the Bystanders to laugh, supposing it not
possible for any of the Company not to know the Fox. This noise being heard
among them by others that stood farther off, made them also to ask one another,
what the noise meaned; they that stood nearest the Scaffold were most of them
Bellin's friends, who had placed themselves there, on purpose the better to
descry the Lord Pitwood's person (as he was called) Subtle Politicians
whenever they fear a discovery of their false Paints and Disguises,
immediately betake them selves to lying and smooth words full of guile.
whom they plainly knew to be Isegrim the Wolf; therefore presently, being
asked by the Crier, what the noise meant? they said, the Company behind desired
to know of what Country the Lord Pitwood was, some of them supposing, others
affirming they had never seen him before, and therefore were not willing to
have a stranger imposed upon them. The Fox hearing this, again bowed himself to
the Company, and said: Loving Friends, and fellow Subjects, I marvel not, that
it is supposed by some, and believed by others, that this honorable Lord
Pitwood here present, is a stranger or foreigner; because he indeed all his
lifetime, with his whole Family and Lineage, has lived a life so obscure and
secret, as never did any Monk in a Cloister live more retired; besides he is so
holy and debout, as the like of him is not to be found in the whole World:
Moreover he is so silent, and of so few words, so humble gentle, affable and
kind, as I know not whether any mortal wight living may be compared unto him.
And that is the reason he is so little known; for had be discovered himself
before the King by his Princely Wisdom took notice of him, undoubtedly The most
ignorant most readily assent to, what they understand not.
none of you would in the least have suspected him to be a stranger: But this
your suspicion had indeed ground enough, therefore his Majesty is not in the
least offended with you, but wills that you give your Approbation by holding up
your right Hands.

Then the greatest part of the Assembly held up their right hands, and many
that scarce heard what was said held up both. After this, Pitwood the Wolf and
his Lineage bowed themselves to the Company, but spoke not a word, least their
Teeth should be seen.

When this was done, the King willed the Fox to speak to the Assembly (before
they were dismissed) about Pitwood's Lineage. Therefore the Fox standing up
again, said, His Majesty is highly pleased with this your Approbation, and
commanded me to thank you all: His further pleasure is, that the Lord Pitwood's
Lineage be recommended to you for you assent for confirming their Offices under
himself, now Lord chief Prelate; as to these persons, in declaring the worth
and goodness of their Father, I have not detracted any thing from them; for
they all have led the same life with him, have been always under his Tutelage,
and still will be under his Governance; so, as although any of them should by
reason of his Youth err, yet his Father will quickly espy it and reclaim him;
therefore I think you cannot do better for your selves, nor better please the
King's Majesty, than to discover your assent by holding up your hands. Then, as
before, the greatest part held up their hands; and Pitwood and his Lineage also
bowed themselves again, but spoke not. When this business was so well effected
to the great content of the King and Nobles but especially of the Fox and Wolf;
It was thought convenient to dismiss the Commons. Therefore Grimbard the Brock
was commanded to intimate so much to them, which very formally he did; first by
three O yes's commanding silence, afterward by speaking to the Assembly in this
manner.

Our Puissant King and all his Nobles give great thanks to you all, for your so
re^dy attendance this day, and also for that you have so cheerfully assented to
what was proposed; therefore for your better commodity, and that you may with
greater ease journey to your own homes, his Royal Majesty and all his noble
Lords here present have commanded me to dismiss you, and you are dismissed for
this time. Upon this the Assembly brake up, some greatly contented, others
doubtful, and not a few plainly sorrowful for what had passed. When the Field
began to be emptyed, and it was thought there was way enough for the King and
his Nobles to walk to the Palace: The King first descended, after him Knaves
and Fo^l; (the first for selfends, the last i^ imitation) honor the worthy,
and most wicked
the Lord Reynard, then the Lord Pitwood and his Lineage, with such seeming
soberness, as many of the Commons that stayed to see the fight, admired the
gravity of him and his. The Fox observing the Lord Pitwood was gazed upon,
stepped a little back. and walked directly before him bare-headed: the Bear and
Cat seeing this, placed themselves on each side of him. likewise bare headed;
after him followed his Lineage all in order, and after them the Nobles, and
lastly Grimbard the Breck, leading a great Treop of Se^vitors, that attended on
the King and Nobles. In this Equipage marched they, till the King was ready to
enter his own Palace; then did the Trumpets sound, and all manner of other
Music was heard in a melodious manner, constantly playing until all the whole
company was entered the Royal Palace.

CHAP. VI.
How the King invited his Nobles the next day to a Feast, and what pafled
thereat.

WHen all the Nobles and their Followers were entered the Palace, the King
willed them all to sit down, and told them, the business of the day holding so
long, and the issue also of the same being dubious, he would not resolve what
to do; but now his affairs being settled according to his wish, he desired they
would all accompany him on the morrow at a Feast which should be prepated for
them; and then he would further declare his mind. They hearing this, all took
their leaves and departed, every one to his own home.

In the mean while the King sent out his Purveyors into all parts, who provided
store of Venison, and other Cates in abundance. When the morrow was come, and
noon drew nigh they all came much about one time: and after obeisance made, all
took their places at the Table, the Fox sitting down on the right hand of the
King, and the Wolf on his left, and all the other Nobles in order, giving place
still to Pitwood's Lineage; so as they sat all intermixed among them. When they
were all sat, the Servitors brought in Meat, dressed in diverse manners with
curious Sauces, and set it before them. Grace being ended, the King cuts first
of the Dish that stood nearest him, bidding his Guests to fall to. They all in
like manner lay hands of what was nearest them, and soon made a clear board.
Then those empty platters removed, other full Dishes, provided for a second
course, were set on the Table; while this was doing the King calls to his
Servitors for Wine, which was brought, and the Cup given into the Kings hand,
he drank to all his Guests, bidding them welcome, withal commanding to fill
unto every one that sat at the Table. This being done they fall to the second
course, and then began to talk a little. The Servitors fearing by their eating
so much Gluttons will always eat greedily, although si^^ting at the Table of a
King.
none would be left for them, take away the second course, and bring in the
third without bidding; and as before fill Wine to the King first, and afterward
to the whole Assembly. And this order they kept in all the following courses
till the Feast was done. Now when the Feast was ended, the King and all the
Company looked very cheerfully one upon another, and the King first of all
said. How bravely did our Cousin Reynard manage his business yesterday? To this
the Wolf (who during the Feast had said nothing, least his Teeth should be seen
too plainly by the Servitors) replied, he did indeed (most Puissant Prince) act
no otherwise, then as if he had been inspired by an Oracle; in truth I was
afraid all would not be well when that rumor and murmuring noise was heard
among the Commons. That verily put me also to a stand, said the For, and I was
a little troubled till I heard what the matter was; then I knew I was able to
put an end to that murmuring. I am glad all things are so well, said the King;
it will be our parts now to endeavor It is honorable in a King to give good
Counsel, but it is baseness in a Subject not to regard the same; as this
Chapter, and the whole History following, clearly prove; for although here the
Wolf for himself, by his silence, and the Fox for him, by a long and lying
discourse, solomnly promise to observe all the King commanded, or advised to,
yo^ they neither of them ever in tended to perform the same.
to keep them so. Therefore to you my Lord Pitwood, I now speak: I hope the
Honor we have conferred on you and yours here present, will never be forgot;
for whosoever is unmindful of benefits, deviates from all honesty. Our Subjects
are numerous, and all of them (as I well noted) did not consent to your
Approbation, though the major part (which is sufficient) indeed did very
cheerfully. For this cause I would have you to consider you have Enemies as
well as Friends, which will be apt to espy all advantages, and ready to exclaim
against you so soon as they can find any occasion, which will by nothing be
sooner given, than by pride and licentious living; of which (though I thus
speak) I hope I shall have no occasion to be jealous.

Then stood up Reynard the Fox, and said, Most dread Sovereign. I dare engage
my honor, yea life and all, for the good deportment of my Uncle. For the
reason why he heretofore was reputed churlish, and licentious, was because of
his penury; this now being totally removed by the office your Majesty has
given him, can be no cause of stirring up in him such vices as were (in times
past) condemnable in him: because had he now no other estate to live on than
his profits, (not to mention other Perquisites) he must needs have so ample a
competency, as that he shall need to desire no more. Yea, I say, his riches
will be so great, as he will be in a capacity rather to give to others, than to
need any thing more than what his office daily supplies him with. Besides, I
consider him by my self; it is well known to your Majesty, how I was
continually complained of by my Enemies, accused of Murder, Theft and Rapine
(as my former troubles do well witness) until your Majesty was pleased to
advance me, and conser on me so ample Treasures, as I now possess. Since this
time, not one Beast of all your Majesty's Subjects has so much as opened his
mouth against me. It is true, Reynard, said the King, I have never heard any
complaint of thee since the time I first advanced thee; therefore I repent me
not of what I have done. Then the Fox bowing himself, said I humbly thank your
Majesty for all your Favors bestowed on me, as also for this great Bounty, for
my sake, conferred on my Uncle; of whom (doubtless) from this day forward, you
will never more hear complaint. With this speech of Reynards the King was
greatly satisfied; and therefore said, Cousin Reynard. I believe no less than
you have told me. I am glad to see you affectionate and loving to your Uncle; I
doubt not but he will repay your Kindness with like love and affection, and in
the Execution of his office be always mindful of saving our Honor. Yes, said
Reynard, that will be his only aim; (...) he has already promised to be always
more mindful of your Majesty's interest th^n of his own. These, and many more
such speeches passed between the King and the Fox, until it was somewhat late
in the Evening; then the King finishing his Discourz, told all his Guests it
was late, he would detain them no longer. So they departed; only Reynard the
Fox was ordered to come to Court early in the morning; for the King told him he
would speak with him alone about earnest Business.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Discourse the King had with Reynard the Fox, touching the Advancement
of Sir Bruin the Bear, and Tibert the Cat.

THe day no sooner appeared, but Reynard hasted to the Court; where his Majesty
had expected his coming almost an hour before, for he was troubled about his
promise to Bruin and Tibert not yet performed, lest they through discontent
should be the Authors of Commotion. Therefore, so soon as Reynard came in, he
said, it is well you are come, Cousin, I was even now, and indeed last night,
thinking of my promise to Bruin, and also to Tibert, how remiss I have been in
performing my word, doubting whether by that omission they two being
discontented (as I suppose they are) might not raise some Commotion and stir
among our Friends and Subjects. Hereupon, the Fox (now finding all things to
succeed according to his own desire) after obeisance made, thus speaks:

Sure, mighty Prince, you have consulted with the Oracle, otherwise you could
not have conjectured so truly. For Bruin the Bear, and Tibert the Cat were
highly offended with my Uncle two days before the Assemby of the Commons, and
came with full intent to his house to have done him some mischief; but by good
fortune, I being present, discerned their design by their looks, and therefore
presently told them of your Majesty's royal intent to promote and honor them,
the very next day after the Assembly of the Commons was over, which for the
present pacifted them, very wolf, but sine^ the time appointed is past and
gone, without any effect, answerable to what I promised, how they now stand
affected. I cannot tell. Well then, said the King, I understand by your words,
that it is high time to do somewhat in this business; but I pray thee Cousin
Reynard, tell me which way I may best honor them, with least damage to my
self, or injury to you. The Fox hearing this, after low Obeisance made, said;
Dread Sovereign, if my poor judgment may be received in this case, I humbly
request your Majesty to consider the nature and temper of them both, and
accordingly to honor them. To this the King replied, you speak well Cousin,
but since you best know their natures, I leave it to you to propose, which way
they may be^ be honored?

Mighty Sir, said the Fox, if it be your pleasure that I It is a point of great
discretion to give honor, or choose Officers according to their
Qualifications, and on active Spirits to conser active employments; but when
any Subject shall persuade his Sovereign so to do, only for the accomplishing
his own base ends, that is of evil consequence, and perilous to the Prince
himself.
shall speak my mind, I briefly say thus. Bruin is a lump, and an heavy flow
beast, one that loves to live in idleness, therefore an empty title of honor
without employment is fittest for him. But Tibert is nimble, active, subtle
and politic, therefore some stirring employment that is profitable (for he is
naturally covetous) will please him better than all the honor in the world.
The King hearing this, was well contented; and further said, what Title shall I
give Bruin? and what Employment shall I find out for Tibert? My Lord, Bruin
will hold himself highly contented with such a Title as Isegrim my Uncle has
that is, if your Majesty will create him Earl of the Forests, although he have
not one foot of Land there, it will be as much as needs to be And for Tibert,
if your Highness will but command my Uncle to make him his Clerk (for a Clerk
he must have) that will be both honor and profit also the last of which is his
chief and only aim. Then the King said, this you speak of may well be done; yet
I doubt there will be an inconveniency in making Bruin Earl of the Forests,
because the Forests are mine only, and in case any Insurrection be, the Rebels
may make Bruin their head, by virtue of this Title, and so my Royal dignity be
in danger. My Lord, said the Fox (bowing himself) how can your Majesty think
thus? For whilst I continue in your Highnesse's grace and favor, Bruin must
needs be under me, especially if this Honor be conferred on him, as for my
sake, that will make him always to act by my advice, and never to do any thing
without it. Besides, if he would be a Traitor, he is of himself so timorous and
fearful, that he must needs bewray himself. Therefore, for him I say thus much,
If ever he be found false to your Majesty, take off my Head. Well Cousin, said
the King, since you have so good opinion of him, I will for your sake do him
this Honor; and that I may the more firmly bind him to serve you, I will at
the same time make you Lord chief Baily of all my Dominions; only at the
receiving these Honors, you shall both of you solemnly swear fealty to me and
my Heirs for ever. At the hearing of this, the Fox (infinitely joyful no doubt,
for by these means he knew all power would be in his hand) vowed himself to the
King, and said; Noble Sir, I am not only willing to serve your Majesty in such
an high and honorable office, but should hold my self well contented to be
accounted your Highnesse's Vassal, since I see so great nobleness, as I am not
able to express. Well Reynard, said the King, I am willing to honor you thus,
because I repose in you so great trust, as I never in all my life did, in any
of my Subjects; For indeed I am so sufficiently persuaded of your Loyalty, as I
suppose I have no cause to doubt any Misdemeanor in you. Oh my Lord, said the
Fox, should I in the least act any thing repugnant to your Majesty's honor, I
should be worse than any Beast, and the most wretched of all Creatures. Then
the King said; Cousin, you have said enough, I believe you. Therefore call in
Sir Tibert, and I will order him to summon the Nobles to appear all here on the
morrow morning betimes. In the mean while you may go home to your own Castle,
until the time of their intended meeting be fully come.

The Fox hearing this, bowed his head, and departed full of joy and content;
but forgot not to send in Tibert to the King. Now when Tibert came before the
King, the King said, Sir Tibert, our will is, that you summon the Lords to be
all here too morrow morning, for I purpose to confer Honors on Sir Bruin and
your self, of which I would have them to be witnesses; also for the Lord
Reynard's good services, I intend, and fully resolve to make him chief Baily of
all my Dominions, therefore have you, and dispatch your Business.

CHAP. VIII.
How the Fox, Bear, and Cat, were honored by the King; and how the Bear and
Fox swore fealty.

THe Cat above measure joyed at this news, runs first to Bruin the Bear, and
acquaints him with the whole story; then he hastens to all the other Lords, and
last of all comes to Malepardus, where Reynard's Castle stood, into which he
enters, and not finding Reynard at home, (for he was gone forth to hunt) he
saluted Reynard'sWife and Children, (who were most of them of good stature) in
these words: Reverend Madam, and you noble Lords, I am hither sent by the Kings
Royal Majesty, to summon my Lord Reynard to the Court early on the morrow.
Having said this, away he runs to his own dwelling, and there remained until
morning. Now, the morrow being come, and the Lords all present in the Court,
the King sitting down among them, began his discourse thus.

My Lords and Friends, We have done much toward the settling of our affairs in
the choice and confirmation of the Lord Pitwood in his office of chief Prelate;
yet there seems something more of necessity to be done; for Sir Bruin has been
long our leige-man, and although of so high descent, as you all know we have
none nearer us by birth, except our own family, in all our Dominions^ yet we
have never unto this day conferred on him any singular specimen of honor.
Therefore our will and pleasure now is, before you all, to create him Earl of
the Forests, thereby to oblige him nearer to us, and to intimate to all our
Subjects in general, that we will honor as many, as either by birth, or
desert, ought to be honored. Also our will is, that Sir Tibert, for his
diligente in executing our commands, be admitted by my Lord Pitwood here
present, as his chief Clerk. We know he is able and capable of such an
Employment; therefore my Lord (directing his speech to the Wolf) I pray accept
of him as your Secretary, by me recommended. To this the Wolf replied, your
Majesty may command much more than this: I do here in this noble presence
accept of Sir Tibert as my chief Secretar^, and none other. Then the King
further said, We have great reason to honor those especially, who (if at any
time seeing us remiss) admonish us of our duty, therefore I am now fully
resolved to confer greater honor on our Cousin Reynard, the Preserver of our
Royal Crown and Dignity^ Having said this, he immediately before them all
called to him the Lord Reynard, and when he had kissed him, gave him a staff
headed with Gold; saying, this is our badg of honor, at all times to be born
before you, by your Cousin Grimbard; or in case he be not well at any time,
then by your Cousin Be^clas the Ape, so soon as he returns from Rome, whence he
is hourly expected; and with this Staff we give you power over all our
Subjects, and therefore constitute you Lord chief Baily of all our Dominions.
After the King had spoke this, the Fox bowing himself, said, Dread Sovereign, I
shall never be able sufficiently by words to express my thankfulness, being
wholly overcome by your Majesty's immense Bounty; but my Actions shall testify
my gratitude, to all your Subjects. Then the King, nodding his head and
smiling, said nothing to him, but called Sir Bruin, and said; Sir Bruin, I
create you Earl of the Forests, and if hereafter I have so ample a testimony of
your Loyalty, as I at this time persuade my self I shall, I will confirm the
same honor on your Heirs and Successors for ever. The Bear hearing this, made
obeisance and hum^^y thanked his Majesty. To this the King said, he had reason
^^^ewise to be thankful to his Cousin Reynard, who had (...) this great honor
for him. Then the Bear turned himself, and gave the Fox great thanks also. This
being Oaths taken by wicked Persons, are no longer binding to them, than till
they can see an opportunity of falcifying the same, to promote their ambitious
intents, as by the following story is evident in the Fox, and Bear, now sworn
before the King.
done, the King said, now there remains nothing, but that you two swear Fealty
to us, our Heirs and Successors. Then the Wolf (whose office it was to swear
them) gave them the Book, on which he bade each of them to lay his right hand,
and then say after him: So the Fox and Bear after him repeated these words: We
swear to be true and faithful to our Sovereign Lord the King, and directly or
indirectly to practice nothing against his Royal Crown and Dignity, etc. Having
said this, he bad them kiss the Book, so they did, and then rose up; for they
took their Oath kneeling.

This being done, the King dismissed all his Nobles; and to the Fox
particularly said; Now, my Lord Reynard, see that you deal justly to all my
Subjects, in deciding their causes impartially; for I am willing you should
your self redress the Grievances of my meaner Subjects; and what difference
shall arise among you my Nobles and Friends, of that I my self will have the
Decision. Then the Fox bowed himself, and said, All your Majesty's commands
shall be exactly obeye^ by me your most obliged.

Then Grimbard the Brock, receiving the Staff of Reynard, bore it before him;
and Pitwood the Wolf, Bruin the Bear, and all the other Nobles followed after,
and attended the Fox to his own Castle gates, where they took their leaves of
him, and returned every one to his own home.

CHAP. IX.
How Pitwood the Wolf went to Malepardus to commune and advise with his Cousin
Reynard about his own Affairs, and what was the Result of that Discourse.

AFter this, some-time being elapsed, Pitwood the Wolf, thought it necessary to
go to his Cousin Reynard. Therefore coming to Malepardus, he knocked, and one
of Reynard's Sons roming to the gate, opened it, and bowed himself to the Lord
Pitwood, saying, My Father is within; if your Lordship would speak with him. I
will go in and call him. I pray thee do, said the Wolf for I come for that end.
So Reynards Son told his Father, the Lord chief Prelate was come to speak with
him. He hearing this, hasted to the Gate, and there saluted his Uncle, in these
words, Reverend Uncle I joy to see you, I think it not expedient to invite your
Lordship to come into my House, therefore we (going to younder hedge) shall have
a very convenient place to sit down and talk together; for I know we shall
there have more privacy, then we can have within doors. Honorable Cousin said
the Wolf, I am always obliged to you for your readiness to serve me, but
especially for your providence and forecast; your self being so circumspect and
wise, as to be able to foresee convenience, or inconveniency, as often as need
is. By this time they were come to the Hedge, where the Fox sitting down first,
invited his Uncle to set by him. When he was sat, the Fox began thus; Uncle
Pitwood, I suppose by this time you perceive the profits of your office? Yes
Cousin, said the Wolf, I have indeed reaped no small benefit by my office, the
Perquisites are large, and I have received great presents, and those of so
great variety, as I never in all my life saw the like; besides, there quantity
is so great, as my own House will hardly contain them. I am glad to hear it,
said the Fox; but how fares it with all my Cousins, your Children and Nephews,
do they also thrive in their offices? Yes, very well, said the Lord Pitwood,
they tell me they have enough, and I believe them; for three or four of them
have lately taken Surfeits with eating (poor hearts.) O Uncle said the Fox,
that is nothing, perhaps their Stomachs were weak; but they will be well enough
in a little time. Yes, yes, Cousin, said the Wolf, I doubt it not. But good
Cousin, let me have your advice in some few things. Suppose I have more than I
can tell where to bestow, what shall I do with the remainder? shall I give it
to the King, This Chapter shows that Liberality is one main upholder of
Greatness, and that without it, Envy and Malice may so ^ar prevail as to be
able to shake, if not totally to ruin these that are in great honor and yet
very c^vetous: Besides, gifts blind the eyes and alter the understanding so, as
men are easily induced to approve of that now, which they the day before did
contemn as monstrous.
or build my House larger to receive all that comes, and your advice, shall I
give to the King, and so ingratiate my self further with him? Not so, said the
Fox, for the King seeing your great affluence of Riches, will begin to cut
short your other Revenues; supposing you will in time grow too mighty for him.
That Is very considerable, quoth the Wolf; what then? I perceive you allow of
enlarging my house? No, said the Fox, if you will take my advice, I see no
security in that, but would rather persuade you to enrich your Friends. How say
you! what Friends can I have in this high estate, which every one envies? To
this the Fox answers Uncle, did you ever know any one envied for giving? It is
not your high estate that causes envy; but the hatred of others against you,
is because they can reap no benefit by your greatness: Therefore, you cannot do
better for your self, nor better secure your own Grandeur than by pleasuring
some few of the Nobles with a small part of your wealth, now and then. Well
Cousin, said the Wolf, I will do so, but you must advise me to whom; for I know
not what to do in such a case as this? What to do, said the Fox, why know you
not that the Earl of the Forests, although mighty to see to, is but poor; and
though he as yet carry fare to you and me, yet if he partake not of part of our
Wealth he may in time prove a bitter enemy: Likewise Sir Firrapel the Libbard,
and Sly-look the Panther, are esteemed great, yet we well know that some small
pittance from us, will be so thankfully accepted by them, as we shall ever
after oblige them firmly to us. And Uncle, it is a very necessary point to be
thought on; for if we be diligent in obliging Friends so mighty, what is it we
may not do? Yet you must be sure to be mindful of your own Servitors that they
may not repine at your wealth; especially, look into your Secretaries profits;
if they be not large enough to content him, you must add more, till he holds
himself well contented. For he who would retain the greatness he at present
has, must not forget to reward his Attendants so, as they never utter one word
in his discommendation. Cousin, said the Wolf, I well understand you, and
purpose to put in practice what you have advised. So for that time they parted,
and the Wolf distributed his Goods among the before-recited Nobles, as freely
and as liberally as ever Wolf did. And the Fox according to the advice he had
given himself. did also largely reward those of whom he thought he stood in
greatest need, or in time to come might have occasion to use, and in his bounty
exceeded the Wolf by far.

CHAP. X.
How the Fox behaved himself in his Office, and of two Causes by him decided.

THe Fox (who knew it was no less wisdom to keep what is gotten, than to get
the same) notwithstanding his other affairs, (which now by reason of his Office
were many) waits and tends upon the King as formerly, always making great
Protestations of his Loyalty, touching which the King doubted not at all, the
Fox had so craftily insinuated himself into his affections. All being well on
this side, we now come to speak of his Decision of Causes and manifest
differences among the meaner sort of Subjects: And of these at this time we
mention only two.

The first is of a Bever and an Otter, who being at strife about Fish they had
taken, make their complaints before the Lord Reynard; the Otter first thus
begins; My Lord, this Bever has done me great wrong; for he and I were
Partners for many years, and all the Fish we got, we stored up in common, and
both his and my Family were fed thereof always in our need, especially in
Winter; and it happened, that this present Winter I expecting the same
privilege I formerly had, came for Fish in my need, but he denied me my right;
and having all the Fish in his possession, gave me not so much as one small
Fish. Therefore I am in necessity, having spent all I had to buy food for my
self and family. The Fox hearing this, asked the Bever, if it w^^e tru^? No,
said he, my Lord, this lying beast accuses me (...) f^y; for he and I were
never Partners, except that we have sometimes gone a fishing together, and
afterward made merry with our Booty. Besides he has not the right art of
Fishing, for he makes such a noise, when he is in the water, that all Fishes
that are near, fly with might and main; but I leap not into the water, before I
espy my prey ready and within my reach. By my discreet fishing I catch more
than two for his one; therefore my Lord, it is not to be imagined that I would
tie my self to so great an inconveniency as to labor for another. Then the Fox
asked the Bever, if he had any store of Fish by him? and he said, No my Lord.
When he heard this, he asked the Otter, what he said to that; had the Bever any
Fish by him, when you and he came last from home? Yes, said the Otter: Believe
him not, I beseech your Honor, quoth the Bever. So the Fox straightway
commanded two Officers to go to the Bevers house to search for Fish. When they
came there, they saw two Rooms one above another, full stored with dried Fish.
The Fish being so much, as they could not bare it away at several times going;
they carried none of it with them, but one stayed to guard the Fish, and the
other hastened to the Court of Judicature saying, My Lord, there is such store
of Fish, as I never saw before; for in the Bevers house are two Rooms full,
etc. When the Lord Reynard heard this, he proceeded to give sentence thus;
Since the Bever has falsely belyed his Neighbor, and denied him his just due,
he shall lose all his Fish. Then touching the Otter he said, since he had been
wronged, he should have one half of the Fish to make him reparation. The Orter
^ep^^ted well enough contented with this Sentence^ but the Bever was man at
heart. This Sentence was as exactly executed as pronounced, and the Fox had as
surely had half the Fish for his pains.

After this there happened a great difference between certain Daws and Rooks.
The occasion take as follows. In an high Tower, appert^ining to a Country-Town,
where men formerly had dwelt, a company of Dawes took up their habitations, and
had dwelt there so long as until they became very numerous. Right against this
Tower, were planted Elmes, which in length of time were grown up to a very
great height; in the upper part of which, at first a few, and afterward many
Rocks but^t N^sts and settled their. These two kinds kinds being so near
N^ighbou^s, at length grew into acquaintance, and familiarity one with another:
the Rooks pretending great kindness to the D^wes, were by them admitted into
their Houses, and sometimes feasted; the Rooks likewise invited the Daws to
them, feasting them after the same manner. This reciprocal entertainment
continued a long time, until a scarce and hard Season came. Then the Rooks
watching their opportunity, when the old Dawes were gone forth, (for it was
Springtime, and they had young ones) being greatly pressed with hunger, agreed
all together to rob the Dawes, and fearing the noise of the young Dawes would
bewray their intentions, it was resolved among them, first to kill all they
found in every house. With this resolution they all at once flew out, and one
or two of them went into every house and slew all the young ones, some of which
in carrying out they let fall, by reason of their haste; but as many as they
could hold, they carried into their own Nests, and returned immediately and
took away all the Provisions they could find (which was not much by reason of
the scarcity of the time) and carried that home also. Then with speed some of
them flew out to purvey, as at other times, but (by reason of their own hunger)
m^de haste home. By this time were the old Dawes also returned with provision
for their Young, whom they never more saw alive. Therefore smelling the deceit,
some of the boldest of them flew over to their Neighbors, and coming unawares
upon the^, could easily see the torn limbs of their children. Others of them
flying again downwards, espied under the Tower-walls several of their
younglings lying dead. At this, they were all so much enraged, as had not some
of the wisest among them diss^aded them from it, they would have suddenly in an
hostile manner assailed their Enemies. Therefore they took up this resolution,
namely, that they would complain of their Grievances to the King of Beasts. But
after it was told them that the King himself would not meddle in their matters,
because he had deputed his Cousin Reynard, they all fly to him, and lighting on
a Tree* nighth the place of Judicature, they called aloud, Justice, Noble Lord
Reynard. Reynard being informed of this Cry, immediately came forth, and
sitting down, said, What is the matter? They said, my Lord, avenge our cause of
those persidious Rooks, who have slain our Children and robbed us of all our
substance. To this, the Fox replied, how shall I know your complaint is just,
unless I also hear those that be accused? At this, they all flew away home, and
being there, called to their Neighbors the Rooks, telling them they must
appear before the Lord Reynard. To this the Rooks answered, that was no lawful
Summons; nevertheless, they would not stick to appear, being sufficiently able
to clear themselves. So some of the oldest of the Rooks flew first to the Court
of Judicature; the Daws seeing that, made haste after them. When both had
lighted on Trees as near the Foxes seat, as they could, the Dawes as before,
exhibit their complaint. To this the Rooks answer, My Lord, these Dawes here
present, belie us shrewdly; for we as well as they were gone forth to purvey
for Necessaries; but their young ones intheir absence crawled out, and fell
down, and so died; some of which are to be seen* at this present, broken to
pieces against the Stones; and this is the cause why these Varlets accuse us,
who are as innocent as your Lordship. To this the Fox answered, it is strange
that all the young ones in every house should at one time be alike disposed to
crawl out; I suspect the truth of this matter, and cannot acquit you, unless
you can by substantial Witnesses, evidence the truth of your Assertion. Then
the oldest of the Rooks said, My Lord we are able to produce Witnesses enough,
some of which saw this downfall of the young Dawes. Go to then, said the Fox,
produce them. Then hasted one or two of the Rooks, and in a short time produced
all the rest of their It is dangerous for guilty persons to come within the
Judge his power.
fellows, who had an hand in the former Massacre of the Dawes. When these
Witnesses were come, the Fox commanded them down to be sworn: Therefore down
they came (though unwillingly) and after they were sworn, and ready to give
evidence, he would not hear them, before the other Rooks, who were accused,
were also come down off the Trees, and brought to the Bar. Now said he to the
Witnesses, let us hear what you can say. We, my Lord, said one of them, were
eyewitnesses of what happened to the young Dawes; for they came all to the doors
of their houses, and there looked one upon another, until at length, striving
(as it seems) to fly (before they were able) they all tumbled down headlong.
Now indeed, we seeing they were fallen and dead, took up every-one of us one of
them, and carried them home, because we knew they were dead. When these our
Kinsfolks, who are now arraigned, came home, we told them the whole story; they
allowed of what we had done; because that was free booty, yet to avoid the
ill will of our Neighbors, they would not suffer us to fetch up any more of
their dead bodies. Now it is true, that some of the Dawes flying over to us,
did see many of us the Witnesses eating of the dead bodies of their Children,
and therefore without one word speaking, they falsely affirmed to your Lordship
that we had slain their children* and robbed them, So then said the Fox, you
deny you have robbed them, yet confess you eat the dead Younglings. Now where
are stolen goods to be found, but in the possession of the Thief? Therefore by
your own evidence you have condemned your selves, and I can do no less in
equity than to condemn you all to be strangled, as a just recompense for your
heinous Massacre. When he had said this, the Fox's Attendants strangled every
one of them in a moments time; but their dead bodies were delivered Crafty men
willingly forgo, and readily give away what is not their own, nor ever like to
be in their possession, as here is evident, by the Fox, who gives the Dawes the
Rookes Nests, because he knew not how to come at them.
by T^le into the Lord Reynard's Kitchen. The D^wes seeing what was done,
rejoiced greatly, and bowing themselves to the Fox, said, Honored Sir, we are
infinitely bound to your Lordship, for that you have so justly avenged our
cause on the Murderers of our Children. The Fox answered, I could do no less;
sor I plainly perceived they were guilty, both of Murder and Theft; therefore
I give you all the Houses and Goods remaining of these Miscreants, (although
indeed my own Pexquisites) that you may ever after live^secure from such
treacherous Neighbors.

Now when the Dawes had humbly thanked the Fox, they took their leaves and
departed; and from that day forward would never after have any Fellowship with
Rooks.

CHAP. XI.
How the Fox liberally bestowed what he got, among the Nobles, and of the
Communication that was held by them at a general Meeting.

THe Fox in this manner handling all matters so, as When aspiring Subjects
abound in Wealth, the Kings royal person and power is liable to great danger.
which way soever the scale turned, profit should redound to him, partly by
Brides taken privily on both sides, and partly by the Forfeitures of the
condemned, had got together an infinite mass of Wealth. Then knowing his own
great Riches, he aspired to advance his estate yet higher, yea even above his
Master, that had honored him so highly, and had given him power sufficient to
endanger his own Crown and Dignity. Therefore, to proceed surely (as he
thought) to his before-imagined Grandeur, he shows himself much more liberal
than formerly, enrighing all the Nobles, and their Followers and Retinue, among
which he most of all gratified Sir Tibert the Cat, giving to him very largely.
By this liberal giving, he was the only eminent person in the land (as they who
were so greatly benefited by him judged) that was endued with Wisdom, Policy,
and great Riches. To Pitwood the Wolf (though he had wealth enough of his own
he also forgot not to send several Presents, not once or twice, but oftener. He
holding this course with the Nobles, was not in the mean while unmindful of
waiting often on the King, and with smooth words, and a lying pret^nce of
honesty, to ^ull him asleep even to a Lethargy of security; for the King being
old, and hearing no complaints, was well pleased, that he had constituted a
Substitute who was able and willing to free and discharge him of all trouble
Thus the Fox, concealing his intent, seemingly behaded himself most uprightly
and indeed he was so circumspect as he would never divulge his mind, until he
saw a manifest occasion offer it self very plainly. Some time being passed, the
Nobles were all met together at the Lord Pitwood's house, to which Meeting the
Fox came not, but attended on the King, whether necessitated thereunto, or
purposely is not well known At this meeting, the Fox's great worth was highly
magnified and Pitwood himself extolled him to the skies, adding withal, that he
was fit to rule a Kingdom. These words being minded by those who judged all he
said to be true, spurred them on to speak disloyally of their Sovereign.
Therefore B^uin the Bear broke his mind Also the Princes security is the
disloyal Subjects advantage; and whenever any man in power is magnified (by
other potent men) above his Master, and the King his Master evil spoken of,
actual Treason is ready to be produced, as this Chapter clearly shows.
thus. He is indeed a most worthy person, and is more mindful to recompense and
pleasure his Friends, than the King himself; for what gives he to any of us? If
we bring him Presents, he for the present only thanks us, and afterward never
more thinks of us, or our Present; but the Lord Reynard expects no gifts from
us, and yet is never weary of conferring Benefits on us. To this Bittelas the
Ape assented (for he was newly come from Rome) and said, My Nephew the Lord
Reynard is not only wise, but courteous, affable, and exceeding mindful of
Benefits; yea, and where he neither has, nor can expect to have reaped any
commodity, there also his benevolence is largely extended. It is true indeed,
said Firrapel the Libbard; and his near Kinsman, Sly-look the Panther owned as
much. At length one among them said, if a vacancy should happen, shall we not
do well to elect Reynard for our lawful King? Yes, said another, we may do well
in so doing; but it is not time to talk of such matters as yet. No, no, said
Pitwood the Wlof, we shall endanger our Heads by such a discourse (as this) if
it should happen to come to the Kings ear. Besides, for us to imagine such a
thing, before we consult with the Lord Reynard thereabout, to know whether he
will accept of our good endeavors, and stand by us in it, and assist us with
his wealth and friends, I judge it a very great imprudence, if not a rash and
hazardous folly.

To these words of his, they all assented, and for that time sp^ke no more
thereabout.

CHAP. XII.
How Bitelas the Ape informed Reynard of all that passed at the Meeting of the
Lords.

ON the morrow early, Bitleas the Ape journeyed to his Nephew Reynard's Castle,
and when he was let in he spoke to the Fox in this manner:

Honored Nephew, I hear your commendations so highly commemorated, as I am
above measure joyed thereat. The Nobles are all at your devotion, there is not
one of them, but he is ready to hazard Life and Fortune for your further
advancement: You know my meaning Nephew, do you not? Yes Uncle, said the Fox, I
know it well enough; for I can step but one step higher, and I think it not
time as yet to begin that Ascent. No no, said the Ape, you mistake me Nephew,
if you think I mention this to engage your Lordship into any rash attempt but
rather that you knowing your Friends, may the better understand how to use
them, when occasion is. You speak very well Uncle, said the Fox. Will you do
one thing ^or me? Yes, said the Ape, that I will Cousin if possi^^e. Then said
the Fox, go to every of the Lords apart, and sound them, to see how they stand
affected; and bring me an exect account.

So the Ape with all diligence sounded them, and found not one dissenting, but
largely promising to hazard all to invest the Lord Reynard with Regal Power.
Only he As in all Treasons, some one principal person is employed by the Grand
Projector, to sound the intentions of all the Conspirators, so here the Ape is
employed by the Fox to fathom the Affections and Resolutions of all the other
Confederate. Traitors. This shows great craft in the Projector; for if any one
had dissented he then had a fair occasion to accuse all the other, and so clear
himself.
perceived that the Bear scrupled his Oath to the King; because he said If he
were but absolved therefrom, he would be none of the backwardest to promote
this design. All this he related to Reynard three days after. Then Reynard
said. smiling, Uncle you have done me a great kindness, I will repay it ere
long. As for Bruin's doubt, I can easily remove it; for I am sure the Lord
Pitwood will absolve both him and my self from that Oath extorted from us by
the King, so soon as time shall serve for effecting this business: Yet we must
not only rely on the Favor of the Lords, but by the best means we can, engage
the Commons also. It is true Nephew, said the Ape; but how that will be done. I
cannot tell; for if Soldiers should be listed, that would never be done so
secretly, but it would be bl^zed abroad, and so come easily to the King's ear.
No Uncle, said the For, that is not the way. We must proceed after another
manner than visibly to raise any Soldiers: Each Lord, must by promise and
reward engage as many of the Commons as he can, pretending a private Quarrel,
in which he would have their assistance, and therefore enjoin them to be ready
armed at any time, when he shall call.

Bitelas the Apt, admiring his Nephews Wisdom, said, This is the direct way to
raise an Army invisibly. To this the Fox said, if we intend to effect our
business thoroughly, we must not visibly raise Soldiers until the hour appointed
be fully come; then how squares will go we shall soon know; and if our first
Exploit prosper, all the other will succeed accordingly, and we shall need the
fewer Soldiers. Therefore the stress of all lies in managing the business well
at first: If we miscarry at first, our Design will scarcely be effected; ney,
it is well if our own Ruin fall not in as an Appendix. The Ape hearing this,
said, You do well Cousin to promise the worst; this seems to me a sure presage
of the future Event, that it will be exceeding prosperous. Well Uncle, said the
Fox, if it prosper, and I obtain my desired end, I will honor and reward you
above all others.

Thus did the Fox disloyally intend the ruin of his Sovereign, his greatest
friend, to whom he had solemnly sworn fealty; but what success he had, shall
hereafter be showed.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Discourse between the Fox and the Wolf, and of another Meeting of the
Lords, and what was agreed on among them.

THe Fox, now filled with hopes of obtaining the height of all power, resolved
to let pass no opportunity of promoting his design; therefore, the first
leisure-time he had, he bestowed in Conference with the Wolf. Who not only
promised his Assistance, but also to absolve him, and the Bear from their Oath
of fidelity. Telling the Fox, that all the Lords he was sure were like minded
with him. If so, said the Fox, it were necessary, loving Uncle, to summon the
Lords as privately as may be. That is done already, said the Wolf, and they
will be all here by and by; but I willed the Messenger not to summon you,
because I intended so soon as they were all sat down, to dispatch an Herald
presentl^ to you. This course I thought would be best, for whosoever should at
that time have been with you, they would have judged, that the King was here,
and so not have offered their service to come and attend you hither, because of
the haste all know you are wont to make when his Majesty sends.

By this time, several of the Lords were come in, most of them entering through
the back-gate, for fear of being suspected Now as every one came in, he first
saluted the Fox with great Reverence, then the chief Prelate Isegrim, lately
styled P^twood. When all were come, and each sat down orderly in his wonted
place, Pitwood the Wolf stood up, and bowing himself a little, said, My Lords,
here is now present the Noble and Puissant Lord Reynard, of whom Fame has made
such a loud report etc. I have disclosed your intentions to him, and he very
well approving thereof, now gives you this meeting. Then the Fox stood up and
said, My Lords and loving Fridnds. I am not ignorant of your affectionate
desire to advance me yet one step higher than I at present am. I also am
informed that for effecting this, you will hazard Life and Fortune, (for which
I give you great thanks, and will not fail to return a proportionable
recompense, if ever I attain ^he wished end) yet I cannot understand, you have
to your selve^ proposed what way to take to bring about your purpose. Then Sir
B^uin the Bear, lately made Earl of the Forests, said, Noble Lord Reynard, we
are all ready to serve you, and follow the Directions your Lordship shall think
good to propose. The Fox hearing this, said, he could propose an expedient
course, which being taken, would further the design, and yet not be perceived;
but before he did that, he desired to be absolved from the Oath of Fealty,
which he and Bruin the Bear swore to the King. The Lord Pitwood hearing this,
stood up and said? I here absolve you, Lord Reynard, and you Sir Bruin, of the
Oath you have taken, etc. and you are absolved. After this, the bowing himself,
began to speak thus. Worthy Friends, it is well known unto us all, that we have
need of the Commons; for as no man can work without hands, so we can never
accomplish what we intend, without the assistance of many more than we out
selves are. Also for procuring their assistance we must not publicly invite,
or solicit any, or otherwise hire and list, as is usual in such Cases.
Therefore there is but one way left us and that is best and will be most
secure. The way is this; Let every one of us here present, by promise and
reward, oblige as many of the Commons as we can, telling them we require their
assistance in a private quarrel, and therefore would have them be ready (but
secretly) in Arms, till we do call for them: This way will both conceal our
design and our selves, until we Here it appear^, that Flattery and
Dissimulation are necessary concomitants of Treason: for had not the Fox waited
on the King as formerly, his absence had given cause of suspicion.
think good to disclose our selves and it. The Nobles hearing the Foxes
proposal, approved thereof; and highly praising his Wisdom, said, They would
put in practice what he had so prudently advised to. Then he again stood up and
said, Worthy Friends, if you think good to put in practice our advice, we also
judge it expedient, that all speed possible be used, because delay may produce
danger; and indeed such designs as this should be as soon executed as thought
on. Therefore I request you, and as Confederates adjure you to use all
diligence this evening, and all day too morrow, to oblige as many as you can,
and then to meet here to morrow-night, that we may determine what to do, and
appoint the hour, in which we will set about the business, and dispatch it.

Having said this, the Meeting broke up, and the Lords went forth one by one,
as privily as they could.

CHAP. XIV.
Of their last meeting, and how they determined to surprise the Also Misereants
before they attempt dangerous Designs, forecast how in secure themselves if it
happen their intentions befrustrated; as here is evident by the ^ox his
^ortilying, and furnishing his Castle to abide a siege, if need should be.
King and Court the next night following.

THe next day the Fex went to Court, and tarried with the King until
Dinnertime; then with great submission and seeming Loyalty he took his leave
of him; who doubting nothing, dismissed the Fox with great cheerfulness.

When Reynard came home, he was not idle, but stayed at home all that day, not
only to view the Fortifications of his Castle, (for he under pretense of
repairing it, had already fortified it strongly) which he liked well, but also
to examine his stores of Provision, observing what was deficient, and supplying
the same that day, that if need were) he might abide a Siege to the confusion
of his Enemies, as he still steadfastly hoped. Therefore such Soldiers as he
levied privily, he kept there, with a plentiful allowance of all that was
needful.

Now the Evening being come, so soon as it was quite Qui malum agit lucem
fugit. Conspiracies and Treasons can at no time so commodiously be contrived as
in the Night; because then Conspirators may meet together unseen, and pass away
undiscovered.
dark, he goes to the Wolfe's house, where he found all the Nobles just come in
before him He observing that not one was missing, concluded that all were right
for his purpose, (as indeed they at that time were) therefore he, full of joy
and content, spoke to them on this manner. Worthy Friends, I am not a little
pleased to see you all so unanimous. To this they all said they would live and
die with him. Then he bowing himself, said, If your Resolution be such after
you have declared what power you have in readiness, I will disclose my
intentions, touching the time and manner of execution. As to our Power, said
Sir Firrapel the Libbard, we had a general Meeting in the Forest before we came
hither, because we would be rightly informed thereabout; and among us all,
except only the Lord Pitwood, who was not with us, we find we are able to raise
at an hours warning three thousand Soldiers. Then the Wolf said, and I, my
Lord, am assured of four hundred, at as short a warning. Well then, said the
Fox, I perceive your Loyalties, for which I give you thanks; I my self have
also Six hundred Soldiers ready when I call for them. These Forces reckoned
together, will amount to no less than Four thousand, a power sufficient to
carry our Design through all opposition and difficulty. Having said this, he
paused a little; and at length stood up again, and said, Worthy Friends, it now
remains, that we fully and unanimously agree about the time and manner of
executing our Design. Therefore, Noble Sirs, if any of you can devise a better
way, for effecting what we intend, than I my self have thought upon, I would
have him speak first. To this they all replied, Noble Lord Reynard, we all are
your Honors Servants, you may command us, we cannot advise you; but whatsoever
you shall propose, that we will do to the utmost of our power. let the event be
what it will. The Fox hearing this, said, For this your Loyalty, I will reward
every one of you with such gratuities, as you could Hopes of Reward, and future
advancement makes Conspirators bold and adventurous. Besides, all Traitors
themselves are very liberal in promising; as appears by the Fox, who promises
to exceed the King his Master, against whom he conspires, and of whom he
contempt^ously speaks.
never expect from the present King. And, as to the time and manner of
execution (since you leave, it to me) my judgment is, that the sooner the
better; yet because it is necessary that our Friends and Allies, (I mean the
Commons by us engaged) should have timely notice to be ready; I find it is not
possible to set about the business sooner than to morrow night. Therefore I
would have you, and all your Soldiers to be ready embattelled in the Forest to
morrow in the Evening, setting out spies every way to intercept all Passengers,
that no Tales may be told: Then will I, when I see the time, give command for
you to march. But first, I would have two or three of you, with your Soldiers
to go to the Court, and if possible to surprise the same, then by a Messenger
to signify the Surprisal thereof to us, that we may with all our Forces come
in immediately to repress all Resistance whatsoever that may be made by any of
the King's Sons, or Kinsfolks, if they happen to escape the first comers, and
should by that Alarm draw to themselves a multitude of Auxiltaries which may
frustrate our intentions. For it is to be understood, that if we do not our
business to purpose, we shall never long hold our gettings in peace and
quietness; therefore, since I well know, that the King and his Sons be strong
and valiant, I think it Evil Designs are never thoroughly executed, without
great effusion o^ b^o^d; for the shadow of a m^n^ter^^^es a M^rthere^,
especially i^ it be of an Allie in blood to the person murdered; as here the
Fox
most expedient for you Sir Firrapel, with your Cousin Slylook, to take with
you your own Forces, and such as will voluntarily follow you; and at the time I
shall give command to march first (yet secretly) to the Court, and there to
demean your selves right valiently, that you may with the greatest speed, and
least noise, surprise the same; above all, be sure you take care that neither
the King himself, nor any one of his Children, or Nephews (who I understand are
all to sup with the King to morrow Night) escape your hands but be either taken
alive, or killed outright. Having said this, the Libbard and Panther stood up
promising to undertake the charge imposed on them, resolving either to effect
it thoroughly, or to die in the attempt. The Fox thanked them, and added, Worthy
Friends, we cannot be too commands, that neither the King, nor any of his
Kindred should be spared; his reason he gives before.
circumspect, or wary in this matter; therefore I judge it fit to use one policy
more, and it is this. Do you two go to the Court to morrow in the forenoon, and
acquaint the King that I am gone a hunting for to recreate my self a little,
because I have lately been greatly wearied with my multiplicity of business,
and also that the Lord Pitwood is busy in preparing a Prepsent for his
Majesty. Then do you enquire of his Sons and Nephews how they do, and he will
answer, they will all be here anon: you hearing that, may say, you will come in
the Evening, and salute their Lordships. By this means your approach in the
Evening will be less suspecte^, and you design much more easily effected. They
hearing this humbly thinked his Lordship for his singular advice, which rendered
their work so easy, as they now had no doubt of accomplishing the same. Then
the Fox directing his Speech to the other Lords. said, As for you my Lord
Pitwood: I leave to you the leading the ^an of the Body of the Army remaining;
and to you Sir B^uin I commit the Care of the Rear. I pray, my Lords* be
careful and circumspect, command your Soldiers to march with silence; so soon
as you are marched out of the Forest, you shall see me with my Six hundred
Soldiers. Yet I will not join with you, but march on one side, at a convenient
distance, that I may the better observe what is to be done; and also, the more
commodiously receive intelligence and give instructions, or come in to rescue
if need be* My Intelligencers or Scouts shall be Sir Tiberts Lineage, over whom
he himself shall be Captain. This is my Determination, therefore doubt him not*
And although in this my charge, I have particularly spoken un^o four of you
only, yet (as your friend) I request, and (as your Chieftain) command you all
to be prudent, and very wa^y in your proceedings, let each of you advise; and
encourage his own Soldiers, and by your obedience to your Supertors, teach them
to be obedient to your self; for thus doing, you your selves shall reap the
profit, and I be the more engaged to serve you in time to come. Upon this, they
all again promised to hazard Life and Fortune, and to be every one (according
as he should be placed that day) obedient to his Superior. After this, they
depart ^ach to his home, for by thi^ time it was very late.

CHAP. XV.
How Sir Firrapel the Libbard, and his Cousin Sly-look, revealed the whole
Treason to the King, etc.

ON the morrow when Sir Firrapel and his Cousin met, they both looked less
theerful then they were wont; and therefore asked each other the cause of his
sadness. The Libbard first spoke thus:

Cousin, I am troubled with the thoughts of what we are going about; for I
consider we have no reason to be Traitors Relenting thoughts in Conspirators,
prove dangerous to grand Projectors.
to our Sovereign, because he never in the least degraded or injured us, but
always admitted us as Friends and Companions; and indeed he is a Prince
deserving the love and not the hatred of all his Subjects, much more of his
Lords, and in an especial manner of the Lord Reynard, and his Uncle Isegrim,
since called Pitwood. But now engaged as we are, we are in such a straight as
what to do I cannot tell.

Then the Panther said, Truly Cousin, I know not what to think, I have been so
perplexed all this night with the consideration of my Disloyalty, as I am now
even at my Wits end. If we bewray the Plot to the King, he is so well conceited
of the Lord Reynard, as he will not believe us; and so we are in danger of
death for falsely accusing him, who is the falsest of all living, and will not
stick to ruin all us, so he may but escape himself. Besides, his language is so
smooth, and he is so crafty and subtle as it will be impossible to prove a
tittle of all we can say against him. No, no, said the Libbard, if we having
declared all to the King, request him to detain us in his Court but for one
day, until our Loyalty be proved or disproved, and in the mean while not be
known we have bewrayed the Plot; we when the time appointed is come, may look
over the Battlements and call to Sir Tibert (who will be sure to lie very near,
that he may give intelligence) telling him the King and his Sons are dead, the
Lord Reynard may now come in securely; then we shall quickly see our selves out
of danger, and the Authors of our trouble brought to condign punishment.
Cousin, said the Panther, I like your counsel well; but if we be detained in
Court all day, and come not with our Soldiers in the Evening to the place of
Rendezvous, Reynard will presently smell the matter, and let fall his present
design, but immediately run to Court and accuse us. It Is true indeed, said the
Libbard, we are in a bad case if we reveal the Treason, and it is very
hazardous if we reveal it not, and any other do; our danger will be the
greater. Therefore, since we are so straightened, it is better for us of these two
Evils to choose the least, and speedily to reveal the Treason, let the event be
what it will.

To this the Panther consented; and so they went together to Court. When they
were come before the King, and This Chapter shows, that some men are easily
wrought upon to consent to Treason, yet will very un willingly put the same in
practice; but rather, to save themselves, reveal the whole Conspiracy, as here
the Libbard and Panther did.
had vowed themselves, they thought to have spoke, but neither of them could
for shame and grief. The King noting their dejected Countenances, said,
Friends, why are you so sad? O Sir, said the Libbard, the consideration of your
Majesty's clemency, and our own unworthiness, is the cause of our present
grief. Why (said the King) speak you thus; Because Sir, said the Panther, we
have been so unworthy, and indeed so false to your Majesty, as to know of a
Treason (intended against your Royal Person, Crown and Dignity) for at least
four days, and not to reveal it; and that which most of all perplexeth us, is,
that we gave our consents, and promised to aid and assist the Traitors against
your Majesty.

Here the King interrupted him; saying, Treason! and would have spoke more, but
for rage could not ot present. Iu a little time his wrath abating, he sternly
said, Who be the Traitors? At which words the Panther and Libbard trembled
exceedingly, and said, We he those Traitors who dissoyally conspired your
Majesty's Death. The King hearing this, knew not what to say, but supposed they
were mad. Therefore he again asked them; What, do you accuse your selves, are
you Traitors? Ye^, we are, said they. Then the King said would you have p^rdon?
Yes, said they, if your Majesty so please. Pleased I am to pardon all that of
themselves make complaint first; therefore I here pardon you, how soul soever
the Treason be, provided you will reveal the whole ^onspiracy, and
Conspirators. At these words they took courage, and (after Obeisance) said We
will not only reveal the whole Treason exactly, from point to point as it is,
but will also (if your Majesty will act by our advice) deliver all, or most of
the Traitors into your own hands, to deal with them as your Highness shall
think fit. Well, said the King, first let me know the Conspiracy, and
Conspirators.

So they in all points declared the whole Treason and Traitors, from beginning
to end, as you have heard. Then the King said, How say you, all the Lords! Yes,
Sir, said they from the highest to the lowest, there was not one that consented
not. It is true indeed Sir, Tibert was not at our Meetings, but he must needs
be privy to it; for he is made Captain of the Scouts that are to go before the
Army; and undoubtedly he may be seen in or about the Court this night, if a
diligent search be made for him. The King hearing this, was above measure
troubled and would often have sent for Reynard, had not his eldest Son, and his
other Friends present, persuaded him to the contrary; saying, We have often
heard your Majesty say, you have twice saved Reynard from death, and that his
Loyalty of late had so far repaid the Recompense of all his former
Misdemeanors, that you had no cause to repent of all, or any your Favors. Has
it not been too, too often seen, that some who receive greatest Benefits, are
most ungrateful to their Benefactors? And is there not a Proverb, Save a Thief
from the Gallows, he will hang you if he can? All this is true, said the King,
but sure our Cousin Reynard is not a Traitor. To this, his Son and Friends
said, Sir, while your Majesty is of this mind, the depth of this Treason can
never be sufficiently known; for if Reynard be sent for, he will deny all, and
(if he be guilty, as we believe he is) acense others most malielously, and so A
well meaning man cannot easily be perswnded to entertain bad thoughts of any
one, that has ^ormerly been his friend; as appears here by the King, who would
not believe that Reynard was a Traitor, etc.
(if your Majesty give credit to his words) escape himself, and another time
put that in practice effectu^lly, which now (we have good reason to hope) he
can never be able to accomplish. With these and the like words, the King was
withdr wn from his intent of sending for Reynard the Fox. Therefore he turning
to the Panther and Libbard, said: Which way can you enervate this Treason, and
deliver the Traitors into our hands? They answered, My Lord we think it not
possible to deliver Reynard himself, because he already intends to come last;
and in surprisal of the other Lords, some one or other of Tiberts Lineage will
enter in among them, and then seeing what is done, acquaint Reynard therewith;
but for most of the other Lords, we may make sure of, before any thing of our
intent is perceived, if Tibert, who will be sure to come this night, enter not
with us into Court, For if your Majesty will be rightly informed by the effect,
and be resolved to take your Traitors acting their Treason, we must have leave
to dep^rt and go to the place of Rendezvous, at the time appointed to meet the
Soltiers by us levied, which will be near Six hundred; with these Soldiers we
(with your Majesty's leave) will enter the Court, and least Tibert should
discover our intent, will counterfeit a fight, as against your Majesty's Guard,
and then rushing in, will by and by cry, all is our own. When this is done, one
of us will call to Tibert, and send him away, telling him we have slain all the
Fox ordered should be slain, and charge him to make haste. Thus we shall
accomplish all things well; and undoubtedly, before intelligence can be given
to Reynard, entangle most of the Nobles in their e^^n Net.

The King liking the yrosect, consented to their departure; Here is also showed
how necessary the advice of Friends is, in a time of great danger.
and so soen as he had dismissed them, he consulted with his Friends what to
do. They advise him to double his Guards, and to call in as many of his Friends
as could be called in so short a time; but that all might be kept secret) not
to acquaint them with the present danger. The King did all things as they
advised, and ordered all private Avenues belonging to the Court, to be stopped,
lest Tibert or any of his Lineage should enter thereat.

CHAP. XVI.
How the Forces of the Lords met at the place appointed, and how Firrapel, and
Sly-look entered the Court, and ensnared most of the Confederates, and among
them Tibert the Cat.

SIr Firrapel the Libbard, and Sly-look the Panther, were no sooner gone from
Court, but they hasted all they could to Reynard, who was at home waiting their
coming; for the whole hindge of his business depended on their Intelligence,
how squares went at Court. When they came near his Castle, he came forth and
met them, and said, My noble Friends you are welcome, how is it you stayed so
long? To this they answered, Most excellent Lord Reynard, after we had spoke
unto the King according to the Instructions we received from your self; he
entertained us with a large discourse of your Merits, telling us how highly he
was pleased with your Lordships great diligence, by which he could Here is
Treason repaid with Treachery.
take his pleasure without fear or care, adding many such like expressions too
long to be now recited; we were constrained to stay by this occasion, otherwise
we had waited on your Lordship sooner. All is well, said the Fox, you are come
soon enough. I would have you now to mind your Levies, and see your Soldiers be
all well armed. for fear of the worst, because you know, it is ordered that you
give the onset. To this they replied, My Lord, we are ready to obey your
command, and so they departed about their Levies, but not with the same intent
as Reynard supposed. So soon as it began to be dark, the Soldiers in Troops
repaired to the Forest, where their Lords were ready to attend them; and when
they were all come, they embatteled them as soon as was possible. Reynard's
Espials giving him Intelligence they were all ready, he gave command for their
March; accordingly Sir Firrapel and his Cousin Sly-look marched out with their
Six hundred Soldiers, having not many Volunteers out of the other Companies,
because each Lord strove to have most Soldiers. Reynard met this Forlorn Hope,
and saluted the Leaders very courteously. but spoke not loud. So on they march
until they come to the Court-gates. When there, they stand a little, and make a
pretended scuffle with the Kings Guard, who well know the Kings mind and so
resisted but coldly. But before Sir Firrapel was entered himself, he charged
Tibert the Cat to wait in one certain place without the gate that he might the
better inform him how squares went; and he, when it was time to be gone, have
no let; withal charging him to command his Soldiers to lie close round about
the Walls of the Court, that if called to on any side, they might presently be
ready to run and give intelligence. Tibert did as he was commanded Now, when
Sir Firrapel and his Cousin Sly-look with all their Soldiers were entered, and
had stayed within some small time. Sir Firrapel failed not to call to Tibert
aloud, saying, the day is our own haste quickly and tell our Lord Reynard, that
all are dead whom he commanded should be killed. Tibert hearing this, sent two
of his Soldiers to the Lord Pitwood, who was not far with the whole Army, to
tell him the News; but ran himself to the Lord Reynard, and said, Most noble
Lord, your renowned Captains Firrapel, and Sly look, have fully executed your
Lordships commands, and all your Enemies are dead; this they have me tell you.
The Fox hearing this, said, It is good news indeed, if it be true: True Sir,
said the Cat, I Will warrant you Nevertheless the Fox, like an old Soldier, would
not believe the first report, but sent away Politic persons believe not
reports by Hearsay, but require a Testimony from fight
Sir Tibert, commanding him to enter into the Court, if possible, and then to
tell him what he knew. In the mean while, Reynard commanded Pitwood the Wolf to
march up to the Court-gates with the whole Army embattelled as they were, and
then to make a stand, and call to him all the Commanders to advise what was fit
to be done, still (as before) wishing him to proceed warily, and to be well
informed, before he attempted any thing. But the Wolf, being over-credulous,
and above measure joyful at the News he had heard, forgot all counsel of
wariness. Therefore, being come up, he found Sir Firrapel, and his Cousin
Sly-look, standing without the Court-gate, with all their Soldiers ready
embattelled within. At this sight, he was confirmed in his former conceit, and
therefore stepping a little before the Army, he saluted them, congratulating
their prosperous success. To this they answer, We indeed, noble Covetous and
greedy minded men, forgetting all good and wholesome counsel given them, rush
headlong upon their own ruin, where matter of profit is strewed as a bait.
Lord Pitwood, did at first find some resistance, but our Soldiers courageously
fighting, soon overcame the Guard and then the King and his Friends were
without difficulty dispatched. Now my Lord, if it be your pleasure to walk in,
and if your Honor will send for all the Comman^ers, we may the better consult
what is fit to be done within, when we are all together; and besides here is
store of Provisions, which were left of the Feast. Here the Wolf interrupted,
Provisions Sir, said he! I am in truth very hungry, having walked about all
this night; and with these words proffered to go in. Then Sir Firrapel said I
beseech your Lordship first to command the Army to stand still embattelled as
they are, and then to send for Sir Bruin, and our other noble Commanders;
otherwise, if your Lordship only enter your self, the other Lords will suspect
some Treason is plotted by us, and so an irrecoverable distraction and danger
will follow. It is well considered Sir Firrapel, said the Wolf. So the Wolf
presently commanded the Army to stay and rest themselves there, where they
were, but that the Commanders should all repair unto him, now gone into the
Court. Which order was scarcely well understood, before the Wolf was entered
within the Court-gate, he was in such haste to fill his belly, as he supposed
he should. Now with him Sir Tibert would have entered, but the Soldiers
diligently watching, on purpose to prevent him, (for they had order so to do)
put him by, saying, he might come in anon after the Nobles; adding also this,
Here is not so much room within as to let in every one that comes. So Tibert
waited till all the Lords were come to the Gate, and seeing the guard of
soldiers to open themselves to make way for them to come in, advised a Nephew
of his to enter in at one side of the gate and slip between the Soldiers Legs,
and so get in. His Nephew old so, and was in. Tibert himself walked under
Bruin's belly, and so was admitted unespied; after Bruin the Bear all the other
Commanders walked in, not one was missing, except Bitelas the Ape, who was gone
to his Cousin Reynard; whether sent for by him, or because he suspected the
Treachery, is not known. When all were within, the Court-gates were shut; and
all the Lords were immediately laid hold of, and secured; also Tibert the Cat
with them; but his Nephew seeing what was done, in great fear leapt over that
Soldiers head, who would have taken him, and so escaped: Sir Firrapel
understanding that Tiberts Nephew was gone, knew it was high time to disperse
the Army. Therefore he with four hundred Soldiers sallyed out upon them,
charging them (who were before disordered) in so furious a manner as most of
them fled, leaving their Arms behind them; many of were taken Prisoners, and
sent into the Court, but some few escaped and ran to Reynard's Company.

CHAP. XVII.
How the Fox consulting with his Uncle Bitelas the Ape, returned to his Castle,
and dismissed part of his Soldiers.

THe Fox greatly perplered at the ruin of his Army, of which he was too,
toosurely informed by the Run-aways, and having just before understood how all
the Nobles were betrayed, he was almost at his wits end. Bitelas the Ape seeing
his Cousin Reynard so exceedingly overcome with grief, said, Cousin, it is not
the first time you have been in danger, and yet have overcome all difficulties,
why not now? Ah, Uncle, said the Fox, there is a vast difference between what I
then was, and what I am now, or at least was but three hours ago. And I too
well know, that the greater any one is, when he falls his fall is so much the
more dangerous. Before I vexed some few only, and those not considerable
persons; but now I have displeased the King himself, and Great disasters
ast^nish the most p^litick, especially when the knowledge thereof comes
unexpected; as here is seen in the Fox, who although before, never had a shift
to seek, yet now is so consounded, as he knows not which way to turn himself.
all his most intimate friends; therefore I must needs be utterly undone. But
Cousin, said the Ape, have you not made some provision beforehand to secure
your self in this time of need? For every one that is wise, will always provide
for the worst. Yes Uncle, I h^ve done as much as could be, for I fortified my
Castle long before, and have stored it with all sorts of Provision: but yet I
am in a very great strait: if I draw all this Company into Malepardu^ after me,
their number is so great as I shall not be able to hold out a long Si^ge,
especially if all the private Avenues of my Castle be stopped up, as they will
be to be sure, if the King with his Forces shall come to sit down before it.
For so soon as I, or my Soldiers shall be res^rained from forage, so many mouth
and will quickly devour all. And if I draw not in with me a sufficient number
to make sallies out upon my Enemies, then they will adventure to storm or blow
up my Fort, and what shall become of us then? Truly, it is an hard case,
Cousin, said the Ape, but cheer up; and first of all, withdraw from this
place, leaving the Kings highway, and be^ake your self and Soldiers to Covert,
in some by Lane, that if the King pursue, he may not find you. Thus doing. you
will have some respit to determine of your March. According to the Ape's
advice, the Fox withdrew into a by Lane with all his Soldiers. Then his Uncle
again said to him, Now Cousin you need fear no surprisal, at least for an hour
or two. If you like not to hasten to your Castle and there to ^bide the brunt,
what is your determination? I cannot at all judge it safe for us to go to the
King, especially whilst his rage is at such an height, as it must needs be at
this time. Therefore I judge nothing will conduce more to our security, then to
protract the time, the best way we can. Indeed Uncle, said the For. I think it
will be best to do as you say; but the many mouths we have to feed will
endanger all. Why Cousin, you have a reme^y for that. Know you not that three
or four hundred in a Fort, will be able to resist ten thousand in the Field.
Yes Uncle; quoth the For, I well know it; yet I would have more than three
hundred, yea more than four hundred Soldiers, if I were sure not to be blockt
up too suddenly. Cousin, Cousin, said the Ape, you must determine somewhat
speedily: Be ruled by me, I pray choose out the weakest of your Soldiers and
dismiss them, and retain none with you, but such as are stout and resolute
Warriers. To this the Fox hearkened, and presently discharged three hundred and
odd of the weakest, but the strongest with him were near four hundred. his Army
being increased by the Run-aways who were retained still with him; and because
the night was far spent, and he durst not abide where he was till daylight, he
by a swift march came toh is own Castle by break of day.

CHAP. XVIII.
How the Fox was pursued, and many of his Soldiers that he dismissed, taken by
the Pursuers.

When Firrapel the Libbard, as is aforeshewed, had routed and dispersed the
Army that lay before the Court; not long after it was thought convenient to
send out other fresh Soldiers, in pursuit of the Fox and his Company. The
Leader of these fresh Soldiers was one of the Kings Friends, that supped with
him that night. He having no guide to direct him where to find the Fox, bade
his Soldiers to lie in wait for straglers. So they did, and in a short time one
of them laid hold of one of Tiberts Lineage, and cried out a Spy, a Spy; the
Captain hearing this, said, bind him and bring him hither: When he was brought
bound to the Captain, he asked him what he was? he told him, he was one of Sir
Tiberts Kindred. Well then, said the Captain, go along with us, and show us the
place where that Traiterous Lord Reynard is. So on they went with this their
Guide to that very by-Lane in which Reynard and his Uncle Bitelas had been, but
were gone. Then he again examined the Guide, if he knew not where they were
gone. The Guide told him, whither they were gone he could not tell, for whilst
they were with their Soldiers in that by-Lane, he was sent out with several
others to lie as near the Court, as they could, to give notice if any marched
out to attaque the Lord Reynard. And that he having layn long thereabout, did
at length return to that place, but found neither him, nor his Soldiers, except
some few that were dismissed by him, as they said, and so were going to their
own homes. Which way went they, said the Captain? this way Sir, said the Guide,
(pointing westward from the Court) and if you hasten, you will overtake them,
for they go not fast. The Captain having this intelligence from the guide,
commanded his Soldiers to follow close. In a little time they found two or
three, and passing further on, found several others by threes and fours in a
Company; this course they held till they had gleaned up almost an hundred. Then
the Captain fearing to be over-burthened with too many Prisoners, gave command
to pursue no further. So he with these Prisoners hasted to the King, but he had
marched out so far in pursuit, as it was Sunrise ere he came to the Court.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Examination of the Traitors and Prisoners.

WHen this Captain with his party were come into the Court, and the King by him
understood that Reynard was fled: He then, fearing no Enemy, commanded his
Purveyors to bring Provision in abundance, that he and all his Friends might
eat and be merry. The Purveyors mate ready as soon as was possible, and the
King and all his Friends dined very cheerfully; after this the Se^vitors dined.
and what was left was given to the Captive Prisoners; but the Traitors all this
while had neither eat nor drunk. Therefore the King commanded, that what the
Prisoners left, the Traitors should have divided among them. This was done
accordingly, and they had no more, any of them except Tibert, who by good
fortune had a Mouse given him by a certain Soldier, who found it dead and trod
on in the Court. This present was so thankfully accepted by Sir Tibert, as he
promised to requite him who gave it with a greater Booty, i^ ever he had his
Liberty.

When the King and his Friends had dined, as we said; The King looking on Sir
Firrapel and his Cousin Sly look, said, Now my Noble Lords, I perceive you have
told me a truth, you have in very deed convinced me of that which I could not
otherwise have believed, although my incr^dulity had cost me my life. I thank
you both for your Loyalty, and all you my Friends for your faithful advice and
assistance. Now I judge it convenient that we first examine the Prisoners, and
afterward the Traitors; that if we find any not guilty, we may dismiss them.
Then Sir Firrapel stood up and said Noble Prince, I do verily believe that all
the Captive Prisoners are not guilty, for they were led by their Lords, but
about what they could not tell, as by Examination your Majesty will clearly
find. Well then, said the King, let Reynard's Soldiers be first called. So when
they were brought before the King, his Majesty asked them, how they durst take
up arms against himself? Some of them answered, they were hired Soldiers, hired
by the Lord Reynard, and by him led forth the last night; but about what, or
for what cause, they never knew, till some of the other Lord's Soldiers run in
among them, saying, the whole Army was either killed, or taken; then indeed
(said they) we mistrusted we were led against your Majesty, but yet of that
could not be assured, because those that fled from before the Court-gates unto
us could not tell who were their Enemies, only they said, they who set upon
them came all out at the Court-gates. The King hearing the simplicity of their
answer dismissed them, and all the other Prisoners, strictly charging them to
be ready at his Summons, when he thought good to hunt the Traitor Reynard. They
all bowing themselves promised they would courageously fight against the Kings
Enemies. So they all departed safely to their own homes.

This being done, the King said, now my Friends, I perceive that this is
Reynard's work, it is managed so craftily; for I plainly see, that not one of
the Commons is guilty of this Treason, because they knew not what they went
about. Therefore let the Lord Pitwood be first called. So Pitwood was brought
in before the King and his Friends, with Bellin's Gown on his back, quaking and
trembling: The King no sooner saw him, but he sternly said, Pull off the
Villain's disguise, that we may see him, as he is. Then did Sir Firrapel
M^^essctors o^ base spirit, and ^l^tton^^, d^spositions, are in their affection
more dejected than others; and the ^ercour of punishment is most ^^e^^^s to
such, because th^^^ ^exation ^^seth not ^^m the ho^^^^^ and ^etes^^^on o^ their
^o^e^aised evils; but from a sense of being utterly dep^ived of liberty, to
persist in that course^ of li^e.
and his Cousin Sly-look, immediately tear off Bellin's Gown, and when all the
Company saw it was Isegrim the Wolf, they laughed heartily. As soon as they
were all silent, the King said. Thou wretch, what moved thee to conspire my
death, who from a low and vile estate advanced thee to so great Honor? Is
Treason Religion? Or, is Murder and Treason virtue in a Priest? At these wor^s
the Wolf was so frighted, as he pist for fear. At length he said, The Lord
Reynard gave me presents often, and often spoke to me, that I should commend
him before the Lords, and at length perswad^ them to establish him in the Royal
Throne. And was that all said the King? Yes, all indeed Sir, said the Wolf (and
then pist again) except that we must with hired Soldiers (who must know nothing
beforehand of the Business) come hither and kill your Majesty and all the
Royal Family, and then set the Crown on Reynard's Head. Enough, enough, said
the King. Take away the Villain, and chain him to a stake, and so keep him,
with bread and dirty water until I call for him. So the Keeper who had charge
of this Prisoner, took him away, and bound, and fed him, according to the
King's will.

Then the King called for Sir Bruin the Bear, who was immediately brought and
examined, and after Examination was found to acknowledge himself guilty of the
Treason; only he pleaded, the Wolf and the Ape instigated him thereto. So he
was taken away and bound, and fed as the former. After him all the rest were
called one by one, and all except Tibert confessed the same as Bruin did,
accusing the Ape and the Wolf. But Tibert the Cat pleaded not Guilty; affirming
as he was Secretary to the Wolf, he was obliged not to reveal his Masters
Secrets, therefore he was clear of this Treason. If so, said the King, why did
you lead a band of your own Lineage? I led none Sir, but went where I was sent,
said the Cat. Then the King said, how say you Sir Firrapel? Mighty Prince, said
the Libbard, This Sir Tibert was made Captain of the Scouts (which were all of
his own Lineage) by the Lord Reynard; and if Scouts know not what they go
about, and go only where they are sent, I leave that to your Majesty to judge.
The King hearing this, said no more, but, Away with the Traitor, look to him
Keeper. Then the King arose, and he and his Friends walked out into the
Courtwalks.

CHAP. XX.
How the Fox with his Soldiers made incursions the next day so eagerly on
several of the Neighboring Beasts, that they complain to the King.

DVring the time the Fox was in prosperity, and had abundance of all things,
either given by way of Presents, or obtained by Delinquents forfeitures, the
Neighboring Beasts, that dwelt not far from Reynards Castle, had rest and
peace, and therefore without fear were wont to walk abroad in the daytime all
there about. But when Reynard was fled home in fear and great danger, with his
Soldiers, intending there to abide a Siege, and protract the time as long as
was possible, (for he knew he was now incapable of mercy) he on a sudden set
forth with two hundred Soldiers, who he commanded all to go silently along by
the Hedges which encompassed a large Warren, where many Conies dwelt. These
Conies fearless, and suspecting Commonly, the most peaceable feel the first
strokes of War.
nothing, played and skipped about in the Sunshine, as they were daily wont to
do; but suddenly Reynard with his Soldiers rushed in among them, and flew two
hundred outright presently, all which he bore away to his Castle. And
immediately returned again, where several She-goats fed their young ones, all
which young ones he and his Soldiers seized and carried home. Many other
Incursions he made that day further into the Country, and made great havoc and
spoil. At this all the Neighboring Beasts were alarmed, and resolved to stand
upon their defense. But when they understood by the eldest of the Goats and
Conies, who it was had done their Neighbors this great wrong, they resolved
jointly to go together to the Court and complain to the King; for by this time
they had all notice of Reynard's Treason and Rebellion; and therefore had no
doubt but they should be heard. So they in the Evening come in troops to the
Court-gates, where the Guard seeing them, demand the cause of their coming
thus in multitudes? They answer, We are come to complain to his Majesty of the
great Outrages Reynard and his company have committed. So the Guard acquainted
the King, who immediately came forth to them; saying, Who is it that has
wronged you? The Conies answer, If your Majesty be pleased to hear us, we will
truly declare what we have suffered. The King said, speak, we will hear you.
Then one of the eldest among them said,

Dread Sovereign, We your Majesty's peaceable Subjects, being employed about
our occasions in tending our young ones, drew them forth to take the Air in the
morning, the Traitor Reynard lying in wait (as it seems) with many Soldiers,
suddenly slew two hundred of us, (for so many young and old are missing) and
bear away the Bodies to his Castle of Malepardus, for there we saw him plainly
go in with all his Soldiers, every one of them bearing one of our dear Friends
and Kinsfolks dead; this we could not have known, had not some of us adventured
to run after them, to see which may they went, and who they were. Thus spoke
the Conies.

The Goats also made a like complaint of sudden surprising their Kid before
they were aware. And all the other Beasts who had sustained wrong, exhibited
their Complaints with tears in their eyes, earnestly requesting his Majesty to
take compassioon of them, and to avenge their cause of such a bloody Murderer.
The King (in a rage shaking his curled locks) said, Be content, if I live I
will avenge my self and you, on that cursed Traitor Reynard, to morrow by this
time, if possible. So they bowing themselves very submissively, departed.

CHAP. XXI.
How the King with his Kinsfolks, and the Soldiers of Sir Firrapel, and his
Cousin Sly-look, marched out of the Court to Malepardus, and there summoned the
Fox to surrender himself.

EArly in the Morning the King willed Sir Firrapel and his Cousin Sly-look to
command their Soldiers to make ready for a March, for he would speedily march
to Malepardus, to be avenged of the Traitors Reynard and Bittelas. When the
Soldiers were ready, the King sets out first with his eldest Son, Kinsfolks and
Friends; then followed Sir Firrapel and his Cousin with their Soldiers, of
whom, and of Servitors, one hundred were left in the Court, to keep Guard
there, and secure the Prisoners. When all that were appointed for this
Expedition were gone forth, the Court-gates were diligently shut; and the King
himself being foremost, made an halt, and turning him to his Son, said, Son, I
this day commit the leading of the Army to your self, that if possible you may
have the honor of finding out and subduing the crafty and Traiterous Varlet
Revnard. Therefore lead as you please, we all will follow, as well as we can.
So this young Prince bowing himself to his Father and Friends, said no more,
but ma^rh on Sirs. And indeed he led so hard, without speaking ought, as he got
within fight of Ma^^pardus, before Noon. When he saw the place, he stood still,
and so did they all. Then ^he King said, now Son it will be good to rest here a
while, and (...) mean time to consider w^^t we have to do First of all (...) do
our best to learn of what strength our (...) ^hether it be best to besiege or
assault th^^ (...) if we do not one of these our labor will (...) purpose (...)
will not come forth to fight us we must either (...) with our Soldiers, and so
by length of (...) them, or suddenly with fire and sword endeavor to force the
Castle, and so drive them forth. His Son said, my Lord to send out Scouts to
discover what they can, is most necessary; but to begirt the Castle, we have
not Forces enough, neither is that convenient at present, because we know not
the private Avenues and Holes belonging to the Castle, how far they are
extended, Here is showed the danger of attempting any thing in War, without
good advice. And how beneficial a right understanding of the Enemy's condition,
is for a future management of Martial Affairs.
and so they may happen to lie within them, and by that means when we only
expect an Enemy before us, they issuing out, assault us behind, and on every
side suddenly. It is well thought on, said the King. Therefore send out some of
the nimblest Soldiers to espy whether they see any passing to and from the
Castle So Spies were sent, and charged to lie close at a good distance from the
Castle round about. In a little time they discovered several Beasts laden with
Provisions to pass in by holes under the Walls of Malepardus; and others not
loaded, coming forth further off, and among those Scouts there was one, who see
the Earth cast up just before him; he lying close a little while, at length see
Reynard himself putting forth his Head; but he espying that the Coast was not
clear, drew back: then did this Scout leap to the Hole, but the Fox had styled
it up so in that short time, the Scout could not so much as put in one hand. He
by this set a mark, and lay still, at length he spyed one of Reynard's Soldiers
coming forth of another hole a little further off; him he suffered to come quite
out, and then immediately seized him, and carried him to the King. Others of
the Scouts saw like passages, and some of them took of Reynard's Soldiers three
or four other that were laden and going to the Castle. When all the Scouts were
returned, it was found by their Relation, that none went into the Castle laden
by those private holes, but by larger holes just under the Castle-walls. The
King hearing this, examined the four Prisoners that were taken laden with
Provisious first; they tell him, that the Fox and his Uncle Bitelas were within
the Castle, and that with them the Soldiers in number were not above Three
hundred seventy-five in all, and that he had store of Provisions of all sorts;
yet fearing that would not be enough, one half of the Soldiers were yesterday
employed in foraging, and the other half to day; withal adding, if his Majesty
were pleased be might take near an hundred of them with their booty in a short
time, for near so many were still out, and had not returned since morning;
because they who went out yesterday had so alarmed the Country thereabouts, as
near home nothing could be got. Then the King immediately sent out a great
Party, here and there to lie in wait on every side. Having done this, he
examined the Soldier that was taken coming out of an hole that lead from the
Castle. He said, that the Lord Reynard (as he still called him) being informed
by the Soldiers, who returned into the Castle with their Booty, that there were
liars in wait, and that your Majesty was near with an Army, was resolved to go
forth by that Avenue where he was seen to put out his head, to see whether the
report was true, and finding by his own experience that it was too true, he
presently commanded me to run to the Soldiers that are yet out, and bid them to
retire into Covert till night, and then come home; this I had done, had I not
been taken, as your Majesty sees. So the King gave command to secure the
Prisoners, yet that they should be used well. After this, the King again
consulting with his Lords, determined to send a Summons to Reynard to deliver
himself and Castle into the Kings hand. This Summons they judged convenient to
send speedily, before the Fox knew what strength the King had, least in the
night he should work them some mischief. So Sir Firrapel the Libbard, Traitors
having forseited their Lives grow desperate, and will hearken to no Summons,
but at the hearing thereof, are the more enraged.
with what Company he pleased, was appointed to Summon the Fox to deliver up
his Castle. Sir Firrapel accordingly took forty Soldiers with him, and came as
near to the Castle as he thought he might with safety, and called aloud, Sir
Reynard, Sir Reynard, his Majesty commands you to deliver up your Fort, with
all the Ammunition you have, into his hands this night, otherwise he is
resolved to use all extremity to force it. By that time he had ended his
Speech, a shower of stones was poured down upon him and his Soldiers, which
hurt many of them, and doubtless had they been nearer, would have killed most
of them. Sir Firrapel thus answered, hastens to the King, and shows him some of
his Soldiers wounded. Upon this the King resolves to be revenged; therefore
said to his Son, Son, I see it will be long work, and we have not soldiers
enough to lay a close Siege. Therefore when those you have sent out be come in,
encamp your selves as securely as you can, either in the place where you are,
or further off from the Castle, not failing to keep good Guard all night; and I
in the mean time will return home, and send out my Mandates for raising the
Country speedily, and then undoubtedly we shall dispatch this business to our
content. So the King went to Court, and his Son encamped the Army, who for that
night supped with what the Scouts brought in.

CHAP. XXII.
How the Fox's Soldiers in the night assailed the King's Camp, and what ensued
thereupon.

AFter Supper the Watch was ordered, and Officers appointed to change the
Centries often, also to set Purdues to lie round about the Camp. All this while
the Fox was not idle, but being extremely discontented that he had lost so many
of his Soldiers (for the King's Scouts brought in above forty with their
Booties) studied how he might most annoy his Enemies in the Night. Therefore in
the deed of the Night he sent out a party of three hundred, advising them to
march silently, and to encompass the Camp round, and when they were drawn very
near to it in their encompassing, all at once to cry out aloud, Now for the
Lord Reynard; and then immediately to assault the Centries first, and afterward
the Camp it self (for he knew the Enemy were encamped very close together, so
as three hundred Soldiers all in a File might conveniently encompass it) on
every side. This party was led by his Uncle Bitelas (for the Fox would rather
lose all the Friends he had, than endanger his own person) who very slyly
marched his Soldiers in the form of an half Moon, that so they might keep
together, and yet be in a posture ready to begirt the Camp suddenly. This
enterprise of his was perceived by the Purdues, and timely intelligence given
to the Lord Firrapel, who himself watched. He therefore on the other side of
the Camp drew out his Soldiers, This Chapter shows how provident Commander^
enervate and frustrate the policy and (...) their Enemies.
which he had in readiness, and dividing them in two parts, led one part
himself, and left the other part to the leading of his Lieutenant; then march
they softly round the Camp of two sides to meet with the Horns of the Enemies
Half Moon, which they quickly met with, engaged and routed, and pu^sued them
till they were driven close together, just before the other Gate of the Camp,
right opposite to that out of which the Lord Firrapel Issued; the other
Soldiers that were at rest in the Camp, being allarum'd, they flank their
Enemies, who were turned both ways to resist the Lord Firrapel and his
Lieute^^^^; in this miserable plight, some throw down their Arms and yield
themselves Prisoners, others are slain outright, (among which Bitelas the Ape,
their Captain, (...) one) many taken, because of their Wounds, which prevented
their flight and some escapd to carry the News to Malepardus. After the fight
was done, they numbered the Captives, and found them to be a hundred and six,
the dead they accounted not till morning; but then it appeared, that of the
King's Soldiers were slain six, and several wounded; but of Reynards Forces
forty eight, so that of the three hundred that issued out of Malepardus, there
returned but a hundred and (...) six. Thus in one day and a night Reynard lost
two hundred of his three hundred seventyfive Soldiers, which he seared would ^e
too many.

CHAP. XXIII.
How the King gave command to proclaim all Traitors that assisted Reynard,
promising pardon to those that would desert him, etc.

EArly in the morning the news of this Victory, and of death of Bitelas the
Ape, was carried to Court by one purposely sent thither to acquaint his Majesty
how matters went. The King greatly pleased with the news, thought of another
way to weaken Reynard, before the Country did come in. Therefore he by the
same Messenger sent an express order to his Son to draw out all his Forces out
of the Camp, and to march to Malepardus, as close as was convenient, and there
in his name to proclaim all Traitors, that assisted Reynard, withal promising
pardon to all that would desert him. Upon this Message the King's Son drew out
all the Forces he had (leaving not one in the Camp, for he feared no enemy) and
marched dirctly to Malepardus; being thither come, and within the hearing of
those within, he commanded silence, and afterward caused the Crier to proclaim
all Traitors that assisted Reynard, but present pardon to all those who would
within three hours desert him. It is commonly seen, that the followers of
Traitors, readily forsake them, when they see a probability of securing
themselves.
Upon the hearing of this, near an hundred of Reynard's Soldiers fled from him,
and came and offered their Service to the King. But ere this was effected, some
thousands of the Commons who had been summoned by the King, marched toward
Malepardus. The King's Son seeing them, sent out certain Scouts to enquire what
they were? they answer, they were summoned by the King to come and assist his
Son, in taking the Traitor Reynard. So the young Prince being glad of this
Supply, did forthwith command them to begirt the Castle. They accordingly lie
down before it all that day, but see no enemy appear. In the mean while, the
King's Son orders the Lord Firrapel, and his Cousin Sly-look, to employ their
Soldiers to march at some distance round about Malepardus, that wheresoever
they saw any Avenues, or private holes, they might stop them with heavy stones;
withal commanding to set out Scouts, who should lie close in manner of Purdues,
the better to descry the outgoing of the Enemies. All these things being done,
no Enemy was seen, either to appear in the Castle, or to come forth by those
private Avenues, (which as fast as they could they stopped) or by any other new
made hole. Therefore now nothing was thought on but a storm, yet night being so
near, they judged it not seasonable to begin the Assault until morning; in the
mean while, care was taken that the Holes and Avennes should be watched all
night. This was accordingly done.

CHAP. XXIV.
How the Fox's Castle was storme^, and all within it killed, only Reynard
himself taken alive, as the (...) commanded.

Early on the Morrow s^^ling (...)being brought, and all things (...) for (...)
Soldiers only waited for the word of (...) the ^ibbard Bold Adventures are
hazardons, therefore the wiles of an Enemy should always be suspected.
was commanded with its Soldiers to begin (...) Assault. But the Fox who all
this while was (...) provided for their coming beforehand, and round about the
Castle-Walls on the inside had dug deep Trenches of a great depth, which
stood fall of ^^^ter, by him drawn thither from a Spring, which stood within
his Castle. Over this Trench upon the Walls he had made a f^lse Batilement
seemingly strong, on (...) when four hundred of the Soldiers (commanded by Sir
F^^^pel) had go^ up, the Battlements breaking down, they fall into the
Trenches, where mo^ of them drowned one another in striving to get out, the
residue were killed by Reynards Soldiers.

This overthrow perplexed Sir Firrapel and the Prince exceedingly; for the
possibility of storming it. seemed now to be taken away. Therefore the Prince
consul^s with all his Friends about the present Business. After a little time
it was agreed by went to sord up certain Soldiers to the top of the Wall, with
(...) not to attempt to leap down, what provocation soever was given, but to
shoot and sling at their Enemies, if (...) were, and to espy how the Avenues
belonging ^o the Castle had their in^let. They accordingly march up round about
the Castle, Here is seen h^^^ Assailants dv^^turing toor^shly, are taught by
their own loss to be afterward more wary.
and met with no small provocations from the Enemy (who were but few in number)
yet they observed what they were commanded, and between whiles well viewed the
Trench and over if they espied several Bridges, many in number round about, yet
all of them were so narrow, as but one Soldier could pass abreast upon them at
once. This intelligence being given to the Prince, he commanded two thousand
Soldiers to employ themselves in opening the Avenues, and making them wider,
which was speedily done; then he ordered more Soldiers to ascend the Walls,
thereby to amuse the Enemy, giving them command to shout and sling, but keeping
in their places. Whilst this was doing he sent in six hundred Soldiers through
the Avenues, commanding them to fight resolutely, and get over the Bridges,
then to slay all they found in the Castle, except only Reynard himself; and for
their encouragement he promised them among them full one half of the Booty that
should be taken Promise (...) necessary in dangerous attempts.
therein; and that if any died in the Attempt (as he hoped none would) his Wife
and Children should have all his part duly given to them.

With this encouragement they boldly entered the Avenues, some of which stunk so
abominably, as the Soldiers were almost poisoned; nevertheless they hastened
forward, and got to the mouths of those Holes where they plainly saw the
Bridges, and Reynard's Soldiers standing here and there one, very near them.
But by the mouths of the Holes they saw another outlet, one of which being
opened, it was found to be one of them Holes, by which the For's Soldiers were
wont to enter, when laden with Booty. Upon this Sir Firrapel gave command, that
all the other Holes (whcih were as many as there were private Avenues should be
opened; this was accordingly done by the six hundred Soldiers, who were in
those Avenues, but du^st not beware over the Bridges. Now when they saw great
m^^bers might speedily have entrance that way to back them, they were
encouraged and boldly set forward. Yet in the mean while Reynard's Soldiers
attempted to pluck up the Bridges; but because they were shot at, both from the
top of the Walls, and also from the mouths of the Holes, they could not effect
what they desired. Therefore as they gave back, the Kings Soldiers came
forward, and in a very short time above one thousand got over the Bridges; then
they flew about like wild Beasts, killing all they sound, and indeed all that
were in the Castle died at that time; and Reynard himself was knocked down with
a Battle-are by a Soldier who knew him not; but his fellow seeing him about to
kill the Fox, said, That is the Traitor himself. Then that Soldier who had
knocked him down, led him out of the Castle, and carried him to the Prince, who
rejoiced exceedingly that his Enemy was taken alive. After this, the Soldiers
that first entered, had half the Booty, and the residue was divided among the
whole Army.

CHAP. XXV.
Of dissolving of the Army, and how Reynard the Fox was carried Prisoner to the
Court, and what passed after this.

AS soon as this work was ended, and the Castle demolished, the Prince sent
home all those Soldiers who were raised by Summons for his Assistance
immediately, and th^^ with the two hundred Soldiers of Sir Firrapel that
r^^rained alive, and all his other Friends, he marched to Court leading the Fox
along with them. A little before Sunset they were all come to the Court, where
they were welcomed by the King, with great expressions of Joy, only some sorrow
was intermixed by reason of the loss of those four hundred brave Soldiers who
were drowned and killed by the (...) policy. Therefore the King at that time
before he sat down, declared that the two hundred Soldiers yet living should be
retained as a Guard for his Person, and over them Sir Firrapel the Libbard
should be chief commander, and his Lieutenant General of all Forces that should
be raised at any time ever after, when need should be. But unto Sly-look the
Panther, Firrapel's Cousin, he said, As for you my Lord I intend to constitute
you the Keeper of my Stores, and Steward of my House. After this, he spoke to
all his Friends, praising their readiness and valor; and to them he promised
Gifts and Rewards, as soon as all his trouble was over; therefore he willed and
desired them not to depart, until the Execution of Reynard and all the Traitors
was passed.

When the King had ended his Speech, his Son asked him, if he would see the
Traitor Reynard? The King answered, No, not at this time, let him be bound, and
diligently looked too, that he escape not; Upon this, the Soldiers that guarded
the Fox, haled him to the Prison, and there in a stinking hole chained him to a
stake, that was fixed in the ground.

Then the King royally feasted his Friends, and the two Lords, Firrapel and
Sly-look. Also to every Company of Soldiers he sent a large Pittance, so they
all feasted right joyfully: But the Prisoners in the hearing of all this were
almost pined with hunger, especially Isegrim the Wolf. After the Feast was
over, and all the Kings Servitors had supped, they gave to every Prisoner a few
scraps, and carried into them a small quantity of dirty water. And indeed their
useage was so hard, as they all even wished Death rather than Life.

CHAP. XXVI.
How the Fox was brought before the King. and Examined; of the Answer he gave;
and how he and all the other Traitors were condemned.

ON the Morrow the King sitting among his Nobles and Friends, said, I suppose
it is now high time that we call Reynard before us. To which they all assented.
Therefore Sir Firrapel went to the Prison, and commanded that Reynard should be
brought forth. His Keeper presently obeying, loosed Reynard from the Stake to
which he was chained, and by his Chain led him into the Kings Presence. The
King at the sight of him was so fraught with Ire as he could not speak, until a
little time being passed, his fury was allayed; then he said aloud, False
Miscreant, how dare thou to hold up thy head, (for the Fox seemingly
undaunted, steadfastly looked upon the King) who art so laden with Vices, as
the worst of all living Creatures is not more Politic persons dissemble their
fe^r till an aggravation of their them relent.
vile! Was it not enough for you (base Traitor) to insinuate into my affections
so far, by Dissimulations (as now I have great reason to judge) as to engage me
to invest that monstrously wicked and cruel Beast Isegrim, with an Office (due
to the best of Creatures) and Title so honorable; but also to persuade me to
create perfidious Bruin Earl of the Forests; and last of all (as if before you
had not been vile enough) to instigate these and all my Nobles at once against
me; and all this for your own base ends, which can never be accomplished? Have
I honored you for this end? Or would any Creature living have thought, that he
who I most honored, would have conspired my Ruin most? What say thou to
this?

To this, the Fox said not one word; but at last hung down his head. The King
said, speak wretch, or I will pronounce Sentence against you speedily. At last
the Fox said, My Lord, I have so many Enemies that it will be in vain to say
any thing contrary to what they have affirmed; and since I know I must die; I
here before your Majesty declare I am guilty of what is laid to my charge, and
would have slain your Majesty (for which I am now right sorrowful) if my design
had not been frustrated by the Treason of Firrapel and his Cousin. It is
enough, said the King, call in all the other Traitors, that as they all
conspired together, so they may together hear their Sentence of Death justly to
be pronounced against them; and then their Execution shall quickly follow. So
all the Traitors were brought in. Then did the King with the advice of his
Friends, in this manner proceed to Judgment. Since you are now all together
(except Bitelas the Ape, who died a death too honorable for his Merit) we judge
it meet, you should all hear your Sentence at one time. Therefore Reynard first
hearken to your Sentence: Because you have Traitorously endeavored the
Subversion of our Government, and Royal Dignity, I condemn you to Death, in
this manner to be executed upon you. First, you shall be dragged contumelously
from this Place to the Place of Execution, and there your right hand shall be
cut off, afterward you shall be hanged by the neck until you are dead, dead.
After death your Head shall be cut off, and together with your right hand be
set up in public view, on some conspicuous place, for a terror to all Traitors
for the future. Unto the Wolf he also repeated the abovesaid words, and
pronounced the same Sentence exactly in all points. But on all the other
Traitors, he only pronounced the Sentence of Death in manner and form as you
have heard, except in cutting off their heads, and right hands, which was not
mentioned in their Sentences.

After this the Prisoners were taken away until the place and time of Execution
was fully determined, and agreed on by the King and his Friends.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the Fox's Consession, and the Execution of himself and all the Traitors.

IN the Evening of the same day that Judgment was given, the King and his
Friends again consulted together, about the place and time of Execution. At
length it was agreed on, that the place should be on the outside of that
Forest, out of which the Traitors marched to put their design in execution. And
the time, the next morning early. In the mean while, that all things should be
provided in readiness, and the Prisoners have notice of their death so near
approaching.

Now when the Morrow was come, and the King and his Friends were gone before to
take their standings commodiously to avoid the Press; (which they knew would be
great) The Fox himself, and all the other Traitors were led out of their
several Prisons; then were their legs and hands tied, the Halters with which
they were to be hanged, were fastened about their necks, and by them they were
dragged (with houtings and shouts of the multitude) to the place of Execution:
When there, Ladders were erected against the Trees, (which were more than
enough to hang all the Traitors) and each Prisoner, by his Executioner, led up
those Ladders, and immediately the Executioners fastened the ropes to the Trees
(supposing they must be hanged as soon as they came there) because it was the
custom of their Country in other Cases to hang Malefactors presently; but the
King spoke to the Executioners, and said, Be not toohasty, if any of the
Prisoners will purge himself by Confession he shall have as free liberty as any
one of our Subjects has, who dies on his bed. The Fox hearing this, said:

Dread Sovereign, and you my Lords here present. I am not a little comforted,
that I have liberty to ease my mind which is sorely burdened with the horror
of my Si^^, ^ the execution of Reynard the Fox have been a loose Liver all my
days; I have often pretended Murder will ^ut at one time or another. Subtlety
betrays the Innocent to (...)
Sanctity, and amendment of Life, yet all was (...). I slew Kayward the Hare,
though Bellin died for it: Oh, (...), thy death, and the great ruin that has
ever since vefell thy Family, is all the effect of my falseness. The King
hearing this, was extremely troubled; and said, What! have we put to death a
righteous person, through false information? Alas! what have we done? To this
the Fox said, It is so noble King, I am the person who wrought so great
mischief; and I also persuaded your Majesty to advance Sir Isegrim the Wolf,
and Sir Bruin the Bear, for my own ends. I likewise was so wicked, as
designedly to give them and all the other Lords Gifts and Presents often, and
then spoke to Isegrim to persuade the Lords to make me King in your Majesty's
stead as they would have done, if Sir Firrapel and his Cousin had not betrayed
us all. Besides in all Cases that ever were brought before me, I always more
sought my own interest than the execution of Justice, yet was still seemingly
just; by which means I gained so great Riches, as I not knowing my self, would
have been what your Majesty is, etc. Then the King said to the For, well
Reynard, I have heard you, and do now plainly perceive, that if you had died
for your first faults, you had not lived to have perpetrated so great and
enormous Crimes; therefore for the future, neither fair words, nor ought else
shall oblige me to Rich puff up: and when men of low degree attain to great
wealth and honor, they (not knowing how to bridle their inordinate Appetites)
do very often aspiring higher, ruin them selves, as by this History is plainly
evident.
pardon Malefactors deserving death.

The King having said this, ordered the Executioner to do his Office; so he
immediately cut off Reynard's right hand, and afterward turned him off the
Ladder. In the mean while the King spoke to Sir Isegrim the Wolf, and said,
Isegrim have you any thing to say before the Executioner do his Office? Nothing
Sir, said the Wolf, (looking roguishly) except that I was drawn in by the Fox's
subtilty, and his great promises made me forget my Loyalty to your Majesty, and
readily to absolve both him and Sir Bruin of their oath of fidelity sworn to
your Majesty, and by me administered. Oh execrable Villain, said the King, what!
durst you release any Subject of his sworn fealty to us? After this the King
would not hear him any further; but spoke to the Executioner, and said,
Dispatch this Varlet out of my fight quickly. So the Executioner presently cut
off his hand, and then turned him off the Ladder. Next to him Sir Bruin the
Bear was asked, if he had ought to say? but he answered, No; and so was quickly
turned off. After him all the rest in order were asked, if they would say any
thing before they died? but they all answered, They could say no more than they
had already said in their Examination; therefore they were all turned off.
After it was supposed the Traitors were dead the King gave command they should
be cut down, and their bodies buried in one Pit. Accordingly they were all cut
down, being all stark dead, except Tibert the Cat, who stirred a little,
therefore his brains were beat out by one of the Guard, and the bodies of them
all were thrown into one Pit, except the Heads and right Hands of Reynard and
Isegrim, which were carried to the Palace, and there set on Poles, placed on
the uppermost Tower of the same, so high as they might be easily seen by all
that passed by the Court.

Thus have you as true an account of these matters as ever was given by any man
that saw them not. If you would know what this grand Treason produced, peruse
the following Chapters which will inform you more plainly than can be expressed
without a Fable.

CHAP. XXVIII.
How the King and all his Nobles returning home, ruminated the Fox's
Confession, and what was the effect of their consultation.

When the Traitors were buried, and the Hands and Heads of Reynard and Isegrim
fixed upon Poles, as is said. The King and his Nobles (being come home) sat
down together in the Court, all of them pondering much the words of Reynard
touching Bel^ins death. At length the King (as one greatly perplexed said, My
Lords, and Fri^nds, it grieves me not a little, that our Chapl. Bellin, was
long since so basely put to death and his Family ruined so, as I question
whether any of that Stock be now remaining in the World. To Although in nocent
persons may long remain injured, yet in process of time, the cause of their
oppression comes to be known and then the ^^dre^^ is nigh at hand.
this, one of the Kings Friends (who was present when Isegrim was chose chief
Prelate) said, Sovereign Lord, think not so, for I am certain, that many of
them were living when Isegrim was made Prelate; because I there saw several of
them, but would not be known I saw them, for fear of your Majesty's displeasure
against them. Sure said the King it is not possible! I suppose your eye
deceived you; however, if it were so then, it is too probable, that they are
all dead since, because the Sons and KIndred of Isegrim, although very
numerous, had all of them Furr-Gowns like Bellin's (which Isegrim himself wore)
not long after they were confirmed in the Priestly Function: for many more of
Isegrim's Kindred came into him after the choice of the Commons, than were that
day present upon the Scaffold with us, and yet all these had such Fur-Gowns,
which they could never have had, if so many of Bellin's Kindred had not been
first slain and stripped, etc. To this, the same Lord replied, Noble Sir, I am
most certain, that in secret places of your Majesty's Realm, there are
thousands of them yet living. It is well if it be so, said the King. After this
Discourse was ended, the King again said. Worthy Friends, I too well know, that
we have confirmed the Priestly Office, not on Isegrim only, but on his whole
Lineage and Kindred, who are all revenous Beasts void of all goodness; nay I
think, the worst of all Creatures living; although the Fox by his subtilty
blinded my eyes, and Isegrims pretended demure carriage alienated my Judgment.
For had honest Bellin yet lived, treacherous Reynard could never have thought
of working our ruin; nor ever could that cursed Miscreant Isegrim, have
contributed any assistance to his disloyal intentions. The young Prince seeing
his Father speak with so great earnestness, said, Royal Father, why is your
Majesty troubled at the Advancement of Isegrims Lineage, let it be signified by
Proclamation, that in their Father's Crime, they have all forfeited their
Offices; and besides, that upon good and sure grounds, your Majesty well knows,
that they are the Destroyers of your Subjects, and continually in their masked
Habits, and under a pretense of Sanctity they rob, and pill them so bare, as of
necessity your Kingdom must be ruined if they be permitted to live in all
excess and riot; for of all the Beasts under your Majesty's Authority, there
are none so debauched and vicious as they. This Speech of the Prince was
seconded by several others of the Kings Friends, all inveighing bitterly
against Isegrim's Lineage. The King hearing this, said, Sirs, what think you is
best to be done? If we lay aside this Generation (I mean displace them of their
Offices) and yet let them hold their Wealth, they may in time by their Riches
work us great wrong. To this that Friend of the Kings Prudent advice to avoid
Vulgar censure.
who first spoke, said, Noble Sir, to lay aside this impious stock is
honorable; but to take away their Wealth will have no good aspect in the eyes
of the Vulgar (whose censure is seldom right) because they will impute their
displacing to arise from no other cause, then that they were rich, or (to speak
more plainly) because your Majesty was disposed to Many men willingly are
blinded, and by cunning Sycophants opp^essed: because they jud^ of things
a^^e^app^a: and not ^^ they rea^y are in themselves.
seize on all they had. Therefore if your Majesty please to displace the
Wolves, there needs no care to be taken of the Wealth they have; for if other
of your Subjects, whose eyes are open, do but once find that they are out of
your Majesty's favor, which way the wealth of these Miscreants must needs go,
any one (without the help of Astrology) may easily conjecture; because
whenever they are displaced and out of favor, there will be so many
Complaints made of their Extortions, as (undoubtedly) all they have will be too
little to make recompense for the wrong they have done. Besides if none of all
this be, they are such monstrous Gluttons as will be necessitated to eat up all
in a short time. You say well, said the King; I heartily believe, if all those
Wolves were but stripped of this their disguise, and compelled to put off their
Furr-Gowns; the Blind then would as clearly see as the Ma^ks and Disguises
constrain m^st men to judge ami^s.
other clear sighted Beasts you speak of. It is true, noble King, (said the
same Lord) pull but off the Mask, there need^ no more. Well then said the King,
that I will not fail to do speedily.

CHAP. XXIX.
How the King made Proclamation, that no Beasts should walk disguised in other
Garments, than what were naturally theirs, and what ensued thereupon.

THe next day early the King caused a Proclamation to be drawn, the tenor
whereof ran thus.

Leo Rex,

Whereas several of our Subjects wear Disguises, and since under such Masks and
false Habits, many Mischiefs have been committed, and some of those Persons
allowed to wear such like Disguises, have proved Traitors to our Royal Crown
and Dignity; We therefore will and command all our Subjects in general, whether
high or low, of what state or condition so ever, that after ten days next
ensuing the Publication hereof, they presume not to wear any Disguise
whatsoever, nor at any time, day or night, to walk clothed in other Garments,
than what are naturally their own; upon pain of being proceeded against as
Traitors to our Royal Crown and Dignity, etc.

After the proclaiming and publishing hereof, Isegrims Lineage were greatly
perpiered, because there was not one of them, if in Office, but he wore a
Furr-Gown, which was not his own natural Garment: Therefore they consult
together what was fit to be done in such a time of affliction as this. But in
all their Consultations they never thought of mending their manners, but how to
insinuate into the King's favor, thereby to prevent this terrible storm, that
(they saw) would make greatest spoil among them. But because their Father
Isegrim, and Champion Reynard were dead, they could conceive no hope of
obtaining their end, unless by bribing some of the principal Courtiers. This
they resolve upon, and (though otherwise extreme covetous) therefore every one
liberally offers part of his wealth, which being given into the custody of two
of the oldest among them, those Wicked persons in distress think not of taking
good courses, but study how by indirect means to acquit themselves of the
present danger. Also they being unfaithful themselves can very rarely find a
faithful friend, as appears by the Panther, action, here related.
two journey to Court, and carry (or cause to be carried) with them a great
mass of Treasure, which they present to Sly-look the Panther, who was lately
made the King's Steward, and Keeper of his Stores; withal protesting to him,
that they were utterly ignorant of their Fathers Treason, and therefore desired
the Kings Favor and Protection, which if he would procure, as they doubted not
but he could, they would (upon receiving his Majesty's Royal Patent, for
preserving them in their Offices and Habits) give him twice so much, as they
had now presented him with. The Panther takes the Present, and with a pretended
secrecy, causes it to be conveyed into his own Lodgings; then he bids them
wait a while, and he would move the King in their behalf. They stay without in
hopes of speeding well, but Sly-look shows all the Treasure he had taken, to
the King, withal telling him, how he came by it, and for what end it was
presented him. The King hearing his relation, and seeing so great a mass of
Wealth, with a promise of twice so much; feared they would (being so rich) be
able to injure him at one time or other; therefore, before he would let the
Panther give any answer to the two Wolves, he advised with his Lords and
Friends thereabout. When they heard the whole matter, they told the King, if
his Majesty pleased, they could easily rid him of his fear; for, say they, let
your Steward Sly-look put them off for this time, with a delay, saying your
Majesty is not at leisure. When they come again, let him tell them, unless they
bring him more Treasure, he will not trouble himself in the business, or the
like. If the Steward manage his affairs well, he may easily g^t all their
Wealth into his hands. To this and King said, I am content to leave the
business wholly to my Lord Sly-looks discre^^on. Therefore my Lord (the King
turning himself to and Panther) Slylook I give you as large a commission as you
will, provided you do not in my name promise a continuation of their Disguise.
The Panther goes to the two Wolves, tel^s them, his Majesty is now very busy
in Council, therefore he can do nothing till the next day, then so soon as he
un^erstood they were come, he would speak to the King. But next time they came,
he told them he had presented all that they gave him, to another Lord, and left
himself nothing; for he perceived they had few Friends in the Court, therefore
he should need much more Treasure than they gave him yesterday, otherwise all
he could do would signify nothing; for, said he, if less than four Lords be
engaged for you, when your business comes to the Vote, it will be impossible to
carry it. With these and like Expressions he drew almost all the Wealth of
Isegrims whole Lineage into the Kings Coffers; and at length brought in these
two Wolves before the King. When the King saw them, he said, what do you
already begin to tread the steps of the Traitor your Father? They answer
trembling, No, and it please your Majesty. Why then did you bribe my Steward
with so great a mass of Wealth? more I fear, then ever you came honestly by. At
this, they stood amazed, and knew not what to say. Then the King (turning to
the Panther) said, My Lord you have their Treasure, see it be not diminished,
nor mixed with any of mine, for I purpose, now it is here, it shall be kept
until I am better informed touching this perfidious Generation; for I suspect,
I shall ere long have so many complaints exhibited against them, as all this
Treasure they have brought, and much more will not repay the damages they have
done. In the mean while (turning to the Wolves) he said, See you demean your
selves peaceably, and when the date of our Proclamation is out, be sure that
none of you be found in this Disguise; for whosoever ^e be that presumes to
wear a Disguise one day after that prefixed time, he shall certainly die as a
Traitor. As to your Offices, I do not take them from you presently, but as you
demean your selves, so you may enjoy them sometime longer, or but for a very
short time; the last of which I rather think.

Having said this, he dismissed the Lords, who were sat in Counsel with him. So
the Wolves departed sad enough.

CHAP. XXX.
How the King desirous to see some of Bellins Kindred, caused three of the
oldest of them to be sent for, etc.

AFter the Wealth of the Wolves was thus taken, and the Kings jealousy
thereabout allayed, he became very pleasant and merry; and in that merry mood,
said, My When the cause of jealousy is removed, cheerfulness necessarily
follows.
Friends, I should be glad to see some of the Rams Kindred; therefore if any of
you know them our pleasure is, that he go to them, and bring two or three of
the oldest among them, before us. Then the Lord, who had before told the King
there were thousands of them living in secret places, said, If it be your
Majesty's pleasure to see any of Bellins stock, I can easily satisfy your
Majesty therein, for I am familiarly acquainted with many of them, especially
with Bellins Grandson, and two more of the Eldest of them, who by reason of
their discretion, have retired themselves from the fury of the Bear and Wolf,
and live safely in a small piece of ground well fenced. The King hearing this,
said, Send for the three you speak of, or go your self and fetch them. So that
Lord immediately went to the Meadow, where they three dwelt alone; and first
saluted them (as he was wont at other times) afterward told his Errand, withal
in what condition the Wolfs Kindred stood, and how they were like to lose their
Offices suddenly. They knowing the realty of their Friend doubted nothing, but
went along with him to the Court. When they were thither come, they by the same
Lord, were brought into the Kings presence, who looking cheerfully upon them,
said, I am glad to see you indeed, for I supposed you had been all destroyed
before this time. I do confess, when I gave my consent to the publishing that
Edict, I thought I had done that which was right; but since understanding by
the Traitor Reynards own words, that he was the Murderer of Kayward, and not
your Father; I heartily repented of what I had done. Therefore before you
depart from us, we will And a good P^^nce, having once c^nsented to the wrong
of other, through the perfidi^^^ actings ^ t^eacheroo^ persons is never
sati^fied till he has completely recompensed that wrong as tar as is possible.
aholish that law, and every part of it totally, as if it had never been.
Accordingly that Law was repe^let and ^^de v^id that very day, and Proclamation
made, that if any B^ust whatsoever committed any outrage against any of
Bellins Lineage, young or old, they thould die for it. Upon this, these three
persons were so well satisfied and assured of their peace and safety, as they
came ^ily to v^sit this Lord, and sometimes went in to the King himself, owning
his favor and protection as the greatest happiness that could befall them.
Also the King himself delighted in their company very much; for seeing their
simplicity, and good behavior, he was not weary of seeing them, but rather
thought they were long ^bsent, if he saw them not once a day.

CHAP. XXXI.
How the Wolves behaved themselves in their Offices after the Date of the
Proclamation was expired, and how they were suddenly ruined.

By this time the ten days expressed in the Kings Preclemation were fully
ended, and the Wolves (much against their wills) had laid a side their
Disguises. Upon this whenever any one of the Commons came to any of their
Houses to commune with them, or present them any (...); so soon as he saw the
Wolf (not masked) he would run away as hard as he could; and acquaint all he
met, that he went to one of the Prelates Sons, and sound none in his house,
except a Wolf lo^king ghastly upon him. The Wolv^s ^erceiving they were utterly
undone, if their Cilen^s should be coustantly thus frighted, knew not what
course to take: therefore the subtilest of them, when any of the Commons came,
either to see them, or to pay their ^^es, or to present them with ought, laid
themselves down, pretending they were not well; and that they might not be seen
as they were, they spread over them a Coverlet of some other skin, (as if they
were laid in a Sweat by the Phisicians order) and so under that would speak
advising them to leave what they brought, in such or such a corner of the
House. This shift held water a while, but long it could not; for the most
inconsiderate, and the youngest of the Wolves would rather run the hizard than
be st^^ved; therefore they again put on their Gowns, and such as came to them
then, were not frighted, as the other (who saw them without those Gowns) had
been. But so soon as this was bl^zed abroad, some of Bellins friends Wolfish
Natures when openly seen, are abominable to all.
came to the Houses of these foolish Wolves, and well marking them, said
nothing, but went and immediately informed against them; offering to prove
their contempt of the King and his Law. When this their Relation was heard by
the King, he sent for those Wolves, and after proof made of their contempt, he
hanged up Seventeen of them; for no more were then taken the other being fled
for fear. The Execution of these terrifled all the other so, as if you would
have persuaded them (with an assurance of never so great seer^si^) to have put
their Gowns on again but for one minute, they would not have done it; nay, they
absolutely hated that G^^b ever after. By this means the Wolves were in extre^m
penury; and needs must so be; for in a very short time it was known to all the
Commons, that the Liueage of Pitwood, and be himself, had been and were, all
very Wolves, and that Furr, Gown which Pitwood himself wore, and all the Gowns
of his Lineage, were the true and natural Garments of Bellin, and Bellins
Kindred, which Garments they took from them, as often as any one of that Race
fell into their hands. The matter being thus clearly known, the King had no
need to think of displacing them; because their Office^ fell from them
immediately after it was fully understood what they w^^e. For all the Commons
did not only fly from ^^rm, but also hard^d together against them; and if in
the daytime any one of them stirred abroad, he was in danger of his Life, th^^
all e^^ing, A Wolf, a Wolf, kill him, kill him. This hard us^ge made the Wolves
to keep close, and not be seen abroad at all in the daytime; (...) they of
necessity must go forth to purvey for food, and accordingly they did, but
always in fear of being taken; so as they ever after led a poor and miserable
Life, until they e^ther died, or were forgot.

CHAP XXXII.
How the King rejoicing at the Wolves ruin, distributed their wealth among the
Commons, and then openly showed his love to D^lin's Ki^dred, and commanded all
his Subjects to fellow their-Instructions, etc.

WHen the King saw the effect of his Proclamation, what a ruin it had brought
on Isegrims Lineage, he was highly contented in his mind, and said, (to that
Lord, who before said, Pull but off the Mask, and there needs no more) now my
Friend the Mask is off, and there needs no more. With that, the same Lord bowed
himself, and said, Your Majesty is now freed from the ^are of displating them.
But who would have thought, they should so suddenly have been ruined? How could
it be otherwise, said the King? certainly the Traitor Reynard well knew, that
Isegrim would never have been admitted by the Commons into his Office, had he
not worn that Disguise. For Isegrim and his whole Tribe were always hateful to
the Commons, and would always have been so, if Reynards policy had not been
observed and put in practice by them. Besides, Isegrim (for his own part)
carried himself so demurely, and spoke so seldom, as even I my self was more
th^n half persuaded, he had changed his nature, and with his new Gown put on
another Nature, directly contrary to that of his own. But I now clearly see,
that a Wolf will be a Wolf, what Coat soever he wears. Therefore I am heartily
glad his whole Lineage is at this time reduced to their pristine condition.
Nevertheless, that I may not in time to come be upbraided by any The true
Emblem of a Noble Prince.
of those ungrateful Beasts, with the retaining their Treasure, I will speedily
order the distribution of the same, among the Commons in general, especially,
amongst those who have sustained damage by them.

The next day the King called all his Lords and Friends to Council, where he
declared his intentions of distributing the Treasure of the Wolves among the
Commons, and principally among such as had sustained loss, or injury by them.
To this they all assented, applauding the Kings Nobleness. Then the King
commanded the Lord Sly look, and his Cousin Firrapel the Libbard, to order the
distribution thereof with as much equity as was possible.

Now while this was a doing, the King again called his Lords and Friends about
him, and said, W^rthy Friends, We unadvisedly and through false accusation
condemnediour Chaplain Bellin, and his Kindred; therefore, since our error is
discovered, and the Murder for which Bellin was condemned, is acknowledged by
Reynard, that false Traitor, to be perpetrated by himself; it concerns us in
some extraordinary manner to recompense the great wrongs that Family has
sustained for so long a time, and all that through a misunderstanding of ours,
and through too great credulity of what we saw: for though Bellin brought
K^yward the Hare's head to us, yet the Fox ^lew the Hare, and put it in his own
Male, and then tied the Male about Bellins Neck; through which notorious crime
craftily veiled, by that wretched Miscreant Reynard, our judgment was deceived,
Bellin was put to Death, his Lineage made a prey to the Bear and the Wolf, and
we and all our Family brought even to the brink of ruin.

These words were uttered by the king with so great earnestness, as all his
Lords and Friends were very much affected therewith; therefore they said, It is
in your Majesty's power to honor and respect them, as much as you please; we
all will readily obey in whatsoever your Majesty shall command thereabout. The
king hearing them thus speak, said, Worthy Friends, since you so readily have
offered to follow our Advice, and obey our Commands, we accept the same kindly;
and therefore will now offer what we think most expedient in this case.

You all know, we by our Proclamation have already taken them into our
Protection; yet you nor we our self cannot suppose that a sufficient
recompense; therefore, since raise the Dead we cannot, to the Living let us
show as much kindness as shall be convenient; for when the Commons perceive
that we not only protect, but also respect Bellins Kindred, they in imitation
of us will do the like. And that our respect, and the good opinion we have of
them, may the more certainly be known to all our Subjects in general, we will
give command, that they all behave themselves lovingly and f^iendly toward
them; so doing undonbtedly, we shall unite all our meaner Subjects in love each
to other, and we our selves be so much the more happy.

This resolution of the Kings was immediately assented to, and put in
execution. And from that day forward the Ram's Kindred walked up and down
safely and found friends and friendly Entertainment in all places wheresoever
they came. The King himself, and his Nobles observing the great Gravity of this
Stock by him supposed to be utterly exstin^) made Bellins Grandson his
Counselor; all the other Nobles seeing this, entertained one, or more of the
Ram's Kindred, to be always residing in, or near their own Lodgings. This
familiarity with Bellins Kindred, wrought an alteration in the King and Lords;
for they heretofore were As evil Communication corrupts good Manners, so on the
other hand, good Examples if followed, produce the well-being of Mankind.
wont to fare deliciously, and to feed on diverse sorts of meats; also upon
slight occasions to be chalerick and angry; they now seeing the great
temperance and meekness of their new Sociates, began to feed more sparingly,
and not of so many sorts at one time; holding this course a while, they found
themselves not so prone to choler or anger as before. The King observing this
change not in himself only but in all his Friends and Nobles, was willing to
propagate it further; therefore he by public Proclamation commanded all his
Subjects high and low to entertain familiarity with the Ram's Kindred, also to
take example by them, and follow their Instructions in all things tending to
sobriety and love. This Proclamation was exactly obeyed by the Commons in
general, who ever after lived in such peace and love, as the like has searcely
ever been heard of since the beginning of The height of all Happiness in this
world, consists in the Righteousness of King and People.
that Kingdom. The King finding this change in all his Subjects universally,
was highly pleased, and rewarded all his Friends nobly.

A POSTSCRIPT.
Friendly Reader,
IN the foregoing History, I have not in any wise deviated from my first
intention, which was to frame a Second Part to the delightful History of
Reynard the Fox, which might yield thee both pleasure and profit. If any one be
offended, let his offense be to himself; my intent was not to give distaste but
delight. Nor have I in the foregoing History let slip any Expressions tending
to the vitiating, or debauching of Youth, but have rather couched my words so,
as the intelligent may be profited, and the disingenious not injured. Therefore
I desire this my Labor may be as well taken as meant; If so, I shall be
encouraged to divulge a more serious piece, (not or Beasts, but of Men) so soon
as time and opportunity will permit, Farewell.

FINIS,
Books lately Printed for Edward Brewster, at the Crane in St. Paul's
Churchyard, since the late dreadful fire.
(...), Or, the Sinner condemned of himself; being a Plea for God, against all
the Uogodly, proving them alone guilty of their own destiuction; and that they
shall be condemned in the great Day of Account; not for that they lacked, but
only because they neglected the means of their Salvation. And also, showing how
fallacious and frivolous a Pretense it is in any, to say, They would do better
if they could; when indeed all men could, and might do better, if they would.

(...), Or, Scriptures Self-evidence: To prove its Existence, Authority in it
Self, and sufficiency (in its kind) to ascertain others, That it is Inspit'd of
God to be the Only Rule of Faith.

Published as a Plea for Protestants in the Desence of their Profession, and
intended only for the use and instruction of the Vulgar sort.

The Doctrine of the Bible.

The History of Reynard the Fox.

The History of Guy Earl of Warwick.

A useful Table of Expenses.

Moses revived: a Treatise proving, That it is not lawful (and therefore
sinful) for any Man or Woman to eat Blood, viz. the Lifeblood of any Creature
etc.

Natural and Artificial Conclusions.

Mr. Ball's Catechism with the Exposition.

Mr. Roger's Righteous Man's Evidence for Heaven 1^.

Christian advice both to Young and Old, rich and poor, which may serve as a
Directory at hand, ready to direct all persons almost in every state and
condition; under 17 general useful heads: By Tho. Mocket. M. A.

Basilius Valentinus last Will and Testament; which was found hid under a Table
of Marble, behind the High Altar in the Cathedral Church of the Imperial City
of Erford, leaving it there to be found by him whom Gods providence should make
worthy.

There is now in the Press two very useful Books. The Apostolical History,
containing a narration of the Acts of the Apostles. By Samuel ^radock, B. D.
fol.

A Prospect of Divine Providence. By Tho. Crane, octva.


