Conjugium Languens: OR, The Natural, Civil, and Religious MISCHIEFS Arising
from Conjugal Infidelity AND IMPUNITY.

By CASTAMORE.

Tu quoque suscepti curam dimittis amici;
Officiique pi um tam cito ponis on us?
Ov. Trist. London: Printed by R. ROBERTS. 1700.

Conjugium Languens, etc.
IT WAS a false and groundless Character which was given by the great Scaliger,
of the English Nation, That they were a People Cruel and Inhospitable, perfect
Self-Admirers, and Contemners of all the World besides. A Vindication of the
English Temper and Kindness.
For if we consider either the Nature of our Laws, or the Genius of our
Religion, which are founded both of them upon the Rules of Equity and
Indulgence, we must needs conclude the Temper of the English to be a perfect
Contradiction to both these, if it is not treatable and human. They may indeed
sometimes be fierce, but then it is in their own Defense: And if they are
inhospitable, it is only to such as would make a Prey of their Civility. For how
many Strangers quit their Native Soil, to enjoy the Pleasure of a more
Indulgent English Clime? And Foreign Merchants crowd our Streets in such
Numbers, as if London were the Mistress and universal Patroness of Traff^ck
through the World. But if men approach them in an hostile way, there is no
reason they should meet with Hospitality, or be treated otherwise than with a
Martial English Bravery, which is highly necessary for their own Defense and
Preservation: For their main Bulwark is their Native Valor; and their Men of
War, their only Alps and Pyrenean Hills. And to say that they are Self*
Admirers, is very weak, since if they should not love themselves, they ought to
be hated of all the World besides. I only wish their Conjugal Love were as
sincere and genuine, as is their Friendliness to Strangers, and as little
liable to Exceptions as their Cruelty. Then many silent Complaints against
Matrimonial Infidelity would cease; then would not those Solemn, Sacred Ties be
so wilfully violated and profaned, so frequently made an occasion to Lewdness,
and sacrificed so impiously to all Immodesty and Lust. For how often is
Marriage made only a Cloak to Impurity? And that dazzling Beauty which before
commanded Respect and Admiration by its Innocence, is under that Religious
Cover exposed a Prostitute to every wanton Eye. Would but the Modesty of our
Women keep pace with the Fortitude of our Men; and the Bashfulness and Purity
of Those, equalize the Courage and Hardiness of These, how valuable should we
be at Home, as well as formidable Abroad! Then would it be difficult to
determine which of these two Qualities would most recommend us to the Esteem of
the World; whether we should more be famed for a Nation of Lucretia's, or for a
standing Race of Heroes.

But the Women will be apt to say, Obj.
That were there no Attacks, there would then be no Victory: Did not the
Importunities of the Men provoke the Modesty of the Women, there would be no
Surrender of their Chastity: And how is it possible for such a weak Defense as
Women are qualified to make, to be able to withstand their repeated Onsets? But
yet as weak as it is, without Consent the general Attempts would be very
fruitless and unsuccessful, and no more than the storming a Wall of Brass with
Tennis-Balls. It is an Observation upon this Island, That no Continent has been
oftener, perhaps, conquered, than it has been: And yet the History takes notice,
That it had always a Hand in its own Conquests; and by the means of some
corrupt Party within, was basely betrayed to its own Overthrow. Answ.
And let the Women but guard their Honor with inward Resolutions, and not
harbor in their Minds a Treacherous Passion to yield to Amorous Glances and
Insinuations, and they may still bravely maintain their Ground, and fairly defy
all Onsets and Surprizals. But since the Weak Sex have rendered themselves much
weaker, by the frequent Conquests that are made over them; and the Malignity of
their Effeminacy ripens daily toward an Universal Contagion, it will be very
necessary to represent the various Mischiefs of this spreading* Evil: That the
Piety and Wisdom of the Nation may prescribe such proper Remedies as may retard
at least, if not totally prevent all the Danger of it; and that as well in the
Men, who are equally guilty, as in the Female Sex.

In India formerly an Elephant was esteemed and allowed as a valuable Gift to a
Married Woman, to debase her self, and corrupt her Chastity. And Solon is
recorded to have been the first in Greece, who by his Laws permitted Women to
prostitute themselves for Necessities of Life. 'Twere well that our Women were
to be bounded only by these Laws: We might then expect some Abatement of their
Impurity, either by the Rarity of that Animal, or by confining that Sin to such
only as are in Want.

And that we may not by our Silence be any longer accessory, as it were, to
this odious Vice, which is now grown so universal, let us consider awhile
those various fatal Mischiefs which attend it. And those are,

First, Lust diseases the Body.
Such as are the Natural Consequences and Effects of it; some of which have so
near an Affinity to Corruption, that they forestall a Natural Dissolution, and
prevent the Rottenness of the Grave: And render the Person that is distempered
so very loathsome and offensive, that as they were formerly too familiar with
others, so they are scarce able now to converse with themselves: They look as
if they were spawned from the Dead-Sea, or were a Limb of Sodom and Gomorrah.
So long has Reason lain asleep, and Conscience been checked and awed to
Silence, that the very Body now is forced to serve as a Monitor to the Soul, to
supply its place, and take its turn to conduct the Mind to Reformation, and to
endure several Corporeal Pangs and Throws, for Neglect of Anguish and Remorse
of Spirit. But this nauseous Evil does not always rest here, but sometimes
descends to a loathsome Offspring, and corrupts the very Innocence of
Childhood: It intails such Sickness and Diseases upon Posterity, as make them
wish themselves unborn, or that they had been stifled at the Birth. So
desirable a Blessing is this which the vicious Parent propagates to the Son.

And certainly if this Lustful Fire be not quenched, Wantonness emasculates the
Age.
or else be timely not restrained, 't will soon emasculate the Age, consume the
Strength, and melt down the Courage of the Nation. 'T will serve instead of a
Thousand Enemies to foil and overthrow the Kingdom, when it has brought our Men
to be as Lascivious as Satyrs, and as Impotent as Pygmies. A French Army will
not be half so Formidable as some Hundreds of English Messalina's, who will top
upon the greatest Gallantry, and sink the Braveness of our Spirits more than
all their Legions and Battalions. If we design to maintain our Martial Valor,
for which we are now renowned through the World, we must keep at a Distance
from Venus Tents. An Effeminate Hero resembles a Ball of Wildfire, expiring in
the Air without any Resistance or Execution: He is truly qualified for Gallant
Achievements; but those tender Indearments he meets with in the Fair Sex
exhaust all his Fire and Strength, and render him very insignificant and
useless.

'Twas a most excellent Observation of Iuvenal, concerning the Ruin and
Declination of Ancient Rome, -- Sa evior Armis
Luxuria incubuit, victumque ulciscitur orbem.


When the vanquished World had nothing left to revenge it self on conquering
Rome, its own Luxury became its Overthrow, and was more victorious over it
self, than any Foreign Power or Arms. And while Effeminacy triumphs among our
Men of Arms, England's Laurels of necessity must wither. The Ancient Gauls
recommended Continency till a full and vigorous Age to all their Men designed
for War, because they observed that Women were apt to abate and divert their
Courage. And the Greek History observes to us, That all such as designed for
Victory in the Olympic Games, took care not to converse for some time before
with any Women.

But this Vice not only dissolves the Courage and emasculates the Spirits,
Children partake of the unruly Pass^ons of their Parents.
but it entails upon the Issue generally very wild and extravagant Passions.
And the Lust and Lasciviousness of the Parent runs frequently in the Child's
Veins; it is rooted in the Constitution, and mixed with the very Spirits and
Blood. And therefore it is the Wisdom of all Persons in their Conjugal
Elections, to see that those they choose be of a well-descended Nature; that
they may be able to pronounce that of themselves, which the Great Alexander
did, That his Virtues he had by Nature, but his Vices came by Chance.

And since most Men marry with a Design of securing to themselves an Issue,
Adulterous Conversation destroys the Offspring.
as well as pleasing of themselves, both these good Ends by an inordinate Lust
are quite defeated: For this by a Natural Cause prevents Conception, and by
consequence must stifle all Hopes of Children in the Womb. The beaten Paths are
always barren, and never productive of any Fruit. This common way of living
would be apt to put an End to the Noblest Family, though even the House of
Austria depended on it. And indeed, whatever springs from an Adulterous Bed is
rarely of a long Continuance. Of That we may affirm what the Poet does of
unjustly-acquir'd Riches, Ex male quaesitis, etc. Ill-gotten Children, as well
as Wealth, seldom continue to the Third Generation, And thus the Two Principal
Ends of Matrimony are utterly baffled and confuted, by frequent Matrimonial
Lewdness, and Adulterous Conversation, which both confound the Nuptial Ioys and
Satisfaction, and extinguish also Lineal Descents, in putting an invincible Non
Ultra upon the Progeny of the Meanest, as well as the most Ancient House.

The next great Evil which attends Conjugal Licentiousness and Impurity, Civil
Mischiefs of this Sin.
is the Plague of Iealousy; a Passion which blows hot and cold at once: It
creates Iealousy.
It Is a kind of Compound of Light and Darkness, of Pain and Pleasure; that
constrains a man to Hate and Abominate That which he mightily inclines to
Admire and Love. It Is of such an Aguish Disposition, that while it pretends to
warm the Spirit with Kindness and Affection, it freezes it again with Coldness
and Neglect. It puts a man into such a tremulous Condition and Suspense, that
he can neither freely embrace his Wife, nor yet think of parting with her
freely, but it bandies his Mind continually to and fro, in a Sea of Inconstancy
and Hesitation. And what is more intolerable, than to be wounded in the most
tender part; than for the Delight of the Eyes to be made the Grief of the
Heart, and to live confined continually to Disquietude and Vexation? And
certainly, except that some Restraint could be put upon the too just Cause of
this tormenting Passion, it seems better much that several Persons should
answer as Thales did his Mother concerning Marriage, who told her, When he was
Young, it was too soon to marry; when he was Old, it was too late. Lepidus, we
are assured, expired with Grief, because of the Incontinency of his Wife: I
heartily wish that he were the only Martyr of this kind of Discontent, and the
last that fell a Victim to this sort of Dissatisfaction; which is a Torment so
intolerable, that the very Animals are impatient under this Pressure, and
enraged to be rivaled in their Amors. And there is nothing certainly that
ferments the Mind to a greater pitch of Anger and Resentment, than those
vexatious Thoughts inspired by Iealousy.

But it is not enough for those that are married thus, Wastes the Estate.
to consume the Eyes, and waste the Souls of such as are injured, with
Discontent; but they likewise quarry very often upon the Fortune, and maintain
their Consumptive Lusts at a large Expense. What Care and Frugality had for a
long time hoarded up, that Prodigality in a very short time makes a shift to
lavish away: What was laboriously collected in the Daytime, is often either by
the one or the other as idly wasted and expended at Night; till the Nests of
the Mistresses and Gallants are richly feathered with their Substance. And in
this they too nearly moralize the Fable of the Danaides, condemning themselves
to put their Money in a Bag with Holes; as those Daughters of Danaus were
punished in Hell with filling Water in a Tub without a Bottom. Of this we have
a late memorable Instance among our Nobility here at Home, besides many more
less-Illustrious Examples which might be produced: For within Three Years which
happened between the late Duke's (Norfolk's) Death, and the parting the new
Duke and Duchess, she run him out by Extravagant Expenses 30000 l. above his
Income; to pay which, obliged him to sell his Life, 2400 l. per Ann. out of his
Estate in Suslex and Yorkshire. [See the Duke of Norfolk's Case.] This is one
main Reason among the rest, that men in this discreet Age, as they call it,
keep at so great a Distance from the Ties of Wedlock, that with the Essenians
they will rather choose to extinguish the Succession of Men, than beget them in
a Married State; or if they do, it is rather for the Love of Wealth than of the
Woman, and so make a Marriage of Bodies without Souls. And when they are tied
together thus very loosely, and the Married Pair, as to any Cordial Love and
Affection, continue still in a Single State, what tolerable degrees of
Indearments and Friendship can possibly be expected from them; since they vowed
that with their Mouth which their Mind disowned, and tied that with the Tongue,
which they never consented to with the Heart? Raises Domestic Broils and
Troubles.
From whence proceed those Rumors daily of so many Skirmishes and Domestic
Discords, of such Broils and Dissentions in several Families, which are perfect
Epitomies of a Civil War, and nothing but Nurseries of Feuds and Discontent;
which render a Wilderness more desirable than a Palace, and a Bed of Rushes
more easy than a Bed of Down. Inclines men to Celibacy.
And while these are the Effects of Matrimonial Engagements, and the wretched
Consequence and horrid Result of those Sacred Vows, no wonder that the Poet's
Choice should be the general Motto of this loose Age, Gall. Ele. 1. Et mihi
dulce magis resoluto vivere collo.
Nothing agrees more with my Mind,
Than Liberty that is unconfined.


But that which highly aggravates this Crime, and renders it far more
unpardonable in the Married Persons, is, that they are under a most solemn
Contract, and indissoluble Obligation to the contrary; and yet they venture
without Restraint, and resolutely break all those holy Bonds asunder. So that
what is remarked of the happy Situation of our Island, That in respect of
Commerce it enjoys this extraordinary Advantage of lying open to all the Parts
of the World, may with Shame and Confusion be pronounced of the unhappy Temper
of our loose Gallants, who expose themselves so commonly to all Strangers, and
drive so general a Traffic with all kind of People: For Confirmation of which,
though we cannot justly pronounce it to be true in all Cases, we need but
observe the strange Diversity of Children that are often seen in one and the
same House, and are thought all to belong to the same Parents. This Child is
naturally as Fair as that Lady whom Horace describes to be endowed with a
vultus nimium lubricus aspici: That other is a perfect Dowdy, and as Black as
any Spaniard. Here you may see one Plump, and shaped like a Dutch Skipper:
There another Tall, and Slender-wasted, like the Monument. One is Sanguine,
another is Pale: Here Is a Dwarf, and there is a Giant: This is Surly, and that
is nothing but Complaisance. They are all as like one another, as a Peasant is
a Lord; and as like the Father, as a rough Tartar is a smooth Italian: So that
if you consider the Children all distinctly, you would really fancy that half
Europe had clubb'd to make up one Family. But herein Charity advises us not to
pass our Judgments rashly; because such Diversities may sometimes proceed from
Legitimate Congress. And this unlawful Freedom not only corrupts the Strain,
and allays the Lineal current Descent with spurious Mixture and a base Breed,
Conjugal Immodesty ignominious to the Family.
but derives likewise a lasting Mark of Infamy upon the Children, stigmatizes
their Character, and libels their Repute and Credit in the World. Now if Men
are so careful of preserving the Breed of their Beasts pure, especially such as
are remarkable for any Excellence, that they will not endure a Mixture from any
of a different kind, for fear of altering of the Strength or Shape; or abating
of some good and eminent Quality; should not then as tender a Regard be had for
Families, for securing them from being adulterated and stained with False
Amors, and Illegitimate Conceptions, and being made a Medley of contrary
Humors, and disagreeable Genius's and Dispositions? And no Parent that had the
least Respect either for he Honor of the Family, or the Comfort and Reputation
of the Children, but would chase rather a thousand times to dye Childless, than
have them brought into the World with such a Train of Miseries attending them.

We may add to this the heinous Injustice which is done to the next Heir, It
deprives the next Heir of his Right.
of cutting him out of all his Pretensions, and robbing him of all those
Privileges and Profits, to which he had an undeniable Claim: Whereby a Nobleman
of the best Family may be supplanted by an obscure Person of the meanest, if
the Woman prove unchaste and false, for want of Issue from the Marriage Bed.
And this I am afraid is none of the least Reasons of the apparent Degeneracy of
some Ancient Families in the Nation. It Is true indeed, the Men in these Cases
are no more excusable than the Women, they are equally as guilty of Matrimonial
Inconstancy as their Wives; but then the Husband cannot bring in an
Illegitimate Child into the Family; he cannot by that means strike out the next
Lawful Heir, and basely deprive him of his Birthright. This is wholly owing to
the unlawful Familiarity of Wives, and is an Evil in them of the first
Magnitude, being compounded both of abominable Treachery and Injustice. And
therefore to preserve the Succession in a right Line, that no base Child may
deprive the Lawful Heir of his just Privileges, it is an Ancient Custom in
several Places of the East, as well as in Africa, That the Heirship of Families
runs all along on the Mother*s side, as being least liable to Sophistry and
Imposition. So that if once the Nativity be allowed, the proper Father is never
questioned. In Rome, formerly, Three of Lepidus's Relations were born with a
Cartilage upon the Right Eye, as a distinctive Mark of that Family to which
they belonged. And were all the Families in England to be traced at the same
rate, and every Child in the Nation affixed to its Genuine Father, what a
Numerous Brood would be found in some Houses, that are now destitute of
Children? And how many Persons that feed and educate Variety of Children, as
their own, would then be really left almost Childless?

Besides these odious Civil Consequences, Religious Mischiefs.
there are Abundance of Religious Evils which this Conjugal Libertinism
produces, which was a Vice so detestable among the Jews, that Death is
pronounced the infallible Penalty of it, Adultery capital among the Jews.
Deuteronomy. xx. 10. And the man that commits adultery with another man's wife,
even he that commits adultery with his neighbor's wife, the adulterer and
adulteress shall surely be put to death. And were this Law in England as
frequently executed as it is transgressed, it would in some measure unpeople
us, I am afraid, as much as either the last Plague, or the late War has done,
and mightily increase the Accounts of Mortality among us. And that this is a
Vice of that intoxicating Nature, that men are but rarely drawn off from it, we
have Solomon's Testimony, Prove. ii. 19. None that go in unto her (the Lewd
Woman) return again, neither take they hold of the paths of life. Chap. vii.
27. Her house is the way to hell, going down to the chambers of death. No
Dungeon is half so dangerous and dismal as her Apartments, notwithstanding all
their splendid Gaiety. And that Wise King, who smarted so severely under their
Enchantments, because he was too familiar with their ways, has with as much
Freedom as Severity kindly given Caution against too much Confidence in them,
in that Sentence of his, which looks as sharp as any Satyr that was written
against them, Eccles. vii. 28. One man among a thousand have I found, but a
woman among all those have I not found. No, not even among the Seven Hundred
Wives that were Princesses, and those Three Hundred Concubines which he chose
to complete his Thousand. But this can be no just Reflection upon the Innocent
Conversation of our Ladies; among whom I question not but there are now several
of as rigid Continence and Virtue, as there were in any Age since his Time.

'Twas in the late Reigns that this Abominable Iniquity came to be so Epidemic
an English Vice. The People of Israel followed the Sins of Jeroboam; and Regis
ad exemplum, etc. were the Sins of ^^. who made England to sin. Address to the
Parliament.
And unless the Great Council of the Nation shall think fit to do something as
remarkable for the Suppression of that Abomination, as has been done for the
Encouragement of it, we must still stand in Fear of its ominous Growth, and
justly dread the fatal Consequences of its Increase among us. That it will, if
not restrained, produce at length a Storm of very heavy Judgments upon us, we
may verily believe, from that severe Indignation which the Almighty has
frequently expressed against this Wickedness; and that not only in threatening
with future, It provokes the Judgments of God.
but inflicting present Plagues. He styles himself slow to Anger, and is unapt
to show his Resentments on a sudden; but yet at length he strikes home; as the
Poet tells us, (...).
Mills of the Gods do slowly wind,
But they at length to Powder grind.


And therefore Job comforts himself with the Remembrance of his Innocence and
Integrity, and the Assurance he had of not smarting for this Sin, which he
reckons to be extremely pernicious and destructive: Job xxxi. 9, 10, 11, 12. If
my heart has been deceived by a woman, or if I have laid wait at my neighbor's
door; then let my wife grind unto another, and let others bow down upon her.
For this is an heinous crime; yea, it is an iniquity to be punished by the
judges: For it is a fire that consumes to destruction, and would root out all
my Increase. He thought it so far from add^^^ any thing to his Family, that it
would certainly exterminate and extinguish those Blessings whereof he had been
already possessed; and that it would diminish his Comforts instead of making an
Increase to them. And doubtless whatever Felicities any Persons c^n pretend to
from such filthy unlawful Practices, the Miseries will in all respects far
over-balance and outw^^gh them, and produce a Train of lasting and very
grievous Evils, for those short and vanishing Delights. And many Nations
besides the Jews have been possessed with so irreconcilable an Odium and utter
Detestation against all Adulterous Conversation, that they doomed the
Commission of it to as Capital a Punishment as the Jews did, and sentenced the
Guilty Persons unto Death.

At Pulo, Condore, and Pegu; at Siam, Cochinchina, Cambodia, and Guinea, the
Natives are so obliging to Strangers, as to offer them the Use of Women, though
not of their Wives. And yet what Heathens disavow'd, is very shamefully
practiced by Christians; and what the Husband is utterly averse to, That the
Wife chooses, against all the Laws of Matrimonial Endearments, the natural
Violence of whose Lust breaks too often through all the various and strong
Restraints of Fear and Honor, which by a Wise Providence were contrived as
Bars to their Chastity, and placed as Guardians to their Modesty.

It was Five hundred and twenty Years after Rome was built, before ever that
renowned and flourishing City heard of a Divorce among her People. And when
Spurius Carbilius dismissed his Wife upon the account of her Sterility, for he
had no Argument against her of Matrimonial Impurity, yet he received a sound
Reproof for that Action; and was told, That the Desire of Children ought to
give place to Conjugal Obligations: Val. Max. lib. 2. cap. 1. It Is not either
for the Barrenness of the Women, or the Natural Coldness of the Men, that
Divorces are so much requested among us, as for their loose unlawful Behavior
to one another. Those Natural unavoidable Infirmities do plead for Excuse, and
are sometimes pardoned where the Affections are entire and ardent: But this
Matrimonial Inconstancy is a Vice of that Malignity, that it poisons the
Kindness of the most Cordial, and cools the most Sanguine Husband or Wife into
Indifference, and oftentimes Aversation.

The Almighty was so averse to unlawful Issues under the Mosaical Dispensation,
that he declares, Deuteronomy. xxiii. 2. A bastard shall not enter into the
congregation of the Lord; even to his tenth generation shall he not enter into
the congregation of the Lord: That is, as the Hebrew Doctors expound it, Never.
And the Reason which they give for it, is this, That Persons might be deterred
from such Marriages as would leave an indelible Mark of Infamy upon Posterity.
And the Wise Son of Syrac has in few words expressed the several great Evils
that attend the Violation of Matrimonial Fidelity, in the Woman particularly,
Ecclus. xxiii. 22, etc. Thus shall it go also with the wife that leaves her
husband, and brings in an heir by another. For First, She has disobeyed the law
of the most High. And Secondly, She has trespassed against her own husband. And
Thirdly, She has played the whore in adultery, and brought children by another
man. She shall be brought out into the congregation, and inquisition shall be
made of her children. Her children shall not take root, and her branches shall
bring forth no fruit. She shall leave her memory to be cursed, and her reproach
shall not be blotted out. And they that remain shall know, that there is
nothing better than the fear of the Lord, and that there is nothing sweeter
than to take heed to the commandments of the Lord.

Now since the Zeal and Conduct of the High Court of Parliament have done such
Miracles for the Safety of the Nation, have conquered Difficulties that seemed
insuperable in Time of War, and have since appeased all the Public Clamours of
Discontent in time of Peace; surely it would not be a Matter unworthy their
Thoughts and Consideration, to reflect upon the Numerous Mischiefs which this
too common Conjugal Inconstancy produces; and prescribe such Antidotes as might
timely put a stop to it. What a Glory will this add to all those Mighty Things
which they have already done? And how many Thousand Families in England will
think themselves obliged to call them for ever blessed for it? And blessed they
must needs be, who make their Authority a Terror to all Iniquity, and take care
that Vice should never trample upon their Power, nor a Wickedness so daring, so
mischievous, and odious as this, should ever pass any longer without a due
Censure, and just Punishment. Were this Effeminate Liberty but effectually
suppressed by their Wise Determinations, what a lovely Alteration would it
produce throughout the whole Kingdom! And how many Injured Persons, whose
Tempers are now dejected with private Grief and Discontent, would then have
them turned immediately into a pleasant Cheerfulness and Satisfaction? Our Men
would then be more Hale and Vigorous, more Active and Hardy than now they are,
and not be enervated with Effeminacy, and subdued with sharp Pains and Diseases
of Lust; nor yet be racked with violent and impetuous Passions derived from the
depraved Appetite of the Parent. How many Estates might then be saved, that now
are wasted and consumed by Prodigal Expensive Lewdness? And how many Families
live like Brethren in Love and Amity, that are now only the Nurseries of
Iealousy and Discontent?

And were these formidable Difficulties of Marriage but removed, and the Wife
safe in the Love of her Husband, and He in the Affections of his Wife, and the
Legitimacy of her Offspring, and not exposed so desperately to the Falsity of
her Love, and the Unlawfulness of her Progeny, the Taxes then that are laid
upon Batchelors would sensible decay and vanish, and those upon Marriage as
apparently increase and multiply. Men then would entertain the Thoughts of
Wedlock with the same Honorable Esteem as that Solemnity gained at its first
Institution; which would no more be looked upon as a State of Slavery, but
Freedom; as fit for Man even in his State of Innocence and Perfection; and a
Blessing designed to inhance the Pleasure, and multiply all the Comforts and
Delights of Life. But such a happy Change as this can never in England be
expected, till those Wise Resolutions which inspired the August Assembly of the
Nation to surmount such Hardships as seemed unconquerable, animate them again
to establish such an Act against this dissolute Matrimonial Behavior, as may
restrain the Married Persons within Bounds of Modesty; which is the only means
of promoting that Honorable Estate, which is now so wretchedly neglected; and
of reviving its decayed Felicities and Comforts. For now the Impunity of it has
encouraged its Violation to that degree of Assurance and Boldness, The
Impudence of Offenders.
as if the Offenders were really Lawless, and outbrav'd the Force of Civil
Constitutions, and the Power of the Legislature to restrain them. For effecting
which, it might not be amiss to contrive such a Method and Law, as might render
Divorces less chargeable and difficult than now they are. For since all
Divorces, with the Liberty of Marrying again, proceed from the Authority of
Parliament; therefore if either there chance to be no Sessions for some time;
or if there be, the Parliament has no Opportunity of dispatching such private
Concerns; or if the Person injured be a Man of no Application, or be destitute
either of Money or of Time to go through with such a weighty Affair; in all
these Instances he must be forced to Silence, and privately to struggle with
his inward Burden and his Grief, because he is not qualified for a Deliverance
from the Difficulties of them. And therefore since our Savior assures us, and
the most Judicious Casuists attest, Divorces lawful upon the account of
Fornication.
That upon the account of Fornication it is really lawful both to divorce, and
to marry again, Matthew. 5. 32. why should not some more Easy Method be thought
of, than now is practiced, for relieving the Party injured and oppressed? For
sometimes Divorces have taken up the space of Four Years before they were
accomplished; as that of the Lord Ross, which continued from 66 to 70. and that
of the Duke of Norfolk's much longer. And certainly 'twere more desirable, that
the speedy Dispatch of the Jewish manner of Divorce, Be expelled from me, and
free for any body else; upon just Conviction, were allowed, than such as are so
Tedious and Expensive as those now mentioned.

Since therefore the happy Constitution of our Government takes care of all
other Properties, Conclusion.
it will not, I hope, hereafter suffer this which is most dear and tender, to
be so easily invaded and ravished from us. Nor will those Laws which are a
Defense for an Ox or an Ass, overlook the Security of the most Valuable
Enjoyment, neglect the Rights and Interests of the Conjugal Bed, and not
maintain the Staple Comfort of our Lives in all the Duties and Obligations of
Matrimonial Constancy and Indearments.

FINIS.

