A Continuation Of the STATE of NEW ENGLAND; Being a Farther ACCOUNT of the
Indian War, And of the Engagement betwixt the Joint Forces of the United
English Collonies and the Indians, on the 19th of December 1675. With the thue
Number of the Slain and Wounded, and the Transactions of the English Army since
the said Fight. With all other Passages that have there Happened from the 10th.
of November, 1675. to the 8th. of February 1675/6. Together with an Account of
the intended Rebellion of the Negroes in the Barbados.

Licensed

March 27. 1676. Henry Oldenburg



blazon or coat of arms of the British royal family DIEV ET MON DROIT
C. R.

HONI SOIT QVI MAY Y PENSE



LONDON, Printed by T. M. for Dorman Newman, at the Kings Arms in the Poultry,
1676.

ERRATA.
PAge 1. line 9. read Nipnet, ibid. l. 26. r. Original, page 6. l. the last. r.
Wigwams, p. 7. l. 7. r. December, p. 13. l. 11. r. Wigwams, p. 14. l. 1. r.
went home, ibid. l. 10. r. incommoded.

BOSTON, February the 9th. 1675.
SIR,
MY last to you was of the 10th. of November past, (which, in regard we have
had much Westerly Winds since) I hope ere this time you have received;
according to the best Information I had or could procure, I made bold to
acquaint you with sundry Passages, that before the date thereof, came to pass
amongst us: I also sent you two of our Orders in Print by Order of the Council
here; The one for the Confinement of our Neetop (i. e. Friend) Indians, the
other for a general Fast throughout this Collony: By the one you may see the
great Care our Authority has, as well to make a distinction visible, betwixt
our Friends the Christian Indians, and our Enemies the Heathens, as also, to
secure the one from injuries, and to lay the other open, and make them liable
to the hand of Justice: By the other you may see what sense of the immediate
hand of God upon us our Magistrates have; and truly Sir, we have great cause to
bless the Lord for that we have such Magistrates and Councellers that we are so
well assured do aim at the Glory of God, and the peace and welfare of his
people in this Wilderness; that however the mighty hand of God is lifted up
upon us, and he has given Commission to the Sword to destroy, yet we are well
satisfied there is nothing wanting that lies within the reach of their wisdom
or strength: Wherefore in the midst of our troubles we comfort our selves in
this, that we are satisfied they do what in them lies: I hope in some short
time I may hear of your receipt thereof.

Sir, In my last I also gave you (at first) an Account of the Reasons of the
Rise and Origin of these unhappy Wars, in which, my Information was not so
perfect, but that there was somewhat amiss; although, at that time, the Account
thereof was generally received, and the alteration is not much, only in some
few particular circumstances: Wherefore, that you might be the more certain
thereof, I shall give you an account wherein I missed, Thus: About six years
since one Sosoman, (an Indian-Schollar and Minister) having spent some years in
the Study of Divinity, being by that time judged capable of Preaching the
Gospel, was by the Authority of Plymouth sent to Preach to King Philip; he with
some seeming-kind of Devotion, heard him for a while at several times; and
however his Zeal was in outward appearance, yet all that time, and a good while
before, he, with several of his own men, had a Conspiracy to cut off the
English thereabouts, and scrupled not to make the business known to Sosoman, as
supposing he might be of great use to him, in the carrying on that bloody
design; whereupon this Sosoman soon after makes this thing known to the
Governor of New-Plymouth-Collony, Josiah Winslow Esquire; King Philip suspecting he
either would divulge, or had already made known this secret to the English,
took Council to kill this Sosoman; wherefore in order thereunto, one day, as he
sat fishing by a Riverside, two or three Indians came and barbarously
Murdered him in the place; whereupon, as soon as the Governor and Council of
Plymouth heard thereof, sent and took the said Murderers; as also a small
Party went to King Philip and brought him and most of his chief men to
Plymouth, and there Examined them, and had several meetings in Consultation
about the business; but King Philip behaved himself very uncivilly (like a
Heathen,) however due proof could not be produced against him, and he nor his
Men not having yet shed any English Blood after his entering into a League of
Peace with the English, was dismissed; only the Murderers after a legal
Condemnation were Hanged. Here lies the occasion of our present difference,
which I have made bold to acquaint you of.

Sir, Toward the close of my last to you, I gave you an Account of what was
done at Hatfield the 19th. of October. last; in which Fight the Heathens were so
put to it, that they were forced to go to their last refuge, that is, the
Narragansets, who I wrote you, word we feared every day more and more would
prove perfidious to us; wherefore the Authority of the United Collonies having
Intelligence that King Philip with his whole retinue, as well Women and
Children, etc. did harbor themselves under the protection of Ninicroft, who is
the King of the Narragansets, as also hearing that that same Sachem, that came
to Boston about the end of September last, (being Ninicroft's Eldest Son) is
since Married to the Squaw Sachem; which Marriage does signify a near
Alliance: and also seeing that what that Sachem did agree unto with our
Authority, when in Boston, is not at all regarded by them, (for that Sachem
sent word when he came home into his own Country, that Ninicroft would not
agree to what he had done:) these things so falling out near the same time, put
our Authority then in Council upon some necessity of finding out a speedy way
to remedy the same. But notwithstanding their perfideousness hitherto, yet
about three weeks after, five Sachems came together from Ninicroft to Boston,
and engaged that our Enemies, entertained by them, should be delivered up
instantly; but nothing being done of what they promised, the Commissioners of
the United Collonies, sitting in Council here, (the several consid erations
here expressed, with others moveing them thereto) in the first place published
this following Remonstrance (here inserted verbatim) and ordered a Body of
Soldiers, Horse and Foot to march hence; in order thereunto, on the 10th. of
this Instant December, six Companies of Foot and Horse marched hence unto
Seaconck: The number of the Soldiers were thus; Of Massachusetts and Plymouth
Collonies 700. Foot and 200. Horse, and Connecticot Collony having 300. Foot
and 100. Horse ready to meet them at New London, whereof Governor Josiah.
Winslow is gone out General: From Massachusetts Collony is gone out in Command,
Major Appleton of Ipswich, Captain James Oliver, Captain Samuel Moseley, and
Capt. Nath. Davenport of Boston, Capt. Johnson of Roxbury, Capt. Gardner of
Salem, and Capt. Thomas Prentice, Capt. of the Horse. These were Commanders of
those seven Companies that marched hence. The 16th. Instant we had advice from
them, that the Enemy had burnt Mr. Jeremiah Balls House at Narragansett, and
killed 18. Men, Women, and Children that were in it, and that they had taken
55. Indians, and killed 10. more, and burnt 150. Wigwams with the loss of four
of our Men, and as many wounded. This exploit was performed by Capt. Prentice,
a Capt. of the Horse.

The weather now being extreme cold, having, both Frost and Snow in most places
two foot, in many places three foot deep, we have as yet had nothing like to a
Field Battle with the Indians, save that Fight we had at Hatfield, of which I
gave you an Account of in my last, until these Soldiers went out last; since
which time, by several Posts coming daily thence, as also by private Letters, I
have this Account of this Fight in particular.

On Saturday the 19th. Instant, the General Mustered up the whole Army in
November, as before, having with them three Ministers, viz. Mr. Dudley, Mr.
Buckley, and Mr. Samuel Nowel, at Capt. Smiths House, (the same Capt. Smith I
told you in my last, that came to Boston with Ninnicroft's Eldest Son a Sachem)
whose dwelling is about four miles off the Narragansetts dwellings, and is now
the strongest Garrison in those parts) and having given orders for a march,
according to discretion, marched toward the Narragansets Country (or Town)
where finding no Indians, they were at a stand, not knowing which way to go in
pursuit of the Indians; but however during their stay, their Capt. Prentice,
with his Company discovered some place under ground, wherein was Indian-Corn
laid up in store by them; this encouraged them to look farther; whereupon in
their search they found several good quantities of that grain in like manner,
which afterward was conveyed to the Garrison. In the Afternoon of that
Saturday, some of the Soldiers accidentally espied an Indian alone, whom they
took and carried to the General, who upon his refusal to answer to those
questions demanded, was ordered to be Hanged forthwith; whereupon the Indian to
save his life, told them where the whole body of the Indians were together, as
well King Philip, and all other Confederate Sagamores and Sachems with their
whole retinue, as also the whole body of the Narragansets, being joined all in
a body in November, about 4500. Indian men, besides Wives and Children:
Whereupon, keeping this Indian for their Guide, they having provisions with
them, marched all night, the Indians being then 16. Miles distant from them,
and that Night there fell a very hard Snow two or three foot deep, and with-all
an extreme hard Frost, so that some of our Men were frozen in their hands and
feet, and thereby disabled for Service: The next day, about Noon, they come to
a large Swamp, which by reason of the Frost all the Night before, they were
capable of going over (which else they could not have done) they forthwith in
one body entered the said Swamp, and in the midst thereof was a piece of firm
Land, of about three or four Acres of ground, whereon the Indians had built a
kind of a Fort, being Palisado'd round, and within that a clay Wall, as also
felled down abundance of Trees to lay quite round the said Fort, but they had
not quite finished the said work: The General placed Capt. Moseley in the
Front, to enter the Fort, and the rest of the Companies were placed according
to discretion: In their march they met with three Indians sent out as Scouts,
whom they shot dead at sight thereof: as soon as ever the Indians saw our Army
comeing, they shot as fast as ever they could, and so our Men did the like.
Before our Men could come up to take possession of the Fort, the Indians had
shot three Bullets through Capt. Davenport, whereupon he bled extremely, and
immediately called for his Lieutenant, Mr. Edward Ting, and committed the charge
of the Company to him, and desired him to take care of his Gun, and deliver it
according to order, and immediately died in the place; his Company were
extremely grieved at his death, in regard he was so courteous to them; for he
being Commander of that Company, belonging to Cambridge and Watertown, etc. was
a Stranger to most of them; and at the time that he came to take possession of
his Company, he made a very civil speech to them, and also gave them free
liberty to choose their Sergeants themselves, which pleased them very well, and
accordingly did so; and it is very probable the Indians might think that Capt.
Davenport was the General, because he had a very good Buff Suit on at that
time, and therefore might shoot at him.

In a short time our Forces entered the Fort, Captain Moseley being in the
Front, the Indians knowing him very well, many directed their shot to him, as
he afterward told the General that he believed he saw 50. aim at him: As soon
as he and they had entered the Fort, he espied a heap of above 50. Indians lay
dead in a corner, which the Indians had gathered together; as soon as ever our
Men had entered the Fort, the Indians fled, our men killed many of them, as also
of their Wives and Children, amongst which, an Indian Blacksmith (the only man
amongst them) that fitted their Guns and Arrow-heads; and amongst many more
Houses burnt his, as also demolished his Forge, and carried away his Tools;
they fought with the Indians, and pursued them so long as was advantageous to
them; then the General gave order to sound a Retreat, which was done according
to order. The Retreat was no sooner beaten, and the Soldiers were in a
Marching posture, before they were got all out of the Fort, a thousand fresh
Indians set on our Men, but in an hours time the Indians were forced to Retreat
and Fly: Our Men, as near as they can judge, may have killed about 600. Indian
Men, besides Women and Children: Many more Indians were killed which we could
have no account of, by reason that they would carry away as many dead Indians
as they could. Our men before they had been set on by the fresh Indians, had
set fire to most of the Wagons in and about the Fort (which were near 1000. in
all,) how many were burnt down they could not tell positively, only thus; That
they Marched above three miles from the Fort by the light of the Fires. Here is
an Account of the number of Englishmen slain by the Indians in this Engagement.

A List of the Number of the English Slain and Wounded in the Battle with the
Indians on the 19th. of November, 1675.
Of the Massachusetts. Slain. Wounded In the Company of Major Appleton 2 22
Capt. Moseley's 9 10 Capt. Oliver's 5 10 Capt. Johnson's 3 11 Capt. Gardner's 7
11 Capt. Davenport's 4 15 30 79 Wounded, whereof some are since dead. Of
Conecticot. Major Treat's Company 20 Capt. Sealey's 20 Capt. Marshal's 14 Capt.
Waite's 17 71 Of Plymouth. Capt. Bradford 20 Capt. Little Troopers 02 Lost in
the Woods 05 27 Captains Slain. Capt. Davenport Capt. Johnson Capt. Gardner
Capt. Marshal Capt. Gallop, who Commanded Uncass's Indians. Wounded. Captain
Bradford Shot in the Eye. Captain Sealy Mortally as is feared. Captain Mason
Captain White. Lieutenants Wounded. Lieut. Savage. Lieut. Ting Lieut. Swan
Lieut. Upham Wounded and Slain in all 207.

We wanting good Accommodation for our Wounded men, our General ordered them to
be removed to Road-Island, where they have good Quarters provided, and care
taken for their Recovery.

Ninegret the old Sachem of the Narragansets, has lately, with a small Party
of Indians separated himself from the rest of his People, disowning their
Actions, and all that join with King Philip, and professes himself a true
Friend to the English Interest.

It may not be amiss to acquaint you that the Night before the Fight was, and
all that day, and the night after, there sell such an extraordinary Snow that
the like has not been known for many years; and in regard that we had no Post
come from our Army for 4. or 5, days, many fears arose amongst us that our men
were lost either by the Enemy, or the Snow, which made many an heart-ake
amongst us: But so it was, that which we feared would spoil us, did very much
disable the Enemy; for we having burnt down almost all their Wigwams, as also
all their Corn that we could find, they thereby have less shelter and less
subsistence left them, which misery of theirs is much aggravated by that great
Snow. The Fight being over, our men Retreated to Mr. Smith's House, where the
Noble General gave Order that the Wounded and Sick should first of all be cared
for, which was done accordingly; and that they might have the better
Accommodation in the House, the General himself lay in a Barn belonging to the
said House. Care is now taken to raise a 1000. men more to attend the General,
which will suddenly march; what the issue will be the Lord knows.

King Philip supposing that Hatfield, a Town on Conecticot-River, was very thin
of men; he drew together 7 or 800. of his Indians, among which they had several
Horses, and suddenly entered the Town on the 19th. of October, 1675. which after
they had set on Fire in three places, they divided themselves into two bodies,
and began to act several Cruelties on the Inhabitants: The English by their
diligence soon quenched the fires; and making up a body of 200. men, most of
which were newly come into the Town, they fell on the Indians with a great deal
of fury, and after two hours Fight, compelled the Indians to leave the Town
with more have than they entered; the English having slain about 100. Indians,
with very little loss to themselves, pursued the rest to the Riverside, where
many were drowned that could not swim to the farther side. After this Fight,
Philip and his Indians fled to the Narragansets, which caused the Counsel of
the Massachusetts to publish in Print this Remonstrance before spoken of

To our Brethren and Friends, the Inhabitants of the Colony of the Massachusetts.
Although you cannot be Ignorant, how studious this Government has been to
preserve Peace in this Colony, and has taken up and Compromised diverse
Quarrels that have Risen between our Selves, our Neighbors, and the Indians;
And thereby at several times prevented those Calamities wherewith we are now
Pressed: Yet to satisfy you that the same Mind, and the same Endeavors are
continued in the present Government, we have thought it necessary to let you
understand the Rise and Progress of our present Troubles, with our endeavors
to have prevented the same.

IN June last, we were Certified by our Friends and Confederates of Plymouth,
that Philip the Sachem of Mount. Hope was in Arms, and had solicited all the
Indians to join with him against the English; and withal, they desired our
Assistance to Suppress him: which we by the Articles of Confederation could not
deny, and therefore applied our selves to Raise some Force for their
Assistance: but were still desirous to prevent a war with the Indians; and
therefore upon a former Experience of a good Effect wrought upon the said
Philip, we resolved to use the same means, viz. sending Messengers from hence
to Philip to Treat with him, hoping of the like Issue, which upon the like case
about four years since we by Gods good hand obtained. But our Messengers
arriving at Swanzy, in their way toward Philip, found diverse English Murdered
on the Road, and were informed by the English there, of diverse hostilities of
the Indians, which rendered our Design and their Negotiation hopeless: Upon
which they returned, and informed us as abovesaid. whereupon our Forces began
their march in Aid of our Friends at Plymouth; and having driven Philip from
his Country, we being informed that the Narragansets harbored his women, and
aided him with men, we ordered our Soldiers to march to Narraganset, in order
to keep them quiet, and prevent their succouring or harboring the Enemy:
where, after some delay, they were drawn to consent to our demands, promising
neither to entertain nor assist our Enemies which they since confirmed in a
Treaty with the Commissioners of the Colonies; Further engaging that they would
deliver all those of Philips party, that upon his Rout near Scatoneck, or
since, were fled to them; but have failed in every particular.

You may also take notice, That before any of our Soldiers marched to
Mount-Hope, we were very careful to understand the state of the Nipnet-Indians,
to prevent Philips design, and secure those Indians, and therefore dispatched
two Messengers well known to them, to certify them of Philips motion and of
our desire to keep amity and friendship with them, according to the Covenants
made with them long since, no ways Violated on our part. And by the said
Messengers, received fair returns from the most of them, being in 10. or 12.
Plantations. Some of them pretended fear of us: For their further satisfaction
(when our Forces were sent out against Philip) we to satisfy and secure them,
sent them by Ephraim Curtice, a Declaration under the Public Seal, that we had
no design or intent to disturb them, or any other Indians that would remain in
their Plantations peaceably: which Message and Messenger was evilly treated by
many of them then Assembled, and the Messenger much endangered by the younger
men, and not with any satisfaction by their Sachems, as the Event showed,
though at that present more moderately received.

Soon after this dispatch and before Philips flying from Pocasser, and march up
toward the Nipnet Country, some of the said Nipnet- Indians Assaulted and slew
diverse of our people at Mendam; whereupon Captain Hutchinson with a small
Guard, was sent up to the said Nipnet-Indians, (if possible to keep them quiet)
who arriving at Quabaog; whereabouts was a Randezvous of the Indians, and
having sent to them, they promised to meet him in a certain place, whither he
at the time repairing, found not the Indians; and being encouraged by the
English of Quabaog, that the Indians were peaceable, etc. he advanced forward
toward the place of the Indians Randezvous to Treat them: But in the way, was
by Ambuscado treacherously waylaid, by which himself, with several others were
wounded and slain, the English of Quabaog immediately Assaulted, and the Town,
except one House, totally destroyed; at which time, as we understand, Philip
also with his broken party came up to the said Indians, and upon the first, or
immediately before the arrival of the Forces, we sent up for the Relief of
those of Quabaog, Philip and his whole crew retreated (as we then feared, and
afterward were informed) toward Conecticot- River, from whence Recruiting
himself with Ammunition from Albany, and with men, partly from the treacherous
Indians about Hadly and Spring-field, to have prosecuted his first design to
Ruin and destroy the English. And notwithstanding all the opposition of our
Forces, has done much mischief and spoil; and since the Repulse he received at
Hatfield, withdrew into the Nipnet. Country, and since that (as we understand)
toward the Narragansets, who we do conclude, have favored, abetted, and
assisted him therein; and by entertaining and harboring our Enemies, have
dealt falsely and perfidiously with us: whereby we find our selves necessarily
Engaged, with the Consent, Advice and Assistance of the rest of the Colonies,
in a War with them, as well as with Philip, unless they prevent the same by a
timely Compliance and Performance, and Security for the future: for the
managing and carrying on whereof, we hope for, and expect (as we have hitherto
had) the Assistance of all his Majesty's Subjects of this Colony in their
respective Capacities, in the just Defense of the Glory of God, the Honor,
Defense and safety of our King, Country, and our Selves, from the Subtilty,
Rage, and Treacherous Attempt of our Barbarous Enemies.

Dated in Boston, the 7th. of December, Anno Christi, 1675. Annoque Dommini
Caroli Secundi Regis Angl. Scot. Fran. and Hiber. Defensoris Fidei, etc. 27th.
By the Council
Edward Rawson, Secret.

BOSTON In NEW ENGLAND, February the 8th. 1675/6.
SIR,
MY last to you beared Date the 21st. of December, 1675. wherein I gave you a
true Account of the state of our Affairs in New England, particularly of the
Engagement of our Forces with the Indians on the 19th, of December, 1675. and
the number of the Slain and Wounded. I shall now continue my Intelligence
according to your request, and my promise, and give you a true Account of all
transactions here (worth your information) since the foresaid 19th. of December.

Our wounded men (thanks be to God) are most of them pretty well recovered, and
only Captain Sealy is dead that I can hear of. By some Indian-Prisoners, lately
taken, we are certainly informed that they had 355. men killed outright,
besides several burnt in their Wagons, with Women and Children, and 180.
wounded, many of which are since dead, particularly Sachem Quanepins Brother,
who was a man of great Command among the Indians. That Night the Indians left
the place where the Fight was, and Retreated 5. miles farther into the Country.
Ninecroft an old Sachem in that Country, who has hitherto continued Neuter,
and neither assisted the Indians nor us, sent some of his men the next day, and
Buried the dead Indians, and as many of the English as were left behind dead.

On the 23. and 24th. of December, the Indians sent some Commissioners to our
General to Treat of Peace, which they had no mind to conclude; but we soon
perceived it was only to prevent our falling upon them, and to gain themselves
more time to remove their Army and Provision twenty miles farther into the
Country, to some Rocks where we could not get at them without great danger.
Although our General knew this, he was desirous to keep the Treaty on foot by
reason the Forces of the Collony of Connecticot had left our Army, and we at
home to recruit, and those supplies from Boston, that are daily expected, not
being yet Arrived, our Army was not in a condition to make any new attempts on
the Enemy; but had not the Connecticot Forces left our Army, we had hopes that
we might have compelled the Enemy to yield to our mercy. During this time, our
Forces foraged the Country, and brought in great quantities of Indian-Corn to
the Army.

About the beginning of January, the Forces from Boston that were sent to
Reinforce our Army arrived at Narraganset, where our Army then lay: the extreme
coldness of the Season had mightily incommended them in their march; they lost
Eleaven of their Men on their march, that were frozen to death, and brought
many others sick and disheartened with the extreme coldness of the Season: they
were joyfully received by the Army; and soon after them the Connecticot Forces
came to the Army, having Reinforced their Companies with some fresh men, and
brought with them Unkus an Old Sachem, who dwelt in the Connecticot
jurisdiction; he brought with him some Companies of his own Indians to the
assistance of the English.

The Winter being now broke up, and the Snow and Ice all gone, our Army
consisting in all of 1600. men, began their March to the Rocks, where the
Indians were fled for protection; but in their way, they had intelligence that
300. Indians had been at Patuxit, an English Plantation on the Narraganset Bay,
where they had burnt Mr. Carpenters Corn and Hay, and all his Houses, except
his dwelling House, which likewise they had set on fire, but it was again
quenched by some English that were in it: They likewise drove away with them
180. Sheep, 50. head of large Cattle, and 15. Horses: Besides, they took much
Cattle from young Mr. Harris, and killed a Negroe-Servant of his; and having
done this mischief, returned home with their Booty.

Our Army being Arrived in Pumham's Countlry, an Indian Sachem, we burnt his
Town, and had a small Reincounter with some of his Indians, where we wounded
his chief Captain Quaquash on the knee, and killed five of his Men, and had
four of our Connecticot men wounded.

Our Scouts brought in Prisoner one Tift, a Renegadoe English man, who having
received a deserved punishment from our General, deserted our Army, and fled to
the Enemy, where he had good entertainment, and was again sent out by them with
some of their Forces; he was shot in the Knee by our Scouts, and then taken
before he could discharge his Musket, which was taken from him and found deep
charged, and laden with Slugs: He was brought to our Army, and Tried by a
Counsel of War, where he pretended that he was taken Prisoner by the Indians,
and by them compelled to bear Arms in their Service; but this being proved to
be false, he was Condemned to be Hanged and Quartered, which was accordingly
done.

Our Army beat the Indians from the foresaid Rocks, and pursued them almost as
far as Quabog, in which pursuit we killed about 60. or 70. of them, and found
many of the Matts scattered in the way, with which they cover their Houses,
which we suppose they could not carry with them by reason of our close pursuit.
Some Prisoners taken from them, inform us, that their body consists of 4000.
whereof 1800. were Fighting Men, half of which wanted Arms, that they were in
great want of Powder, and greater want of Provisions.

Provision growing scarce in our Army, and the Enemy having cleansed the
Country of things that might tend to our Relief, our General resolved to pursue
them no farther, but to hasten homewards, which accordingly was done with what
speed we could; but the scarcity of Victuals daily increasing, we were forced
to kill several of our Horses for our Sustenance. Our General dismissed the
Connecticot-Men, and sent them home the nearest way, and Old Unkus and his
Indians along with them. They proved very faithful in our Service, and were
well treated by us. Our General having left 60. men in Garrison at Mr. Smiths
House, at Narraganset, where the Fight was on the 19th. of December, came home
by the way of Malborough: Many of our Soldiers are troubled with the Flux, of
which our General is one.

King Philip has not yet been at Narraganset, as we feared; but is retired
with his Men near Albany, where he has kept his Winter Quarters. We very much
fear the Indians falling on our Out-Towns this Spring, which if they should,
would extremely damnifie us.

Our Friend Mr. H. O. went out again into the Army, before he was cured of his
old wound, and has received another on his Elbow-joynt, which we fear will
cause him to lose his Arm, if not his Life. Our Enemies are yet very
Unmerciful, sparing no persons life that they can Master.

I see no likelihood of any Peace, but much fear our Wars are far from an end:
Our Trade to Virginia is quite decayed, not one Vessel having gone from hence
thither since the Wars began; but by a small Vessel Arrived here from thence,
we are informed that the Indians have fallen unexpected on the English, and
destroyed many of them, and done much harm with very little loss to themselves,
but this report finds very little credit with us; by the next Shiping I shall
(God willing) give you a farther Account of our Affairs, and in the mean time
shall neglect no opportunity of informing my self of the transactions of these
Parts, being sensible how much you have obliged

Your Friend to his Power, N. S.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Thought it needful to acquaint you that on the 21th. day of March, Anno.
1621. the English made a League of Peace with Massasoiet, who was Grand father
to the present King Philip, on the following Terms and Conditions,

1. That neither he nor any of his should injure or do hurt to any of our
people.

2. That if any of his did any harm to any of ours, that then he should send
the Offender unto us for punishment.

3. That if any English took any Goods belonging to the said Massasoit, or any
of his Indians, they should restore them again: and he obliged himself to do
the like.

4. That if any of the Neighbors of the said Massasoiet should make war
against him, the English should assist him: and he obliged himself to assist
the English on the like occasion.

5. That he should inform his Neighbors and Confederates of these Covenants,
that they might be careful of wronging either party.

6. That where any of his Indians came amongst the English, they should have no
Bows or Arrows, or any other Arms with them.

7. That in so doing, our Sovereign Lord King James should esteem him as his
Friend and Ally.

These Articles were agreed on to the good satisfaction and content of both
Parties, and Massasoiet was content to become the Subject of our Sovereign Lord
King James, his Heirs and Successors, and gave to the English all the Lands
adjacent, and to their Heirs for ever.

On the 25th. day of September, in the year 1639. this great Sachem Massasoiet,
with Moanam his Son, came personally to the Court held at Plymouth in
New England, and desired that the League and Confederacy formerly made with the
Government of Plymouth, might stand and remain inviolable, and the said
Massasoiet and his Son Moanam did faithfully promise to keep and observe the
Covenants and Conditions therein expressed and contained; and that neither of
them should needlessly or unjustly raise any quarrel, or do any wrong to other
Natives, or provoke them to War against them; and that neither of them should
give, sell, or convey any of their Lands, Territories, or Possessions
whatsoever, to any person or persons whomsoever, without the privity and
consent of the Government of Plymouth: All which conditions the said Massasoiet
and Moanam his Son, for themselves and their Successors, did then faithfully
promise to observe and keep; and the whole Court, in the name of the whole
Government for each Town respectively, did then ratify and confirm the
aforesaid ancient League and Consederacy; and also did further promise to the
said Massasoiet and to Moanam his Son, that they shall and will from time to
time defend them and their Successors when need and occasion shall require,
against all such as shall rise up against them, to wrong or oppress them
unjustly.

Anno. 1662. There being occasion of some suspicion of a Plot intended by the
Indians against the English; Philip; the Son of the aforesaid Moanam, and
Grandson of Massasoiet, and now the implacable Enemy of the English, made his
personal appearance at the Court held at Plymouth, August the 6th. and did
there earnestly desire the continuance of that amity and friendship that had
formerly been between the Governors of Plymouth and his Deceased Father and
Grandfather; and for that end the said Philip does for himself and his
Successors, desire that they might for ever remain subject to the King of
England, his Heirs and Successors; and does faithfully promise and engage that
he and his will truly and exactly observe and keep inviolable such conditions
as have formerly been by his Predecessors made; and particularly, that he will
not at any time needlessly or unjustly provoke or raise war with any of the
Natives, nor at any time give, sell, or any way dispose of any Lands to him or
them appertaining; to any Strangers, or to any without our privity or
appointment; but will in all things endeavor to carry it peaceably and
inoffensively toward the English. And the said Court did then also express
their willingness to continue with him and his the abovesaid Friendship; and do
on their part promise that they will afford them such friendly assistance by
advice and otherwise, as they justly may; and we will require our English at
all times to carry it friendly toward them: in witness whereof, the said
Philip the Sachem has set to his hand; as also his Uncle, and witnessed unto
by sundry other of his chief men.

Witness,
John Sousamen. The Mark E of Francis the Sachem of Nauset. The Mark P of
Philip, alias Metacom.
Likewise in the year 1621. several of the Indian Sachems, besides Massasoiet
before-named, came unto the Government of New Plymouth, and acknowledged
themselves to be the Loyal Subjects of our Sovereign Lord King James, and
subscribed unto a writing to that purpose with their own hands; the tenor of
which said writing follows, with their names annexed thereunto, some
judicious persons conceive it may be of use in succeeding Ages, if not in ours;
I think it convenient here to insert it.

September the 13th. 1621.
Know all men by these Presents, that we whose Names are under written, do
acknowledge our selves to be the Loyal Subjects of King James, King of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. In Witness whereof,
and as a Testimonial of the same, we have Subscribed our Names or Marks as
follows.

Obqnamebud. Gawnacome. Obbatinua. Nattawahunt. Counbatant. Chikkatabak.
Quadaquinta. Huttamoiden. Apannow.

The Original Instruments signed with their own hands, and the chief of their
men still remain on Record in the Register of the Court of New Plymouth.





In the said year, 1621. the Narroganset Indians sent a Messenger to the
Governor of Plymouth with a bundle of Arrows tied together with a Snakes skin,
which he understood was a threatening and a challenge. Upon which the Governor
sent them this Answer; That if they loved War rather than Peace, they might
begin when they would; he had done them no wrong, neither did he fear them, nor
should they find him unprovided; and by another Messenger sent the Snakes skin
back with Bullets in it, but they would not receive them, but sent them back
again; but the Indians were better advised than to quarrel with the English at
that time.

BARBADOS, Spickes-Bay, November the 30th. 1675.
MY last to you was an information of a bloody Tragedy intended against his
Majesty's Subjects here in this Island, by the Heathen the Negroes, which was
by the Providence of God miraculously discovered eight days before the intended
Murder should have been acted: The manner of the discovery was thus; A Negroe
man belonging to Mr. Hall Senior, being absented from his said Master, among
several other Negroes who had a hand in the Plot: In a Council among them, they
did contrive that the Negroes belonging to each several Plantation, should in
the dead time of the Night fall on at the sound of the Allarm, which was to be
given in one hour, and at several places through the Island, which Negroes so
allotted was to kill their Master and Mistresses with their Overseers; this
foresaid Negroe of Mr. Halls (though one of the chief Plotters) yet having a
respect to his Master, would by no means consent to the killing of his Master,
and upon refusal was much threatened; and being afraid of his Life, makes his
escape and returns home; and one day, which was a little before the prosecution
of the murder, was overheard (telling the Plot to his Countrymen) by a Negro
Woman, who waited and attended on her Mistress, which the Negro Woman
immediately reveals. The Negroe man being taken to examination, confessed the
whole truth, which was immediately told the Governor, who appointed some
Captains to raise their Companies for depressing the Rebels, which accordingly
was done, and abundance taken and apprehended, and since put to death, and the
rest kept in a more stricter manner; yet Jethuran like, we have kicked against
God, and slighted the mercy of so great a deliverance. The manner of their
proceedings I wrote to your more at large; and as the Lord did deliver us from
the Tyranny and barbarous cruelty of Savage Heathens, and we still remaining
obstinate, and refusing to return to him by Repentance; the Lord has taken us
into his own hand to chastise us, which chastilements lies very heavy on the
poorer sort, and none of the Rich excepted. Sir, upon the last day of August
last, about six of the Clock in the Afternoon, there did arise a Violent Storm
of Wind and Rain out of the North West, and continuing between the North and
the South so violent, that before the hour of Twelve at Night, there was not
twenty Houses standing in our Parish, in which there is above three hundred
Families, and those that did stand, much damnified; our Neighboring Parishes
tasting of the same Cup. There is killed outright (by the falling of Houses)
in this Parish, thirty seven, and many more is since, with the violence of the
wind and cold, dead, and many lying in their beds of sickness; and as to our
Ships, all drove Ashore to pieces, except one of the Kings Men of War, which
went to Sea, and returning next day after the Storm was ceased, did protest to
the Governor, that twenty Leagues off there was no Storm, for he carried his
Top sail half Mass high. Our fellow subjects in New England, have the 28th. of
the same month tasted of the same Cup, and was very hard put to it this last
Summer by one King Philip an Indian King, who has Revolted without cause given
him by the English, neither will he show any reason why; but being by an
Ambassador from the Governor of Boston, demanded why he would maintain the
War, refused to Treat with the Ambassador, telling him, The Governor was but a
Subject, and that he would not Treat except his Brother King Charles of England
were there: There is abundance of Families destroyed, besides those killed in
the War; but it is very much hoped this Winter they will be Routed; the reason
is, because they have no Woods nor Bushes to shelter in, which is a great help
to a Flying-Army, such as they are, for they will not bide any pitch Battle.
Our Brethren in Virginia had been hard put to it this last Summer, if it had
not been for the Relief of New England and New York, which makes it the harder
with us here: pray God mend it.

By the tempestuous Wind, and the violent raging of the Sea, which has much
over-flowed our banks, and incroacht upon the Land, here are many Houses lost;
among which mine was in number, where I saved nothing to cover us from the
violence of the Storm but what was on our backs. Pray God that I may make a
sanctified use of the Chastisement, because the Lord has not given over our
Life to Death. So having no more at present, but my Service to your self and
good Lady, I rest

Your humble Servant, G. W.
I forbear to tell or to write to you of the strange Accidents, as the removing
of whole Frames, great timber Trees many yards from their proper stations, by
the violence of the Storm; if I should, it would be counted Ridiculous, but I
leave it to the Relation of others.

Wind-mills down in this Parish 16. much damnified 12. indeed none standing but
stone mills in the Parish, but what must be pulled down. Churches down 9. Such
another blow will bring Barbados near the Horizon.



FINIS.

