Numb. 2. A Continuation of News From that part of His Majesty's Fleet That now
lies at HIGH-LAKE near CHESTER: Giving an Impartial Account of all considerable
Occurrences since its leaving Harwich, to this present time.

Licensed, Aug. 20. 1689.

J. F.

From on Board the Hannibal, Aug. 14. 1689. SIR,
IN continuance of my Advice, these are to inform you, That on Saturday the 3d
of August, we weighed at three in the morning, and stood out from Ousely Bay,
the Wind westerly. About Ten we got into the Downs; and discovered on to the
Leeward, the High-Land of France, and the Goodwin. About Two in the afternoon
we came to an Anchor before Deal, where we discovered off of the Foreland two
small Vessels, which appeared to be some that went before, and promised to meet
us in Dover Road. The Captain of one of them came aboard about Three, and
brought us News that a little Dutch Privateer had that same week brought Eleven
Prizes into this place; some pretended Hamburgers, one Irish, but all freighted
with French Goods.

About Five the Purser went ashore for fresh provisions. The Captain intended
to sail again the same night for Dover, and toward the Isle of Wight: He fired
the Gun accordingly, preparing to stand away, several of the Fleet being
already under sail. But while we staid for the Purser, the Wind chopped about
more to the westerly; on which he changed his Resolution, and moored in Deal
Road.

Saturday the 4th. the Wind continued still at the same points, or rather came
about more southerly: So we were forced to stay here all day.

After Evening Service, came up the brave Captain Pottinger, in his little
Fantau, which we so long wanted; who came aboard us, and gave us an account
that the Dragon Sloop lies yet about Gravesend or the Hope, and stays for
Orders.

Here we first heard the News that the Toulon Squadron of French Men of War was
got into Breast. And the pretty passage of the great Galeon, one of the richest
Laden of all the Spanish Fleet, then homeward bound, which being separated from
the rest, put into a little Creek just at that Instant that the French went by;
and being just got in, discovered them; on which, you will believe, she lay very
close, till they all past by without seeing her, and so the prey got out of
their clutches, and they got safe into their own Harbor.

Monday morning August 5. at Two a Clock, we had a fair Easterly Wind came up,
with which we set sail from the Downs.

We hear here we are designed, after we get to our Port at High-Lake by
Chester, for Loughfoyl and London Derry; whence I hope to give you an account
of more material passages, our Men being all as resolved and cheerful as so
good a Cause can make 'em.

August 14. High-Lake near Chester.

Sir, You had heard sooner from me according to promise, but that we touched no
where after we left Deal, till we came to an Anchor at our Port of High-Lake,
and the Boat went away before I had finished my last; so you have now two
together.

August 5. As I told you in my last, we set sail from the Downs about Two in
the morning, but after Dinner, the Wind slackning, we were almost becalmed, and
so came to an Anchor in Dover Road over against Dover Castle.

Between 3 and 4 we saw a Gale coming; so weighed again, and by 8 in the
morning August 6. raised the Isle of Wight.

About the same time we saw a Sail toward the Coast of France, and sent off the
Navy Yacht, one of our Hoys, and the Fantau to speak with her, who about 10
came up with her, and found her an Ostender, but laden from Bourdeaux for
Bruges with French Wines and Brandy: They had been taken some days before off
of the Lands end by a Dutch Privateer, who had put Four or Five of their Men
aboard her. However, not knowing but 'twas a trick to get from us, we kept 'em
till we came over against Plymouth, where meeting the Privateer who took 'em,
and they confirming what had before been said, we turned her off for Plymouth,
having before taken her in a Tow; but this happened not till Friday August the
9th.

Wednesday August 7. We raised the Beak of Portland, and the Shores of
Dortsetshire.

Thursday morning. August 8. About 4 in the morning we saw two Sail to the
Leeward and suspected 'em Frenchmen, they still keeping off, and having no
Colors out. About 7 Captain Pottinger, and Captain Pet. of the Navy Yacht came
aboard, having the same apprehensions. At 8 we spread our Colors on our
Ancient Staff, and they not answering with theirs, we concluded without more
ado they were Enemies. We saw they were men of War, and Stout Ships so
prepared for an engagement in earnest. We gave the signal, and the Commanders
came aboard. We stayed our Cabins, cut down our Hammacks, heaved Chests over
board, and the Seamen made all ready with the greatest briskness and courage
imaginable. And after having cleared our Ship, shotted all our Guns, nailed
down our Hatches, and done what is usual in such cases, bore up toward some of
our Fleet, who were run a head of us, and being without defense, would soon
fall into the Enemies mouth. We have just got up our small Arms, and every man
to his Quarter, bearing away to 'em as fast as all the Sail we could make would
carry us when they both lowr'd their Topsails, and put out Orange Colors on
which our Seamen were all very Melancholy having lost ^uch a fair occasion of
trying their valor, when they ^^ought they were now sure of it beyond
disappoint^^nt. This happened about seven or eighth Leagurd to the Westward of
Portland.

The next morning we discovered another Sail a great way ^stern of us, after
which we sent two of our Catches* but she out-sail'd 'em both, came under our
Lee, and lowr'd her Top-Sail, but did not care to speak with us* On which we
fired a Gun, and brought her under our Stern, with Trumpets sounding and Drums
beatin^ (...) Which we answered with what Music we had when they came up with
us, they appeared to be a D^ Privateer, with fourteen Guns, and six Petereero
^d eighty two men. They gave us three Guns and a cheer which we returned, and
so parted they told us ^^^y were bound for the Sea, which was all the acco^^^
we could get of 'em.

Saturday ^orning. August 10. One of our Catches took a small Boat bound from
France to Galloway in Ireland, laden with Salt. He had been taken by the same
Flushinger we met on Thursday, who had taken the first, who had also some men
aboard her. There were in her English, Dutch, and Irish. The Englishman (I
think her Master) told us that he came from before Breast some few days past,
where he saw the French Fleet ready to leave it, about twenty already being got
out of the Harbor: And say they were about seventy Sail. We let him go again,
and doubled* the Lizzard point, and got into Mountsbay, and discovered the
Mount about twelve at Noon.

In the afternoon as well as all the day before we heard several Broad-sides,
and a great many hundred Guns to the Coast of France. About four a Clock we
heard a great blow the same way, and immediately after saw a huge Pile of smoke
rise from the place where we heard the blow. This was seen by most of our
Fleet, and is concluded some Ship or other blown up.

Sunday and Monday we made the best of our way toward our Port, with fair
Winds, and fine Weather.

Monday in the afternoon, about 3 a Clock, we saw the Welsh Land, and two
strange Ships ahead of us; on which we tackt, for the rest of our Fleet, and to
get the Weathergage. About 6 we came up with 'em, and found 'em a Yacht and a
Smack, who confirmed the happy News we heard from Weymouth, of the Relief of
Derry: They also told that Admiral Herbert and our Fleet, about Eighty Sail,
were of off the old Head of Kingsale, whence they lately came, and were now
again going to 'em.

In the evening we came up with some little Islands; and about 12 at night past
the Bishop and his Clerks, without any of all those Bugbears Hickeringall talks
of. We found 'em very peaceable Rocks; they let us all go by without touching
us, though had we had a fancy to try hard-heads with 'em, it is ten to one we
had got the worst on 't.

Thursday we saw Bardley Island, and the main Land of Wales, and a parcel of
Mountains, one would think high enough to break the Goats necks that clamber to
the tops of 'em. In the evening we came up with Anglesey, whither in the night
most of our Fleet stole away from us, and got to an Anchor in Beaumarys Bay.

Wednesday 14. We took a Pilot on board, got round the Sand-bank, and came to
an Anchor in our Port of High-Lake. In working our Ship about to get her into
the Harbor, the Wind being somewhat against us, one of our Men was beaten
against the sides of the Ship with a Rope, and taken up for dead, but he
recovered, and is like to do well; all the misfortunes we yet met with in our
Voyage.

They tell us here that Duke Schomberg went off for Ireland with a fair wind,
on Monday last, with about 13000 men, and the rest we find Shipping to follow
him as fast as possible. There is now with us at Highlake the Dartmouth Frigot,
which fired against Kilmore, while relief went into Derry, there is upon the
shore just ready to embark for Ireland my Lord Lucas his Regiment, and other
Soldiers.

Advertisement.
The Tragedies of Sin contemplated in the ruin of the Angels etc. [by Stephen
Jay Rector of Chinner] in the County of Oxon.,

There is also now (in a large octavo) published The Bloody-Assizes or A
complete History of the Lives, Actions, Trials, Sufferings, Speeches, Deaths
and Characters of all those Excellent persons who fell in the West of England
and elsewhere from the Death of Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey to this present time;
with the Pictures of several of the chief of them in Copper Plates. To which is
added the Life, Death and Character of George Lord Jefferies [Written by a
person of great learning and piety. Printed by the order of several of their
Relations, for John Dunton at the black Raven in the Poultrey.

London, Printed for John Dunton at the Black Raven in the Poultrey. 1689.


