A CONTINUATION of the DIALOGUE Between Two Young Ladies Lately Married.
Concerning the MANAGEMENT OF Husbands.

PART the Second.

Wherein is a most Passionate LETTER, Full of Wit and Affection, WRIT BY
ELOISA, (a Young French Lady,) to her Husband, ABELARD, who was Emasculated by
the Malice of her Uncle.

London, Printed in the Year, 1696.

Price Six Pence.

A CONTINUATION of the DIALOGUE BETWEEN Two Young Ladies, lately Married,
CONCERNING The Management of Husbands, etc. PART II.
Amy. MY dear Lucy, I Am extreme glad to see you.


Lucy. I Am pleased to hear you say so, since your Friendship is so much my
Interest: I wish I could make you as valuable Returns, that your Goodness might
not be altogether the Motive of the Favors you have shown me.


Amy. You're mistaken, Lucy: Friendship ought not to be mercenary; the bare
Reflection of Endeavoring to serve my Friend, brings a sufficient Reward along
with it. But how go Affairs betwixt you and your Husband, since I last saw you?


Lucy. Indifferently. We have had no great Storm since.


Amy. The last time I gave you what Advice occurred to me, and such as, with
good Success, I used my self, in order to make Marriage a very happy Estate:
But since I saw you, I have accidentally light upon a Letter, written
Originally in Latin by one of our Sex, to her unkind Lover; as the Subject was
very uncommon, so was the Passion, and so was the Wit, of our Eloisa, (for that
was her Name.) It appears to me to be the most perfect and accomplished Pattern
of Tenderness, and Cunning, that ever I saw written by any of our Sex. Whoever
reads her Letter, may find therein that variety of Argument to Persuade, and so
large a Field of Subjects, that a Commonplace Book might be made out of it, to
serve upon all Occasions; and so far as I am able to apprehend, whoever says
any thing after her upon this Subject, must either borrow of her, or perform
infinitely short of what she has done.


Lucy. Have you got it about you?


Amy. Yes -- 'Twas, as I told you before, written Originally in Latin, but I
light upon it translated into French, of which I have now again made a second
translation for your use. But before we read the Letter. it is necessary I give
you a brief History of this Eloisa and Abelard, (the Names of our married
Lovers,) in order to understand several Passages in the following Letter.


Lucy. Ay, Pray let us have it by all means.


Amy. Eloisa was the Daughter of a noble Family, aged about Sixteen Years, of a
quick and sparkling Wit, and of a Beauty able to touch the most Insensible. Her
Parents dying in her Childhood, her Uncle Fulbert, who was a Canon of a Church
in Paris, took her into his Care, and resolved to give her an Education
suitable to her natural Abilities; and as he loved her much, so he employed all
imaginable Means to accomplish his Design, and could hardly speak of any thing
else but the Wit and Beauty of his Niece; such rare Qualities made all Persons
in Love with her. Amongst the rest, Abelard, a great Philosopher, was one of
those that felt the Power of her Charms' a Person famous for Learning and
Gallantry: He had a surprising Cleanness of Wit, a Firmness of Mind in
Misfortunes. In a word, That which makes up the best and most excellent Part of
Merit in Great Men, makes up the True Character of Abelard.


Lucy. Happy Eloisa! Surely, if she did not prove Kind and True to such a
Husband, she was certainly the worst of Women.


Amy. Hold, Lucy, be not too hasty; you will change your Mind before you hear the
Story out. But I Will go on.

Our Abelard could not, with all his Philosophy, reason himself out of the
Fetters of Love; therefore made all the Interest he could to gain Acquaintance
with her Uncle, and not without success; for after a little Converse, he
thought no Person more Disinterested, nor better Qualified than Abelard, to
read Philosophy to his Niece: He desired Abelard to abide with him, gave him
Eloisa for his Scholar, and, as if he had conspired with Abelard's Design,
entrusted him with the absolute Command of his Niece. Thus the Tenderness he
had for his Niece, and the Reputation of Abelard, wholly deceived him. Abelard,
who gladly undertook this Charge, failed not to make good use of the Liberty he
had to be with Eloisa; almost every moment he discovered his Passion for her,
and managed it so well, that in a little time she listens with Pleasure, and at
last began to love him so tenderly, that she could refuse him nothing.

It was not long before this amorous Converse betwixt Master and Scholar was
observed: His continual Attendance, and the tender Methods of Managing her,
soon convinced those about 'em, that Philosophy was not the only subject of
their Conversation. In fine, our Lovers were not so close and prudent in the
Management of their Amor. but the Uncle began to suspect something, and
resolved to separate them, and prevent the ill Consequences of such
Familiarity. But 'twas too late. For our Lovers being fully resolved that
nothing should divert their mutual Passion, they became as jealous of the Uncle
as he was of them; and Abelard improving his Opportunity, did easily prevail
with Eloisa to believe that the Form of Matrimony was nothing but a Ceremony
and that it was absolutely necessary for them to consummate the same betwixt
themselves upon solemn Promise, as being the only Means left them to prevent
the cruel Separation which the Uncle designed. And thus* Lucy, poor Eloisa was
overcome before Marriage: And afterward perceiving some strange Alterations in
her self, she acquainted Abelard with it, who, to save her Honor, carried her
off by Night to Paris, in order to be Married privately, in the common Form;
though at the same time her Affection to Abelard was so great, that she did
voluntarily offer to sacrifice her Honor, so she might be but assured of his
Love, rather than deprive the Church of so great a Prelate by the Ceremony of
Marriage.

The Stealth of Eloisa was an extreme Affliction to her Uncle, who loved her so
entirely, that he could not live without her; and besides he was so sensible of
the Affront that Abelard had put upon him, that he swore he would be Revenged
Abelard in a short time goes back to Fulbert, and endeavored by all means to
appease him, and entreated his Pardon with the utmost Submissions. Whereupon
the old Gentleman did craftily feign a Reconciliation, that he might have the
better Opportunity to execute his Revenge; which he effected, by corrupting one
of Abelard's Servants, to let into his Chamber some Villains, who, whilst he
was asleep, set upon him, and with a Razour, at one stroke, unmanned him. The
Assassinators were afterward punished by course of Justice.

After this great Misfortune, our Philosopher retired amongst the Monks, and
entered Eloisa into a Nunnery.

The Monks in a very little time forced Abelard to fly and retire to a Desert,
where he erected a Chapel, which he afterward turned into a Monastery, made
his Eloisa Lady Abbess, and then retired into a remote corner at a great
distance.

During this Separation, a Letter that Abelard had writ to one of his Friends
near the Nunnery, in which he made a long Narrative of all his Persecutions,
fell accidentally into the Hands of our new Abbess, who opened it, and having
found therein a thousand things which nearly concerned her self, she took
occasion to write the following Letter, complaining of the Severity of being
left to so many disquieting Thoughts, which so long a Silence might occasion.


Lucy. This is a very strange Account, and makes a greater Impression upon me,
since the poor Lady had the same Misfortune as I had, of being overcome before
Marriage: But methinks I should (had I been in her case) have begged my
Husband's Pardon for going into a Nunnery, or plaguing my self much about him,
after that unlucky Misfortune. Let her pretend as she pleases: I cannot think it
possible for a Woman to love an Eunuch-Husband. For my part, I know what I
think of it.


Amy. But, my Friend Lucy, that is not so much the Business. Is not here a very
sad Misfortune, for a couple of tender Persons? Had they been both buried
alive, there could not have been a greater Task for the Passions. The poor Lady
is Cloistered, deprived of all her Friends, shut up from the World, and yet
accompanied with all the vehement and unruly Passions of an amorous Lover, and
the Cares of a tender Wife. What an exquisite Torture must it be to her, to
lose her Lover in the midst of all her Beauty and Charms! to reflect upon the
Scandal, and Persecutions of one she loved better than her Life! and what still
adds to the Weight of all their Misery, her good Education gave her such a
Taste of all the Accidents of ^ife, as was much more delicate and sensible than
otherwise it would have been! Perhaps you will ask what great Hopes she could
have in Abelard's Return to her. Though she had lost the Lover, she loved the
Friend: And if she could write after such a strange manner for half a Husband
to return and live kindly with her, what would she have done, if she had been
to have Reclaimed an effective Husband, such as yours or mine?


Lucy. I can forbear no longer: Pray let us hear the Letter.


Amy. I Will read it then.


Eloisa to Abelard.
It Is to her Master, her Father, to her Brother, her Husband, that a Servant, a
Daughter, a Sister, a Wife, and, to include in one Word, all that these Names
have in 'em of Honor, Respect, Tenderness, and Freedom, it is to her Abelard
that Eloisa writes.

SOme time since a Letter fell into my Hands which you had writ to one of your
Friends, as I knew the Character, and loved the Hand, my Heart keeping
Intelligence with my Curiosity forced me to open it, flattering my self, that I
had a sovereign Right to every thing that comes from you, and did not believe
there were any Laws of Decorum for me to observe, when I was enflamed with a
violent Desire of knowing what was become of you. But, alas! what has my
Curiosity cost me? How many Tears has it drawn from me? And how was I surpised
to find in your Letter nothing but a sad and long detail of your Misfortunes! I
saw my Name in it an Hundred times, and I never found it but with ^ear, there
being always some Affliction or other attending it. I also read yours, which
was nothing more happy. These lamentable, yet dear Idea's so strongly affected
me, that I believed you wrote not so much to Comfort a Friend under some light
Disgraces, as to describe our Misfortunes and Persecutions. What Reflections
did not I then make! I began to think all over anew, and found my self seized
with the same Grief as when we began to be first unhappy; and although Time had
diminished those Pains, 'twas enough to see 'em written by your Hand to make me
feel them over again. Nothing can ever make me forget what you have suffered. I
shall always remember the Malice of a Cruel Uncle, an Assassinate, and a Lover
ill Treated. I shall never forget how your Wit begat Enemies, and such as were
jealous of your Glory. I shall continually represent to my self that high
Reputation which you have so justly acquired. What Tempests have not the Monks,
those Religious Traitors, raised against you? This Chain of so many Evils has
drawn Blood from the bottom of my Heart. My Tears, which I could not keep, have
effaced part of your Letter; and I could have almost wished to have served it
all so, and sent it thus back again to you.

It Is true nevertheless, and I confess it to you, that before I had read I was
much more easy; but so soon as I had perused it, my Grief was renewed. It Is
too much, I say, it is too much to suffer without complaining, since the Rage of
our Enemies is still living; since Time, which disarms the most mortal Hatred,
never disarms them; since your Virtue must be persecuted even till your Coffin
serves for an Asylum; nay, perhaps blind Anger will even disturb your Ashes. I
hope I shall always remember these past Misfortunes, and fear such as may still
come upon you. I shall never mention the Name of my dear Abelard without Tears
in my Eyes. I shall never pronounce his Name without a Sigh. See, I pray you,
the Condition you have reduced me to, Sad, Afflicted, and without any Comfort,
if it comes not from you. Refuse me not then, I conjure you, but give me a
faithful Account of all that relates to you, how dolorous soever it is. I would
be ignorant of nothing. Perhaps, by mingling my Sighs with yours, you will
suffer the less, if what is commonly said be true, That Afflictions divided
become easy.


Lucy. Poor Lady! And all this for an Eunuch. So much Tenderness, Wheedling,
and Recounting of Misfortunes, etc. to call back a disabled Straggler! For my
part --


Amy. Why do you interrupt me, Lucy, with such Remarks as these? You ought
rather to consider, and imitate herein the Art of Persuasion. See what tender
Expressions upon all Occasions she does use! what Stories of past Misfortunes
does she not repeat! which, perhaps, is a Subject that as much endears the
Parties that have shared 'em as any thing in the World. Then for her modest
Commendations of him, which you call Wheedling, it is no unsuccessful Method.
None, how prudent and mortified soever they be, are able to stand the Battery
of a handsome Commendation.


Lucy. I thank you for these Observations. I confess, every Advice or Word that
comes from you, my Friend Amy, has a Charm in it, and each Argument has a
double force. Pray will you read on.


Amy. Presently -- There Is another Remark I cannot pass over. You see how
importunate she was for knowing his Concerns, and bearing her share in his
Afflictions. What can be more obliging then this, or a greater Sign of True
Friendship? But to proceed --

Tell me not for an Excuse, that you will spare our Tears: I desire no such
Pity. Besides, if to write back to me you wait till you can write upon some
agreeable Subject, you will stay too long. Virtuous Men have but little
Happiness to hope for here. 'Twill indeed be to me a great Pleasure to open one
of your Letters, if 'twas only to be informed that you don't forget me. Seneca
(whom you have so often read to me) appeared so sensible, (as much a-Stoick as
he was,) when he opened one of Lucillas' s Letters, that he imagined he tasted
all the Pleasures of Conversation.

I have observed in your Ahsence, that we do more admire the Pictures of the
Persons we love, when far distant from us, than when they were near. It seems
to me, the more distant they are from us, the livelier and likelier to the
Truth is their Pictures; at least our Imagination, which continually depaints
'em, makes us find it so. I have your Picture, and I never pass by it without
fixing upon it; though when you was present, I could scarce look upon it. If
Painting, which is only a dumb Representation of Objects, gives so great
Pleasure, what Joys will not Letters inspire! They are animated, they speak,
they carry with them that Spirit which explains the Motions of the Heart, they
contain within them the Fire of our Passions, and render every thing as
sensible as if seen; they say every thing that can be spoken of Love and
Tenderness when we are together, and even sometimes they speak to greater
Advantage. We may write to one another; a Pleasure so innocent is not forbidden
us. Let us not lose by our negligence the only Happiness that is left us, and
that perhaps which our Persecutors cannot deprive us of. I will tell you, that
you are my Husband; you shall see me speak like your Wife; and, in despite of
all your Misfortunes, you shall be in a Letter whatever you would be. 'Twas for
the Comfort of Persons encloister'd, as I am, that Letters were first invented.
Having lost the effective Pleasures of seeing and enjoying you any more, I
shall find'em again in some manner in your writing to me: I shall there read
your most secret Sentiments, and carry: 'em continually about me. In fine, if
you are capable of any Jealousy, let it be that only of the Caresses I shall
give your Letters.



Amy. Pray, Lucy, what think you of this? Suppose you had a Husband under
Misfortunes, that estranged himself from you, and would not see you, (which, no
doubt, is a sad Affliction) What could possibly be invented, or thought of, to
make him write or return back to you, that is not here said? I could read it a
Hundred times over, and be proud that one of our Sex could write at this rate.


Lucy. It Is indeed an extreme passionate and clean Wit; and, I think, worthy an
effective Husband.


Amy. The more Remarkable, I think, since 'twas the effect of pure
disinterested Friendship.


Lucy. I am not of your Opinion, by any means: I rather think it the Effects of
an old Habit; and that the Influence of past warm Embraces was not yet so
extinct as not to dictate much of these passionate Expressions. But however
pray proceed.

I would not have you to write to me with Application: I had rather hear the
Language of your Heart than your Wit. I could not live, if you should not tell
me that you loved me always: This Language must be so natural to you, that I
believe you cannot use any other without doing your self great Violence.
Besides, it is but just, that you heal again, with some Marks of Constant Love,
the Wounds that you have made in my Soul by that sad Account which you have
given your Friend.

It Is not that I reproach the innocent Artifice you have made use of to Comfort
the Afflicted, by comparing his Misery with a greater. Charity is ingenious and
commendable in these Pious Circumventions. But are not your Obligations greater
to me than to this Friend? What Friendship can there be betwixt you? They call
us your Sisters, and we call our selves your Daughters. If there was any thing
in the nature of these Expressions that could tie us more strictly to you, we
might make use-of it to express this Act of Devoting our selves under your
Conduct, and of your Obligations to us again.

When a deep Silence shall cover our just Acknowledgments, this Church, these
Altars, and these Places, shall speak enough; but indeed, it is neither these
Stones, nor these Marbles, but your Self that speaks; (and I shall always
mention it with pleasure) it is You, that are the only Founder of this House.

The Augustines, the Tertullians, and the Jeromes, have written to their
Eudona' s, their Paula' s, their Melania' s: And when you read these Names, How
can you forget mine? Will it be a Crime for you to cultivate my Mind like a
Jerome? To preach to me like a Tertullian? And to speak to me with the Grace of
St. Augustine? Your Sciences and Knowledge ought not to be barren and fruitless
in respect of me. In writing to me, you will write to a Wife: A Sacrament has
rendered this Commerce legitimate: And since you can satisfy me, without
committing the least Scandal, why will you not do it? I have an Uncle a
Barbarian, whose Inhumanity serves only to make you dearer to me. You have no
Reason now to fear me, Why do you fly me? Hear my Sighs; it is enough if you
will be only a Witness of 'em.

You remember, doubtless, (For what cannot those remember who have loved?) with
what Pleasure I traveled to hear you; after what manner, when we were not
together, I stole from all the World to write to you; what Inquietudes did one
Billet cost me, even till it came to your Hands, because of the Management and
dangerous Trust. I reposed in the Deliverer. I know well this Account surprises
you, and you are afraid to hear the rest: But I blush no more about it, since
my Tenderness for you has no Bounds. I have done more than all this: I Am Hated
for Loving you; and I am come here to lose my self, to make you live without
Disquiet. There Is nothing but Virtue, joined with a Love that is disengaged
from the Commerce of the Senses, which can produce such Effects. When we love
Pleasures, we love the Living, and not the Dead. We cease to burn for those who
are not in a Condition to burn for us again. My Cruel Uncle thought thus: He
thought me like other Women, and that I loved your Sex more than your Person.
But his Aim had not that effect. I love you more than ever, and revenge my self
upon him by heaping all my Tenderness upon you. If heretofore the Affection I
had for you was not so pure as it is at present, if formerly both my Mind and
Body partak'd of the Pleasure of Loving you, yet I told you a Thousand times,
that I had always more content in possessing your Heart, than in enjoying all
the Felicity of our Sex; and of all that you had, it was not the Man that
pleased me most.



Lucy. Perhaps so.


Amy. Why, Lucy, it was or ought to be so. It Is not long since you complained
that such Enjoyments were grown insipid and dull.


Lucy. That Is right, because I want 'em not. But were I in Eloisa's case,
perhaps I should think otherwise again. But proceed, if you please.

You ought to be persuaded of this by the extreme Reluctance I had against
Marriage, although I well knew that this Name was Honorable amongst Men, and
Holy in Religion, yet I ceased to find those Charms there, in thinking that I
ceased to be free. The Chains of Marriage, how honorable soever they may be,
carry along with them such necessary Obligations, as ravish the Glory of being
Loved. I was willing to have shunned the Necessity of Loving a Man, who,
possibly, might not love me always. I hated the Name of Wife, to live happily
with that of your Mistress. The Tenderness of a Maid which you loved with so
much Passion, yet less than she wished for, are not altogether forgotten by
you, since you entertained your Friend with them in that Letter which I
surpised. You say very well in this, that I found nothing but what was insipid
in all the public Engagements which tie those Knots that only Death could
break, and which make a sad Necessity of Life and Love: But you add not, that I
protested to you, an Hundred times, that it was infinitely more agreeable to
me, to live with Abelard as his Mistress, than to be an Empress with Augustus;
and that it would be more Happiness for me to Obey you, than to Captivate
lawfully the Master of the Universe. Riches and Grandeurs are not the Charms of
Love. True Tenderness distinguish^s the Lover from every thing else, takes no
notice of his Fortune, his Rank, and Employments. This would be to seek such a
Marriage, as would rather satisfy the Ambition than the Heart: But I believe
such Persons can never taste that sweet Union, nor feel the secret and charming
Emotions of Two Hearts, which for a long time have endeavored to be united.
Those who marry for other Considerations, do continually sigh after better
Fortune, which they believe have escaped 'em. The Wife sees Husbands Richer
than hers, and the Husband sees Wives Richer than his: Interested Vows beget
Regrets, and Regrets, Discord; and Discord, Separation, or at least, Hatred.
Unquiet and immoderate Desire is the Revenger of a Love which is offended by a
seeking after any Happiness by Love, than what is in Love it self. If there is
any Shadow of Felicity here below, I Am persuaded it is only to be found in the
Union of Two Persons who freely love, whom a Secret Inclination has joined,
and a reciprocal Merit satisfied.



Amy. What think you, Lucy, Had not this Lady a true Taste of the Business of
Life? How many of our Acquaintance has she Arraigned at once.


Lucy. Perhaps all the Married Worlds at least some time or other. But the next
--

If I could believe you were as much persuaded of my Merit as I of yours, I
would tell you there was a time when we might have reckoned our selves in the
Number of the Happy. Alas! how should I not be persuaded of your Merit? If I
should doubt of it, an universal Esteem would determine in your Favor. Is
there any Country, Province, or Town, which has not desired you? Where can you
retire your self where you will not be followed with Hearts and Eyes? All the
World takes Pleasure in saying they have seen Abelard. Wives, in 'spight of
those Laws of Decorum which the World has put upon 'em, sufficiently testify
that they feel something more than a simple Esteem for you: I have known 'em
Praise their Husbands, when at the same time they were Jealous of my Joys, and
plainly signified that nothing would be impossible to you, in respect of them:
So that who could Resist you? Your Reputation, which flattered the Vanity of
our Sex; your Air, your Manners, your lively Eyes, in which your Soul was so
admirably painted, your Discourses, and in a word, every thing that belongs to
you spoke in your Favor. There Is nothing, even to the least Songs or Copy of
Verses which you have made for me, which has not a Thousand Beauties; I will
make 'em endure so long as there are Persons that shall love; they shall sing
to others that which you thought only to make for me; and those Words, so
natural and tender which were the Testimony of your Love in light Verse, and
little Songs, shall serve for others to express their Thoughts much better than
they could do themselves. But have not these sort of Gallantries made me many
Rivals? How many Women have been willing to appropriate the Subject to
themselves, and would have it a Homage which Love paid to their Beauty? Others
through despair have Reproached me, by saying, that I had no other Beauty
besides that which your Verses gave me, nor any Advantages above them, but in
being beloved by you; and in 'spight of that Self-Love, which is so discernable
in all Women, I esteemed my self happy in having a Lover, to whom I was
indebted for all my Accomplishments; and I took a secret Pleasure in the
Service of a Man, who, when he pleased, could make a Goddess of his Mistress.
Proud of your Glory, I read with Pleasure all the Praises you gave me, and
often, without consulting my self, I was willing to be such as you described
me, that I might more certainly please you.

But, alas! where is the Time that I speak of? I now bewail my Lover; and of
all my Joys there remains only an unhappy Remembrance of 'em, which overwhelms
me. You that were jealous of my Happiness learn, that he, for whom you envied
me, is no more either yours or mine. I loved him; my Love was both his Crime
and Punishment; my weak Allurements charmed him, and content with each other we
lived happily, and calmly passed on some blissful Minutes; and if it was a
Crime to live thus, this Crime would please me again. But my Misfortune is to
have had unjust Relations, whose Hatred and Rage troubled the Calm of our
Bliss. If these Barbarians had made use of their Reason, I should now have
enjoyed my Abelard in Peace. How Cruel were they, when their blind Passion
engaged an Assassine to surprise you in your Sleep! If we had been together, I
would have defended you at the Expense of my own Life; my Cries only would have
stayed his Arm. But in this Place Love is scandalized, and my Modesty joined to
my Despair makes me silent. I am not permitted to say all that I think upon
this Subject; and although I were permitted, yet I could not do it: Great is the
Eloquence of Silence, where the greatest of Evils cannot be expressed. Tell me
only, for it is very afflicting to me, whence came it that you began to neglect
me after my Profession of a Monastic Life. Let me hear the Reason of your
Coldness, or rather permit me to discover my Thoughts to you, Is it possible,
that only the Prospect of Pleasure should draw you to me, and that my
Tenderness, which could deny you nothing that you could wish, should diminish
your Flames. A sad Experience has taught me, that Men fly those to whom they
have the greatest Obligation; and that a Grant of many Favors to 'em, is
rather an Occasion of Indifferency then Gratitude. Thus this weak Heart was too
ill defended to be dear to you long: You easily took it, and now give it me
back again. No, ungrateful Man! I will never consent to receive it; and though I
ought in this Place not to have my own Will, I have nevertheless secretly
preserved a Desire of being Loved by you. At that very time I made my sad Vows,
I had about me the last Letter you sent me, in which you protested you would be
always mine, and that you would only live to love me: So that it is to you that
I am sacrificed; you have my Heart, I had yours. Ask me nothing back again; and
suffer my Passion, as something which is so much yours, that you cannot deprive
your self of it.

Alas! What is my Weakness to talk at this rate? Cruel Man! you forced me
hither by your Conduct. Infidel! Must you all at once love me no more? Why did
not you deceive me for some time, and not abandon at once? If you had at least
given me some feeble Marks of a dying Friendship, I should have assisted you to
have deceived my self, and would have made all possible Efforts to have
believed you capable of some Constancy; But in the way you now treat me, what
Opinion can I have of you? What can I think of such a Forgetful One as you are?
Why do you take away all Means of Writing to you? I have passionately wished to
see you; but if it is forbidden me to hope for it, I would now be contented
with some Lines from your Hand. Is it then so great a Trouble to write to them
you love, if it be yet true that you love me? I ask not such Letters as you
fill with Learning, and with which you raise your Reputation; all that I beg
for, is a few Letters which your Heart will dictate to you, as fast as you can
write, without any study or application. How was I deciev'd, when I thought you
was all mine, and took this Veil, engaging my self to live for ever under your
Laws; for in making Profession, I pretended not any thing else than to be
Yours; and I voluntarily took it upon me, through the Desire you had of seeing me
Encloister'd, and now nothing but Death can free me from this Place where you
have put me: Yea, my Ashes shall remain here to wait for yours, or at least to
be a Mark of my Obedience to you.

What signifies it, to conceal the Secret of my Vocation? You know it. 'Twas
neither Zeal nor Devotion that transported me into this Cloister. I am here, I
remain and abide here, because an Unhappy Love, and Cruel Relations have
condemned me hither; and if I have no Continuation of your Care, if I lose your
Friendship, what will be the Fruit of my Prison? What Reward is there for me to
expect? I, who am at the Head of a Religious Community, am the feeble Captive
of unhappy Love, and devoted only to Abelard. I repeat continually in my Memory
past Misfortunes, not being able to think upon any thing else.



Am. Do you see, Lucy, what other Arguments she here uses: Her Obedience, (a
harsh Word you think,) and the injurious Effects of her Passion for him: and,
considering that his Afflictions may have wrought much upon him, in order to a
pious Life, she (as you will see presently) omits not this Topic neither;
framing her self to every thing she believes may please him, in order to
prevail upon him.


Lucy. I say, all this would have been well, if it had not been spent upon one
that had been capable of making any benevolent Returns.


Am. Will you never leave this way of talking? -- But to proceed.

What an Account, what a Relation is this! I reproach my own Faults, and accuse
you of yours; And why all this? See into what a Disorder you have thrown me!
How hard is it to strive always in Duty against Inclination? I know what I owe
to this Veil which covers me; but I feel much more than what a Habitude of
Loving can influence upon a sensible Soul. I am conquered, I am overcome by my
own Inclination. My Love raises a Tempest in my Soul, and will. In one Moment I
hearken to the Sentiments of Piety which are raised in my Soul, and in another,
I suffer every thing that is tender and soft to reign in my Imagination. I tell
you to Day what I would not have told you Yesterday, I would not love you. I
dreamed, that I had made Vows, that I was Veiled, Buried, and as it were Dead;
but by degrees there arose from the bottom of my Heart a Trouble which overcame
all these Sentiments, which darkened my Reason and Piety. You reign in the
secret and imperceptible Places of my Heart, so that I cannot attack you; and
when I dream of Breaking the Chain that ties me to you, I flatter my self, and
all the Efforts I can make, serve only to bind me the faster. For Pity's sake
assist a miserable One, to renounce her Desires to her self, and to you, if it
be possible. If you are a Lover, if you are a Father, Succor a Mistress,
Comfort a Daughter: Cannot these Names, these tender Names, soften you? Come
back, either out of Pity or Love. If you do, I shall begin to be Religious
without profaning my Vocation any longer.

I had thought to have ended here; but whilst I am complaining of you, I must
discharge my Heart, and ease it of all its Suspicions and Reproaches. 'Twas, I
confess to you, a very hard thing to me, to see you in the Design you had of
engaging me in this Profession before you had undertaken it your self. How!
thought I, does he think to find in me a new Example of Lot' s Wife, who looked
behind her as she left Sodom? If my Youth and Sex made you believe that I might
return to other Lovers, Paris being not yet in Flames nor Ashes, my Manners, my
Fidelity, and that Heart which you ought to know, ought to cure you of these
sorts of Suspicions. How! thought I, Time was, he would have been assured upon
my bare Word, And must there now be Vows to answer for me? What Reason have I
given him, in all the course of my Life, which could make him suspect me of the
least Lightness? Could I be able to find him at all his Rendezvous, And shall I
stick to follow him into the House of Holiness? How! I that am made a Victim of
Pleasure to satisfy him, Shall I refuse to be a Sacrifice of Honor to obey
him? Has Vice then greater Charms for well-educated Souls? Or, having once
drank of the Cup of Sinners, shall I never take, but with Regret, the Chalice
of Holiness? Or rather, have you believed your self a better Master in Vice
than Virtue, do you think you cannot as easily persuade to one as the other? No,
this would be, without doubt, too injurious to us both. Virtue is too fine, not
to be embraced when discovered; and Vice is too much deformed, not to be
avoided when known. Every thing has Charms for me when you will it. Nothing is
Frightful, nothing Difficult, when you are by. I am not weak, but when you
don't enlighten me; so that it will be your Fault, if I am not what you could
wish me to be. I have done too much, and I must at this Day triumph over your
Ingratitude. When we lived happily, you might have doubted whether 'twas
Pleasure, or Friendship, which tied me to you; but now the Place, wherein I am
and write, decides the Matter. I love you here at least as much as ever I did.
If I had loved Pleasure, when that base Attempt was made upon you, Could not I
have found how to have pleased my self? I was not Eighteen Years old at that
time; and there were other Men, whom I might have hoped to please; but Abelard
was no more of that number, and yet I would have none but him. 'Twas then for
Love of you, that in an Age so proper for Love, and its Triumphs, that I threw
my self alive into a Monastery. It Is for your sake that I have given the
Remainders of my Beauty to the Days and Nights which I pass alone, which are
now hasting to wither up; and because you could not enjoy 'em, I offered 'em to
God only, and made him a second Present of my Heart, my Days, and my Life.



Amy. This Paragraph is one of the chiefest Motives I had to read this Letter
to you; Eloisa's Case here and yours, being the very same. If your Husband is,
or should be, Jealous of you, you have here, perhaps, the best Arguments in the
World to cure him of it. Besides, my Friend Lucy, I thought it would be more
effacious and taking, to find such Arguments dispersed up and down in an
Historical Account that wants not the greatest Ornament of Pleasing, I mean
Truth, than to have collected 'em for your use, and put 'em under their proper
Heads, divesting 'em of this Advantage, of being as it were acted over, and
represented to you by a Third Person. I confess, it is a Method would take much
better with me than a dry Moral, which has not the inviting as well as the
profitable part.


Lucy. It Is extreme well done, and your Design I highly approve, and think my
self Happy, that I have so great an Interest in your particular Care. Pray
let us have the rest.

I enlarge a little too much in this place, and I ought to speak less of your
Misfortune, and of that which I suffer for the Love of you. We tarnish the
Glory of fine Actions, when we make a Panegyric of our selves. It Is true, but
when we have to do with Men stupify'd with base Ingratitude, we cannot speak too
much of the Concern we have with them. If you were of that Number, this
Reproach would teach you many things: I will not make you one of them, least I
should wrong you. Irresolute that I am, I perceive I love you still.
Nevertheless, I hope for nothing; I have renounced Life, despoiled my self of
every thing; for I find I have lost Abelard in losing my Lover. I preserve my
Love in a Monastery where I keep my Vows. Our unpitying Laws have not made me
lose Humanity. You have not made me Marble, by changing my Habit; my Heart is
not hardened, by being separated from you. I am sensible of every thing I have
been, and yet I must be so no longer. Suffer, without hurting your Empire, that
my Lover may exhort me to live under your Laws: Your Yoke will be very light,
if his Hand supports it: Our Exercises will become lovely, when he shows their
Profit. Retreat! Solitude will not affright me, if I could learn that I had some
part in his Remembrance. A Heart so deeply touched as mine, is not so easily
determined to Indifference. Yes, Abelard, I conjure you, by the Chains which I
drag here, to ease the Weight, and make 'em as agreeable as I could wish 'em.
Give me the Maxims of a Holy Love, that, after having quitted you, I may glory
in being the Spouse of God. My Heart adores this Title, and disdains all
others. Make me know how this Divine Love is nourished, entertained, and
purified more and more. Before we were retired from the World, we busied our
self much in your Composures, which told the Age of our Joys and Pleasures: Now
we are in the Haven of Grace, is it improper to speak with me of my Happiness,
and show me how to increase it? Have but the same Complaisance for me in the
State wherein I now am, as you had for me before our Retirement. Without
changing the Heart, let us change the Object; and, leaving our profane Songs,
let us sing Divine Hymns. Let us elevate our Hearts to God, and have no other
Transports but for his Glory.

I expect all this from you, as a Charge whereof you cannot extricale your self.
God has a particular Right over the Hearts of Great Men which he has formed:
When he touches 'em, he ravishes 'em, and makes 'em that they neither speak nor
breathe, but for him. Even till this Moment of Grace happens, think upon me,
forget me not: Remember my Tenderness, my Fidelity, my Constancy. Love a
Mistress, cherish a Daughter, a Sister, a Spouse. Dream, that I love you still,
and that I endeavor not to love you any more. What said I? I tremble, and my
Heart contradicts that Word. Help me to blot it out again. I finish this long
Letter, by saying, if you will have it so, (would to God I could subscribe to
it,)

For Ever Farewell.


Lucy. Dear Amy, oblige me with a Copy of this Letter.


Amy. With all my Heart.


Lucy. Oh! there is my Will. a coming.


Am. What do you mean, Lucy: Who is that?


Luc. My Husband: I Will retire, and leave him to your Management.


William. Madam, Your most humble Servant; I know not whether my Surpri^e, or
Joy, to see you here, is greatest.


Am. Your Servant, Sir; I came to pay a Visit to your Lady: She is gone up
Stairs, and will be here presently.


Will. Ay, when she pleases.


Am. I have had some Acquaintance with her before she was Married; I hope you
are very Happy in your Choice.


Will. Indeed, Madam, to be free, I am not over Happy in it.


Am. Why, Sir, your Wife is extreme pretty; and, so far as I can guess, would
make any Man happy.


Will. You're much in the right on it; I believe she would: She is pretty free
of her Favors.


Am. I meant only so far as a good Wife could do it. Pray excuse my Freedom.
The little Acquaintance I have had with her, I hope, will not be unuseful to
either of you.


Will. Indeed, Madam, you are the only Person among all my Wife's Acquaintance,
(and that perhaps is not a few,) whose Reputation, I think, is clear and
unspotted: I beseech you to continue your Correspondence, and, if possible,
make her a Proselyte to your Virtues.


Am. Pray be a little more particular.


Will. No, Madam, I must not; for I should rail, and make you uneasy.


Am. Sir, It Is the Office of one Friend to take a part in the Happiness or
Misery of another: I see such Characters of Uneasiness in your Face, that I am
concerned to know the Cause of it.


Will. In short, Madam, think the worst of a Woman you can, and you will make a
faint Essay toward the Character of my Wife.


Am. Why do you talk at this rate, Sir? Does she abuse your Bed?


Will. I am not very sure, Madam; but I am a little jealous of it.


Am. What, Sir, perhaps you have no other Reason, but that you were overhasty
your self, and would not stay till the Parson said Amen.


Will. And if I did so before, Is there not as great a Probability, nay a much
greater, that others have done the like afterward, when there is not half the
Fears and Inconveniences to oppose the Temptation.


Am. You say, you only suspect it: Unless you were sure, Why should you make
your self uneasy, by Anticipation? Cannot you forgive your Wife an imaginary
Crime, which only Excess of Affection to you, caused her to commit?


Will. No. Why should I forgive her?


Am. And can you forgive your self?


Will. Why not? Would not any Man have done as much?


Am. I confess, most Gentlemen, nowa-days, think it no Sin, or Fault, to do so:
But pray, How could that be a Fault in her, which was not one in you? Have not
all the same Passions? Had she resisted you, you had been criminal alone, and
she virtuous; and at the worst, when she complied, she was guilty but of half
the Crime; and 'Partnership should rather be an Argument of Endearment than
Aversion: It Is so in every thing else. I speak not this, to extenuate what I
could wish had not been; but to convince you of your Injustice, in endeavoring
to shift off and evade your own Guilt, by laying it upon another, who had been
more Innocent and Virtuous than your self, had it not been for you.


Will. I confess, my Prejudices may be as unjust as you have represented 'em: I
wish I could not think so unhandsomely for the future.


Am. I Will make no Excuses for my Freedom with you; but if there be no other
Obstructions that lie in the way of your Happiness, I see no Reason why the
Estate of Marriage should not be the most happy Estate in the World: The
Ordinance is Divine; it is Natural; it has the Advantage of Advice, Tenderness,
Interest, and what not. All conspire together to make you Happy, if it be not
your own Faults.


Will. Your Husband must needs be Happy, in having so good a Wife.


Am A good Husband makes a good Wife No Woman that has common Sense, and
Gratitude, but may be made a very good Wife.


Will. Then, I think, my Wife has neither Sense, nor Gratitude; for she is
continually upon unaccountable Visits, seldom or never pleased, when at home;
always railing, and calling provoking Names; nay, this before Servants,
Strangers, etc.


Am Are you without Fault? Do you never give any just Occasion for her doing
so? Are you always Tender, Affable, and Agreeable? You ought to comply, though
against your Inclinations, till by degrees, and proper Opportunities of
speaking, you make her and your self easy.


Will. How! Comply against my Inclinations!


Am. Ay, that is the great Secret of conjugal Happiness. Does the Word
Compliance or Self-Denial, seem so strange to you? For my part, I think there
is a great deal of Prudence and Reason in it. He that conquers himself, does
more than he that takes a City. Conquest supposes Opposition. Do you think the
Word Patience, and Self-denial, etc. are empty sounds? No, my Friend, I know
you do not. Can we then reap the Rewards and Fruits of these without exercising
'em?


Will. Ah, Madam, how much easier is the Theory, than the Practice of Things?


Amy. True; but the Difficulty, by degrees, vanishes, as you exercise your self
in the contrary Virtue. Do but consider the many mechanic Trades in the
Nation, some of which would give you much difficulty and trouble to attain to;
but yet you see it continually conquered, only for the fake of Living. Now
whether is Living, or the Happiness of Life, a greater Blessing? Certainly the
latter. Why then should you not think a little Pains, and Industry, a little
Application of Mind, (doubtless much less than is commonly used in the Affairs
of getting the Necessaries of Life,) worth the Recompense of living Happily. In
fine, my Friend, let me persuade you to take heed, that no irregular Action of
yours be a Temptation to your Wife. Examine your own Conduct toward her; and,
if you have Convenience, take her into the Country with you, and live retired
for some time: Be as kind to her in every thing as possible; and when absent,
recommend good practical Treatises of Religion: Take proper Opportunities of
speaking to her; discover a greater Concern for her Reputation, than your own.


Will. I dare say, all that that would not do.


Am. It Is hard to think so; but do what is in your Power. If, when you have done
your pa^^, you cannot Reclaim her, you have nothing to answer for. But I am
morally certain, that those, Irregularities you impute to your Wife, are in a
great measure owing to your self. If you would reclaim her, reform your self;
and I question not, but you will find a great Alteration of Affairs in a little
^^^e.


Will. Indeed I cannot justify my self in all my Actions toward my Wife, I
believe I may contribute toward her Miscarriages. But for the future,
according to your Advice, I Will endeavor to give her a good Example.


Amy. I wish you would: I shall reckon my self very Happy, if I may any ways be
^^cessary to serve you, and my Friend Lucy in a Business of such Importance.


Will. Dear Madam, I thank you; and to let you see how much I value your good
Advice, I Will begin to put it into practice presently. Oh there is my Lucy a
coming. I vow, I imagine I Am going a Courting again -- Methinks, my dear Lucy,
this looks like our Marriage-Day. We have here our best Friend to be witness of
our Passions; What say you* Shall we be married again?


Luc. You mean unmarried, my Dear.


Will. No, I protest.


Lucy. Well then, if it be so, you must court me again; and if we marry a
second time, we must both alter our Humors; otherwise we shall never be Happy.


Will. How long must the Courtship last?


Luc. All my Life: But, dear Amy, am not I obliged to you for my Husband's
pleasant Humor? I wish he be not in jest.


Will. Ha, Madam, she prevents me -- Am not I in a Dream?


Am. Come, my Friends, you are or may be as Happy as you please: I cannot set
my Husband and my self as your Patterns; for I hope you will make greater
Examples: But, I think, neither of us Envy the Condition of any Person alive.


Luc. I could say so too, would my dear Will. be kind and constant.


Will. Indeed, Lucy -- Then I Will hinder your Happiness no longer. Be Happy, and
I cannot be otherwise.


Am. May both your Resolutions last -- You must both bear and forbear, look
upon each others Fallings as your own, prefer each others Inclinations before
your own, and then I Will secure your mutu^l Peace and Happiness.


FINIS.

