Jail-delivery of NEWGATE, April 13. 1670.
Licensed,

April 19. 1670. Roger L'Estrange.



MARCH 1. Upon an Inquiry made of the death of Elizabeth Moorehead wife of
Joseph Moorehead in Houndsditch of St. Botolph Bishopsgate Grocer, she was
found to have been smothered with smoke, after the manner following: On the day
immediately preceding, there happened a fire to break forth in their
Mansion House, which portended much danger, had it not been timely stopped by
the vigilance of the Magistrates, and the diligence of Neighbors. After the
loud report thereof had awakened those of the Family (for it was about
Midnight) every one endeavoring Self-preservation, they all soon escaped into
the Street, this Gentlewoman only abovenamed remaining within doors. After a
small space of time, her Husband uncessantly urged some persons about him to
attempt her rescue, which some readily undertook; one whereof went up a Ladder
to the Chamberwindow, which was Two-story-high, and there saw her; but by
reason of the abundance of smoke issuing out at the Window, he was forced to
hasten down without success; but others venturing in at the Chamber Door, did
violently, with some hazard of their own lives, pull her forth, but the smoke
had so much suffocated her before they could come to her relief, that she
instantly dyed, being at that time big with Child, within a day or two of her
expected delivery.

March 5. James Tedcastle of St. Saviors Southwark Glover, cut his own Throat
with a Pair of Sheers that he made use of in his Trade; he was aged about 80
years old, (and for ought that could be known) upon no other consideration, but
his former prosperity, and present poverty, together with his unwillingness to
be burthensom to his Friends and Relations, he thus laid violent hands on
himself: He lived one day and night after the wound was given, for the aspera
arteria, commonly called the Windpipe, was untouched, which time he confessed
that he took up and laid down again the said Sheers, about 20 times before he
wounded himself: He was found by the Coroners Inquest, to be felo de se.

Ditto. Anthony Garret, a Carpenters Servant, was, together with some others,
employed to hoist up a piece of Timber for the building of the Apothecaries
Hall in Blackfryers, which suddenly and accidentally fell on him, and mortally
bruised the right side of his Belly, whereof he instantly dyed.

Ditto. There was Inquisition taken of the death of Henry Gutheridge of St.
Sepulchers Blacksmith: Although his death was natural, yet there was sufficient
reason to suspect otherwise. March 4. He was drinking Strong Water with some
of his acquaintance in Bishopsgate Parish, where he seemed as cheerful and
healthful as at other times; and, to the astonishment of his Friends with him,
he suddenly, inter calicem supremaque labra, fell down dead! They had not drank
to Excess, neither were any of the Fellow-sharers of the same Liquor, then, or
since, sensible of any alteration or abatement of their bodily health.

March 9. Inquisition was had of a certain Male-Bastard-Child, born of the body
of Hannah Whitford, Servant to one William Newel, of Great St. Bartholomews
Salter: She never before discovered her self to be with Child, but upon her
frequent qualms of Stomach, and other indispositions incident to Women with
Child; she imposed upon those that knew her, to believe that she was troubled
with the Scurvy and Dropsy, till at last a busy Nurse, who used to frequent
the House, gave occasion of suspicion that she was delivered of a Child; which
upon strict search made on her body, and urging her to a Confession, she
acknowledged, and directed a Midwife to open a Cupboard in her Chamber, where
the said Bastard-Child was found, wrapped up in a Petty-Coat. She was brought to
Bed alone, and concealed it from Morning to the Evening: She was Servant to a
professed Quaker, and alleged, she was promised marriage by a person unknown
to the Family, the who, was the supposed father of the Child. She remains in
Newgate, and more of her hereafter.

March 11. The Corpse of ^liz. Lloyd, Wife of ^o. Lloyd of St. Saviors
Southwark Labourer, was prohibited from being interred, till Inquisition was
first had, forasmuch as she was supposed to have been killed by her Husband ^o.
Lloyd aforesaid; the proofs for this, were such only as she acquainted her
Friends of, as, that her Husband not long before struck her over the Belly with
a Cudgel, and that at sund^y times he had threatened to kill her; her Belly and
Breasts were somewhat swelled: A Chyrurgion, upon the Dissection of that part
of the Body, was rather inclined to believe she dyed of an Ulcer in her Lungs:
so that it was doubtful, whether she dyed by this supposed violent stroke, or
naturally. Her Husband however was committed to Prison, and a Prosecution was
intended; but he has since been called before the Tribunal of Heaven, where his
Conscience will be a Thousand Witnesses. He dyed March 17. following, in the
Marshalsea' s Prison in Southwark.

March 15. One Edward Winball, a poor laboring man, having a ^odd full of
Mortar on his shoulder, sell off a Ladder about Twostory, by which fall he was
very much bruised, rendered speechless, and soon after dyed in St. Giles
Cripplegate.

The Jail-delivery of Newgate, holden at Justice-Hall in the Old Bailey, April
13.

THe first that was Indicted, was Hannah Whitford aforesaid; she pleaded to the
Indictment, that her Child was born dead, and withal produced one Witness to
prove she cried out; so that the Court directed the Jury to find a Special
Verdict, which accordingly they did; this their Verdict is to be Controverted
before the Judges, and as they shall determine in that point of the Statute
which concerns this present Case, so it must fare with her either as to Life or
Death.

Eleven Men and two Women were found guilty of several Felonies, and begged the
favor of Transportation, which was granted them.

One Woman, being a Notorious Thief, was Branded in the Hand.

Four were found guilty of Manslaughter.

One, for killing his Wife, by throwing a a pair of Tailors Sheers at her, and
wounding her so desperately in her Groin, that she instantly dyed.

A second, for kicking one at Nine-pin playing, of which he dyed some days
after.

A third, for killing a man by Wrestling.

A fourth, for killing a Boy by throwing a stone, though it did appear, he
killed not him ^^ whom he aimed his throw.

Three of these were Burned in the Hand, upon their allowance of the Benefit of
Clergy; and one to be Transported, by special Order of the Court.

Two Felons also were Burned in the Hand for stealing of Cows.

Three received judgment to dye (viz.) Two men for breaking open Houses, and
stealing Goods, but were Reprieved after Judgment given.

Also one Woman named Mary Line, for Murdering her Bastard-Child, which she
choked, by thrusting a Cloth down its mouth; she was a blind Woman, and was
Executed April 20 following, at Tyburn.

A man and his wife were Indicted for Murdering Mr. Stiveings a Merchant, by
Pistolling him in the Head. At the Trial there was an accumulation of so many
Circumstances, as that it was evident he killed not himself, which the
Prisoners pleaded: but, however, the Jury acquitted them, and brought them in,
Not Guilty.

There is a Person in the Goal, that is suspected for several Felonies,
Robberies, and Treason; he has gone by the Names of Bathazar, alias
Baskervile, alias Dormer, alias Mathews, alias Slader, found with four
different colored Perriwiggs, and Pick-locks in his pocket. He was brought to
Newgate, April 10. by a Writ of Habeas Corpus, from Rutland Goal. He boasts
himself to be Somebody, and possibly next Sessions will discover more clearly
who, and what he is.

LONDON, Printed by Tho: Newcomb, in the Savoy. M. DC. LXX.


