THE True WILL Of his late Catholic MAJESTY CHARLES 2d. King of SPAIN, WITH
THE CODICIL.

Translated from the Original lately brought hither from Spain, And Answered
Article by Article.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1700.

Price 6 d.

THE TRUE WILL Of his late Catholic MAJESTY, with the Codicil, Answered
Article by Article.
Article I.
IS an Invocation of the Name of God, for obtaining the Grace of dying in the
Faith as his Majesty lived.

Answer
As these Articles were drawn up by a Cardinal, so the Archbishop of Toledo,
does excellently well to persuade his King to beseech God to let him die in a
Faith, the adhesion to the Errors of which, had gotten his Eminence the fattest
Bishopric in Christendom; but had his Majesty given as little Faith to his
Persuasions when Dying, as he did when Living, sometime before his last
Sickness, it had been more advantageous to the Security of the Peace of Europe.

Article II.
He demands the Intercession of the Holy Virgin, and prays the Kings, his
Success^rs, to continue the Instances he had made at the Court of Rome, to
obtain a Decision of the Pope in favor of the immaculate Conception of the
Virgin.

Answer
Had his Majesty been in his right Senses when he made this Petition, the
Blessed Virgins Intercession would never have been granted him; neither is it
to be supposed whatever Service his blind Zeal might have made him endeavor to
do her, in getting an Idolater, to grant Bulls in her Fa^our, though she had the
Power of Mediation, on Attribute only to be ascribed to God the Son, she would
make use of it, for a King, who begged it to countenance a Will, which was
likely to make Divisions among Christian Princes; and was contradictory to the
Commands of the Blessed Jesus, which enjoined Unity, and the Loving one another.

Article III.
His Majesty ordains that his Body shall be Interred in the Monastery of St.
Laurent the Royal, in the Tomb of his Ancestors, but with the least Pomp that
the Royal Dignity will permit of.

Answer
His Majesty, though he never Lived like a King, and was Governed by Priests,
etc. is to be commended for his Orders to be Buried like one, amongst his Royal
Ancestors; and the Cardinal did not amiss to persuade him to command as little
Expenses as possible at his Funeral, for fear the Young Prince, his Successor,
should not have enough in the Royal Treasury to Reward so Zealous and
Affectionate a Servant.

Article IV.
The Foundations which the King has made, during his life in favor of the said
Monastery, shall be maintained.

Answer
The Priest gets the better of the Subject here; and the Monastry of St.
Laurent's increase of Wealth must be taken care of, though the People who have a
Veneration for the Superstitious Follys that are practiced there, are ready to
starve.

Article V.
The Kings Successors to his Majesty are also to have a particular care, to
preserve the same in the form and Splendour which King Philip the 2d. gave it in
Founding it.

Answer.
The Question is, Whether Phillip the V. be such a Relick-monger, as King
Phillip the II. though it must be owned he springs from a Religious Family.
However it is no more to be doubted, but he will promise as strict an observer of
his Benefactors Commands in this point, as much as he will hold fast to the
performance of his Injunctions of being a True Spaniard, when he has it in
Power, to be a downright Frenchman.

Article VI.
A hundred thousand Masses shall be said for the Salvation of his Majesty's
Soul; and in case he need them not, they shall be then for those of
Predecessors.

Answer.
Would to God his Eminence had been enjoined the Penance of saying all these
Masses himself for making his Master take his leave of the World in such
ridiculous Terms. If a Prince who had been led by the Nose all his Lifetime,
and had been guilty of few Sins, but that of a blind Bigotry, has occasion for
100000 Masses, how many must our wicked Testament-maker have, before he can
creep out of Purgatory after his Decease. But this is a profitable
Superstition, that brings Grist to the Romish Churches Mill, and though his
Majesty nor his Predecessors can receive any Profit from it, the Clergy that
survive may; and that is an Argument good enough to make a Cardinal push forward
so advantageous an Article.

Article VII.
King Philip the 4th having formerly Established a Fund of 6000 Ducats for the
Redemption of Slaves, Marriage of poor Maids, and release of Prisoners, his
Majesty ordains, that the Designs of the Foundation be punctually put in
execution.

Answer.
Very good! After he has made provision for those who are too implicit
Believers, he is for scattering some of his Masters loose Ducats if he can find
'em amongst Infidels. He had better have persuaded his Sovegaign Lord to have
left a Sum to drive the Moors from Ceuta, and hinder 'em from taking any
Slaves, than to furnish 'em with Money to empower 'em to take more. The Marriage
of Poor Maids, I confess is an excellent thing; but Spain is a Hot Country, and
they take Man so early there, that few Ducats will go a great way.

Article VIII.
His Majesty recommends to his Successor, a perfect Obedience to the Holy
Apostolical See of Rome, the fear of God, and observation of his Commandments;
and that he would procure above all things the exaltation of the Faith, honor
the Gown, love his People, impartially Administer Justice to all, be watchful
over the Conduct of his Ministers, and be persuaded that in doing all these
things he will draw God's Blessing down upon him.

Answer.
By Honoring the Gown, his Eminence put's the Young King in mind of the good
Offices he has done, but if he have a watchful Eye over the Conduct of his
Ministers, he will soon find that the Lord Porto Carero is better pleased with
telling over Loves d' Or's, than counting his Beads.

Article IX.
The King's Successors to his Majesty are to sacrifice all for the defense and
advancement of the Roman Catholic Religion, and in case any among them should
be found infected with Heresies, and condemned Doctrins, his Majesty declares
him incapable of Reigning, and deprived of all Right to the Crown.

Answer.
That Is as much as to say, Your Majesty must do as your Predecessor (now in
Glory) did, loose your Towns, while you are Kissing your Relics, and in order
to advance the Roman Catholic Religion, break Friendship with those Heretics
who were his Preservers in the late War. The Dutch have some Reason to take
notice of this Article, and if the Duke of Anjou's Complement to a certain P --
had any Truth in it, so have the English too. As for his Majesty's turning
Heretic, there is no great fear of it, his Grandfather has Taught him his
Lesson; and he is as likely to be as great a Friend to the Inquisition, as the
most Christian King is to the Conversion of those he call's Heretics.

Article X.
The Kings and Successors to the Crown of Spain shall prefer the Considerations
of Religion before those of Politics, and by those means draw upon them the
Blessing of God.

Answer.
That is, the King shall be a muttering Ave Maria's, while the Cardinal sits at
the Helm, and takes care of public Affairs; and concerns himself in more
profitable Matters; which shows there is nothing like a Bigoted Prince for a
Covetious Statesman, and a Sovereign possessed with Superstition, for a
Disciple of Matchiavel to work on.

Article XI.
The Adoration of the Holy Sacrament, which has been particularly established
and founded in the Chapple of the Palace, shall be observed, for the future,
as it is at present.

Answer.
As for this Article, I have nothing to say to it, let 'em elevate the Host, as
his deceased Majesty thinks fit. Though something occurs observable enough from
the frequency of his Orders against all manner of Alterations, he has some
suspicion of his Successor, and can hardly be assured a Prince of the House of
Bourbon can bring himself to a Castilians Temper without great difficulty.

Article XII.
The King declares that if God, by his infinite mercy gives him lawful
Children, the Eldest of the Males shall Succeed him, and by defect of Males,
the Daughters, according to the Laws of his Kingdoms; but it not having pleased
God, at the time of this Testament, to grant him that inestimable favor, and
the first Obligation which is incumbent on him, is to provide for the Welfare
of his Subjects, and the preservation of his Kingdoms in the Union conducive to
the Public Good, they keeping the Fidelity they owe to their King, and Natural
Lord, as they have done for the time past, and regulating themselves most
justly, and wholly conforming with the Supreme Authority of his Disposal.

Answer.
The Commands which went before were only as so many leading-strings, to what
the Will is now pointing at. God has not blessed his Catholic Majesty with
Issue from his own Body, and the Welfare of his Subjects, and Preservation of
his Kingdoms make it but sitting he should declare a Successor, who should be
instrumental in continuing the Blessings they had received from his Auspicious
Reign. And the sequel will tell us what Provision he has made for it.

Article XIII.
By which his Majesty being convinced that the Renunciation of the late King of
France, having been made to prevent the Reunion of the two Crowns in one sole
Monarchy; and that when this fundamental Reason comes to cease, the Right of
Succession belongs, pursuant to the Laws of the Kingdom, to the next Relation
and Heir, which now happens in the Person of the Dauphin's Second Son. His
Majesty calls him in that Quality to the Succession of all his Kingdoms and
States, without any reserve or exception; Authorizes him to take Possession
thereof, after His Majesty's Death, by taking the Oaths to maintain the Laws,
Ordinances and Customs of the Kingdoms and States of the Monarchy, and in case
the Duke of Anjou should happen to Die, or Inherit the Crown of France, the
Succession of the Crown of Spain shall pass to the Duke of Berry, his Brother,
and if the same should fall out, in the Person of the said Duke of Berry, his
Brother, his Majesty calls to the Succession, the Archduke, Second Son to the
Emperor, and not the King of the Romans, his Elder Brother, for the same
Reasons which regard the Duke d' Anjou, and in case the Arch Duke Charles
should by the same Accident of Death be wanting, his Majesty appoints the Duke
of Savoy and his Children, Willing and Commanding, That his Will be punctually
executed without any Partition or Dismembring of the Monarchy; and his Majesty
desiring Ardently that the Peace, and Union between the Emperor and the Most
Christian King, be Conserved; he Recommends and Exhorts, that for the better
Confirmation of this Union, and the Tranquillity of Europe, the same the
rendered indissolble by the Marriage of the Duke d' Anjou, with one of the most
Illustrious Arch Dutchesses, etc.

Answer.
Right! the Renunciation was certainly made to hinder the Two Crowns from being
United in the Person of one Sovereign, but how well this Declaration agrees
with it, may be easily perceived. The Design of it, without doubt, was to keep
a French Prince from Sitting on the Throne of Spain, and to continue the
Succession in the House of Austria. Now That this is Frustrated to all intents
and purposes, by calling the Duke of Anjou to the Possession of a Prince of the
Austrian Family, is very Apparent; and that an Union of the Two Kingdoms is now
more to be feared than ever, may appear from the French King's own Words, who
said, France and Spain should be one, at his acceptance of the Will. Which may
be more easily made so by the Contiguity of their Frontiers to each other, when
it had been much more unlikely, to have been effected by the Germans, because
of the distance of their Territories from each other, had the Illustrious Arch
Duke been chosen for His Majesty's Successor.

Article XIV.
His Majesty makes an Enumeration, and Destinction of the Countries in which
the Duke de Anjou is to Succeed him to the Title of Castile, and those that
depend on the Crown of Arragon, Declaring that from the Moment it shall please
God to remove him from this Life; the Duke shall be ipso facto, King of all his
Countries, notwithstanding all sort of Renunciation, and orders all his
Subjects and Vassals, of what Condition soever, to Acknowledge him as such,
without any Delay.

Answer.
The Testator has taken upon him to disanul the Validity of the Renunciation;
but how the Person that drew up the Testament could absolve him before he had
repented of such an apparent injury to his own Ilustrious Family, it is not in
me to imagine. If the poor King had lost his Senses, what Injustice has the
Cardinal done, if he parted with his Conscience, and made his Majesty Sign a
Paper, which approaching Death would not permit him to Read. Which seems not
impossible, if we consider with our selves, with what earnestness an Austrian
Prince is made to recommend another with, to the Inheritance of his Dominions,
whose Family had been at War with him from his very Cradle, and laid his
Country desolate in the most Savage manner imaginable:

Article XV.
And it being necessary to provide for the Government of the Countries of the
Monarchy, in a manner Conformable to its Constitutions, until such time as his
Majesty's Successor might repair to Spain, and in Person take care of the
Government: His Majesty Ordains that the same shall be put into the Hands of a
Juncto, which shall be Composed of the President or Governor of the Council of
Castile; the Vice Chancellor, or President of Arragon, the Arch Bishop of
Toledo, the Inquisitor General, of a Grandee, and a Counciller of State, whom
his Majesty will Nominate, either in this present Testament, or in a Codicil,
or in a Paper Signed by him; this Jucto shall meet in the Queens presence, in
such an Apartment and place, as she shall be pleased to order, during the time
she shall, remain in Spain, and her said Majesty shall have a Casting Voice,
that is to say, that when the Suffrages shall be divided, the side on which
here is is, shall carry before the other, but for the rest, the Plurallity of
Voices shall carry it in all things.

Answer:
To palliate the ma^ter, and make the Germans an atonement, his Majesty's Royal
Consort the Queen, a Sister of the present Empress, is made one of the Regents,
But where is the Favor that she has the Casting Voice. when it is well known the
French Nation has a great Majority in the said Juncto, that she can never have
occasion to make use of it? Or the mighty Privilege in making choice of what
Apartment she pleases for 'em to Meet in, when she is certain to be overruled
by 'em, when they are met?

Article XVI.
And in case, that when the King Dies, he who is to be his Successor, should be
Minor, or under the Age of 14 Years, the same Governors here above named, shall
have in his Name the Administration of the Government, and shall be his Tutors
and Curators.

Answer.
But his Present Majesty will be none of their Pupils, nor if he were under the
Age of 14 Years, as it is Visible he is not, would his Grandfather think it not
in his Power to choose him French Tutors, since he has already made choice of a
French Man for his Confessor.

Article XVII.
The Vice Chancellor of Aragon, whom his Majesty has named to be one of the
Juncto, as Tutor to his Successor, shall Especially and Particularly, if it be
Conformable to the Privileges and Customs of the Kingdom of Arragon,; but if
the said Customs and Privileges, permit not him that is President to exercise
that Post, his Majesty then appoints in his place the most Ancient Councellor
of the Robe, of the said Kingdom, to make it his Function; and in defect of
him, he appoints him that shall be next, and shall follow him in Place and
Seniority.

Answer.
The Vice Chancellor of Arragon may perhaps be his Titular Tutor; but L -- XIV.
will actually be his Instructor; and the First may endeavor to inculcate true
Spanish deliberation, in his Royal Disciple; but the Doctrines of the Last will
be more prevalent for his Imitation.

Article XVIII.
The said Regent of Arragon, that shall be Tutor, shall Reside at Court, shall
keep his place in Council, shall assist at the Juncto; and propose those
things, that shall relate to, and concern the Kingdom of Aragon, to the end
that the Juncto being informed thereof, they may resolve by plurality of
Voices, upon such Measures as shall be most conducing to the Service of God and
his Successor.

Answer.
He may Reside at Court, Assist in Council, take his Place in the Juncto, and
propose what Matters he pleases; but a Prince who has sucked in Arbitrary
Notions with his Mothers Milk, has heard of nothing but absolute Power, and
been harangu'd with no Schemes, but those of Ambition, will not lessen his
Authority in taking other Peoples Measures, when he is fixed in his Throne, and
has it in his Power to follow the Dictates of his own Will.

Article XIX.
His Majesty gives all his Ministers and Officers, the Power, Authority and
Faculty, that is necessary toward a due Exercise of their respective Offices,
during the Minority of his Successor, provided they do first take the Oath of
Fidelity to him.

Answer.
And what signifies the Power and Authority which is given 'em? They have no
Minor to deal with, their King is above 14 Years Old, and a Successor of that
Age, as the Will has given us to understand in one of the Precedent Articles,
is declared to be in a State of Majority.

Article XX.
The Tutors abovesaid shall Administer the Affairs all together, and not one by
one; and for that purpose, shall Assemble every Day, in an Apartment of the
Palace, which the Queen shall assign, the Secretary of the Universal Dispatches
being present to make the Relations, and assist in the same manner as he did
did, during the Kings Life.

Answer.
If they are to consult of public affairs altogether; and the Queen as Supreme
Regent has Authority to appoint, how comes it to pass, that public Business is
concerted without her Majesty's Consent, That Letters of Thanks are sent
without her Hand and Signet to 'em; and that Embassies are ordered without her
previous Approbation? For the very Letters from Paris agree, That the Queen
Swoonded, at the News of the Duke of Anjou's being Declared King, and not one
Instance has been given of her acting any ways since Her Royal Husband's Death,
then by sending Letters to some Princes to give her the News of it.

Article XXI.
All the Matters of Consultation, that are to be laid before the Councils to be
Communicated first to the Secretaries Office of the Universal Dispatches,
afterward opened to the Juncto, and the Secretary of the Dispatches is to
appoint the Resolution.

Answer.
This is a Piece of Formality, not much Intelligible to Men of our Nation, who
are as quick in dispatch of Business, as the Spaniards are wanting in
Expedition, among whom, if you were but to ask where a Grandee was, you must go
through as many Hands before you will be out of your Pain of Enquiry, as one of our
Foot Guards does in running the Gauntlet.

Article XXII.
In the Dispatches which the King is used to Sign, as well with his Royal Hand,
as with his Signet, the Queen shall Sign in the same place the King did; and
the Tutors shall Sign lower, to the Number of Four at least; and in the Affairs
of Aragon, the Regent of that Kingdom shall always Sign.

Answer.
It Is to be supposed Her Majesty will scarce tire her self in Signing
Dispatches, which are concerted against the Interest of the Imperial Family, or
that she will be prevailed with, by the pretended Honor of Writing her Name in
the King's Place, to make use of it for the Benefit of those who are Enemies to
the Austrian Interest.

Article XXIII.
Every one of the Regents shall be permitted to propose, what he shall think
most convenient for the benefits of the Kingdom, and the plurality of Voices
shall decide it.

Answer.
Very good! but they must do what they intend for the Benefit of the Kingdom in
a very short time, or it may possibly be out of their Power. Their young Prince
is on his Journey to take the Staff out of their Hands; and he will probably have
People about him, that will Instruct him how to make his own Voice carry
Matters beyond their Plurality.

Article XXIV,
In case the voices should be found equally divided in the Juncto, either by
the Queen's absence, or some other accident, the President of the Council, to
whom the Matter then in Question shall belong to, shall be called for, or if
there be no President, the Dean of the same Council, or at least he that shall
be most Ancient after the Dean.

Answer.
If the Queen's absence will make the Voices equal, the President of the
Council etc. is likely to have the Casting Voice, at every Sitting of the
Juncto, before his Majesty's Arrival.

Article XXV.
Appoints the Morning for the time of meetting, and the manner how they are to
Assemble in Extraordinary Cases.

Answer.
The time is fixed, because their Lordships should know how many Hours they are
allowed, to put on their Short Coats, and Long Swords in.

Article XXVI.
His Majesty exhorts the Members of the Juncto to entertertain between them a
good Correspondence, necessary for the good of Affairs, and prays the Queen to
Animate them by her Example.

Answer.
This is better than all the rest, the Queen must set before 'em a Pattern of
Good Correspondence, when she is the only Member of the Juncto, that gives 'em
an Example, she can hold no such thing with Persons, who are against the Common
Security of Christendom.

Article XXVII.
The Successors presence, being very necessary for the Benefit of the Kingdom,
his Majesty Conjures him to repair thither with all possible diligence.

Answer.
They may take his Majesty's Word for it, he will answer his Pedecessor's desires
in this Point, how backward soever, he may prove in giving Ear to his other
Pious Exhortations: For in short, he is in as much have to be at Madrid, as the
poor Spaniards are to have him make his Public Entry, for the sake of the
Pieces, which his Grandfather has given him to scatter among 'em; and has got
forward on his Journey, as soon as he could fear another Relation of the
Deceased Kings, should have reached Spain before him.

Article XXVIII.
In case the Successor be of Age, the Juncto of the Regency shall render him an
account of their Administration, and the State of all Affairs immediately after
his Arrival.

Answer.
Then they may make up their Accounts, for he was Born in 1683 though it
signifies very little, since these worthy Patriots have done little more than
put their Heads together to Endite the Contents of what he already knows, or
they may rest satisfied his Majesty would not undergo a Forty-days Fatigue, to
pay 'em a Visit in answer to 'em,

Article XXIX.
And in case he be still a Minor, his Majesty 's Will and Commands that they
shall not omit to give him an account of Affairs that shall be Treated of in
the Juncto of the Regency proportionably to his Age, and the Capacity of his
Sense, as well to inform him by that means for the Government, as to render to
his Authority and Royal Dignity due Respect.

Answer.
Had his Majesty's Father left the same Orders behind him at his Decease, as
the Royal Testator has, in Relation to his Successor, it is all the World to
nothing, his Catholic Majestys defunct would have had such an insight into
Public Affairs, as to have consulted his Subjects Good by another Testament.

Article XXX.
In case the President or Governor of Castile, the Vice Chancellor, or
President of Aragon, the Archbishop of Toledo, and the Inquisitor General,
should happen to die immediately after his Majesty's Decease, or during the
Successor's Minority, their Places in the Juncto shall be Officiated by those
which the same Juncto have chosen for succeeding their Offices; and for what
belongs to the Grandee of Spain and the Councillor of State the Juncto may
choose in their place another Grandee, or another Councillor, in case those his
Majesty shall appoint should die; and that his said Majesty had not provided
for filling up their Places.

Answer.
The Articles still are contradictory in relation to the present Succession:
For what significe the Juncto, when at his Arrival, his Age Entiles him to the
management of Regal Affairs; and make what shall be done after it, without his
Approbation Null and Void? However the Catholic King did well to make the
Inquisitor General a Member of it, in order to keep his Successor in fear of
turning Heretic.

Article XXXI.
In their Sittings, they shall observe the Precedence, which His Majesty has
before given 'em in their Nomination; but if one of the Members of the Juncto
be a Cardinal, he shall have the first Place; and in respect to the Grandee and
the Councellor of State, they shall take the first or the last place, as they
shall come: In the manner of giving the Suffrages, the Form of the Juncto shall
be observed, and not that of the Council of State.

Answer.
This shows the Spaniard all over, who is a mighty stickler in Matters of
Precedence; but gives chiefly an insight into the knowledge of the worthy
Person that was Author of this last Will and Testament, if one of the Members
be a Cardinal, etc. (as Lord Porto Carero certainly is) is enough to Point him
out to us, and though he had no great kindness for his Country, any body may
perceive he has no small value for himself.

Article XXXII.
All the Tribunals of the Kingdom shall keep their Authority and manner of
Judging, and Administering of Justice after the Kings Defase as formerly.

Answer.
If the Courts of Judicature were to cease at his Majesty's Death, it might
have been said Justice had departed this Life, with the Catholic King; but the
Nation has so little of that Commodity to spare, that his Will-maker would not
suffer his Royal Master to carry any out of the World with him.

Article XXXIII.
His Majesty recommends to all Tribunals, Officers, of the Kingdom, to render
Justice to the People with Integrity, and to the Kings, his Successor, to make
no alteration in the said Tribunals and Offices, but rather observe punctually
and religiously the Castoms and Privileges of each of the Kingdoms, States,
and Towns of the Monarchy; and above all things, to admit none in the places of
the Government but such as are natural born Subjects of the Country; without
ever giving thereupon any Dispensation to any body.

Answer.
I dare lay my Life, what ever the young King does in respect of his Majesty's
Recommendation in the first part of this Article, he can never be so perfect a
Castilian, as to be punctual in the observance of what he enjoins him in the
last. The Word Natural Born, is hard to be complied with, and if this
Government is to be supported by the Politics of Versailes, without doubt some
of the Courtiers there, who are to be his Majesty's Instructors, are designed
to have some Preferment or other for their pains.

Article XXXIV.
His Majesty ordains, that immediately after his Decease, there shall be given
to the Queen all what has been granted her, either by Dowry, or otherways, and
as an addition the Sum of Four Hundred Thousand Ducats a Year for her
Maintenance, recommending expressly to his Successor, to put this Point in
Execution,

Answer.
Immediately after his Decease, was excellently put in for the Queen, and
without doubt the Cardinal had more than an ordinary fetch in wording it after
that manner. Its presumed he himself had received his before his Majesty's
decease of a certain Minister, and to secure the Queen for his Friend, in case
the French King should stand hard and fast (as he promised heartily by the
Partition) and his Nose should be out of Joint with the Archduke, for drawing
up a Will so directly opposite to his Interest, he is altogether for a prompt
Payment of her Majesty's Legacies and Dowry. But this might be the dying King's
one Sentiments for all that I know, he having had several Instances, in his
Reign, of the Dilatoriness of the French in performance of Articles, and being
perhaps not so well satisfied with his Successor as to believe, He would think
it advisable to part with so much Money very soon, when he was likely to meet
with some Disturbances before he got possession of his Throne.

Article XXXV.
His Majesty bequeaths, and gives to the Queen all the Jewels and Goods that
are in her possession, and are not inseparable from the Crown. He orders his
Subjects and Vassals, to show her a great deal of Respect and Love on all
Occasions, and affectionately recommends to the King, his Successor, to see
executed what is above mentioned; and if the said Queen, of her own accord and
Will should think fit to pass into Italy, to Govern any of the Kingdoms of that
Country, he shall grant her forthwith the Government thereof, and give her for
Councillors and Ministers of State, Persons of the greatest Consideration,
Experience and Wisdom: But if the said Queen should choose rather to reside in
any City of Spain, she shall have Liberty of Choice, and the Government of that
City, with that of the Territories and Jurisdiction belonging thereto, shall be
given her.

Answer.
More Sugar Plumbs yet for the Queen! This looks as if the Contriver of the
Will was afraid that Philip the 5th would plunder his Royal Mistress, and
strip her of the Jewels her Husband had given her, and therefore confirms the
Right of Possessing her own Goods to her Sacred Majesty. But what is chiefly
worth Notice is, the Grant which is made her of being constituted Regent or
Governess of any Kingdom or City in Italy, if her Majesty thinks fit to remove
from her Residence in Madrid, which its hardly thought the King of France will
suffer his Granson to comply with; because if her Majesty should demand the
Regency of Naples or Sicily, she has no such unkindness for her Sister, as to
keep out the Emperor her Husband, from his Pretensions to it as a Fief of the
Empire. Her Majesty may take this as a Sweetner, and she may expect her Court
in Naples, when the great Sums that are left her are paid, which are not likely
to be, unless the most Christian King makes a tender of his Purse, and offers
the paying her Majesty for some private Consideration, as he lately did to wipe
off the Mortgages of the Dutch upon the Towns in Flanders.

Article XXXVI.
If the King that succeeds his Majesty be Minor, his Majesty Wills and Ordains
that he shall be served by the same Officers of his Household that are at
present in place, without making any Alteration therein; and if he be Major, he
recommends to him to have some regard to the services of the said Officers and
Servants, and to continue them in their Employ during their Life.

Article XXXVII.
The Officers and Servants of the Household, as also those of the Queen, the
King's Spouse, and of the late Illustrious Queen Mother, shall be continued in
their Places, Honors, and Emoluments during their Life.

Answer.
36 and 37. The Cardinal's Head was certainly running upon his Love's de Or's,
when he hammered out these two contradictory Articles. The first makes his
Majesty lay his positive Commands on his Successer, if in his Minority, and
requests him by way of Letters of Recommendation, provided he is out of it, to
make use of the Officers and Servants his Majesty left behind him after his
decease. But the last enjoins him to keep 'em during life, whether the Heir to
his Crowns be Major or Minor. How the provisional Command or Request, can be
reconciled to the positive Injunction, its not in my Power to determine, unless
his Eminence meant himself to be continued in his Post during life by the last,
and the Queen Regent, and those who were not in the French Interest to be
durante been placito by the first.

Article XXXVIII.
The Guards du Corpse being instituted to serve the Person of the actual King,
and not another, his Majesty commands the said Guards to quit the Guard-House
of the Palace immediately after his Death, without disbanding nevertheless,
but to continue in a Body, in order to serve the King, his Successor, and the
Government, as he shall be pleased to ordain.

Answer.
As for the Institution of the Guard du Corpse, I know very little of the
matter, but I am satisfied that this is as trivial an Article, and as
unbecoming the Spanish Gravity, as ever proceeded from Don's mouth.

Article XXXIX
But the Spanish and German Guards shall continue their Service at the Palace
as hitherto, as well for the Honor of the Crown, as for the Service of the
Queen, his Majesty's most dear and well beloved Spouse.

Answer.
A pretty Compliment to the German Nation, to have the same favor done 'em, as
the Spaniards themselves, after he had slighted 'em as to their just
Pretensions to his Dominions.

Article XL.
The late King Phillip the 4th. having added, and annexed to the Crown the
Golden-flower-de-Luce,, the Lignmum Crucis, and abundance of other Relics
which came from the Emperor Charles the 5th. and are to be found in the
Reliquary of the Chaple Royal, his Majesty conforms with this Disposition, and
confirms it.

Answer.
And if his Majesty should add to his Royal Predecessors's Gifts the multitude
of Relics he died wrapped up with, what would the Crown be the better for 'em?

Article XLI.
And whereas the same King Philip the fourth has also added, and annexed to the
Crown several Jewels, Pictures, movables and Rarities, which are in the Royal
Palace at Madrid, his Majesty declares them a fresh, Goods of the Crown, and
recommends the payment of the Creditors that furnished him with 'em.

Answer.
Jewels, Pictures, and other rich Movables, are something indeed, in
comparison of the Lignum Crucis, which if it were alienated from the Crown,
would have as little effect upon the Subject, as it had upon the King.

Article XLII.
His Majesty likewise adds, and annexes to the Crown for ever, all the Houses
and Palaces he possesses, as well at Madrid, as any where else, with all the
Jewels, Pictures and Movables that are there, ordering that for that end exact
Inventories he made thereof.

Answer.
Methinks the Spanish Gravity suffers very much by such needless Repetitions,
and when his Eminency's hand was in, he might have left all that belonged to
the King by his own Acquisition, and what had been Annexed to the Crown by his
Ancestors in one Article. But the Will must appear like something done in
Concert with the Council of State, and is Spun out into a Multitude of Articles
on purpose to amuse the Public.

Article XLIII.
The late King Philip the 4th. having left to his Majesty, and the Kings, his
Successors, a holy Cross, which is to be found in the Wardrobe, his Majesty
leaves it likewise to his Successor, and the Kings that shall succeed him.

Answer.
I question not, but as the Goods in the Wardrobe were bequeathed to the
Successor, the Young King would have taken Possession of the Holy Cross, which
was among 'em; I wonder he did not bestow an Article upon every particular
piece of Furniture, that we might have seen what Goods his Majesty had, and
know the Temptation of Lewis the 14th to break through the Bonds of the Partition.

Article XLIV.
His Majesty having always had a particular esteem for rendering Justice to all
his Subjects and Vassals, and wronging no Body, he persists in the same
Sentiment, and ordains that for that end all his Debts shall be entirely paid,
and that Satisfaction shall be given to all Persons that shall have any thing
to pretend, by virtue of the Resolutions he has taken, oo the Dispositions he
has made.

Answer.
His Majesty for all that I know, might have always had a particular esteem for
Justice, but he had not always a Power to execute it, as appears by his Present
Testament. The Payment of Debts is inserted on Purpose that the Nation may be
beholding to the Most Christian King, for how his Successor can Discharge the
Debts to the Elector of Bavaria, and the Dutch, without French Love's d'Ors,
it is not in the Power of the Wisest Spaniard to Divine.

Article XLV.
His Majesty recommends to the King, his Successor, to avoid all superfluous
Expenses, to spare the People, and ease them of the Taxes and Impositions luid
on them, as soon as necessity will permit.

Answer.
What went before was an Order for the Payment of his Debts. and what
immediately follows it, is a Charge to his Successor, to ease his People of the
Taxes and Impositions. But how the former is to be obeyed, and the latter have
a due Observance paid to it, his Eminence I believe cannot tell. I am rather
apt to believe they must raise New Funds by fresh Taxes, or the Spaniards will
be as far from the Payment of their Old Debts as ever.

Article XLVI.
Is a recommandation to the succeeding Kings to love, cherish and henour their
Estates and Kingdoms, and particularly the Kingdom of Castille, as also to
honor and reward those of their other Subjects and Vassals, that shall deserve
it.

Answer.
The Cardinal without doubt, is a Castillian, because that Nation is
recommended in particular to his Majesty's Love, whether they deserve it or no,
when other States are not to be Loved Chrish'd, and Honored, but in case of
Merit.

Article XLVII.
And it being the true and proper Office of Royalty, to render Justice equally
to every Body, to be the Father of his Subjects and Vassals, the Support of
Widows, Orphans, and the Relief of the Poor and Miserable, his Majesty
recommands in particular all these points to the King, his Successor.

Answer.
The Office of a King, is certainly to be the Father of his Countries, etc. but
it is to be feared his late Majesty had not Power enough to execute it, and not
unlikely but some Foreign Maxims will persuade the Present King to Grasp at
more Authority than what consists with the Office of Royalty.

Article XLVIII.
His Majesty moreover advises and charges him to make much of his Vassals,
which are more remote as in the Indies, etc. and repose as much Confidence in
them, as in the very Castillians, it being the means to gain more and more
their Love and Fidelity.

Answer.
Here Is another Contradiction, first the Castilians were chefly to share his
Majesty's Affection, and now the Successor is enjoined to make as much of his
Subjects, which are under his Dominion at a greater distance. But Mexico and
Peru have a Mettle that grows in 'em, which can make one say and unsay all in a
Breath.

Article XLIX.
And whereas his Majesty has been constrained to exact from his Subjects and
Vassals, diverse extraordinary Impositions, and it having not been possible to
take them all off, his Majesty recommends expressly two things to his Successor,
the one to remit, as soon as possible, the burden of the said Taxes, the other
never to spend as much as a single Real of that Fund, either in Donatirns or
Liberality, considering it is the blood of the people and that recourse ought
to be had thereto, but in the last extremity.

Answer.
If Taxes are the Blood of a People there is nothing like a French Surgeon to
take it from 'em, and whether the Emperor pursues his Pretensions or no, it is
thought the Successor will not want being taught Evasions to keep 'em on the
same Bottom, but as for Donations or Acts of Liberality, which are not to be
bestowed out of that Fund, we may suppose the Cardinal has already Fingered his
reward, because he shuts up his Majesty's Exchequer against others.

Article L.
His Majesty Ordains and Enjoins, that conformable to the Laws of the Monarchy,
neither the King his Successor, nor those that shall come after him, shall ever
alinate any part of the Kingdoms and Countries, or divide, or share them upon
any account soever, not so much as to give Apenages to their own Children, but
on the contrary, as well the Kingdoms that are now annexed to the Crown, as
those that may fall thereto for the future, shall be continued united for ever
in an inseparable manner: His Majesty confirming for that purpose, the Law made
in the States of Valladolid in the Year 1442, by King John the 2d, and
afterward approved and confirmed by King Firdinand, Queen Isabella, his
Spouse, the Emperor Charles the 5th. Philip the 2d, Philip the 3d. and Philip
the 4th.

Answer.
The Dreadful Partition is still in his Eminency's Head, tho he has taken the
proper means to prevent it by the Nomination of a Prince of France, and here is
an injunction laid on the Successor not to Alienate or divide it, as if he was
sensible Phillip 5th would make a Compliment of some of his Dominions to his
Grandfather, for his great Condescension in not possessing himself of all.

Article LI.
His Majesty confirms certain Rights settled by the King, his Predecessors on
the Grandees and Nobility of the Kingdoms, and Countries of Spain.

Answer.
That is, his Majesty would have the Grandees assume the same Government over
his Successor, as he quietly suffered over himself. But French Princes are not
to be led by the Nose, which the Testament-maker may one Day find,
notwithstanding great Services.

Article LII.
And whereas the great Occupations of Peace and War, in which his Majesty found
himself exercised, obliged his Majesty to use Tolleration and Dissimulation in
this respect, he declares that the said Tolleration and Dissimulation cannot
have brought any Prescription, Alteration, or Prejudice to the Rights of the
Crown, and annuls, make void, and destroys all what might have been made
hitherto, tolerated, or dissembled against the said Right, which he maintains
in all their force and vigor.

Answer.
His Majesty on my Conscience, never troubled himself much with the great
Occupations of Peace or War, and as for Dissimulation that is for certain a
part of the Character of his Eminency Porto-Carero.

Article LIII.
His Majesty having never pretended that his Subjects should receive any damage
from the Woods and Forests he possesses in diverse parts of the Kingdom, his
Majesty ordains that Satisfaction be forthwith given, to all those that shall
have any thing to pretend upon that point.

Answer.
Satisfaction forthwith, implys an immediate Act of Justice, but the great Men
who are chief Rangers of these Woods and Forests, will scarce be in have to
redress those Grievances which occasion such considerable Additions to their
Power and Estates.

Article LIVE.
His Majesty provides for the continuation of the Edifices, and Embellishments
he had ordered to be made in diverse Palaces and Royal Houses, and orders that
all Sums shall be exactly paid that shall be due upon that account.

Answer.
Then the Cardinal, and his other Favorites, should not have exhausted his
Majesty's Treasury, and Disabled his Successor to go forward with 'em.

Article LV.
His Majesty will and recommends to the Executors of his Will, to pay all his
particular Debts, as soon, and in the best manner, that can be for the
Discharge of his Conscience.

Answer.
When Kings leave Debts, nether Executors nor Successor are uneasy, till they
are paid, and the Creditors are seldom the better for what Injunctions soever
are laid upon 'em to Discharge 'em.

Article LVI.
There being diverse Clauses of the same nature found repeated in the Wills of
his Majesty's Predecessors, which could not have been entirely executed
hitherto, and it being nevertheless just they should, his Majesty confirms them
all, recommending to his Successor to execute them.

Answer.
Here his Majesty is made to own, he has not paid the King's his Predecessors
Debts, which is enough to insinuate that if his Successor or Executors don't
clear his, they have an Example to vindicate himself by.

Article LVII.
His Majesty bequeaths and leaves to the King, his Successor, all the Goods
that shall be found to belong to him, having first discharged all the Debts and
Obligations above named.

Answer.
The King cannot leave his Goods twice to his Successor, that is certain; yet
the Cardinal has made him do it again, and again, and since they were not to be
alienated from the Crown, how comes it about, that this Article intimates his
Successor must pay his Debts first, or they should be Sold toward the
discharge of 'em?

Article LVIII.
His Majesty Names, for Executors of the present Testament; first the Queen,
his dear and well beloved Spouse, and afterward those, who at the time of his
decease shall be found to be in possession of the places of Sommelier du Corpse,
and if there be none; the eldest Gentleman of the Chamber until there be one,
the Mayor Dome Major and if there be none, the eldest Major Dome until there be
one. The Cavallerizo Mayor, or him that shall exercise that Office, the Almoner
Mayor, the Confessor, and him that shall succeed in that Employ. The President
or Governor of the Council of Castille, and if there be none, the Eldest
Councillor, till there be one. The Vice Chancellor of Arragon; and if there be
none, the eldest Councillor till there be one. The Inquisitor General, and if
there be none, the eldest of the Council of the Inquisition, until there be
one, The President of the Council of the Indies, and if there be none, the
eldest Councillor til there be one. And the Prior of the Covent of Saint
Laurent the Royal.

Answer.
Had his Majesty written his Will himself, he would scarce have made his Dear
Consort one of his Executors; since it could not be otherwise than an apparent
Violence to a Princess's Temper to be made an Executrix of a Will; or obliged
her Majesty to prefer a Foreign Prince before her own Blood.

Article LIX.
His Majesty wills and ordains that his present Testament shall be reputed good
and valid, and shall have the force of a Law, and as such shall be executed in
all points.

Madrid October 2d. 1700. Signed, I, the King.

Answer,
The Cardinal may make the King's Will, and Ordain what he pleases; but can
never give this Testament the force of a Law, without the consent of the States
of the several Kingdoms, however he has concluded it with I the King, when most
People conclude it should have been, I THE CARDINAL.

The CODICIL.
Article I.
HIS Majesty confirms in favor of the Queen the Contents of the 35th. Article
of the Testament; and for her greater satisfaction, orders that if she finds it
agreeable, to prefer the Government of the Law Countries before those of the
Kingdoms of Italy, she may go over thither, and recommends to his Successor, to
dispose thereof immediately in her Favor.

Answer.
The Queen has a rare Opportunity to be even with her Kinsman the Elector of
Bavaria, for his great Zeal in opposing the interest of his own Family, by her
acceptance of the Government of the Netherlands, and has in her Power, if the
King Elect pleases, to send him Back to Munich, to sit upon the Stool of
Repentance.

Article II.
The Building which has been begun by the King's Order in the Chaple Royal at
Madrid, for the greater Worship of the Holy Sacrament, shall be continued on
the same Plan and design, until it is perfected, all at the Expense of his
Successor.

Answer.
So perhaps it will, if his present Majesty finds a sufficient Sum bequeathed
him to maintain it; but he will have enough to do to reward his Electors, etc. so
that I believe the Building will not be perfected, till some time after his
arrival.

Article III.
His Majesty bequeaths to the Royal Convents of barefooted Franciscans of the
Incarnation, of the Augustine Recollects of St. Theresia, St. Ann, and the
barefooted Carmelites, a Jewel to each at the Queen's choice, to whom he
recommends the Execution of this Article.

Answer.
For certain her Majesty will pick out the best she can, that it may not fall
into the hands of the Successor. Nuns are great admirers of Precious Stones,
and will leave their Needle Work to handle things of that nature.

Article IV.
Item, his Majesty Ordains that the Convent of the barefooted Religious of the
Title of St. Joseph d'Avila, shall be incorporated into the Royal Patronage.

Answer.
That Is an Act of Charity indeed, they will scarce go barefooted again, and now
they are taken into the Protection of the Royal Patronage, they will certainly
have good Shoes to their Feet.

Article V.
His Majesty ordains and wills, that paying all his Debts, all the Queen's his
Spouses, shall also be paid, that shall be found to have been contracted, till
the day of the King's decease.

Answer.
'Twas a sign that St. Teresia was an excellent Protectress indeed, when she
suffered him all his Life, to be worsted by every petty Distemper; and if
Philip the 5th stands the Spaniard's Friend no faster than the Glorious
Teresia, the Emperor will certainly Seize upon Millan, and the Archduke be
Crowned at Madrid.

Article VI.
His Majesty having desired all his life time to put his Kingdom under the
Protection of the glorious St. Theresia of Jesus, for whom he had a particular
Devotion, he exhorts his Successor to accomplish that good desire.

Answer.
If it has no more force, than the Testament should lawfully have, he has just
done as much good to his Kingdoms, by signing I the King, as he did to himself
by relying on the Protection of St. Teresia.

Article VII.
It Is his Majesty will, that the present Codicil shall have as much force and
value, as if it were inserted word by word in the Testament it self.

Madrid, October 5. 1700. Signed, I, the King.

Answer.
But suppose the Young Prince, who now writes I the King, should not admit of
'em as such Councillers, what signifies his Majesty's Compliment of tacking 'em
to his Will?

The Substance of the Paper mentioned in the 15th Article of the Testament.

The King appoint^ as Members of the Juncto of the Regents, the Count de
Frigiliania, alias Aguilar, for the Council of State, and and the Count de
Bonavente Sommelier du Corpse on the behalf of the Grandees of Spain.

Madrid, October 2. 1700. Signed, I. the King.

FINIS.

