CONSIDERATIONS Touching the DISSOLVING OR TAKING AWAY The COURT of CHANCERY,
AND The Courts of Justice depending upon it, WITH A Vindication or Defense of
the Law from what is unjustly charged upon it, AND An Answer to certain
proposals made for the taking away, or alteration, of it.

Cicero pro Cluentio. Civitas sine Lege, ut corpus sine mente.

Leo Imp. in proaem. Constit. Novellarum. Sunt Leges tanquam Custodes vitae
nostrae.

London Printed by F. L. for Thomas Heath, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Covent Garden, 1653.

The Contents.
OF the Court of Chancery, Chap. 1. The great inconveniences which will happen
by the dissolving of it to the whole frame and body of the Laws and Justice of
this nation, chapter 2. Besides other sad effects and consequences will be brought
upon the people by it, chapter 3. That the Laws are not in themselves evil, but are
only abused by the people, chapter 4. That to put down or overturn the Chancery,
and so many Courts of Justice which depend upon it, will be so much against the
former customs and reasons of this or any other nation, as it is not to be
presidented, chapter 5. That the very being of Parliaments is preserved by the
Laws, and that so great a distemper and disturbance as will come by the taking
away of the Laws, will by a necessity of Justice, and better ordering of
affairs, bring them, by a revolution of time, back again into their old
channel, chapter 6. That the erecting of so many new Courts as are proposed, or
cutting and translating the great Courts at Westminster, into so many little
Courts and Jurisdictions, will, besides the beforementioned inconveniences,
not only be very prejudicial to the State, but to the people, chapter 7. And not
only raise up again those old grievances which were formerly the cause of
disusing, or restrayning, the Sheriffs Turns, County Courts, Court Barons, and
Hundred Courts, and suchlike petty Jurisdictions, but far exceed them, chapter 8.
That the annexing of a Jurisdiction or power of equity to every or many of such
new Courts, will much increase the peoples grievances, and turn that little Law
which shall be left, into a course of arbitrariness. chapter 9. That in the right
administration of Justice, there is a necessity of Lawyers, and men of skill
and experience, chapter 10.
CONSIDERATIONS Touching The Dissolving, OR Taking away, the COURT of CHANCERY.
THe Parliament that intends to bless and make the Nation happy, are to
consider what may best advance it.

In order to which, as they may claim the Prayers and obedience of those they
represent; So on the other side, the Peoples great concernment, in what shall
be acted or suffered by them, is entitled to a modest and well-ordered liberty
of address, and advices, not only in the general, but in particular also, to
the end that every part, how little soever, of the Body Politic, may be
either heard, or rightly understood, before any alteration or Sentence shall
go out against it; Especially when their Livelihood, Freehold, and
Posterities, are to be the present and immediate Sufferers in it.

For it could never be intended by the Laws, or Constitutions of this Nation,
or is indeed imaginable, that the Parliament can (like a Deity) see through, and
know all things at once, or beforehand, or judge of what can be objected or
said in any particular case or concernment, without hearing parties or defenses.

The Justice and reason whereof may be exemplified from God himself, who being
not only Omniscient, but Omnipotent, would not think it fit to condemn Adam,
until he had heard what he could say for himself.

Whence the Law of Nature, and Nations, the Civil, Canon, and Common Laws, and
all the Parliaments of this People and Nation, have not only made it their
Rule, but their Practice, to hear both parties, without which no Sentence or
Judgment can be said to be just or valid, (though the parties that did it
should intend it well, and give as just a Sentence as possibly they could)
according to that generally received Maxim amongst all Nations, Qui judicaverit
altera part inaudita, aequum licet, statuerit, injustus est. Upon which
consideration of Justice, and that most ancient and uninterrupted custom of
it, and the reason of all Nations and Men of Reason,

It is hoped, that the now Parliament (according to the ancient courses of
Parliaments, and those sage and successful Customs of those Sons of Liberty
the Romans; who, in the Rogation and promulgation of their Laws, did not only
hear, but demand what the People, and those that were to experiment the sweet
or sour of it, had to say against it) will give leave to those that have been
bred up, laid out their Fortunes, and spent a great part of their lives in
Chancery, and well understand it, to be heard, concerning the preservation of
what shall be good, or the taking away of any thing that shall appear to be
evil in it, before they shall proceed upon those Proposals, which have been
made unto them for the dissolving of that Court; And for the better
sanisfaction of that small part of the People, which tire the Supreme Authority
1
with their wild Proposals, to represent unto them what that Court is, which
that kind of People would have the Parliament to put down.

The great inconveniences which will happen by it, to the 2
whole frame and body of the Laws, and Justice of the Nation.

Besides other sad effects and Consequences will be 3
brought upon the People by it.

That the Laws are not in themselves evil, but are only 4
abused by the People.

That to put down, or overturn the Chancery, and so 5
many Courts of Justice which depend upon it, will be so much against the
former Customs and reasons of this, or any other Nation, as it is not to be
presidented.

That the very Being of Parlements is preserved by the 6
Laws; And that so great a distemper and disturbance, as will come by the
taking away of the Laws, will by a necessity of Justice, and better ordering of
affairs, bring them by a revolution of Time, back again into their old Chanel.

That the erecting of so many new Courts as are proposed, 7
or cutting the great Courts at Westminster, into so many little Courts and
Jurisdictions, will, besides the before mentioned inconveniences, not only be
very prejudicial to the State, but to the people.

And not only raise up again those old grievances, which 8
were formerly the cause of disusing or restraining the Sheriffs-Turns,
County-Courts, Court- Barons and Hundred-Courts, and such like petty
Jurisdictions, but far exceed them.

That the annexing of a jurisdiction or power of equity 9
to every or many of such new Courts will much increase the Peoples grievances,
and turn that little Law, which shall be left, into a course of arbitrarinesse.

CHAP. I. What that Court is, which they would have taken away.
THe Court of Chancery (not to trouble the Reader with what is more largely
declared by Crompton in his Jurisdictions of Courts, Sir Henry Spelman in his
Glossary, and Sir Edward Cook in the fourth part of his Institutes, and the
known benefits, which redound and come unto very many of the People by it (for
those that are restrained by it from their oppressions are not always
well-pleased with it) is the conscience of the Supreme Authority, to qualify
the severitie of the Laws, when they happen to be so in some particular cases,
without taking away those Laws, or breaking them, or opening a gap to Ten
Thousand men's inconveniences, to give relief to some one particular man, which
without those general remedies and applications of conscience, could not
otherwise be avoided; And as to the Law or Latin part of it, and granting out
of Writes Remedial, will appear to be a Court as ancient as the Reason or
Civilitie of the Nation; from which all the other Courts at Westminster Hall,
County-Courts, Sheriffs-Turns, Court-Leets, and Baron, and all other Courts
inferior, may truly be said to have their beginning; the Matrix, or Womb of
all our Fundamental Laws, either before or since Magna Charta, which had its
birth and being from it; A Court, where the Genius loci, and Salus populi, like
Nature in the Womb of the Creation, resides, to give out its ordinary
administrations of Justice for the good of the people, and is for that purpose
as the Soul to the Body, in the direction and subsistence of it; And the head,
to which all the Nerves and Sinews of it are joined; The repository (in the
absence of Parliaments) of Justice in all cases where the helps of Parliaments
were not necessary; The St. German de fundament. Leg. Angliae, cap. 7.
Custom of the Nation; The Officina Justitiae, the place or workhouse of
Justice; The original and Authority of all men's Assurances and Conveyances by
Fines and Recoveries; The Preserver of their Rights and Estates in them; The
primum mobile of all or most of our proceedings at Law; The principal
Secretary, Amanuensis, or Register of the Supreme Authority, and which bears
Record unto it; The place, whither the Petitions in Parliament, that could not
be dispatched, were usually referred; The Fountain and Chanel, by which
Justice, Reason, and Equity, was upon any of the peoples necessities or
complaints conveyed unto them, and the Magazine, storehouse, and dispensatory
of all Writts remedial, and in which all the peoples rights, liberties, and
properties are so concentred, and incorporate, as they must either die or live
with it, and is, as says the last Parliament, no longer ago than in April,
1641. by a long usage and prescription grown to be, as it were, Lex Terrae, M.
Hides Argument before the Lords in Parliament, by Order of the House of Commons.
the dissolution whereof, must of necessity produce very many mischiefs and
inconveniences.

CHAP. II. The mischiefs and inconveniences which will happen to the whole
Frame and Body of the Laws, and Justice of the Nation, by the dissolution of it.
FOr it will not only take away the equitable and English part of it,
consisting of Bills, Answers, and Decrees (being a latter part of the business
of it) to examine Frauds, Combinations, Trusts, Secret uses, and the like, and
moderate, or take away the rigor of Laws, and rescue men out of the hands of
such as would oppress them, by putting extremities upon them; but the old and
most ancient part of it, consisting of writs of Habeas corpus, which no other
Court can grant in a vacation; For that the Chancery was always to be open, to
give remedies where it can to the people; The Sealing and Inrolling of Letters
Patents and Pardons; Inrolling of Treaties and Leagues with Foreign Princes and
States; Making or granting out Writs or Summons of Parliament, Edicts,
Proclamations, Charters, Protections, safe Conducts, or for Elections of
Knights of the Shire, Burgesses, Parliament men, and Coroners; Writs of
moderata misericordia where any were too much amerced, and of a reasonable part
of goods for Widows and Orphans; Patents for Sheriffs; Cercioraries to remove
Records and false Judgments in inferior Courts; Writs of Audita querela and
Scire Facias; Inrollments of Deeds betwixt party and party concerning their
lands, estates or purchases; Taking recognisances, and making out of extents
upon Statutes and recognisances for payment of moneys, or securing of
Contracts; Writs remedial or magisterial, Commissions of appeal, Oyer and
Terminer, for the Peace, and many other things not here enumerated, tending
either to the well-being or conservation of Justice; And in a word almost all
the Justice of the Nation ( Parliaments being properly pro arduis, and eminent
occasions, not determinable by any other Court.)

Make all the Decrees of Chancery and Injunctions granted against
unconscionable acts or proceedings at Common Law, when the said Court shall not
have any being to protect or maintain them, to be contemned; and the parties
put again to new vexations and troubles; increase and encourage desperate
swearings and perjuries, in the Intervals, betwixt the putting-down of the old
Court and erecting of a new.

Enervate, and put into a suspicion, all those very many judgments and
decrees, which have been founded upon the proceedings of it; as is demonstrable
enough in the Acts of the Courts of Star Chamber, Requests, and High
Commission, Courts of Honor, and Marches of Wales, and the North, upon their
dissolution.

Take away the prescription and birthright of all the freeborn people of
England to their Laws and customs; And by dissolving the Chancery, and so many
Courts of Law and reasonable Customs as depend upon it, Leaves them only some
Statute and penal Laws to support their Proprieties: For, as many of them as
they can get again, must be by a new grant, which those that have had right of
Common or Copyhold (being of a far less concernment,) and lost it, by pulling
down an old Tenement and building up a new, or taking a Lease of their Copyhold
estate, may guess how prejudicial it may be in greater matters.

Obstruct, and put to a stand all assurances, contracts and bargains, which are
every minute going and passing amongst the people.

May disturb, and prejudice many men in their estates and properties, as well
as Magistrates in their power and authority over them; And put them on to
jeaiousies, Scruples, and questionings of the present authority, when they
shall have none, of the Customs, of the old, which they took to be reasonable,
left to go along with them, or persuade to an obedience to it; And may be but
as the throwing down at once of an old Park pale, upon hopes that the Deer will
be persuaded to tarry in, upon an expectation of a new.

All the writs and Commissions made out and retornable in Chancery will be to
seek for a validity, as to their execution or retorn.

All the causes now depending, enough to take up (if they should lay aside the
work of beginning and emergencie of new causes) the unwearied skill,
endeavors, and time of the present Lords Commissioners and Mr. of the Rolls,
for seven years (who by former motions and proceedings are well acquainted with
the nature of many of them, and by that means may be more skillful in the way
of determining of them, than any Committee, which can be chosen) will then be
put to the decision of Strangers, or such as may be as long again in finishing
of them.

And if the heap of new causes should be undertaken by the same men at the same
time, may make such a stop, as may swell up the discontents of the people, to a
complaint, or breaking down the banks of any new erected Courts or Committees
for it.

The Court of Common Pleas betwixt party and party, which has its originals
and Commissions from it, will expire, for it cannot hold plea without it.

All that our former Laws, appointed to be done in certain prescript ways and
times, as the bringing of Formedons in discender or remainder; and all those
several sorts of remedial writs, in the Natura Brevium, and register (being
like so many several sorts of approved and experimented physics, and remedies
prepared, boxed, and laid-up by a long observation and experience for the
future, for the several diseases of men's estates, rights or liberties) will
become useless.

All the many necessary and wholesome powers, and business, which former
Parliaments have by their many Acts and Laws entrusted to the Chancery, will be
laid aside; and the people sent to look out new ways, or remedies, where they
can find them, and take-up that which their forefathers refused as
inconvenient, instead of that they formerly received so much benefit by.

Magna Charia, and its 30 times confirmation, which 17 E. 1, ca. 7. 25 E. 1.
Ca. 1, 2, 3, and 4.
was delivered with Curses and Anathemas to the Infringers, and commanded to be
read once a year in Churches, against which no law was to be made, upon the
penalty of being void, was got, and continued, with so much blood of our
Ancestors, and forbids the denial of justice to any should ask for it, gave the
Trials per Pares, and that none should be imprisoned or disseised, but by
original writs (then and ever since issuing out of Chancery) and due process
of Law; And the care taken formerly that Nullus recedat a Cancellaria sine
remedio, will be to no purpose when the Court is put down that should grant it.

The Wolf may eat the Lamb, when there shall be none to stretch out their hand
to deliver the oppressed. All that was good in that Court, and beneficial for
the people, (for certainly it being so ancient, and of so long a continuance,
could not be so unhappy, as to have no good thing, nor proceeding in it) will
be put under the same fate, as the bad, wherein it will be lost; unless by a
new constitution, or a particular enumeration of them in a new establishment,
(which will find store of difficulties) it shall happen to be revived, there
being a great difference betwixt what a Court has incorporated in it by a
custom, and what it must get and have by a new authority for, and may tend to
the greatest alteration in the administration of Justice that ever happened to
a Nation, and produce many other sad effects and consequences will follow upon
it.

CHAP. III. Other sad effects and consequences will follow upon it.
FOr above 2000 Families, whose livelihoods, labors, and fortunes, have been
laid out in the labor, and attendance of this so high and necessary a Court,
will, without some recompense or subsistence made or provided for them, be
utterly undone, and exposed to Beggary; the rather, for that they are not like
Husbandmen, or day- Laborers, that can fit themselves for common and servile
labors. Above 20000 Families of Townsmen and Citizens, in or near London,
(whose industry and maintenance depended much upon the residence, and study of
the Laws at London, (besides the Professors of the Law, and those many families
are maintained by it) will be either totally undone, or much impaired in their
estates, and livelihood; Many Thousands of Watermen, the strength and
subsistence of our Sea-affairs, and Thousands of Artificers, and other people
who live by Trading and traveling to London, will be ruined; and that City,
which by its Situation and Neighborhood to the Sea, the riches, skill, and
corresponcy of her Merchants, and a long fixed Trade and custom, is the fittest
of all this body Politic, to make a heart of; And was wont to be the Center
of the Laws, and Courts of Justice, whither all the people flocked for
Commerce, as well as Justice, will by the deprivation of them, be little better
than as a City two parts in three destroyed; or burnt: And be so put into a
continual lessening or decay, as the rents and profits of at least a dosen
neighboring Counties, whose provisions and commodities did, by their
neighborhood and trading thither, bear a higher price than in other remote
places, will be diminished, as much as a half, or one part in three, in their
Estates and manner of living, and disabled to pay, as they have done, public
Taxes or Assessments, when they shall be called for: And not only those, but
all the other Counties and Cities of England, as they shall nearer relate or
communicate to those Counties, be made the worse for it; But the smallest Towns
or Villages, or most remote parts of the Land, will quickly come to be woefully
sensible of the distemper or decay of such a principal and vital part of the
Nation; The ruin, or but disordering whereof, by the putting down of the Law
and Courts thereof, may prove to be a cause of many more, and greater
inconveniences, than if that great and general Manufacture or Trade of Clothing
should be prohibited; then the altering or turning the course of all the
Rivers, or known channels, or currents of waters, or the stopping or taking away
the Highwayes, and known roads of the Nation, could bring upon the People.

Whilst they that thus bespeak their own ruin, do not yet, perhaps, so fully
take into their consideration, as they may hereafter, when it shall be too
late, that the Chancery, and the Courts of Justice at Westminster, are as the
Asylum's or sanctuaries of all that are oppressed; the Protection of the
people, and (next under God, and the Supreme Authority) the most certain rules
of their liberties and properties. And that the liberties of the People do
reside, and have their Being in the Laws and Courts of Justice, as the vital
and animal spirits do in the blood; and that it is as impossible (as was not
long ago observed by a learned Judge of this Nation) to Lord St. John.
destroy the form of the Law, and preserve the body, as it is to take away the
form of a man, and to preserve his Being: For when the Law like the Body
natural shall dissolve or die, the Justice of the Nation, which is as the Soul
to that Body, must immediately take its flight and be gone.

Those that would procute the Vinyard to be destroyed, because they themselves
are shut out of it, do not consider, that there are more motions and business
in Chancery dispatched in one day, than a Committee of the late Parliament did
in a year, and more business in a year determined in that and the three other
Courts of Westminster, by themselves and their ministerial Offices, than all
the Committees of the late Parliament have dispatched in 12 years last past, or
would have been able to do after their usual pace in twice as many more, and
need not go far to be informed. What an obstruction and hindrance there must
then be to the people of this Nation, when these Courts and Offices shall be
taken away, and the People left to attend and Petition for some Months
together, before they can so much as get a Petition read, and Tire and Trouble
all the Friends they have, for that they might formerly for a far lesser Fee,
and in an ordinary course have obtained in half an hours space, as soon as it
was asked for.

Nor observe as they might; that the reason why the good intentions of many men
in those many several Committees (which the necessities of war did cause the
late Parliament to erect in this Nation) brought them so much into the hatred,
discontents, curses, and Complaints of the People, was (amongst other their
failings) their ignorance in the Laws of the Land, and of the old course of
expounding, taking-in, and giving out of reason, their immethodical
proceedings, and seeking sometimes to make a reason out of half a reason, or
that which was but a shadow or color of it, which with their many scruples
(which would not be made by more knowing men) their bidding the people so often
to withdraw, and advising with themselves, or referring it to their own Counsel
(which made many several hearings of that, which other men would have
dispatched presently) have been the cause of those outeries, pamphletings, and
Petitions have from most Counties and places been against them, and that the
horrid delays and small dispatch of those Committees (who, if there were
nothing else in it, must needs in so many different opinions, arguings, and
needless debates amongst themselves be a great deal more redious and
undispatching, than a fewer number of able men in a Court) were much of the
cause also of the peoples heavy complaints against the late Parliament.

And that the Chancery and Courts of Justice have not for many hundred years
past (put all the Complaints which have been made against them together) had so
many, and so universal Complaints made against them as have in the space of
these last Ten years been made against the late Committees, of which those that
have left their Hosanna to the Laws to cry Crucifige would be ill contented if
all the Trades in London should be at once put down, for that there are greater
abuses in them, Do not do as they would be done by, nor think what a drouth
and want of Justice there will be all over the Land, when the Springs thereof
shall be stopped-up, and what an increase of wants and necessities there will
be when the way of preferment, and provision for younger Children, shall in the
ruin of this great Tribe, and part of the people, be taken away? And what a
strange attempt it would be in Physic upon the body Natural, to go about to
divert the daily and constant Course of the blood from the heart, and put it
into a new way, or to make some other parts of the body to do the office of it.

Nor do those Proposers (who would take away their Neighbors wood to build an
Altar to sacrifise their own imaginations upon,) consider, as they ought, what
it is to remove the old Landmark, and enter upon the field of the Fatherless;
nor how great a burden of sin will lie upon their Souls in the day of Terror
and Account, for the unnecessary ruin of so many Thousand Families, as are now
living, and a general disturbance and distemper of a whole Nation, and their
posterity for the time to come, and all upon no greater a Score than their own
presumption, and incapacities to judge of Laws, and meddle where they had no
calling, either from God or Man, and when they stopped their ears like the
Adder, and might have been advised, but would not: or how much greater or
sadder a burden it will be to their consciences, if that which they shall now
fancy to be good, should prove hereafter to be a continual curse and thraldom
to a whole Nation, and a Succession of generations after them? That the taking
away from the people their Courts of Justice, and reasonable Customs, will not
only root out and overturn their properties, but cast it into an arbitrariness
of will and power; from which the best intentions and integrity of those, that
shall be in power at the present, will not be able to secure the people or
their posterity; And that this so great an alteration (though carried on with
never so good purposes) may meet with no better a success in the end, than that
unadvised and loving attempt of old Pelias Daughters in the Poets, who by
letting out of the old blood of their Father, to procure new, lost what they
might have kept, and gained no more than an impossibility to keep him alive,
whom they thought to have made young again.

And that when they shall have done all they can, or have obtained what they
would of the Parliament by such kind of proposals, it will be to as little
satisfaction to the people, as to take away (if they could) the Sun out of the
Firmament, and promise them another instead of it; or forbid all known
experimented Medicines and Courses in Physic, and tell them they shall have
better.

CHAP. IV That the Laws are not in themselves evil, but are only abused by the
People.
ALl which might be sufficient to call off those Tradesmen, who have no more
acquaintance with the Law, than what they got in some Suites were rightfully
adjudged against them, and some others, who are near Allied unto a busy
ignorance, from troubling the Supreme Authority with their so eager pursuit,
and persecution of those Laws, which in the beginning of the last Parliament
they took to be the Walls and Bulwarks of Parliaments, and could protest,
swear, covenant, take arms, expend and hazard their lives and estates for to
maintain. Or to persuade them not to hunt the Lamb instead of the Fox, or their
own happiness in stead of a grievance, nor to think their Time well spent in
Crying-down the Fundamental Laws of England, without which they once thought
they should be most miserable, if they were not hurried, or headlongly driven
on by a strange fury of their own Fancies, or presumptions, or an expectation
of setting-up themselves by the ruin and downfall of many Thousands, will be
losers to every one, will be gainers by it, or were not Acted by some
Jesuitical party, or influence, would disturb and destroy this Commonwealth.

To prevent which, and to do what we can as long as there is any hope left, we
shall entreat them by the Tears and Compassion of their already too much
impoverished, torn, and languishing Mother England, and the love they ought to
bear to their Brethren, and their own (if they will not be careful of other
men's) posterities, to stand a little, and look about them, before they drown us
and themselves in that Sea of misery and confusion, they are letting in upon
us; and either to read our Laws, or be informed by those that understand them,
and consider well beforehand, now they may help it, that which Truth and a sad
experience may hereafter tell them, when they cannot find a remedy for it; That
the Laws and Courts of Justice they world now over-turn, are those Laws and
Courts, which by a long-experience, and universal reason, and consent of our
Forefathers, have thorough many ages and generations, descended and come unto
us, as a common Birthright and Inheritance, will (if rightly examined, and
inspected) appear to be deduced from no worse original, or authority, than the
Decalogue, or Ten Commandments themselves, and the reason and equity of many
of those other Laws, which God himself in Mount Sinai commanded Moses to
declare unto the people, That the Law of England is Ipsissima ratio, right
reason it self.

From which, and the right use and practice thereof, if they that shall make it
their business to accuse our Laws and reasonable Customs, and Courses, of
Courts of Justice shall but abstruct and take (out of all the causless
complaints are made against it, which ought to be done by those will judge
aright of it) all that happens by the ignorance, or weakness of men, in
making of their Contracts and Assurances one with another; The cavils, and
strange subtilties, of those that would deceive, oppress, or take advantage by
it; The making of Wills and Conveyances by ignorant persons, unfit placing of
words in them, and want of coherence, or signification, (which do not seldom
beget contradictions, or perplexities of the sense or meaning of the parties)
their holding hard to advantages gotten; by a mistake of words or parties to
create a right, or title, where there should be none; Wresting of Laws to their
own purposes; Self-conceited, false or frivolous Suggestions, in their motions,
or desires to the Courts; Reiteration and succession of pretenses, and strange
allegations, not at first discernable by the Lawyers or Judges themselves;
Hasty, and wilful commencing of Suites upon small or no advice at all;
Ravelling and perplexing of their own Causes, Eluding, or striving to
overreach the Laws, or strain them beyond their intentions; Ignorance or
wilfulness in managing of their Causes, and the frowardness or unquietness of
their own spirits, in coursing one another, through all the Courts of Law at
Westminster Hall, by several Trials, and Verdicts, bringing writs of Error
upon them, out of the Common Pleas into the Upper Bench, thence to the
Exchequer Chamber, to be heard by all the Judges of England; Thence to the
Parliament, (though they pay great and several costs to their adversaries)
discontinuing of writs of Error, or abatement of them, by the death, or
instance of some of the parties, bringing their Bills, and Cross Bills in
Chancery, getting Orders upon Orders, Decrees upon Decrees, Rehearings,
Reviews, or Dismissions, Entitling the State afterward to what they sued or
vexed one another for; Appeals from the Country- Committees, to Haberdashers
Hall, from thence to the Committee of Indemnity, Thence to the Committee of
Obstructions, from thence to the Committee of Petitions for grievances, And
from thence to the Parliament again, and if they be rejected, or cannot be
heard in one Parliament, Try another, and another, and as many as they can live
to solicit; their multiplying of needless and frivolous Actions, obstinate,
and wilful endeavors, in trying all they can to overpower, or woorie their
Adversaries, never acquiescing in the Judgment of their own Lawiers or of any
Court, as long as any wit, or invention of any other Lawier (who cannot always
see through his Clients unjust pretenses) can but show them the way to further
vexations; The Necessity which lies upon Judges and Courts to keep Rules and
Orders, which may not be broken to help particular Cases; Miscarriage of Causes
by mispleadings, and Incertainties in the Plaintiffs or Defendants own Actions
or instructions; Their hiding or concealing truths, Their not agreeing or right
Stating of matters of fact, misapplications of good Laws and remedies to ill
purposes, deceit and delay of one another in references, weakness of
Arbitrators, and Awards, deceit or ignorance of Sollicitors (a race of people
was not allowed or heard of in the Law about 100 years ago, (but where
Noblemen had and retained them in their houses as menial servants) too many of
which of late have been broken, and busy Tradesmen, or such as scarcely know
the names of a book of law, or to spell, write, or read. Their champerty
maintenance and ambodextry (some knowing and honest Sollicitors excepted)
taking money before hand of their Clients, and never giving an Account for it,
mistakings or wilfulness of Juries, want of evidences, intricacy of causes,
Errors or misinterpretation as mistake the of Judges, Ignorance, malice or self
ends of those that speak ill of them, and the difficulties which sometimes do
lie upon the wisest and most honest of men in discerning between truth and
falsehood, and dividing betwixt them, and distinguish, as our Forefathers and
the wisdom of former ages used to do, betwixt the right use, and the abuse of
them, between particular mischiefs, and general inconveniences, betwixt the
Inconveniences which some one Law may sometimes bring upon a few particular
men, and the good it brings to one hundred thousand others at the same time,
and allow but (that which was never yet denied to all the Laws of the world)
an impossibility of foreseeing, preventing or remedying of all things which the
wickedness of the hearts of men, or their devices may lay in their way, there
will not be enough left to prove them to be corrupt in their foundations.

Take away and lay at the doors of those that ought to bear it, the selling or
mortgaging of lands Twice or Thrice over, the Counterfeiting and putting to the
Seals and hands of parties and witnesses, forgeries, and taking out, and
putting in of words into deeds or evidences, strange and unheard of
combinations, practices, Witchcrafts and Sorceries, putting of dead men's hands
to Wills, moulding, hiring of false witnesses, and Suborning or packing or
laying of Iuries (which are the Actions of the parties themselves to compass
and bring to pass their own wicked purposes, and not of the Lawiers.)

Let it be but considered, that if there happen in an age some unreconcilable
Suits, wherein some contentious spirits have for many years together, chased
and vexed one another out of one Action into another, almost to their utter
undoing, There have been in every year of those many years, many thousands of
causes (as may be demonstrated to any that will call for a proof of it)
dispatched and put to an end by the Courts of Law at Westninster, or in the
Circuits, and that a multitude of People Actions and businesses more than
formerly, in a Time of more Deceit, Falsehood, Perjuries, Secret and cunning
combinations, and breaches of Trust, than ever were, may make an increase and
multiplicity of Suits, and yet the Lawiers, who in an age have not a common
Barretor amongst them, be as innocent as the Physicians, who are not accused
for much practice in a time of Pestilence, or when there are store of
Epidemical diseases, there will be no cause to say that the Law is endless.

Let it be but considered, that the greater part of established Fees in the
Courts of justice, are less than what the most common Artificers do take for
their labor, and as for any which exceed that rate, are but that which was
allowed one Hundred years ago, when the rate and price of Cloths and Victuals
was not one in three so much as it is now; that the Attorneys 3 s. 4 d. fee,
and the Lawiers 10 s. fee, would then have bought 3 times more than what may be
now for it.

That the Gentry have since raised their rents two parts in Three, the Farmers
the price of their Corn and Cattle, and the Citizens their Commodities, and
servants and workmen raised their wages, yet the Lawiers except some eminent
and great practisers, who take but the Free will offering of those that give
them the greater Fees, to take the greater care of their business, have but
the same Fees were formerly taken by them.

That the Lawiers who had no worse a name auntiently given to their profession
by the most Civilized Nations of Europe, than Sacerdotes justttiae, the
Ministers of Justice, and had so right an esteem in our former Parliaments, as
by several Acts of Parliament made upon several and successive necessities of
the People, in 2 Edward 3 cap. 2. 14. Edward 3 cap. 16. 34. Edward 3. cap. 1.
and 20. Richard 2. cap. 10. It was specially provided, that none but men
learned in the Law should be made Justices of Assize and Goal delivery, and
that there should be in every County men learned in the Law made Justices of
the peace; And in all their Actions either at home in their Counties, or at
London in the Terms, are known to be men of Godliness, Sobriety, and learning,
and compared with any other profession or part of the People, to have fewer men
of vice or ignominy amongst them than any other profession. Let it be but
considered that the Law (as it may be demonstrated, if an account were kept, as
some Physicians do of their consultations and Cures, or as the People of the
Bath do of some that are cured in every year) does in every year recover and
get in many Thousands of men debts redress their Injuries, preserve their
rights, secure their estates, rescue and take some Innocent men's lives and
estates out of the jaws of death or oppression, support the hand of Justice,
and is as eyes and ears unto it, puts her Judgment in the right way when it
was sometimes almost carried off, ormislead into a wrong, and has kept us and
our forefathers in a greater safety and certainty of it than Roman Legions
could have done, and Ten greatet Armies than we now bear the charge of.

That in the determination or adjudging of every Action or Suit in Law or
Equity, one of the parties is discontented, and one of them most commonly
faulty, or much mistaken in the grounds of that Contest (Actions of Debt or of
other natures, where the Plaintiff will not give time, and the Defendant only
stands out a Suit to gain it only excepted) and do all they can to lay the
fault upon the Law, when it should be charged upon themselves.

And that the difficulty in the case before Solomon betwixt the true Mother of
the Child, and the false, could not be charged upon any defects of the Hebrew
Laws, or the Professors thereof, but the wickedness and false pretenses of her
that had no right to it, and that every discontent and every Complaint is not
just because the party thinks it to be so; There will be as little cause to
say that the practice of the Law, as to the Law it self, or to the Lawiers, is
a grievance, or that they are worse than Ten Thousand Devils, as that Tenterden
Steeple is the cause of Goodwyne Sands: For most of the things complained of in
the Law (if impartially and knowingly examined) will appear to be neither from
the Law, or by the Law it Self, or of the Essence, Nature, or Intention of it,
but merely proceeding from the people, and their own misuse or abuse of them,
which being not evil in themselves, but commanding good things to be done, and
forbidding evil, are no more to be charged with the faults which the people
themselves Commit in abusing of them, than that great Luminary and comfort of
Mankind the Sun, can be said to be the cause of darkness, or ill influences,
because in his journey or execution of his Office he is sometimes orecharg'd
with Foggs, ill vapors, or exhalations from the Earth, which he would disperse
or carry away, or meets with so many Clouds, interpositions, and Shadows of the
Earth, Conjunctions of Planets, or Malevolent Aspects; than the necessary arts
of Physic and Surgery are to be blamed for the many Errors and mischiefs
are done by Montebanks, or confident and credulous women that have no skill in
them; than wine and women for the General abuses of them, or Religion and the
Sacred Scriptures, because the world has of late been troubled with so many
Heresies and Schisms, proceeding from the mis-interpretation of the one, and
practice of the other, and may the better be understood and believed to be thus
Innocent, when those that not long ago could run to Westminster, and cry for
justice against the Earl of Strafford, but for at most an endeavor to subvert
the Laws, and cried out they could have no Trading or subsistence, if his head
were not taken off, cannot now give us a reason why those very Laws, and the
Courts that administered them, should not now be as good as they were then.

Or why the Old Chancery and Court hands, which being made out of Saxon letters
or Characters before any Friars or Monks ever came into England, have through
so many generations come down to us, and given such a legibility, duration, and
continuance to all our records, as they may yet be plainly seen and read for 7
or 8 hundred years past, should be more inconvenient, Popish, and
Antichristian, than the Secretary, and other Mungrel and Scrible dashed hands
made out of the Roman and Italian, which will not as it begins to appear
already last 7 years together.

Or why the Lawiers may not use Abbreviations as well as the Doctors and
Apothecaries, or why Abbreviations should be bad and not allowable in Court or
Chancery hands or writing, as well as in the writings which Merchants have
daily occasion to use, in the Dutch, French, or Scottish Laws or writings: Or
why the Law should be bad because the Lawiers do use Terms of Art or short
expressions tending much to the ease of themselves, and the Court and Judges
that are to hear them are not denied to all other Arts and Sciences, but are to
Bricklayers and Carpenters, to Farriers who have their Terms of their own
making, as to cure the Mallender, Farses, Trunchions, Bards and Wanders in a
horse, and to heal a wound in the Lampas, and to the Seamen or Mariners who are
never found fault with for using the Terms of Starboard, and Larboard, Lee
shore, Misne-Mast, shrouds, bear up, Weather-gage, run so many glasses, and the
like strange words and notions are not to be understood by any but those that
have served long at the profession, and learned their Sea Grammar. Wherefore it
will be time to tell those that shall thus labor to take away from the Nation
their well-being by such their fond proposals, That the war to which they
contributed was not undertaken by the late Parliament to pull down the
fundamental Laws, but to preserve them, and that if the Articles or Public
Faith but once given by the Army to Enemies upon the surrender of Oxford and
other Garrisons were so precious and sacred to the late Parliament and Army, as
well as it is to this, as not in the least part to be violated, Those many
great protestations of the late Parliament and Army in very many of their
Declarations and Remonstrances (some whereof were ordered to be read in
Churches) and their Public Faith so many times reiterated and given, may
surely give a stop and denial to these Traders in Innovation, especially when
it shall be considered, that those Public Faiths and promises, were not made
or given to those that were Enemies and fought against them, as the other side
did in a jealousy, and distrust that they did not intend (as they promised, to
maintain those Laws, which they pretended to fight for; but to those that
believing them did adventure and engage all they had, and went all the way
along with them; and that if there were nothing else to be said for it, the
Parliament in their great and continual care of the People and Commonwealth
will not certainly suffer the Chancery and all the Courts of Justice which
depend upon it to be taken away, would be so much against the former Customs
and reason of this as well as other Nations, as it is not be precedented, but
will be contrary.

CHAP. V. That to put down or take away the Chancery, and so many Courts of
Justice which depend upon it, will be so much against the former Customs or
reason of or any other Nation, as it is not to be precedented.
TO what was done by the Athenians, who in all their Ostracismes, and popular
unquietness, could preserve their Laws and Courts of Justice. Or the Romans,
who in all their Changings and Tumblings from one government to another, in
their sending for new Laws to Athens, their complaints and dislike of
Magistrates.

Bloody proscriptions of the Sullan and Marian factions; Tribunitial powers,
Dictatorships, and revolving back again into Monarchy, could keep close to the
body of their Laws and Constitutions.

To what our Savior Christ did in his reformation, who when he brought the
glad Tidings of the Gospel into the world, took away the rigor and Ceremonial
part of Hist. Juris Civil. composit per Justinianum
the Law without destroying the moral. To the reformatiof the Civil Laws by
Justinian the Emperor, who having appointed Ten of the most eminent and worthy
of his Empire, (amongst which were Tribonianus and diverse learned professors
of the Laws,) to read over and peruse all the voluminous Laws in being, did
compile and make out of them his Pandects, and that body of the Civil Law which
has for above one Thousand years since inhabited and been esteemed amongst the
most Civilized Nations of Europe, as a great part of their Chronic. Jo. Eromton.
guide and reason;

Contrary to what our old King Alured or Alfred did about 800 years since, who
could in Parliament reform some of the Laws made by King Ethelbert above 200
years before, punish some Judges, and think ne ver the worse of the Laws, for
some abuse of them.

To what William the Comquerour did, who by granting Chronic. Leichfieldense,
and in 2 Edw. Confesso^, confirm. per Gulielm. Conquest.
the Saxons their old Laws (many of which are still amongst us) strengthened his
Conquests, and gave quiet entertainment to as many of his own edicts, and
Norman Customs, as were found to be reasonable.

To that of his Son Henry the first, Who could amend some of his Fathers and
predecessors Laws, without overturning all the rest.

To that of Henry of second, Who removed and alterd many things amiss in the
execution of Laws, but left that which was good and useful in them.

To what was done by Edward the first, Who finding all his Judges but Two, so
corrupt as they deserved punishments, did not banish all the Laws with them.

To what was done by Henry the eighth, Who in the regulation Reformationes
legum Ecclesiastic. and in Epist. H. 8. and E. 6.
of the Ecclesiastical Laws, appointed by Act of Parliament in 35 Hen. 8. to be
done by eight Clergymen, eight Canon, eight Civil, and eight Common Lawyers;
And by his most virtuous Son Edward the sixth delegated to that learned and
Godly Martyr Thomas Cramner Arch Bishop of Canterbury, Peter Martyr, and other
Divines, 2 Doctors of the Civil and Canon Laws, and two Common Lawiers, did
leave what was good to remain of it.

Contrary to what the States of Holland and the United Provinces did, who in
their imbittered detest of the Spanish government, could find it as necessary
as reasonable, to keep their Common Law, Burgundian and Batavian Cornel.
Neostad. in Epist. lib. de Successione feudi Juris script. Hollandiae.
customs, the Fewdal Laws of the Lombards, and as much of the Roman and Civil
Laws, as did not contradict their own, and therefore in the laying of the
foundation of their confederacy and government did in one of the Articles of
their solemn league made at Virecht in Anno 1579. bind one another to the
defense of their Laws and Statutes, a Majoribus accepta, and ordered the People
In Foedere Ultralect Anno 1579 Art. 2. and 21.
to be sworn unto them. To the Wisdom and proceedings of our forefathers in
Parliaments, who (if some of them had been foolish, could not for the Major
part in every Parliament been have destitute of wisdom; or if in one year,
meeting, time, age, or generation, cannot with the reputation of wisdom to any
that shall so judge of them, be thought to have been so to a continual
succession) did only correct, alter, and add, as there were necessities or
occasions, but left us our Laws and reasonable customs to preserve our estates
and properties.

Contrary to all the Petitions and pretenses of Grievances, that ever were
exhibited by any of the people before, or since the Conquest, to any King,
Parliament, great Council, or Assembly, for above one thousand years.

To what our Ancestors did in England, Who in the change of governments, and
succession of Kings, from the Saxons to the Danes, from them to the Normans,
thence to the Plantagenet line, from the right Heirs to the wrong, from the red
rose to the white, from the white to the red and white united in Henry the
seventh, from the Catholic religion to the Protestant, from that to the
Catholic, and from that back again to the Protestant from the English line to
the Scottish, did never find any cause to take away that Court, which they
found by so long and successive experiments to be the conservator of Justice.

Contrary to the National Covenant, which many have endeavored to prove to be
consistent with the Engagement; to what was done by the late Parliament in
their reformation of religion, wherein, though the Bishops and Book of Common
Prayer were put down and abolished (and that not at once) did not put down all
the Doctrine of the Church, or all the Discipline, or parts of it, nor shut up
the Church doors.

Contrary to the many Declarations vows and Imprecations of the late
Parliament. The many Declarations and Remonstrances of the Army. The Course
held in the late Conquests of Scotland and Ireland, who by enjoying their Laws
and Courts of Justice have yielded an easier submission to it. The Act of the
late Parliament in erection of this Commonwealth, which declared and promised
to the people that they would not alter, nor take away the fundamental Laws.
The Peoples purpose of their engagement upon it. The Act or order of Parliament
for the regulation of the Laws. The regulators Systeme, and the Nature of a
reformation or regulation. The late Act for taking away Fines in Chancery, and
many of the Petitions that of late have been against the Laws, which desired a
regulation, but not a total taking of them away.

CHAP. VI. That the very Being of Parliaments is preserved by the Laws, and
that so great a distemper and disturbance as will come upon the people by
putting down of the Laws, will by a necessity of Justice, and of the better
ordering of Affairs, bring them back again by a revolution of time into their
old Chanel.
WHich for so much of them as have their Principles from the Laws of Nature and
right reason, and the consent of them, or are founded and deduced from them,
are so interwoven and radicated in the very Being of Parliaments, so
inseparable from it, and so reciprocate to it, as that high Court of
Parliament, which is not by themselves intended to be any standing or ordinary
Court or Rule of Justice, cannot when it shall sit upon emergencies or matters
of greater consequence, be without it, no more than the people can in the
Intervals or absence of it, for that the Law of Nature, which God imprinted and
put into the Hearts of all Mankind, and that Law of reason, which binds
Creatures reasonable in this world, and with which by Reason they most plainly
perceive themselves to be bound, and so much of our Laws, which out of the Law
either of God, or Nature, or Reason, our Forefathers probably gathered and
conceived to be expedient (which the learned Hooker putting all together
calls the second Hooker 1 lib. Ecclesiastical Policy
Law eternal) are so in some sort immutable, as they cannot be taken away, or
repealed by any Act of Parliament whatsoever, but will retorn and grow up again
with the nature and reason of Mankind; for Laws of men, not contrary to the Law
of God, nor to the Law of reason, are to be observed in the Law of the Soul and
Doctor and Studient 4 Chap.
he that despises them resists God, and that which plain and necessary
reason binds men unto, will upon some inconvenience or necessity, at one time
or other, get it self in again, and obtain an allowance or ratification of
human Laws for it.

Which should advise a great inspection, and examination, into the nature,
cause, and effect of all our Laws, before a sentence of condemnation pass
against them, that so it may be clearly known, what, and how much of them have
their Being from the Law of God or Nature, right reason, or convenience, and a
value accordingly put upon them, that the Gold may not be cast away for the
dross, nor the Saint for his infirmity; That we may not be sent to seek after
in the rubbidg for that we might have kept, or laid by, or not seem to have
pullen down all the house, when some little part of it would have served the
turn, or to be such ill Husbands, as to cast away the materials might have
served for the new building, and is better or more substantial than any can be
gotten instead of it, of which opinion were all our former Parliaments, who
hitherto in their correcting and altering of Laws, could never be brought to
forsake any thing might be good, or fit to Sir Francis Bacon. Judge Hutton in
his argument against the ship money, and Lord Hobart in his Reports.
remain of them, and all our Forefathers, who in their greatest esteem and
reverence of Parliaments, did believe that an Act of Parliament it self,
enacting any thing against Common right, and right reason, would be void, and
of none effect; to what end then should these men solicit a Parliament, to
take away the matter of its own form and subsistence, and its Being or
coexistence with the Laws, or to take away that which is to be a rule of
justice to the people, when they cannot themselves intend it, or to lay by
those Laws which the wisdom of their Predecessors thought they had done the
people good service when they did procure them to be enacted, and those
reasonable customs which the people were wont to swear their Kings to observe,
when the late Parliament took it to be a good way for the preservation of the
Laws and Liberties of the people, that Sheriffs and Justices should be sworn to
the Remonstrance 15 December 1641. and 26 of May 1642.
due execution of the petition of right (m) Styled themselves the Conservatory
of Laws, took Arms for the maintenance thereof, and appealed to the people
touching that imputation (which they said was then laid upon them) that they
which represented all the Commons of England, and had so great a share in it,
should endeavor to take away the Laws, and run so great a hazard to make
themselves Slaves.

Wherefore, if the Parliament (to please these unquiet and proposing spirits,
and let them see what is to ask Stones instead of Bread, or Serpents instead of
Fishes) should give them the misery which they demand of them, and contribute
(which cannot be easily imagined) so much to their unruly desires, as to let
them fling off their old Laws, like an unusefull, or too long a worn garment;
It will be no hard matter without the help of Lilly, and his College of
Astrologers, to foresee (what, besides the many mischiefs and inconveniences
before recited, must be endured and gone through in the interim) and foretell
what will become of it; for suppose it to be done, and that we see the old man
put into his Cradle again, or Adam into his Apron of fig leaves, the event will
come up as close as a Conclusion to good Premises, that such young Committees
or new model Courts will in time creep into the method and manner of the old;
all that was reason in one case or cause will be made use of, and made a
precedent in another: The wiser and most able men will be followed, pleadings
and allegations will be by the Committee or Judges themselves ordered to be
with Certainties or Method; The Court or Committee will more willingly hear
those that can save them a labor, by speaking more short and pertinently, than
the parties themselves, and the parties themselves will rather desire men of
skill, and such as know the usage and orders of the Courts and Committees, to
speak for them, than to adventure to do it themselves, when their interest may
beget a passion and disturbance, and hinder them from the right managing and
ordering of their own business, abuses and misdoings of those that attend
those Courts or Committees will from time to time require new orders and
officers to prevent them. For in this, manner, in all probability, and without
doubt, those most venerable and useful Courts at Westminster came by degrees
and small beginnings, through the Course and care of so many ages to the
perfection is now to be seen in them, cannot be denied by those that shall
without the Spectacles of ignorance or partiallity, but equally and judiciously
look upon them.

But if any shall doubt of this necessity of the Laws falling again into their
own Chanel, after a Series or long course of inconveniences to the people, and
some ages spent in bewailing the loss of their former happiness; Let them see
but what has been done but in three or four years space in the Committee of
Sequestrations at Haberdashers Hall, who from a Committee of seven
Commissioners, with a Clark or Register to attend them, can now use the benefit
of a Bar to admit Lawiers and such as know the use of their Committee to plead
before them, order some things to be done by the Clarks and officers in an
ordinary Course, and other things not to order, and have the use of an
Examiner, Remembrancer, and Assistant, Counsel of the Court, can refer causes,
have an Auditor, an Attorney, or Solicitor General, mark, sign, and seal,
their orders or warrants whereby they may not be counterfeited, order men to
take Copies of their own Petitions, and leave the originals, to file affidavits
and reports, and that none shall be heard without bringing the last order, or a
Copy thereof under the Registers hands; Turn the way of Petitions as is now
lately done into a way of Motions, have under- Clarks in several distributions
of employment, Doorkeepers, Messengers or Sergeants, to commit and imprison men
for not obeying their orders; order and allow of Fees to be taken by their
Officers, appoint certain days and times for several sorts of business, and
have their vacations or intermissions, in which Committee or Court now a
breeding, although every man has a liberty of pleading or speaking in his own
cause, yet because he that was never there before, may hurt, or mischief, or
perplex his own business, or go a longer way about, for want of the knowledge
of the ways or courses there holden, or what is fit to be asked, or is usually,
or ordinarily granted, most men that have to do with them, are so unwilling to
be without the help of Lawiers, or those that can instruct them, as they make
use of Sollicitors, and those that are not Lawiers, to move and plead for them,
insomuch as little Mr. Kirk formerly a Clark of the Committee of the
imdempnity, and Captain Smith formerly a Tradesman, do constantly appear and
plead at that Bar in their black Caps, with great bundles of Breviars and
papers, as if they were grave professors and Sergeants at Law; So as it may be
ringhtly enough concluded, that until there shall be (which God forbid) a
prohibition against all reason, the Laws which are but right reason, cannot be
totally taken away, or if they shall receive a change from the old right way of
reason, to a new and round about way of it, there will be a necessity of making
use of them again for the people, and the reason that has heretofore guided
them, can no more be kept from the same paths they have troad in all this
while, or some other made very near, or like unto them, than they will be from
all manner of reasoning, or use of their natural Logic, though the art of
Logic should be forbidden to be used, or the use of medicines, though that
most necessary art and profession of Physic be banished out of this
Commonwealth, for which, they that shall thus propose the casting away of the
old Laws, and Rules of reason, will at the best get no more thanks of the Major
part of the people, than a Physician shall have of his patient, for putting him
out of a competency of health, into an absolute sickness, and leave him after
many years troublesome course of Physic, and diet, to find his way (if he can)
again into his former condition.

But lest these that thus trouble themselves to bring trouble upon a whole
Nation, as well as themselves, should so over- esteem that which they intend to
put in the room of our good old Laws, and Customs, as to think no loss or
ruin so great, but may be recompensed by what they offer instead of it; It
will not be amiss to examine by the rule of right reason, and what has
happened formerly, and what is like to come by such proposals (if they should
be granted) and how far those kind of new ways may amount to a happiness of
the Nation.

CHAP. VII. That the erecting of so many new Courts, as are proposed, or the
cutting and translating the great Courts at Westminster into so many little
Jurisdictions, will (besides the beforementioned Inconveniences) not only be
very prejudicial to the State, but to the people.
THe cantoning or cutting of the Courts at Westminster Hall into so many County
Courts, or parts (as some have proposed) will if there should be but a standing
Court in every County, (except London and Middlesex) make almost as many great
Courts in England and Wales (besides those carkases of Courts, which some are
content to leave at Westminster to determine Appeals, and other necessaries to
that contrivement) as there will be Counties, the yearly allowance or Salarie
of whose Judges, if they should have but two hundred pound per Annum for every
Judge, according to the number of Five in every County Court of Fifty, will
amount to 50000 l. per Annum more charges than the Commonwealth is at already
for Judges Salaries.

And when they shall be thus paid and furnished out, will (if Lawiers shall be
so much excluded from being Judges as has been proposed) be as to Four in
every Five of them, mere Strangers to the Laws of the Land, or know so little
of them, as not to be relied upon for their Judgments: For we cannot suppose
that the eleven Judges in the Courts at Westminster Hall are intended to be any
of them, or can be at one and the same time at Westminster, and in these new
County Courts, or serve, or be enough to make one, in every of these Fifty
County Courts, as some would contrive it, to sit with these new County Judges,
who having (as is to be feared) not read much of men, or books, will have no
ground or capacity for knowledge to grow in, nor any thing of parts or learning
to build up an ability withal, but be wilful, or obstinate in their ways or
opinions for want of better understanding, or domineering, because they shall
not be able to know when they do well or ill. And if they should be honest
(which perhaps will not always happen) their want of knowledge of the Laws,
and the rules they should go by; their not knowing how to understand what shall
be said to them, nor what answers to give; their inability to expound the Law
by other Laws, or make a right construction of the words or meaning of Deeds or
Parties, or to distinguish and divide betwixt truth and falsehood, right and
wrong, reason and pretenses of it, color or reality, or how to find the
difference betwixt the Cases or Evidences that shall be urged by the one side
or the other, or to state the matter of Fact, or to sever the point or material
part from the circumstances, will make them as fruitful in their oppression as
in their errors, and mistakes, apt to be led or mislead by their fellow Judges
that shall be Lawiers, or (which will be worse) to be like wax taking the
impression of every man's Seal that shall be last clapped upon them; be directed
by a Wife, or Clerk, or some other simple or knavish favorite, that shall
broak and trade in every cause that shall come before them, and be sure to
abuse it.

Trouble and delay the people with needless scruples and niceties, by making
Quaeries or doubts of that, which to others would be common and easy, and
stumbling at every word that comes not up to their apprehensions, give
advantage to knaves, and put men to seek indirect Courses or ways to balance
the Judges, because they dare not trust them to do that which they ought to do;
hurt rather, than help such as shall be innocent and oppressed, or are not
allowed. Counsel to plead for them, make them be ready to allow of all the
reasons given by the Plaintiffs Counsel, and as ready to approve of that which
the Counsel for the Defendant shall urge against it, and for want of knowledge
to guide them in their Judgments, to be uncertain, and instable, making an
order one day at the instigation of the Plaintiff, and another the next day
quite contrary to it at the request of the Defendant, be like Feathers blown
with every wind of Doctrine, and like Bowls run only according to the Byas
shall be put upon them; one will like the Mole in the Fable, think himself the
most clear sighted of all his fellows, another help to mislead himself, and
others by endeavoring to make men believe that which he speaks is from Christ
Jesus, when he never spoke with him, or knows how to expound his written word;
another will have a fancy of the Spirit or think himself guifted, when he
himself would not trust the most guifted Tradesman to settle a Daughters
jointure, or make his Conveyance, and when they shall have nothing of learning
or Law to make use of but their own will and weak apprehensions, will make such
kind of Justice as will be had from them more arbitrary than that of a Tyrant,
whose will and purpose of governing without Laws when he knows them, cannot be
so lasting and dangerous as the will of those men of ignorance, which shall be
only guided by the necessity of an invincible ignorance, and may prove to be a
greater oppression to the people, than it those that shall be thus made to be
corrupt, or to do like unrighteous Judges had been knowingly wicked, for that
the one sort does commit numberless errors by not knowing them, and the other
committs but a few, because they dare not adventure to do it often. Whereas the
old constitutions and course of the Laws of England (as ill as the proposers
think of them) knew how to serve the people better, by making choice of such
men for Judges, as by Seven years study in an Innes of Court, or College of
Law had come to the degree of Barresters, And from thence after a great number
of years practice, and continuance of Study to be Readers of the Law to the
Innes of Court, whereof they were, after that Sergeants at Law, and after that
for their eminency of parts and honesty to be Judges, where by a continual
Study, observation, and practice of the Law from their age of 16 or 17. until
they came to be (as it most commonly happens before they come to be Judges)
above Threescore years of age, they became to be great Masters of reason, and
so fully experimented in the whole body of the Law, and Customs of the Nation,
as by their knowledge therein, and of the Civil and Cannon Laws which border
upon them, and so many Cases and experiments as had in all that time passed
through the course of their Studies, and practice, as they were honorable in
the gates of their people, and appeared completely able to contradict or
rectify Hundreds of other Lawiers that moved or pleaded before them, and not
only to advise the Supreme Authority, when they were called to it, concerning
the making or executing of Laws, but to apply fit remedies to every man's action
or grievance that came before them, and had all their life after no other Trade
or profession to divert or call off their thoughts from a continual Study of
the Law, and right administration of justice.

But if it shall be said, that all that Catalogue of evils will be prevented
by a careful choice, or election of such as shall be made Judges, out of the
best, or most knowing of the people, that will but, little amend the matter,
when the Lawiers, all but such as shall be chosen to make one of the five in
every County (who as to the Administration of Justice are the best and most
knowing of the people) shall be laid aside, and forbid to be chosen, for there
must needs be a strange election, when blind men shall be employed to buy
pictures, or the Boys in every parish to choose their School-mamasters. And if
there could be any election without the guide or direction of a party or
faction, it will not be uneasy to guess, whether the Self conceited, well
known, little wisdom of the multitude does most commonly carry them, or to
believe that the knowledge of the Law, in one of every 5 of those County
Judges, when 4 or the Major part of them shall be at liberty to be ignorant,
will as little help the business, as Alexander the Copper-Smith, and Demetrius
the Silver Smith did Paul in the preaching of the Gospel, or if it should
happen that one of every five of those Judges of the County Courts being a
Lawyer (though it may by, they may be such as have have only the name or Title
of it, or for want of practice have lost, or are to seek what they have read of
it) should be so much relied upon for their judgments, as to be able to guide
and govern the rest which are no Lawiers, To what end should the Commonwealth
be at the charge of such Ciphers, or those Ciphers should only sit to receive
or take such Figures, as the Suitors or people shall add unto them? The Lawier-
Judges, if they chance to be as wise as Ulysses, will be but set to plow with
such kind of Cattle as he did; and therefore it was not unwisely said to King
James by the Conde de Gondomar that grand Spanish politician, who when he had
demanded of him, what was the reason he had put the Lord Chancellor Bacon, who
was so eminent a wise man out of his place, and left in the Chancery Sir Julius
Caesar, who by his ignorance committed many more errors, and the King had
answered him, that the Parliament advised and importuned him to put him out,
because he was a knave (though in truth it was only some of his corrupt
servants had abused him) replied, that they had a Proverb or saying in Spain,
that it was better to have a Thief in a Vinyard, than an Ass, for that the one
took but what he stole without spoiling the Vinyard, but the other trod down
and spoiled all before him.

Which may come to be sadly enough experimented in our own cases, when the
liberties and properties of the people shall be lost, and made uncertain by
those that should take a care of them; when those that shall be as the Watchmen
of Israel, and neither slumber nor sleep, shall have neither eyes to see, nor
ears to hear, neither understand their Office, or know how to execute it,
wherein it is not the well meaning of those that shall undertake so weighty a
business, will be able to protect them from the great sin of presumption,
which they shall incur by taking a charge upon them they could not perform, nor
secure the people from the damage and losses they shall sustain by them, when
time and authority shall beget in them a power, and that power like a
Loadstone, draw in and allure factions and parties, and those factions and
parties busy themselves in misleading their good intentions, out of the narrow
and seldom trodden path of Righteousness, into the great road of partiallity
and oppression.

From whom if there should be no appeals, or seeking further for Justice, it
would not only be contrary to what was counseled by Jethro, ordained by God
himself, and practiced by Moses in bringing the most difficult causes, or those
that could not be determined in the smaller Courts, to the Judgment of higher
Courts, or the Supreme authority, but to all other Laws and governments of the
world whatsoever, and make every one of those new little Courts to be too much
independent.

Or if there should be an allowance of appeals, make as many, if there should
be but a hundred in a year, from every one of those new County Courts (which is
like to be the least at the lowest computation) for if there were no real
grievances, many will as they did, and do still use to do in the the Civil
Law, Appeal to win time, or shelter themselves from the extremity of an
adversary) as may amount to 5000 in every year, and every of those appeals
bring to the people so many second hearings, and a double expense of time and
money, from which also, if there should be any Law made to obstruct or hinder
them, by some mulct or sum of money, ordered to be paid or deposited upon the
bringing of every appeal, so as few shall have the mind or ability to go
through with it, that will but raise the discontent and cry of the people
higher, when they shall find themselves sent on an errand, to receive Law or
Justice from those that understand it not, and for want of understanding in
their Judges, be cast either into a greater controversy, or an appeal to
complain of a grievance, and when they think they should have better Justice,
must not have it, because they cannot be at the price or hazard is put upon it:
Or if the Judges should be fined, as some would have it, for their errors
(though by the Law as long ago as King Edgar, a In ll Edgari cap. 1 and in
Guliel. 1 cap. 15
Judge was not to be fined, if he would make oath, that he did as well as he
could, or that he did it only by error or mistake, and not of Malice, or by
corruption) they that have any wit or estate, will rather quit their places to
such as have neither of them, then take upon them, or continue such a place of
continual hazard and unquiet, and then the matter will be fairly mended, and
besides, there will be no small difficulty at any time to assign or fasten the
errors upon the Judges, who it may be for want of skill were mislead by the
Plaintiffs or Defendants themselves, or had not the matter or fact clearly
stated before them, and then there will be no reason to lay the fault upon the
Judges, when they did as well as they could, and they might have chosen wiser.

Such new County Courts will beget in every Province several Laws and
Jurisdictions or power (for as long as there shall be inequality of riches or
places (which ever was and ever ought to be) there will be powers, and
authorities over-awing one another) one power will grow greater than another,
and perhaps too powerful for the other parts of the Government, and commit all
manner of injustice and oppression.

The Justice of the Nation, which next to the Military and protection part of
it, is and ought to be the greatest care of the Supreme power, and is so much
the more Superior to the other, as it is the end of it, and not only helps to
put the Sword again into the Scabbard, when it is drawn, but very much conduces
to keep it from coming out again, and is in the ordinary execution thereof at
this time trusted out into less than twelve hands in the ordinary Courts of
Law at Westminster, will by these proposals upon very small security be trusted
and put into the hands of Two Hundred and Fifty men more, who will want that
wisdom as well as estates, which the other have to make them responsal; whereby
the Supreme power of the Nation, may by its being too much divided and diffused
into such lesser bodies, come to want that strength and intireness it has
formerly had and enjoyed in the several succession of Kings for almost One
Thousand years together, by keeping their residence in the chief City or part
of the Nation, As David and the Kings of Juda did at Jerusalem, and as all
other Kings and Estates do in other Nations, with their chief Courts of Justice
about them, where the pulse, contents and discontents of the People, from all
parts of the body Politicque may be felt, whither all their Complaints or
principal business might Circulate and come, and pass to and fro, like the
blood from all parts of the Body, to the Heart, and from thence back again to
all parts of the Body, and whither the Common sense did from time to time bring
in its Intelligence to the great Counsel which was holden in the Brayn for
preservation of the Heart as well as every part of the body.

They that heretofore could with one expense and charges prosecute a suit at
Law at Westminster, and at the same time attend the Parliament, or their
Committees, the Council of State, the Exchequer or Committee of revenue, and
the motions and designs of their adversaries, who it may be had bills in
Chancery, or actions in some other Court of Westminster depending against them
at the same time, and do many other businesses whilst they remained there, meet
and confer with Friends, or Foreiners, or people of all parts of the Nation,
could make bargains, and dispose of Children, and have the help or assistance
in their Suits at Law of the ablest and most eminent Lawiers in their several
Innes of Court or Stations, must now perhaps go to the Shire Town as a
Plaintiff or Defendant at Law, and to London for his other business, and be
content with such Lawiers only in his own Country as are there resident, when
it may be there are none eminent, or very able, to be had there, or be enforced
to procure such as are to come at great rates, one hundred or Two hundred miles
at a time, from the places where they inhabit, and that Country and many a more
distressed Client want them in the mean time.

Such a multitude of Courts will throw many men, especially such as have great
dealing and multitude of business with men of many Counties, into so many
journeys and perplexities, as they shall never be at leisure from attending one
Court or other, whereas now one man that has occasion to prosecute Actions of
debt against one Hundred Debtors living in 20 Counties, dispersed over the
whole Nation, does his business without Traveling or sending any further than
to London, Streightens and gives men no time to provide their evidence or
Witnesses, and puts the Lawiers as well as their Clients by so much attendance
at so many several Courts into a continual attendance or Traveling from one
Shire to another, and will not a little distract men's affairs, to have an
Action at one and the same time to be tried or called upon at London, Cornwall,
Barwick, and Pembroke Shire, where they should be personally at every one of
them, and can be but at one, and must be in a continual unquietness and
trouble, when all the year shall be as a continual Term, or time of
controversy, and when they shall be enforced to neglect their affairs of
Husbandry and Harvest, to travel and tire themselves through all the lines of
the Circumference, when they might have a shorter way to and from the Center,
which by the intermission of Terms and Vacations, and the known and convenient
times of Assizes, when the Terms were ended, was by the Laws now in being
sufficiently prevented.

But these are not like to be all the inconveniences neither, for if the Courts
of Westminster shall besides the Two and Fifty County Courts to be taken out of
them be cut into lesser pieces, by giving cognizance of pleas, of Actions, of
Trespass, Battery, and the like, and of Actions of debt under 40 shillings as
some would have it, there will then be as many smaller Courts as will make us
up above 2600 Courts, the Judges whereof will look to be paid as well as the
Judges of the other Courts for the neglect of their own business, to take care
of other men's, and if they should have but 50 l. per annum a piece for standing
salaries, will make a yearly charge to the State, of above Sixty Five Thousand
pounds per annum, or if they shall be prohibited their taking of Fees, will
grow careless and nnwilling to be troubled, pretend to be sick or absent when
they are not, or half hear causes, or like some of the Midlesex, or Suburbian
Justices take a great deal more in Fees and Incomes than that would come to,
and do as little for it as they use to do in matters of Breach of this Peace
or petty Brawls, which is to bind them over to the Sessions, and take their
Fees for it, and for those causes which they shall adventure to determine beget
in a year more appeals than there shall be Justices of the peace, which in a
year but after the rate of 2600 petty Courts or more, but 40 Times appealed
from, every one of them, will yield to the people above One Hundred Thousand
appeals, which may cost them no small money and time to maintain, and bring to a
hearing, and by such double and treble agitations, discovery of Titles, and
evidence, and half hearing of their causes, make their contentions grow as
endless as their Charges.

CHAP. VIII. That it will not only raise up again those old grievances, which
were formerly the cause of disusing, or restraining the Sheriffs Turns, County
Courts, Court Barons, and Hundred Courts, and such like petty Jurisdictions,
but far exceed them.
BUt surely they that thus err for want of knowledge, and do too much build
upon their own ignorance, would, if they knew the reasons that accompany our
Laws, not be so forward to go back again into those evils which our Ancestors
and the care of former Parliaments did bring us out of, nor take that to be a
new and better way, is but a going back again into them, and a reviving of old
grievances.

We shall therefore show them, what they were, and let them see they are very
like unto that they are now: so willing to establish amongst us. The Courts
called Hundreds, Wapentakes, and the County Courts, had their original by
consent of most Authors from K. Alfred, who Polidor in Guliel. Conq. Spelman
Gloss. in verb. Justitia
would not trust them with Capital or Chief matters Criminal, but reserved them
ad Majores Justitiarios. And though he gave them power to determine lesser
matters, yet did he as well as King Ina his predecessor, and those Saxon and
Danish Kings, Edward the elder, Athelstane, Ethelbert, Edgar, Canutus, and
Edward the Confessor which succeeded him, give leave to any to appeal, pro
defectu Iustitiae, or when right could not be obtained.

But that being in a time when the smallness of Commerce, paucity, poverty,
and inculture of people, little acquaintance with Navigation, or Foreign
Customs, continual wars one with another, in a Heptarchy, or multiplicity of
Kings, and Invasions of the Danes, could not allow them much business at Law,
and if they had where withal to have been contentious, were so bound up by
certain strict Laws, fit only for a people were newly escaped out of Paganism,
and lived in a Country more like a desert or Wilderness, than as now it is, as
they could not if they would have many Suites at Law to trouble the lesser or
greater Courts withal, for in every Tithing In ll. E. Confess. cap. 20.
or Friborgh, every man answered so for one another, as they were bound to
bring offenders to Justice, every In ll. Edgari c. 6 and in legibus Ethelredi
cap. 1.
man did put in securities to do right to one another, the Lord for In ll. H.
1. c. 23 et 41. in ll. Canuti c. 25 and 28. and in ll. Ethelst. cap. 10.
his Tenants, and the Master fot his Servants; In legibus Edw. Reg. cap. 1.
no man bought any thing without a pledge or voucher, or exchanged goods but
before a Magistrate, or the Minister, or Lord of the Manor, he that In ll.
Aluredi c. 33. and in ll. Ethelstani cap. 8.
received a Stranger, answered for any thing In ll. E. Reg and in ll. Canuti
cap. 64.
he had done in the place from whence he came; no man under a penalty harbored
a Fugitive, or kept him from Justice, he that was misdoubted In ll. Inae. In
ll. Edgari c. 2 and l. Canuti li. 16.
or accused, was in many things to purge himself, by his own oath, or of so
many of his neighbors, and if any had ( w) complained before they had demanded
right in those lesser Courts, were fined and punished.

Yet though those Courts had their work so much done to their hands, the people
were so little notwithstanding satisfied with their Justice, as we shall find
William the Conqueror afterward to have his Chief Justice to at tend him for
the determining of such causes as came to demand his Justice, his Son William
Rusus the like, and by that time the Crown came to Henry the first, who was not
also without his Chief Justice, the Laws began to take notice of the different
Laws of Provinces, of a penuria Iudicum in In ll. H. 1. c. 7.
some Hundreds, and of violences and disturbances, which made [a necessity of
carrying some causes upon denying right to be done in those Courts to the
County Courts, (all actions of breach of the peace, and pleas of Treasons,
Murder, Coynings of moneys, and many more which are enumerated in his Law de
Jure Regis, then belonging to the King.)

King Stephen had his Chief Justices, and when King Henry the second comes to
reign, the Kingdom was so full of exactions and oppressions, as he is much
troubled how to find a man fit, and honest enough to make Chronic. Jo Bromton.
a Chief Justice of, though he had tried Abbots and Earls, Commanders and
Soldiers, and Spiritual men as well as Secular, and therefore we find him upon
the peoples Complaints of their want of justice from several parts of the
Kingdom in a Parliament at Nottingham in Anno Domini One Thousand One Hundred
Seventy Six, (in imitation of what had been formerly done in France, Spelman
Glossar in verb. Justic. tinerant.
by Carolus Calvus in Anno Eight Hundred Fifty and Three) ordaining Justices
Itinerant or in Air according to their allotments of several Shires, but all
Fines levied in the Kings Court, Actions of debt, writs of Assize, Dower,
advowson, and all or most pleas of consequence brought and held in the Kings
Courts (except such as were sometimes allowed by his Writs or lib. 11. c. 1.
Commission to be determined in the Sheriffs Court or the Hundred, or Courts
Barons) for any might then lib. 12. c. 7.
remove an Action from the lesser Courts to the Kings, 3 c. 3. et 5.
or have an Accedas ad Curiam, or prohibition, if we may believe Glanvil,
Glanvil lib. 10. c. 1.
who was his Chief Justice.

In his Son Richard the first his time the power and privileges of Sheriffs did
grow so great in their Counties and Courts, as some Bishops whose places in
those times led them quite off from Secular employments, were enticed to take
upon them the Offices of Sheriffs, but were questioned for it afterward, and
forbid by the Pope to intermedle any more in them. But about 9 H 3. the
Complaints of the people did so follow the King and his Chief Justice, as it
was enacted by Parliament that Common pleas should not follow the Court, but be
holden in 9 H. 3. c.
some place certain, in 52 H. 3. Complaints were made 52 H. 3. cap. 11.
in Parliament, that great men, and diverse others, refused to be justified by
the King and his Court, as they ought and were wont to be, in the time of his
progenitors, but took grear revenges and distresses of their Neighbors, and
others, until they had amends and Fines at their own pleasure; And would not
suffer delivery of such distresses as they had taken of their own authority,
distrained men to do Suit to their Courts, that Eodem Anno c. 9.
were not bound by their Deeds or Enfeoffments, amerced men wrongfully for
default of Common Summons, and compelled c. 17 and 22.
Freeholders to answer for their Freeholds without the Kings writ.

In the reign of his Son E. 1. as appears by Britton who compiled a book of
the Laws by the Kings appointment, all men by a Public Cry and proclamation
were to come with their plaints, causes, and actions before the Justices in
Air, when they came into the Counties, and all other pleas to Cease, and all
those who claimed any Franchyses were to show their Title to them, and special
enquiries made of Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and Stewards, concerning the execution of
their Offices, maintaining Quarrels, amercing men wrongfully, committing
extortions, and holding pleas in debt or trespass above Forty Shillings, which
did not belong to Britton c. 2. 20. 21.
them, 3 E. 1. cap. 15. Sheriffs and others did let out of prison such as were
not repleviseable, and kept in prison such as were

Beasts were distrayned and carried into another County; Great men and their
Bailiffs did attach and arrest others, passing through their Jurisdiction, and
compelled them to answer upon Contracts covenants and Trespasses done out of
their power and Jurisdiction, 13 E. 1. cap. 13. Sheriffs did in their Turns
feign men to be indicted before them for felony, and Trespasses, and imprisoned
them, and exacted money of them, when they were not lawfully indicted by Twelve
Jurors, Lords of Courts, and others that kept Courts and Stewards, cap. 36.
intending to grieve their Inferiors, did procure others to enter Actions in
their Courts, and to move matters against them, and to put in sureties and
pledges, or to purchase writs, and compel men to follow their County Courts,
Hundreds, Wapentakes, or other like Courts, until they had made Fine at their
will, Sheriffs, Hundredors, and Bailiffs of liberties, did use to grieve such
as were in subjection to them, putting in Assizes and Juries men diseased and
decrepit, and such as dwelt in other Counties, to extort money from them, and
Bailiffs intending to grieve their Inferiors to the end they might exact money
of them, did send Strangers to take distresses, by reason that the parties so
distrained, and not knowing such persons, would not suffer the distresses to be
taken; 33 Ed. 1. Stewards and Bailiffs of great Lords did undertake to bear, or
maintain quarrels which concerned other parties. 38 E. 3. Great cap. 3.
men came armed and with power to disturb the execution of Justice, 4 E. 3.
cap. 11. Diverse as well great men as other made Alliances, confederacies, and
conspiracies, to maintain parties, pleas, and quarrels, whereby diverse were
wrongfully dis-inherited, ransomed, and destroyed. 14 Ed. 3. cap. 16. Enquests
and Juries were taken in diverse Counties where no Justice did come, to the
great mischief of the Parties that did sue, as also of the good people that
were impannelled, and Sheriffs did let their Hundred Courts at great rates, to
the impoverishing and oppression of the People. 17 E. 3. The Rot. Parl. in 38.
Commons Petition that excessive Fines imposed on them by such as have Leets
might be redressed, 20 Ed. 3. cap. 6. Bailiffs of Franchises, and their
under-ministers did commit maintenance, and imbracery of Jurors, and took
gifts, rewards, and other profits, which they did take to array pannels, and to
execute them, to the subversion of the Laws, and disturbance of Common right.
31. Ed. 3. cap. 15. Sheriffs held their Turns in time of Harvest, and hindered
the people. 20 Rich. 2. cap. 10. Notorious Thieves were delivered by favorable
inquests procured to the great hinderance of the people; Lords, cap. 3.
and other great men did use to sit upon the Bench with Justices of Assize. 17.
Ed. 4. cap. 2. Courts of Pypowder were misused by Stewards, Vnder-Stewards, and
Baylifls holding pleas for contracts made out of the Fairs. 1 Rich. 3. cap. 4.
Diverse inconveniences and perjuries did daily happen in diverse Shires of
England, by untrue verdicts before Sheriffs in their Turns, by persons of no
behavior, nor dreading God, nor the worlds shame. cap. 6. Courts of Pypowder
were misused by Stewards and Bailiffs upon feigned plaints to trouble men to
whom they owe evil will to make men lose their Fair, or to get favorable
inquests, whereby many coming to the Fairs were grievously vexed for contracts
made out of the Fair, The Lords lost their profits of their Fairs, and the
People wanted those merchandises, would otherwise come to them. II. Hen. 7.
cap. 15. Great extortion was used in diverse Countries, by Undersheriffs,
Shire-Clerks, and other Officers, holding and keeping County-Courts, and in the
name of the Sheriffs, by entering Plaints without the Plaintiffs direction
against Defendants, to the intent that if they appear not, they may be amerced;
or entered Plaints in the name of such as were dead, and to that end did not at
all attach or summon the Defendants, but caused the said amerciaments to be
levied. 3 H. 8. cap. 12. Great extortions and oppressions were by Sheriffs, and
their Ministers, by impanelling such as will be perjured. 26 Henry 8. cap. 4.
Juries in Wales gave untrue verdicts, because upon indictments of Murder, and
Felons, the Kindred and Friends to such offenders had access to them.

27 H. 8. cap. 7. Diverse oppressions, maintenance, imbraceries, riots,
trespasses, etc. were in Chester and Wales, by reason that common justice was
not administered there as in other places, by reason of a diverse ministration
of Justice. Diverse authorities of justice appertaining to the King had cap. 24.
been granted away, to the great hindrance and delay of Justice. cap. 26.
By reason of diversity of Laws and usages in Wales and England, great
discords, variance and sedition have risen betwixt the People.

Which irregularities of Small Courts, so all along from time to time
complained of in Parliament, were not only the cause of making those many Acts
of Parliament in those several years to redress those grievances, but of the
making of several other Acts of Parliment: As that in 13 E. 1. cap. 30.
authorizing Justices of Nisi prius, to go at certain times of the year into the
Counties; that of 27 E. 1. cap. 3. and 4. to make those Justices of Assize
Justices of Gaol delivery, and that enquests and recognisances taken before
Justices of either Bench should be taken in time of vacation before any of the
Justices before whom the plea is brought. That of 28 E. 1. cap. 10. that
against Conspirators, false informers, procurers of enquests, and Iuries,
remedy should be had, by a writ out of the Chancery, and that the Justices of
both Benches and Justices assigned to take Assizes, should, when they come into
the Country, upon every plaint made unto them, award enquests. Char of 12 E. 2.
cap. 3. and 4. that enquests and Juries in pleas of Land that require great
examination, should be taken in the Country before two Justices of the Bench,
and that which they shall have done shall be reported in the Bench at a certain
day there to be enrolled, and thereupon Judgment shall be given; And to
provide that inquests and Juries should notwithstanding be taken in the Bench
if they came. That of 2 E. 3. cap. 2. that Assizes, Attaints, and
Certifications be taken before the Justices commonly assigned, which be good
men and lawful, having knowledge of the Law, and none other. That of 14 E. 3.
cap. 16. that nisi prius shall be granted, as well at the Suit of the Defendant
as of the Plaintiff, and before a Justice of another Court, then where the Suit
depends, and if it happen that none of the Justices of the one Bench or the
other may go into the Country, then Nisi prius to be granted before the Chief
Baron of the Exchequer if he be a man learned in the Law, and in case he cannot
go, then before Justices assigned to take assizes in those parts; so as one of
the said Justices assigned be Justice of the one Bench or the other, or the
Kings Sergeants sworn. That of 20 R. 2. cap. 10. that two learned men in the
Law Justices of the peace shall be in Commission of Goal delivery. And of
making the several Acts of Parliament, 28 E. 1. cap. 14. 9 E. 2. cap. 4. 4 E.
3. cap. 5. 9. E. 3. cap. 3. 14 E. 3. cap. 7. 28 E. 3. cap. 7. 1 R. 2. cap. 11.
and 1 H. 4. cap. 4. That none should be Sheriffs and Bailiffs for above a year
together, or but such as had sufficient to answer the Complaints of the people;
that Bayliwicks, and Hundreds should not be let to Farm at over great Rents;
that Sheriffs Clerks should not practice as Attorneys during their office; the
Act of Parliament in 28 E. 1. cap. 4. That the Chancellor, and the Justices of
the Kings Bench, should follow the King, that he might have at all times near
unto him some that were Learned in the Laws, which might be able daily to order
such matters as should come unto the Court at all Times when need should
require; that of 28 E. 1. cap. 7. That the Constable of Dover should hold no
pleas within the Castle gate, but such as did belong to the keeping of the
Castle; that of 30 E. the first, to question by Quo Warranto all liberties to
which there could not be a good Title shown, for that to the King belonged the
care of execution of Justice: And that of 9 E. 3. cap. 5. at the request of the
Commons, that Justices of Assize, Goal delivery, Oyer and Terminer, should
every year at Michaelmas send their records to the Exchequer.

And did put the Kings of this Nation into such a continual watchfullnesse and
care of the due administration of Justice to be done in the Counties and remote
parts of this Nation, as the Justices of Assize never went their Circuits, but
they either attended the King or his Chancellor to know what special matters
were to be given in charge to the people, and did at their retorn upon any
extraordinary thing that happened in their Circuits, give him, and his Council
an account thereof; and yet notwithstanding all this their care, and the
sending of Justices twice a year into every County, which did much awe, and
keep in order those County Courts, Sheriffs Turns, and the Actions of Stewards
in their Court Leets, and Court Barons, and that the wisdom of former times
took all the care they could to have the hundred Courts, Courts Leet, and
Courts Baron, County Courts, and Sheriffs Turns, to be executed by able and
honest men, as we may see in the reign of King Henry the first, who would not
allow, viles and inopes personas, to be Legum Judices, or Stultos aut Improbos,
sed optimates qui non personam sed opera dijudicent. And that Bailiffs were
long after in ll H. r. c. 9. and 29.
Characterd by Fleta to be moribus and legibus pro officio sufficientes, and
the Stewards in legibus consuetudinibusque Fleta lib. 20. 60 and 65.
Provinciae, and officio Seneschalciae cognoscentes; and that those Franchises
and little Courts were forfeitable by a misuser of them, all the care could be
possiby taken to prevent it, nor the punishment or forfeiture which hung over
them, could not so restrain or keep them in order, but that there were daily
complaints made of them, and writs obtained from the Kings Courts to remedy
them, as writs of right patent, Ne injuste vexes supersedeas, writs of right,
writs of Pone, prohibitions, writs of false judgment, de executione judicii,
Recordares, accedas ad Curiam, Cerciorares and habeas Corpora, to remove
causes, Register of writs.
writs to take one in Witherman, that would not suffer a man to be replevied,
and writts of Error to County Courts. Insomuch as the people were in the sense
of their own grievances which were never like to fail them in those inferior
Courts, and those natural inclinations, and propensities, which are in all
Mankind to the best things, and that which may soonest accomplish their ends,
so brought (especially when they found that the Stewards or Judges of those
inferior Courts could not hold any proportion, or stand in the balance with
the Judges at Westminster) by degrees to a contempt and waving of the County
Courts, Court Barons, and Hundred Courts, as they became to be generally
disused, or laid aside (the people seldom appearing at them, when they were
summoned, and the Stewards as seldom keeping of them.)

For though it must be confessed that it may be possible thatsome few men may
by such new County Courts save some labor, charges, or trouble, for once, or
a a little while, as their particular cases or conveniences, neighborhood, or
conditions of adversaries may happen to be (for no doubt but there were some
that did find good by the Courts of Star Chamber, and High Commission, and the
Courts of Honor and Marshal sea, and of the Marches of Wales and the North in
every year of their many years or ages continuance, though they were afterward
taken away as grievances, yet those particular benefits which some few of the
People shall receive by these new to be erected Courts, will or can as little
assure them, or their own posterity from meeting at some other time with those
many inconveniences, may happen unto them afterward, as it will do Thousands
more than themselves, and the whole body of the people, that shall be
prejudiced by it in the general, for all that are or may be benefits to some
particular men or places, have neither a possibility or capacity of being so in
the general, and to all people of the Nation, or to those very individuals at
all times, or upon all occasions, and therefore the making of a Law to forbid
all usury, or taking profit for money lent, would not be profitable to the
people in general, nor to those men that at once might perhaps save some money
in the payment of their debts, when they shall be more troubled after upon
their next occasions or want to borrow money than that amounted unto, nor would
it be for a public or general good, that every Town or Village in the Nation
should have a Market kept every week it, though it might be good for some
solitary Towns, in a Forest or upon the Woalds to have it so, nor would the
Country people that can be sometimes content to supply their present or lesser
occasions by the Pedlars at their own doors, be well pleased that they should
therefore be restrained from seeking better upon their greater disbusements or
occasions, at the wellfurnished Shops in the Cities, or that they should have a
Monopoly of only selling to them the worser sort of commodities.

Wherefore, let any men of Learning, reason, or impartiality judge, if all this
would not do when the little Courts could not proceed in any Action above Forty
Shillings, but that the people were so frequently enforced for want of Justice
to remove their causes to the higher Courts, how many, very many Complaints and
grievances there would have been if this way had been stopped or taken from
them as is now desired.

Or whether the people of England, did any wrong to themselves, in passing by
those little Courts where the Steward was most commonly ignorant, and the
Suitors which were the Judges a great deal more, and were sure enough to meet
with ignorance, injustice, or oppression, and if the cause were like to go well
with them, to have it removed, upon any pretenses of their adversaries, to come
to the Superior Courts, where they should be out of the danger of Appeals, and
could not want Justice when they sought it, nor protection in the seeking of it.

Or whether they did not better to seek for Justice at the Wellhead and
Fountain of Justice, where they could not doubt of the skill and honesty of
their Judges, and the assistance of able Lawiers to plead for them, or to have
their Actions tried before some of the same Judges in their own Counties at the
Assizes, and might be dispatched sooner, and with less trouble and charges to
both parties, than they could at a Second or Third hand, by removing their
Actions from the Hundred Court to the County Court, and from thence to
Westminster.

The Common use or allowance of which more approved and convenient way, if the
reason of it had lain hid or concealed, had been enough to tell us and all
after ages, the benefit and good which the people had by it, as well as that,
of making bread with Wheat instead of acorns, or wearing clothes instead of
going naked, when the ignorance of our older forefathers allowed them no
better, or the peoples leaving some Market Town to talk only of their Charter,
whilst their own conveniences carries them to a better.

For that must needs be out of all danger of error or inconvenience which has
had so long an experimented and constant allowance, when there was not
heretofore any Petition in Parliament or to any the former Supreme Authorities
against it, and when a general use or convenience, not for one but for many
ages successively, has brought it into a custom, and universal approbation.

And should be now of a greater price, then to be exchanged for all those and
more grievances, which heretofore filled our former Parliaments with Complaints
against the County Courts, Sheriffs Turns, and Hundred Courts (for the Cries
of the poor and indigent, and their many smotherd oppressions could not always
reach thither) will not only be raised up again and restored to the people with
interest by these new establishments, but far exceed them, and be like so many
Councels of the Marches in every County.

But they that have engaged their Fancies to put so great a disturbance upon
the people and might in a repentance of it go quietly back again into their own
Trades, do no tthink all this enough, unless some augmentation be laid to the
peoples grievances, by annexing of a power or Jurisdiction of equity, to every,
or many of these little Courts, which may bring up a Brigade of Inconveniences
as a reserve to the former.

CHAP. IX. That the annexing of a Jurisdiction or power of equity, to every or
many of those new little Courts, will much increase the Peoples grievances, and
turn that little Lawwhich shall be left into a course of arhitrariness
FOr the annexing of the equitable part of the jurisdiction of Chancery to the
Courts or courses of Common Law, when they shall be again established, as some
would have it in their proposals or regulation of the Law, will, by giving
every judge at Law a power of equity, make a cause that would be begun and
brought to hearing, and an end, in two Terms, continue Six or Seven, and by a
long and tedious course of examining and cross examining of Witnesses, be ten
times more chargeable to the people, and when there is not now one in every
hundred causes at Law, that go after to Chancery, and might be fewer if there
were more Conscience in men, and the Rules of the Court better observed, make
every single cause a double one, and a Suit in Chancery as well as at
Common Law when it needs not, put the Judges at Law (who before were so tied up
to their Oaths, and a prescript Rule of Law, as to weep over their own Sons and
nearest relations, rather than to deviate, or Swerve from the Text or Rule of
Law, into too great a liberty of exposition or arbitrarinesse: Or if the equity
of every cause should be put to the Jurors, give us Twelve men of equity or
Chancellors in every cause, will hardly be brought to understand it, but be so
puzzled in the finding out of it, as it will hardly, or, if at all, very
tediously be drawn from them, if the matter of equity shall be left to the
Judges alone, there will be little need of the Jury, if the Jury alone, as
little of the Judge, such an intermingling or uniting of the power of equity
with the power of Law, can produce no better effect then to make every one to
begin or make his Suit or action, would otherwise have been ended in a short
course of Law, in a long examination of circumstances of equity or way of
Chancery, and render the equitable or arbitrary part of those Courts so
Superior, and predominant to the legal, as in a short time it will alter or
take away the force and power of it: For the Judge will have a double power and
Capacity to take which Hand he will, and to judge according to this or that
Circumstance, which he shall like best; the Law will be then fast and loose at
pleasure, and will not be as it is now Lex a Ligando, nor Lex a Legendo, but so
uncertain and inconstant, as to alter or dissolve it self into an equity of
this or that circumstance, which can lay the fastest hold upon it, or the
Judge, and be so much at the exposition or command of the Judges, who were wont
to be commanded by the Laws, as every thing they would have must be turned into
an equity.

Which the wisdom of our Parliaments and Laws were so far from suffering, as
they would not suffer the Chancery to meddle with matters of Law, and the
people in former ages so jealous of it, as they petitioned in former
Parliaments, that judgments should not be given in causes of Law, but by
process at Law, and that they might not appear in Chancery upon Sub poenas, or
writs of quibusdam certis de causis, when there was remedy at Law, and was the
cause that the Chancery has heretofore and to this time kept themselves to
their constant course of allowing Demurrers, and discharging such causes as
might be relieved at Law. For if it were formerly a grievance for the Chancery
to determine matters at Law, The putting or mingling of matters of equity into
Courts of Law, will be but one and the same thing, and as like to be a
grievance as the other.

Of which the late Parliament, in their argument against the Council of the
Marches of the North in 1641, were so sensible, as they alleged it would be
prejudicial to the people if the King should be permitted to canton out a part
of his Kingdom to be tried by Mr. Hides argument in April, 1641 before the
Lords in Parliament by order of the House of Commons.
Commission (though it were according to the Rules of Law) or to erect new
Courts of Chancery, and that the latitude and power of the Judges of that Court
of the Marches, in judging according to equity and discretion, was the
Quick-sand that swallowed up the peoples property and liberty, and that the
very administration of Justice founded upon such illegal principles, was a
grievance, and oppression to the people; and the House of Commons in the late
Parliament (of which some of the now Members were then a part) were so far from
altering their opinion in that particular, as in their grand remonstrance of
the State of the Kingdom, the Remonstrance 15 December 1641
15 of December, 1641 repeating what good they had done for the people, and
what Courts they had taken away, they reckon that, and some other arbitrary
Courts, and called them the forges of misery, and oppression.

And yet this is not all the proposers would have, nor will their appetite of
change be satisfied, or the confusion be completed, unless the Lawiers may be
totally extirped, and the Innes of Court and Chancery, which used to breed
them, be abolished, a doctrine any but the quondam Jack Cade and his men of
rudeness, who would have all Learning and Letters suppressed, and the Score
and the Tally to be the only Books of the Nation, would not only blush at, and
be ashamed to own, but stand amazed, and dissolve themselves into a wonder,
that any men should think (as some of these proposers have done) that the
Lawiers or professors of reason should not be fit to intermeddle in the
administration of Justice, as if reason, which God gave for a blessing and
distinction to mankind, could be Antichristian or the mark of the Beast, or
that all the praises of wisdom in the Scripture, were only to let men know,
that those that had it were not fit to be employed.

CHAP. X. That in the right administration of Justice there is a necessity of
Lawiers, and men of skill and experience.
FOr the Laws and Customs of all people, Christians and not Christians,
Barbarians and not Barbarians, do allow and practice that most necessary and
useful Maxim, Cuilibet in art sua credendum, It is best to believe every one
in his own art, or that wherein he is skilful. All our Laws and reasonable
Customs do forbid the using of Trades, to which men have not been Apprentises
for seven years 2 and 3 P. and M. 8 Eliz. cap. 11. 1 Iac. cap. 24.
together. And several Acts of Parliament would not so much as trust Watermen
to row upon the river of Thames nor the inhabitants of several Shires to use
the art of Clothing, nor so much as to make Caps or Pol Davis, unless they
had been Apprentises to it.

The Parliament in the third year of the reign of King 3 H. 8. cap. 11. 1 Ma.
cap. 9.
Henry the eighth, and some other Acts of Parliament made since, provides that
none but allowed and skillfull Physicians, and Chirurgions, should practice
Physic, and Surgery, for that the practice thereof, by Artificers, and
unlearned persons, was to the great displeasure of God, and grievance, hurt,
damage, and destruction of the People.

How then can these proposers, or Tradesmen, imagine it to be good for a
Common wealth, to banish all the knowledge of the Laws, and the means of doing
Justice out of it, and to take in all manner of ignorance in the place of them?
or that the Lawiers or men of Justice should be a burden to the Nation; when
Paul took it to be no dishonor to have sat at the feet of Gamaliel, was more
than ordinary careful of Zenas the Lawier, Epist ad Tit. 3. v. 13.
and had never gone to Rome, not converted some in Nero's own household, if he
had not been learned in the Laws, and Privileges of the Romans, as well as of
the Jews.

When the Dutch in their united Commonwealth or Provinces dare not trust their
smallest causes to their Commentar. de Stat. confederat. Provinciar Belgic.
Commissarissen op de kleyne Saecken, without a Lawier added to them, and for
causes of greater consequence will not in all their Colleges or Courts of
Justice want an Assessor or Syndic, being a Professor of the Civil Law, to
direct and guide them.

When the Turks who for the most part of them are by the Tyranny and designs of
their Emperors kept in an ignorance of all Learning and Letters, can have their
Cadies in their lesser Courts, and their Judges in the Divano, or greater,
purposely educated, and brought up in that which might enable them unto it, and
do not put their mad men in places of Judicature, though they give much respect
unto them, and take them to be inspired.

And when these Proposers can at the same time for any thing which they have to
do in their own affairs, labor to find out the most able and skillful men, and
would think them not to be their Friends at all, or to be some of the
Inhabitants of Gonzagua's newly discovered Country slipped down hither through
the Moon which should instead of a Physician bring them when, they are sick a
Carpenter, or a Plaisterer when they are wounded for a Surgeon.

For can any man think that the Law which was heretofore esteemed to be as hard
and difficult a Science, as it is noble and worthy, can be practiced or given
out to the people, without any manner of knowledge or learning of it, would
these Proposers desire an Act of Parliament, that no sick and wounded men
should any more use the help of Physicians or Chirurgians, but should go to the
Justice of Peace for it? or that no Carpenter, Mason, or Bricklayer, should any
more meddle in the building of Houses?

May not the Civil part of the government or power come in a short time to be
as much endangered or disordered, by such an ignorant management of Justice as
these proposers would have it, as the Militia or Military part thereof would
be, if all the old Legions or Regiments and tried Soldiers of the Army, should
by a Law be disbanded and forbidden the art of war, and young boys newly come
from School, be taken on, and listed in their places, and none to be Captains
or Officers but such as should want their sight or be blind? Or how little
difference will there be betwixtan ignorant administration of Laws, and the
having of no Laws at all.

Was it Jethro's good Counsel to Moses to choose able as well as honest Judges?
and will any Trades men, or Country men now serve the turn? or to what a small
avail had it been for the Children of Israel for Moses to have been learned in
the learning of the Egyptions, and to have been enabled by God himself in his
taking the Laws from his own mouth, if ignorant and foolish Judges had been
appointed under him? or to what end was Solomon's prayer to God for Wisdom, to
go in and out before the people, if those to whom he should commit the care of
Justice should not know how to execute it? or what would Paul the Apostle now
say if he were to plead for his life before such Judges as these Proposers
would bestow upon us, or how should he then say as he did to Agrippa, I think
my self happy, Acts 26. 2 and 3.
King Agrippa, Because I shall answer for my self this day before thee,
especially because I know thee expert in all the Customs and questions which
concern the Jews.

These men therefore of Novelty or change may do well to consider that all
things enjoy a happiness in their rest, and that a settled consistence must
needs be more happy for States (so called of their Stabilities) than to
adventure the hazard of so many changes, as the humors or designs of the
people shall tender unto them, and to believe Plato, who was of opinion that
Legum mutationes Plato de legibus
were perniciosae, that it was most dangerous to change Laws, and remember what
in the Last Parliament was delivered by an eminent Member of their own for a
most certain truth, That the Law Mr. St. John in his argument concerning ship
money in January 1640.
was the Temple or Sanctuary, whither the People were to run for shelter and
refuge, and that part of Mr. Pyms Speech against the Earl of Sttafford
published by order of the House of Commons in the late Parliament, and spoken
by their own sense and direction, That the Law is that which puts a difference
betwixt good and evil, betwixt just and unjust; If the Law be taken away, all
things Mr. Pyms argument against the Earl of Strafford.
will fall to confusion, every man will become a Law unto himself, which in the
depraved condition of Humane nature must needs produce many great enormities,
Lust will become a Law, and Envy will become a Law, Covetousness and Ambition
will become Laws, and what dictates and dicisions such Laws will produce, may
easily be discerned.

That the Common Soldiers of the Army did so well (e) Remonstrance and
Proposals of the Army p. 11.
understand it in the year 1647, as they made it their request in their second
Apology to their General the Lord Fairfax, that (e) Justice and Judgment
might be dealt to the meanest Subject of the Land, according to the old Law.

That the said Sir Thomas Fairfax and the whole Army, did Declaration of his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax and the Army 14 June 1647
afterward remonstrate to the Parliament, that nothing was more dear and
precious to them in their thoughts, (they having hitherto thought all their
present enjoyments, whether of life, or livelihood, or nearest relations, a
price but sufficient for so rich a blessing) that they, and all the Freeborn
people of the Nation, might fit down in quiet under their Vines, and under the
glorious administration of Justice and Righteousness, and in full possession
of those fundamental rights and liberties, without which they could have little
hopes (as to humane considerations) to enjoy either any comforts of life, or so
much as life it self.

And were at that time so far from desiring the Laws to be taken away, as they
desired of the Parliament that the right of freedom of the People to represent
to the Parliament by way of humble Petition their grievances, (for such things
as could not otherwise be remedied than by Parliament) might be cleared and
vindicated, and that in such things for which men have remedy by law, they
might he freely left to the benefit of it,

And that in the Parliament Anno 1648 (Many of whose Members were then the
Officers of the Army, that had subscribed that Remonstrante) were so well
contented with it, as in a Declaration of the Parliament of England (g)
expressing the grounds of their proceedings, and of settling the present
Government in the way of a Free State, they declared unto the People in these
words, viz. that.

They are Declaration of the Parliament of England 17 March 1648. p. 24. and. 25
very sensible of the excellency and equality of the Laws of England, being
duly executed; of their great antiquity even from before the time of the Norman
slavery forced upon us; of the Liberty, and Property, and Peace of the Subject,
so fully preserved by them; and (which falls out happily, and as an increase of
Gods mercy toward us) of the clear consistency of them with the present
government of a Republique, upon some easy alterations of form only, leaving
entire the substance; the name of King being used in them for form only, but no
power of personal administration of judgment allowed to him in the smallest
matter contended for.

They know their own authority to be by the Law, to which the People have
assented; and besides their particular interests, (which are not
inconsiderable) they more intend the Common interest of those whom they serve,
and clearly understand the same, not possible to be preserved without the Laws
and government of the Nation; and that if those should be taken away, all
industry must cease, all misery, blood, and confusion would follow, and greater
calamities if possible, than sell upon us by the late Kings misgovernment,
would certainly involve all persons, under which they must inevitably perish:
and that these arguments are sufficient to persuade all men to be well
contented to submit their lives and fortunes to those just and long approved
Rules of Law, with which they were already so fully acquainted, and not to
believe, that the Parliament intends the abrogation of them.

But we have read of a people that died with quails in their mouths, and of a
generation of that people did expostulate with a Roman Magistrate for going
about to hinder them in their Self-destruction, we shall therefore leave these
Proposers to the busy employment of their own imaginations, and make our
addresses to the Supreme authority, who being called together for the works of
righteousness and Justice, and bringing good intentions along with them, have
a power to give a stop to that Fury, is now amongst a small part of the People,
but enough to undo all the rest: Humbly beseeching them to rescue out of their
hands, the Laws and Birthright of the people, and to reach out their hands to
preserve that Law of Property, which God himself by Thundrings and Lightenings
pronounced from Mount Synai, and wrote 8th. Commandment in the Decalogue
a second time with his own Finger.

That the Judges and professors of the Law, and also all Persons interessed or
concerned in any loss may happen by any alteration thereof, may be heard or
advised withal in what particulars may be charged a^^^^^^ the Laws in being,
or thought fit for reformation, and to take into their consideration. That in
the reformation in the Body natural, the Cure is never gone about by a total
dissolution, nor any part of it intendedly cut off even in case of Gangrene,
where there is any hope to keep life, or to cure without it.

That the Petitions which have been against the Laws are not the voice or
general outcry of the People in their several Counties, or made by the consent
or approbation of the major or any considerable part of them, but are an Engine
or Artifice of some people never made use of till these times of Troubles, to
advance their designs and conveniences, and bring ruin to others, by
petitioning in the names of a whole County or Province, of which many times not
one in every thousand of the Inhabitants ever knew or heard any thing before of
it. Too many of the Petitions concerning public affairs, having been of late
and for some years past made and framed by a few in the name of many, and many
times not in the place or County from whence they seem to come, 20000 hands
said to be subscribed, when there was not so many scores, and of those, many
ignorant peoples names or marks put to it, that were merely led or seduced unto
it, eighty Schools Boys have at once subscribed their names to a Petition by
the procurement of their School Master, some have had their names subscribed
when they were never privy unto it, and others that could not write or read,
have been drawn to suffer their names to go along with a Petition, was for
other matters than they were informed of.

And that if all the People of this Nation were but freely called together by
Tribes and Wards, or Centuries to give their votes concerning our Laws, as the
People of Rome(k) were, to peruse and approve the Laws of the Ten Tables
brought from Athens, and to speak and give their voices as freely as they did
then, there would be one thousand for or to every one that should appear
against it, would not only consent to the continuance of the Laws and Court of
Justice we have in being, but be most earnest Petitioners for them.

And would be pleased if upon a free and full hearing, as has been lately
granted in the matters of Tithes, any thing shall be found fit to be abrogated
or taken away, they to consider,

That in the Acts of Parliament of 27 Henry 8. cap. 28. and 31 Henry 8. cap.
13. Touching the dissolution of Abbeys, there is a saving of all Corodies
profits and pensions, due to any other than the Donors, and their Heirs, and
Abbots and Abbesses, etc. In the Act for establishing Laws and Ordinances in
Wales. 34 and 35 Hen. 8. cap. 26. There is a saving for the Kings Officers for
their Offices and Fees. In the power given by Parliament to Queen Mary in the
first year of her reign, to dissolve, alter, unite, or put into one, the Courts
of first fruits, Wards, and Surveys, Augmentation, and Duchy of Lancaster;
there is an express saving of all annuities, pensions, fees, stipends, or sums
of money, which they might or ought lawfully to have, by any letters patents or
grant of the said Court of Augmentation.

And that if the Queen should annex any of the said Courts to the Exchequer, it
should be with a saving to all persons of all Offices, of keepers of Chases,
Parks, Houses, and the profits thereof, and all Rents, Annuities, Fees, etc.
with a provisoe, that that Act should not extinguish or take away from any
person any Fees, or Sums of Money which they Lawfully had before the seventh of
July then last past: That in the dissolution of the Abhies by Hen. 8. provision
was made, and pensions given for life to such as had places or employments in
them, as to Readers, Curats, etc. and the like: and Corodies or provision of
diet made into a yearly pension granted out of Abbeys and Priories saved to
those that had right to them, many of which are to this day enjoyed by the
purchasers of them.

That in the Act of Parliament 3 Jacobi, cap. 16. For the bringing of the new
river water to London, recompense and amends was to be made and given before
hand to such as should be endamaged by it.

That in the Act of Parliament 7 Iacobi, cap 19 for the continuance and repair
of a Wear upon the River of Exe, near the City of Excester, recompense is
provided for any that shall be losers thereby, for that (as the words of the
Act are) it stands with the rule of Equity and Justice, that those which
should receive so great benefit by it, should yield competent and sufficient
recompense to such as should sustain any loss or detriment thereby.

That in the putting down of Episcopacy in Scotland in the late King reign, the
Parliament of Scotland did think fit to allow to the Bishops yearly pensions or
maintenance during their lives, and suffered them to enjoy it.

That in the last Parliament of England satisfaction was promised to the
Officers and Clerks of the Court of Wards upon the dissolution thereof, and so
much intended as the Lord Say, and Sr Penjamin Rudiard had some thousands of
pounds paid or promised unto them, and a Committee was appointed to consider of
the value of every Clerks place, and their losses sustained by it. The Wives
and Children of Ministers that were put out of their Benefices, and of
Delinquents, were allowed a fifth part of their Husbands estate. And that in
the Proposals or Petitions for taking away of Tithes, there is a desire or
intention to give to them a maintenance equivalent by some other way. That in
the Act of the Parliament 29 May, 1649. for the draining of the Lincoln Shire
and Cambridge Shire Fenns, the Commissioners have power to make satisfaction to
such persons, whose Interest or Lands, shall be made worse in quality or
condition, by the draining of them, proportionable to their loss and damage.
That 2 Reg. 23. 9.
Josias king of Judah in his reformation, and turning to the Lord with all his
Soul and with all his might, did breaking down the high places permit the
Priests (though Causers of gross Idolatry) (and more peccant than any which do
now belong to the Law) to eat of the unleavened bread among their Brethren.
That by the rule of our Savior Christ in the Gospel we are to do as we would
be done unto. And that the promise in the first Act of this Parliament to be as
careful of the Peoples property and liberty as of their own lives and estates,
will not be performed without having rightly informed themselves before hand of
what they would put down or alter, hearing those that are concerned, and giving
them a just recompense, for what shall be thought fitting to be taken away.

Which if for a general good may (for such part of the Law as shall be found
fit to be abrogated or taken away) be done.

With content to all People, and according to natural and common equity.

By a Public and general Assessment, or some other way of certain
satisfaction for it.

That so there may be a mutual preservation of the people, no sighing of
multitudes of poor, or broken in Spirit, nor complaining in our Streets.

FINIS.
By the Authors absence from the Press the Errata's following have escaped the
Printer, which the Reader is entreated to amend, or supply.
IN Page 9. line 12. add [ which] in l. 33. dele [ for] in p. 16. l. 7. r. [
Jesuitical] in l. 33. r. [ and] p. 17. l. 6. r. [ abstract] in p. 19. l. 9. r.
[ or] for [ as] in l. 10. r. [ the mistake of the Judges] in p. 20. l. 1. r. [
and] in p, 20. l. 25. dele [ but] in l. 32. r. [ now be had for it] in p. 25.
l. 8. r. [ may then] in p. 26. in l. 3. of the title of Chapter V. r. [ of this] in
p. 26. l. 7. r. [ Syllan] in l. 15. r. [ Reformation of] in p. 28. l. 14. r. [
have been] in p. 29. l. 1. r. [ and from] in l. 10. r. [ they did not] p. 31.
l. 25. r, [ or fit] in p. 32. l. 19. r. [ it is] p. 33. l. 1. r. [ new modeld]
in p. 34. l. 5. dele [ to] in l. 6. r. [ Assistant] in the latter end of l. 32.
dele [ the] in p. 35. l. 4. r. [ rightly] in l. 10. dele [ and] and r. [ can no
more be kept from] in l. 11. dele [ can no more be kept from] and in l. 12.
add [ and] in l. 12. dele [ save] in l. 17. r. [ should] in p. 36. dele [ and]
in p. 38. l. 23. add [ that] in p. 39. l. 26. r. [ Canon] in p. 40. l. 23. r.
[ will little help the busines] l. 25. r. [ and to oppose] l. 29. r. [ be] in
p. 41. l. 3. r. [ or if] in l. 14. r. [ had advised] in l. 25. r. [ that
should] in p. 47. l. 5. r. [ the] in p. 49. l. 11. r. [ security] in l. 33. r.
[ and] p. 50. l. 23. r. [ were] in p. 51. l. 3. in the Margent, r. [9 H. 3.
cap. 11.] in p. 54. l. 6. r. [27 H. 8. cap. 5.] in p. 55. l. 21. r. [ Serjeant]
p. 57. l. 14. r. [ attachments upon] l. 18. r. [ Withernam] in p. 62. l. 9. r.
[ to] in p. 74. l. 6. r. [ Benjamin] in l. 24. r. [ in] in p. 69. l. 23. dele [
in] add [ in Anno] in p. 46. l. 3. r. [ one hundred and Thirty thousand] in p.
24. l. 16. r. [ allowed] in l. 17 dele [ to Bricklayers and Carpenters.]


