THE Connection: BEING CHOICE COLLECTIONS OF SOME PRINCIPAL MATTERS IN King
JAMES his Reign: Which may serve to supply the Vacancy betwixt Mr. Townsend's,
and Mr. Rushworth's Historical Collections.

LONDON, Printed for W. Crook, at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar, 1681.

AN ADVERTISEMENT OF THE Collector.
WHo ever you are, or of what Quality you be, that this Connection comes to the
^ands of, there is no need of an Au^hor's begging your Favor, for, (without an
Apology) if the seri^us and deliberate Results of a Wise King, by his
Parliament, and by his Privy Council, with the Learn^d Discourses of some Great
men in that time (such as the Duke of Bucking ham, Sir Francis Bacon, etc.)
without Reflections, Annotations Observations, etc. will not please, am sorry
for it; yet I will give the reason of the Publication of this viz. There being
an Historical Collection of the last Parliaments o^ Qu. Elizabeth, by Mr.
Heywoo^ Townsend, which Ends before the beginning of King James his Reign^ and
Mr. John Rushworth begin^ his Historical Collections so late i^ the said King's
Reign, that ther^ is nigh twenty years space betwix^ them, of which time,
nothing of History is in Print in this Method: And although Wilson and
Saunderson have both wrote that Great King's Life, yet neither of them have
reported Matter of Fact in this manner. You have these Collections as ^hey came
to my hands, from several ^areful Collectors of Choice Things: And truly, I was
in hopes I should ^ave got more relating to that time, ^ut I found these so
difficult, that I ^ave over the farther search, and ^ielded to the desire of
some that ^ad seen them, to let them go as ^hey are.

THE CONTENTS
AN. 1. Jac. Reg. A Proclamation b^ King James, to Repress all Pyr^cies and
Depredations upon the Se^ wherein Rules and Articles are set for the prevention
of Sea Rovers and Pirates.

An. 2. Jac. A Proclamation of the Revocation of Mariners from Foreign
Services, and to prevent them turning o^ Pirates, and to hinder Acts of
Hostility to be committed on the Coasts of England.

An. 3. Jac. An Act of Parliament for the granting of three entire Subsidies,
and six Fifteenths and Tenths granted by the Temporality to his Majesty, with
the Reasons why granted, showing the great Advantage his Majesty has been to
the Kingdom.

^ac. The Declaration of the Opinions of the Non-conformists, as it was
delivered to King James in the third year of his Reign.

^ac. A Proclamation by King James, with Rules to prevent Pyracies.

^. 7. Jac. A Proclamation of King James touching Fishing.

^. 8. Jac. The Case of Sir John Kenne^da and his Lady, showing the Contract
^in Marriage.

^ac. Upon the Case of Sir John Ken^eda, whether an English Jurisdiction may
disannul a Marriage made in Scotland?

^ac. Certain Points of Law and Reason, whereby it may plainly appear, that ^he
Question between the Lady Kenneda and Sir John, concerning the Validity of
their Marriage, may, and ought, by ordinary course of Law, be heard and
determined before the Ecclesiastical Judges in England, who have Jurisdictions
in the Places where they do both dwell. Whereupon the Civilians have grounded
their Opinions, given in this Case to that Effect.

9 Jac. The Commission and Warrant for the Condemnation and burning of
Ba^tholomew Legate, who was burnt i^ Smithfield in London, for Heretic^ Opinions.

9 Jac. The Commission and the Warran^ for the Condemnation and burning o^
Edward Wightman of Lichfield, wit^ an Account of his Heretical Opinions.

14 Jac. An Order of the King's Priv^ Council sent to the Peers of the Realm
for the Trial of the Earl and Countes^ of Somerset, for the poisoning of Si^
Thomas Overbury.

14. Jac. Sir Francis Bacon's Speech a^ the Arraignment of the Earl of Somerset.

14 Jac. King James his Pardon to Frances, Countess of Somerset, for poisoning
Sir Thomas Overbury.

19 Jac. An Order of the Privy Council.

22 Jac. His Grace the Duke of Buckingham's Answer to the Scandals of the
Marquess of Inoiosa the Spanish Ambassador: wherein his Abusive Reflections are
wiped off.

CHOICE COLLECTIONS IN King JAMES His Reign.
Anno Dom. 1603. in An. Reg. Jac. 1.
A Proclamation by King James to repress all Pyracies and Depredations upon the
Sea, wherein Rules and Articles are set for the prevention of Sea Rovers and
Pirates.
THE Kings Majesty being certainly informed, through the manifold and daily
complaints made to his Highness, as well by his own Subjects as others; of the
continual Depredations and Pyracies committed on the Seas by certain lewd and
ill disposed persons; and finding, that the ordinary proceeding held of late
times, for the suppressing of these enormities and offenses, have wrought less
Reformation than was expected: In his Princely care to preserve Justice, as one
of the main Pillars of his Estate, and for the speedier suppression of all such
Pyracies and depredacious Crimes, most hateful to his mind, and scandalous to
his peaceable Government, and for the better continuance of Amity with all
other Princes and States, has with the advice of his Privy Council, for the
speedy prevention or severe punishment hereafter of such foul crimes and
pyracies, set down certain Articles hereunto annexed, which his Highness
commanded all his Officers whom it may concern, of what degree soever, to see
duly executed, wherein if any manner of person shall be found culpable or
wilfully negligent, contemptuous or disobedient, his Majesty declares hereby
that punishment shall be inflicted upon him or them with such severity, as the
Example thereof shall terrify all others from committing any so odious crimes
or contemptuous Offenses.

First, That no Man of War be furnished or set out to Sea by any of his
Majesty's Subjects, under pain of death and confiscation of Lands and Goods,
not only to the Captains and Mariners, but also to the Owners and Victuallers,
if the Company of the said Ship shall commit any pyracy, depredation or murder
at the Sea, upon any of his Majesty's Friends.

Item, That if any person whatsoever shall upon the Seas take any Ship that
does belong to any of his Majesty's Friends and Allies, or to any of their
Subjects; or shall take out of it by force any goods of what nature or quality
so ever, he or they so offending shall suffer death, with Confiscation of Lands
and Goods according to the Law in that Case provided.

Item, That all Admiral Causes (except the Causes now depending before the
Commissioners for Causes of depradations) shall be summarily heard by the Judge
of the High Court of the Admiralty, without admitting any unnecessary delay.

Item that no appeal from him be admitted to the Defendent or Defendents; in
causes of Depredation, either against the offenders, or their Accessaries,
before or after the offense committed, or those in whose possession the Goods
spoiled are found, unless first by way of provision, the sum adjudged be paid
to the Plaintiff upon Sureties to repay it; if the Sentence shall be reversed.

Item, that no prohibition in such cases of spoil and their accessaries or
dependencies be granted hereafter.

Item, That no Ship or Goods taken from any of his Majesty's Friends, shall be
delivered by any other Order than upon proof made in the said Court of the
Admiralty, before the said Judge or his Deputy, to the end that a Record may be
kept of all such restitutions made to strangers, to serve when occasion shall
require.

Item, That every Vice Admiral is enjoined by this Proclamation (whereof he
shall take notice at his peril) to certify into the said Court of the
Admiral^y every Quarter of the Year, what man of War has gone to the Sea, or
returned home within that time, with any Goods taken at Sea, or the procedure
thereof, upon pain to lose to his Majesty (by way of fine) for every such
default forty pounds of current money of England, to be answered into his
Majesty's Receipt of the Exchequer, by Certificate from the said Judge of the
Admiralty, under the Great Seal of that Office, to be directed to the Lord
Treasurer, and the Barons of the Exchequer.

Item, That all the Kings Subjects shall forbear from aiding or receiving of
any Pyrate or Sea-Rover, or any person not being a known Merchant, by
contracting, buying, selling or Exchanging with them, or by victualling of
them, or any of their Company, whereby they or any of them shall be the more
enabled to go or return to the Seas to commit any pyracy or disorder, upon pain
for so doing to be punished presently, as the principal Offenders and Pirates
ought to be.

Item, That the Vice-Admirals, Customers, and the other Officers of the Ports,
shall not suffer any ship to go to Sea before such time as they respectively in
their several Ports, have duly searched and visited the same, to the intent to
stay such persons as apparently shall be furnished for the Wars and not for
^erchandize or Fishing, and if there shall be any manner of suspicion that the
said person, though he shall pretend to trade for merchandise or fishing, has
or may have an intent by his provisions or furniture, otherwise than to use the
trade of merchandise or fishing, tha^ in such case of suspicion, the Officers
of the Ports shall stay, and in no wise suffer the same to pass to the Seas
without good Bonds by sufficient Sureties first had, to use nothing but a
lawful trade of merchandise or fishing, and if the said Officers shall suffer
any person otherwise to repair to the Seas, then above is mentioned, they shall
not only answer for any pyracies which any such person shall chance hereafter
to do upon the Seas, but shall suffer imprisonment, until the Offenders may be
apprehended, if they shall be living: And generally his Majesty declares and
denounces all such Pirates and Rovers upon the Seas to be out of his Majesty's
protection, and lawfully to be by any person taken, punished and suppressed
with extremity.

And whereas diverse great and enormous spoils and pyracies have been of late
time committed within the Streights of Gibralter by Capt. Thomas Tomkins, Gent,
Edmond Bonham, Walter Janerin, Mariners, and diverse others English Pirates, and
the Goods, moneys, and merchandises brought into England by them, have been
scattered, sold, and disposed of most lewdly and prodigally, by the means of
their Receivers, Comforters, and Abettors, to the exceeding prejudice of his
Majesty's good friends the Venetians, whom they have robbed, and to the great
displeasure of God, and dishonor of this State: His Majesty does expressly
command all Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Admirals, Vice Admirals, and their
Deputies, and all other Officers of the Admiralty, and all Justices of the
Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and all others his Officers and
Ministers whatsoever, to use all care and diligence in the inquiring, searching
for, and apprehending all such Pirates, their Receivers, Comforters, and
Abettors; and if they shall by their travels and cares find any of them, to
send them presently under safe custody to the Common-Goales of Hampshire or
Dorse^shire, there to remain without Bail or mainprise, till the Lord High
Admiral of England, or his Lieutenant the Judge of the High Court of the
Admiralty shall dispose of them according to the Laws in that case provided.

Given at his Majesty's City of Winchester the 30th. day of September 1603. in
the first year of his Highness Reign of England, France and Ireland, and of
Scotland, the seven and thirtieth.

Anno Dom. 1604. An. Reg. Jac. 2. A Proclamation by King James for the
Revocation of Mariners from foreign services, to prevent their turning of
Pirates, and to hinder Acts of Hostility to be committed on the Coasts of
England.
WHereas within this short time, since the Peace concluded between us and the
King of Spain, and the Archdukes our good Brothers; It has appeared unto us
that many Mariners and Seafaring men of this Realm, having gotten a custom
and habit in the time of the War to make profit by spoil, do leave their
ordinary and honest Vocation, and trading in merchantly Voyages, whereby they
might both have convenient maintenance, and be serviceable to their Country,
and do betake themselves to the service of diverse foreign States, under the
title of men of War, to have thereby occasion to continue their unlawful and
ungodly course of living by spoil, using the service of those Princes but for
color and pretext, but in effect making themselves commonly no better than
Pirates to rob both our own Subjects their Country men, and the Subjects of
other Princes our neighbors, going in their honest trade of merchandise: By
which courses they impeach the quiet Traffic of Nations one with other, leave
our Realm unfurnished of men of their sort, if we should have cause to use
them, and inure themselves to an impious disposition of living by rapine and
evil means, although by reason of the universal peace, wherein we rre at this
present with all Christian Princes and States, they may have a more plentiful
employment in an orderly and lawful na^igation, that at any time of late years
they could have had: We have thought it necessary in time to prevent the
spreading of such a corruption amougst our subjects of that sort and calling,
whereby our Nation will be so much shandered, and our Realm so greatly
disedvnataged, wherefore we do will and command all Masters of ships, Pi^ts,
Mariners, and all other sort of ^ea-faring men, who now are in the ^artial
service of any foreign State, ^at they do presently return home in^o their own
Country, and leave all ^ch foreign services, and betake them^lves to their
vocation, in the lawful ^ourse of merchandise, and other or^erly Navigation,
upon such pains and ^unishments as by the Laws of our ^ealm may be inflicted
upon them, if after this Declaration of our pleasure, ^hey shall not obey; And
We do also upon the same pains straightly charge and ^ommand all our Subjects of
that profes^on* that none of them shall from hence^orth take Letters of Mark or
Reprisal, ^r serve under any that has such Letters ^f Mark or Reprisal from
any foreign ^rince or State whatsoever, nor otherwise ^mploy themselves in any
warlike ser^ices of any foreign State upon the Sea, without special license
obtained from our ^elf, or from our High Admiral, as they will answer the
contrary at their perils* And for as much as although we are in peace with all
Christian Princes and States, yet during the continuance o^ the War between the
King of Spain, and the Archdukes on the one side, and the United Provinces of
the Low^ Countries on the other side, many chances may happen, as some already
have happened, of difficult interpretation to our Officers and Subjects, how to
behave themselves in such Cases, unless they be explained unto them: We have
thought it convenient to make an^ open Declaration how our said Officers and
Subjects shall demean themselves toward the Subjects as well of the King of
Spain and Archdukes, as also of the States united in the Cases following.

First our pleasure is, that within our Ports, Havens, Roads, Creeks, or other
places of our Dominions, or so near to any of our said Ports or Havens, as may
be reasonably construed to be within that Title, limit or precinct, there shall
be no force, violence, surprise, or offense, suffered to be done either from
man of War to man of War, or man of War to Merchant, or Merchant to Merchant of
either party, but that all of that Nation soever, so long as they ^all be
within those our Ports and pla^s of our Jurisdiction, or where our ^fficers may
prohibit violence, shall be ^nderstood to be under our protecti^n to be ordered
by course of Justice, and be at peace each with other.

And whereas some of the men of War of each side have used of late, and ^^ is
like will use in time to come, though ^ot to come within our Ports, because
^here they know we can restrain vio^ence, yet to hover and hang about the
^kirts of our Ports, somewhat to Sea^oard, but yet so near our Coasts and ^he
entry of our Harbors, as in reason ^s to be construed to be within the ex^ent
of the same, and there to await the Merchant of the adverse part, and do ^eize
and take them at their going out of our Ports, which is all one in a manner as
if they took them within our Port, and will be no less hindrance to the trade
of Merchants: Our pleasure therefore and commandment is, to all our Officers
and Subjects by Sea and Land, that they shall prohibit as mu^^ as in them
lies, all such hovering (...) men of War of either side, so ne^^ the entry of
any of our Havens (...) our Coasts, and that they shall recei^^ and succor all
Merchants, and other that shall fall within the danger of an^ such as shall
await our Coasts in so nea^ places, to the hindrance of Trade an^ Traffic,
outward and homeward from and to our Kingdoms; And for the better instructions
of our Office^ in the execution of these two Article^ We have caused to be sent
to the^ plats of those limits, within which (...) are resolved, that these
Orders shall b^ observed.

And where it has happened, and (...) like to do often, that a ship of War
(...) the one side, may come into some of ou^ Ports, where there ^^all be a
Merchan^ of the other side: In such Case for the benefit and preservation of
the lawfu^^ Trade of Merchants, our pleasure is that all Merchants ships, if
they will require it, shall be suffered to depart ou^ of the said Port, two or
three Tide before the man of War, to the intent, that the Merchant may be free
from the pursuit of his Adversary, and it it so happen, that any ship or ships
of War of the one side, do find any ship or ships of War of the other side in
any our Ports or Roads aforesaid: like as our pleasure is, that during there
abode there, all violence be forborne, so do we likewise command our said
Officers and Subjects both on Sea and Land, that the ship of War, which came in
first, be suffered to depart a Tide or two before the other which came in last,
and that for so long time they shall stay and detain any ship of War, that
would offer to pursue another out of any of our Ports immediately: And where we
are informed, that notwithstanding the severity of our Laws against Receivers
of Pirates goods, many of our Officers of our Ports and other Inhabitants
within and near unto them, do receive daily goods brought in from Sea by such
as are indeed Pirates, if they and the getting of their Goods were well
examined, we do hereby admonish them all to avoid the receiving or buying of
any good^ from sea, coming not into the Realm by lawful course of merchandise,
for that they shall find we are resolved so to prevent all occasion and
encouragement of Pirates to be used by any ou^ Subjects as we will cause our
Laws to be fully executed, according to their true meaning, both against the
Pirates, and all Receivers and Abettors of them, and their goods.

Given at Thetford the first day of March, in the second year of our Reign of
Great Britain, etc.

Anno Dom 1605. in An. Reg. Jac. 3. An Act for the granting of three entire
Subsidies and six Fisteenths and Tenths, granted by the Temporaltie to His
Majesty, with the reasons why granted, and the great advantages his Majesty
has been to this Kingdom.
MOst Gracious Sovereign, as at the first entrance of your Majesty into this
Kingdom, there appeared universally in all your Loving Subjects, greater
demonstrations of affection toward your Royal person, than ever has been
observed toward any former King, upon a joyful and foreruning expectation of
your Majesty's Religious, Just, and Gracious Government; so finding by the
grounded experience of three years now complete of the same your happy
Government, that your Majesty has turned our hopes into sensible and actual
benefits, we cannot but still settle and increase in Love, Zeal and Duty
toward you, which we think fit more and more to make manifest to your Majesty,
not by externe shows, but by real effects. And therefore We your most Loving
and Loyal Subjects being by your Royal Authority assembled in Parliament to
consult of the great and important causes of this your Kingdom, have entered
into due consideration both of your Majesty's great Benefit, and of your
present estate, in the support whereof the continuance of these benefits does
principally consist, wherein we do in the first place call to mind that by Gods
great mercies and blessing, and your Majesty's Religious care in execution of
the good Laws for that purpose ordained, the true Religion of Almighty God
freed and delivered from the servitude of blind and Foreign superstition, is
continued unto us, and that in such sort as considering your Majesty's
constant, and Judicial profession thereof, and the Religious Education of your
Children, we rest assured that under Gods favor, we shall comfortably enjoy
the same to us and our posterity for ever.

Next to Religion and peace with God, we will Remember that Universal peace of
State both at home and abroad, which under your Christian and prudent
Government we enjoy, whereof we have the less reason to doubt any interruption,
when we behold the Greatness and reputation of your Majesty's power, and the
goodness and Excellency of your Royal disposition, whereof the latter is not
like ^o give the cause or occasion, and the ^ormer is likely to abate the
Courage and forces of any hostile attempts. And ^astly we cannot but with
unspeakable ^oy of heart consider of that blessing, which having respect to
later times in ^his state, is rare and unwonted, which ^s the blessed fruit and
Royal Issue of ^ingular towardness and comfort, which God has given your
Majesty, with ^reat hope of many the like; these being ^ndeed as arrows in the
hand of the, Mighty, able to dant your Enemies, and to assure your loving
subjects, and ^o safeguard your Royal person, and to shield and protect each
other, and to be a pledge to us and our posterity, of future and perdurable
felicity.

The benefits, and blessings (dread Sovereign) amongst many others, as we
gladly acknowledge to your Majesty's great honor and our great comfort: So
nevertheless having upon mature advice concluded to present to your Majesty a
gift, in proportion and speed of payment, exceeding all former presidents of
Parliament; and the times of Peace considered, we do further think fit to add
and express those reasons special and extraordinary, which have moved us
hereunto, lest the same our doing may be drawn into President to the prejudice
of the State of our Country and our posterity.

A first and principal reason is, tha^ late and monstrous attempt of that
cursed crew of desperate Papists, to have destroyed your Excellent Majesty, the
Queen, and your Royal Progeny, together with the Reverend Prelates. Nobility
and Commons of this Land ^ssembled in Parliament, to the great confusion, if
not subversion of this Kingdom; the barbarous malice in ^ome unnatural
subjects, we have ^hought fit to check and encounter with the certain
demonstration of the ^niversal and undoubted Love of your Loyal and Faithful
Subjects, not only for the present to breed in your Majesty a more confident
assurance of our uttermost aides in proceeding with a princely resolution to
repress them, and to furnish your Majesty against hostile attempts both by Sea
and Land, out also for the future times to give their Patrons and partakers to
understand, that your Majesty can never want in this Kingdom means of defense
of your rights, revenge of your wrongs, and support of your estate.

A second reason is, that memorable benefice wherewith it has pleased the
Divine providence in great grace and favor to bless this Nation in your
Majesty's person by addition of another Kingdom, whereby both ancient
hostilities are quite extinguished, and all footing and approaches of any For*
rainer in this Island are excluded, and your Majesty's other Dominions the more
secured, which happy event was nevertheless attended with sundry rare and
necessary circumstances of charge now at your Majesty's first entrance and
settling, such as the like has not been in former times, nor is like to be in
suceeding ages.

A third and most urgent reason is, the great and excessive charge, which the
unnatural Wars of Ireland newly finished before our late Renowned Queens
decease, did necessarily impose upon your Majesty, by drawing with it a long
train of after expenses even in your Majesty's time, till the peace thereof
were thoroughly settled and assured, which Kingdom is now since your Majesty's
time become in the vastest Province thereof, capable of the plantation of
Religion, Justice, Civilty and Population, and may in longer time arise to be a
most profitable and opulent member of your Imperial Crown.

A fourth reason arises from the great contentment and joye which we have in
the remembrance of your Majesti^ most gracious disposition to the good of your
people, testified as well at your first entrance into this Kingdom, by your
Princely care you took out of your own Royal mind to free them by your
Proclamation from any burdens of Monopolies, and other unlawful things which
then remained in use, as also of late your comfortable messages sent unto us,
dureing this Session of Parliament, purporting the continuance of like gracious
intention toward them, where just occasion of grief should appear, which joye
of ours has bred a desire in us, to express in more then ordinary manner our
extraordinary and humble thanks unto your Majesty for the same, and to make it
appear on our parts, that we will at no time omit any Testimonies of Love and
Duty toward your Majesty, that may procure or deserve the perfecting and
accomplishing of so Princely a work (so well begun) of Grace and favor toward
us, it being far from our dispositions to entertain any such unthankfulness
into our hearts, as not cheerfully to assist with our goods and substance, and
all other duties of Subjects, such a Sovereign, by whom we find our selves so
tenderly regarded.

Thus (Gracious Sovereign) out of those extraordinary Reasons and
considerations, as also out of our great Love and affection toward your
Majesty's person, virtues, and felicities, we do with all humble and cheerful
affections present to your Majesty three subsidies and six Fifteenths and
Tenths, and we do most humbly beseech your Majesty, that it may be enacted by
Authority of this present Parliament in manner and form following.

Anno. Dom. 1605. An. Reg. Jac. 3. The Declarations of the opinions of the
Non-conformists as it was delivered to King James himself on their behalf in
the third year of his Reign.
1. WE hold and maintain the same Authority and Supremacy in all causes and
over all persons, Civil or Ecclesiastical, granted by Statute to Queen
Elizabeth, and expressed and declared in the Book of Advertisements and
Injunctions, and in Mr. Bilson against the Jesuits, to be due in full and
ample, manner (without any Limitation or Qualification) to the King and his
Heirs and Successors for ever, neither is there (to our knowledge) any one of
us but is and ever has been most willing to subcribe and Swear unto the same,
according to form of Statute: And desire that those that shall refuse the same
may bear their own iniquity. That,

2. We are so far from Judging the said Supremacy to be unlawful; that we are
persuaded that the King should sin highly against God, if he should not assume
the same unto himself, and that the Churches within his Dominions should sin
damnably, if they should deny to yield the same unto him, yea though; the
Statutes of the Kingdom should deny it unto him.

3. We hold it plain Anti-Christianism for any Church or Church Officers
whatsoever, either to arrogate or assume unto themselves any part or parcel
thereof, and utterly unlawful for the King to give away or alienate the same
from his own Crown and Dignity to any Spiritual Potentates or Rulers whatsoever
within or without his Dominions.

4. We hold, that though the Kings of this Realm were no members of the Church,
but very Infidels, yea and pers^cutors of the truth, that yet those Churches
that shall be gathered together within these Dominions, ought to acknowledge
and yield the said Supremacy unto them, and that the same is not tied to their
Faith and Christianity, but to their very Crown, from which no subject or
subjects have power to separate or dis-joyn it.

5. We hold that neither King nor Civil State are bound in matter of Religion
to be subject and obedient to any Ecclesiastical person or persons whatsoever,
no further then they shall be able to convince their Consciences of the truth
thereof out of the word of God, yea, we think they should sin against God, if
they should ground their Religion, or any part or parcel thereof, upon the bare
Testimony or Judgment of any man, or of all the men in the world.

6. We hold, that no Churches or Church Officers have power, for any crime
whatsoever, to deprive the King of the least of his Royal prerogatives
whatsoever, much less to deprive him of his Supremacy, wherein the height of
his Royal Dignity consists.

7. We hold, that in all things concerning this life whatsoever, the Civil
Jurisdiction of Kings and Civil States excels and ought to have the
pre-eminence over the Ecclesiastical, and that the Ecclesiastical neither has
nor ought to have any power in the least degree over the bodies, lives, goods
or Liberty of any person whatsoever, muchless of the Kings and Rulers of the
earth.

8. We hold, that Kings by virtue of their supremacy have power, yea, also that
they stand bound by the Law of God to make Laws Ecclesiastical, such as shall
tend to the good ordering of the Churches in their Dominions, and that the
Churches ought not to be disobedient to any of their Laws, so far as in
obedience unto them, they do not that which is contrary to the word of God.

9. We hold, that though the King should command any thing contrary to the
Word, unto the Churches, that yet they ought not to resist him therein, but
only peaceably to forbear obedience, and sue unto him for grace and mercy, and
where that cannot be obtained, meekly to submit themselves to the punishment.

10. We hold, that the King has power by virtue of his Supremacy, to remove
out of the Churches what^oever he shall discern to be practiced ^herein, not
agreeable to the word of God, and if he shall see any defect either in the
worship of God, or Ecclesiastical discipline, he ought by his Royal Authority
and power to procure and force the redress thereof, yea, though it be without
the consent, and against the will of the Ecclesiastical Governors themselves.

11. We hold, that the King has as much Authority over the body, goods and
affairs of Ecclesiastical persons, as of any other of his Subjects whatsoever,
and that by his Authority, he may force them, not only to all Civil Duties
belonging unto them, but also unto all Ecclesiastical, afflicting as great
punishment upon them for the neglect thereof, as upon any other of his subjects.

12. We hold, that he has power to remove out of the Churches all scandalous,
Schismatical and Heretica^ Teachers, and by all due severity o^ Laws to repress
them.

13. We hold, that all Ecclesiastical Laws made by the King (not repugnant to
the word of God) do in some sort bind the Consciences of his subjects, and that
no subject ought to refuse obedience to any such Law.

14. We hold, that the King only has power within his dominions, to convene
Synods and General Assemlies of Ministers, and by his Authority Royal, to
ratify and give life and strength to their Canons and Constitutions, without
whose Ratification, no man can force any Subject to yield any obedience unto
the same.

15. We hold, that though the King may force the Churches to be subject and
obedient unto him, and to be members of the commonwealth, yet that the
Churches severally or jointly have no power to force him or any subject against
their will, to any service unto them or to any Religious duty whatsoever, no,
nor so much as to ^e a member of any Church.

16. We hold, that the King ought ^ot to be subject to the Ecclesiasti^al
censures of any Churches, Church^fficers or Synods whatsoever, but on^y to that
Church and those officers of ^is own Court and household, unto whom (in
reverence of their Religi^n and of the Spiritual graces of God ^e sees shining
in them) he shall of ^is own free will, subject and commit ^he Regiment of his
Soul, in whom ^here can be no suspicion or fear of any ^artialitie, or unjust
or rigorous deal^^g against him.

17. We hold, that if any Ecclesi^stical Governors (call them by what ^ame you
will) shall abuse their Ec^lesiastical authority in the execution ^f their
censures, upon any man what^^ever: That the King and Civil States under him,
have power to punish them severely for it, much more if ^hey shall abuse it
upon the Supreme Majesty himself.

18. If the King subjecting himself to (...) Spiritual Guids and Governors,
shall afterward refuse to be governed and guided by them according to the word
of God, and living in no torious sin, without repentance, shall wilfully
contemn and despise all their holy and Religious censures, that the^ these
Governors are to refuse to administer the holy things of God unto him, and to
leave him to himself, and to the secret Judgment of God, and wholly to resign
and give over that Spiritual Charge and tuition over him which by calling from
God and the King they did undertake, and more then this, they may not do. And
after all this we hold, that he still retains, and ought to retain entirely
and solidly, all that aforesaid Supreme power and authority over the Churches
o^ his Dominion, in as ample a manner, as if he were the most Christian Prince
in the world.

19. We acknowledge King James to be our only lawful Sovereign, and unto him
to be due all the aforesaid Supremacy, and we renounce and abjure all Opinions,
Doctrines, Practices whatsoever repugnant or Contrary to ^he same, as
Anabaptistical and Anti^hristian: And wish they may be se^erely punished.

20. We hold, that the King ought ^ot to give his Authority away, or to ^ommit
it to any Ecclesiastical person ^r persons whatsoever, but ought him^^lf to be
as it were Archbishop and General overseer of all the Churches ^ithin his
Dominions, and ought to ^^ploy under him his Honorable Council, his Judges,
Lievtenants, Ju^ices, Constables, and such like, to o^ersee the Churches in the
several di^isions of their Civil Regiments, visit^^g them and punishing by
their Civil ^ower whatsoever they shall see a^iss in any of them, especially in
the ^ulers and Governors.

21. We hold, it utterly unlawful ^r any Christian Churches whatsoever, ^y any
armed force or power, against ^e will of the Civil Magistracy and ^ate under
which they live, to erect ^ad set up in public, the true wor^^ip and service
of God: Or to beat down or suppress any superstition or Idolatry, that shall
be countenanced and maintained by the same, only every man is to look to
himself, that he communicate not with the evils of the times, enduring what it
shall please the state to inflict, and seeking by, all honest and peaceable
means all reformation of public abuses, only at the hands of Civil public
persons, and all practices Contrary to these we condemn as seditious and sinful.

Anno Dom. 1605. An. Reg. Jac. 3. A Proclamation by King James with Rules to
prevent Pyracy.
WHereas the Kings Majesty has always been ready to Embrace and Cherish such
a perfect amity and friendship between him and the King of Spain, and the
Archdukes his good Brethren, as might stand with his own honor, and the
common good of his people for the better and more particular ^bse^vation
whereof, there has been lately passed a Treaty, wherein his Majesty's Royal
will and pleasure ^s made so notorious to the world in ^ll things, as whosoever
does, or shall ^ross the sincerity of his Majesty's in^ention by any action of
theirs, cannot ^void the censure of high and wilful ^ontempt against his person
and state, ^though his Majesty is not Ignorant, that these offenses for the
most part, ^e daily committed by such, as part^ out of their own original
corrupti^n, and partly by habit of spill and ^apine, are become so insensible
or ^esperate of the peril they draw upon themselves, and the Imputation they
^st upon the honor of their Sover^^gn (so precious to him) as his Ma^^^ty is
driven for repair thereof, to ^^ke open profession of his sincerity in ^^s
kind, more often then otherwise he ^^uld; nevertheless, his Majesty (...)
lately found by many circumstan^, that most of these great faults do ^ow and
multiply, by negligence of ^eriour officers, (especially such as are ^dent in
the ports, and dwell in the Maritine Counties,) from whom his Majesty expects
so continual care and vigilance (not only out of fear of his Majesty's
displeasure, but even for Conscience sake,) as they should be rather
industrious watches over those that run such wicked courses, then (in any
degree) receitors or abettors of the same, considering that those are a well
accomptable to God, that hinder not the evil of others (being in their power,
and incident to their perculiar places and duties) as those that are the
personal Actors, or Contrivers of the same; His Majesty has thought it
necessary once again to publish to all persons of what place or condition
soever within His Majesty's Dominions these Rules and Ordinance^ following, as
things whereunto he commands all persons (whatsoever) to yield their dutiful
obedience, upon peril of his heavy Indignation and the grievous pains
belonging to the same.

First, His Majesty commands tha^ no Seaman or Mariner whatsoever shall be
suffered to put himself into any warlike service at Sea of any Foreign Prince
or State, straightly charging all that are in any such service already, to
leave the same presently, and without delay, and to record their appearance in
their Native Country to some of His Majesty's officers upon pain to be held and
punished as, Pirates.

Item, If any person offending, do at any time hereafter come into any Port, or
place of His Majesty's Dominions, upon what pretext soever, His Majesty
expressly charge all his officers forthwith to apprehend the same, and to
commit them to prison without Bayl or Mainpress, and the Certificate thereof to
be presently returned into the Admiralty Court, to the end that they may be
proceeded withal, according to the Laws of the Realm, and the contents of his
Majesty's former Proclamations,

Item, His Majesty Commands all his Subjects, (as they will avoid his heavy
Indignation) to forbear to be aiding or Receiving of any Pirates, or such
persons as shall continue in any such warlike service, as aforesaid, or any
person not being a known Merchant, by contracting, buying, selling, or by
Victualling of them, or any of their Company, upon pain for so doing, to be
punished presently, as the principal offenders and Pirates ought to be.

Item, That no shipping, or men of War, of what estate or condition soever,
going forth with Commission of reprisal, or in any other warlike manner to
serve at Seas, shall be permitted in any of his Majesty's Ports, or in the
Members thereof to victual or relieve themselves with any warlike provisions,
thereby to enable themselves the better to any acts of hostility at Sea against
any of His Majesty's Friends: But only in their return homewards, if they
happen to come into any of His Majesti^s Ports, that then it shall be lawful
for them to relieve themselves with Victual, or other necessaries to serve them
only for the sp^^e of twenty days and no more, which is a proportion
reasonable to use ^^ Trade of Merchandise.

Item, That all Vice-admirals, Cu^omers, or other officers of the Ports ^^all
not suffer any Ship of His Majesty's ^ubjects to go to the Seas, before such me
as they (respectively in their se^eral Ports) have duly searched and ^isited
the same, to the intent to stay ^^ch persons as apparently shall be fur^ished
for the Wars and not for Mer^^andize or Fishing, and if there shall ^e any
manner of Suspicion, that the ^id person (though he shall pretend to ^rade for
Merchandise or fishing) has ^r may have any other intent by his ^rovisions or
furniture, than to use ^he Trade of Merchandise or Fishing, that in such case
of suspicion the officers ^f the Ports shall stay, and no ways ^uffer the same
to pass to the Seas, with ^ut good bands, with sufficient sureties first had,
to use nothing but the Law^ull trade of Merchandise or Fishing, and if the said
officers shall suffer any ^ersons otherwise to repair to the Seas, ^han above
is mentioned, they shall not only answer for any Pyracies, which any such
person shall chance hereafter to commit upon the Seas, but shall suffer
Imprisonment until the offender^ may be apprehended, if they shall be living.

And further, as his Majesty declares and denounces generally, all such
Pirates and Rovers upon the Seas to be out of his protection, and therefore to
be lawfully pursued and punished to the uttermost extremity, so because His
Majesty presumes, that all other States and persons in peace and friendship
with him, will think it just and honnourable to proceed toward him, with the
same sincerity, which he observes toward them, His Majesty does also hereby
nortifie to the world, that where it falls out that diverse of his Subjects
are, or may be entertained to serve at Sea under Captains and Commanders
belonging to some Foreign Prince or State, (which are now or may be in terms
of Hostility with any of His Majesty's Friends) thereby Imagining, when they be
free from any Interruption, according to the liberty of Common amity and
correspondency which is usually observed between Princes in such cases, only
because the Commander or Captain with some few persons besides are strangers,
and the rest only discovered to be his Majesty's Subjects: For as much as His
Majesty (having made his just and equal intentions thus apparent to all men by
his public Proclamations) would be loath to frustrate the expectation of any
his friends whom it does or may concern; he does hereby declare to all the
world that if he shall hereafter find any such fraudulent course taken, in hope
colourably to avoid the true construction of his so just and necessary
ordinances, the breach whereof gives cause of further trouble and jealousies to
arise between His Majesty and other Princes in the mutual exercise of their
Subjects free Trade and intercourse: He will make absolute stay of any such
Ships and persons, which shall be so brought into his Ports or Harbors, as
persons and things wholly exempted from that protection and favor which he
entendeth to maintain and afford to all others, which shall not in such kind go
about to abuse his Majesty's Integrity, whose desire is to receive no better
measure in any thing, than he is willing to yield to others upon the like
occasions.

Given at our Castle of Windsor the eighth of July, 1605. in the third year of
our Reign of Great Britain, France, and Ireland.

Anno Dom. 1609. An. Reg. Jac. 7. A Proclamation by King James touching Fishing.
JAmes by the Grace of God, King of great Britain, France and Ireland ^ender of
the Faith, etc.
To all and singular persons, to whom it may appertain, greeting.
Although we do sufficiently know by our experience in ^he office of Regal
Dignity (in which by the favor of Almighty God, we ^ave been placed and
exercised these many years) as also by the observation which we have made of
other Christian Princes examplary actions, how far ^he absoluteness of
Sovereign power ^xtendeth it self. And that in regard ^hereof we need not yield
account to any person under God, for any action of ours, which is lawfully
ground^d upon that Just prerogative: Yet such has ever been and shall be our
^are and desire to give satisfaction to ^ur Neighbor Princes, and Friends, in
any action which may have the least Relation to their Subjects and estates, as
we have thought good (by way of friendly Premonition) to declare unto them all,
and to whom soever it may appertain, as follows.

Whereas we have been contented since our coming to the Crown, to tolerate an
indifferent and promiscuous kind of Liberty to all our friends whatsoever, to
fish within our Streams, and upon any of our Coasts of Great Britain, Ireland,
and other Adjacent Islands, so far forth as the permission or use thereof might
not redound to the empeachment of our Prerogative Royal, nor to the hurt and
damage of our loving Subjects, whose preservation and flourishing estate we
hold our self principally bound to advance beforr^ all worldly respects: So
finding that our connivence therein, has not only given occasion of over great
encorachments upon our Regalities, or rather questioning of our right, but has
been a means of much daily wrongs to our own people that exercise the trade of
Fishing as (either by the multitude of strangers, which do preoccupy those
places, or by the Injuries which they receive most commonly at their hands) our
Sujects are constrained to abandon their Fishing, or at the least are become so
discouraged in the same, as they hold it better for them to betake themselves
to some other course of living, whereby not only diverse of our Coast Towns are
much decayed, but then umber of Mariners daily diminished, which is a matter of
great consequence to our estate, considering how much the strength thereof
consists in the power of Shipping, and use of Navigation: we have thought it
now both Just and necessary, in respect that we are now by Gods favor lineally
and Lawfully possessed, as well of the Island of great Britain as of Ireland,
and the rest of the Islles Adjacent, to bethink our selves of good and Lawful
means to prevent those incoveniencies, and many others depending upon the
same. In the Consideration whereof as we are desirous that the world may take
notice, that we have no Intention to deny our Neighbors and Allies, those
fruits and benefits of peace and friendship, which may be justly expected at
our hands in honor and reason, or are afforded by other Princes mutually in
the point of Commerce, and exchange of those things which may not prove
prejudicial to them: So because some such Convenient order may be taken in this
matter, as may sufficiently provide for all these Important Considerations
which do depend thereupon: We have resolved first to give notice to all the
world, that our express pleasure is, that from the beginning of the Month of
August next coming, no person of what Nation or quality soever, being not our
natural born Subjects, be permitted to Fish upon any of our Coasts and Seas of
great Britain, Ireland, and the rest of the Isles Adjacent, where most usually
heretofore any Fishing has been, until they have orderly demanded and
obtained Licenses from us, or such our Commissioners, as we have Authorized in
that behalf, viz. At London for our Realms of England and Ireland, and at
Edenborough for our Realm of Scotland: which Licenses, our intention is, shall
be Yearly Demanded, for so many Vessels and Ships, and the Tonnage thereof, as
shall in^end to Fish for that whole year, or any part thereof, upon any of* our
Coasts and Seas as aforesaid, upon pain of such Chastisement as shall be fit to
^e inflicted upon such wilful offend^urs.

Given at our Palace of Westminster, ^he sixth day of May, in the seventh year
^f our Reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland.

Anno Dom. 1610. An. Jac. Reg. 8. The Case of Sir John Kennedy and his Lady.
UPon the Treaty with Gray Lord Chandoyes it was thought meet that 16500. l.
should be allotted to the Lady for her right, to the value of 14500. l. in
Land, and 2000. l. in money: But in regard the whole estate moved from the
Lady, and that Sir John Kennedy, was able to give her no advancement or dower
out of his Estate, It was thought meet, that the Lady should have, 8000. l. at
her sole dispose, and the residue to be at their joint dispose.

After upon motion on the Ladies behalf, out of a fear, that the Estate might
be wasted by Sir John, and thereby she deprived of maintenance (she ^hen
having no knowledge of the Marriage in Scotland, or hope of a Divorce, ^r
nullity of the said Marriage) it was ^ppointed, that the same should be
con^onveyed over to certain Feoffees in ^rust, to her use, that she by her
Inden^ure under her hand and Seal, solely and without Sir John, might dispose
thereof.

The which Conveyance was directed ^y three liveing of this Honorable board,
viz. the Lord Treasurer, the Lord Privy Seal, and the Lord Stanhope, and by the
Lord Popham, Lord Tanfeild, Sir Thomas Heskt^, Sergeant Dodridge, and Mr.
Stephens.

The land allotted the Lady being sold for 7800 l. with 6500 l. thereof
Barne-Elmes was purchased, but Sir John being trusted by the Lady to go to Mr,
Stephens to draw the Conveyance. went to other Council, and in the Clause where
it should be freely at the Lady's disposal, solely without Sir John; ^he caused
to be inserted these words, that the Lady should have power to convey the same
to such intents and purposes, as by the said Elizabeth solely, and without the
said Sir John Kennedy by writing under her hand and Seal enrolled, should be
limited and appointed; wherein besides the contradictoriness of the sense he
caused in that Deed delivered the Lady (the more to blind her Eyes) Enrolled to
be rased and made Indented Deed. 31. December 3d. Jac. 8.

And after the rasure was found out then by his Deed Dat. 2. July 4. Jac. he
the said Sir John did limit power to the Lady by her Deed, Enrolled or not
Enrolled to limit Uses.

The Lady has been a suitor two Years (if Sir John for saving his own credit
will not confess matter to make a Divorce) then that in course of Justice she
may be admitted to her proof, which for that it concerns matter of state (as
is suggested) she is denied.

1. And therefore she hops, it is ^ut the same Equity to stay his proceedings
touching her Estate, against her or her Feoffees in Course of Justice,
considering it is not by her laches that the Marriage is not disproved, until
both the said causes having a dependency one upon another, may be handled at
this Board.

2. The Course of Conveyance by Feoffees, was by Honorable Personages, grave
Judges and learned Lawyers, directed when the Lady was supposed the true Wife
of Sir John, and they held in Law and Equity sufficient, and now a fortiore it
should be more sufficient, she being none of his Wife, if she may be admitted
to proofs.

3. Sir John has already advanced himself by the sale of the Ladys Estate,
over and above the Purchase of Tonbridge which cost 8500 l. wherein he has a
Joint Estate of Inheritance, and all her Debts that he has Paid 7700 l.

4. If the Course propounded at this Honorable Board shall not hold, then will
the Lady never assent to sell, and so shall the Debts of the Lady before
Marriage now resting unpaid being 2207 l. and Sir John's own Debts rest
unsatisfied to the oppression and clamor of many poor men, and the King still
troubled with renewing his protections.

5. If Sir John should proceed in Course of Justice, and that the Conveyance
made to Feoffees should not be held sufficient, and strong enough to convey the
same to the Lady; yet Sir John can have but the profits thereof, being but 300
l. and not that clear, which is not able to pay half the Use of the Money.

6. Besides before any Suite began, the said Manner of Barne-Elms was for
Valuable Consideration of money lent, mortgaged, and now rests forfeited, for
non-payment of 2000 l.

Whether an English Jurisdiction may disannul a Marriage made in Scotland.
A. B. a Scotch man in a Parish Church in Scotland, publicly in the presence
of the Congregation, Solemnizeth Marriage with a Scotchwoman.

About six or seven years after the said Marriage, the Scotch woman pretending
that at the time of her Marriage, she was but ten years old, or at the most
under twelve, before certain Competent Judges in Scotland procures a sentence
of divorce to be given against the said A. B. whereby the Marriage between A.
B. and her was promounced to be void and of no force, and that she was at
liberty to marry again to any other, upon this ground that she was under twelve
years of Age at the time of her Marriage, and that she never consented thereto
after she was twelve years old, nor had Carnal knowledge from the said A. B.
from which sentence no Appeal or provocation was made.

Afterward the said A. B. coming into England did solemnize Marriage with an
English Woman, the Scottish Wife being then living; after which Marriage, the
said A. B. and the English woman for certain years Cohabited together here in
England as Man and Wife, the said English woman being Ignorant of the Premises
done in Scotland, during the time of her cohabitation with the said A. B. the
Scottish woman dies, after whose Death, the English woman being certified,
that A. B. had another Wife living when he married her, so as he could not be
her lawful Husband at the time of her Marriage, the said A. B. and she dwelling
both in England: she refraineth from the company of A. B. and complains to
the Eccleastical Judges in England, having Jurisdiction in the place where the
said A. B. and she dwells, and craving Justice, offers to prove that the
said A. B. and the said Scottish woman were lawful man and wife, and after the
said Marriage had Carnal knowledge of each other, and that they cohabited
together as man and wife five or six years, after she was twelve years of Age,
admitting she had been under that age at the time of her Marriage, and desires
to be admitted Judicially according to the ordinary course of Law, to allege
and prove her aforesaid assertions before the said Judges, and upon proof
thereof, to have sentence for the nullity of her own Marriage according to
Justice.

It is objected on the behalf of A. B. that she ought not to be admitted
thereto, for these causes ( viz) because the Marriage with the Scottish woman
was solemnized in Scotland, the sentence of Divorce was given in Scotland by
the Judges there, where the Judges of England have no Jurisdiction, nor
Superiority over them: that there was no appeal or provocation from that
sentence, that it was given by the Judges of an high Courtin Scotland, from
whence no appeal lies; and that if the English woman's Marriage should be
proved void here in England, the Justice of the Realm of Scotland, may thereby
seem to be taxed.

The Question is, whether the Ecclesiastical Judges or Judge having
Jurisdiction in the place in England where the said A. B. and the English woman
dwell, be competent Judges, and may and ought at the Petition of the English
woman, to hear and determine this Cause of nullity of the Marriage between her
self and A. B. notwithstanding the former objections.

We are of opinion, without any doubt, that the Ecclesiastical Judge having
Jurisdiction in the place in England, where the said A. B. and the said English
woman dwell, may, and in Justice is bound, at the Complaint of the said English
woman, to hear and determine the said Cause, concerning the validity of her
said Marriage, and to pronounce the Marriage between her and A. B. to be void;
if she prove before him the matters by her alleged, notwithstanding the
aforesaid objections.

Neither can the Justice of Scotland be thought to be Impeached thereby, though
upon sufficient proof made before the Judges here in England, which was not
made before the Judges in Scotland, he gives a Sentence which may seem
repugnant to the Sentence given in Scotland.

Anno Dom. 1610. An. Jac. Reg. 8. Certain Points in Law and Reason, whereby it
may plainly appear, that the Question, between the Lady Kenneda and Sir John
Kenneda concerning the validity of their Marriage, may and ought by ordinary
Court of Law be heard and determined before the Ecclesiastical Judges in
England, who have Jurisdiction in the places, where they both dwell: whereupon
the Civilians have grounded their opinions, given in this Case to that effect,
FIrst by Law and Reason there can fall out no Question or controversy between
any Persons inhabiting in any Civil Commonwealth or State, but the same must
be decided by some Competent Judge or Judges, who ought to have Authority to
hear and determine the same, or else there must needs ensue confusion and
horror.

Secondly, when any controversies happen between any Persons proceeding of any
Contract whatsover, and that require a Determination, or ending by Judgment
wheresoever the Contract was made; Those Judges are by Law the Competent Judges
to hear and determine that controversy, who have Jurisdiction and Power in the
place where both the parties, or party defendent, dwells, to hear and
determine Causes of that Nature.

Thirdly, If there fall out any controversy between any two Persons, the
Defendent cannot be compelled to appear to answer the Plantiff, but before the
Judge of the place, where the Defendent dwells, and especially if the
Plaintiff himself dwells under the same Jurisdiction.

Fourthly, In all causes where there may ensue Peril of Soul, and continuance
of sin, the Judge of the place ought of his Office to enquire thereof, and
redress the same though no man complain thereof.

Whereupon it follows, that the Ecclesiastical Judges here in England, who
have Authority to hear Causes of Matrimony, are the competent udges, and have
po^er to hear and determine this matter of the lawfullness or unlawfullness of
the Ladies Marriage, and the rather for that the Ladies Marriage (which is the
Principal matter in Question) was made and solemnized here in England.

If it be objected, That because that Point whereupon the validity or
invali^ity of the Lady Kenneda's Marriage ^ependeth, viz the Marriage between
Sir ^ohn and Isabel Kenneda is already ad^udged by a definitive Sentence long
^ince, from which there has been no Appeal or provocation; and therefore it
must bar the Lady. We answer al^hough in causes of other Nature, where no
danger of sin might ensue, though the sentence were against the Truth; if a
sentence be once lawfully given, and not Appealed from in due time, the matter
cannot be called in question again: Yet where a sentence is given to dissolve
or annul a lawful Matrimony, that sentence may at any time, though never so
long after, be called in question and reversed, whenever it may be made to
appear that the truth is contrary to that sentence, and that may be done even
by the party himself who obtained that sentence; and therefore not only Sir
John Kenneda, but Isabel her self might have reversed that sentence, proving
the same was given by error: Much less shall the Lady who was not Party to that
suite, be thereby debarred from proving the Nullity of her Marriage, being a
distinct cause from that. And the reason of the difference between a sentence
against a Matrimony and a sentence in another Cause, is, because in other
causes, where no fear is of sin, or peril of soul to ensue, the Parties may may
by their agreement, make what end of the business they list by Composition or
other ways; and therefore if they do not appeal from the sentence given against
them, they are thought by the consent to confirm the same; but because a
Marriage by Gods Law cannot be disolved by the agreement or consent of the
Parties, no sentence threin given against a Marriage contrary to the truth, by
error, can by the Parties agreement be confirmed, lest if it should be
otherwise, thereby they might by color of the erroneous sentence marry other
persons and live in Adultery. Nay more, if the Parties themselves thus
erroneou^ly divorced contrary to the truth would hold themselves contented with
the sentence. If either of them marry any other person, or they both live
incontinently with other persons, the Judge of that place, where they inhabit,
may and ought of his own Office to enforce the Parties so by error divorced to
live together again as man and wife, and separate them from their second
Spouses.

If it be objected that the sentence was given in another Country, where the
Judges of England have no jurisdiction, and in an high Court from whence, there
lies no Appeal, and that the Judges of England have no superiority to call
their sentences in question, and that herefore the Lady cannot call that
divorce in question here. We answer, that the Principal cause in this case of
the Ladies, is not to reverse or call in question the sentence given in
Scotland, but the principal cause here is, whether her Marriage made in England
with Sir John, be of validity or no; for that (as we say) Sir John had another
Wife living (viz. Isabel Kenneda) at the time of her Marriage, without any
mention to be made by the Lady of any sentence of divorce given in Scotland;
this Question of Divorce is brought in but incidently by Sir John in this
Cause, and also vainly and impertinently, if it can be proved that the truth is
contrary to that sentence. For that sentence is in Law merely void, and cannot
bar the Lady for the reasons before alleged, and for that Ecclesia was
decepta in giving of that sentence: now when a sentence which is void in Law
(and especially against a Marriage) is called in question but incidently before
any Judge whatsoever though, an inferior, in a cause that does principally
belong to his jurisdiction: That Judge may take knowledge of, and incidently
examine the validity of that sentence, whether it were good or no, by whom and
wheresoever that sentence was given; tho he were never so superior a Judge; not
to the end to reverse, or expressly pronounce that sentence to be void or not
void, but as he finds it by examination of the Cause to be good or void, so
to give sentence accordingly, and determine the cause Principally depending
before him, without ever mentioning the erroneous sentence in his sentence.

Neither can the sentence given here for the Nullity of the Ladies Marriage
upon other matter, than was pleaded and proved before the Judges in Scotland,
although the same sentence had been principally called in question, and
directly pronounced to be void, any ways impeal the Justice of Scotland, for
since Judges in all Courts and causes, must Judge according to that which is
alleged and proved before them; what impeachment is it to the Justice of any
Judge (although his sentence be revoked, and and a contrary sentence given by
another Judge) when the parties between whom the suite is, either cannot, or
through negligence or collusion will not allege or make such proof before him
the first Judge as they might, but afterward before the second Judge, good and
sufficient proof is made, a matter which falls out every day here in England,
in every Civil and Ecclesiastical Court upon Appeal made from one Court to
another, and the like falls out in all other Countries, and yet the former
Judge whose sentence is reversed, thinks not himself any whit impeached of
injustice thereby.

That the absurdities which would ensue may by example more plainly appear, if
the Law should not be as we say. Put this Case, a Widdower in the Confines of
England toward Scotland, marries a Wife in a Parish Church publicly, in the
presence of a hundred Witnesses, and afterward they live together by the space
of a year, and have a Child; at the years end upon some coffeehouse, they
both being disirous to be ridd, the one of the other; the woman in England
sueth her Husband to be divorced from him, pretending that at such time as he
married her, he had another wife living, and produces witnesses which prove
that he had married another wife before he married her, and peradventure make
some probable show, that that wife was living, when he married his second wife;
who in truth was dead before, as the man could have plainly proved by twenty
witnesses, if he had listed: Notwithstanding the husband being willing to be
ridd of his wife, either would not plead, that his former wife was dead, or
else would not make any proof thereof, Whereupon the woman obtains sentence
against the man, whereby the Marriage between them two, by this Collusion and
error is pronounced void, from which sentence there was no Appeal or
provocation: Now within a Month after this Divorce, this man goes into the
Confines of Scotland, not Ten Miles from the place, where he and his divorced
wife formerly dwelt, and there he marries another woman, being ignorant of the
former wife and Collusory Divorce, and there Cohabiteth and dwells with her.
This woman shortly after understanding of the premises, and that she could not
be his lawful wife, but lived in Adultery with him; desires before the Judge
in Scotland, under whose Jurisdiction they both dwell, to be devorced from him,
and to be delivered from her Adulterous living with him, and offers to prove
all the Premises most manifestly; were it not now a most absurd and abominable
thing, that this woman, should have no remedy any where, but be enforced to
live still in Adultery with this man, because the sentence of divorce was given
by a Judge in England, pronouncing the marriage between the man and his second
wife to be void, whereas it can be most manifestly and apparently proved, that
the first wife was dead before his second Marriage, and so the sentence was
given against the apparent Truth? And what impeachment of Justice can this be
to the Judge in England, before whom it was never proved, that the man's first
wife was dead, to have his sentence reversed upon new proofs made before the
Judge in Scotland.

Now between the Ladies Case, and this Case there is no difference in truth of
matter and point of Law, only by reason of the multitude of the witnesses, the
nearness of the time and place, when and where, these things in this Case were
done; the truth whereof may more easily and readily be proved than in the
Ladies Cause it can, though with more difficulty, the cases are all one.

If any man shall yet doubt, whether this cause can be heard and determined by
the Ecclesiastical Courts in England, it is desired, that Sir John's Council,
considering the Marriage was made here in England, and the Lady and Sir John do
both dwell here, and by Law Sir John is not compellable to appear in any other
place than in England, for this matter, I would tell before what Judge this
matter should be heard and determined; for it is to be presumed, that when two
persons live in Adultery together, and so in continual sin, and the one of them
seeks red^ess, and to be freed from that sinful and Adulterous Life; no man
will say, that he or she shall be compelled to live notoriously in Adultery
still, and have no Judge at all to separate them and remedy this enormity.

If further doubts be made how, where, or in what manner proof shall be made in
this Cause: It is said that this Question does not concern the Question, what
Court, or or before what Judges the Cause shall be heard and determined; But to
this, it, is answered; That the Proofs shall be made in such manner, as they be
ordinarily in all other Cases, that is, by the answers of the contrary part
upon Oath, by such witnesses as they can procure voluntarily to come before the
Judges here, from whence, or out of what Country soever they can procure them:
If they will not come voluntarily, then if they be within the Jurisdiction of
the Judge, and the Party producent think so good, he shall have process to
compel them to come before the Judge; if they dwell so far off, as that it will
be too chargeable to bring them before the Judge, then a Commission shall be
granted to some Commnsioners, to examine them near the places where they dwell,
and this if they dwell within the Judges Jurisdiction, but if the witness dwell
out of the Ju^ges Jurisdiction, in any other place, Realm, or Country, then the
Judge of the Cause may direct requisitory to the Judges of the places, or
Countries, where the witness dwells, to entreat them to examine the witness
remaining there by their Authority, and to send them depositions to the Judge
of the Cause. Also by the Records of other Courts, or any other Instruments or
Writings which may any way further the Cause; these being the ordinary and
usual courses, used for making of Proof in every Cause, every day, and will
not be denied by any acquainted with the proceedings in any Ecclesiastical or
Civil Courts.

Anno Dom. 1611. An. Reg. Jac. 9. The Commission and Warrant, for the
Condemnation, and burning of Bartholomew Legatt, who was burnt in Smith-feild
in London, 1611. for Heretical Opinions.
JAmes, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and ^reland,
defender etc.
To our right Trusty and well beloved Councellor Thomas Lord Elsmere our
Chancellor of England, Greeting:
Where the Reverend Father in God John Bishop of London, having judicially
proceeded in a Cause of Heresy against Bartholomew Legatt of the City of
London, in the Diocese of the Bishop of London, concerning diverse wicked
Erours, Heresies and Blasphemous Opinions, holden, affirmed and published by
the said Bartholomew* Legatt, and ch^ifly in these thirteen Blasphemous
Pos^^ons following, viz. That the Creed called the Nicene Creed and Athanasius
Creed, contain not. a profession of the true Christian Faith, or that he will
not profess his Faith according to the same Creeds, that Christ is not God of
God begotten, not made, but begotten and made; that there are no Persons in the
Godhead; That Christ was not God from Everlasting, but began to be God when he
took flesh of the Virgin Mary, that the World was not made by Christ, that the
Apostles teach Christ to be man only, that there is no Generation in God, but
of Creatures, that this Assertion, God to be made Man, is contrary to the Rule
of Faith, and monstrous Blasphemy; That Christ was not before the fullness of
time Except by Promise, that Christ was not God otherwise than an anointed God,
that Christ was not in the form of God Equal with God, that is in substance of
God, but in Righteousness and giveing Salvation, that Christ by his Godhead
wrought no Miracle, that Christ is not to be prayed unto; wherein he the said
Bartholomew Legatt, has before the said Reverend Father, maintained his said
most dangerous and Blasphemous Opinions, as appears by many his Confessions
publicly made and acknowledged, for which his Damnable and Heretical Opinions,
he is by Difinitive sentence, by the said Reverend Father John Bishop of
London, with the Advice and Consent of other Reverend Bishops, Learned Divines,
and others Learned in the Laws assisting in Judgment, Justly adjudged,
pronounced and declared to be an obstinate and incorrigible Heretic, and is
left by them under the sentence of the great Excommunication: and therefore as
a Corrupt Member to be Cut off from the Chruch of Chist, and society of the
Faithful, and is to be by our secu^ar Power and Authority as an Heretic
punished, as by the Significavit of the said Reverend Father in God, the said
Bishop of London, bearing date at London the third day of March, in the year of
our Lord, 1611. In the ninth year of our Reign* and remaining in our Court of
Chancery more at large appears. And although the said Bartholomew Legatt has
since the said sentence pronouced against him, been often very Charitably
moved, and exhorted, as well by the said Bishop, as by many grave and Learned
Divines, to dissuade, revoke and remove him from the said Blasphemous and
Heretical Opinions; yet he arrogantly and wilfully persisteth and continues
in the same: We therefore according to our Regal Function and Office, minding
the Execution of Justice in this behalf, and to give Example to others, lest
they should attempt the like hereafter: Have determined by the Assent of our
Council to will and require, and do hereby Authorize and Require you our said
Chancellor, Immediately upon the receipt hereof, to award and make out under our
great Seal of England, our Writ of Execution according to the Tenor in these
Presents ensuing; and these Presents shall be your sufficient Warrant and
Discharge for the same.

The WARRANT.
THE King to the Sheriffs of London* greeting: Whereas the Reverend Father in
Christ John Bishop of London, has signified unto us, that when he in a certain
business of Heretical pravity against one Bartholomew Legatt our Subject of the
City of London, of the said Bishop of Londons Diocese and Jurisdiction, rightly
and lawfully proceeding by Acts enacted, drawn, proposed, and by the
Confessions of the said Bartholomew Legatt, before the said Bishop Judicially
made and acknowledged, has found in the said Bartholomew Legatt, very many
wicked Errors, false opinions, Heresies, and cursed Blasphemies, and Impious
Doctrines, expressly contrary and repugnant to the Catholic Faith and Religion,
and the Holy word of God, knowingly and maliciously, and with a pertinacious
and obdurate plainly Incorrigible mind, to believe, hold, affirm and publish;
the same Reverend Father the Bishop of London with the advice and consent, as
well of the Reverend Bishops and other Divines, as also of men Learned in the
Law, in Judgment sitting and assisting, the same Bartholomew Legatt by hi^
Definitive Sentence has pronounced, decreed, and declared to be an Obdurate,
Contumacious and incorrigible Heretic, and upon that occasion as a stubborn
Heretic, and rotten contagious Member to be cut off from the Church of Christ,
and the Communion of the Faithful, whereas the Holy Mother Church has not
further to do and prosecute in this part, the same Reveren'd Father has left
the aforesaid Bartholomew Legatt, as a Blasphemous Heretic to our secular
power to be punished with Condign punishment, as by the Letters Patents of the
said Reverend Father in Christ the Bishop of London in this behalf, above made
has certified unto us in our Chancery; We therefore as a Zealot of Justice,
and a defendor of the Catholic Faith, and willing to maintain and defend the
holy Church, and Rights, and liberties of the same, and the Catholic Faith,
and such Heresies and Errors every where what in us lies, to Root out and
extirpate, and to punish with Condign punishment such Heretics so Convicted,
and deeming that such an Heretic in form aforesaid, Convicted and Condemned
according to the Laws and Customs of this our Kingdom of England in this part
occasioned, ought to be Burned with Fire, We do Command you that the said
Bartholomew Legatt, being in your Custody, you do Commit publicly to the Fire,
before the people, in a public and open place in West-Smithfield, for the
Cause aforesaid, and that you cause the said Bartholomew Legatt to be really
burned in the same Fire, in detestation of the said Crime, for the manifest
Example of other Christians, lest they slide into the same fault, and this that
in no wise you omit, under the peril that shall follow thereon, witness, etc.

Anno Dom. 1611. An. Reg. Jac. 9. The Commission and Warrant for the
Condemnation and Execution of Edward Wightman, at Lichfield, 1611. with an
Account of his Heretical Opinion.
^Ames, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and ^eland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To our Right Trusty, and Right ^ell-beloved
Counselor, Thomas, lord Ellesmere, our Chancellor of ^ngland, Greeting.
Whereas the Re^erend Father in God, Richard, Bi^op of Coventry and Lichfild,
Having ^diciously proceededf in the Examina^on, Hearing, and Determining of a
Cause of Heresy against Edward Wight^an, of the Parish of Burton upon ^rent,
in the Diocese of Coventry and ^ichfield; Concerning the wicked He^sies of the
Ebionites, Corinthians, Va^ntinians, Arrians, Macedonians, of ^imon Magus, of
Manes, Manichees, of Photinus, and Anabaptists, and (...) other Heretical,
execrable, and unheard of Opinions, by the Instinct (...) Satan, by him
excogitated and holden viz.

1. That there is not the Trinity (...) Persons, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, in the Unity of the Deity. 2. That Jesus Christ is not the true
Natural Son of God, perfect God, and of the same Substance, Eternity and
Majesty with the Father, in respect of his Godhead. 3. That Jesus Christ is
only Man, and a mere Creature, and not both God and Man in one Person. 4. That
Christ our Savior took not Humane Flesh of the Substance of the Virgin Mary
his Mother; and that that Promise, the Seed of the Woman shall break the
Serpents Head, was not fulfilled in Christ. 5. That the Person of the Holy
Ghost is not God Coequal, Coeternal and Coessential with the Father and the
Son. 6. That the three Creeds, viz. the Apostles Creed, the Nicene Creed, the
Athanasian Creed, are the Heresies of ^e Nicolaitaines. 7. That he the ^id
Edward Wightman is that Pro^het spoken of in the Eighteenth of ^euteronomy in
these words, I will ^ise them up a Prophet etc. and that ^at place of Isaiah, I
alone have trodden ^e Wine Press; and that that place, those Fan is in his hand,
are proper ^d personal to him the said Edward ^ightman. 8. And that he the said
^ightman is that Person of the Holy ^host spoken of in the Scriptures, ^d the
Comforter spoken of in the ^xteenth of St. John's Gospel, 9. And at those words
of our Savior Christ the Sin of Blasphemy against the ^oly Ghost, are meant of
his Person. ^^. And that that place, the Fourth ^^ Malachy, of Elias to come,
is ^ewise meant of his Person. 11. That ^e Soul does sleep in the Sleep of ^e
First Death, as well as the Body, ^d is mortal as touching the Sleep ^e first
Death as the Body is: And ^t the Soul of our Savior Jesus ^rist did sleep in
that Sleep of Death well as his Body. 12. That the Souls of the Elect Saints
Departed, are not Members possessed of the Triumphant Church in Heaven. 13.
That the Baptizing of Infants is an abominable Custom. 14. That there ough^ not
in the Church the use of the Lords Supper to be celebrated i^ the Elements of
Bread and Wine; and the use of Baptism to be celebrated in the Element of
Water, as they are now practiced in the Church of England: but that the use of
Baptism i^ to be administered in Water, only to Converts of sufficient Age and
Understanding, converted from Infidelity to the Faith. 15. That God has
ordained and sent him the said Edwar^ Wightman, to perform his part in the Work
of the Salvation of the World to deliver it by his Teaching or Admonition, from
the Heresy of the Nicolaitanes, as Christ was ordained and sent to save the
World, and by hi^ Death to deliver it from Sin, and to reconcile it to God. 16.
And tha^ Christianity is not wholly professed and preached in the Church of
England, but only in part, wherein he ^he said Edward Wightman, has before the
said Reverend Father, as al^o before our Commissioners for Cau^es
Ecclesiastical, within our Realm of England, maintained his said most ^erilous
and dangerous Opinions, as ^ppeareth by many of his Confessions, ^s also by a
Book Written and Subscri^ed by him, and given to us; for the which his damnable
and heretical O^inions, he is by Divine Sentence declared by the said Reverend
Father, ^he Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, with the Advice and Consent of
Learned Divines, and others Learned in ^he Law, assisting him in Judgment,
^ustly adjudged, pronounced and declared to be an obstinate and incorrigible
Heretic, and is left by them under the Sentence of the great Excommunication;
and therefore as a Corrupt Member to be cut off from ^he rest of the Flock of
Christ, lest he should infect others professing the true Christian Faith; and
is to be by our Secular Power and Authority, as an Heretic punished: As by the
Significavit of the said Reverend Father in God, the Bishop of Coventry and
Lichfield, bearing Date at Lichfield the Fourteenth day of December, in the
Ninth Year of our Reign, and remaining in our Court of Chancery, more at large
appears. And although the said Edward Wightman has since the said Sentence
pronounced against him, been often very charitably moved and exhorted, as well
by the said Bishop, as by many other Godly, Grave and Learned Divines, to
dissuade, revoke and remove him from the said Blasphemous, Heretical and
Anabaptistical Opinions; yet he arrogantly and wilfully resists and
continues in the same. We therefore, according to our Regal Function and
Office, minding the Execution of Justice in this behalf, and to give Example to
others, lest they should attempt the like hereafter, have Determined, by the
Assent of our Council, to will and require, and do hereby Authorize and Require
You our said Chancellor, immediately upon the Receipt hereof, to award, and
make out, under Our Great Seal of England, Our Writ of Execution, according to
the Tenor in these presents ensuing; And these presents shall ^e your
sufficient Warrant and Discharge for the same.

Then was a Warrant granted by the King, to the Lord Chancellor of England, to
award a Writ under the Great Seal, to the Sherriff of Lichfield, for Burning of
Edward Wightman, delivered over to the Secular Power by the Bishop of Coventry
and Lichfield.

The Warrant.
THE Kng to the Sheriff of Our City of Lichfield, Greeting, Whereas the
Reverend Father in Christ, Richard, by Divine Providence, of Coventry and
Lichfield Bishop, has signified unto Us, That he judicially proceeding,
according to the Exigence of the Ecclesiastical Canons, and of the Laws and
Customs of this our Kingdom of England, against one Edward Wightman of the
Parish of Burton upon Trent, in the Diocese of Coventry and Lichfield, of and
upon the Wicked Heresies of Ebion, Cerinthus, Valentinian, Arrius, Macedonius,
Simon Magus, of Manes, Manichees, Photinus, and of the Anabaptists, and other
Arch Heretics; and moreover of other cursed Opinions, belched, by the Instinct
of Satan excogitated, and heretofore unheard of; the aforesaid Edward Wightman
appearing before the aforesaid Reverend Father, and other Divines and Learned
in the Law, assisting him in Judgment, the aforesaid Wicked Crimes, Heresies,
and other detestable Blasphemies and Errors, stubbornly and pertinaciously,
knowingly, maliciously and with an hardened Heart, published, defended and
dispersed, by definitive Sentence of the said Reverend Father, with the Consent
of Divines, Learned in the Law aforesaid, justly, lawfully, and Canonically,
against the said Edward Wightman in that part brought, stands adjudged and
pronounced an Here^ick; and therefore as a diseased Sheep ^ut of the Flock of
the Lord, lest our ^ubjects he do infect by his Conta^ion, he has decreeed to
be cast out and cut off. Whereas therefore the Holy Mother Church has not
fur^her in this part what it ought more ^o do and prosecute, the same Reve^end
Father, the same Edward Wightman as a Blasphemous and Condem^ed Heretic, has
left to our Secu^ar Power to be punished with Con^^ign Punishment, as by the
Letters Patents of the aforesaid Reverend Father the Bishop of Coventry and
Lichfield in this behalf thereupon made, is certified unto us in our Chancery.
We therefore, as a Zealot of Justice, and a Defender of the Catholic Faith,
and willing that the Holy Church, and the Rights and Liberties of the same, and
the Catholic Faith to maintain and defend, and such like Heresies and Errors
every where, so much as in us lies to ^oot out and extirpate, and Heretics so
convict, to punish with Condig^ Punishment; holding that such an H^retick in
the aforesaid Form Convi^^ and Condemned according to the Laws and Customs of
this our Kingdom of England in this part accustomed, ought to be Burned with
Fire^ We command thee, that thou cause the said Edward Wightman, being i^ thy
Custody, to be committed to the Fire in some public and open Place^ below the
City aforesaid, for the Cause aforesaid, before the People; and the same Edward
Wightman in the same Fire, cause really to be Burned in the Detestation of the
said Crime; and for manifest Example of other Christians, that they may not
fall into the same Crime: And this no ways omit, under the Peril that shall
follow thereon. Witness, etc.

Anno Dom. 1616. An. Reg. Jac. 14. ^ Order of the King's Privy Council sent to
the Peers of the Realm, for the Trial of the Earl and Countess of Somerset.
Whitehall, Apr. 24. 1616.
AFter our very hearty Commendations to your Lordship; ^hereas the King's
Majesty has re^ved, that the Earl of Somerset, and ^e Countess his Wife,
lately indicted ^f Felony for the Murder and Poy^ning of Sir Thomas Overbury,
then ^s Majesty's Prisoner in the Tower, ^all now receive their Lawful and
^ublick Trial by their Peers, imme^ately after the end of this present ^aster
Term. At the Trial of which ^oble Personages, your Lordship's ^resence, as
being a Peer of the Realm, and one of approved Wisdom and In^grity, is
requisite to pass upon them. ^hese are to let your Lordship understand, that
his Majesty's Pleasure ^^ and so commands by these our Le^ters, that your
Lordship make you^ repair to the City of London, by the Eleventh day of the
Month of M^^ following, being some days before the Trial intended; at which
time you^ Lordship shall understand more of hi^ Majesty's Pleasure. So not
doubtin^ of your Lordships Care to observe h^ Majesty's Directions, we commit
yo^ to God,

Your Lordships very loving Friends, G. Cant. T. Ellesmere Canc. Fenton. E.
Wotton. Tho. Lake. Lo. Dare. C. Edmonds. E. Worcester. Lenox. P. Herbert. R.
Winwood. F. Grevyll. J. Caesar.


^he Speech of Sir Francis Bacon at the Arraignment of the Earl of Somerset
(the Countess having received the King's Pardon.)
^T may please your Grace my Lord High Steward of England, and you ^y Lords the
Peers; You have here before you, Robert, Earl of Somerset, ^^ be Tried for his
Life, concerning ^e Procuring, and Consenting to the ^oysoning of Sir Thomas
Overbury, ^^en the King's Prisoner in the Tower ^f London, as an Accessory
before the ^act.

I know your Honors cannot be^old this Noble Man, but you must ^emember the
great Favors which ^he King has conferred on him, and ^ust be sensible, that
he is yet a Mem^er of your Body, and a Peer, as you ^re, so that you cannot cut
him off ^^om your Body but with grief; and therefore you will expect from us
that give in the King's Evidence, sound and sufficient matter of Proof to
satisfy your Honors Consciences.

As for the manner of the Evidence, the King our Master, who (amongst other his
Virtues, excels in that Virtue of the Imperial Throne, which is Justice)
has given us Command, that we should not expatiate, nor make Invectives, but
materially pursue the Evidence, as it conduces to the points in question.

A matter, that (though we are glad of so good a Warrant) yet we should have
done of our selves: For far be it from us, by any Strains of Wit or Arts, to
seek to play Prizes, or blazon our Names in Blood, or to carry the Day other
ways than on sure grounds; We shall carry the Lanthorn of Justice (which is the
Evidence) before your Eyes upright, and so be able to save it from being put
out with any grounds of Evasion or vain Defense, not doubting at all, but that
the Evidence it self will carry that Force, as it shall need no Advantage or
Aggravation.

First, My Lords, The Course that will hold, in delivery of that which shall
say, (for I love Order) is,

First, I will speak something of the Nature and Greatness of the Offense which
is now to be Tried, not to weigh down my Lord with the great^ess of it, but
rather contrariwise, to ^ew, that a great Offense needs a ^ood Proof: And that
the King, how^ever he might esteem this Gentle^an heretofore as the Signe^ upon
his ^inger, (to use the Scripture Phrase) ^et in such a Case as this, he was to
^ut it off.

Secondly, I will use some few words ^ouching the Nature of the Proofs, which
in such a Case are competent.

Thirdly, I will state the Proofs.

And Lastly, I will produce the ^roofs, either out of Examination, and matters
of Writing, or Witnesses ^iva voce.

For the Offense it self, it is of Crimes ^ext unto High Treason, the greatest,
is the foulest of Felonies: It has ^ree Degrees. First, It is Murder by
Impoysonment. Secondly, It is Mu^der committed upon the King's Prisoner in the
Tower. Thirdly, I might say it is Murder under the color. ^ Friendship; but
that it is a Circumstance Moral, and therefore I leav^ that to the Evidence it
self.

For Murder, my Lords, the fir^^ Record of Justice which was in the World, was
Judgment upon a (...) therer in the Person of Adam's First born Cain; and
though it was not punished by Death, but Banishment, and marks of Ignominy, in
respect of the Primogenitors, or the Population o^ the World; yet there was a
sever^ Charge given, that it should not g^^ unpunished.

So it appears likewise in Scripture, that the Murder of Abner by Joab,
though it were by David respited, in respect of great Services past, or reason
of State, yet it was not forgotten. But of this I will say no more, because I
will not discourse: It was ever admitted and ranked in God's own Tables, That
Murder is of Offenses between man and man next unto High Treason, and
Disobedience to Authority, which sometimes have been referred to the first
Table, because of the Lieutenancy of God in Princes the greatest.

For Impoysonment, I am sorry it should be heard of in our Kingdom: It is not
nostri generis, nec sanguinis pec^atum; it is an Italian Comfit fit for the
Court of Rome, where that person that intoxicateth the Kings of the Earth, is
many times really intoxica^ed and poisoned himself; but it has three
Circumstances which makes it grievous beyond other matters.

The First is, That it takes a man away in full peace, in God's and the King's
peace; that thinks no harm, ^ut is comforting of Nature with Re^ection and
Food, so that as the Scripture says, his Table is made a Snare.

The Second is, That it is easily committed and easily concealed; and on ^he
other side, hardly prevented, and hardly discovered: For Murder by violence
Princes have Guards, and Private Men have Houses, Attendants and Arms. Neither
can such Murder be committed, but Cum sonitu, with some overt and apparent
Acts, that may discover and trace the Offenders; but by Poison, the Cup it self
of Princes will scarce serve, in regard of many Poisons that neither discolor
nor distate: It comes upon a man when he is careless, and without suspicion;
and every day a man is within the Gates of Death.

And the last is, because it concerns not only the destruction the Maliced
men; but of every Man, quis modo tutus erit? For many times, the Poison is
prepared for one, and is taken by another; so that Men die other Men's Deaths,
Concidit infoelix alieno vulnere: And it is as the Psalmist calls it, Sagitta
nocte volans, the Arrow that flies by Night, that has no Aim nor Certainty:
And therefore, if any man shall say to himself, Here is great talk of
Imposoynment, but I am sure I am safe: For I have no Enemies, neither have I
any thing another man should long for. Why, that is all one, he may sit next
him at the Table, that is meant to be Impoysoned and pledge him of his Cup: As
we may see in the Example of 21 Hen. 8. That where the purpose was to Poison
one man, there was Poison put into Barm or Yeast, and with that Barm, Pottage
or Grewel, was made, whereby Sixteen of the Bishop of Rochester's Servants were
poisoned. Nay, it went into the Alms-basket likewise, and the Poor at the Gate
were poisoned; and therefore with great Judgment, did the Statute, made that
Year, touching this Accident, make Impoysonment High Treason, because it tends
to the Dissolving of Humane Society: For whatsoever Offense does so, is in the
Nature thereof High Treason.

Now, For the Third Degree of this particular Offense, which is, that it is
Committed upon the King's Prisoner, who was out of his own Defense, and merely
in the King's Pro^ection, and for whom the King and State were a kind of
Respondent: It is a thing that aggravates the Fault much: For certainly (My
Lord of Somerset) let me tell you this, That Sir Thomas Overbury is the first
Man that was Murdered in the Tower of London, save the Murder of the two young
Princes, by the Appointment of Richard the Third.

Thus much of the Offense, now to the Proofs.

For the matter of Proofs, you may consider, that Impoysonment, of all Offenses
is most secret, even so secret, that if in all Cases of Impoysonment, you
should require Testimony, you should as good proclaim Impunity.

Who could have impeached Livi^ by Testimony, for the poisoning of the Figgs
upon the Tree, which her Husband was wont to gather with his own Hands? Who
could have impeached Parasetis for the poisoning of the one side of the Knife
she carried with her, and keeping the other side clean; so that her self did
eat of the same Piece of Meat that they did, whom she did impoyson.

These Cases are infinite, and need not to be spoken of the Secrecy of
Impoysonment; but wise men must take upon them, in these Secret Cases,
Solomon's Spirit, that, when there could be no Witnesses, collected the Act by
the Affection; but yet we are not at our Cause, for that which your Lordships
are to try, is not the Act of Impoysonment; for that is done to your Hands: All
the World by Law is concluded to say, that Overbury was poisoned by Weston; but
the question before you, is of the Procurement only, and as the Law terms it,
as accessory before the Fact; which abetting, is no more, but to do, or use any
Act or Means which may aid, or conduce to the Impoysonment.

So that it is not the buying, nor the making of the Poison, nor the preparing,
nor confecting, nor commixing of it, or the giving, or sending, or laying of
the Poison that did the only Acts that do amount unto the Abettment; but if
there be any other Act or Means done or used, to give opportunity of
Impoysonment, or to facilitate the Execution of it, or to stop or divert any
Impediments that might hinder it, and that it be with an intention to
accomplish and atchieve the Impoysonment: All these are Abettments, and
Accessaries before the Fact: As for Example, if there be a Conspiracy to murder
a man, as he journeyeth on the way by Invitation, or by color of some
Business; and another takes upon him to dissuade some Friends of his Company,
that he is not strong enough to make his Defense; and another has a part, to
hold him in talk till the first Blow be given. All these, My Lords, without
Scruple, are Accessaries to the Murder, although none of them give the Blow,
nor assist to give the Blow.

My Lords, He is not the Hunter alone, that lets slip the Dog upon the Deer,
but he that lodges him, and hunts him out, or sets a Train or Trap for him,
that he cannot escape, or the like; but this My Lords, little needs in this
Case: For such a Chain of Acts of Impoysonment as this, I think was never heard
or seen. And thus much of the Nature of the Proofs.

To descend to the Proofs themselves, I shall keep this Course.

First, I will make a Narration of the Fact it self.

Secondly, I will break and distribute the Proofs, as they concern the
Prisoner, and,

Thirdly, According to the Distribution, I will produce them and read them, to
use them, so that there is nothing that I shall say, but your Lordships shall
have Three Thoughts or Cogitations to answer it.

First, When I open it, you may take your Aim.

Secondly, When I distribute it, you may prepare your Answers without
Confusion, and,

Lastly, When I produce the Witnesses, or the Examinations themselves, you may
again ruminate, and read vise to make your Defense.

And this I do, because your Memory and Understanding may not be oppressed or
over-laden with length of Evidence, or with Confusion of Order: Nay more, when
your Lordships shall make your Answer in your time, I will put you in mind,
where Cause shall be, of your omission.

First, Therefore Sir Thomas Overbury, for a time, was known to have great
Interest and strait friendship with my Lord of Somerset both in his meaner
Fortunes, and after, insomuch, that he was a kind of Oracle of Direction unto
him; and if you will believe his own Vaunt, (being indeed of an Insolent and
Thrasonical Disposition) he took upon him, that the Fortunes, Reputation and
Understanding of this Gentleman (who is well known to have an able Teacher)
proceeded from his Company and Counsel; and this Friendship rested not only in
Conversation, and Business at Court, but likewise in Communication of Secrets
of State: For my Lord of Somerset exercising at that time, by his Majesty's
special Favor and Trust, the Office of Secretary, did not forbear to acquaint
Overbury with the King's Pacquets and Dispatches from all parts of Spain,
France and the Low Countries; and this not by glimpses, or now and then
rounding in the Ear, for a Favor, but in a settled manner. Pacquets were sent,
sometimes opened by my Lord, sometimes unbroken unto Overbury, who perused
them, copied them, registered them, made Table-talk of them, as they thought
good; so I will undertake, the time was, when Overbury knew more of the Secrets
of the State, than the Council Table did. Nay, they were grown to such
Inwardness, as they made a Play of all the World besides themselves; so as they
had Ciphers and Jurgons for the King and Queen, and Great Men of the Realm.
Things seldom used, but either by Princes or their Confederates, or at the
least, by such as practice and work against, or at the least upon Princes*

But understand me, My Lord, I shall not charge you with Disloyalty at this
day, and I lay this for a Foundation, that there was great Communication of
Secrets between you an^ Sir Thomas Overbury, and that it ha^ relation to
matters of State, and the great Causes of this Kingdom.

But, My Lords, as it is a Principl^ in Nature, that the best things are in
their Corruption the worst, and the sweetest Vine makes the sourest Vinegar;
so it fell out with them, that this Excess (as I may say) of Friendship, ended
in mortal Hatred on my Lord of Somerset's Part.

I have heard my Lord Steward say, sometimes in the Chancery, that Frost^ and
Fraud end foul; and I may add a Third, and that is, the Friendship of Ill Men;
which is truly said to be Conspiracy and not Friendship: For it fell out some
twelve Months or more before Overbury his Imprisonment in the Tower, that the
Earl of Somerset fell into an unlawful Love toward that unfortunate Lady the
Countess of Fsse^, and to proceed to a Marriage with her; this Marriage and
Purpose did Overbury mainly impugn, under ^retence to do the true part of a
^riend, for that he accounted her an ^nworthy Woman; but the Truth ^as,
Overbury, who (to speak plainly) ^ad little that was solid for Religion, ^r
Moral Virtue, but was wholly ^ossest with Ambition and Vain Glory, was loath to
have any Partners in ^he Favor of my Lord of Somerset; and especially, not any
of the House ^f the Howards, against whom he had ^ways professed Hatred and
Opposi^tion.

And my Lords, that this is no sini^er Construction, will appear to you, when
you shall hear that Overbury ^ade his Brags, that he had won him ^he Love of
the Lady by his Letters and Industry; so far was he from Ca^es of Conscience in
this point.

And certainly, my Lords, howso^ver the Tragical Misery of this poor Gentleman,
Overbury, might somewhat ^bliterate his Faults, yet because we ^re not upon
point of Civility, but to ^iscover the Face of Truth before the Face of
Justice: For that it is material to the true understanding of the Stat^ of this
Cause, Overbury was nough^ and corrupt; the Ballads must be me^ded for that
point.

But to proceed, when Overbury sa^ that he was like to be Possessor o^ my Lords
Grace, which he had po^sessed so long, and by whose Greatness he had promised
himself to d^ Wonders; and being a Man of an unbounded, impudent Spirit, he
began not only to dissuade, but to dete^ him from the Love of that Lady; an^
finding him fixed, thought to find ^ strong Remedy; and supposing tha^ he had
my Lord's Head under his Gi^dle, in respect of Communication o^ Secrets of
State, as he calls them him self Secrets of Nature; and therefore dealt
violently with him, to make hi^ desist with Menaces of Discovery an^ the like.
Hereupon grew two Stream^ of Hatred upon Overbury: the one from the Lady, in
respect that he crossed her Love, and abused her Name* (which are Furies in
Women) the other of a more deep Nature, from my Lord of Somerset himself, who
was afraid of Overbury's Nature; and if he did break from him, and fly out, he
would wind into him, and trouble his whole Fortunes. I might add a ^hird Stream
of the Earl of Northampton's Ambition, who desires to be first in Favor with
my Lord of Somerset; and knowing Overbury's Malice to himself and to his House,
thought that Man must be removed and cut off; so as certainly it was resolved
and Decreed, that Overbury must die.

That was too weak, and they were so far from giving way to it, as they crossed
it; there rested but two ways of Quarrel, Assault and Poison: For that of
Assault, after some Proposition and Attempt, they passed from it, as a thing
too open and subject to more ^ariety of Shame: That of Poison likewise was an
hazardous thing, and subject to many Preventions and Caution, especially to
such a Working and Jealous Brain as Overbury had, except he was first fast in
their Hands: Therefore the way was first to get him into a Trap, and lay him
up, an^ then they could not miss the Mark And therefore in Execution of thi^
Plot, it was concluded, that he should be designed to some Honorable
Employment in Foreign Parts, and should underhand by my Lord of Somerset be
encouraged to refuse it; and so, upon Contempt, he should be laid Prisoner in
the Tower, and then they thought he should be close enough and Death should be
his Bail; yet were they not at their End: For they considered, that if there
were not a fit Lieutenant of the Tower for their purpose, and likewise a fit
Underkeeper of Overbury, First, They should meet with many Impediments in the
giving and exhibiting of the Poison. Secondly, They should be exposed to Note
and Observation, that might discover them. And Thirdly, Overbury in the mean
time might write clamorous and furious Letters to his Friends, and so all might
be disappointed: And therefore the next Link of the Chain, was to displace the
then Lieutenant Wade, and to place Yelvis a Principal Abettor in the
Impoysonment, to displace Carry that was Under-keeper in Wade's Time, and to
place Weston, that was the Actor in the Impoysonment; and this was done in such
a while, that it may appear to be done as it were in a Breath. Then when they
had this poor Gentleman in the Tower, close Prisoner, where he could not
escape, nor stir, where he could not feed but by their Hands, where he could
not speak nor write, but through their Trunks; then was the time to act the
last Day of his Tragedy.

Then must Franklin, the Purveyor of the Poison, procure five, six, seven
several Poisons, to be sure to hit his Complexion; then must Mrs. Tur^er, the
Lay-mistress of the Poisons, ^dvise what works at present, and what at
distance; then must Weston ^e the Tormentor, and chase him with Poison after
Poison, Poison ^n Salt Meats, Poison in Sweet Meats, Poison in Medicines and
Vomits, until at last his Body by the use of Treacle and Preservatives, was so
fortified, that the force of the Poisons was blunted upon him. Weston
confessing, when he was chid for not dispatching him, that he had given him
enough to poison twenty men.

And Lastly, Because all this asked time, Courses were taken by Somerset both
to divert all the true means of Overbury's Delivery, and to entertain him with
continual Letters, partly with Hopes and Protestations for his Delivery, and
partly with other Fables and Negations: somewhat like some kind of Persons,
which keep in a Tale of Fortune-telling, when they have a Felonious Intent to
pick their Pockets and Purses. And this is the true Narration of this Act,
which I have summarily recited.

Now for the Distribution of the Proofs, there are four Heads to prove you
guilty, whereof two are precedent to the Impoysonment; the Third is present,
and the Fourth is following or subsequent: For it is in Proofs, as it is in
Lights, there is a direct Light, and there is a Reflection of Light, and a
double Light.

The first Head or Proof thereof is, that there was a Root of Bitterness, a
Mortal Malice or Hatred mixed, with a deep and bottomless Mischief, that you
had to Sir Thomas Overbury.

The Second is, That you were the Principal Actors, and had your Hand in all
those Acts which did conduce to the Impoysonment, and gave Opportunity to
effect it, without which, the Impoysonment could never have been, and which
could seem to tend to no other end but the Impoysonment.

The Third is, That your Hand was in the very Impoysonment it self, that you
did direct Poison, and that you did deliver Poison, and that you did
continually hearken to the Success of the Impoysonment, and that you spur^ed it
on, and called for a Dispatch, when you thought it lingered.

And Lastly, That you did all things after the Impoysonment, which may detect a
guilty Conscience for the smothering of it, and the avoiding of Punishment for
it, which can be but of three Kinds.

That you suppressed as much as in you was, Testimony, that you did deface,
destroy, clip and misdate all Writings that might give light to the
Impoysonment; and you did fly to the Altar of Guiltiness, which is a Pardon of
Murder, and a Pardon for your self, and not for your self.

In this, my Lords, I convert my Speech unto you, because I would have you
alter the points of your Charge, and so make your Defense the better: And two
of these Heads I have taken to my self, and left the other to the King's two
Sergeants.

For the first main part, which is the Mortal Malice coupled with Fear that was
in you to Sir Tho. Overbury, although you did palliate it with a great deal of
Hypocrisy and Dissimulation, even to the very end: I will prove it, my Lord
Steward, the Root of this Hate, was that which cost many a Man's Life, that is,
fear of discovering Secrets; I say, of Secrets of a dangerous and high Nature;
wherein the Course that I will hold shall be this.

I will show that a Breach and Malice was betwixt my Lord and Overbury, and
that it burst forth into violent Threats and Menaces on both sides.

Secondly, That these Secrets were not of a Light, but of an High Nature: I
will give you the Elevation of the Pole; they were such as my Lord of Somerset
had made a ^ow, that Overbury should never live in Court nor Country; that he
had likewise opened so far, that either he or himself must die for it; and of
Overbury's part, he had threatened, my Lord, that whether he did live or die, my
Lord's Shame should never die; but that he would leave him the most ^dious Man
in the World; and further, that my Lord was like enough to repent, where
Overbury wrote, which was in the Tower of London, ^e was a Prophet in that. So
there is the highest of the Secret.

Thirdly, I will show you, that al^ the King's Business was by my Lord put into
Overbury's Hands, so as ther^ is work enough for all Secrets whatsoever, they
write them, and lik^ Princes, they had Confederates, their Ciphers and their
Jurgons.

And Lastly, I will show you, tha^ it was but a Toy, to say, the Malice was
only in respect he spoke dishonourably of the Lady, or for doubt o^ breaking
the Marriage, for that Overbury was Coadjutor to that Love; and the Lord of
Somerset was as deep in speaking ill of the Lady, as Overbury* And again, it
was too late for the matter; for the Bargain of the Match was then made and
past: And if it had been no more than to remove Overbury from disturbing the
Match, it had been an easy matter to have landed over Overbury; for which they
had a fair way, but that would not serve.

And Lastly, periculum periculo vincitur, to go so far as an Impoysonment, must
have a deeper Malice than Flashes; for the Cause must have a Proportion in the
Effect.

For the next General Head or Proof, which consists in the Acts preparatory, or
middle Acts; they are in eight several Points of the Compass, as I may term
them.

First, There were diverse Devices and Projects to set Overbury's Head on Work
to dispatch him and overthow him, plotted between the Countess of Essex, and
the Earl of Somerset, and the Earl of Northampton, before they fell upon the
Impoisonment: For always before men fix upon a Course of Mischief, there will
be some Rejection; but die he must one way or other.

Secondly, That my Lord of Somerset was principal Practicer, I must speak it in
a most perfidious manner, to set a Trap and Train for Overbury, to get him into
the Tower, without which they durst not attempt the Impoysonment.

Thirdly, That the placing of the Lieutenant Yelvis, one of the Impoysonments,
was done by my Lord of Somerset,

Fourthly, That the placing of Weston the Underkeeper, who was the principal
Impoysoner, and the displacing of Carry; and the doing all this within the space
of fifteen Days after Overbury's Commitment, was by the Means and Countenance
of my Lord of Somerset; and these were the Active Instruments of the
Impoysonment ^ And this was a business the Ladies Power could not reach unto.

Fifthly, That because there must be a Cause of this Tragedy to be Acted, and
chiefly, because they would not have the Poisons work upon the sudden; and for
that the Strength of Overbury's Nature, on the very Custom of receiving the
Poisons into his Body, did overcome the Poisons, that they wrought not so fast;
therefore Overbury must be held in the Tower, as well as he was laid in; and as
my Lord of Somerset got him into the Trap, so he keeps him in, and abuses him
with continual hope of Liberty, but diverted all the true and effectual Means
of his Liberty, and makes light of his Sickness and Extremities.

6. That not only the Plot of getting Overbury into the Tower, and the Devices
to hold and keep him there, but the strange manner of the close keeping of him,
being in but for a Contempt, was by the Device and Means of my Lord of
Somerset, who denied his Father to see him, denied his Servants that offered to
be shut up close Prisoners with him; and in effect handled it so, that he made
him close Prisoner to all his Friends, and exposed to all his Enemies.

Seventhly, That all the Advertisement the Lady received from time to time,
from the Lieutenant or Weston, touching Overbury's State of Body and Health,
were ever sent nigh to the Court though it were in Progress, and that from my
Lady, such a Thirst and Listening he had to hear that he was dispatched.

Lastly, That there was a continual Negotiation to set Overbury's Head on Work,
that he should make some to clear the Honor of the Lady, and that he should be
a good Instrument toward her and her Friends; all which was but Entertainment:
For your Lordships shall see diverse of my Lord of Northampton's Letters, (whose
Hand was deep in this Business) written, I must say in dark words and Clauses,
that there was one thing pretended, and another thing intended; that there was
a real Charge, and somewhat not real, a main Drift and Dissimulatien: Nay
further, there be some Passages which the Peers in their Wisdoms will discern,
to point directly at the Poysonment.

King James his Pardon to Frances, Countess of Somerset, for Poisoning of Sir
Thomas Overbury.
James Rex,

THe King, to whom, etc. Greeting. Whereas the Fountains, ^s well of Mercy as
Justice, are wont, and ought to flow from the King's Throne, of which the
former of Ju^tice in the memorable Case of the Death and Murder of Sir Thomas
O^erbury, in a constant and right Course, ^ath flowed, and is derived from us,
and our Royal Court, for the full Sa^isfaction of our selves and Subjects: And
whereas diverse and manifold Causes of our Clemency occur, which ^ay move our
Regal Mercy toward Fr. Carre, late Countess of Somerset, ^hiefly, that
Murder, with so many and such examples of Justice, before this ^ime expiated,
especially two, whereof the first respects her Father, and Friends, and
Family, and Noble Progeny; the other has respect to her self, because she
freely and willingl^ confessed her Offense, submitting an^ prostrating her self
at the Altar of ou^ Mercy, not only during the time ^^ her Imprisonment, but
also publickl^ and in her Trial: And forasmuch a^ Lord Ellesmere, our
Chancellor ^^ England, and being our High Steward of England in that behalf,
and a^^ her Peers, by whose Judgment she was Convict, at the Humble Petition of
the said Frances publicly made solemnly bound themselves by their promise to
intercede for our Roya^ Mercy toward her; and first, weigh^ing with our selves
the Nature of he Offense, upon which she was Indicted, Arraigned, Convicted and
Condemned, viz. that the Process and Judgment were not as of a Principal but as
of an Accessory before the Fact and that she seemed to have begun by the
Procurement, and wicked Instigation of certain base Persons. Know ye, that We,
moved with Pity, o^ our special Grace, and of our certain Knowledge, and our
mere Motion Pardoned, Remitted and Remised, and by these Presents, for us, our
Heirs and Successors, do Pardon, Remise and Release to the aforesaid Frances
Carre, late Countess of Somerset, or by whatsoever other Name or Surname, or
Addition of Name, or of her Surname of Dignity, Place, or Places, the same
Frances may be known, esteemed, called or named, or lately was known, esteemed,
called or Named, the Slaughter, Killing, Poisoning, Bewitching, Death, Felony,
and Felonious Murdering of the aforesaid Sir Thomas O^erbury, or by whatsoever
Name, Surname, or Addition of Name or Surname, of Place or Places, the said
Sir Thomas Overbury may be known, esteemed, called or named, or lately was
known, esteemed, called or named by the said Frances, by her self alone, or
with any other Person, or Persons whatsoever, howsoever, in what manner soever,
whenever or wheresoever done, committed or perpetrated, all and all manner of
Conspiracies, Felonies, Abettments, Procurements, Incitations, Partnerships,
Maintainances, Helps, Hirings, Commands, Councils, Crimes, Transgressions,
Wrongs, Offenses and Faults whatsoever the aforesaid Death, Slaughter, Killing,
Poisoning, Bewitching, Felony and Felonious Murdering of the aforesaid Sir
Thomas Overbury, in any wise, touching or concerning, and the Accessory of them
as before the Fact, as after the Fact, and Flight and Flights made thereupon,
although the said Frances of the Premises, or any of the Premises stand, or
not stand Indicted, Impeached, Appellat, Vocat, Rectat, Maneat, Convicted,
Condemned, Attainted or Adjudged by the Judgment of her Peers, before the
aforesaid High Steward of England, or otherwise howsoever, or thence in time to
come, shall appear to be Indicted, Impeached, Appellari, Rectari, Vocari,
Waviari, Convicted, Condemned, Attainted or Adjudged; and all and singular
Indictments, Judgments, Condemnations, Executions, Pains of Death, Pains of
Corporal Punishments, and all other Pains and Penalties whatsoever, of, for, or
concerning the Death, Slaughter, Killing, Poisoning, Bewitching, Felonies, and
Felonious Murdering of the aforesaid Sir Thomas Overbury, in, upon or against
the same Frances, had, made, returned or adjudged, or which we against the same
Frances may have in time to come, (Imprisonment at our Royal Pleasure, or
Restraint confining to a certain place only excepted) Moreover we do pardon,
and by these presents for us, our Heirs and Successors, remit and remise to the
aforesaid Frances, all and every Outdowries, which against the same Frances, by
reason or occasion of the Premises or any of them, have been proclaimed, or
hereafter shall be proclaimed; and all and all manner of Suits, Complaints,
Impeachments and Demands whatsoever, which we against the same Frances for the
Premises, or any of the Premises have had, have, or in time to come shall
have; and the suit of our Peace which appertained to us against the same
Frances, or may appertain by reason of the Premises, or any of them, and by
these Presents, we do give and grant our firm peace to the same Frances,
willing that the same Frances by the Justices, Sheriffs, Escheators, Bailiffs,
or any other our Ministers, by the occasions aforesaid, or any of them, be not
molested, troubled, or in any manner vexed, so as nevertheless she stand right
in our Court, if any toward her should speak concerning the Premises, or any
of the Premises, although the said Frances do not find good and sufficient
Security, according to the Form of a certain Act of Parliament, of the
Sovereign Lord Edward the Third, Late King of England, our Progenitor, held at
Westminster, in the Tenth Year of his Reign, for her Good Behavior from
henceforth toward us, our Heirs and Successors, and all our People: And
farther, for us, our Heirs and Successors, of our more ample, special Grace,
and out of our certain Knowledge, and our mere motion, we will, and grant by
these presents, that these our Letters Patent of Pardon, and all and singular
the things contained in the same, shall stand and be good, firm, valid,
sufficient and effectual in the Law, and from henceforth shall by no means
be^ome void; and that in time to come, ^he said Frances by any means shall not
be Indicted, Arrested, Accused, ^exed or troubled of, for or concern^ng the
Death, Murder, Slaughter, Poisoning, Bewitching, Felony, or ^elonious Killing
of the aforesaid Sir Thomas Overbury, howsoever, or by whatsoever means the
said Sir Thomas Overbury came to his End. The Statute of the Sovereign Lord
Richard the ^econd, Late King of England, in the Thirteenth Year of his Reign,
or any other Statute, Act, Ordinance, Pro^ision, Restriction to the contrary
^hereof notwithstanding. In Testimo^y whereof, etc. Witness, etc.

Francis Bacon.

Anno Dom. 1621. An. Reg. Jac. 19. An Order of the Privy Council.
Whitehall January 18. 1621.
Present,
Lord Keeper. Lord Treasurer. L. President. L. M. Hamilton. Earl Marshall. L.
Vis. Falkland. Lord Digby. Lord Brook. Mr. Treasurer. Mr. Secret. Calvert* Mr.
C^anc. Excheq* Master of the Rolls*
Whereas his Majesty is Graciously pleased to enlarge and set at Liberty the
Earl of Somerset and his Lady, now Prisoners in the Tower of London ^ and that
nevertheless it is thought fit* that both the said Earl and his Lady be
consined to some convenient place* It is therefore, according to his Majesty's
Gracious Pleasure and Command* Ordered, That the Earl of Somerset and his Lady,
do repair either to Gray^ or Cowsham, the Lord Wallingford's Houses in the
County of Oxon, and remain confined to one or either of the said Houses, and
within three Miles compass of either of the same, until further Order be given
by his Majesty.

The Duke of Buckingham' s Answer to the Spanish Ambassador's Informations,
etc. Anno Dom. 1624. in the 22d. of King James.
From the Original, written by Sir Edward Coke's (then Attorney General) own
Hand.
MY Master's known Wisdom, Justice, and constant Favor toward me, attended
with Confidence in my own Faith and Innocence, may make it seem both needless
and unfit by any Defense, to show respect to a Libellous Information, which
reflecteth wholly upon the Author's Dishonor: For who will not abhor this
deplored Art of Calumniating boldly? Because no Aspersion (how false soever)
can be washed off so clean, but some discoloring will remain.

Besides, though Conspiracy be a Work of Darkness, hardly to be cleared, because,
in it, Suspicions go for Proof; yet my Youth and manner of Life, and even that
Character of Irregular Freedom which the Accusers set upon me, will, by
Caesar's known Judgment, acquit me thereof: And therefore, if my Personal
Disgrace or Danger were the Marks they aim at, I would stand or fall by his
Knowledge of me, who has made me what I am; and has both Right and Power to
unmake me at his pleasure.

But as that Wife King well understood, that when his Brother demanded the
Shunamite, he sought not her but the Kingdom; so his Majesty's piercing
Judgment will discover my Name to be the Mask, Himself, his Royal Children, and
his Kingdoms to be the true Subjects of this practicing Complaint. And though
the Particulars thereof are forged, partly by Jesuits and their Factions at
Home, and partly by corrupt Ministers and Emissaries Abroad; yet the Workmen
that manage them are Public Ministers of State, of whose Offices and Sway
amongst us, we already feel the smart, and have cause to prevent the Danger
that may ensue: especially considering, they are Engines of that affected
Monarchy, which has enlarged it self by Negotiations, more than by Arms: And
which by advantage of late Treaties, has not lately invaded the Patrimonies of
his Majesty's Children, but procured such Liberty and Connivance with his own
Kingdoms, as they supposed would produce a Rebellion, not to be appeased
without the help of their Arms.

And since their Designs (by God's Providence) are now brought to light, what
could Malice it self have attemped more pernicious than by such Infectious
Breaches, fury-like to stir Jealousies betwixt the King, his People and most
obliged Servants; and which is more horrible, betwixt the Bark and the Tree:
Nay, betwixt the Tree it self and all the Branches thereof. Now in respect of
these Consequences, although my Person be of no Consideration, and happily, by
saying nothing, or doing easy Offices, might redeem their Displeasure: Yet
where my Duty is so deeply engaged, I, in my Heart, cannot hold; and therefore
for their Interests for whom by my humble thankfulness and Faith, I account the
chief Hopes and Fruits of my Life; yet so as the World shall bear me Witness, I
plead my Cause, the demonstration that his Majesty commanded these
Informations; first to be told, and then to be written in the Letters they
allege, whereby they excuse themselves of being Informers, as of a Practice
too base for Persons of their Rank. But the Truth redoundeth only to his
Majesty's Honor. For as in their Treaties, they ever drew us on by making us
rich and happy in general Promises, so now by such general contriving of
strange Conspiracies and Plots among our selves, they endeavor to divert us
from any further Discovery or Prevention of theirs.

And this his Majesty perceiving, First pressed them to Particulars, finding
their Verbal Charges uncertain, and subject to Inlargment, or Restriction, at
the Peoples Pleasure: he then commanded them to be written so as now they are
fixed, and no more in their Power; but may be examined and judged by all men of
Understanding, to whose Construction and Censure, I willingly submit both them
and my Answer. For what can be the Danger, When in the very Entrance of my
Accusation they acknowledge, that the matters objected against me, are not such
as may be cleared by Judicial Proofs? And must his Majesty then take them
merely upon Trust? Indeed Ambassadors have an Honorable Trust for their
Masters Affairs; and if they obtain a like Trust with those Princes to whom
they are employed; what will they not persuade? Shall not the Restitution of
the Palatinate, the Marriage and Dispensation, and the Portion be made Articles
to be added to our Creed? But the Original Sin and Root of all Treasons and
Offenses laid to my Charge is, that by eating the forbidden Fruit in Spain,
mine Eyes have been opened to discover the Evil as well as the Good; and so to
trust them no further than they deserve.

And yet I will not here take them too short, for they say they have Witnesses;
but such as for fear of my Power do withdraw themselves; such as dare not speak
and deliver their minds, though commanded by the King; and though thereby they
suffer the best King in the World to be brought into Extremities; and such as
neither will nor dare speak, if first they be not freed from Jealousy and
Fear, yet these they pronounce to be his Majesty's Most Faithful Subjects.
Surely of our Faith they cannot be which holds them Traitors, Faithless and
Perjured, that prefer not the Safety, and Honor of their Prince and Country,
before the Fear and Respect of any person whomsoever: And if this Fear proves
them to be of their Faith, how can they think, the Entering into the
Ambassador's House, to be so heinous, a matter as here is pretended? Does not
all the World know the Liberty they give; and which, as Papists, have taken
beyond Examples in this kind? They are not then Mass-Papists, but perhaps of
Higher Rank, having Place and Access to deliver their Minds to the King if they
durst.

And such only are worthy their Nomination, and his Majesty's Audience in
Matters of this Weight. His Majesty therefore, to go beyond Craft and Malice,
has, in his Royal Wisdom and Justice, by a new Example, permitted even the
great men, which by their ordinary Access might be subject to this Scandal, to
be examined upon Oath. And what the Accusers gained thereby, let them boast,
and show reason (if they can) why the Honor done me in their Answer, should
not give both his Majesty and the World Satisfaction on my behalf; and why they
themselves, (till they produce other Authors) should not be reputed the
Inventors of these Scandals and Reports? And whereas they say in in the end,
that there wants not means to free these honest Men (as they call them) from
Fear and Distrust: Indeed the Inquisition of Spain is said to have found the
way, First to Imprison, and keep close, and so encourage Accusers, if such be
not ready found, then to force men by Extremities to be Accusers of themselves.
But howsoever this way has prevailed to Exterminate from their Country that
which they call Heresy, and we True Religion: Yet considering no other Nation
approves it as Lawful and Just, I hope I shall not be the first Example of
planting it amongst us.

But they say further, though his Subjects durst not, yet the Ambassadors would
have informed his Majesty against me, if any free Audience could in my Absence
have been obtained. And why in my Absence? Or why should not the Ambassador of
so Great a King accuse me to my Face? Or how could they without Dishonor to
their Master and themselves, traduce me behind my Back? And why did my
Industrious seeking to be present, argue my Fear and Diffidence of Conscience,
and not rather an assured Confidence in my Truth? But this (say they) is not to
be done, save only where the King is of small Experience or under Age, or of no
Judgment, and the Favorite wise, circumspect, and of great Judgment and
Experience; and not in this Case where every thing is contrary. Whereunto I
answer, that I am most willing to lay my Honor at my Master's Feet in the
Dust; so as the World be sensible with greater Indignation of this
Jesuit-school-wit that by the Figure of Opposing, my Master to me, and him to
other Princes, seemingly flattereth, really staineth the Honor both of our and
their Kings.

For ours, the Freedom of Access, Discourse, Conversation and Entertainment he
gives to all Ambassadors, is such a Singular Glory to all his Royal Abilities,
and Gracious Disposition as no Favorite can Eclipse, no Carper can blemish:
And for theirs, wha^ Power Favorites have had in their Accesses and all
Affairs, every Man knows, that knows ought o^ Spain: And must we therefore
apply the Use and Honor of their Favorites, to the disabling of their King*
As unexperienced and precipitate as they make me, I know my Duty better; and do
well understand, that Favorites do then vanish, when their Masters Greatness
by them becomes less: Yet this is not all; for they tell us, that his Majesty
is Most Wise, o^ Great Experience, and the best King in the World. And this
they repeat, that with the Sugar of these Epithites they may cover their Bitter
Pills* For they forbear not withal to say, that he suffers a Precipitate
Novice to be too Powerful with him, that his Most Faithful Subjects dare not
deliver their Minds unto him: And that thereby he is brought into Great
Extremities, and does many unfit things.

And are these Figures to be used to Princes? Did the Ministers of Great
Monarchs thus by Deeds confute Words? And am I the Cat they whip, to make the
King believe I draw him over the Pool? This savoureth not of that Modesty which
I may challenge to my self, if I acknowledge those defects they charge me
withal. And yet when they have laid me as low as they please, they shall find
my weak Understanding supported sufficiently with my Master's Wisdom: And for
my Experience, though I may assume somewhat by so many Years Trust and
Employment under him; yet somewhat more I have learnt in Spain, to be put in
practice when my Service shall be commanded in those Parts. Notwithstanding I
confess ingeniously, that what I do amiss, proceeds from my own Precipitation
and Error. And what I do well, is by my Master's Wisdom and Instruction, for
which I owe him more, than for his great Favor, and the Fortunes I enjoy. But
for these Actions, which under the Veil of my Name, they endeavor to make
odious to their Party, I profess, that as they are really his Majesty's or the
Princes; so they are well approved by the chiefest and best part of
Christendom, as tending to the Honor of his Wisdom, the Good of the Prince,
the Happiness o^ the People, and the Settling of this State in their Posterity
for ever.

For the better clearing whereof, I will proceed to a particular Examination of
those Extremities to which they say his Majesty is now brought.

The First is the Enmity of their most powerful King by my industrious
Procurement. And why his Enmity? Because the Treaties are dissolved. And is
this a necessary Consequence, that either we must suffer them by Treaties to
undermine and compass all their ends, or else undergo their Enmity, and (as
they afterward interpret it) a most cruel War? And is not this a Proclamation
to all the World, that they aspire to such an absolute Monarchy, as so many
Books Stories, Discourses, and the general Complaints of all Princes and States
have long charged them with? And indeed, as the true Character of their
Religion is Persecution and Blood, so the true mark of their Empire is
Oppression and War: Yet connot these Threatenings amuse or disturb the Religious
and peaceable Resolutions of our King, Prince and People. They hate War, they
pray against it, they love Peace, they prosper by it; and therefore endeavor
by all means to preserve it: But if they be assailed, they cannot but remember
how God's Mighty Hand, by a Late Queen of peace, brought down her Enemies
greatness and pride, to acknowledge the Sovereignty of a despised people, which
ever since has resisted and balanced their power: And therefore they cannot
but hope, that the same Arm by a King of peace, shall in the end prevail with
them to entertain a safe peace upon more equal Terms; and then all men shall
have cause to applaud that Wisdom and Resolution which these men are troubled
with, and therefore speak against.

The next Extremity they complain of is the calling of a Parliament by my
procurement, and to my ends, wherein the Honor they do me is more than I am
capable of. And for the Jealousy they would raise of making my self Head of
that Council, or the Puritan Faction; my Master will laugh at it, and thereby
know they want probable Matter to object against my Faith; which when they
question, they assail me in my Strength, and shall find my Deeds as ready and
confident Justifications as my Words. But it is not my Faith or Aspiring, they
here would bring in doubt; they have a further Strain: For as before they made
my Name a Fume to disquiet the Head; now they make it a Poison to carry
Infection into the Body.

For, What is the Parliament, but the Body of the Kingdom? And why do they
stain it with the hateful Name of Puritan, but to make it odious to the King?
Indeed such Names help the Jesuits in Disputes of Religion, when they are
driven from all real Defenses; and would they practice this deplo^able Art in
the Matters of State, if they were not in his Case that called Christ Galilean,
when he was vanquished by his Power? For who knows not the Upper House of
Parliament consists of all the Pre^ates and Peers, and the Nether House of
near 500 Knights and Burgesses, Elected and sent out of all Parts of ^he
Kingdom? And are all these Pu^itans? Do my Plots receive better En^ertainment
amongst them than with ^he Council of State? And does this re^roachful
Comparison honor or dis^onour those Able and Wise Men who are here presented
to be well ^ffected to their Cause? but their end ^as no Man's Honor: It was
to break ^he Parliament, by setting Faction a^ongst the Members of both Hou^es,
as well as with the Head; and their ^and is most evident in misrepresenting the
Case.

For where they say, that almost every one of the Council both liked and
allowed of the Propositions of the Catholic King, and found therein no Cause
to dissolve the Treaty. They conceal that the Proposition was then made for the
Palatinate alone, supposing the Treaty of the Marriage should proceed: And in
that Case it might seem reasonable to very Wise Men^ that the other Treaty
should not b^ broken off. But in Parliament where both Parties come in Question
together, not one of those Able and Wise Men (for they were all Member^ of the
one House or the other) dissented from the Council of dissolving them both. The
Altars of Provocation may then be objected to Worshippers of Saints, or to them
that appeal to their Idol at Rome, and no^ to Us, who acknowledge no Sovereign
upon Earth but our King, to whom both Council of State and Parliament yield
Odedience in all things. How then may it be said, tha^ the Parliament is now
above the King? Or how can they hope that such shameless and impious
Suggestions can make a prudent and good King jealous, and doubtful of a most
obsequious and dutiful People? Especially at this time, when it may truly be
said, That the Spirit of Wisdom in the Heart of the King, has wrought the
Spirit of Unity in the Hearts of his Subjects, which made the Success more
happy than former Parliaments have had. And this indeed is the matter which the
Devil and they storm at.

For who can doubt that they and their Faction cannot endure without much
trouble of Mind (as they confess) to see the weightiest Affairs, and of
greatest Moment, to be now referred to the Censure of the Parliament, when
their fair Promises and Pretenses can no longer prevail? Yet let them tell us,
what greater and more Honorable Senate they have seen in Spain or elsewhere.

Besides, Do not the very Writs for the Summons of Parliament, express, That is
for the great and weighty Affairs of the Kingdom? And have not our greatest and
wisest Kings heretofore referred Treaties of Leagues, of Marriages, of Peace,
and War, and of Religion it self, to the Consultations of their Parliaments?
Those then that take upon them to undervalue this High Court, do but expose
their own Judgments to Censure and Contempt; not knowing, that Parliaments, as
they are the Honor and Support, so they are the Handmaids and Creatures of
our Kings, inspired, formed and governed by their Power. And if Charles the
Fifth o^ France, by his Parliament of Paris, recovered a great part of that
Kingdom from this Crown; and if Succeeding Kings there, by the Assistance of
that Court, redeemed the Church from the Tyranny of the Pope, We have no cause
to doubt, that our King, by the Faithful Advice, Assistance, and Service of his
Parliament, shall be able both to recover the Palatinate, which they here make
so difficult, and to protect our Neighbors and Allies; and either to settle
such a Peace as we really desire, or to execute such Vengeance as God's
Justice, and their Sins shall, for their Ambition assuredly draw upon them.

But they proceed, and tell the King, that it is said, I have propounded many
things to the Parliament in his Name, without his Advice or Consent, nay,
contrary to his Will. And is not this to abuse the Ears and patience of a
Prince, to tell him many things are said, and yet neither specify the Matters
nor the Men? Or is not this to dally with my Name by Hear-says, when with a
harsh and incoherent Transition, they suddenly fall upon ^he Prince, who is the
next true Mark their Malice shoots at: And when Malice it self cannot but
acknowledge his Ingenuity and great Gifts; and that in all things he shew^th
himself an obedient and good ^on; yet these Attributes they will ^eeds qualify
with a Nevertheless, which cannot charge me as with a ^ault, that I am
confident in his Favor: Or that I therefore despise all men, to which Vice of
all other my Nature is least inclined; but indeed taxes the Prince at least
with participation of my ill Intentions, by suffering me to make those persons
subject to my Will, which are most conformable to His. Whom they mean I know
not; but pray God, that those Men they thus recommend to his Highness's neare^
Trust, prove not more dangerous to his Person, than I have hitherto been
refractory to his Will.

But having shot this Bolt, they come back again to me as to their
Stalking-horse, to choose a new Mark. And first, for a preparative to the Prince
Attention, they wish that my Action were directed to his Good. Then t^ give at
least some Varnish to their Work, they tell him, that good me believe (meaning
such as believe the^ with an implicit Faith) that I (wh^ have imbroiled the
Match with Spain will not be less able to break any other his Highness should
affect: i^ which Speech, if a Man will dive t^ the Bottom of their Malice, he
must descend into Hell. But for the Match with Spain, can any man believe, that
his Majesty sent his Son; that he went in Person; that he both trusted Spain so
far, and did that Kingdom so much Honor, and yielded to such Conditions; or
that I underwent that Hazard and Charge, and pressed their King; importuned his
Favorite and Council, and subjected my self to so many Indignities; or that so
great a Fleet even into their own Ports, with Minds to interrupt or embroil, or
not rather to remove all Impediments, to ^asten the Marriage, and to bring ^ome
the Infanta which was promised with as great Assurance as words could express?
But they will say, that ^his Earnestness and Haste, was it that disturbed all
the Business; and so I ^hink it did: And I confess withal, that it was our End
and Endeavor ^o put them from their Shifts; and to ^ring to an Issue, that
Treaty, under ^he Delay whereof we had suffered so ^uch. And I profess further,
that the Honor and good Success of this Intention, do properly belong to his
Majesty and the Prince, by whose Wisdom and Resolution a desperate Remedy was
so well applied to a desperate Disease.

But they say, That howsoever my Endeavors might at first concur to hasten the
Match; yet after the Princess Palatine had written Letters unto me, and had
sent her Secretary to confirm a Marriage betwixt her So^ and my Daughter: Then
I instantly caused the Prince to revoke his Procuration, and turned all upside
down And here is revealed another mystica^ Use they would make of my Name to
divide Father and Daughter, Brother and Sister, Master and Servant and to break
all the Bonds of Nature and Affection, by Jealousy of Stat^ And can the Devil
attempt more But what Proof? Nay, what Appearance do they shadow this withal
Forsooth, by telling, that they kno^ in Spain, that the same day tho^ Letters
were delivered, the Revoc^tion was pronounced; but how knew they that? Or do
they not know in Spain, that the Prince himself opened and read all the
Letters, and heard all Addresses. And by what Inspection could they know more
than the Prince? Except those innocent Letters were like indented Pictures,
which show to one's view a fair, and to another's a foul Face? Is it not
strange, that Malice it self is not satiated with the Distresses of those
Worthy Princes, except it bereave them not only of necessary Support and
Relief; but also of that Love and good Opinion whereby they must subsist? And
to what other End tends that careful Admonition to the King, to takeheed both
to himself and to the Prince? My Precipitation, my Ambition and my Popularity,
are but the Fringe and Shadow: The supplanting of these Princes the Diversion
of the Affection of their Father and Brother, the bereaving them of all
Assistance and Comfort; and finally, the Disturbing of all our Affairs, are the
true Ends of these Fore-warnings, and false pretended Fears: For my Ambition
and Popularity, how appeared it in Parliament? by casting (say they) all Odious
Matters upon the King; and arrogating the thanks of all things acceptable to my
self, and by the Title given me to be Redeemer of my Country: Such Generalities
are ever the Subterfuges of deceit, But let them instance in any Particular,
either of odious Matter there propounded, and cast upon the King, or of
plausible, whereof all the Honor was not his; and that with greater
Demonstration of Reverence and Thankfulness, than in former Parliaments has
been seen. For the Title, it is true, that by our Journey into Spain, we were
brought out of Darkness into Light; and the Discovery of former
Inconveniences, and future Dangers of the Treaties was applauded in
Parliament, as no less than a Work of Redemption to the State. But therein, all
that I assumed, or was attributed to me, was the Happiness to have been under
the Prince's Government, whose Wisdom in discovering the Insincerity of their
Pretenses, in refusing those things which were utterly inconvenient, in
yielding to such, as being prejudicial, were corrigible afterward; and in
qualifying the rest to a tolerable Construction, was the only means of
redeeming our Safety, and settling our Affairs. And for his Majesty, who has
heard of his Name that can doubt that his deep Understanding and Experience was
the true Fountain from which all our Directions did proceed?

Then how can I be charged with Envy against the great Good of Christendom, and
especially of England and Spain? When all the World shall understand, that the
King and Prince under God, and by his Blessings, are the chief means to rescue
all Christendom, especially England, from the Usurpation of that pretended
Empire, which they call the Good; but is truly the Bondage and Misery of both
-- Having thus served their Turns with my Name against his Majesty, against the
Prince, against the Parliament, against his Royal Daughter, and her Race; who
could think it possible their Malice could strain higher? Yet their
Masterpiece is behind. And whereas their former Suggestions were grounded
upon, they say here, They know in Spain, and such Shaddows of Testimonies at
large: For this they now hatch, because it is monstrous in it self; and has
nothing in Being, possible to ground upon. They lay a strange Foundation upon a
bare Pretense, that many speak ominously fearing the worst; but withal, knowing
that his Majesty's Wisdom cannot be wrought upon by Popular Apprehensions, they
say farther, that he that told it, did the Office of a good Man, both to God,
his Majesty and the Prince. Yet surely, this was not the good Man of David,
that imagines no Evil, and tells no Untruth; but such an one as St. John
calls the Accuser of the Brethren, or as Doeg the Edomite, that told the
King, how David his Son-in-law, and the Priest of Abimelech had conspired
against him: For what says this good man? Forsooth, that the Puritans (if they
do desire a King, which willingly they do not) do not at all desire the Most
Illustrious Prince, but the Prince Palatine, whose Scout Mansfield is,
whatsoever he pretends: And lest any man might imagine, that they mean Factious
Puritans, which are now no considerable Number amongst us: In the next Clause,
for Explanation, they mention the Fury of the Parliament; and soon after, the
Reproach of the whole English Nation. But why then do they not call us by the
old name of Protestants? Because that is now a Name of too much allay, and
could have bred no distaste in the King; but knowing what he suffered by
Puritans elsewhere, to make the whole Nation odious both to King and Prince,
they turn us Puritans all at once, though that Faction be more hated and
suppressed amongst us, than in all the World besides. And what is then our Ruin?

First, In General, That we are not willing to be subject unto Kings.

Secondly, In Particular, That we desire not the Prince, but the Palsgrave to
succeed.

For the First, Let them know, that these Kingdoms of Great Britain, are beyond
Comparison more Ancient than the Kingdoms of Spain; and yet no Story reputeth,
that they ever had or desired, or were capable of any Government but Regal: And
the Religion we profess, binds our Consciences more firmly to obey, honor,
support and defend our Kings against all hteir Enemies than Popish Religion can
do: And this they will find to be true when they attempt ought against us,

For the Second, I will not be so vain, as to discourse of the Prince, or his
Interest in the good Opinion of the People. This only I say for his Religion,
they made him a Confessor in Spain, as their Faction long since made his Royal
Father in his Honor a Martyr: And for his Carriage, he converseth with us
daily, and knows us much better than any stranger can; and therefore we trust
his own Experience and good Opinion of us, against all they can suggest. And
for the Prince Palatine, we love his Nation, from which we were extracted; and
we love his Religion, which was the Ground of the Alliance with him; and we
much esteem that Noble Princess by whom he participateth, with that Duty and
Affection which from the King, as the Root, in due proportion disperseth it
self in all the Branches; yet so, as whenever they shall divide from the
Head, or the Body, they cannot but know, that their Moisture will dry up. And
for Count Mansfield, it is worth the observing, how they labor to dissemble,
and divert that Fear of him which they cannot have for us, but indeed for
themselves; least he, who has already so troubled them in Germany, should
disturb them elsewhere. Now whereas they conjure King and Prince, to foresee
the Vengeance of God, provoked by my Practices, and the Fury of Parliament, for
Testimonies and Libels against the Honor of Spain: How much more Cause have
they both, and we all, to consider and praise God's Miraculous Goodness, in
preserving their Persons, and blessing their Endeavors in so happy a Discovery
and Prevention of those Dangers, which the Treaties would have brought upon our
Religion and State? And thereby rest assured, that he will still bless where
they curse, and establish the Scepters of the Defenders of his Faith, and in
pouring his Vengeance upon the Beast, and the Enemies of his Truth. And if the
Testimonies published against Spain, and believed in Parliament, were not true,
why do they not convince them and satisfy them, and satisfy the World? And
for those bitter and ignominious Libels they mention, why can they not be read,
without Ignominy to our Nation, as well as Pasquin's in Rome, and like Libels
in France, Germany, and other Nations with their Reproach? Especially
considering, as the Spaniards of all People, are most pursued with Writing of
this kind, so the English of all other, do punish Libels with most Severity and
Rigor.

But that which follows, is yet more remarkable: It is apparent (say they)
that the League is broken, and Histories will witness it: Surely those
Histories must be of their Writing; for true histories cannot record any breach
on our part. The Treaties are indeed dissolved. First, materially by them, and
then formally by us. But are those Treaties any Articles of the League? Or is
it in the Power of any Subject (be he never so willful) to break the Leagues of
Princes without due Justice demanded and refused? But now the Ambassadors,
public Ministers of State, have made such Declaration: How far that extends
his Majesty may consider; and whether it be not an Advantage cunningly ^ought
to countenance the first blow? And the rather, because immediately after this
peremptory Declaration, which may seem a degree to a Denunciation of War, they
use all the Oratory to lull his Majesty asleep, and to persuade both him and
the Prince, to prefer Peace and Quiet ever before their Kingdoms, which thereby
may be lost.

And what Confidence is this? Do they think their Learning sufficient, to teach
my Master to understand his own Note, who can much better teach them that
Pacifici beati, are not passive but Active? And that the Swor^ makes Peace,
both in Governmen^ and in War, by supporting Justice wherein the happiness of
all Society does consist. But whosoever construeth the Speeches of these men by
the litteral sense, comes short o^ their meaning: For what are all these
specious Adornings of his Majesty and the Prince in the Long Robes o^ Peace;
but a Figurative menacing them with the Consequences of War And to see what the
Love of the one or fear of the other may happily work, by Peace, i. e. by a
quiet submitting the Marriage of the Palatinate and the safety of the Kingdoms
and Allies to the Devotion of Spain. First, His Majesty may believe his Symbol
(as they say) is verified in his Person; and that he is extolled and admired
through the World: Or that otherwise he shall enjoy neither Happiness nor
Honor.

And Secondly, That the Prince can no other way succeed peaceably into the
Hereditary Possession of these Kingdoms, or the Honor of his Father; or show
that he is indeed of his Blood, or bears him Love (as if all these should be
questioned) if he do not entertain the same Peace with those Princes whose
Alliances his Majesty has so well procured and deserved, meaning, by giving
them way to work out all their Ends: And this being the sense clouded up in
their unjointed Applications; all they gain thereby, is to give these due
Acknowledgments to his Majesty and the Prince.

First, That their Royal Dispositions and Endeavors ever tended to peace.

Secondly, That of themselves they intended no alteration without violent
Motions, on the other part: And,

Thirdly, Those which force them, if at the very Entrance into War they want a
just Cause; as the Jews called for Vengeance against themselves, so these men
truly prophecy, that they shall have their Success. Hitherto I have been
brought upon the Stage, to play other men's parts. Now follows my own
Indictment in more particular Terms.

First, Concerning my Carriage of the Negotiation in Spain: And,

Secondly, For my Personal Actions and Behavior.

For the Spanish Business, because greater Persons are still involved in their
Censure, they make their way (as Poets do in Tragedies) by raising me as a
Ghost, to possess King and Prince, and to terrify all men that oppose my
Designs. Surely, I think, they smiled, when they writ this passage: For they
cannot think me so predominant, nor so terrible a Creature. But to satisfy the
World in those four first Questions which contain the Substance of all the
Business in Spain; I will briefly as I can, repeat the Proceedings which have
been related in Parliament more at large, and justified by Letters and Records;
and allowed, not only by the most temperate men they speak of, but by general
and unanimons Votes, from which no one did dissent.

But First, having the honor to be of my Master's inward Council in these
things, I must testify to the Renown of his Wisdom, and especially of his
Goodness; that as in the Marriage of his Daughter, his chief Intention was to
settle and corroborate the Party of our Religion where it is most improved; so
by the Marriage of his Son, in some powerful House of the other Religion, he
sought not only the strengthening and assuring is own Peace and Succession, but
the Universal Good of all Christendom: and a means to qualify by the
Cooperation of those Princes, the Spiritual Usurpations, whereby, in time, some
better accord in the Differences of Religion might be made. From these
Intentions, and that special Respect and Affection his Majesty ever bore to the
most Illustrious House of Austria, the former motion for the Marriage of Prince
Henry (who is with God) did proceed. But that brake (as the World knows) by
incongruous Propositions on either part. Since then an Overture being
entertained in France for Prince Charles that succeeded: And Notice thereof
being gotten in Spain, both the Duke of Lerma, and their Ambassador the now
Count Gondomer, were employed to divert that Match, by negotiating a Second
Treaty for a Daughter of that Kingdom: And that with such Protestations for
the accommodating of all former differences of Religion and State, and for so
great a Portion, and with so Royal Conditions, that his Majesty thereupon was
persuaded to give Instructions to that purpose, to his Ambassador in Spain;
whereupon they proceeded, not only to Treat and to Article, but even to the
granting of Commissions, and powers to contract: And all this while, no Stop,
no Difficulty was proposed, which they made not light and easy to pass over:
Nay, the Engagements were so potent, that the Wars of Bohemia then happening,
upon confidence that their Forces should not attempt the Palatinate, his
Majesty forbore to assist or countenance his own Son-in-law: And thereupon
ensued the loss of the Battle of Prague, the disbanding of the Union; and under
color of restoring, the Conquest of that Country, and the disposing of the
Electorate to another Prince: and in the mean time to add Scorn to Loss, his
Majesty was drawn with great Charge, to send Ambassadors to Prague, to Vienna,
to Heidelbergh, to Bruxels, to mediate for Truce, for Cessation of Arms, or for
Peace, as best suited for their Advantage; whilst by cross Letters, or secret
Intelligences, they cooled or kindled their promised Mediation, and kept us
still in appetite and hope, by our own Ministers and their assuring us of the
Match. At length the Treaty at Brussels gave the first Jealousy, that their
Intentions were indirect. And thereupon his Majesty sent Porter into Spain,
with a peremptory Direction to return in ten days; and to bring express Answer
from the King, whether, according to the promise made by his Ministers, he
would cause the Palatinate to be restored: Or if by Mediation, he could not
prevail, whether he would join in Arms to recover it by force; or at least,
give Passage for the King's Forces thither. The Return brought by Porter, was
cold and unsatisfactory; and withal delayed longer than here was expected: And
this moved the Prince more seriously to consider, how by holding us in Treaty,
they had gotten full Possession of his Sisters Estates; they had scattered and
broken most of our Allies; they would in short time eat out our Neighbors; And
every day gained upon us in matter of Religion.

And this wrought in him that Princly and Heroical Resolution, to go in person
into Spain, either with Honor and Contentment of both Nations to consummate
that Marriage which his Heart was so constantly set upon; or else to free both
his Father and Himself from being any longer abused with delays. This Counsel
his Highness was pleased to communicate with me, and to make me his Servant to
break it to the King, which I did accordingly. And His Majesty after long and
deep deliberation, was contented to give way, and commanded me to wait upon him
in his Journey. So we undertook it with that Adventure, Charge, Danger, and
Travel both of Body and Mind, which I need not speak of, and yet with that
Courage and Alacrity, and with that Constancy, which the confidence of Love,
and the hope of good Success do usually bring forth in young men. And to show
how great this demonstration was of His Majesty and the Princes affections and
desires to settle a sure interest and correspondency with that Royal House. I
know not how to express by any parallel on Earth, I must do it by looking up to
a Transcendent in Heaven, whence the Father sent his Son, and his Son gave
himself for their love to Mankind.

So at the first, the great Obligation put hereby upon all Spain, was
acknowledged and magnified, by their Oracle Conde d' Olivares; who in
thankfulness concluded, it must needs be a Match; and that the two Kings of
Great Britain and Spain must part the world betwixt them: But this was the
flourish of a mind which found it self surprised, and was not yet resolved in
what mould to cast it self. For the very next day, upon second thoughts, he
mixed a specious welcome, with a great deal more strangeness, and with a
disavowing of all that was past, and spoke of the match, as of a new thing;
forgetting even the Laws of Hospitality and Honor, propounded an uncouth
Condition to the Prince of changing his Religion; as if all former agreed
Articles by the Advantage of this honor done unto them, had been utterly
disanull'd. And when the Prince's brave constancy put them from this hold, then
they cast all upon the Popes Dispensation, which must be expected before any
thing could be done. But in the mean time the Prince being in their power, what
Difficulties? what Jealousies? what F^ars were raised up? what Arts of Divines,
what Councels, what Persuasions, and what Engines were used to batter a young,
but well resolved Heart, were too long to repeat. At length the Dispensation
came clogged both in matter and manner contrary to agreement, and new
Conditions were also stood upon, either to draw the Prince, by accepting them,
under their yoke, or by refusing to make him the Author of the breach.
Notwithstanding by his care, wisdom, and patience, and also with some
resentment and show of Resolution to depart unsatisfied; their expectation was
gone beyond: and thereupon the Match brought again to some tolerable terms
though advantageous on their part, ye^ such, as thereupon the sending away o^ the
Infanta with the Prince, and a Blank for the restoring the Palatinate were
again promised and assured, if these Conditions might be ratified in England,
which was all they now required Insomuch that even in Spain, it was then
believed, and much rejoiced at, that the Match was fully concluded on all
parts. But it is to be noted, that this fair show was made whilst Mansfield^
and Brownsweek stood entire in the field, for after they were broken, though all
was done in England according to their desires, yet then they found it too late
to send the Infanta till the Spring; they complained that their Rebels in the
Low-Countryes were served by our men; they required our assistance to reduce
them to obedience; and the matter of Religion was meanly insisted on; so that
now the Prince could not but understand that he was but juggled with, as
himself has declared; and therefore he began to make way for his return, which
was all the hope left him to make ^his a good Voyage. And because they ^till
bare him in hand, that they inten^ed that Ma^ch, he was still contented ^o
pursue the Treaty; so as the resti^ution of the Palatinate, which before ^ad
been assumed as a divided Article, ^ight now go hand in hand; and to that
effect he left the power of Despon^atories with the Ambassadors, which was
afterward restrained, and renewed, and finally revoked, as the confident or
cold Answers out of Spain did require. And this is the substance of that
Negotiation.

The other particulars delivered in Parliament, how they said and unsaid,
promised and denied, remembered and forgot, and played fast and loose at their
pleasures, and what indignities they put upon us, I take no more pleasure to
repeat, than I did to suffer. It suffices that by this which is said, the
Questions propounded by the Informers are answered: First, who they were that
gave the first cause of distaste. Secondly, whether the Complaints against the
King of Spain be true. Thirdly, whether the King of Spain did desire to give
satisfaction to the Prince. And, Fourthly whether he did faithfully endeavor
the Marriage? And if in any of these points any scruple does remain, for the
perfect discovery of their intentions an^ proceedings, the Letters produced by
the Conde D'Olivares, and read in Parliament will justify my Report; being (as
it were) a Manifest from that King and his Council, that they never intended
the Match, nor held it lawfu^ or convenient for that State, and the King
therein requiring some other way to be found, to give without the Match
contentment to the Prince; whereby I make as little doubt of that Kings own
Royal disposition and affection toward the Prince for all personal respects,
as I do of the insincerity of his Ministers in all their proceedings.

In the rest of my Indictments, the Interrogatories which followed concer^ for
the most part my Behavior toward the Prince, whereunto I will not answer by
Recrimination, though I have a ^ge field, nor by way of Defense; ^d for these
Reasons, First, in Persons which they now, and I then did instance, ^e
reflection of our faults upon the ho^ur of our Masters makes the pub^^hing as
offensive as the Facts. Se^ndly, by giving Answer unto them ^at Charge but by
Reports, I shall ^eak my Duty to the Prince, who ^est knows the Truth in
these things ^ey object; and if there had been cause ^ould have called me to an
account. and, Thirdly, my purpose is not (as I ^id) to Apologize further than
may ^ncern the interest of that Cause which ^rough my sides they have labored
^ wound. For my self, I know well, ^at I shall stand or fall in the opini^ns of
wise men, neither by the slan^ers of any, be they never so great, or by my
verbal Justifications, be they ever so confident; but rather by the ^ctions and
Carriage of my Life, my ^irth, Breeding and Fortune, which ^ay happily, raise
me above base Im^utations, and also give hopes of A^endment, if in ought I have
done amiss. As for the Conde D'Olivar^ when he charge me with breach ^ Faith
toward him, I will make hi^ such Answer as may give him just content. And for
revealing the Secre^ Treaty for Holland, I did it not wit^ out leave from the
Prince, nor till might appear that it was entertain on our parts, but for the
Discovery ^ the advantages they sought.

And this is all the Answer I wi^ make to these unworthy Reproache raked out of
the Channel to be ca^ in my Face, only to Disfigure m^ and then serve their
turns with me i^ what shape they please: And so having used me (as I said) for
their Stalking-horse, from under my Shadow, to shoot at other Games, the^ tell
me they wish me well, and tur^ me off to Grass: yet in requital of their
favor, I will give them this Advic^ before I go: That the best way for them
and me to do the Christian worl^ good, which they seem to desire, is t^
persuade our Masters to moderation and peace, and not to busy our selve^ ^ith
malicious aspersions upon the A^ions of Princes, or Parliaments or ^overnments
wherein we have no skill. ^or which fault of theirs, I presume their ^ommission
gives no warrant. And ^o' my Master should think it punish^ent enough for
them, thus to disho^our themselves, and justify men's com^aints against their
unthankfulness and ^alice, where they have found so much ^espect; yet let them
take heed, lest ^^me occasion may not fall out, to move their own Masters to
question them ^r this scandalous example, which cannot but reflect upon his own
Go^ernment and State, as having no pre^edent in any former time.

Transcribed from the Original written with Sir Edward Coke (Lord Chief
Justice) his own hand.

FINIS.
Books newly Printed for W. Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple-Barr.
THE Moors Baffled, being a Di^course concerning Tangier, especially when it
was under the Earl ^ Teviot, by which you may find wha^ Methods and Government
is fitest t^ secure that place against the Moor^ Written by a Learned person
long r^sident in that place. 40 6d.

Thomae Hobbes Angli Malmsburiens^ Vita: being an exact account of M^ Hobbes,
of the Books he wrote and the Times and Occasion of their writing Of the Books
against him, and the Authors. Of his Conversation and A^quaintance; being a
full Account ^ his whole Life, part wrote by him se^ in Latin, the rest by Dr.
N. B. in 8 price 5 s.

The Institution of General History, O^ The History of the World. In two
V^lumes in Folio. By Dr. W. Howell Cha^cellor of Lincoln.

Historical Collections of the Four la^ Parliaments of Queen Elizabeth. B^
Haywood Townsend, Esquire;


