The Copy of a Letter from a Gentleman in Dort to a Member of the House of
Commons in London.
Translated out of Dutch.
SIR,
I Am got safe to Dort after rough Passage, and have taken the first
Opportunity, after the composure of my Spirits, and a little converse with my
intelligent Friends, to return you the most impartial Account I can to those
Enquiries you gave me in Charge at my departure; wishing they may be as much to
your Satisfaction, as the most obliging Treatment I received from you, and your
other generous Friends in London, and your later Correspondences challenge from
me.

At this time I shall endeavor to resolve Three of your Enquiries, as those
which more immediately concern you as a Member of Parliament, leaving the
Remainder to a farther Opportunity. The first, as I remember, was to know what
the Successes of the French King's Arms have been this Campaign. Secondly, what
I have observed of the state of both our Countries in relation to the present
War. And lastly, what Measures are taken by the Confederate Princes toward a
Peace, or Preparation for a more vigorous War.

As to the first, it is true the intemperate Spring, and thereby the late
opening of the Campaign, on the part of the French, and especially that King's
surprising return to Versailles, and his detaching from hence so great a part
of his Troops to the Rhine, put us in great hopes that we should have been able
to have at least made a good Defense this Summer; yea, our States expected some
considerable Victory, and the regaining some Frontier Town from the French. But
we have had a fatal Disappointment; our Statholder had very commodiously
encamped himself at Park, where he could want no sort of Supplies; we had with
great diligence fortified Huy, a Place of the greatest importance, considering
it was the only Place of strength upon the Maize, betwixt Namure and Liege, yet
it was lost without our being able to make any Advances toward its relief,
when our Army was in its fullest Vigor and Heart; so that now Liege, and all
that fertile Country, and all the Circuit to Bois le Duc, lies open to the
French for Forage and Contribution, out of which they infinitely store their
Magazines of Provisions for the next Campaign: We ascribe it to want of
Courage, or Conduct, that we attaqued not the Duke of Luxemburgh while he was
posting himself to cover that Siege.

But we have much more reason to exclaim against the Conduct of detaching the
Duke of Wirtenburgh to make so insignificant a forcing of the Lines, and
sending such a part of our Army to Liege, at a time when the only excuse we
make for the Loss at Landen was the French overpowering ns in Numbers.

But surely all wise Men will consider, That as our Army was entrenched, and
our Artillery planted, we had the Advantage of Three to One, the French having
no Coverture, but were to storm a Fortified Camp with at least 40, or as they
own 45000 Soldiers in it; an Attempt and Success scarce to be paralled in
History; in which Action the World must own it self convinced that the French
conquer by Courage, Manhood and Valor, and not by Treachery or Surprise, or
inequality of Forces: And if our Losses must be ascribed to the French
outnumbering of the Confederates in all Places, when must we expect better
Success? For to what Number soever we may vainly hope to increase our Troops,
he is able to augment his proportionably; so that let us swell to what degree
soever our windy Imagination may stretch us, we shall be but like the Frog to
the Ox in the Fable.

But it must nauseate all thinking Men to consider, what pitiful Excuses both
your and our Prints make to cover the Loss we sustained at Nere Winden: They
tell us, That the French were slain in whole Brigades by the advantageous
disposal of our Cannon, and the small damage we sustained by theirs, our
Infantry being commanded to lie upon their Bellies while their Cannon played;
and that in fine they lost above 20000 Men killed, or mortally wounded; yea,
some advance the Loss to be double to ours, and when by Authority they publish
these things, to buoy up the Spirits of the People, they with design to have
made us hope for some after Success told us, That when the Detachments to
Liege, and with the Duke of Wirtenburgh were rejoyned, the Army would be
stronger than before the Battle. From which we may learn the truth of the old
Proverb, That Liars ought to have good Memories; for it is well known that
those Detachments amounted to 27000 Men, as the Remarks upon the London Gazette
plainly proves.

Therefore it is plain though involuntary Confession, that we lost so many, and
we ascribe all this Loss to our Statholder's Obstinacy, which with you is
called his great Courage; that he would not hearken to the Council of
withdrawing his Army over the River Geete in the night: whereby all those Men's
Lives might have been preserved for future Events, as his was by a timely
Retreat to secure his own Person; which Conduct Marshal Luxemburgh moderately
censured, by saying he now found Prince Waldeck was dead. Another convincing
Argument of our Loss, as great as I have mentioned, is easily gathered from the
Resolution of our States to raise 25000 Men more, which I believe they would
willingly enough do, to recruit the Losses of the last Campaign; and yet no
ways increase their Numbers; but without they be supplied from you with Money, I
know our Paper Treasury is so low, that we are no ways able to accomplish our
Designs. I own the German Princes and Switzerland might supply us, but we must
pay at least 20 Dollars a Head, and they must be punctually paid while in
Service, or we can get no Men; for the Princes of Germany raise no Forces but
what they sell, as a great Branch of their Revenues, and the Arbitrament of War
and Peace depends upon the Gelt, which made our Statholder and States to buy
off the King of Denmark from the Siege of Ratisburg, with 100000l. in hand, and
as much more promised to be paid after. But we that know the usage of this
State know, That that King may stay long enough for the latter Payment, now
that the Storm is over.

But while I am mentioning those Recruits, you are to consider what raw
undisciplined Men they will be, more fit to make Fascines with, than to conquer
the well disciplined Army of the French, flushed with so many Victories.

However the hopes of our State is, that the Rumor of such a Vote of raising
Supplies will obtain from you proportionable Recruits, if you be either able or
willing to send more of your Fellow Subjects to the Common Shambles.

But to proceed, it was rational to think that after such a success Luxemburgh
would attempt either Liege or Charleroy; and if our Army had been in so good a
condition as our and your Gazettes would have persuaded the World, we had
opportunity enough to have posted our selves so, as to have prevented the
Siege; while the general Discourse even at our Statholder's Table was, as
several Officers assure me, that the French Army was so so harassed, and
weakened by the slaughter of their Men at Nere Winden, and 8000 of their
wounded Men couped up in Hospitals that they were able to do no more this
Campaign.

But to the eternal Shame of our Statholder as Generalissimo, we have suffered
Charleroy to be taken without once essaying a Relief, for we want the Skill or
Manhood to attacque an Enemy in their Trenches. But it may be you know not what
an Excuse we make for such a neglect, for the States had sent a new Train of
Artillery to supply the Loss at Landen, as fair Brass Cannon as any was to be
seen; but it seems, being so credulous that the Statholder had saved his Wagons
and draught-Horses by his giving out he had sent them away with his Baggage
before the late Battle, they sent no supply of them; so that too late it was
owned how great a part of those were lost. So that now we have no manner of
Excuse why we relieved not Charleroy, but that we wanted Wagons and
draught-Horses to furnish a marching Army with a sufficient Train, and
Provisions for a few days; and so were forced to stand in our Camp with our
Arms across for 20 days, till we had notice of the Surrender of it. So that now
as Huy opened a free Passage to Liege; so this to Brussels and the remainder of
Brabant, even to our Fastnesses of the united Provinces; and it is not forgot
among us how 20 years since in one Spring this so victorious King took 60 of
our strongest Towns and Forts in one Month, when he had neither Huy Namur, or
Mons, and advanced within a few Leagues of Amsterdam: So that we have great
reason to be apprehensive of our eminent Danger the next Spring, if no Peace be
made this Winter; when we are exposed so naked of any Barrier in the Spanish
Netherlands, and consider how untenable the strongest places have hitherto been
against the force of his Assaults, when to conceal or cover our Impotence, we
ascribe the Successes to Treachery. Thus I have given you a short touch of this
King's Successes in our Parts.

I pass now to the Rhine; where it is notoriously known, how vast a Magazine of
Arms, Ammunition, and all sorts of Stores were taken at Heidelberg, and though
Prince Lewis of Baden had so strongly entrenched himself, that the Dauphin and
Marshal de Lorge thought it not advisable to attacque him, yet the French have
had the honor to have couped him up all this Summer, and the Advantage to have
maintained their whole Army in an Enemies Country, and raised immense
Contributions, which, by reason of the Hostages they have in Custody, must be
paid, even when their Army are withdrawn into their Winter Quarters.

Of how great importance the taking of Roses in Catalonia is, may be seen even
in the Monthly Account, which industriously lessens all Successes of the
French; it is not only a Port Town and Harbor toward the Mediterranean, but
has a very great Trade into Catalonia: So as it is a Key both to Trade inward
and outward; and gives not only an Harbor to French Merchants, and Galleys, but
extends likewise its Jurisdiction to a large part of Catalonia, where it seems
the Spaniards are so weak, that his Forces have not been able to take any
Advantage over the Duke of Noalles, although he detached some part of his
Forces to Marshal Catinat.

This leads me to give you a short Account of that wise and fortunate General
Marshal Catinat's Successes, who, after he had quietly sustained all the
contemptible things from all the Confederates Gazetters, as if he were neither
able to Succor Pignerol, or Relieve Cazal; at last, like another Fabius
Maximus, descended from the cloudy Hills into the open Plains, and by fine
Force obtained as complete a Victory over the unfortunate and obstinate Duke of
Savoy as any has been obtained in this War. Since which he marches as
Conqueror where he pleases through the Country, constraining that Duke's
Subjects to furnish him with all sorts of Provisions, and most large
Contributions; and the French King resolving to push the War, on that side,
either to a Peace upon his own Conditions, or an entire Conquest of the
Country, has ordered an addition of 50000 Men to the Marshals Army, which will
much facilitate the Conquest of that Country, or force a Peace.

As I have given you this Account of the Successes of the French King's Arms,
so you cannot but with me observe the unprosperous Proceedings of the
Emperor's Troops this year in Hungary, where the wily Grand Vizier, as much
contemned as Catinat was, suffered the Duke de Croy to lay Siege to Belgrade,
the Reduction of which in one Month our Gazettes assured us off: But after the
Duke had lost by Assaults, Sickness and Death, in his march almost as many
Thousands of his Men as he had been Days before it (for some Prints compute
them at 15000 Men) the Vizier made a short turn upon him, and made him
ingloriously quit the Siege. For excuse of which no other than the common one
is made, That the Enemy out-numbered ours, who by the Prints was, from 10000
Men a few days before were multiplied to 50000. at the raising the Siege.

You may, if you please, add to these the Consideration, That since this
present War the Confederates have neither gained one Town or Fort from the
French, or preserved any one, which his Troops attaqued (except Rhinefield) nor
been able, though that King is surrounded on every side with an entire Circle
of Enemies, to hinder him from enlarging his Conquests on every side; and is so
provident that every year he has sufficient Magazines before hand of all
things necessary for one or two years succeeding, and all his Money for two or
three years ordered in readiness; and this year can increase his new Levies
proportionable to what ever he finds the Confederates are able to do. This I
suppose is sufficient to Answer the first of your Enquiries.

As to the second Head, it may be branched into several Particulars, as
relating both to you and us; which I will not pursue in an exact Method, but as
Matters of Enquiry has occurred to my mind since I was with you, or the later
Letters of you, or your Friends, have suggested to my thoughts.

And first, as to the propensity of our Country to embrace a Peace with France;
you may remember that in our Town, which has the first Vote, the P. of O. was
first made Statholder, though all the States and Magistrates of the Seven
Provinces had taken Solemn Oaths never to admit a Statholder, and particularly
not the P. of O. nor any of his House; and the Prince himself had taken an Oath
not to accept of the Office though tendered to him: So that the breach of all
their Oaths upon that Election was by some styled absolute Perjury, but we
found a softer Word for it, in styling it, the mortifying the former Edict. You
know how our Senior Burger-master Cornelius de Wit, and his Brother the
Pentitioner, were most barbarously Murdered, because they did not so readily
comply. Now in this very Town the Senior Burger-master Halewin, as you know by
his Sentence printed with you, was settling some Correspondence with Monsieur
Amelet, in order to know what terms the French King would insist upon; and I
assure you this was not a personal Caprice of his, who is a solid, juditious
Person, and of a great Interest and Popular; who acted nothing in that but with
the good Liking and underhand Approbation of many other great Men and
Magistrates, which you may easily perceive by the boldness of his Expressions,
as you have it printed in your Translation of his Sentence in these Word; viz.
Page 12. That it is agreed on all hands, that to endeavor to procure a Peace
is not at all prejudicial to the State, but is so far from that, that those
that employ themselves about some honest way of obtaining it, should not be
looked on as Criminals, but rather to have a Statue erected them, and that he
was willing to do it with the peril of his Life.

Also in the 13. Page it is said, That being before the high Court of Justice
of his Country, he had a great mind to convince them, that it was none of his
Fault that Lives and Estates was Sacrificed to Men, and that he would rather
dye than that it should be longer continued, and to play on Dobb, Dobb, Dobb,
Fanfare for the King of England; by whom he means not King James but our
Statholder, for whose sake he neither would have Lives or Estates Sacrified nor
War continued. And in the next Page it is added further, That in case some
solid and reasonable Proposals of Peace should be offered, it being a thing so
necessary, and salutary for the State; that every true Patriot would readily,
and without any other reason, have embraced them: withal assuring the Judges
that what steps ever he had made in this affair, they were occasioned by
nothing else but a sincere intention to promote the true interest of this State.

I assure you he spoke these things with great boldness, and wanted not the
majority of the Suffrages of many Magistrates of Cities, if not those of the
Judges themselves; and if the Princes Authority had been as great now, as when
he was first made Statholder, he had been de Witted rather than had so easy a
Sentence. I verily believe that I perfectly know many Scores of our chiefest
Magistrates, who are of the same Opinion with Monsieur Halewin; and by the
Conversation I had with very many of your Parliament Men, I think there are a
majority of you, who, if they might give their Vote by Balloting, would put an
end to the War, by returning to the Condition our Countries were in before the
War; and if they would consider their Strength, as well as Interest, they would
value the Saving of their Country from ruin, before the private concern of any
Prince whatsoever. And to me it is an unaccountable thing to find leading
Gentlemen in Governments, both at home and abroad, so forward and outragiously
zealous to Supplant and Abdicate their lawful Kings, Supreme Governors or
Magistrates upon small Pretenses; who yet can see their Country fleeced, yea,
gnawed to the Bones, with Taxes to support such, as have either been Sovereigns
of their own Creation, or Usurpers; as I have known some Servants who were
audatious and refractory to their Masters, and yet were slavishly Cowards and
abjectedly suffered the Affronts and Insolences of their fellow Servants. I am
sure this is an odious Disposition in Magistrates or Representatives of the
People, as you are styled.

But to return to the head of this your Second Enquiry; I can assure you we are
so solicitous for our own Preservation, and suspicious of our Statholder, that
when ever we shall surmise that he shall prefer the Preservation of any
Interest before ours, we shall with great precipitation entertain any
reasonable Proposals from France, and though Monsieur Halewin says, That unless
France would deliver up to the Spanish Netherlands some considerable place,
there is no Dutchman who would not rather Sacrifice the last Stiver he had then
think of a Peace; yet I am well satisfied if we might have Mastricht in our own
right, as it now properly belongs to the Spaniards, they would that moment quit
the Interest, not only of the Statholder but of all our Confederates, and leave
them all in the lurch, as you know we have constantly done in all the separate
Treaties we have had, and are well known, even to a Scandal upon us, in those
of 48 and 74. And I must here note to you, we are in no condition to continue
the War, for though Monsieur Halewin, in his Discourse to Monsieur Amelet,
says, That it was true that the most considerable Families of our Country
suffered very much by heavy Taxes, as having great Estates in Land which carry
the greatest burden, yet the Merchants were gently treated for the benefit of
Trade, yet he owns that those Arguments he used, in Page the Third and Fourth,
were only to magnify the Power of the States; being desirous, like a Lover of
his Country, to let the French know the utmost of our Abilities that we might
obtain better Terms; but the French King knows too well our insufficiency to
carry on the War, for the Taxes are here so heavy that I know several
substantial Citizens, in our City of Dort, who pay as much for Taxes as the
yearly Rent of their Houses yield them.

And though Monsieur Halewin says, That the Taxes on real Estates could cause
at the worst but a change of Masters, which did not at all concern the States
in general and in abstracto; yet surely the impoverishing of the landed Men to
that degree, That they must be forced to sell their Estates for nothing, to
others that were able to pay the Taxes, must in a little time effect the States
in general; who cannot subsist without the supply of the Terra firma, no more
than the Heart, Brain, or Arms and Legs, without supply from the Stomach; for,
however it is unregarded, all other Taxes, upon what sort of Commodities
soever, either of Ware or Tare, in the last resort, fall upon the Land and its
Occupiers; and to let you see how our States, not only at this present squeeze
the People, but oppress them to the highest degree, there was a Gentleman who
had as fertile a Plat of Ground as any in the Country, which being judged
Commodious to build a Fort upon, the States offered a Sum of Money for it, but
the Owner being unwilling to part with his Inheritance, they laid heavier
Impositions upon it, till the Taxes amounted very near the yearly profit he
made of the Land, so that at last he was forced to part with it; yet, as
Monsieur Halewin says, the States were no Loosers, for he was Taxed according
to the old rate; it being alleged he had received Money for it, which was to be
Taxed: I remember I heard, when with you, that this Story was related at an
Entertainment, when some made complaint of the heaviness of your Taxes; it was
replied, Then, and not till then, England would have reason to complain, when
you were driven to such Extremities: you know how great a Man he was that
related this, and Major Ashton can name him if he pleases.

Monsieur Halewin, page 3, in his Communication with Monsieur Amelot, to
aggrandire our power, told him, Though there were some losses of Trade on one
hand, yet they were repaid on the other by a considerable Sale of the
Manufactures, and those that stood in need of the Goods were to pay a greater
price; and that the Merchants generally ensured: But I must tell you this was
said, to put our best foot forward, for though our Merchants, of whom our very
States consist, devise all the ways they can to promote or preserve Traffic,
yet our common People, what by the burden of Taxes, and the Obstruction of the
old course of Trade, are reduced to such a poor Estate that they are upon the
very Tipto of rising in mutiny against our Magistrates and States, for their so
obstinate persisting in the War; and generally exclaim that our Statholder
never yet had any success ar all against the French, so that if this Winter, or
in the Spring, the French King should have any one signal Success in these
parts, it would be impossible to restrain the Mobile any longer.

Indeed our Merchants have many Contrivances you want, because our States being
all such, contrive or connive at the Frauds; for whereas we read weekly in your
Gazetts of French Prizes, taken by some of our Privateers, they are generally
such as by Assignation are to be brought to our Ports, and by these measures we
supply you and other Countries with French Commodities, besides we are glad to
be excused with so small a quota of our Men of War, while you make a great
noise with increasing the number of your grand Fleet, by which means we spare
more for Convoys; and it is an admiration to our People, that you should not
discover our Arts and Industry to ingross all the Trade into our hands. We
have, without your being able to censure us for it, utterly defeated all your
Laws of Navigation: we bring you in our own Bottoms, at least under some of
your own Peoples names, the far greatest part of all your imported Commodities,
which may be discovered every day, by the number of our Dutch built Vessels in
your River, and all your Ports: We have had good Lading back of Corn, Butter,
and Cheese, and there is one Fraught we bring of our Countrymen, French
Refuges, and other Foreigners, for what uses your Master and ours designs them,
it becomes you to look to it; we have got one advantage since your Revolution
besides many other colatcral ones, that we know the soundings of all your
Ports, the strength of your Fortifications, the Stores of your Arms and
Ammunition you had, which have been Transported hither or to Flanders, the small
Stock you have left, the Secrets of your Revenue, and what is above all the
disposition of your People, and the easiness of managing your Parliaments to
our advantage, whereby we and the Confederates have gained many Millions, since
we found you so ready to give us 600000l. for our assisting our own Statholder,
for which benefits we have reaped since in any other Reign we would have given
Millions.

Yet notwithstanding all these Emoluments, if you once withdraw your giving
hands, we shall be forced to make Peace; and when you have given to the last
Doit, and are sufficiently exhausted, we shall be able to make our Terms, and
then enjoy the sole Trade, for obtaining which only, we use all our Arts to
engage you still in the War, from which we expect no other advantage. And our
Statholders interest will never fail within our consideration, for that he
uses his despotick Power in nominating or approving only such Magistrates as
are his Creatures, which has highly disobliged this Town, Roterdam, Pregow,
and many others of our most opulent Cities, and by his preferring to the
Supreme Command of our Armies, The Dukes of Halston Ploen, and Wirtenburgh,
General Ginckle and others, he has so disobliged the Prince of Nassaw
Statholder of Friesland and other Princes of his own Blood, as well as
deserving Men of our Country, that he has lost very much of his interest in
Friesland, Groninghen, and, other Provinces lying most obnoxious to the French,
which is no inconsiderable weakening of our Country; and I doubt not but by our
Statholders disobliging many leading and popular Men in our Country as well as
in yours, he must have cooled the Affections of many to his Person, as well as
his advancing several among us, who are not very greatful to the People: as I
remember I heard many wonder with you, that one Coningsby, who was much
blackened by Informations against him in Parliament, and yet, as if done it in
dispight to the Houses, he made him a Lord, and took him into his Secret
Council.

This Consideration leads me to tell you, what Resentments he used of the
Conducts of the Admirals this Year, as he had formerly done against Admiral
Torrington, and Admiral Russel; which we look upon as a perfect Design to
convince our States that he has an heartier good will to promote our Interest
than yours. I must confess it was a great oversight in your Council, and
Commissioners of the Admiralty, that they did not Order the Grand Fleet to
attend the Merchants under the Care of Admiral Rook, till they had certain
Notice where the French Fleet was; but since they had no such Orders, I know
not wherein the Admirals are to blame; for I hear that Admiral Almond owns that
Sir Ralph Dalaval, and I think the other two Admirals, at a Council of Flag
Officers, moved that the Grand Fleet might attend Admiral Rook till they knew
where the French Fleet was; which being utterly denied by our Flags, and such
of yours as joined with us, he then moved, that at least they might go a
hundred Leagues further; which being likewise denied, by reason I presume of
the positive Orders to attend so far only, without any Latitude in their
Instructions, I cannot see why our Statholder should not remove some of the
Commissioners of your Admiralty, if he be satisfied there have been no
Miscarriages of the Council. As to the Loss sustained there, I think we and the
Hamburghers had the greatest Share; yet when I consider the Charge your
Merchants had been at, in lying Fraught Nine, Ten, or Twelve Months in
expectance of Convoys, the Charge of buoying up the sunk Ships, and damage to
their Goods; the absolute Loss of their Market, the Money which must be paid
for their Conducting home, and the Expenses while they stay for a stronger
Convoy, and the real Loss you sustained, as appears by the Remarcks on the
London Gazette, the Merchants must have lost a pretty round Sum. And I learnt,
before I came from London, that upon the first Alarm of that Loss, many
thousand of Workmen at the Clothworkers Trade had been dismissed; so that in
one Parish. viz. Leeds in Yorkshire, Five hundred Workmen had been discharged
in one day. And the hazard of Adventuring has so discouraged the Merchants to
buy, that they are still out of Employment; and we have the like Effects with
us.

However the matter fell out that you suffered no more, yet the French at that
time in Ships, and Goods, got as much (besides the Burning of so many Ships) as
will desray the greatest part of the Charge of their Fleet this Summer; whereas
you have been at a vast Charge, and yet scarcely have preserved one inward or
outward bound Ship, which was discovered by a French Privateer.

Neither can we apprehend the true reason of your late Proclamation concerning
your Seamen, that they shall have no pay till their next going to Sea, and
then only a promise to be paid to Michaelmas last. The Pay they used to have at
the laying up of their Ships was a great Support to their Families in Winter,
and by short Voyages till the Fleet went out, they got something toward the
Summer following: I know not how you can think that near 100000 Persons,
including their Wives and Children, can have any possibility of subsisting
without Stealing, Begging, or Starving, if they be not paid now.

This kind of way of Proceeding our Seamen would not suffer; and such
Proclamations have that fatal Consequence, besides the Discouragement of the
Seamen (which you may be sure pleases us here) that it discovers either the
real want of Money the Governmeet is in, or else the Squandering what is given
to unwarrantable Uses. Such as the magnificent Buildings here at the Loo, where
our Statholder is building a Palace to equal Versailles, or the Pleasure-house
of the Duke of Savoy; to furnish which, besides the Curiosities and splendid
Ornaments, he has provided, as an Onyx Table and Stands from the Emperor, he
has transported the richest Hangings, and other Furniture of the Palaces of
your Kings, and several rich Silver Tables and Pictures; and he has demolished
a great part of Hampton Court, and so magnificently rebuilt it, that I was told
when I went to see it, that already he had Expended above 100000 l. upon it, it
would Cost 400000 l. more ere finished and furnished, while Whitehall lies
still in Rubbish; and one of your Commissioners for taking the Public Accounts
told me, that as much was Expended upon that Building, and at Kensington, and
for Jewels and other needless Matters, as would have built Fourscore Men of
War. And I remember an Extract of their Accounts was shown me, whereby it
appeared that since our Statholder's Administration in England, he had received
into the Exchequer 25 Millions; of which, according to a full discharge of all
Money to be defrayed according to the Establishments, he must have Expended no
more than 20 Millions, and yet there was a Debt owing of 5 Millions still; and
that he expects for carrying on a Vigorous War no less than 7 or 8 Millions
more, and an increase of 20 or 30000 Men, without which he can hope for no
better Success than he has had formerly; whereas it is our Opinion you neither
can provide such Supplies, nor if he had them he would be able to effect
greater Matters than he has hitherto achieved. I own there are many secret
Sluices by which great Sums of your Money have passed, which whether they be
publicly owned I know not: The Duke of Savoy, besides 100000 l. Prest-money,
has received 20, 30, 40, or 50000 l. per Month. The King of Denmark had a
large Sum for the hiring the Troops under the Command of the Duke of
Wirtenburg, though Prince George his Royal Brother has had ill Usage by your
Court. The Duk of Hannouer, and several other German Princes, proportionable
Sums: Above 100000 l. spent upon the Swiss Cantons and Vaudois, besides what we
and the Spanish Neatherlands have received. So that your Money has plentifully
Circulated through the whole Confederacy.

How much has been squandred away upon other Accounts I know not; but I
presume upon giving liberty to due Informations you may easily learn. And I
cannot think it needful to descend to many Particulars; but one Instance I
cannot omit, a Master of one of the transport Ships related to me in presence
of several, not as any Secret, but as the Case of many other such Masters; That
upon his first Employment into Ireland, he had 70 l. worth of Hay a board, and
was retained at 50 l. a Month, and ordered with his Hay to lie at one Port
after another, till his Wages amounted to 1300 l. and when he related this he
said he had the like Lading on Board upon the other years pretended Descent,
whieh he had kept on Bonrd till his Pay had run up to 750 l. He adds further,
That a year since there was 500000 l. owing to transport Ships, which he durst
Undertake to prove, was more by 400000 l. than all their Cargo was worth.

I think you may cast into the Scale of the lavish Expense 300000 l. at least
squandered away upon your noised Descents, by which you mightily raised the
Expectation of all Europe, to have seen some Masterpiece of Stratagem, which
by their Abortiveness have redounded to your eternal Disgrace; and if your
present Undertaking, with your Squadron under Capt. Bombo, with his Well-boats
and Bomb Vessels, shoul end in an empty Burst, you will forfeit for ever your
Reputation in Policy, and Conduct.

I remember, when I was with you, I heard several of your Character liberally
censuring some of these Matters, as also bitterly inveighing against the
Numbers of civil and military Officers and Pentioners in the House; for whom it
was reported that 150000 l. was lodged, not to be touched for other Uses, that
it might be ready for Distribution agoinst the Sitting of the House. Besides
the quarterly Payments of 30000 l. which I doubt not but our States, if
required, would willingly pay a share of, rather than such useful Persons
should want their Wages; for the more Liberal such Men are of the public
Money, the more comes to ours and all the Confederates Treasury, as well as
yours. And I think you may easily judge in whom this Aurum Potabile works most
effectually; for they will seem, at the first Sitting, as forward as any to
redress public Grievances, yea, to enquire into some Miscarriages, and seem
unwilling that any Money should be given till public Accounts be stated; but
when they have gotten the Reputation of Patriots by that Art, they then know
when to follow their Fileleaders, to supersede all further Enquiries, by
diverting the House by some new Matters, or suggesting Dangers from abroad, or
Plots at home, and then watching an Opportunity when their Party is strongest
in the House, they gain some fundamental Vote for a Supply, and as soon as that
is obtained, they pursue that Quarry only, letting all other public Bills
sink, insinuating that they had found no such grounds of Complaints, or
Mismanagements, as at first appeared to them. This Discovery I gained by
discourse from a Member of our States General, who has a great influence in
your Councils, as well as ours; so that you may be confident that till you
remove such mercinary Members out of the House, as Monopolists, and other
obnoxious Persons, as Betrayers of their public Trust, have been in other
Parliaments, you will never be able to obtain a true Account how your Money
has been Expended, and what vast Arrears are owing to the Fleet and Army,
Providores of Stores, of Victuals, Ammunition, transport Ships, etc. It
pleases us infinitely that so great Sums are brought over hither for pay of
the Army, and the Confederates in Specie, and the best Money, and I cannot
learn that our Statholder brought any great Sum back in Silver, hesides 1500 l.
in washed and clipped Money. I am sure you cannot forget how a very credible
Person of Quality told you and me, That if a strict Enquiry were made, there
would appear that 1900000l. had been given by you since the Administration of
our Statholder with you, for your Fleet more than ever had been paid to the Sea
men, or expended upon it, and he believed such like Defalcations would be found
in what was given to the Army, and for other Occasions, besides placing more to
Accounts than really had been paid: I shall long to know, whether in this
Sessions you make any Enquiry into such Matters; for it is believed, if you
trace these Matters up the Stream, (which if you do not, you will be notorious
Breakers of the Trust reposed upon you) you will pinch some great Ministers,
who must either have an unusual Decian Courage, to devote their Lives to excuse
some above them, which will be a rare Gallantry in this Age, or you will at the
Fountain head find the source of Miscarriages you are to Enquire after, of
which we here talk more openly than you do. Having thus dispatched the second
of your Enquiries in these several Particulars, I how proceed to the last.

It is more difficult I must confess to give an Answer to this than either of
the former; because the Consultations of the Confederate Princes are kept, as
they ought to be, very Secret; only I can tell you in the general, That neither
the Emperor, King of Spain, Duke of Bavaria, or the other German Princes, are
so devoted to our Statholder as formerly; since they see he can work no
Miracles. And all the deference they have for him now, is because he has been
so well credited, and befriended by you, as to be supplied with Men and Money
hitherto, according to his desire, without rendering any Account; which, though
it be to the infinite damage of your selves, who reap no sort of Blessings, or
Benefits thereby, yet is the only Cement which prevents the Crumbling of the
Confederacy.

For I assure you we are sufficiently tired; out and exhausted by the War, and
would be very thankful to such unengaged Princes as would uneergo the Office of
Mediators; for which purpose we have late Advice that the Emperor has sent to
the Pope, to acquaint him, that he is not averse to Peace, provided he may have
honorable Terms and for that purpose desires a Copy of the French King's
Terms. The King of Poland likewise has represented his Inability to sustain
the Losses his Subjects receive by incursions and pressures of the Tartars:
What Applications have been made by the Emperor to the Northern Crowns, and the
Willingness of the French King to accept of their Mediation is much discoursed
of; and how instant the Pope, the State of Venice, and the Italian Princes, are
to persuade the Duke of Savoy to accept of the Overtures of the King of France,
you cannot be ignorant, though it may be it is concealed from you into what
strates the Duke is reduced; for we have it from sure hands, That in the late
Battle, after a perfect numbering of the Duke's Soldiers slain, they amounted
to 9000 and 600 Men, and that 3000 Prisoners were taken, and 117 Standards and
Colors, and besides all the Cannon and Baggage, a vast number of Bombs and
Carcasses were taken, with which the Duke intended to Bombard Pignerol. That
since this Victory the whole Army under Marshal Catinal has quartered in that
rich Country, and has drawn such vast Provisions from thence, that he has
stored Pignerol for two years, shall do the like for Cazal, besides putting so
large a Garrison into it, as shall enable them to make Excursions all this
Winter; and the French King has sent a Message to the Italian Princes, that if
they admit any of the Germans to quarter in their Territories, he will send
his. Troops among them, otherwise he will inviolably preserve the Peace of
Italy; and our very last Advices are, that the Duke has at last sent to the
Duke of Orleance to medeats a Peace; upon which the French King dispatched a
Courier with his Answer in five hours; and if a Peace be once made in that
Quarter; it will be a great step toward the like with the Emperor.

You must, in the next place, consider the French King is so much above his
Work, that he may continue the Wars many years yet longer, without
impoverishing his Subjects in 12 years more, as much as ours and yours have
been in these Four or Five years last; for that he maintains a great part of
his Troops, by Quarterings, Forage, and Contributions out of the Confederate
Countries, and his Sea Force by Prizes, while his own Kingdom enjoys a profound
Tranquillity, as if no War was in their Borders. And all the World knows with
what ease out of his large and populous Dominions he can raise what Men be
pleases by Warrants only from Lieutenants of Provinces, to the respective
Cities and Towns, who at a day prefixed bring to the Rendevouz, a double Number
of Men, out of which the Officers pick out the Number needed of the ablest Men,
without beat of Drum, or allowing his Officers so much per Head, as the
Confederates are forced to advance for theirs. And his Subjects have such a
perfect Love to him, even to a Veneration, and such a Sense of the Honor which
redounds to the French Nation by his glorious Successes, that with great
Alacrity they submit to whatever he requires; besides that, all Undertakings,
after mature Consultations, are ordered by himself solely, so that his Purposes
and Determinations are never betrayed, or embarrassed, or retarded, by staying
for the Consent of others, as the Confederates are yearly ^ompelled to submit
to; and then he has 400000 stout and resolu^e Men, under the most experienced
Commanders of any Age, to put all his Commands in Execution; and his Fund of
Money is inexhaustable, for that in times of Peace the whole Revenue of his
Kingdom passes through his Exchequer once in Five or Six years, some affirm it
in Four. And if he chance ever to be put to a Straight, a few of his rich
Allies will supply him.

Thus, Sir, I have given you not only my own Judgment, but that of very
juditious Men I have conversed with: Yet, least my Letter should be too long, I
have omitted several things I had to say; which, if this be of any use to you,
may be supplied in my next; and with profound Respects I remain,

SIR, Yours.


