MOSES next to GOD, AND AARON next to MOSES SVBORDINATE and SVBSERVIENT:
Opened, in A SERMON PREACHED At St. PETER'S in EXON on Wednesday the 29th of May
1661. being the Solemn and Anniversary Thanksgiving, for the double Birth of
our most Gracious SOVEREIGN K. Charles the II.

By John Copleston M. A. sometimes Fellow of Kings Coll. in Camb. now Vicar of
Broad Clyste in Devon, and Prebend of St. Peter's Exon.

2 Timothy 2.1. I exhort therefore, that first of all, supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men: for Kings, and for all
that are in authority.

Hieron Epist. ad Evagr. 58. Aaron and filii summi Sacerdotes, and ut Aaron
Eleazar and Levitae, juxta traditiones Apostolicas hoc sunt Episcopi,
Presbyteri, and Diaconi.

London, Printed by W Godbid for Richard Thrale, and are to be sold at the
Cross Keys in St. Paul's Churchyard at the entering into Cheapside. MDCLXI.

To the Honorable Sr. COPLESTON BAMPFEILD, Bart. High Sheriff of the County of
Devon.
SIR,
THough I have good reason to acknowledge with all thankfulness, the constancy
of that affection and favor you have ever had for me; yet I must assure you,
and all the world, the arguments which prevailed with me for this Dedication,
were fetched from a Topic of a far different nature. The discourse is of
Public concerment, and therefore no Patron could be more suitable then one of
so public a spirit, as all that know you must bear witness unto; Moses and
Aaron will not go out under any other Patronage, save of so Loyal a subject,
and hearty a well-wisher to the Doctrine and Discipline of our Church: I mean,
that good old way established by Law, practiced by our Ancestors ever since the
Reformation, and sealed with the blood of Martyrs, which is too evident to be
denied or eluded; unless it can be made appear that Ridley and Cranmer were no
Episcopal men. Nor do I doubt of your candid acceptance, having been privy to
that cheerful resolution and undaunted courage, with which you undertook,
though with the hazard of all that was dear unto you, to endeavor to make way
for the Celebration of such a day, and a Sermon of such a subject upon it; in a
time of the greatest difficulty, when the enemies both of Church and State, God
and their King, were most prevalent, and many people began to be content they
should be so.

Their brawny necks being now accustomed to the Yoke, with Issachar they
couched down between their burdens; the reason whereof is also rendered in the
same pl^ce, Genesis 49.15. He saw that rest was good, and the land that it was
pleasant, and bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a servant unto tribute.
But God was pleased to defeat those resolutions, and to strangle as Loyal
Designs, and Noble Intendments, as ever were in the world; making them to
become abortive in their very birth; yet with a far greater design of mercy,
then if your intentions had come into Action, and every action been crowned
with its desired success; for your way must have been through that Red Sea, on
the brinks whereof your feet then stood, and perhaps when you had passed
through that, you might have seen a Wilderness before you. But God has brought
us to Canaan a nearer, and much a safer way, giving us the Land of Promise,
without acquainting us at all, either with the Red Sea or Wilderness: And all
this, that his own Counsels might take place, and that such a Deliverance might
be the more wonderful in our eyes, when we were thus convinced that it was his
doing.

But though you were prevented from laying the foundation, as you intended, yet
you resolved to contribute your utmost, for the finishing that in the West,
which was so happily began in the North; witness the indefatigable pains you
took, and the great charges you were at, that things might not roll back again,
when they were once tumbling, though as yet very hazardous. What acceptance
your labor and travail found with all persons of Honor and Loyalty in these
parts, is not unknown to any that then knew the West.

Nor did those Buds and Blossoms of Loyalty and Affection to His Most Sacred
Majesty, only put forth when it was now the spring, and the summer of our
deliverance drew nigh; but bore fruit even in the midst of that sad winter,
when the blackest storm was over us. How you were afflicted all along with all
them that suffered upon the account of the King, or the Church, or both? How
their iron even entered into your soul, those seasonable Contributions, which
passed through my hands, for refreshing the bowels of such afflicted ones, can
testify; these are I suppose good grounds for publishing it under your name.
There was great reason for that, sure, if I might with modesty publish any
thing at all, after so many Exquisite Sermons, and Treatises already Extant
upon this subject; for this I shall wave the ordinary excuses, though I could
with much evidence of truth have alleged them all, and only say for my self,
that when of old the Arc was to be adorned, though men of the greatest
abilities brought Gold, Silver, and Purple; yet were not those of meaner
quality to be rejected, who appeared with an offering, though but of
Badgers-skins, or Goats-hair. Printing is not my itch as they can bear me
witness, who are privy to the temptations I have often had unto it, and
hitherto ever resisted, though the authority of some very excellent persons,
together with other weighty reasons have now prevailed upon me.

I hope, no man will like it the worse, for coming a little otherwise from the
Press, then it was uttered from the Pulpit; the Eye and the Ear, the Fancy and
the Judgment, being very different, what the one is affected with, the other
without some corrective may nauseat. Besides, I have here laid down the
substance of the matter all a long, as it was then delivered, though in some
places (as it fell out) somewhere contracted, in others a little more enlarged,
where the subject might better have been streched out to the length of a
voluminous Chronicle, then confined within the narrow bounds of a Sermon. A
Paragraph or two I have transcribed, De novo, Word for word out of Mr. Dud.
Diggs, for satisfaction of such who still persist in very great errors, only
upon the pretense of those convictions they lie under, from the no grounds of a
falsely fancied Co-ordination, whereby every unprejudiced Reader may in some
sort be satisfied, others will never.

I shall hold you no longer in the porch, then only to let you know, that as I
long have, so shall daily bow my Knees to the Father of Spirits, that he would
bless and guide you in all your undertakings, that your ancient Family which
has f^r so many years been in honor in these parts, never suffer any Eclipse
or Diminution, but that you may ever be followed with fresh accruements of
temporal Honor here, and so walk as to obtain an Eternal weight of Glory
hereafter; which shall ever be the prayer of

Your obliged and devoted Servant, JOHN COPLESTON.

MOSES next to GOD, AND AARON next to MOSES, SVBORDINATE and SVBSERVIENT.
PSALM 77.20. Thou leadest thy People like a flock, by the hand of Moses and
Aaron.


OMitting what might be spoken, touching either the Inscription or Occasion of
this Psalm; I shall betake my self to the subject matter, in which he that
runs may read Faiths Conflict and Triumph.

In the first whereof, we have the afflicted Church under the Person of the
Prophet Asaph, strangely struggling with fits of Diffidence and Distrust of God;
whilst he compares their former prosperous condition, with their present sad
pressures under Pharaoh Neco, or else the Babylonish Yoke: Those days wherein
they enjoyed their God, in the daily services of the Temple, (for so Cajetane
understands those Songs of Sion in the Night v. 6. with the years of their
Captivity, wherein their neglected Harps were hung upon the Willows in Babylon.

This consideration puts the Church upon those Melancholy Infidel reasonings,
and sad Expostulations. v. 7, 8, 9. but verse 10. begins the Psalm of
Remembrance, where we have the Church correcting the weakness of her former
Expressions, and her self for them; and betaking her self for shelter to that
sure Refuge, the experience she has formerly had of Gods goodness and power,
in her greatest straights; to the remembrance of the years of that Right Hand
of the Most High, which can never be shortened. So that let the present yoke be
never so heavy, yet the consideration of that Right Hand which miraculously
shook off that of Egypt, may support and ease you under it.

This use the Spirit of God in Scripture frequently makes of the Egyptian
deliverance, as in other places, so Psalm 74. v. 14. Thou breakest the head of
Leviathan in pieces, and gave him to be meat for the People inhabiting the
Wilderness. His meaning doubtless may be, that whereas the People in their
straights in the Wilderness, might be tempted to doubt of or distrust the
Providence of God toward them: To prevent this, God had given them Leviathan
as food for their Faith, which was sufficient to uphold their spirits, and
maintain a life of Hope and Confidence within them; if they would but look up
unto him, and make their dependence upon him, according to the glorious
encouragement, and triumphing provocation of so great and unheard of a
Deliverance.

The Prophet Asaph here takes the same course, with the distressed Church when
in a wilderness condition, hungry and thirsty, their souls faint within them:
He goes to Leviathan, whom God had broken in pieces, and sets him before them
for meat, (from the 14. verse to the words of my Text.) And here lest God
should be thought not to save to the utmost, but only for his own Namesake to
rescue from some eminent danger, and so leave them to shift for themselves; we
are assured that after he had been their Deliverer, himself also became their
Conductor, and whereas they were a Rude, Ungoverned and Confused multitude, he
crowns them with the blessing of a Gracious Governor, and Regular Government,
leading them with as much care, as the most vigilant Shepherd his flock, By
the hand of Moses and Aaron.

The words are plain, the sense is clear and evident, and therefore it would be
but lost labor farther to expound them. What is requisite this way shall be
taken notice of as we pass, in the mean time, we have here these three things
Observable.

1. The Supreme Governor, together with the Divine Institution of a Regular
Government, and that over his own peculiar People, in these words; Thou leadest
thy People.

2. We have here his Vicegerent Moses, deriving immediately from him, and
placed next even to God himself, with the Subordination of Aaron employed; for
it is By the Hand, not the Hands, more Fingers it seems, but one Hand.

3. Here is the manner of Gods Conduct, employed in these words, As a flock.

I shall take them in their order, and in the first of them, these three things
again offer themselves to our Consideration.

1. The Divine Original of Government, or its Author God, employed in the word,
Thou.

2. The Blessing of a Lawful Governor and Regular Government, couched under a
pastoral Metaphor, Leadest.

3. The People blessed by being thus made subject; his own People, the seed of
Abraham whom he had chosen.

1. God leads. God is the Author, or Power belongs unto God, it derives from
him and is still managed by him, who is here said to lead by the hands of them
he intrusts with Scepters; the hand is the hand of Moses and Aaron, but the arm
is an arm of Omnipotency, wrapped up in the Clouds, such divine things will God
have Kings to be reputed, that he challenges almost every thing about them for
his own, the Oil wherewith they are Anointed is Gods Oil, their Thrones are
Gods Thrones, the Judgment they execute is Gods Judgment, their Kingdom is
Gods Kingdom. Hence they are called the Sons of God, yea Gods.

I have said ye are Gods.

There is a passage in Tully concerning the Tragical Poets, to this purpose;
Quando fabulae suae exitum reperire non possunt recurrunt ad Deum: What they
did fabulously, we may; nay must, do truly; if we will find out the pedigree of
Supremacy, for it is Coeli depositum, which like that Scepter in Homer conveyed
by innumerable Predecessors unto Agamemnon, was first handed down from Jupiter.

As Moses so every other Princes face shines with the glorious beams of Divine
Power communicated unto them, that ^od who by an Omnipotent fiat first called
the passible world into Act, and has ever since laid out the same power for
preserving what at first he created. That God (I say) by virtue of his Dominion
over all, and for the good of the whole, first placed this part of his own
Image in fathers of families, (for Dominion doubtless was at first paternall.)

But when a Nimrod arose, with hounds at his heels, and began to hunt men,
necessity became a virtue, and what they could not do in their single
capacities, they endeavored to effect by joint engagement; the weakness of
each individual, being backed by the united strength of the society unto which
he adhered.

This the Ancients signify by the Harp of Orpheus, which charmed, that is,
civilized men as savage as Lions and Tigres, whereby they were brought to
submit themselves to Governors, and yield up part of their natural, for the
preservation of their civil and religious rights; yea, of their very Beings.
Without this our Streets would immediately be turned into Shambles, and our
Houses filled with Tragedies. Anarchy, but for a short space would beget more
confusion, then when Phaeton drove the Chariot of the Sun out of its course,
and put the whole world into a combustion.

The Persians therefore had a Custom, that when their Princes dyed, four or
five days of misrule were indulged the People, in which they might do what they
listed without control, that by the Rapines and Outrages, which might well be
thought would be committed therein, they might be brought the more in love with
the person and government of their succeeding Prince.

It is a sad way, I confess, but a sure one, to know the happiness of
government, by experimenting the confusion of Anarchy; witness our own late
dismal and tragical consequences of no King in Israel.

Wherefore ever blessed be the name of that God, who for the good of Mankind,
and preservation of Humane society, has entrusted Kings with a power over the
Estates and lives of others, which trust could be of no validity, if reposed in
them by any other save him alone, who by virtue of his Supreme Authority had a
power over both; and so could dispense with those Laws otherwise in force both
against Murder and Theft. Man has not an absolute power over his own life, and
therefore cannot bestow it upon an other, the Charter by which the Magistrate
acts in such cases is sealed, Genesis 9.6. Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man
shall his blood be shed. Without this Divine Sanction from the Supreme
Lawgiver, the very Sword of Justice would have committed Murder, as often as
it had been dipped in the blood of Malefactors.

For what had the Magistrate to do to take away the life of his fellow creature
were he not Gods Minister empowered and ordained by him to execute wrath on evil
doers?

It was a Miracle among the Heathen, that so many Nations, yea, Kings and
Princes, should give their Heads to One, sometimes a Woman, sometimes a Child;
which argues, that by the Light of Nature they saw such impressions of
Divinity stamped on them, as rendered their persons more Sacred, August and
Venerable, than what was merely Humane.

That power given to Kings and Princes over others, is a Divine Institution,
the consent of most Authors both Ancient and Modern, Sacred and Profane do
abundantly confirm, who are frequently acted both by Casuists and Practical
Divines treating on this subject. I shall mention only two or three and so
proceed.

Saint Chrysostom has said enough alone in these words, (...), which may be
translated out of Saint Paul, Romans 13. v. 1. The Powers that be, are ordained
of God, to which also Tertullian bears witness. A Christian (says he) is no
Man's enemy, much less the Emperors, whom he knows to be appointed by his God.
Colamus ergo Imperatorem. etc.

Go therefore reverence the Emperor as a Man next to God, and as one that has
obtained, what ever he has gotten from God. And elsewhere, whence comes the
Emperor? whence comes his Power? whence comes his Spirit? which he learned
from Irenaeus before him. He whose powerful word creates souls, the same
creates Princes and Potentates.

But we need not go to Ophir for gold, the Scripture is a rich Mine, out of
which we may digg abundantly to overlay this part of God's Ark, both within and
without, Psalm 62.11. God has spoken it again and again, that power belongs to
himself. Psalm. 47.9. The Shields of the earth they are the Lords, they bear
his Arms and Inscription, he holds them up and over the world. Psalm. 22.28.
The Kingdom is the Lords, and he is the Governor among the Nations. No power
is of force, but what is from above; as the whole scope and drift of the 13. to
the Romans sufficiently demonstrates, from which is there rightly inferred an
injunction to Obedience under penalty of Damnation verse 2.

This Truth is that stone in Jeremie, which not only supports Nebuchadnezars,
but the Thrones of all the Kings upon earth. Truly Brethren, those Melodious
Aires of rarest Music, those Triumphant Arches, Magnificent Titles, that Train
of Nobles, Knights, and Gentry, the Crown of pure Gold, together with a
glorious Throne and Scepter, are all requisite and suitable to the state of
King and Kingdom, and apt to beget Awe and Reverence in the hearts of the
Vulgar.

But alas, this is but the outside and ceremony of the Sacred Majesty of God,
whose representative the King is, whose judgment he pronounces; This, this is
that which renders him truly Sacred to all religious and judicious men and
minds. Divinity is the maintainer of Civil honor, and Religion bears up the
Throne in due reverence, whilst Men are taught to discern God as having the
chief hand and stroke in government, by whom Kings reign and Princes decree
justice whilst they are taught (I say) to see God leading: by the hand of Moses
and Aaron.

Away then with that Irreligious and Dangerous Tenet, so frequent in the Mouths
and Pens of some Men in these days, that all power is from the People,
interpreting I know not by what Authority, Dei Minister, the Peoples Servant.
That Magistrates, yea, even the Supreme Magistrate is trusted by the People,
and if he be not faithful, that is, if he satisfy not their giddy humors,
(which in Prudence and Conscience he is bound not to do,) then they may assert
their native rights, and reassume the trust reposed in them. Thus does this
pernicious Error pretend to a Law of Nature for the violation of all the Laws
both of God and Man. A Doctrine big with Rebellion and Confusion, whose teeming
Womb, never brings forth any other Issue but Blood, and Fire, and Pillars of
Smoke.

I hope I have demonstrated unto you, that power derives from a higher house,
and that the Magistrates Charter is not so drawn, as to be revoked again at the
Peoples pleasure; that the Supreme Magistrate is Gods Deputy, and so
accountable to no creature whatsoever, because subject to no Man or community
of Men whatever.

This the Heathen Sages knew well, and therefore that their Laws might be the
more inviolably observed, pretended still they were enacted by the assistance
of a Divine Wisdom. Thus Lycurgus imposes upon Spartae, by the help of the
Oracle at Delphos. Numa on the Romans, by a supposed privated commerce with the
Goddess Egeria; the like may be said of Solon and the rest. Mahomets Impostures
had never been so taking but that he persuaded his deluded Followers, that they
were whispered into his Ear, by the Holy Ghost.

From all which we may infer, that then both Laws and Lawgivers have their due
honor from the People, when they can look through the cloud and smoke, and
hear God dictating the one, and see him acting in the other.

And this may suffice touching the Divine Original of Government, employed in
the word Thou; the benefits follow, couched under a Pastoral Metaphor,
Leadest. This implies a motion whereby something more inconvenient is avoided,
and something more convenient obtained; and as all other motions, so this has
its two Terms. A quo, and ad Quem: The Term from which is Egypt, a Land of
Slavery and Idolatry; the Term to which is Canaan, a Land wherein he will set
them at liberty, and establish true piety. But let us take a short view of the
Bondage, that so we may learn to set the higher value on the Deliverance.

1. This bondage lay most heavy on their Estates, so that though at first they
were seated in Goshen, yet now made use of but as sponges, which the Tyrant and
his Taskmasters squeezed at their pleasures; here to have been a good Husband,
was the readiest way to have been a bad Subject, and then exposed as a prey to
the Talons of Pharaoh's State Vultures.

2. But food and raiment was all Jacob would bartar with Heaven for, that God
might be his God, and he his Servant; and therefore as long as they breath free
Air, go and come at their pleasure, no matter for so many full Baggs or
cramb'd Coffers, their Souls motion toward Heaven was like to be so much the
swifter, for that their Bodies were not laden and clogged with thick Clay. But
here is their misery, to the burden of Poverty was added also the loss of their
Liberty, for you could hardly find one of the race of the Hebrews, who had the
spirit of a true Israelite in him, but either in the Brick-kilns and Mortar, or
else the Stocks hurting his Feet, and the Iron entering into his Soul.

3. But Estate and Freedom, yea all is well sold, so we may have but Lierty of
Conscience for it: This indeed cost them very dear, but then see what it
amounted too, truly no more but a wild permission tolerating any other, save
the true worship of the true God. They might perhaps worship Isis, Anubis or
Serapis, either Crocodiles or Serpent, Onions or Garlike, which the Poet ^^outs
with a Felices nemium, quibus haec nascuntur in Hortis.
Numina, --
[Juvena.]

Yea, other things, as the Red-cloth. Varro reckons up among many hundreds of
other Pagan Deities, whilst sacrificing to the true God only was an abomination
to those Egyptian Saints, whose Religions were full as various as their Faces,
and so much was worshipped that there was nothing left to be worshipped.

Now if the Impure Conversation of the Sodomites were such a corrosive to just
Lot, if David's eyes ran down with water because men kept not Gods
Commandments, much more must it grieve the seed of Abraham to see the Glory of
the God of their Fathers given to such base Creatures.

But that which yet makes their misery exceeding miserable, was that they never
petitioned for redress, but their return was an hard an^wer, and fresh
imposition: Ye are Idle, ye are Idle, let therefore the allowance of Straw be
withdrawn, and the tale of Brick be doubled; and thus they made them serve with
rigor, rendering their lives bitter unto them, Exodus 13.14.

Egypt is easily translated into England, and then farther Application will be
needless; we had our Egypt, our Pharaoh, and our Taskmasters too, nor were
Gods appearances less glorious in breaking our Egyptian yoke. He has raised up
Moses and Aaron, and now leads us by them; here is the difference, God was
forty years leading them to their Canaan, but has within the space of twenty
Months brought us to much more then we could hope, and indeed all we can
desire; they had their Wilderness and Red Sea to pass through, but God found
out a nearer way for us, abating both.

You have now seen from whence it is that God leads, let us now with him take a
view from Pisgah, and see whither it is he leads them. And that is from Egypt
to Canaan, from Onions and Garlic, to Milk and Honey; from Slavery and
Idolatry to true Liberty and Piety; from Temporal and Spiritual Pressures, to
Temporal and Spiritual Happiness.

For their Estates, the Judicial Law stood as a Wall of Fire round about them,
securing their Prosperity, and encouraging their Industry, since they might be
sure to enjoy what they had whilst they lived, and after leave the rest of
their substance to their Babes; they were now under known Laws, not arbitrary
Commissioners.

1. The same Law also which secured their Propriety; was also the fence of
their Liberty; they were as free as the Air they breathed in, notwithstanding
their subjection to Moses and Aaron, for this is the true nature of Liberty, to
enjoy the benefit of good Laws and just Governors, and not to bear a share in
the government it self, to reap the fruits of Distributive and Vindicative
Justice, the Pillars of State from the hands of such as God has instrusted
with the Sword.

2. For the satisfying and quieting of their Consciences, all was done
according to the Pattern in the Mount. Ah blessed change! from the Temples of
Isis and Anubis, to the Tabernacle in Salem, and the Name made so great in
Sion; yea as the happiness of man is that of Time which is present, or that of
Eternity which is to commence when Time shall be no more; so Canaan is put for
both being the Type of Temporal and Eternal Happiness, of an Earthly Paradise
and of an Heavenly, called the New Jerusalem, which is above, and is free, the
Mother of us all. Now from this slavery both of Body and Soul to this Land of
Liberty and true Piety, from danger as to our present and future estates, to a
security both of Temporal and Eternal Happiness. God leads his people by the
Hand of Moses and of Aaron.

And thus by opening the Terms, I have also intimated the Benefits of a Lawful
Governor and Regular Government, couched under the Metaphor, Leadest.

3. Now follows the third thing proposed in the first General, the Persons who
were thus made Happy, in these words, His People, Gods People you see they are,
he owns them still, though in Egypt, the Red Sea, or Wilderness; He cease not
to Love them, because the World Hates them: when he makes up his Jewels be
will be mindful of them as precious things, though reputed as the offscouring
of all things. Outward properity is so far from being a mark of the true
Church, that the contrary is most true, the Persecutors thereof being
oftentimes successful and lucky Villains; yet he who sets bounds to the Sea,
has said to the proud Waves of their rage and malice also, hither shall ye
come and no further: yea, so gloriously does he appear for their deliverance,
as if he intended nothing more then to convince his and his Churches Enemies,
that he is with his Bush in the Hottest Flames, and with his Lillies amongst
the Sharpest Thorns, that so all things may work together for the good of his
Church and People.

This Note I shall not insist upon, though I could not but glance at it as I
passed; that which is more observable is, that though they were Gods peculiar
People, yet they are under Moses's conduct, this can be no plea to exempt them
from their Allegiance, and Duty to Moses and Aaron, since it is the best
evidence of being his People, when we reverence his Image in those he has set
over us. If any People in the world, these here in the Text might have shaken
of the Yoke of Obedience and Loyalty upon this pretense, for they were his
People more then any Nation under Heaven several ways.

1. They were his People by Covenant; I mean not such a Covenant as Cateline
and his Brethren in that conspiracy entered into, a Covenant conceived in
Treason and brought forth in Blood and Rebellion, wherein they plighted their
faith each to other by quaffing of whole Goblets of humane Blood; nor such a
one as Minutius Felix tells us, was falsely laid to the charge of the Primitive
Christians, no Holy League of France; but I mean that Covenant sealed in Heaven
by the blood of the Lamb slain from Eternity, published in the infancy of the
world in these words, The seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents head, and
afterward renewed with Abraham, Genesis 17. and sealed with the Sacrament of
Circumcision, wherein God covenants, that he will be their God, and that they
shall be his People.

Almost every Scripture where the word Covenant is but named, has been grossly
abused in these last and worst times, whilst that which concerns the great
Covenant made by God in Christ with lost man, or if you will, those Eternal
transactions betwixt God and Christ for the Redemption of the World, are
frequently applied to their own, that I say no worse, illegal and
unwarrantable conspiracies and combinations, whereas Gods Covenant is very
consistent with Moses Conduct, by Gods Covenant his Peope are more engaged to
be obedient.

2. They were his People by that special care he took for them, and providence
by which he watched over them, four hundred years together, when Israel came
into Egypt, and Jacob sojourned in the Land of Ham, Psalm. 105.23. when he sent
one before to provide them bread, and pay his Brethren for selling him: when he
preserved and increased his flock, though in the midst of their enemies, as
Sheep among Wolves, or Lambs in the midst of Lions; and when his time of
deliverance was come, he carried them out with a mighty Hand, and outstretched
Arm, showing Signs among the Egyptians, and Wonders in their Land, yet we
never find that they urged Providence to ruin Moses.

3. They were his People by special Conduct, he went before them in a Pillar
of a Cloud by day, and a Pillar of Fire by Night; yea, his Angels were made
Ministering Spirits for their good, Exodus 23.20, 23. and yet we find not that
when Moses executes Gods Laws, they cry out, we will have King Jehovah, or King
Serakhim, or King Jesus, we will not have this Moses to reign over us; for they
knew that being in Covenant with King Jehovah, they were the more engaged to be
obedient unto Moses the servant of the Lord, their lawful Governor: Yea, if
any of them began to Murmur, that their Governors took too much upon them,
since all the Congregation were the Lords People, or Holy as well as they; so
far is such a pretense from bearing them out, that it seems to hasten, yea, and
heighen their judgment too; for God will not suffer them to dye an ordinary
death, but opens the earth, and as it were by a Trap-door lets them down a
nearer way into the bottomeless pit, as in the case of Corah and his
Competitors.

There were in those days neither Pharisees, Saduces nor Essenes, 'twas in
after-ages that the Corruption of the Church proved the Generation of these
Sects, and therefore by Gods People here is meant a National not a
Congregational Church over the whole twelve Tribes, not some few choice ones of
our own Tribe, whom we style the Elect, and therefore separate them as the
precious from the vile, as if by a more discerning eye then that of ordinary
Mortals, we had pierced the Clouds, and read over the Iron Leaves of Eternity,
and could now perfectly tell whose names were written most fairly in the Book
of Life.

Not a people of God, I say, picked and culled out of the People of God, as if
we meant to pair the Onion till nothing remained, rending not only Christ's
seamless Coat, but his very Body into pieces, and crumbling it into attomes.
The Nation of the Jews, not some certain Sects and Factions, are here styled
Gods People, and not only here, but throughout the Old Testament, The seed of
Abraham: The people of the Jews in contradistinction to the Heathen Nations
round about, were by a special Title called Gods People; as in the New
Testament those that were converted from Gentilisme or Judaisme to the Gospel
of Christ, were called Saints, and the Church, (for the Church at Corinth is
the same with the Saints at Corinth,) and both with the Christians or
Professors of Christianity at Corinth, in the New Testament Language, which I
have the rather a little insisted on, because no one expression was ever abused
to viler ends and purposes, then this of Gods People and Saints. Gods People,
they are the Apple of his Eye, and Saints ought to be precious in Ours; but
when we will upon presumption of our own Saintship, reproach others professing
the same Gospel with our selves, having the same grace for their way, and glory
in their eye; when, I say, upon such a presumption we brand our
Christian-Brethren for Hypocrites, that we forsooth are Israel, they Egypt, and
so make no Conscience to rob and spoil them; pretending in our Profession to a
higher pitch of Piety, but in our Practice falling down below the Rules of
Common Honesty.

All that I shall say more to this sort of men is, that those Pictures which
with one light give you the resemblance of a Saint, and with another of a
Friend, may well set forth to the life, and be the Emblemes of such Saints, who
under this Vizzard act such things, as Hell it self stands amazed to see, and
so become a shame to those who are Saints indeed, and a scandal to
Christianity it self; and yet, all this in order to the advancement of the
Saints interest, and by such who have appropriated the name of Gods People and
Heirs of Promise to themselves, and would fain inherit under that Title;
Because they have learnt to Cant in Scripture phrase, and abuse the Language of
the Holy Ghost, converting it into mere gibberidge, and bending the highest
things to serve the lowest and basest ends.

But the people with whom we have to do were Israel indeed, Gods own people,
even the seed of Abraham, whom he had preserved and delivered; and now that he
might make up their mercies complete, leads them by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

And so I come to the second General, where we have Moses Gods Vicegerent,
deriving immediately from him, and placed next to God himself, with the
subordination of Aaron implied, for it is by the hand, not hands, more fingers
it seems, but one hand. Three things here also implied.

1. Moses the Supreme next to God. 2. Aaron in Subordination, or next to Moses.
3. Both Moses and Aaron make up but one hand, they have, it seems, no more in
this great work of conducting Gods people.

1. Here we shall consider Moses, 1. in his Personal capacity; 2. in his
Political; and show you in every respect, God has owned him as a person most
fit to be the Leader of his People. But I would not be mistaken, as if I
intended to give Korah and his company occasion, or ground of framing a
distinction betwixt the Abstract and Concrete, that so they may oppose and
resist the Person in power, whilst they pretend to own and reverence the Power
of the person; a Doctrine, than which, nothing can be more destructive both to
Governors and Government. But to show what a special providence watches over
their persons, whom he will advance to the honor of leading his people; and
therefore how sacred they ought to be to us, since they are so dear to him.

1. Moses, as his name imports, was drawn out of the floods, out of the waters
of many troubles does God rescue him, that he might lead his people by those
still waters of Comfort and Order, which run most pleasantly.

2. God uses a weak Instrument, that his own glory may be the more
conspicuous; he makes use of a woman to preserve, conceal, and protect his
Moses; a woman, I say, whose memory is recorded in holy Writ, and shall
flourish, yea does, now that the memory of those Instruments of cruelty, those
sons of violence, is perished with them; and the Tyrant is remembered, yet it is
so, as that he were better be forgotten: I had rather, says he, no body should
ever know there was such a man as Plutarch, than be remembered only for
devouring Infants, and furnishing the world with Tragedies.

3. He turns all to the advantage of the Church and People, by giving hereby
their Moses Princely education in the Court of Pharaoh, whereby he became
learned in all the learning of the Egyptians, wise as an Angel of God, and so
mighty both in word and deed. Thus the Lion's Den became a shelter to the Lamb,
even the meekest upon earth in whatsoever concerned himself; but most zealous
for the glory of God, and good of his Church.

Now by such a Moses, thus preserved in the day of hazard and peril, thus
protected and educated, will God lead his people as a flock from Egypt to
Canaan, from slavery to liberty, from misery not to be expressed, to happiness
beyond what we could conceive; for as this deliverance 'twas true too, When God
turned our captiv^ty, then were we like them that dream. But that which
completes this mercy, giving it all its dimensions, is, that Gods hand has
appeared all along in it, that the very enemies to truth and peace must
confess, It is the Lords doing, and wonderful in the eyes of all the world; it
came not like one of those common mercies, which God seems to hurl about the
world, and scatter (as it were) at all adventures; 1o Ex Deliberatione, and 2o
Ex Dilectione.

1. From the depth of Counsel and Wisdom, God seems after a deep deliberation
(abating still the imperfections which accompany such acts in us) to pitch upon
our King as Pharaoh upon Joseph, Genesis 41.38. Can we find such a man again as
this? or as himself did of old upon David, 1 Samuel 13.14. The Lord sought him a
man after his own heart, says Samuel, there alluding to the scrutiny among the
sons of Jesse.

2. This mercy proceeded, as from the depth of Counsel, so from the height of
Love and Affection, from those turnings of his bowels which were ever toward
us. Should we now expostulate with God, and say, Wherein have thou loved us?
why, there is a sufficient evidence of his love, in that he has given us a
King, yea, such a King: The Queen of Sheba took notice of this as the greatest
manifestation of his love to his people of old; Blessed be the Lord God which
delighted in thee, to set thee on the throne of Israel; because the Lord loved
Israel for ever, therefore made he thee King to do judgment and j^stice, 1
King. 10.9. Should not we now thankfully ack^owledge and highly value this
fruit of Gods love, the Queen of Sheba would rise up in judgment against us,
and condemn us.

I have now done with his Personal Capacity, and shall now treat of his
Political, under these two Heads.

1. Moses stands next to God. 2. He stands alone there, without any Compeers or
Co-ordinates.
1. God alone is over Moses, and he immediately under God, and all the people
under him; so that Moses may say with the Centurion, Matthew. 8.9. I am under
authority, he was under Claudius Lysias, and he under Felix, and he under the
Em^eror, h^c pro Deus under God, and so under Authority also; but so much above
^ll other humane Authority, that the people are said to ask couns^l of God wh n
they consulted Moses, Exodus 18.1.

It is essential to the order of Governing, that a Supremacy of power be
entrusted somewhere by God, questionable only by himself.

Reges in Ipsos Imperium est Jovis. Neither is this truly said only of
Monarchy, the best and noblest, but also of Democracy, the worst and basest of
Governments; it is as very a Monster as the (...), which have faces of men in
their breasts, but are without a Head; yet even here the people will have some
to govern the rest, and represent themselves, against whom there shall be no
rising up.

That you may never again be mistaken in this point, because a mistake will be
of very dangerous consequence, I shall spend a little time, and take a little
pains in opening the nature of this Supremacy, and acquainting you with the
latitude and extent of it. And here for your better information I shall
endeavor to explain, first, the Quid nominis, or those words and single terms
in which the Scripture expresses it: Secondly, the Quid rei, what be the
Ingredients or constituent parts of this Supremacy?

1. For the first of these we find three words in Scripture, the first shall be
that of 1 Timothy 2.2. (...), where such seem to be distinguished from Kings, and
so must signify either those, who under other forms of Government managed the
Supreme power, and yet were not Kings; or else those in places of eminency
under Kings. Take it in which sense you please, it infers the duties of the
first verse, viz. that Supplications, Prayers, intercessions, and giving of
thanks be made for them. Still, I say, it secures Supremacy, rendering it sacred
and inviolable.

Nor would I be misunderstood, as if I thought there were any thing in this
Scripture for the support and bolstring up of Oppression and Usurpation; an
Usurper alters the case, and there is no just scruple but those may be turned
out by force according to Law, who come in by force against Law, as in the
story of Athaliah destroyed by Jehoiada, whereby Joash, who had true title, was
established in the Throne: All that can be said, is, that it secures their
persons who are entrusted with the Supreme Power, either in Aristocratical or
Democratical Dukedoms or States; all that are thus justly in the possession of
Supremacy, have a Title to Prayers and Thanksgivings.

An eminently learned B. Andrews on the Commandments.
Prelate of our own interposeth this word, An Excellency of a Gift; when a man
ha h somewhat above others, either by Birth, or Natural, or Acquired
Endowm^nts, as well as Places.

By Birth, Nobility doubtless gives great capacity of Rule and Authority, it is
the Quarry out of which God raises the Pr^nces of his people. 'Twas a
character of the worst of times, Isa. 3.5. when the child behaved himself
proudly against the ancient, and the base against the honorable. Tobias the
servant is not fit to rule, nor Abimelech the son of an handmaid, nor must
Jotham's Bramble be preferred and promoted over the Trees.

Now, if this be the sense of (...), I am sure it secures our Sovereigns Title
to all the duties of the first verse, end engages us to be more devout in them
this day, yea, every day. Our Land is blessed in having (...), the son of
Nobles for its King, one who sways Scepters transmitted to him from enumerable
Kings and Princes his Predecessors; and therefore is in this sense amongst
those (...), and has the excellency of this gift.

For the other gifts of Natural or Acquired Qualifications and Endowments,
though I am far from their opinion who hold, that Dominion is founded in grace;
far, I say, from casting an Utopian Prince in Zenophon's mold, as being well
assured that Zerubbabel's Title is his being the son of Shealtiel, Hag. 2.23.
yet I think I may safely say, and that without the least suspicion of flattery,
that if we were to choose a King for such natural and acquired endowments, as
might capacitate him for so high an employment, we could never make a better
choice than God has made for us, which is so clear a truth, that I hope you all
bear witness to it, and rejoice in it this day. We are called to rejoice in,
and to bless God for the best of men, as well as of Kings, (...), as it may
signify the excellency of those gifts also, entitles our Sovereign to, and
engages us to be the more devout in, the duties of the first verse, not only
this day, but I say again, every day. You will, I hope, pardon the digression I
have made in explicating the first word, since it has been no very impertinent
one, and I shall be the briefer in the other two: the next of which is,

2. (...), Romans 13.1. a Power, or a Sword, without which, says the same learned
and reverend Prelate, all is a shadow. They are not here to be hearkened to, who
interpret (...) a lawful power, that is according to them, a power commanding
lawful things, as if as soon as the Prince commands unlawful things, or such as
we think so, the reins are then thrown upon our necks, and we are let loose
into an active resistance of such commands: This use has been made of this
Exposition, but I hope for ever to suppress and silence it, when I come unto
the third word; in the interim, take the word in either sense, either for a
Power lawfully derived and acquired, or lawfully used, it secures our
Sovereign, and subjects those who will not be his obedient and loyal subjects
to the damnation of the second verse.

The third word by which the Scripture expresses Supremacy or Sovereignty, is
(...), i. e. Principality, or a place of Government to exercise his gift and
power in. And if (...) in this sense gives a title to Sovereignty, King CHARLES
has as large a one as three Kingdoms can give him. But for silencing that
Exposition of (...) even now mentioned, know, that (...) and (...) are used
promiscuously, and Tit. 3.1. are joined together, and Ministers are charged to
mind men of being subject unto both, (...); So that though there be not (...)
in the sense some contend for, yet if there be (...), you must practice, and we
must both preach and practice subjection and obedience unto it. Now place
Supremacy in one, or in all these, for they have an affinity, and it imports a
power over all those, that God has subjected unto them, uncontrollable by any,
save God himself, and is thus defined by the learned Lib. 1. de qui Belli and
Pac. c. 3. 7.
Grotius, Illa dicitur summa potestas cuju^ actus alterius juri non subsunt,
ita ut alterius voluntatis humanae arbitrio irriti possint reddi; That Power is
termed Supreme whose acts are not subject to another Law, so that they may be
rendered null and void at the pleasure of any others will whatsoever.

The Ingredients, or Constitutive, and Integral parts of this Supremacy, as
they are summed up by that excellent Author out of the fourth book of
Aristotle's Politics, cap. 4. as also diverse places of Dionysius
Halica^nassensis, may be reduced to these following heads:

Jus legum condendarum and tollendarum, a power of making and abrogating Laws,
in which it is most certain our King is Supreme, however some men are otherwise
prepossest, by Arguments drawn from three Estates, Coordinate quoad hoc, which
were not indeed to be answered, were there any such thing as such a
Co-ordination as they contend for. A King may be Supreme, and yet not absolute,
and that is our Sovereigns case; He is Supreme in making Laws, though not
absolute and alone; our Worthies in Parliament do not give their Sovereign Law,
but they do legem petere and rogare, it is the Royal Assent that speaks a Bill
into a Law. Which Supremacy reaches not only to Civil, but Ecclesiastical Laws
also, which in matters indifferent, and not against the clear evidence of Gods
Word, are binding unto conscience.

2. Jus decernendi de bello and pace, a power to denounce War and conclude
Peace, this power Gods Vicegerent is entrusted with by God himself, Romans 13.4.
Psalm. 47.9. there he is entrusted with the Sword and the Shield. And we read of
the times when Kings go out to war. August. contr. Faust in Manic. lib. 22.
cap. 75.
Ordo ille naturalis mortalium paci accommodus hoc possit, ut suscipiendi belli
authoritas atque concilium penes principem sit. Even natural order accommodate
to the peace of mankind requiring this, that the power of making War remain
wholly in the Prince; which when the people usurped, we see they were punished,
Numb. 14.43, 44. That the power of concluding Peace, and making Confederations
and Leagues is also Sovereign, the examples of David and Solomon clearly
evince, 2 Samuel 10.19. 1 King. 4.2. 1 King. 5.12. 1 King. 2.56.

3. Jus Magistratuum creandorum, etc. A power freely to elect their own
Servants, and dispose of all Offices in Church and State. This also is a Jewel
of the Crown, and one of the Ingredients of Sovereignty. For Church Matters,
see the example of Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 17.8, 9. for State-Assemblies, the
example of David, 2 Samuel 20.4.

4. Judicia, to pardon offenders, or punish with death, as in Joab's and
Shimei's cases, 1 King. 2. yea, to receive Appeals from other Judicatures, Act.
25.10, 11. All this, and more also, does this learned man conclude must go to
the constituting and making up the Supremacy, which God entrusts him withal
whom he sets over his people, next and immediately under himself.

This is that Paladium, which whilst preserved inviolable, stands as a firm
Fence round about a Nation or People, to preserve and protect them in their
rights and privileges, both Civil and Religious; for by this trust reposed in
the Prince it comes to pass, that each single person is fortified with the
strength of a Nation.

I hope now it partly appears what Supremacy is, and with whom entrusted. Since
then Moses is this Supreme, placed by God next to himself, it necessarily
follows, that nothing less than God can exact an account of Moses's carriage or
miscarriage; which is true of our Moses also. It Is said, that if the Sun will
not run its race, or go its course, there be certain Eumenides who are to
scourge him; if Kings and Princes will not do their duties, they shall
hereafter find their Eumenides; but still divino judicio sunt reservendi, they
must be reserved for Gods Tribunal: we may not wrest the Iron Rod out of Gods
hands, that with it we may dash his Anointed in pieces as a Potters vessel.
Know this, that we cease to be subjects when we fall to questioning Princes,
and immediately incur the danger of the Apostles condemnation, Romans 13.1. When
therefore such temptations shall at any time hereafter be laid before you, by
which the weak and ignoranter sort of people are apt to be deluded, remember
these Principles, let not the Oath of God be forgotten, nor how much it
concerns you reddere juramentum Domino, to perform your Oath unto the Lord. Let
never any hand be lifted up against our Sovereign, which has been laid upon the
holy Gospel in witness of our submission to him, as to him whom God has
constituted Supreme in matters, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil. Nor may such
Orthodox Divinity be branded (as sometimes it is) for Court-flattery, since we
find by experience what great reason there is, that a generation amongst us,
animated with a spirit of Rebellion, should be instructed in such Principles as
these, at certain seasons in our most public Assemblies; 'twill be too late to
think of reclaiming men with a Sermon of Allegiance, when the Trumpet sounds to
the tune of that in 1 King. 12.16. What portion have we in David? we have no
inheritance in the son of Jesse: to your tents, O Israel: now look to thine
house, David.

I have done with the first, wherein I have acquainted you with Moses's power
and place, and upon that the peoples duty, all which will yet appear much more
evidently, when as I have showed that he stands next to God, so I shall have
proved that he stands alone there. For though Aaron seems to be joined with
him, yet we doubt not but as we pass, to set him in his due subordination: now
where there is a due subordination, the Dominus and Servus, make up but unem
aegens, Master and Servant are but one agent, and so it is but the hand, though
empowered and actuated both by Moses and Aaron.

I AM sent Moses, and if God commissioned him, we cannot well imagine he should
set up any other government over his People here on Earth, then that which he
himself exercises over his Saints and Angels in Heaven; no more Kings there
then Gods, Unity is convertible with Entity, and therefore chiefly with the
Being of Beings. God is King in Heaven, and Christ is King in Sion, in this
office he accomplished the great work of the worlds redemption, Sir Copleston
Bampfields Motto this year.
(...), is the Motto which Loyalty has this year written upon public Banners,
and it is no more then I believe, experience has long ago engraven upon all
our hearts. Two Suns would set the World into a combustion, more winds cause a
Harricane, and gather up nothing but Straw and Stubble, and light matter
together; Regni societas neque unquam cum fide incepit, neque sine sanguine
desiit, says the eloquent Minuc. Felix. Partnership in supremacy always began
treacherously, and ended bloodily. The Scepter in the hand of one, is doubtless
more steady and upright, then of many; and as we find one soul to govern one
body, and when it ceases to be one, the body is dissolved; so we may observe
that the greatest Empir^s that ever were, grew great by Monarchy, which soon
crumbled away when shared among the many. To speak of the Original of
Monarchy, together with the advantages and blessings accomplishing that, above
any other Government whatsoever, is not my intent; nor is it requisite, nor
will the time permit; the worst that can be said is, that it may degenerate
into Tyranny, but experience has sufficiently convinced us, that the teeth of
many Harrows are far worse then the point of one Sword. Monarchy is doubtless
the way God intended the World should be governed, that as he was most
excellent himself, and had all things under him, so there might be in his
creatures also a pattern of that excellency and subjection; wherefore to honor
Kings, when any excellent thing is to be set forth, the Scripture styles it
Kingly or like a King: Yea, so far, as one observes, did Christ honor Caesar,
as that he puts him before God, saying, give unto Caesar first, and then next
give unto God, etc. For he well knew the things of God would go on much the
better, if those of the King were well ordered; and it may be taken notice of,
that he never Coined Money but once, and that miraculously in the mouth of a
Fish, that Caesar might not go without his due.

Moses you see stands next to God; he is supreme, yet not absolute, id est, his
will was not his law, for he was to act, ex praescripto, according to his
pattern. And this may be the case of other Kings and Princes also, they may
have a supreme yet not an absolute power, so that by reason either of Gods
Laws, or a restraint from their own grants and positive constitutions, active
obedience may not be due to their illegal commands, yet by reason of their
supremacy, passive obedience becomes necessary under the penalty of damnation.
We have heard, and read much in these latter and worser days, touching a mixed
Monarchy, which yet has been sufficiently demonstrated to be but Anarchy; by it
they mean a Monarchy compounded of three Coordinate states, which in plain
English speaks this Nonsense, the power which one only has, is in three
states jointly and equally.

If restrained here to Moses, then it follows Moses was next to God alone, and
yet the Princes, and Captains, and Priests assembled by the Silver Trumpets,
were next to God also, Coordinate with him in the supremacy, not subordinate
in any respect. If extended to us also, then not the King, but King, Lords, and
Commons, are the jointly the Supreme, and then the Correlate is wanting, none
are left over whom they should reign, we should have a Kingdom without a
Subject, because all may challenge a share in Sovereignty. And, because I have
heard many, whose Birth, Parts and Education, set them far above the Vulgar,
urge arguments drawn from this false Topic of three Coordinate Estates, to
confirm such principles and practices, as I, and all the Orthodox Ministers in
England or elsewhere, must and ought resolutely to bear witness against; I
shall for the satisfaction of them and others carried away with the same
error, here transcribe verbatim some passages out of the incomparable Sir
Dudley Diggs, because perhaps many may read that here which they never did nor
would in that most excellent Author.

If by Co-ordination, says he, a Division of Sovereignty be meant, it is
against the nature of it, and a clear contradiction; so that, if the King be
one Sovereign, there is no such thing as Co-ordination; if three states be
joint Sovereigns, in what a miserable condition are we Englishmen, who should
be bound to impossibilities, viz. three Masters commanding contrary things? How
can we do homage to any save him only to whom we have sworn, Cum per id
efficiamur solius illius cui juravimus, as the Civilians determine, and we
cannot be duorum in solidum. They are his Subjects or not, if Subjects, not
Coordinate; if not in subjection they ipso facto put themselves out of his
protection, page 88.

And again, we grant, says that accute and learned Gentleman most truly, that
there must be a joint concurrence of three Estates to some purposes; such as
making new and repealing old laws, raising supplies for the Kings necessities,
in such proportion as they shall think fitting, which are indeed great
Democratical advantages, yet the fruits of the most gracious concessions of our
Princes, and therefore doubtless can include no authority of making Hostile
resistance against their Sovereign, in case he should do contrary the to
established laws; it is true, they are in force, and bind the Conscience, till
abrogated by joint consent, but he cannot be forced to put them in execution,
because he has no superior in jurisdiction; and no equal in managing jus
gladii, or the material sword, which is necessary to distinguish resistance
from rebellion, and give it the title of a just war. For, unless we can prove
our selves not to be Subjects, if we fight we become Rebels by the Law of this
Land, and by the Law of God incur a far greater penalty, Romans 13.7. page 139.

3. I have done with Moses's standing next to God, and shall now come in the
third place to speak of Aaron standing next to Moses, or in subordination to
Moses, as I delivered it in the second general; and for this we have two very
clear places of Scripture, Exodus 7.1. And the Lord said unto Moses, see, I have
made thee a god to Pharaoh, and Aaron thy Brother shall be thy Prophet. And
again, Exodus 4.16. And he shall be thy spokesman unto the people; he shall be,
even he shall be to thee in stead of a Mouth, and thou shall be to him in stead
of a God. The Jews have a saying, that the Keys of the Temple were laid every
night under Solomon's Pillow, not hung to the High Priests girdle.

Kings are doubtless Supreme in Spirituals also, yet Priests may do somethings
which Kings may not, though not without the Royal Assent and Permission. Then a
King (says one) serves God like a King, when he does that for him which none
else but a King can do, to maintain; settle and uphold religion by law is the
great service which belongs to a King. Let Moses regulate the duties and
ordinances pertaining to Divine Worship, but let Aaron and his Sons have the
honor still to Minister before the Lord. And indeed, we read not that Moses
meddled with the Ministration of holy things after the Consecration of Aaron:
and we know how dear it cost Saul his Sacrificing, and Uzziah his Incense
burning. We have this fully set forth in the example of Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles.
29.3, 4, 5. etc. 3. He in the first Year of his reign in the first Month opened
the doors of the House of the Lord, and repaired them. 4. And brought in the
Priests and the Levites, and gathered them together, into the East-street. 5.
And said unto them, hear me ye Levites, sanctify now your selves, and
sanctify the House of the Lord God of your Fathers, and carry forth the
filthiness out of the Holy Place. And then verse. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. he goes on
acknowledging the transgressions of their Fathers, and making a Covenat with
God for turning away his fiery wrath. But verse 11. he returns again to the
Levites, My sons be not now negligent: for the Lord has chosen you to stand
before him, to serve him, and that you should minister unto him, and burn
incense.

Hezekiah here you see impowereth the Levites, but touches it not himself; he
commands, but they execute; he makes provision for Religion, but medleth not
with the action; he is Supreme as King, yet they act under him as Priests and
Levites: And we are well assured also, that our sons of Aaron never thrive
better, than when Kings are their nursing fathers, and Queens their nursing
mothers, the influence of a Royal bounty being the most natural nourishment for
such plants We are not for Civil Subjects, and Ecclesiastical Superiors, much
less are we for the setting up the Tripple Crown of Rome; we stand for, and
stick to the Apostolical and Orthodox Doctrine of our 37th. Article, which
seems to be mystically set forth unto us, when the holy Crown was set upon the
Miter in Aaron's Vestments, Exodus: 29.6. the one in subordination, yet
serviceable to the other; and then indeed the work went on, when Aaron led in
his place as well as Moses in his. When the Prince was a support to the Priest,
and the Priest to the Prince, then Amalek fell before the Armies of Israel,
when Moses prayed in Horeb, and Aaron and Hur held up his arms.

There were nevertheless of old, who thought the sons of Levi took too much
upon them, as daily among us there arise men speaking perverse things, who
would have persuaded the world, that the claim of our sons of Aaron as from
God, I mean our Episcopal Power, as from Christ and his Apostles, was an
assault upon the right of our Kings, and tended to the disherison of the Crown,
as if, says Learned Mr. Sancroft.
one of our own excellently, the Calling might not stand by divine right, and
yet the Adjuncts and Appendages by humane bounty.

The Office it self may surely be from Christ, and yet the exercise of it only
by and under the permission of pious Kings. Why may not the Church owe the Keys
of the Kingdom of Heaven, both that of Order and Jurisdiction too (purely
spiritual, and without any temporal effect) to the Donation of Chri t, and yet
at the same time owe all the coactive Power in the external Regiment, to the
Political Sanction.

Nor is this Discourse impertinent either to the Text or Time; for as we have a
Moses, so our Aarons also; and there is a very great Analogy betwixt these of
the Old, and ours of the New Testament; those by whom God led them to the
earthly Canaan, and these by whom he conducts to the new Jerusalem. Aaron had a
call from God, called as was Aaron, Heb. 5.4. the Priests that succeeded,
succeeded in virtue of his call. We had Apostles, not by, or of men; and we
have Apostolical men, reverend Fathers of the Church, invested with power of
Jurisdiction and Ordination, by virtue of that which Christ first placed in his
Disciples, yet acting in a professed subjection to the Magistrates
Super-inspection, Regulation, and Censure. And now I hope you see, though it be
by Moses and Aaron, that it is but by the Hand, not of either alone, but by the
Hand of both; both are instrumental in order to this great mercy, both are
employed by God, both are useful and necessary for his People; for without
Moses they would not have been a People, a Flock, but as sheep scattered on the
Mountains of prey having no shepherd: and without Aaron, they would not have
been Gods People. As men, we need Moses; as Religious men, we need Aaron; and
better be no Men, than not to be Religious Men; and to be no People, than not
to be a Religious People. Both have but one work, both have but one hand, both
being subordinate make up but one Agent, both are here Commissioneo by God to
bring Israel out of Egypt, Thou leddest by the hand, etc.

There is no Inconsistency, you see, Moses may have the longest finger, though
of the same hand, no jarring here. Moses's Rod, though it may devour the Rods
of the Romish Sorcerers, that draw to the obedience of another Supreme Head,
yet not Aaron's Rod, and Aaron had a Rod too laid by the Pot of Manna; so also
had St. Paul, Shall I come unto you with the Rod? the Rod of Doctrine and
Discipline are very consistent, yea, sub^ervient each to other.

Nor may any wonder that we make Ministry to be full as high born a thing as
Magistracy, that Aaron should be extracted from as divine and heavenly a
Pedigree as Moses himself; since they are Brethren, they may, I hope without
offense, lawfully lay claim to the same Father. Now the ground of our
Episcopacy is partly derived from the pattern prescribed by God in the Old
Testament, and partly from the imitation thereof confirmed by Christ himself,
and brought in by the Apostles in the time of the New. The government of the
Church of the old Testament was committed to the Priests and Levites, unto whom
the Ministers of the New do now succeed, in like sort as our Lords day does to
their Sabbath, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet
touching the vocation of the Gentiles, Isa. 66.21. I will take of them for
Priests, and for Levites, says the Lord.

That the Priests were superior to the Levites, no man doubts, 1 Chronicles. 24.6.
and that there was not a parity either betwixt the Priests, or betwixt the
Levites themselves, is manifest by the Word of God, Ezr. 8.29. wherein mention
is made of the Heads and Rulers both of the one and of the other.

Each of the three Families of the Levites, viz. the Gershonites, the
Kobathites, and the Merarites had over them one Number. 24.30.^5. (...), or Ruler
appointed by God himself; and as the Families of the Levites, so the four and
twenty courses of the Priests had their (...), clearly distinguished from that
singular One, who was the Type of our great High Priest: Yea, in the Old
Testament we find two of these named Bishops in one Chapter, Nehem. 11. the one
of the Priests, the other of the Levites, that dwelt in Jerusalem; the Greek
Interpretation, verse. 14. gives you among the Priests (...), and both the Greek
and Latin Interpreters verse. 22. give you (...), which Jerome renders,
Episcopus Levitarum in Jerusalem, Azzi filius Bani, and not without approbation
of the Scripture it self, which renders the Hebrew word (...) of the same
Original in the Old, by the Greek (...) in the New Testament, Act. 1.20. (...),
and his Bishopric let another take.

As Episcopacy has its foundation in the Old Testament, so it appears to be of
Apostolical institution also, for the prevention of Schism, and that upon the
occasion of those notable Ones in the Church of Corinth: Beza himself has done
my work for me in these words, Certe si ab ipsis Apostolis esset profecta haec
mutatio non vererer illam ut ceteras Apostolicas ordinationes divinae in
solidum dispositioni tribuere. Sure I would not doubt (says he) to ascribe to
Episcopacy a divine Ordinance, if this change had proceeded from the Apostles.

Walo, alias Salmasius, the cruellest enemy ever Prelacy met with, will however
so far gratify us, Institutio Episcopi si ab Apostolis est jure divino, If the
institution of Episcopacy be from the Apostles, then it is of divine right.
That therefore which we have to do, is to prove it Apostolical, which we could
do from Scripture Commented on by the constant practice of Antiquity, and that
again seconded by the Concessions of the most eminent Protestant Divines of the
Reformed Churches: But I had rather St. Jerome should do it for us, especially
since he of all the Ancients is supposed least to favor this cause; but let us
hear him on Tit. 1.

Antequam Diaboli instinctu, studia in Religione fuerint diversaria inter
populos, Ego sum Pauli, ego Apollinis, ego Cephae; communi consilio Presbyteri
Ecclesiae gubernabantur, postea autem toto terrarum Orb decretum est, ut unus
ex Presbyteris electus superponeretur caeteris. Before, by the instinct of the
devil, factions grew amongst people in Religion, saying, I am of Paul, I of
Apollo, I of Cephas; by common Council the Churches were governed by
Presbyters; but afterward it was decreed through the world, that out of the
Presbyters one should be chosen and set over the rest.

The ground and occasion of Episcopal Institution you hear from this most
learned Father, to have been those Schismatical Rents and Divisions in the
Church of Corinth; the time in which this healing Plaster was spread and
applied, was viventibus adhuc Apostolis, the Apostles being yet alive, as
Scultetus affirms, and no man can doubt, that will but read the first Epistle
to the Corinthians. If then St. Jerome's authority pass for current, this is
alone enough to prove Episcopacy to be of Divine right, because by Apostolical
Institution: And that this fell not from him by chance, but was his settled
persuasion, is clear in that, besides this passage, in the ninth Tome; we have
in his first Tome a Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers, amongst which he
reckons up St. Peter, first Bishop of Antioch, afterward of Rome; James
surnamed Justus, Bishop of Jerusalem, Timothy of Ephesus, Titus of Creet, and
Mark of Alexandria, with diverse others; so ancient is Episcopacy even according
to Jerome. And again in his second Tome, ad Rupert. adversus Vigilant. miror
sanctum Episcopum in cujus parochia Presbyter esse dicitur acquiescere firmi
ejus, and non virga Apostolica and ferrea confringere vas inutile. Where the
Episcopal part of Excommunication against Vigilantius, he calls his
Apostolical Iron Rod.

And that we may prove all that we contend for, even from St. Jerome in the same
Tome, inhis Epistle to Evagrius, Quid non Presbyter facit, quod Episcopus
excepta ordinatione, where he reserves Ordination as the Bishops peculiar: And
in the same Epistle we have these words also, Omnes Episcopi ubicunque sunt
locorum, successores sunt Apostoli; All Bishops are the Apostles successors. In
the same place also alleging the Analogy between Aaron and his sons, in
respect of the Levites, with Bishops and Presbyters, from, as he says,
Apostolical Tradition. It were incredible if all those Apostolical relations,
concerning Episcopacy, should not amount unto so much as to make up an
Apostolical Institution, which if it does, it follows, it must be of Divine
Ordinance, even the enemies being judges.

I have now done with the second General, on which I have insisted a little
more than ordinary, as considering that we, our Moses's and Aaron's, Princes
and Priests, have suffered so much by the disbelief of, and opposition to,
these so great, so necessary Truths.

And lest any should surmise, as the world is full of jealousies and mistakes,
that I have all this while contended for tyrannical Oppression, or insolent
Domination, to be exercised over those who are quiet and harmless in the land,
let me desire your patience a little to the third and last particular, wherein
is set forth the manner of Gods conducting Israel by the hand of Moses and
Aaron, in the continuation of the Metaphor, as a Flock, i. e. with Lenity, and
in Unity.

1. With Lenity, like Sheep, not Swine or Oxen, with violence and rigor: And
therefore when God chose a man after his own heart to govern his people, He
takes David from following the Ewes great with young, that he might feed Jacob
his people, and Israel his Inheritance. And here Moses a man of the same
temper, the meekest man upon earth in his own concernments, but a Lion when
Gods glory, or the good of the Church, required just severity. We have a Moses,
a David, one who shares in all those endowments they were furnished with all,
as they were to be Shepherds of Gods People; no Jehu, Phaeton, or Furius, one
that has that property of the Kings of Israel most eminently in him, that he
is a merciful King, he knows not how to punish but where 'twere cruelty to
spare, where some transcendent villainy has left no room for mercy; this is a
choice Jewel in our Kings Crown, it is hard to say whether his Subjects love
him more for his mercy and goodness, or his Enemies fear and dread him for his
power and greatness; If yet he has any Enemies, or if any fear him, sure I am,
they have no reason, unless they be such as have rendered themselves as
incapable of Gods mercy as of the Kings; now this wilful and final obstinacy
alone does. It Is not so much that we have been sinners, as that we do persist
in sin, such an obstinacy neither God nor his Vicegerent will endure, all the
rest is put in utter oblivion.

Now for such a Prince who desires to have his Throne established in
Righteousness, and supported with the Pillars of Mercy and Godliness, are we to
pay the yearly tribute of Praises to our God this day, which I hope we shall
all do with more enlargement of soul then ordinary. This is the Day which the
Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it: He has made it a joyful
day for his Birth as a Man, a blessing to which Heaven bore witness in a Star
appearing at Noonday, as if nature it self would teach us that there was a Sun
and a Star, that might both very well shine together. Where was ever a Birth so
attested, since that of our Savior, will not easily be showed? But this is not
all, for as God has made this a joyful day for his being born as a Man, so
also for being as it were born again as a Prince, in this desired restitution
to us his People, his Crown and Dignities; and that at such a time, when his
and his peoples enemies, were endeavoring more solicitously then ever how to
entail our misery, and obstruct every passage, which might bring us home such a
mercy. Now, praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me praise his
holy Name.

2. The second thing in Gods manner of Conduct was, that as it was with Lenity,
so in Unity; as one sheep, says the Original, one in respect of Union, a flock
in respect of Communion and Society. Some strayers from the flock there will
be, and therefore Shepherds are necessary, and here let such strayers learn
their own danger, and how to avoid it, (viz.) by feeding with the flock; for
though we read of a lost sheep, yet never of a whole flock, there is security
doubtless as well as comfort in communion.

Doubtless, as it displeases God in Heaven, so it is no comfort to his
Vicegerent here on Earth, to see his People scattered up and down in Holes and
Hedge-bottomes, and straggling every one from their own Folds and Pastures. He
loves to see them as a flock.

It Is the interest of an Usurper indeed, that there should be Division,
according to the known Maxim, Divide et impera: But every Lawful Prince with
David would have their People as Jerusalem a City compact within its self: it is
part of the work of this day to bless the Name of God for a Prince wonderfully
preserved, restored and advanced to the Throne and Dignity of His Royal
Predecessors, a Prince who by his Lenity has invited and does still invite us
unto Unity. O that his People would be like Gods People here, like a flock, and
to that end, bless ^od for restoring them again to the conduct of Moses and of
Aaron, of Moses the King as Supreme, and be contented to be led by him, and
those that be sent by him, i. e. governed and directed in the civil affairs of
the Kingdom by the Civil Magistrate: By Aaron, the Bishops and those appointed
by them in the sacred things of God and his Church, especially since
self-conceited fancy, and pretended revelation, and inspiration by the Spirit,
has experimentally been found to be the mother of all confusion and delusion.

But since, to our knowledge, some among us are otherwise minded, I shall have
something to them by way of Application, and so conclude.

1. Use. Here is something by way of Redargution, and that to three sorts.

1. Such as would willingly be led neither by Moses nor Aaron.

2. Such as pretend highly to affect Moses, but care not what becomes of Aaron;
would be friends with the Crown, but are irreconcilably fallen out with the
Mitre.

3. Such as own both, love both, and would die for both in profession, but
disgrace and dishonor both by an unsuitable conversation. A word to each of
these.

1. Some are neither for Moses nor Aaron, a generat^on of Seraphical men, as
they count themselves, which will be led by no other light; then the Candel of
God within them; those rays, which shining forth from the face of the Sun of
Salvation are scattered upon their dark Souls, the only Pillar they will have
go before them all along the Wilderness, and these may well be styled
Fanatics, being nothing else but the Spawns of those old Priests who were
possessed by the Devil, or as they themselves thought inspired in their Fanes and
from their Curtains; and then foming and raving they were wont so to put on
God, as to put off men, uttering strange things in their Extatical raptures, of
which many oftentimes came to pass afterward; a trick of the Devil's, thereby
to confirm them in the ways they were in, and inveigle others also: you have
one of them described by Virgil, in the beginning of the sixth of his Aeneids.

-- Non vultus, non color unus,
Non Compcae mansere (...): sed pectus anhelum,
Et rabic fera corda tument; majorque videri,
Nec mortabo Sonans; afflata est numine quando.
Jam propiore Dei. --
All which has in effect been already Englished unto you, and therefore I shall
spare that pains here. These seem to be derived to us, from the Maniche's as
those from the Stoik's, the Stoik's held two principles, (...), Mind and
Matter. So the Manichees had their two principles which they affirmed to be
equally Eternal, Good and Evil. Good, they named Light and Mind; Evil, they
call Darkness and Matter, which they thought the cause of all wickedne^s and
vice: men that acted upon the evil principle they styled (...), Earthly and
Material, whom they thought by reason of the seeds of their evil nature must
necessarily be carried out to all manner of wickedness, and could not possibly
turn themselves or be turned unto God; on the contrary, those who acted from
Light or Mind, did necessarily do righteous things, and could not sin, or walk
in the broad way, by reason of the conduct of that light within them, though
they taught also that they were not obnoxious to the law, though they brake it,
because the law was, said they, for those who from matter, were Material, not
from spirit, Spiritual; they held that whatsoever we did, whether good or evil,
we did it necessarily, and therefore rejected both the Old and New Testament,
pretending to Revelations, Enthusiasmes, and Inspirations, and that they might
seem more then ordinary Mortals; Car. Chron.
Subito in turba se in terram absicientes, and velut attoniti, diu tacentes,
deinde tanquam ex specu Triphonio and plorantes, multa vaticinati sunt. On a
sudden some of them falling down, and as it were astonished or intranced, for
a long time together not speaking a word, afterward with a countenance as sad
and dejected, as if they came out of the Triphonian Den, they held forth, or
uttered those things which were revealed to them by the the Spirit in the
Agony: Many of them were doubtless counterfeits, and (as wise men think) many
also were really possessed, that the Devil might the better carry on his design.
Wedlock, Magistracy, Ministry, and all order, whether Political or
Ecclesiastical; they held not to proceed from Light or Mind, but from the evil
principle, Matter or Darkness. What horrid wickedness this Party or Faction
were guilty of, Clemens, Epiphanius and Euse^^^s, have recorded from the time
of Marcion till this Colluvies Marcionis, this filth of Marcion seditiously
seized Papuza in Phrygia, which they new Christened Jerusalem; together with
many other such pranks acted over again by those in Germany at Munster, and by
some amongst us, who not many years since Christened Hamshire by the name of the
land of Ham, with much more to the same Tune. Manes at length pretending to
heal diseases also by a skill in Physic infused by the spirit, whether through
ignorance or malice is doubtful, destroying the King of Persiae's Son whom he
undertook to cure, was flayed alive, and so hung up against the Sun, and died
miserably. So let thine Enemies perish, O Lord, and all those which are the
implacable adversaries of thy Sion. These, and such as these, are indeed
rightly termed Fanatics: God forbid, that the sober practices of honest and
godly men and women, who make it their work to glorify God, serving him in the
Gospel of his Son, etc. to work out their own salvation with fear and
trembling: I say again, God forbid, any such should be thus odiously branded,
only, because they run not into the same excess of riot with the wicked world.
But let them have it, who deserve it, by endeavoring to overthrow all order in
Church and State, and reduce us again to a Chaos of confusion. It Is strange
there should be any such, yet that such there have been, and still are, is too
evident; such, I say as look upon all government as Tyranny, and just laws as
Bolts and Shackles; such as Saint Peter and Saint Jude have charactered unto us
in their Epistles, to despise Dominion, speak evil of Dignities, and all
presumptuous and self-willed persons. It is doubtless true liberty to have the
benefit of good Laws, which are nothing but right reason, and he is a Beast or
Bedlame that will not be ruled by reason: These high-flown Christians come
short of many of the old Pagans in this particular; so highly did the Persians
value their Laws, that they taught their Children the knowledge of them as soon
as of letters. Others after experience of great happiness by observing old
laws, and miseries by indeavoring to innovate, would not endure a motion of any
alteration, Locrenses.
but with Halters about their necks that made it, to the end they might
presently suffer, if their motion were not upon good grounds to be publicly
approved of. The Grecians, and Agathyrsi, were so in love with their laws, that
they taught them in S^ngs with Music to their Children, an imitation possible
of Gods own prescription, who taught his people the sum of his Law in a Song.
Saint Paul gives command that prayers, and not only prayers but thanksgivings
also, should be offered up to God for Kings and all in Authority, that under
them we may live a godly and a peaceable life: if that we may, much more when
we do, or may do if we please; let us make of it a day holy rejoicing upon this
account also, that this snare amongst many other is broken, and our soul is
escaped, since the Prince of the People has let us go free. It Is reported of
one of Augustus houses, that it was so infected with the Croking of Frogs, as
that almost it became inhabitable and useless; which when Caesar would go to
see, the Frogs were silent ever after, and never heard to Croke more, when he
had once appeared there. Caesar has appeared, and we partly have, and partly
hope the like effects through the Nation; for those crokers which have so long
infected us, either Croke faintly, or are quite silenced in many other places.

2. Others there are who forsooth ptetend they should like the King, could they
but keep the Bishop from putting in his foot: But we know that the same
principles, and perhaps arguments too, which trample upon the Mitre, profane
the Crown also, and cast it to the ground. It Is strange those men should cry
out against Heresy and Schism, no men more or louder, and yet pull down with
their own hands the best fence, and mount that ever the Church experimented
against both. But we are now come to grant a Primitive Episcopacy; to this, as
has been proved belongs Jurisdiction and Ordination, and who ever pretended to,
or contended for more? T^eir Manors, Lordships and other Perquisites and
Appurtenances, they acknowledge they owe to he favor of Princes, and we affirm
they may be or may not be, the essence of a Bishop remaining entire without
them. Yet why only learned men should espouse Beggary, and when men place
abroad their Children to other t^ades, why should they have an eye to their
future advancement, and rising to wealth and honor in the world, and yet doom
such of them as with more care and cost they bring up to learning, I say, to
doom to such to poverty and rags, is not easily imaginable? Is it rational of
Scholars only, many of which would have come to as much in any other way, as
any other men, should be bound to take upon them the most laborious calling in
the world, and study hard for many years, only that at length they may become
poor and contemptible? I believe if we should set down and soberly debate the
business, there would be as good reason shown, why there should be parity
amongst all other men also, as there can, why there should be amongst Scholars
and Churchmen. But to pass by these men and their irrational principles, I
hope we have not so learned Christ and the Gospel, but that with joy and
gladness we own Aaron as well as Moses; nor ought it to be forgotten this day,
since it is a day of Remembrance, that with our Ancient Monarchy God has been
pleased graciously to restore our Ancient Primitive, Apostolical Episcopacy;
that ^od has put it into the Kings heart to mind the House of God more then his
own, is, and ought be the cause of many Thanksgivings, to as many as have a
good will to this our Sion this day; nor let that vulgar objection prevail with
you, that you would be for good Bishops: You acknowledge, I am sure, that you
have no reason to complain, you I mean of this City and Diocese, but to bless
God this day upon that account al^o, and therefore you are bound to judge
charitably of all the rest of these Reverend Fathers of the Church by what you
have seen with comfort in him.

3. Here is a word of severe reproof for such as own both Moses and Aaron in
profession, but dishonor both, or any Cause they adhere to, by an unsuitable
life and conversation. We hope the world is a little better instructed, than to
judge of principles by some particular men's practices; for we confess with
grief of heart, that there are a Rabble in the world that pretend to be for
Moses and Aaron, which the true sons of the Church do heartily wish were of any
other persuasion. Men and women, under the burden of whose sins the best Cause
that ever was in the world has sunk once already, and we may justly fear will,
without speedy repentance and amendment, pull down fresh judgments upon us
again;, I mean, such who live, as if to be lo^al were to be profane, and there
were no may of manifesting our affection to our King, but by drinking his
Health; it is to be feared they have to answer for drinking one King dead
already, thus mingling Royal blood with their wine. For, Let the Throne of my
Lord the King be for ever clear; we must take to our selves the guilt of those
sins, which gave the saddest stroke that ever was struck in the world. Nor can
there be a greater dishonor to our present Sovereign, than to make pretentions
of affection toward him, the shelter and sanctuary for looseness and all manner
of debauchery; then to part asunder what ^od has joined together, viz. Fear
God, from Honor the King. And I wish all those who spend most of their time in
such loose, dissolute, and debauched practices, would lay this to heart; such,
I say, who have scarce time through the year to entertain a serious thought,
but live as if God had sent them into the world, as the Leviathan into the
deep, only to take their pastime there; those are they who for the most part
scoff at Sermons, and are never so witty as in their Atheistical contempt of
all Ministry; let them pretend what they please, they love no Minister that
will deal roundly and plainly with them. And here I cannot but condole the sad
condition of the Church of England, Papists will kiss the hem of the meanest
Friars garment; Schismatics adore their seducing Ringleaders, and would even
pull out their own eyes to do them good: only some men who would be counted
true Protestants, but indeed are downright Atheists, speak reproachfully of,
and deal most scornfully and imperiously with as learned a Clergy, as excellent
a Ministry, as ever the Church enjoyed. For I have experimentally found, that
through the sides of Factio^s and Schismatical ^u^des, they wound all the rest.
How can they bless ^od this day for them, that think, and stick not to say, it
would be better without them. God grant this do concern none that hear me this
day, I hope it does not, any farther than to enlarge your hearts in
thankfulness, as for the restoring of Monarchy, so the establishing of
Ministry; which had ere this been utterly destroyed, had not God wonderfully
interpo^ed the wisdom, courage, and integrity of his Excellency, our most
renowned General, betwixt us and the sad things designed for us.

We can express our thankfulness no way better, than by living worthy so great
mercies and gracious deliverances; especially let us be careful of manifesting
a hatred and abhorrency of those sins, which had a most immediate influence
into our punishment; yea, which God turned into punishments. Remembering, that
whilst the Nation ceased to be Loyal, they were Miserable; that ever since the
Kings Throne was cast to the ground, God has been pouring out contempt upon us
also, yea, upon the whole Nation, even to the time of his Majesty's
Restitution. Yea, let our prayers be for our Jerusalem, Jerusalem of old was
Domus Regni and Religionis, there were the Thrones of the house of David, and
there were the Ark and the Tabernacle; let us therefore join, Church and State,
King and Priest, in our duties this day; when we pray to, and praise God for
Moses, let not Aaron be forgotten; so shall peace be within our walls, and
plenteousness within our palaces; God shall bless us out of Sion, yea, God
shall bless us out of Heaven, delighting still to lead us as a flock by the
hand of Moses and Aaron.

Secondly, Here Is a word of Exhortation, and that to several Duties.

First, To sit down and recount with our selves, how wonderfully God has
appeared for us, breaking our Egyptian yoke, and restoring Moses and Aaron to
us, and us to them: Here to set in order before you those Magnalia Dei, those
wonders of the most High, were the work rather of a Chronicle than a Sermon;
yet, for method's sake, consider the deliverance God has wrought, and the
alterations by which he has compassed them. First, for the deliverance, he
took us as a prey out of the jaws of the terrible, and broke every staff of
the oppressor in pieces. Neither was this deliverance only from what was felt,
but what was feared; what had been continued was bad, but that which was now
upon the wheel, when God broke them in pieces, was yet worse, if worse could be.

But now let us see what it cost ere Pharaoh would let the People go free; and
first it cost the removing one that was a terror in the land of the living, and
laid his sword under his head; the cause of all that misery these poor Nations
felt for twelve years together was removed in a moment, God taking that quarrel
into his own hand, and summoning him to answer before a higher Court of Justice
than ever he erected. 2. It cost the discovering of the greatest hypocrites,
dissemblers, and self-ended public pretenders that ever were in the world. 3.
It cost the defeating of many Achitophels, and turning the wisdom of the wisest
into folly. The case of our Sovereign is set forth Heb. 11.33, 34. and that of
his and our enemies is set forth also, if you compare Isa. 43.16, 17. with Isa.
1. ult.

Let us study our own mercy and duty, consider what God has bestowed upon us,
for what he removed from us. That which we have received from him is the
greatest token of his love, even the Signet of his own right hand; he has
fulfilled the same promise to us which he made to his people of old, after
their return from captivity, Haeg. 2.23. in giving Zerubbabel the son of
Shealtiel, in restoring one lineally descended from our ancient Monarchs, whose
undoubted right it was. Four things, some say, must not be in a Signet, it must
not have (...), an idolatrous stamp or sculpture; and surely in this respect
our Zerubbabel is a fit Signet for Gods own right hand, he neither names,
knows, nor worships any other, save the God of his fathers; which will seem the
more admirable, if we consider his age, and the advantages he might probably
have made by changing his Religion. But neither the wicked and treasonable
practices of these his enemies, who pretended to the same Religion, nor the
complying overtures from the Factors of Rome, could ever bring him to bow in
the house of Rimmon; thereby making it appear, that it was his settled
persuasion, that he were far better sit down by the loss of three earthly
Kingdoms, than hazard his Title to one heavenly Crown.

2. There must not be cut or engraven on it (...), an instrument of cruelty.
Our Zerubbabel has no other but a stamp of clemency, and therefore in this
respect also fit for a Signet to be worn on Gods own right hand, he never does
any thing with a worse mind than punish, wishing really, utinam nescirem
literas, when he is forced to sign a fatal Bill or Warrant, but where 'twere
cruelty to spare, where transcendent villainy has left no room for pardon or
mercy. So that though all men acknowledge him to be admirable at remembering
men, yet must it be confessed, that he is far better at forgetting injuries.

3. It must not have on it (...), etc. an emblem of intemperance. Our
Zerubbabel bears no other but the stamp of sobriety, he has thoroughly learned
Lemuel's mothers lesson, Prove. 31.4. It is not for Kings, O Lemuel, it is not
for Kings to drink wine, nor for Princes strong drink. He is far from the
disease of the Kings of Israel that Solomon complains of, Eccles. 10.16, 17. He
eats and drinks for health and strength, not for excess and drunkenness; yea,
so far is he from this, that some who were habitual drunkards, as we have heard
have been strangely reclaimed, since they perceived that they could not enjoy
the pleasure of their sin, without the displeasure of their Sovereign. And
therefore in this respect also is our Zerubbabel a Signet fit for Gods own
right hand.

4. A Signet may not have on it (...), a wanton or a lascivious Posey. Our
Zerubbabel bears no other but a stamp of chastity, take all circumstances even
to a miracle; Whose bed has he defiled? whose Virgin has he defloured? had he
been blemished but with the least suspicion in this kind, time was when it
would have been sufficiently aggravated: But blessed be the God of that grace,
which has kep^ him in this respect as well as in all others: So that he has
perfectly learnt that good old lesson, Regium est ita vivere, ut non modo
hominum nemini, sed ne libidini serviant: survey the world, and not many such
men; surely not such a King again to be found. And therefore in this respect
also is our Zerubbabel a fit Signet for Gods own right hand. To prosecute this
a little further, if any remain yet unconvinced, if any have the heart to look
back upon, and hanker after the fruit of their ways, who have not perished, as
they deserved, in the gainsaying of Corah; let them but consider the
difficulty of the work they have to do, and then study to be quiet, and do
their own business; if ever they prevail, they must pluck Gods Signet from him,
to which the Scripture has assigned three places, all importing the Signets
safety.

1. The right hand, as in the second of Haggai, the last before cited, and this
implies custodia dextrae, the protection of his right hand, for them who are
the men of his right hand, as Kings are styled; this, I say, implies ordinary
preserva^ion.

2. There are Extraordinary cases of danger, and therefore he has a stronger
place; His Arm, a Signet on his arm, Cant. 8.6. God has a strong arm, an
outstretched arm, an arm of salvation for extraordinary dangers. This Signet
of his has had sufficient experience of the hand, yea, and of the outstretched
arm of his God too, for his defense in times of greatest danger.

3. He has yet a closer and surer place to set his Signet on, and that is on
his Heart, in the place last cited, Cant. 8.6. and this betokens the greatest
care and custody; the Heart is called Repositorium amoris, Love's Cabinet. Now
Love is strong as death, says Solomon. There is then a Hand to hold Gods
Signet, an arm to defend it, and a heart for his hiding place: It will be hard
to snatch him out of his Hand, harder out of his Arm, but hardest out of his
heart. Lay aside therefore your thoughts of revenge, and take up thoughts of
praises this day, and that shall be the third Branch of my Exhortation.

3. Be exhorted to consider what Gods design may be in all the great things he
has done for, and amongst us; yea, in bestowing the Signet of his own right
Hand, Arm, and Heart upon us; surely his main end is his own own glory, the
carrying on of Christ's Kingdom, by removing what ever stands in its way. We
have heard much talking in these last days of the Kingdom and Scepter of Jesus
Christ; if any Government in the world may pretend to these Titles above the
rest, it is doubtless that ancient way by Bishops and Archbishops, which these
expressions have been made use of to pull down, which Christ himself bears
witness unto, by removing what ever stands in its way; Covenants,
Congregations, Anabaptists, Quakers, whatsoever opposes out Articles, Liturgy,
and Episcopacy, is born down before it, Isa. 14.32. What shall one answer the
messengers of the Nation? the Lord has founded this our Sion, the poor of the
Nation shall trust in it. Gods design you see is founding Sion, raising a
Phaenix out of her Ashes, making that which was but Brick to be Marble, and
turning Sicamore into Cedar.

4. Be exhorted to answer all his mercies with suitable returns, as he has
preserved the Gospel, so let us adorn it, as we do now again enjoy Holy
Ordinances, so let us get Holy Hearts; Heavenly Institutions will but aggravate
our condemnation if we be without Heavenly Conversations. We had need be the
more careful in this particular, because no temptation is so strong under
mercy as to break off Communion with God; the Devils yoke being shaken off he
would fain revenge himself by causing you to shake off Christ Yoke also; but if
you would complete your mercies, set your Faces against your sins, show that
you Honor the King by fearing God. Our sins drew down a heavy storm on the
Father, for still we must acquit the Throne, and condemn our selves, let our
repentance procure blessings for the Son our Sovereign; for know this, that if
judgment be removed and sin remains, it is removed in anger, not in mercy, God
gives over punishing in displeasure. It may go, but it is Cum animo revertendi,
it goes to return again, if we take not Christ's warning, Go and sin no more, a
worse thing will befall us; if we do exalt our selves, God will plead with us;
if we turn his grace into wantonn ss, then his anger in smiting shall not be
turned away, But his hand shall be stretched out still: That therefore he may
not be provoked to withdraw these rich expressions of his loving kindne^s in
displeasure, Give him in these three returns especially.

1. Give him a return of Praise and Thanksgiving, magnify that ^od who has
sweetened all your sufferings with so gracious a deliverance; God expects this
tribute from his redeemed ones, Call upon me says God in the day of trouble, I
will deliver thee, and tho^ shall glorify me, Isa. 65.13, 14. there be the
King and Countries friends distinguished from others by their joy and
thankfulness on such a day. Behold, my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be
ashamed; behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for
sorrow of heart, and shall houl for vexation of spirit. We are called this day
as many as have a good will to King and Kingdom, to Sing the Song of Moses,
and the Lamb; of Moses for Temporal, and the Lamb for Spiritual deliverances;
if ever a Nation in the world had cause, we have to sing it this day, we are
led from Egypt for Slavery, from Babel for Disorder and Confusion, from a mere
Hell for Heresy and Blasphemy. Egypt began to double the tale, and now God
resolved to free his People from making the Bricks; be not backward then, sing
the song of Moses and the Lamb, speak thanks and live thanks.

2. Give him in a return of Worship and of Service, testify your thankfulness
by a constant attendance on his worship, when his People of old would go out of
Egypt they had no other pretense but that they might Sacrifice to their God.
You pretend you value the Liturgy, and remember the restitution of it as a
great mercy this day, be constant therefore henceforth in waiting upon God in
that Service, and show that you value it by abandoning the sins there prayed
against, by improving the grace, and following the conducts of that spirit
there prayed for and to, by being moved with the exhortations, and dreading the
comminations of that book. This is the use we should make of such a
deliverance, that being delivered from the hands of our enemies, we may serve
him without fear; if we improve not mercies this way, God will say of us as
David of Nabal, Surely in vain have I kept these men, and all that they have. 1 Samuel 25.21. They have requited me evil for good.

3. Give him a return of holiness, let us testify that God leads us by being
godly, and make it appear that Loyalty is very consistent with Piety, and that
the best Christians are also the best Subjects. His presence among them was the
great argument from which he pressed his People of old. O that his Spirit would
bring forth this fruit of these his gracious dealings, that we might be a holy
people: let us take care of prostituting such mercies to the service of any
lusts whatsoever. Beware o^ making that use of peace and plenty that the rich
fool in the Gospel does, Soul take thine ease, follow Luxury, Pride and Vanity,
let not those that are or have been Filthy, Profane and Loose, be so still, let
every one forsake his evil way, and the iniquity that is in his hand. That we
who erewhile were scarce a People, may now be a People to the praise of the God
of our mercies, that God may look upon our Sovereign for good, and that as he
is, so he may continue as the light of the morning when the Sun is risen, even
as a morning without clouds, and that we who are under rule, may every man set
under our own Vine, and under our own Figtree, and praise the God of peace in
peace.

Send us away at present with such apprehensions as these upon our spirits. God
has so done his Miraculous works, that they ought to be had in everlasting
remembrance, and endeavor to lay the due Emphasis not so much on the things
done, as on the doer of them; not so much on this that they are done, as that
you can read God in them. Our Soul is escaped as a Bird, the Snare is broken,
and we are esaped. And then to close up all, What shall I render to God for all
this? I will take the cup of Salvation, and I will pay my vows of thankfulness,
of worship and service, yea, of holiness unto the Lord, for leading us as a
flock from Egypt to Canaan, by the hand of Moses and of Aaron.

FINIS.
Books newly Printed, and are to be sold by Richard Thrale, at the Cross-Keys
at St. Paul's Gate, entering into Cheapside.
ECclesiae Anglicanae (...), in qua perturbatissimus Regni and Ecclesiae
status, sub Anabaptistica Tyrannide, lugetur. Dictante Johanne Gough S. Th. D.
Coll. B. Ma. Magd. Oxon. quondam Socio, Vicariae Sti. Stephani juxta Cantuariam
nuperrime restituto.

The Most accurate History of the ancient City, and famous Cathedral of
Canterbury, being an exact description of all the Rarities in that City,
Suburbs and Cathedral; together with the Lives of all the Archbishops of that
See, illustrated with diverse Maps and Figures; published by William Sumner.

A Breviate of our King's whole Latin Grammar, vulgarly called Lillies,
(analytically disposed) or a brief Grammatical Table thereof, to facilitate the
Apprehension, strengthen the Memory, and to increase the benefit of young
Learners, made for the use of all Philologists; by the labor and pains of
Josh. Brookbank

Manchester al Mondo. Contemplatio Mortis and Immortalitatis. A Contemplation
of Death and Immortality. The seventh Impression much enlarged, with the Latin
Sentences rendered into English.

The Mirror which flatters not, concerning the Contempt of the World; or, the
Meditations of Death of Phillip King of Macedon, Saladine, Adrian, and
Alexander the Great: by le Sieur de la Serre Historiographer of France,
transcribed into English from the French by T. Carry Esquire.

An Antidote against immoderate sorrow for the death of our friends, taken from
an assured hope of our Resurrection to Life and Glory. Delivered in a Sermon
preached in the Parish Church of North-wraxal in Wiltshire the 12 of April
1660. at the Funeral of Sir William Button Baronet; by Francis Baily.

The strong man ejected by a stronger than he: In a Sermon preached at
Gloucester May 15. 1660, being the day his Royal Majesty King Charles the Second
was proclaimed. By W. Bartholomew M. A. Vicar of Campden in Gloucestershire.

A Sermon prepared to be preached at the Funeral of Walter Norbane Esquire; by
William Haywood D. D. and one of the Chaplains in Ordinary to his late Majesty
of glorious memory.

Virgilii Evangelisantis Christiados Libri 13. in quibus omnia quae de Domino
nostro Jesu Christo in utroque Testamento, vel dicta vel praedicta sunt,
altisona divina Maronis tuba suavissime decantantur, inflante Alexandro Rosseo
Aberdonense.

Carminum Proverbialium totius humanae vitae statum breviter delinea^^^^ nec
non utilem de moribus doctrinam jucunde proponentium. Loci communes in gratiam
juventutis selecti.

The works of that famous Physician D. Alexander Read, Dr. of Physic, and one
of the Fellows of Physicians College London; containing Chyrurgical Lectures
of Tumors and Ulcers.

2. A Treatise of the first part of Chyrurgery, which teaches the reunitio^ of
the parts of the Body disjoined, and the methodical doctrine of Wounds.

3. A Treatise of all the Muscles of the body of Man.

The Manuel of the Anatomy of the body of Man, containing the Enumeration and
Description of the parts of the same, which usually are showed in the public
Anatomical Exercises, with sundry Figures; by Dr. Alexander Read.

The Complete Gentleman, fashioning him absolute in the most necessary and
commendable Qualities, concerning Mind or Body, that may be required in a
Person of Honor; with the Gentleman's Exercise for Drawing, Limming, Painting,
etc.

Thearrum Botanicum, A Theater of Plants, or a complete universal Herbal; by
John Perkinson, in Folio.

Paradici in soli Paradisus terrestis, or a Garden of all sorts of the rarest
Flowers, with their nature, place of birth, time of flowering, useful in
Physic, or admired for beauty: To which is added a Kitchen-Garden, furnished
with all manner of Fruits, and Roots, and Herbs, used with us for Meat or
Sauce. Also the Art of pla^ting an Orchard; with the right way of Preserving
and Conserving of them, with their select Virtues; by John Perkinson, in Folio.


