A COPPIE OF A LETTER, Sent to Lieutenant General CRUMVVEL From the
Well-affected Party in the CITY.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed in the Year 1647.

A Copy of a Letter to be sent to Leiutenant General Crumwell, from the
well-affected Party in the City.
Crumwels Valor and Virtue, let him be ignorant. He is the Great Counsels
Eye, the great Generals Hand, Englands, Irelands, nay and Scotlands Wonder.
Open thy Gates, O London, and let Crumwel enter, whose Gallant spirit is able
to fill thy spacious Rooms, and whose unerring Genius will lead thee to that
Religion and Liberty which neither Besse, not James, Charles, nor his
Parliament had ever so much Happiness as to dream of.

He that is not sufficiently Organized to see thy worth, it is not because thou
want Splendor and Brightness; but because he wants his Eyes. He that is
obstinate, and shuts the windows of his face on purpose, let him neither enjoy
the light of the Sun, or which is worse, not the light of thy Countenance. O
blessed Crumwell, thou art not only the finisher of the old War; but the
Wise, the Valiant Restorer of a new one.

A new one, we say: not only in respect of the Cause which is changed from
Popery to Presbytery; But in respect of the Title from Truth and Peace to
Truth and Righteousness.

Formerly we fought for Peace and Truth: But Peace is an old over-worne
Malignant Title; and therefore now, as heretofore, waving Peace, we march on
valiantly for Righteousness sake. And truly Sir, whoseever be our General,
we unanimously resolve that you shall be our Ringleader.

Our name shall be the New Army; the word Model is too peaceable a Title: and
because we have new lights by your Permission, and new causes by your
Invention, and a new war in hand by your Instigation, we will therefore call
you not in disgrace (as was Cicero) but in honor by Antiphrasis our Novus
Homo, our New-man.

We are not ignorant that all your Papers to the Parliament, your humble or
high Remonstrance, your particular Charge against the Public Members have the
name of Fairefax before them; it is good policy, to make one man beat the Bush,
whilst you catch the Bird; and we wish from our heart, that name may be ominus,
othat you may fare and fac, say and do.

But Sir, to our singular comfort, we by experience dare aver, that you are the
principal wheel, the Primum movile, that moves and sublimates both him and
others to this New, this Brave, this Holy war. Sir Thomas is the Esau, whose
rough hands the Parliament feel with great regreat: But you are the Jacob, the
supplanter, that carries the Cause smoothly, and like the deep River, though
you have most force, yet are you most silent.

Pardon us dear Sir, our affection to you has so far ravished us, as we
forget the Cause for which we write, which shall be concluded in two
particulars: 1. In giving of Thanks. 2. In giving, and desiring advice.


Now that which is the grand occasion and Argument of our Thanks, is that long
looked for Charge against the eleven Members, who have been as Motes in our
eyes, as thorns in our sides, and have much infringed the liberty of the
Saints.

We have observed of these 11. Members in general before the particular Charge
came in, that they had been very active to advance Presbyteriall Government,
and therefore long ago worthy to be cast out of the House, and exposed to our
scorn and infamy; But we are sorry the iniquity of the times is such, that you
must be put to so much pains, as to beat your brains for Articles, and that a
bare Accusation qua Presbyter. will not serve the turn; you have indeed
attainted them boldly (as Machiavell instructs) and we are assured something
will stick by them; But (O) that instead of eleven you had made them a Dozen,
that is a Round Number; but in this case the Bakers Dozen which is uneven we
hold the better.

Truly Sir as we said before, we hope your design is against Presbytery not
Injustice, against corruption in Discipline, not against corruption in Offices,
for were it so, you would strike a terror into your own Party: now to Charge
an Independent with a Presbyterian that be far from you.

Alas Sir, you know we have had the Magazine both of Arms and Treasure, all
the Committees and Sequestrators at our beck, we have placed and displaced,
turned the Kingdom of England and Ireland topsie turvy, we have played Rex
indeed. We displaced Waller, Massy, Mitton, and diverse others, and yet
continued in C. B. who is B. of C. M. D. N. F. as our own creatures by that
Almighty power which was vested in us, and if justice should now be done these
were undone, for they behaved themselves so as some called them not Parliament
drivers (as Mr. L. is in your Declaration) but War drivers, or War contrivers,
of which Craft and Trade we hope one day you will be made free.

And now Sir, having done with the first Part we come to the first Branch of
the second Part, which is giving advice.

And to speak freely, as we always do in either our public or private
addresses, we could heartily have wished that you had abstained a while from
Particularizing of 4. Persons, not that either their lives or reputation is
dear to us, but because they seem either popular, or else innocent men; your
Ink in your Declaration is too little to make them black enough, is there not
two false witnesses in a whole Army? they say, -- Nulla fides pietasque viris
qui castra sequuntur venalesque manus -- or do we lack a Iezabel instead of a
Crumwell to mould the design; You know Massy is generally loved because of his
Gallantry; Glyn is a noli me Tangere, because of the City; and as for Harley
and Long, I doubt you may stay long enough before you have accusation or proof
sufficient; for may not any man go to the Lady Carliles Lodging, is she or her
house a Malignant, or may it not be lawful for people to assemble, or when two
or three Parliament men walk or talk together, is this a design? beware you
speak not a word, in any case which may bring up a scandal upon our
conventicles.

Besides, what is Mr L? why, you tell us he is a Parliament Driver (Peace man,
the world is not our own yet) must he therefore by an express be driven out of
Parliament because he is a Parliament Driver?

The Gallantry of Massy is known, because he did once save the Kingdom in
saving of Gloucester; and though we conceive he did not fight for the
righteousness of Christ, yet he hated the unrighteous Mammon. Horatius Cocles
having defended the Romans against the three Curiatij alone, though afterward
he killed his Sister, yet was he pardoned by the State for that Noble service
which he accomplished for the States; and this Story will be laid in our Teeth.

You have almost subdued him in subduing his Army, and his free Spirit has
made him not worth the fleecing, and therefore it were not amiss we conceive
to reprieve him, and pick and choose another Member where you please.

Glyn is the mouth of the City, and should we think to stop the Cities mouth,
(who know us well enough since we searched the Lord Majors Pockets to find the
King) he would make such a Cry as all the Kingdom would hear, and then
Scotland will hear too.

As for his Wife if she be unsound, we desire she may be searched by a Jury of
Women.

Harley is an innocent Puny, a little Bit, and not sufficient to stay our
stomachs: We have not time to dally, and with Commodus to kill flies: Besides,
we conceive he goes but according to the Liberty of his conscience, which to
maintain we now take up Arms: Non gaudet tenui sanguine tanta sitis: Long, as
your Papers show us, is but a Coward, and that is pardonable, every man is not
a Cromwell, or an Ironside; marry if Cowards must be complained of qua Cowards,
what shall become of our Saw-pit Lord, or poor Not. Fines?

Now we are come to the last Branch, which shall not we hope be troublesome to
your patience, and that is to crave advice to eight Queres. 1. Whether it be
not unseasonable to question men for malignancy while we are a closing with
them, as Judge Jenkins well observes? 2. Whether the Accusation of Eleven
Members be sufficient to daunt the whole Body? 3. If love and honor be to be
shown to the King, acquaint us with measure and time, that is, how much and
how long? 4. What is further to be acted for the bringing up of our Army into
the City? 5. How shall we answer the Objection, that we stand upon Puntilios of
Honor, whilst in the mean space Ireland lies gasping? 6. How shall we
resolve that Objection, that the Army strives to be under pay, and yet strives
against obedience? 7. Is there not need of an Index expurgatorius, to blot out
all the reverent Titles, all the obedient passages, concerning the Parliament
out of our Independent Books? 8. Whether the Assembly of Divines shall not be
attainted of High Treason for laboring to introduce a foreign Power of
Government, contrary to the Liberty of free Religion in this Kingdom?


By the appointment of the new Fraternity. Signed John Worth-Rush. Secr.

FINIS.

