A Copy of a LETTER Sent by the Burga-Masters and Council OF AMSTERDAM, To the
rest of the CITY's that have their Session IN THE ASSEMBLY of the STATES OF
Holland and West-Frezland.
GENTLEMEN,
WE have Understood by the Report of Our DEPVTIES that Assisted in Our
States-Provincial, the 10th Ditto, with great amazement, How that the same Day,
by Order only of the Pentionaries of Holland, without the usual putting it to
the Question, that the doors of the said Assembly were commanded to be shut, as
also the Antichamber belonging to the States-Provincial, with an Injunction
that no Man might be suffered to go out; and that at the desire of the Prince
of Orange, Two of our Deputies, the Here Gerrard Hoof one of the Council of
this City, and the Hier Hop our Pentionary, left their Seats and went into the
said ante-Chamber, for that it was pretended that this Affair did concern them
in particular as well as others: After which, the Prince of Orange laid before
the States-Provincial, That the Marquess D' Grana having intercepted several
Letters from the French Ambassador at the Hague to the King his Master, bearing
date the 9th of January last, which he had sent to him, containing (as it is
said) a circumstantial relation of some private correspondency betwixt the said
Ambassador and us; of which the said Prince of Orange thought himself obliged
to give them the said States an account thereof, and that accordingly the said
Letters were read in the Assembly of the States by the said Pentionaries of
Holland; and that the said Prince of Orange did suppose that the Two
before-named, our Deputies, were much concerned in this Correspondency, and did
not know whether they had Orders so to do, or not. This matter being under
debate, our Two Deputies, which before had quitted their places, came in and
took possession thereof again, and endeavors were used to cause them to depart
into the ante-Chamber again; but our aforesaid Deputies did not look upon
themselves as obliged to do what they required, especially for that they had
done nothing but by Virtue of Order; However the States-Provincial thought good
that Coppies of the said Letters should be sent to the Knights, Gentlemen,
Burghermasters and Common-Councels of the respective Cities, to have their
Advice what was most convenient to be done concerning this Affair, which fills
us with no small amazement that a beginning should be made of a Criminal
Process against so just and upright Members of the States, notwithstanding
their earnest opposition, and they proffered to purge themselves against all
that could be laid to their charge, drawn from the aforesaid Letters by
erroneous constructions. Notwithstanding all which, our Papers, and those of
our Pentionaries, were Sealed up by Two of the Members of the States, as also
by the Secretary Beamount, and laid aside till after a Communication of the
aforesaid Letters to their Principles, it should be concluded whether the said
Paper should be Examined or no. When We begin to reflect on the one side, That
the Charge of an Unlawful Correspondency betwixt the French-Ambassador and us,
comes simply, and only to appear out of the aforesaid intercepted Letters to
the King his Master, and so falling into the hands of a Foreign Minister, and
only as it agrees with his apprehensions and constructions, the Letters being
in Ciphers, which we know not whether they be truly uncyphered and have their
true sense or no: and reflecting on the other side, that this is the Foundation
of all these severe Proceedings; as first, In the locking of the Doors of the
Assembly of the States Provincial in an unusual manner, and that by the Order
only of the Pentionary of Holland, and then in their severe handling of our
aforesaid two Deputies, who are not so much as mentioned in the Letters
intercepted by the Marquess D' Grana; and who not only immediately proffered to
move, as the truth is, not so much as to have spoken with the said French
Ambassador, but by our Order; but also to disprove what was most abusively laid
to their Charge by the Pentionaries of Holland, as that they the same day that
the said Letters were sent away for France by the French Ambassador, had not
been at his house, making it plainly appear, the one that he was indisposed,
and the other, that, that day he had not been out of his Lodgings at the Hague.

We do exceedingly wonder, that notwithstanding all this, it should be thought
good to seal up our Papers, and to proceed with such Extravagancies;
precipitating such Reports both within and without this Country, as tends to
the diminishing and dishonouring of this City, against the illiterated
Solicitations of our Deputies: That the said Letters might be read again in
their hearing, they being in the Antichamber while they were read before the
States Provintial, promising to make a Cathegorick Answer to the same, which
then without question, they would have forborne sealing up our Papers, and their
innocence appearing, they would have desisted from those so strange
proceedings; or at least would have showed so much Wisdom and Discretion, as
not to have sent away a Charge to all the Councels and Cities, until they had
heard what could be said in our Defense.

We desire also your Honors to consider how much we are concerned for the
security of our Deputies in Respect to their Persons; as also of their Papers,
according to the Justice of this Country, and the Resolutions relating to that
Affair; for which Reasons we cannot forbear but be highly concerned, and be
heartily sorry, and the more when we consider that those Proceedings against
such Upright and Faithful Members of the State, are not only against all Forms
of Justice and Prudence, but also against the Honor, Freedom, and Security,
that belongs to the Members Composing that Assembly. And then considering what
ill Consequences may be the Effects, that the aforesaid Charge is only drawn
out of Intercepted Letters from the Ambassador of France to the King his
Master. And we cannot Apprehend but with great sorrow and trouble of mind, the
great Mischiefs and Difficulties that might fall upon this State, by those
Commotions that may be raised within us by such Scandals as these are, and at a
time wherein all the Members ought to be equally Zealous by the Extending and
Uniting of their Understandings with all the care imaginable, to conclude what
may be good for Christendom in general, and for this State in particular, and
for the preventing of a dangerous War; concerning which, we can Call God for
our Witness, that all our Conducts and Advices have tended to the same purpose.
There is nothing troubles us less, as the making our Innocence appear to the
aforesaid Charge, and we shall make the same plainly appear to your Honors,
when the said Letters of the said French Ambassador shall come to our hands;
And in the mean time we desire your Honors for your own advantage to consider
those mischievous Consequences that may attend the Assembly of your Honors and
every Member thereof, if any Resolution should be taken not founded upon good
Reason, Order, and Polity. And therefore that you would be pleased for to stay
for our Information after we have received the Letters from the said
Ambassador, before that you would come to any Resolution to our prejudice, or
to the prejudice of the Rights of this Country, and of every Member thereof in
particular; we assuring you that we will not be wanting on our parts in any
thing relating to this Affair. -- But, b f re we conclude this Matter, we
cannot pass by without great admiration, that it appears to us by the Advices
from several Members of the States, that the Sealing of the Papers of the Here
Hopour Pentionary in particular ought not to have been done, for that the said
Pentionary from time to time, received Letters from the Here Pan Buningham,
present Burgermaster of this City, for it cannot be imagined, neither is there
any reason of Suspicion of any Crime or Misdemeanour, that a present
Burgermaster should Write to a Minister in the Hague, And that in all Justice a
Man ought to be looked upon a very Criminal, before that at a Corrospondency
with him should be the Cause of sieizing of Papers in the Possession of any
Man; especially in the Hands of Deputies at their places Assigned. This Letter
being ended, there is come to our Hands a Copy of the aforesaid Intercepted
Letters from the French Ambassador, which we cannot pass over without some
sudden Remarks.

As first, That it seems to be but an Extract of a Letter and not the whole, in
regard there is not only Words left out, but Words put in, which could not be
well omitted to make up the Sense; As also in the said Extract, there was left
a great many Varancies, which plainly shows, That the Marquess d'Grana has not
sent the full Contents of the said Letter. And therefore, before a true
Judgment be Conformed of this Affair, or that we should give a through
satisfaction in the Thing demanded; it must be known, That the Principal
Contents of the said Letters were, That we have done our Endeavors to make
known to the States, and to bring before them as a Matter of Deliberation, what
the said Ambassador of France made known to us in particular, and what we made
as the first overture in December, which was Communicated to our Deputies, and
immediately also to the Pentionary of Holland, and several other of the
Members. And in regard it tended to no other End, then to move the Spaniards to
a speedy Accommodation of their Differences with France, for the security of
the Spanish Neitherlands, and for the squenching that Fire of War which was
already broken into a Flame, which never appeared to us to be otherwise then
serviceable and acceptable into the Members of the States, that it had given
them Occasion to Deliberate on that Affair. Other Matters contained in the
Letter, are Affairs without our Knowledge.

As for our selves, we have been so far from holding any particular
Correspondency in making any Engagements or Promises to the said Ambassador of
France, that our Care and Circumspection will appear to be such, that it were
heartily to be wished, that the like were observed by all those that bare a
part in our Government.

Printed at Rotterdam, Feb. 19. 1684. New Style, by P^ter Martin, and Reprinted
in London by J. Millet.


