THE ENGLISH ORACLE: OR, A Late PROPHECY OF THE MISERIES that will happen this
Next Year, 1679.

By A. C.

Licensed, and Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for W. M. at the Acorn in S. Paul's Churchyard: where you may
be furnished with most sorts of Bound or Stitched Books, etc. 1679.

THE ENGLISH ORACLE, etc.
HIstory the only Office of Intelligence, whereat we inform our selves of the
Transactions of former Ages, amongst other things that it hands down to
posterity, relates, that before that Alexander the Great left the world (his
Conquest) some Astronomers of that Age observed a new Congeries of Stars so
placed in the Heavens, that they made exactly these words, (...), To day dies
Alexander. Whether we keep good correspondence with Antiquity or no; or whether
this may not be a lie dressed up in the specious term of authentic History, I
shall not dispute, though I cannot but give some credit to it. For since that
Providence made Bonefires at his Birth, lighting the vast Temple of Ephesus as
a Flambeau to light Alexander into the World, and so made use of an earthly
Comet as a Phosphorus to usher the Rising-Sun into our lower Hemisphere: what
wonder that the Heavens should publish his death, seeing his victorious life
had made him so great, that no Action of his could be sufficiently solemnized
by any Prodigy of his Vassal the Earth. But whether Alexander's Fate was thus
written in the Heavens, or no, it is certain that there are many sick-brain'd
and Fop-Astrologers that are continually poring in the Skies, as if the Destiny
of all Mortals were written there. They hunt among the Stars for Prophecies,
and News for future Ages, as if the Firmament were but a great Volume, or vast
Sheet of Paper, and the Stars an Alphabet, in such manner disposed, as if God
Allmighty had written therein the Destiny of Kings and Kingdoms for these silly
men to read through a Jacob's-Staff. It Is strange how presumptuously these men
will pretend to be able to read God Allmighty's hardest Hand, and understand
his Secrets written in his abstrusest Characters, by finding strange
Hierogliphick Sense in the Planets; whereas in reality their Intellect is so
dazzled by much contemplating those bright Orbs, that at last they understand
just nothing, like those that look so long at the Sun, that they look
themselves blind; or rather, it fares with them as it did with the ancient
Astronomers, who by continually gazing at the Heavens, at last gazed themselves
into a belief that they saw strange Forms, as Centaurs, Bears and Scorpions,
whereas to every sound eye there appears no more than an azure ground studded
with a few Celestial Gems. These Night-Philosophers that have an Intellect as
dark as the time they study in, and a Brain as cloudy as the foggy Region they
look through, are still looking through Tubes and Optics, as if those silly
Instruments could assist mortal sight to see into future Ages, and discern
things as far distant as the end of time; they are continually peeping in the
Moon and Stars, as if they were so many Looking-Glasses that did represent
every action, motion and gesture of men below; and those not only present and
past, but future too. And indeed they are so desirous of seeing something, that
oftentimes they fancy that they see strange things in earnest, as the Downfall
of Kingdoms, Subversion of Empires, Civil Wars, raging Plagues, and a thousand
such aerie Fantoms; like Children, who by long looking on the Clouds, frame to
themselves Men on Horseback, Chariots drawn by Lions, Armies in Battel-Array,
and the like, which, those that stand by and hear them tell their Vision, know
to be no more than the delusions of a weak sight, and a weaker Brain. But yet
the curiosity of man (who seldom expects with patience the natural Birth of
things, but is still best pleased when nature by some extraordinary means
miscarries, and is brought to Bed of an abortive Issue, before she is half out
of her Reckoning) receives almost every Dream for a Prophecy, although the
Astrologer can foretell no more of the thing he prophesies about, than only that
it either will be, or will not. As I detest the practices of these ^mpostors,
so I shall impose no such lies upon the world: for my Predictions shall appear
as infallible as theirs uncertain, and as impossible to be false, as it is that
the Sun should run counter, Rivers slide back into their Springs, and the Moon
lose her way, and instead of traveling from East to West, wander in the
unknown paths of the North. For I do not draw my Consequences (as others do)
from between the Horns of the Moon, nor pretend to have seen what I foretell,
written in the Forehead of Mercury, or Venus; nor do I deduce any thing from
the dark sentences of our English Sibyl, Mother Shipton, or from the equivocal
Writings of our modern Gypsie-Prophets, but from the unvariable tenor of
Providence, immutable nature of things, and convincing Axioms of Ethick
Philosophy.

First therefore from these infallible Rules I draw that this following year
1679 will be infected with an universal Plague, a Disease which the Latins
style morbus animi, and the English generally call Vice. This malignant Pest
first began in the first year of the Creation of the Universe, and was brought
into the world by the man that first received life, the protoplast Adam; and he
got it from a surfeit. By eating too much of the fruit of Paradise he fell
desperately sick of this Disease, and so infected his whole progeny; for the
Fountain being once poisoned, the streams that run from it must needs be
tainted: and this year this old Disease will be as rife as ever. No Country,
Town, or Family will be free from its infection. You may go round London, as
Diogenes went about Athens with a Lanthorn and Candle at Midnight, or Midday
to seek for a sane man, and you find all either dangerously sick, or far gone
of this Disease: nay, should one of the quick sighted Spirits of Heaven take
the Moon in his hand for a Torch by night, and the Sun for a Light by day, and
search the world in every corner, he would not find one single person free from
all the symptoms of this Plague; the Species of which are infinite, and the
effects various. For some it sieses with a desperate Melancholy, some with a
choleric Frenzy, and some it turns all into proud flesh, and proud humors.
Others it takes with a kind of a Dropsy, which the Moral Physician Seneca
calls Avarice. This thirsty Disease and ravenous Distemper makes the greedy
Patient still gape after precious Liquor; but the more he drinks the dryer he
grows, and is never satisfied till he is choked, like Midas with liquid Gold.
But with most this Epidemical Plague will turn to a malignant Fever, known to
the Latin Doctors by the name of Lues Ven^rea. This lecherous Disease burns
man quite up with the flames of Lust, and destroys the whole Fabric by firing
it within, and rotting it without. Some of these are ashamed of their
misfortune, and like the Egyptian Bird that buries her Excrement because she
knows it noxious to other Beasts, conceal their Malady from the public eye,
because they will not poison the whole Flock; but others glory in their
condition, and publish their Distemper to the world, carrying their Leprosy
with Ozias, in their very Foreheads; and to show that they have the malicious
nature of those that are sick of the Plague, they endeavor to infect all they
meet, esteeming themselves never worse than when they see others well, and so
bear a malice equal to that of the Devil whose greatest Hell it is to see
others in Heaven. I have said so much of this dreadful Pestilence, that I come
later than I intended, to speak of the universal Slaughter that shall be
committed upon all Sexes, and all Ages by that pale Monster which the
Evangelist saw in the Apocalypse, armed with a sharp Sithe, and mounted on a
rawbon'd Horse, that went more swift than March Winds, or Summer Lightning.
This merciless Tyrant, which the Greek Text calls Thanatos, and the English,
Death, has been on Horseback some thousands of years, riding down through all
Ages toward the end of time, and is now come within some few days of 79, and
when he reaches it, he will begin his Massacre from the very first moment of the
year, and continue it to the last, upon men of all Degrees and Ages: he will bear
no respect to Nobility, no pity toward Youth or Beauty; the Rich shall find no
Treasures to bribe him, the Stout no courage to resist him, the Eloquent no
Rhetoric to move him, nor the Dextrous any Slight to avoid his Stroke; for
where he aims he hits, and where he hits he kills: no crowd of Clients shall
defend the potent, no corner conceal the timorous, since the Mothers Womb shall
not be able to hide her Infant from his Weapon. All this is nothing, compared
to the Outrages and Villainies that shall be committed the same year. Young
Virgins shall be deflowred almost in the very sight of their Parents, the
Husbands sacred Bed-right shall be invaded, the Rich shall be designed upon by
the needy, the abject trampled on by the proud, the poor shall starve at the
prodigal's door, while the prodigals Dog eats from off the same Trencher, the
lame and blind shall lie in the Streets as hoarse with begging, as if they had
been bawling to the Clouds or Stars for an Alms, and yet shall have their
Purses as empty, as if they had been begging from Marble Statues, and holding
out their hands to Monuments of Brass.

This, and much more shall happen, and if it fails, let the World cast the lie
in my teeth in as opprobrious terms as it can, and let every understanding man
tell me I prophecy no truer than a Poet, but let me tell you, if what I have
foretold, happens not, you may expect that the next year the Heavens turn
backwards, the Sun be blown out, the Rivers forget their way into the Sea, and
run over the tops of Mountains, and all things put off their old nature, as
Serpents do their cast-off Skins, and no longer remain the things they were.

FINIS.
There is lately Published a Catholic Pill to purge Popery, with a Preparatory
Preface, obviating the growing Malignity of Popery against Catholic
Christianity: By a true Son of the Catholic Apostolic Church. Useful for all
private Families.


