Copy of a Pape Presented in the Year, 1681. to the then DUKE of YORK, Whilst
He was in Scotland; Entitled, Considerations on the Scots MINT;

And of a Commission granted under the Great-Seal, in the year, 1682. by King
Charles the Second, for Trial of the Mint; and of the Reports made thereon:
Together with the Copies of His Majestes several Missive Letters, containing
His Approbation, and further Determination thereanent; Faithfully Transcribed
from the Originals.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, anno DOM. 1691.

Considerations upon the Scots Mint.
IN the 1 Par. K. Ja. 1. holden at Perth, anno. 14^4. Act 28. It is Ordained,
that our Money be of equal weight and fineness, to the Money of England. K. Ja.
2. and the following Kings, did so likewise, But K. Ja. 6. more particularly in
the 2 d year of his Reign over Great Britain, Did, by a written Engagement,
bind the Mint-masters of both Kingdoms to the precise observance thereof.

King Charles the 2 d. soon after His happy Restoration, renewed the same
Order, and for that end, caused with great care, prepare a great square Silver
Plate, of exact Sterling fineness, to be the Rule and Pattern, whereby to Try
all Coined Money, or Goldsmiths Work of Silver in either of the Kingdoms
thereafter.

This Plate of Silver so framed, was divided in four equal parts, whereof one
was committed to be preserved in the Thesaury of England, another to the
Mint-house at the Tower of London, a third to the Thesaury of Scotland, and the
fourth to the Mint-house at Edinburgh; all the four having the King's Seal
stamped upon the corners, and cutted asunder by way of Indenture, for the
greater Security.

The Standard for the Money and Silver-plate, then determined for both
Kingdoms, called Sterling fineness, is expressed in England to be eleven ounces
and two penny fine, which is understood thus, the pound is divided in 12
ounces, and every ounce in 20 penny weight, of these 12 ounces, 11 integral
parts and a fraction, to wit 1/10 part of the 12 th ounce must be pure Silver,
and the remnant part of the fraction being 9/10 parts, is allowed to be Copper,
for making up of the total.

The allowance of remedy for the fineness is 2 grains over, or under in the
pound; But in Scotland, this Standard sterling fineness, is called, eleven
denier or penny fine out of the fire, which is neither so good, nor so
significantly expressed, as the manner of England, not only because of the
difference betwixt the common Weights of the two Kingdoms; but apparently
rather to keep up the matter in a Mystery, that it should not be easily
understood.

The Remedy of fineness also allowed in Scotland, is two grains over, o^ under
upon the pound.

Amendments fit to have been added as to fineness.
1. That the Denomination of the fineness had been expressed in precise
intelligible Terms, common to both Kingdoms.

2. That the same species of Coins had been also appointed to be Printed in
both, with one and the same Inscription, differing only in placing of the Arms,
for distinctions sake, to have prevented many inconveniences.

3. That the Silver pieces reserved in the Pixis to be the Trials of the
fineness of every several Journal, should have put to the Essay, at least every
year before persons of Trust and Understanding in that affair.

4. That all Melting or Coining of current Money, without License therefore
granted, had been discharged under severe certifications.

5. That an Essay-Master had been placed at Edinburgh, over all the Goldsmiths
in the Kingdom, for Trying and Marking their Work, and for whose fidelity
sufficient Security should have been entered, as it is in Goldsmiths-Hall,
London; For want whereof, there is not one piece of Plate of Sterling fineness
wrought in this Kingdom, to the great dishonor of this Nation.

Considerations upon the Weight.
As His Majesty established a Rule for the Fineness, so did He cause adjust the
Weights for all His own current Silver-Money, according to the extrinsick value
put upon the same, observing the fineness beforementioned; for this end He
commanded four Pales of Weights to be made of alike size, equal one to another,
and equally divided, as He had done the four indented Plates, for the common
Rule of fineness.

The Remedy in Weight allowed for the greater pieces of Coin, being 3 grains,
and for the lesser 2 grains, over and under.

And ordained an ounce of Silver, Sterling fine, to be raised 2 pence English
more than the extrinsick value thereof, had formerly been, and so to pass at
the rate of 5 ls 2 d English, and all other Weights to pass at Rates
proportionally thereto.

And the ounce of pure Silver, without allay (called Silver Refined from the
test, to be worth 5 ls 9 d English and the other greater and lesser Weights to
be valued accordingly.

Amendments fit to have been added as to Weights.
1. That the common Scots Troys pound and ounce, which are lighter than the
English, by the difference of 4 penny Weight and 9 grains, or 105 grains in the
pound, and by 8 grains and 18 units English in the ounce, might both be brought
to an equality.

2. That the Troys Weights of both Kingdoms, less than the ounce, should not
only be equal, but also have a like numbers of Fractions, in which they are
divided, to make our reckonings the better to agree.

3 That the Denominations of all the Weights under the ounce, should be the
same, for in England they reckon, Penny Weights, grains, units, droits, periots
and blanks, unequally divided in 20 and 24 parts alternatively; and in Scotland
by demers, grains, primes, seconds, thirds and fourths, equally divided each of
them in 24 parts.

4. That the only exact check upon the Weight of current Money should be, that
the Mint-master always deliver the King's Coin to the Merchant for his Bullion
by weight, and no otherways; and so the Officers of the Mint can never so much
as work upon the Remedy; Nor is the Warden and Counterwarden, Weighing and
Troning of every piece, a sufficient check, to keep the Money at the due
Weight, as experience teaches.

Observations and Queries.
1. Why has there never trial of our Money been made as to the fineness, by the
Pattern of that indented Plate, sent to us from His Majesty for that purpose,
nor any use made of these Pales of Weights, fitted and brought hither to
examine the justness of the Weights of every several species? which ought to
have been done yearly at least.

2. Wherefore is the Inscription upon our Money, of Mag. Brit. Franciae, etc.
always used upon King James the 6 th, and King Charles the 1. their Coyns now
of late changed to Scotiae, Angliae, Franciae, etc?

3. Why is there not an account called for yearly of the Bullion Imported,
according to the form prescribed in our Law, or of the Money received for it,
and of what quantity of Coin is stamped therefore.

4. How comes the two late Acts of Parliament concerning Bullion, to differ so
much? The first being, 1 Par. Chapter 2. Act 37. Earl Middleton Commissioner,
wherein the penury of the Coin of Scotland, is justly charged upon the small
proportion of Bullion Imported? For remeid whereof, and to prevent the abuse of
taking current Money, or so much per ounce, or any other thing in place of
Bullion; It is ordained, according to the ancient custom of this Kingdom, that
the Merchants find good Caution, or give Pledges to deliver their due
quantities of Bullion, answerable to the Commodities, which pays the same in to
the Officers of the Mint; which Officers are also discharged to receive any
satisfaction whatsomever from the Merchant, (except only foreign Bullion) or
to transact* or compone any manner of way for it, upon very penal
Certifications. The other being, 2 Par. Chapter 2. Act 8 Duke Lauderdale
Commissioner, whereby the former good Law, and all the preceding Laws for
Importing of Bullion, are in a manner Repealed; for by that Act, it is left to
the option of the Merchant to pay Bullion, or twelve pence English for the
ounce thereof in place of it self; and the Officers of the Mint are left to
Import the Stock of Bullion themselves, at their own discretion.

5. Since that time the matter has been so managed, that the Merchants are
well pleased to be free of the vexatious attendance upon the Essays and
payments of their Bullion at the Mint-house; and choice rather to pay the 12
pences for every ounce, to redeem themselves from the trouble, and loss of
their time, albeit it be otherways to their prejudice.

6. The true and just advantage for support to the charge of Coynage, which the
Officers of the Mint ought to exact, betwixt the Imported Bullion of pure
Silver (or being baser to be considered by weight and reckoning) and the King's
current Money of Sterling fineness, is only 7 pence English upon the ounce,
which is the intrinsic value of the difference betwixt the two: But by the
late Act of Parliament, if Bullion were Imported, there is but 5 shillings and
about a penny English to be paid for each ounce thereof, whereby the gain is
increased to 8 pence and some more; and now when only Money is received in
place of Bullion, the profit arises to full 12 pence per ounce, besides other
advantages.

7. In the Parliament 1674. a Complaint was exhibit upon the abuses of the
Mint, both as to the weight, fineness and otherways; but the D. of Lauderdale
then His Majesty's Commissioner, rejected it, and to palliat the matter,
plausibly ordered a a Committee of Council to make Trial of that affair, who,
as they were named, were either too great Friends to the Parties concerned, or
not at all versed in such matters, for they knew not how to proceed, but did as
the Officers of the Mint instructed them; so a superficial Trial was used, with
more jesting than knowledge, and a Report made, approving all to the Council;
then a piece of Silver was sent with great speciousness to His Majesty, to be
put to the Essay at London; which piece, albeit it had the advantages of
passing the Fire before it came there, yet all the Tower was not found to be of
Sterling fineness: Nevertheless a Letter was procured from the King, to Exoner,
Indemnifie and thank the General and Officers of the Mint, for their Fidelity
and good Service in that Trust, which being publicly read in Council, was
opposed by diverse of the Members, who objected the abuses committed by the
Officers of the Mint, and offered demonstratively to prove them immediately; But
the effect of all was, the General, the Mint-master, and the rest were
approven, and the movers of these Objections soon turned out of the Council, to
terrify others from using the like freedom and faithfulness thereafter.

8. Many true Essays of all the several species of His Majesty's Money, Coined
at the Mint-house in Edinburgh, has been made by particular persons, both at
the Tower, and at Goldsmiths-Hall in London; but there was never one piece of
them (stamped before the year 1674) that proved to be of Sterling fineness, but
all were base, less or more, and some to the degree of 11 penny worse; and as
for the weight, the half-merk-pieces were found in the Balance to differ 6
grains one from another, which 2 grains at most is the remedy allowed them; the
truth of this can be instructed by Testimonies in writ, under the Hand and
Subscription of Peter Trovel, then Essay-master of London.

9. It Is no wonder then that our Money be both scarce, base and light, In
respect 1. The Merchants brings no Bullion home, whereby the Original Fountain
from whence our Money should flow, is not only drained, but even our own, and
the best of Foreign Coyns current with us, daily exported; and the basest of
Money from abroad, returned hither again in lieu thereof, which of late is
become a profitable Trade to the undertakers. 2. If Bullion were Imported, yet
when the trial of the fineness is neglected, it will quickly corrupt and
disgrace the Native Coin of the Kingdom. And 3. Seeing there is neither check
nor control upon the Weight, as it ought to be, by payment of the Bullion to
the Importer, in the current Money of this Realm, put in the Balance weight
for weights, and no otherways, without which, the lightness passes undiscovered.

10. These things considered, Why the Council should have raised the extrinsick
value of all our own Coin, to the rate of five per cent, more than it was
current for before, is much admired? except it be pretended, that our
Merk-pieces and others are carried over to Holland, melted down there, and
returned to us again in Cullen and Leg-dallars, which are a baser species of
Money than our own, whereby they make good profit, but we must pay for it at
last.

11. The Emoluments arising to these employed in the Mint, (being so Lucrative
as it is made of late) may be well understood by the sudden increase of the
Riches of the Officers entrusted therein.

12. How unfit it is for any Member in the Thesaury, especially for the
Thesaurer Deput to be General of the Mint, appears in this. That it is a
special part of his Office, to call yearly before the Exchequer, for an exact
account of all Bullion imported, and paid in to the Officers of the Mint: As
also, how and in what species the same is stamped by them for a constant supply
of the Stock of Coynage to the Nation; whereas now, as the matter is stated, he
is only to count for himself.

13. The Officers of the Mint ought to be men honest and faithful, free from
the guilt of suspicion of the Crimes of Bribery or Perjury, in respect the
greatest security demanded of them for their Trust, is their Oath De fideli.

14. But if they pretend Warrands of Parliament and Council, to justify
themselves from the Charge of abusing their Trust, it is not relevant, because
they always penned their own Warrands, which were implicitly granted, and for
which they ought to be answerable.

Here is but a Compend of what might be represented, as to the Silver-Mint: But
the abuses committed by the Copper-Money, and the exorbitant advantages made by
the Coyners thereof, will appear far greater, and more grievous to the Kingdom,
when particular discovery is made of the same.

COMMISSIO Pro visitando Monetario.
CAROLUS Dei gratia, Magnae Britanniae, Franciae and Hiberniae Rex, Fidei que
defensor Omnibus probis hominibus totius terrae suae Clericis and Laicis
salutem, Sciatis quod nos animo revolventes quantopere pondus puritas and
tenuitas Testae (vulgo the Standart) monetae nostrae tanquam quae omne
commercium domesticum and extraneum fovet Rei nostrae and subditorum nostrorum
interfit; Quodque minimus in eadem error maximi sit momenti, nostroque regimini
manifest deroga^et; Cumque nostra praecipue referat ut monetarii nostri
Officiarios and Ministros observemus, ne numerum excedant necessariu^; utque
singuli munera sua respectiva summa fide and dilig^ntia exerceant and
fungantur, neque a subditis nostris plus quam lege permissum est exigendo, neve
quod nobis just debetur abstrahendo; Cumque horum examen and inquisitio per
Regios nostros progenitores immediato magis scrutamine praestita sit, quam
absentia nostra ab antiquo Regno nostro Scotiae nos sectari permittit (...) Ad
quod supplendum idem per specialem quandam commissionem ad amussim investigari
and examinari statuentes. Igitur nominavimus and constituimus, tenoreque
praesentium, Ioannem Marchionem de Athol, Willielmum Ducem de Hamilton, Jacobum
Marchionem de Montrose, Willielmum Marchionem de Queensberry, Dominum
Justitiarium Generalem, Jacobum Comitem de Perth, Patricium Comitem de
Strathmore Ioannem Comi^em de Tweeddale, Dominum Georgium Gordon de Haddo
nostrae Sessionis Praesidem, Dominum Georgium M^kenzie de Tarbet no^is ab
Archivis and Registris, Dominum Georgium M^kenzie de Rosehaugh nostrum
Advocatum, Dominum Patricium Ogilvie de Boyne, and Dominum Ioannem Murray de
Drumcairn Senatores Collegiae Justitiae, Ioannem Drummond de Lundin, Praefectum
Generale^, Willielmum Drummond de Cromlix, Robertum Gordon juniorem de
Gordonstoun, Dominum Jacobum Dick nuper Edinburgi Praepositum, and Robertum
Baird de Sauchtounhall, vel majorem eorundem partem speciales nostros
Commissionarios seu delegatos, Nominamus and constituimus, nec non per
praesentes ipsis damus and concedimus nostram plenariam potestatem jus and
commissionem die Mensis proximo futuri Edinburgi conveniendi, and deinde sese
ad quaecunque loca and tempora prout ipsis visum fuerit prorogandi, and
(quoties opus fuerit) omnes Officiarios and Ministros nostri Monetarii;
custumarum nostrarum omnes nostros Collectores eorumque Clericos and Literarum
assertitiarum Scribas (vulgo the Clerks of the Cocquet) aliosque quoscunque qui
aliquid de nostro Monetario, officina cusoria and balluca nostra (vulgo
Bullion) and quibuscunque eo spectantibus reserare poterint, coram sese
convocandi and citandi, eoque tempore and l^co exactum Moneta nostrae
puritatis, and debitae regularum, per quas nostra firmatur testa, observantiae
examen and scrutinium faciendi, idque eisdem modis and methodis quibus dictis
Commissionariis visum fuerit, ac etiam quasvis personas unum sive plures in
dicta^re peritos pro ejusdem executione constituendi: Et similiter nostrae
Ballucae receptionis modum, ejusdem quantitatem, quomodo eadem a mercatoribus
exigatur and Thesaurario nostro persolvatur, and quaenam emolumenta corona
nostrae exinde oriantur, quaeque sint debita salaria and perquisita ad
Officiarios and servos pertinentia, quaeque etiam in rebus illis, temporibus
retroactis ex quo avus noster Regius Jacobus Sextus, beatae memoriae, Comitatum
seu aulam suam Regiam ad Angliam removerit, ad datam usque praesentium habita
sit observantia examinandi; Omnesque abusus eidem, durante spatio praedicto,
irreptos perscrutandi, quantitates etiam omnis Moneta generis tam Argenteae
quam Aerea (a foelici nostra ad regale nostrum Imperium restauratione) ^^sae
probandi, fidelitatem pariter curam and ailigentiam respectivorum Monetarii
nostri Officiariorum and servorum privilegia illis omnibus and singulis
spectantia quoque modo se mutuo respiciant investigandi; inque hunc finem
Volumus and Mandamus Monetarii nostri servis, and Officiariis, ut dictis
nostris exact obtemperent Commissionariis, ipsisque cum requisiti fuerint
Registra sua, Commentaria Diaria Lie- Journal Books, Praeceptorum and
Computorum Libellos, omniaque warranta and contractus dicto officio referentia,
and eorum custodiae commissa exhibeant and producant; Utque pixides probationis
aperiant and tentamina and experimenta faciant, aliosve per Commissionarios
nostros constituendos quocunque tempore and loco quibus dictis Commissionariis
visum fuerit tentamina and experimenta facere and subire permittant, prout
nobis respondebunt; Mandamus pariter nostri Registri Clerico, ut Registra and
Archiva nostra exact perscrutetur, eademque Commissionariis nostris praedictis
a^ effectum praescriptum cum per eosdem requisitus sit exponat and exhibeat;
Per praesentes etiam Volumus and mandamus dictis nostris Commissionariis ut in
dicto negotio summa diligentia procedant, nobisque rei integrae plenarium
referant responsum ut nostrum eatenus beneplacitum declaremus; Per presents
pariter praefatis nostris Commissionariis Committimus, ut nostrum in rebus
illis interesse, de tempore in tempus, durante hac nostra Commissione,
diligenter attendant, eandemque Commissionem (quoad per nos revocetur)
permanere and perdurare volumus. In cujus rei testimoninm Praesentibus Magnum
nostrum Sigillum appendi Mandavimus, apud Aulam nostram de Windsor Castle,
Vigesime nono die Mensis Aprilis, Anno Domini, Millesimo sexcentesimo
octuagesimo secundo, Regnique nostri trigesimo quarto, 1682.

To the Kings most Sacred MAJESTY, The Report of the Commissioners appointed
for trial of the Mint of Scotland.
AT Edinburgh, the Fourth day of August, One thousand six hundred and eighty
two years: Whereas His Majesty considering the great interest His Majesty and
the Subjects have in the weight, purity and fineness of the Standart of Money,
as that which influences all Commerce, Domestic and Foreign; and that the
least error therein is of great importance, and would reflect upon his
Majesty's Government: And also his Majesty having a special concern to advert
to the Officers and Servants of the Mint, that they exerce their respective
trusts with diligence and honesty, neither exacting from the Subjects more than
Law allows, nor detracting from his Majesty what is justly his Majesty's due:
And that his Majesty's Royal Predecessors, who being present in this Kingdom,
did take trial in these things by a more immediate search, than the distance his
Majesty is now at will allow; For supplying whereof, his Majesty intending that
the said matter should be exactly enquired into, and tried by a special
Commission: Therefore his Majesty having granted a Commission under the Great
Seal, to certain Commissioners, with full power to them, to call and cite
before them all the Officers and Servants of his Majesty's Mint-house, and any
other person whatsomever, who can give information, of and concerning his
Majesty's Mint, Coynage, or Bullion, or what relates thereto; and to make exact
search and trial of the fineness of his Majesty's Money, and of the due
observance of the Rules whereby his Majesty's Standart is secured, and that by
such methods, and in such manner, as shall seem most expedient to the
Commissioners, and to employ such persons in the same, as they shall judge
knowing in that matter: And likewise to examine the manner of receiving his
Majesty's Bullion, the quantities thereof, how the samen is exacted from the
Merchants, and paid to the Officers of the Mint, and what Emoluments do
thereby arise to the Crown, and what are the due Sallaries and Perquisites
belonging to the Officers and Servants, and to examine what observance has
been kept in these matters in time past, since the time of his Majesty's Royal
Grandfather King James the Sixth (of ever blessed memory) his removing of his
Court from this Kingdom into England, to this present time, and to take trial
of any abuses that has crept in during that time; As likewise to examine the
quantities of all kinds of Moneys, Silver or Black Money, Coined since his
Majesty's happy Restoration to his Royal Government, and to make inquiry into
the fidelity, care and diligence of the respective Officers and Servants in the
Mint-house, the privileges belonging to all and every one of them, and how
they relate one to another; and for that effect, that the Officers and Servants
in the Mint give exact obedience to the Commissioners, and to exhibit and
expose to them (as they shall be required) their Registers, Journal Books,
Books of Receipt, and Accounts, all Contracts and Warrands which are in their
custody, relating to the said Office, and to produce their Pix, and to make
Trial and Essays, or to permit others employed by the Commissioners, to make
Essays and Trials, when and how often the Commissioners shall appoint; And the
Commissioners are required to proceed in that matter with exact diligence, and
to make a full report of the whole matter to his Majesty, that he may declare
his Royal Pleasu^e thereupon. And in humble obedience to his Majesty's Royal
Commands, the Commissioners having met, and called before them all the Officers
of the Mint here present (the Lord Haltoun and the Lord Justice-Clerk his Son,
who are conjunct Generals of the Mint, being then in England) and having
examined the other Officers that were present, upon several things relating to
the Mint, and having required them to produce all the Registers, Commissions,
Compts, and other Papers of the Mint, that might any ways clear their diligence
and faithfulness in their respective offices, as to the Bullion, fineness, and
weight of the Coin, and what quantity of Copper-money had been Coined;
accordingly they produced some Accounts and Papers, but declared that the Lord
Haltoun one of the Generals, had taken up from them most of all the Records,
Registers and Accounts of the Silver and Copper Coin; and by the confession and
acknowledgment of the other Officers, and the Papers produced, there did appear
several abuses to have been committed by the Office^s of the Mint; whereupon
the Commissioners waited for the Generals return from England, expecting a full
and ingenuous account from him, of all things relating to the Mint: And so soon
as he returned, he being called before the Commissioners, and desired to inform
upon Oath, as the other Officers had done, concerning the matters of the Mint;
in place of giving any formal answer, he gave in a Representation, alleging,
that the Commissioners could not make inquiry in any matter relating to the
Mint, because he had exonerations from the King, as to the Copper Coin, and a
Discharge as to the fineness of the Silver Coin; and if any errors were
committed by him in his Office, he was secured by his Majesty's Act of
Indemnity in July 1679. And that any Crime committed in relation to the Mint,
did fall under that Clause of the Act of Indemnity, by which all such are
Indemnified, as had maleversed in any public station or trust, or were liable
to any pursuit, for any cause or occasion relating to any public
administration, and refused to declare upon Oath concerning the particulars
relating to his Office: Upon which he was desired to Depone, but pretended that
he did not know how far it might reach, or what it might import; and that no
man was obliged to Depone, as to his actings in any public station, or in
relation to his Office. And the Commissioners having considered the
Representation, and grounds thereof, it did appear by the perusal of the
Exonerations, as to the Copper Coin, that they did only relate to Six thousand
Stone, which was allowed by the Acts of Parliament and Council, to be Coined
within the time contained in the Warrands and Prorogations mentioned in the
Exonerations, and therefore was not an Exoneration, as to what more Copper was
Coined, than the quantity contained in the Warrands, to which they particularly
relate: And as to the Discharge, in relation to the fineness of the Silver
Coined from July 1664. to December 1673. years. The Commissioners declared,
they would make no inquiry of the fineness of the Money Coined the time
mentioned in the Discharge, further than to inform his Majesty, by what appears
to the Commissioners, that the trial then made in Scotland, to have been very
insufficient, as to the fineness. As likewise, there was no mention at all made
in that trial, of the sufficiency of the weight, which was als material as the
fineness. And as to the Act of Indemnity, the Commissioners were of the
opinion, that this being a trial and inquiry for his Majesty's Information, the
Act of Indemnity could not hinder them to proceed in the inquiry, that they
might inform his Majesty of the state and condition of the Mint, and of the
abuses committed by the Officers thereof, the Act of Indemnity being only
granted to these that had acted in, or against the public Government of the
Kingdom, and not for deeds of malversation in any particular or peculiar
station, which had no connection with, or relation to the troubles and disorders
in the Country, in matters of Government; For as the Act of Indemnity cannot
be extended to Crimes committed by Sheriffs, Baillies, Commissars, their Deputs
and Clerks; nor to abuses, malversations, and breach of trust committed by
Customers, Collectors, his Majesty's Cash-keepers, or any others intrometters
with his Majesty's Revenues, if they shall imbazle the Kings Rents, and not
make a full account, nor to any other person in public Office, not relating to
the public Government of the Kingdom; so neither can it be extended to crimes
and abuses committed by the Officers of the Mint: For albeit these may be
accounted public Offices in some respect, yet they are but private stations in
respect of the Offices that concerns the public Government of the Kingdom. As
also, the Act of Indemnity bears an exception of all private Crimes, and
suchlike as never used to be comprehended under general Acts of Indemnity. And
it appears by the late Act of Indemnity past in the Parliament in the year
1662. That all Crimes not relating to the late troubles, are excepted; and
particularly the Accounts of all such persons as have intrometted with any of
his Majesty's Revenues, and all other public Money, for which they had no
other Warrant or Assignment, for their own private use, and for which they had
not duly compted, and received Discharges thereof, from such as pretended to
have authority for the time, to do the samen, and all other former Acts of
Indemnity made by his Majesty's Royal Predecessors, are only in relation to the
public troubles that has been in the Country, but not at all to any Crimes
or malversa^ions that has been committed by the Kings Officers, in their
private stations, not relating to the public administration in the Government,
or to the troubles and disorders of the Country, and therefore the said Act
ought not to be extended to the abuses and malversations committed by the
Officers of the Mint, far less to debar and preclude his Majesty from trial and
inquiry; that his Majesty being informed thereof, may give order for better
regulating of the Mint, and remeeding these abuses in time coming. And as to
that pretense alleged by the Lord Hatton, That he could not be obliged to
Depone upon any thing relating to the Mint, because he does not know how far it
does reach, or what it might import; the Commissioners were of the Opinion,
that this being a matter of Trial and Inquiry, he ought to give Information
upon Oath, concerning things relating to the Mint and Coynage, that was
committed to his Trust, as the other Officers of the Mint had already done, and
whatever might be the import thereof, he was only desired to give his Oath upon
these particulars relating to himself, if he was truly innocent, and had not
malversed in his Trust, which is no more but a purgatory Oath, that he might
purge himself of these Abuses and Malversations, which by public Fame, and
other Evidences, were presumed against him, and which was most consonant and
agreeable to the common Law, and the practice of other Nations, and the Laws
and Practique of this Kingdom Cap. 14. Statute Wilhel. cap. 4. Stat. David 2.
cap. 1. number. 6. Statute David 2.
both in Church and State, in the like cases, especially where the samen is
done for His Majesty's Information; As to the particulars, upon which he was
desired to give Information upon Oath, Relating to the other Officers of the
Mint, he was only desired to Depone, upon the best of his knowledge, which was
no more but an Oath of Credulity, which no man in reason ought to refuse; and
which is appointed by an express Act of Parliament, Acted. Sess. 2d. Par. 2d.
Chapter 2d.
That all Persons should Declare and Depone upon Oath, their knowledge of any
Crimes against the Public Laws, under very severe punishment; especially seeing
all the rest of the Officers of the Mint, did freely Depone upon all these
particulars, (except the Lord Justice-Clerk, conjunct General, who was here
present) only the Lord Hatton makes use of the Act of Indemnity, and refuses to
Depone. And as to that pretense, That he was not obliged to Depone in any thing
relating to his Office, it was frivolous; for as every man in Public Trust, is
obliged to give his Oath, That he shall Faithfully discharge his Trust, at the
entry to his Office; So likewise ought he to give his Oath upon any thing
relating to his Office at any time thereafter, when ever he is required by his
Majesty, or any having Commission for that effect: And if it were otherwise,
that a person in Public Office should not be obliged to Depone concerning his
actings in that Office; then any man in Public Office, might commit the
greatest Abuses, Malversations, Injustice, Oppressions, and all other heinous
Crimes without control, providing he could do it privately, that it could not be
otherways proven, but by his own Oath; and that would invite men in Public
Trust, to commit all Acts of Malversation and Injustice imaginable, if they
were not obliged to Depone upon their Actings in that Office, and purge
themselves of any Crimes that may be laid to their charge. For these Reasons,
and in obedience to His Majesty's Royal Commands, by His Commission; The
Commissioners having proceeded to the Trial and Inquiry, and considered the
Depositions of the Master and other Officers and Servants of the Mint, and the
Books, Papers, and other Evidences adduced, It did appear; First, That albeit
His Majesty and His Royal Predecessors, Have always had a special care to
provide Bullion, for increasing and maintaining of the Stock of Coynage in the
Kingdom; and that it is expressly provided by Act of Parliament Act 8. Sess. 1.
Par. 2. Chapter 2.
That the Goods and Merchandise imported by the Merchants, should pay so many
ounce of Bullion, or otherways pay twelve shilling Scots for every ounce in
place thereof; the Generals and Master of the Mint, being ordained to Import
the Stock of Bullion themselves, and Coin the same for His Majesty's use: And
albeit there has been considerable Sums of Money, paid by the Merchants to the
Officers of the Mint, in place of Bullion, there has been but a small quantity
of Bullion Imported by them; and in place thereof, great quantities of the
Money current in the Kingdom, has been melted down, to the great prejudice of
the Leidges, and contrair to many express Acts of Parliament, Acts 9. Pa. 13.
Ja 2. Act 65. Pa. 8 ^a. 3. Act 17 Par. 17 Ja. 6.
By which it is Declared, That in respect Silver and Gold put in the Fire to be
made Bullion to other new Money, is diminished, wasted and destroyed in the
Translation by the Fire, and incurs great skaith, in hurt of the King and all
his Liedges; Therefore it is Statute, That neither Silver nor Gold that bears
Print and form of Coin, be any ways melted, or put in the Fire by the King's
Coyners, without special license of the King; but all Gold and Silver that is
Coined, and ha^ Print, to be observed, and holden whole among the King's
Liedges, as he ordained it to have course, and the contraveeners of the Law to
be punished with the Confiscation of the half of his Goods for the first, and
of his whole Goods for the second fault: And likewise the Generals and Master
of the Mint, have divided amongst themselves, the benefit of the twelve
shilling Scots, paid in to the Mint by the Merchants, and so have failed in
their Trust, to advance their own private gain: As also. His Majesty, out of his
Princely care for the good of his Subjects, increasing of the Money in the
Kingdom, and for advancing his own Revenue, arising by the Mint, did allow a
certain sum yearly as a stock for buying in of Bullion from time to time, which
might have been exchanged ten or twelve times in the year, as was in use
formerly to be done; yet notwithstanding that Stock of Money has not been at
all Employed, by which the Country has been extremely prejudged, and the King
defrauded of the benefit that would have arisen thereby, if the Bullion had
been imported and exchanged; as it ought to have been according to His
Majesty's appointment, and the time that should have been so profitably
employed in Coining of Bullion, has been misspent in Coining great quantities of
Copper-money, to the great prejudice of the Liedges at home, and to the hurt of
Trade and Commerce abroad; and albeit that stock of Money was not employed in
manner as was appointed; yet the Generals and the Master did exact yearly from
the King, the interest thereof, as if it had been employed. Secundo, His
Majesty, after the example of His Royal Predecessors, having designed, for the
advancement of the Union, Trade and Commerce between the two Kingdoms, that the
Money Coined in both should be of alike weight and fineness; Cap. 38. and 46
Stat. David 2d, Act 23. Par. 1. Ja. 1. Act 54. Par. 4. Ja 4th.
And for that effect, in the year 1662. caused frame an indented Silver
Standart Plate of Sterling fineness, and secured with His Majesty's Seals, a
part whereof was sent hither to be kept as the Rule whereby to make Essays of
the fineness of the Silver, in all time coming. Nevertheless, it appears, That
all the Money of this Kingdom, since that time, has been designedly Minted far
below the fineness of that Standard Plate; Neither has there ever any use been
made thereof, since it came hither, and as for the remedies in fineness, (only
allowed in cases of Casuality, and no otherways) the Officers have combined,
not only to work upon, but even below them, and by paction to divide the
profits arising from thence, amongst themselves, when indeed they were obliged
to count to His Majesty's Thesaury for every such Grain of Remedy in fineness,
wrought upon, under the true established Standard: By this it is evident, That
the Generals who should chiefly have been concerned for the King's interest,
has malversed in their Offices, that the King has been defrauded of a
considerable sum, which would have thence accresct^d to him, and that the
Master and Wardens have concurred to persist in debasing the fineness of the
Money of this Kingdom, for their own advantages: And albeit it be contrair to
Law, and the Nature of all Mints, that any Silver Money should pass the King's
Irons, without an Essay thereof first taken, that it may be found of fineness
deliverable: Yet it appears by the Books of Meltings, and Printings, and
several Depositions, that a great part of the Coin of this Kingdom, under the
pretense of Silver, called Chizle, Heads, Sweeps and Scrapes, has been melted,
and Printed, without the presence or knowledge of the Essay-master, or any
Essay thereof taken, which furnished opportunity to the Officers to Coin at
what rate they pleased: And as His Majesty, at the time foresaid, established
the fineness of His Coin, in manner mentioned; so did He with no less
consideration, determine the true weight thereof, and for that end caused
adjust four Piles of Weights, fitted for the Denominations usual in both
Kingdoms, two whereof were sent hither, and the other two kept at the Tower
of London, all exactly marked for their security, and ordained to be the common
Rule for the Silver Weight of both Kingdoms: Nevertheless it appears, that one
of these Pyles being the proper Weights of Scotland, the like being reserved in
the Tower of London, after it came hither was kept up by the Generals,
without giving order to make use thereof, for some years, until the Master in
the year 1680, apprehending he might be questioned for using the Dean of Gilds
Weights of Edinburgh, when the King's Weights were in the Mint-house, Did of
himself, without order, adjust his own Weights by that new Pyle, and caused the
Work men to work accordingly; But the Generals not pleased therewith, commanded
him to deliver up both these new Pyles that came from London, and the old
Weights he had rectified thereby, to the Wardens to be set aside, and no more
used, and caused make a new Set of Weights for his greater gain, to be adjusted
at the sight of David Maitland their Deput, according to the Dean of Gilds
Weights of Edinburgh, which are far different from the New Pyle of Weights sent
hither by His Majesty for the common Rule of Weight: Neither did they exhibit
the King's Warrant for receiving that Scots Pile of Weights, and making use
thereof to the Master, before the year 1682. as appears by the Double of the
Warrant produced, and Attested by the Lord Justice-Clerk, one of the Generals:
And thus they used, and changed the Weights at their pleasure, contrair to His
Majesty's Order; The common Law, and the Laws and Acts of Parliament of this
Kingdom, Act 114. Par. 7. Ja. 5. Act 2. Par. 19. Ja. 6.
By which It is Statute, That no person should use different Weights, and that
the users of false Weights, shall lose their whole Goods and Gear, and the same
to be intrometted with for the King's use; and as to the Remedies of Weight
which are allowed only as the other Remedies of fineness, in cases of casual
Accidents and no otherwise; The Wardens have so far transgressed, that they
constantly Troned the Pieces according to the Remedies under the just weight,
and by this means, designedly rendered the King's Money to be light, as they had
by the like Artifice debased it in its fineness, whereby the King was frustrat
of the Profits which should accresce to him by the Grains of remedies of
Weights under the just proportion, for which the Officers were obliged to count
in Exchequer, but shared the Profits thereof amongst themselves, the Merchants
were also abused in delivering their Bullion at the Mint-house, where they were
forced always to give it by the Dean of Gild's Weights of Edinburgh, which are
heavier than the Scots Troy weight, by two Unces and a half every Stone weight,
whereby they were discouraged to import the same; They have also been
constantly paid for their Bullion by ^ale, whereas they ought to be paid by
the Kings Coin in the Balance (if the Mint were rightly regulated) which would
prove the only sure Check to secure the S^lver Coin from any abuse in its due
proportion of weight, which accordingly ought to have been done by the Law,
Act. 249. Par. 15. Ja. the 6 th.
before the Act of Parliament in the year 1669: As also the pieces of Coin
reserved in the Pixe, ought to have been kept whole, whereby some Trial even
that way might have been had of the just weight; but it has been a corrupt
Custom to cut these pieces, that no means might be left to cognosce upon the
Silver, whether it be weighty or light. Tertio, By the Laws and Acts of
Parliament of this Kingdom, the Coyners of black Money without warrant, are
punished with Death Act 18. Par. 3 d. Ja. 3 d.
And albeit His Majesty, since his happy restitution, was pleased to allow Six
Thousand Stone of Copper to be Coined, at two several limited times; Yet
notwithstanding, it appears by the Depositions of the Wardens, the Accounts and
other Evidences adduced, that there has been Twenty Nine Thousand and six
hundred Stone Coined, whereas there was only six Thousand Stone allowed; So
that there was twenty three Thousand and six hundred Stone of black Money
coined more than was allowed by the Warrands, which is an infinite Prejudice to
the Kingdom: And whereas the Generals should have stopped the further coining
of Copper-Money, so soon as the quantity allowed by His Majesty to be coined at
every Journey was exhausted; Yet notwithstanding, the Generals did allow, and
ordain the Officers to go on in the coining of more Copper-Money after it was
made known to them by the Master, that the quantity of Copper allowed by His
Majesty to be Coined was exhausted, and they also received the half of the
Profits arising from the superplus that was coined more than was allowed by His
Majesty. Quarto. The Coin of this Kingdom being lately cried up, and there
being a considerable quantity of Bullion lying in the Generals and Masters
hands; The whole Profit of the Exaltation being Five per cent. which did belong
to the King; It appears that the Generals did acclaime the Benefit of the one
half of the Exaltation from the Masters as a perquisit due to them, albeit it
truly belongs to the King, and which did amount to a very considerable Sum.
Quinto, Albeit by the Common Law, and several Laws and Acts of Parliament of
this Kingdom: It is statute, that if any Judge or Minister of the Law, take
Buds or Bribes, they shall lose their Honor, Fame, and Dignity; and their
moveable Goods to be confiscat, and deprived of their Offices, and punished in
their persons at his Majesty's Will: Cap. 22. Statut Rob. 1. Cap. 25. Stat.
Wilhel. Act 104 Par. 7. Ja. 5. Act 93. Par. 6. Ja. 6.
Yet notwithstanding, the Lord Hatton, one of the Generals did in the year 1679
(being then Thesaurer Deput, and one of the Commissioners of His Majesty's
Thesaurie and Exchequer) as appears from what is deponed by the Master, by
Writs and other pregnant presumptions, take from the Master of the Mint the Sum
of six hundred pounds Sterling, to procure allowance and payment of the
balance of his most unjust and exorbitant Accounts from the Exchequer
preceding the year 1674, relating to the Mint and Coin, stating the King
Debtor to him in Forty four Thousand pounds Scots, which he as General of
His Majesty's Mint, was obliged to comptrol, having special Trust and a
Sallarie from His Majesty for that effect; By which Accounts, it likeways
appears, that the Lord Hatton as General, received payment of three years
Sallarie, from the year 1660, to the year 1664; Albeit there was no Money
coined preceding that time, beside an hundred and fifty Guinies of Gold given
to the Duke of Lauderdale, and fifty pounds Sterling to John Kirkwood his
Servant upon that same account, as the Master has Deponed: And further, the
General did again most grossly exact his Sallarie for the same years out of His
Majesty's Excise, and so did get double payment of his Sallarie for the same
years, albeit in reason there was none due, In respect there was no Coynage or
Overseeing the Mint for these years. Sexto, Albeit by the Common Law, and
several Laws and Acts of Parliament of this Kingdom, it is Statute, That if any
Officer be negligent and culpable in the execution of his Office, he is to be
punished in his person according to the quality of his Crime, at the Kings
Will, Cap. 13. Statut. Rob 2. Cap. 41. Statut. Rob 3d. Act 77. Parl. 14. Ja. 2.
Act 105. Parl. 14. Ja. 3d.
. And albeit the Generals by their Gifts and Offices were appointed to
Comptroll the other Officers of the Mint, and had power to hold Courts, and to
punish Delinquents; and notwithstanding they did know that the Counter-Warden,
who is Check to the Warden, did not attend his Office, and that the
Underofficers of the Mint were negligent in keeping of Compt-Books, Registers
of the Coynage, and many other things relating to their Offices, and that they
had committed many abuses and done many deeds of Malversation, yet the Generals
of the Mint did not hold Courts to punish them, but were Sharers with them in
the benefit arising by their Abuses and Malversations: And the better to
palliat the Abuses that they might not be discovered, and that it might not be
known what Profit and Advantage the Generals and other Officers of the Mint had
made all this time past, the Generals did take up all the Compt-Books,
Registers, and other Papers belonging to the Mint from the Underofficers,
which were all Abstracted, except two Leafs relating to the last
Copper-Journal, which had been torn out of a Book, and were delivered to the
Commissioners by the Counter-Warden. Septimo, Albeit by the Common Law, and
Laws of all Nations, the eliciting and extorting of Bonds and Sums of Money,
especially by a superior Officer from these in Office under him, is manifest
and gross Oppression, and severely Punishable, yet notwithstanding the Generals
of the Mint did vex and threaten John Falconer the late Warden, to call him
before His Majesty's Privy Council, unless he would grant a Bond to Al.
Maitland Counter-Warden for the Sum of Twelve Thousand Merks upon the account
of the third of the Remedies that were alleged to be due to him since his
entry to his Office, who never attended the same, which Remedies did truly
belong to the King; yet notwithstanding the Warden was necessitat to grant Bond
for Eleven Thousand Merks, and grant a Discharge of a Thousand Merks that was
due to him of his Fees; and albeit the Bond was taken in Alexander Maitland's
name, yet it appears to have been to the Generals behove, they having caused
use Diligence upon the Bond, and put the Warden in Prison, where he was
detained while he was necessitat to Compone and Transact the same with the
Generals for the Sum of Seven thousand Merks, which was paid, and employed for
their use and behove. It is not easy to make an exact Account of the Profits
arising to the Generals, Masters, and other Officers of the Mint from these
Abuses, which certainly will amount to vast Sums. But to conclude far within
bounds, it appears by an Account given in under David Maitland's Hands, Deput
and Trustee for the Generals, that Twelve thousand four hundred and forty
three Stone of Copper did pass the Irons in the last Journal, the printed value
thereof accounted by them amounts to Two hundred ninety four thousand four
hundred and fifty five Pounds Scots, and compting the Stone of Copper at a Merk
the Pound (which was more than they truly paid for that Copper in cumulo,)
amounts to one hundred and twenty eight thousand Pound, so that there remains
of free Profit to the Officers in the Mint, one hundred sixty six thousand four
hundred and fifty five Pounds Scots Money, whereof the one half was altogether
assumed by the Generals Remedies, and all for he would not allow any
Defalcation to the Workmen or Wardens, as appears by an Account given in, all
Written with the General's own Hand; and the first Journal consisting of
Seventeen thousand Stone, will by the rule of Proportion afford of free Gain,
two hundred twenty six thousand three hundred and seventy eight Pounds, so that
the free Gain of both the Copper-Journals amounts to Three hundred and ninety
two thousand eight hundred thirty three Pounds, whereof there being only due to
the Officers of the Mint, by His Majesty's Gift, the Profit arising from Six
thousand Stone, which is about the fifth part of the free Profit they have
gotten; So that they are justly due to the King of the Profit that they have
gotten of the said Copper-Coyn, Three hundred and fourteen thousand Pounds
Scots, which in English Money, is Twenty six thousand one hundred and sixty six
Pounds thirteen Shillings four pence; But there being much more Coined out of
the stone of Copper the first journal, than was coined out of the Stone of
Copper the second Journal, as is clear by their own Depositions, the Profit
must be yet a great deal more, and the Profit arising to the Generals and
Masters of the Mint, from the Bullion weight and fineness of the Coin, and
Exaltation-money can hardly be well known; but it appears by a Claim given in
by the Generals to the master, whereby they crave the half of the Benefit of
the twelve shilling for the ounce of Bullion not paid in by the Merchants in
specie, that should have been employed for the buying of Bullion, the whole
Bullion of the Kingdom paid in Twelve Shilling for the Ounce, being an Hundred
and fifty Stone yearly, at Five Pound Ten Shilling Eight Pennies Scots upon the
Pound, beside the Kings Twelfth part for the said one Hundred and Fifty Stone,
will amount yearly to the Sum of Thirteen thousand two hundred and eighty
Pounds Scots, which from Candlemass 1670, conform to the Act of Parliament, by
which Merchants were allowed to pay in to the Mint Twelve Shilling in place of
every Ounce of Bullion, being Twelve years and a half, amounts to the Sum of an
Hundred and Sixty Thousand Pounds Scots, and the Profit arising by the
difference of the Coin from the indented Standart-Plate does thus appear, the
Scots Coin being often Two Grains less than Eleven Dinnier Fine, which being
Four Grains less than the indented Sandart-Plate, (they usually working upon
the Remedies of Fineness, which with the Remedies of Weights,) will amount to
an Hundred Pound Sterling yearly, which for the space of Sixteen years bypast,
will amount to the Sum of Nineteen Thousand Two Hundred Pounds, and the Profit
arising by the Exaltation-Money, being Three Shilling Two Pennies upon the
Ounce, which is Forty Pound Ten Shilling upon the Stone upon two hundred Stone
that is Coined yearly, which for an year and a half bypast, will amount to
Twelve thousand Pound, and the Profit of Two hundred Stone lying uncoyned in
the Mint the time of the Exaltation, by that same rule will amount to Eight
thousand Pound, and the Profit arising from the King's Stock of Twenty thousand
Merks allowed yearly for buying of Bullion, might be Coined and Exchanged at
least ten times in a year, being Two thousand two hundred seventy three Pound
yearly for these Twenty one years bypast, since the King's happy Restitution,
will amount to the Sum of Forty seven thousand seven hundred seventy three
Pounds Scots Money, and the double Payment of the Generals Sallaries for the
space of three years preceding the year 1664, which was unjustly exacted, is
Four thousand and nine hundred Pounds, and the yearly Interest arising by the
Bullion paid in to the Generals and Master of the Mint by the Merchants, and
not Coined in due time, (seeing it appears by the Books, that there was always
200 Stone of Bullion in their hands, and not Coined) for the space of 16 years,
ever since the year 1666. will amount to the Sum of an hundred and twenty
eighth thousand pounds, which Sums in all will amount to the Sum of six hundred
and ninety nine thousand eight hundred and seventy three pounds Scots, which in
English Money is, fifty eight thousand three hundred twenty two pounds fifteen
shillings, and which is beside the profit of the Money Coined without Essay,
which cannot be known, it being oft-times worse than the Standart, which
likewise will amount to a great Sum; All which profits, albeit they belong to
the King, yet they have been retained by the Generals, and the Master, and
employed for their own private use, and thereafter there being some Information
made by the Lord Hatton, that he was willing to declare and give an Account of
all things relating to the Mint; And the Commissioners having sent two of their
own number to him, to know if he would yet give a full and ingenuous
declaration of things relating to the Mint; he absolutely refused, unless
First, he was allowed to see all the Depositions of the other Officers and
Evidences adduced, which being altogether contrair to Law and Form; The
Commissioners were of the Opinion, that it could not be granted, but declared
to him, if he would give a full and ingenuous Account of all things relating to
the Mint, he should then see all the other Officers Depositions and other
Evidences adduced before Report were made to His Majesty, which he refused; And
as to the Trial of the Fineness of the Money coined in His Majesty's Mint, the
Commissioners humbly represents to His Majesty, that the practice formerly used
in the Mint, in order to a Trial of the Fineness of the Money coined, was that
at every Journal there was a part cut out of an whole piece of Coin reserved in
the Pixe, and the pieces of several Journals being all melted together in one
Lignat, was to be tried by the Standart; By which Trial, His Majesty may be
grossly abused, and such a Trial is altogether elusory, for the piece of Silver
that made up the Lignat, being taken out of the Coin of several Journals; The
Officers of the Mint might coin one small Journal of utter fine Silver, which is
Twenty two Grains above the Standart, and one other great Journal of Twenty
two Grains below the Standart; The essay piece of each Journal being of equal
quantity, and both those pieces being melted into one Lignat, it is evident
that the Lignat will be of equal fineness with the Standart; and there being
perhaps ten times as much coined in the Journal which is below the Standart as
was coined in the Journal which was above the Standart; there will be nine
parts of eleven of the Money coined that will be twenty two Grains below the
Standart; So that albeit the Lignat be of equal fineness with the Standart, yet
nine parts of eleven of all the Money coined in this Kingdom may be below the
Standart; and probably by that manner of Trial, the King has formerly been
informed, that the Money of this Kingdom was of exact fineness conform to the
Standart, whereas by this manner of Trial, there is no security that the Money
coined in this Kingdom is of equal fineness with the Standart, and this is no
Trial at all as to the weight, which ought to be rectified, and a certain way
of Trial appointed, that the Money coined be not debased neither in Weight nor
Fineness: As also the Commissioners considering, how uncertain it were for them
to make an exact Trial of the Silver Pieces reserved in the Pixe, whereby they
might examine the Journals coined since the last Essay was taken, in respect of
the scarcity of Essay-Masters, whom they can trust in so important a matter,
have transmitted a competent number of these Pieces taken out of the Pixe in
presence of the Commissioners, two Wardens, and Essay-Master of the Mint, and
secured under the Seals of the said two Wardens and Essay-Master, to the
Effect, Trial may be made by such as his Majesty shall judge fit; As also humbly
represents to His Majesty, that the former methods and practice of the Mint of
this Kingdom, how these Pieces have been reserved for Trial in manner
abovementioned, has not been so exact, but that the Officers of the Mint may
Coin at their pleasure, and that the Fault cannot be discovered by the Pixe:
And therefore, the Commissioners in humble Obedience to His Majesty's Royal
Commands, makes Report to His Sacred Majesty of the Particulars
abovementioned, which was sufficiently verified and instructed to them in
manner foresaid, And humbly remits the same to His Majesty's serious
Consideration, to do therein as His Sacred Majesty shall think fit.

Sic Subscribitur G. Gordon Cancel. Queensberry. Athol. Montrose. Perth.
Southesque. Tweeddale. G. Mackenzie. G. Mckenzie: Patrick Ogilvie. I: Murray.
W. Drummond. R. Gordon. Ja. Dick. R. Baird.


May it please your Sacred Majesty,
HAving received a Commission from your Majesty for trying all Affairs relating
to Your Mint, in this Your Majesty's Ancient Kingdom; we did according to our
Duty, use our exactest Endeavors in the said Trial and Inquiry, and have
returned Your Majesty a just Account thereof by two of our Number, the Lord
Justice General, and Lord Register, to the end Your Majesty may be satisfied by
them, both in clearing any of the particulars, if the matter so require, or in
relation to any further Proposals Your Majesty may have for regulating Your
Mint for the future, this being an Affair of so great Consequence, both to your
Majesty and to your Subjects, we hope our Faithfulness and Endeavors in this
Trial, will convince your Majesty how ready we are upon all Occasions to
manage any Trust reposed upon us, as becomes,

May it please Your Sacred Majesty, Edr. 7. Aug. 7. 1682. Your Majesty's most
Humble, most Faithful and most Obedient Subjects and Servants. Sic
subscribitur. G. Gordon Cancel. Queensberry. Athol. Tweeddale. Geo. Mackenzie.
Patrick Ogilvie. I. Murray. W. Drummond. R. Baird. R. Gordon.


Instructions from the Lords Commissioners, for Visitation of His Majesty's
Mint of Scotland, to the Lord Justice General, and Lord Register, two of their
own Number*
Edinburgh, 7th of August, 1682.
1. IMprimis, To signify how favorable the Commissioners proceeded in
inquiring into the State of his Majesty's Mint of Scotland from the General
thereof, allowing him what time he craved to give in the same, and how he
offered to them a Representation, in place thereof, declining the powers
contained in their Commission, and what time he spent before he would subscribe
it; how he denied to answer their Interrogators in presence, and demanded them
in Writing, with some days to consider and answer, which was also granted, how
he desired time to advise, whether he would Depone upon the Points of the
Interrogators, which was also dispensed with; and how after so much time spent,
he plainly refused to answer any question relating to the Copper, or Depone
upon any Point, in order to the Silver Coin.

Secundo, To show the Reasons whereupon the Commissioners Judges, that the 8 th
Act of His Majesty's 2 d Parliament, whereby it is left in the option of the
Merchants, either to import Bullion, or to pay 12 shilling Scots to the
Officers of the Mint, for every ounce thereof, and the Officers to furnish the
Bullion by themselves, to have been the ground of many abuses committed in the
Mint-house since that time, such as the vexatious attendance of the Merchants,
to get their Bullion Essayed, received and paid, the u^just exactions upon the
Weights, the not payment thereof by weight in the Balance, the melting down
and recoyning of Foreign current Silver in place of Bullion, which should have
been Imported from abroad, whereby manifold advantages did accrue to the
Officers of the Mint, which were divided amongst them, but the King and Kingdom
thereby much prejudged.

Tertio, To inform what Arts were used some years after the first Copper
Journal was ended, to abuse His Majesty's Privy Council, to grant a new Copper
Coynage, how some of the Generals and Master of the Mints Creatures, such as
Sir William Binning, Provost Kinloch, and others of the Commissioners of the
Royal Burrows, were induced to supplicat therefore, and how the Privy Council
yielded thereto, upon the Trust they reposed in the General, and not knowing
then that any more than 3000 stone of Copper had been formerly Printed, when
now it appears there was about 17000 stone past the King's Irons long before
the Petition was presented.

Quarto, To declare how that since the Report was finished, there was in the
Mint-house, some Silver, called Sweeps, which are small Corns or Grains,
brushed off from the Moulds, and Lignots, immediately after casting, and
Collected from a years work or more, this being prepared, was charged in the
Pot, and put in the Furnace by the Masters Deput, without the knowledge of the
Warden, which was the first fault; the Warden coming to the casting thereof,
he, with the Counter-warden, took a piece off the Lignots, for making the
Essay, but kept it up for two or three days, and left the Lignots in the
Masters Deputs custody, which was a second fault; after some days, the Wardens
brought that piece to the Essay-master, who immediately in their presence, took
the Essay and reported it to be some seven or eight Grains worse, but not
knowing how that should be, for his better security, went to take another
piece, for a new Essay, which he did, and found it as before, only when he
called for the Silver, he perceived they had proceeded to Miln the Lignots, cut
the Silver in 56 shilling-pieces, and justed them, ready for Blenshing and
Printing, which was the greatest fault of all.

Quinto, To represent how necessar it is, that His Majesty cause Regulat many
abuses which have been too long practiced amongst the Officers of the Mint,
that they may be preventen for the future.

Sic Subscribitur, Geo. Gordon Cancel. Queensberry. Atholl. Tweeddale. Geo.
Mackenzie. Patrick Ogilvie. I. Murray. W. Drummond. R. Gordon. Robert Baird.


ACT, Anent the Report of the Essay-pieces, taken out of the Pix of His
Majesty's Mint of Scotland.
AT Edinburgh, the eleventh day of August One thousand six hundred fourscore
and two years, Compeared in presence of the Lords Commissioners, appointed by
His Majesty for Trial of His Mint of Scotland, Robert Gordon younger of
Gordonstoun, one of the Commissioners thereof, and in obedience of the Command
given by the said Commissioners to him, William Drummond of Cromlicks, and Sir
Robert Baird of Saughtounhall, three of the said Commissioners, or any one of
them, to go to His Majesty's Mint-house at Edinburgh, and there to make Trial
of ten Essay-pieces of Silver, taken forth of the Pixe thereof before the said
Commissioners, and that in presence of Sir John Falconer Master of His
Majesty's said Mint, Alexander Maitland Warden thereof, Archibald Falconer
Counter-Warden of the same, Master Henry Alcorn Essay-Master thereof, Alexander
Reid His Majesty's Goldsmith in Scotland, and Mr. John Borthwick, Essay-Master
to to the Goldsmiths thereof; And to make Report of the Trial of the same, to
the said Commissioners; Having accordingly gone and made Trial of the said
Essay-pieces, in presence of the said persons, Did give in, and produced the
Report thereof underwritten, Subscribed with the said Robert Gordon his own
Hand, and als with the Hands of the said Sir John Falconer, Alexander
Maitland, Archibald Falconer, Alexander Reid, and Master John Borthwick; Which
the said Lords Commissioners appointed to be Recorded in their Books by their
Clerk, and Ordained him to give forth this present Act, and Extract thereupon,
under his hand and Subscription, which they declared should be als valid, and
make als great Faith, as the Principal Report it self, Of the which Report the
Tenor follows.

AT Edinburgh, the ninth Day of August One thousand six hundred eighty two
years, William Drummond of Cromlicks, Sir Robert Baird, and Robert Gordon of
Gordonstoun, being commanded by the Commission, for Trial of the Mint, to make
some Essays of the Pieces taken out of the Pixe, Did, in presence of the
Master, Wardens, Essay-master of His Majesty's Mint* Alexander Reid the King's
Goldsmith, and Mr. John Borthwick the Goldsmiths Essay-master, take the Trials
following; First, in respect that it is difficult, especially for strangers to
judge of the exact degrees of heat in any Furnace, and that the diverse heats
may occasion great variety, in the Reporting the finest Silver from the Cople
and Beam, we did take one pound of Fine-Silver, a pound of the Indented Trial
Piece, a pound taken off from a new English Shilling, and a pound made of the
Commixture of eleven ounces, two Pennies of fine Silver, and eighteen Pennies
of clean Copper, placed in the Furnace in Coples, according to the Order
underwritten, the pounds of fine Silver, and of the Tryal-plate inmost, and
the pounds of the English Coin, and the Commixtion outmost, toward the mouth
of the Furnace, the pound of fine Silver did come out three Grains lighter, the
Indented Tryalpiece came out eleven Deniers and half a Grain large, the English
Shilling came out eleven Deniers and one Grain large, the Commixed Standart
came out ten Deniers twenty three Grains and a Quarter, at the next Trial the
fine Silver and Indented Plate, being placed as before, the fine Silver did
rain, and came out three Grain lighter, the Indented-Plate came out eleven
Deniers two Grains and a sixth part, the English Coin came out of the same
exact weight with the piece of the Plate, one piece out of our Pixe, which was
Reported the third day of March, One thousand six hundred seventy six years, to
be eleven Deniers, one Grain, did come out ten Deniers twenty three Grains and
three Quarters, at the next Trial, the fine Silver and pound of the Indented
Plate, being placed as before, with a pound made up of two pieces, taken out of
the pixe and melted down together, with a little Borax, both the pieces being
Reported under the Essay-masters hand, at ten Deniers and twenty two Grains,
the fourth Cople being commixed English Standart, the pound fine came out at
eleven and twenty one scarce, the Indented-plate came out eleven Deniers and
half a Grain, the commixed English Standart came out at eleven Deniers and
three Quarters of a Grain, the melted two pieces of the Pixe Reported the fifth
of September, one thousand six hundred fourscore one years, to be ten Deniers,
twenty two Grains, did come out eleven Deniers five Grains and a half. At the
fourth Trial, the fine Silver and pound of the Indented-Plate, being placed as
before, with a pound made up of two pieces, taken out of the Pixe, and melted
down together, with a little Borax, being reported by the Essay-master in
September, one thousand six hundred fourscore one years, to be ten Deniers and
twenty three Grains; the fourth being a commixed English Standart, the fine
pound came out two Grains and an half worse, the Indented Plate came out eleven
Deniers, one Grain and three quarters, the melted two pieces of the Pixe,
formerly in September, one thousand six hundred fourscore one years, Reported
at ten Deniers twenty three Grains, came out eleven Deniers four Grains and a
quarter, the commixed English Standart came out eleven Deniers large. At the
fifth a commixed English Standart was put in place of the fine Silver, which
came out ten Deniers, twenty three Grains, and three quarters; a pound made up
of two pieces, taken out of the Pix, and melted down together with a little
Borax, being Reported by the Essay-master in September, one thousand six
hundred seventy six years, to be ten Deniers and twenty two Grains, came out
eleven Deniers nine Grains; a pound made up of two pieces, taken out of the
Pix, and melted down together with a little Borax, being Reported by the
Essay-master in March, one thousand six hundred fourscore one years; and July
26. one thousand six hundred fourscore two years, to be eleven Deniers fine,
came out eleven Deniers, eleven Grains and three quarters; and a pound made up
of two pieces, taken out of the Pix, and melted down together with a little
Borax, being Reported by the Essay-master, in July, one thousand six hundred
seventy six years, to be eleven Deniers, two Grains fine, came out eleven
Deniers and seven Grains fine. At the sixth heating a pound of fine Silver,
placed as formerly, comes out eleven Deniers, twenty one Grains large, a pound
out of an English Crown, comes out eleven Deniers, two Grains, a pound out an
English Sixpence, comes out eleven Deniers, two Grains and an half, a pound out
of a piece, taken out of the Pix, Reported by the Essay-master, in August, one
thousand six hundred and seventy eight years, to be eleven Deniers, one Grain,
comes ou^ eleven Denies, seven Grains; The Essays all taken by Mr. Alcorn the
Essay-master, Weighted by us at Edinburgh, the tenth Day of August, one
thousand six hundred eighty two years, in presence of the King's Goldsmith and
Essay-master of the Goldsmiths, and of the Wardens of the Mint; The
Essay-master of the Mint, did place as before, a pound of fine Silver, one
pound taken out of the English Shillings, which were Tried yesterday, one pound
taken out of the commixture, by melting with a little Borax, of two pieces,
eleven Deniers, two Grains fine, taken out of the Pix, Reported by the
Essay-master, in July 15 and 31 days, one thousand six hundred seventy six
years, which Lignot was Tried yesterday, and a pound of the commixture, by
melting with a little Borax, of two pieces taken out of the Pix, and Reported
by the Essay-master, on March fourth, one thousand six hundred eighty one
years, and July twenty sixth, one thousand six hundred fourscore two years, to
be eleven Deniers fine, which Lignot was also Tried yesterday, the fine Silver
came out about three Grains worse, having rayned the pound of English Shilling,
came out eleven Deniers, two Grains, and a sixth part; the pound of eleven
Deniers two Grains, out of the Pix, came out eleven Deniers, seven Grains and
an half, the pound of eleven Deniers out of the Pix, came eleven Deniers twelve
Grains; All the above-written Trials, did hold as above-written: In Witness
whereof, we the persons above-written, who were present, have Subscribed this
Report, day and place foresaid;

Sic Subscribitur, R. Gordon. Jo. Falconer. Alex. Mai^land. Alexr. Reid. Archd.
Falconar. Jo. Borthwick.
Extractum per me, sic subscribitur, Ja. Johnston, Cls. Com.

Memorandum and Additional Report for the Lords Justice General and Register,
from the Commissioners of the Mint. (...) 11 Au^^st 1682.
WHereas we mentioned in the close of our last Report, that the Method used
here for Trial of the fineness of the several Journals, by putting pieces of
every Journal in the Pix Box, which pieces were to be melted into a Lignot, and
Judgment given of the whole Coynage, according to that Lignot, was not only
unsecure, but illusory. Now on some Trial made, in presence of a Committee of
our Number by the King's Goldsmith and Essay-master of the Mint, It is found,
That albeit both the Officers of the Mint did confess, and their Registers do
expressly bear, That some Journals have been of ten Deniers and twenty two
Grains, others of eleven, and others of eleven and two Grains, and the pieces
of these Journals, which were put in the Pix, had the report of the
Essay-master wrapped about every piece, conform to the Registers, and their own
confessions; Yet the foresaid Committee, the Goldsmith, and the Goldsmiths
Essay-master, together with the Master of the Mint and Wardens, Have Declared,
by their Subscribed Report, that the pieces of these very Journals, are finer
than the Report in which they are wrapped, or which is contained in their
Registers or Confessions, some by 5, some by 6, some by 9, and some by 10
Grains, which must necessarly evince, that either the Essay-Master is ignorant,
or that other pieces than what he Essayed, may be conveyed into the Pix; and
consequently that a Trial made thereby, is altogether unsure, and the rather
that by their own Registers, it appears that no Money came in to the Mint,
neither in Bullion or Lignot, near to the said Fineness.

Sic subscribitur, G. Gordon Cancel. Queensberry. Tweeddale. W. Drummond. R.
Gordon. R. Baird. Geo. Mackenzie. Patrick Ogilvie.


Sic suprascribitur, CHARLES R.

RIght trusty and right well-beloved Counselor, We greet you well. Having
heard and fully considered the reports (^earing dates of the 4 th and 11 th
instant, sent to Us from the Commissioners lately appointed by Us for the trial
and examination of the state of Our Mint of that Our ancient Kingdom, We are
very well satisfied with the Exactness thereof, and with their Care and
Diligence in pursuance of Our Commission relating thereunto, The Malversations
of the Officers of Our Mint, related in the said Report appear such; And we
give so entire Credit to the Information we have received thereby, that we have
now thought fit to remove the Lord Hatton, Sir John Falconer, Alexander
Maitland, and Archibald Falconer, not only from their respective places and
Offices in Our Mint; But also from all other public Offices and Employments,
which at present they enjoy under Us, which we hereby require you to intimat
unto them, and to cause these presents be recorded in Our Books of Privy
Council; as also you are to take care that Our Council command Our Advocat to
prosecut the forenamed Persons before the Competent Judges, either Civilly or
Criminally as accords of the Law: And since we look upon the Regulation of Our
Mint, as a matter of the greatest Importance to Us and Our People, you are to
call the Commissioners aforesaid, and to require them to meet, and to proceed
by virtue of their former Commission to consider what shall be the fittest
methods for ordering and securing Our said Mint for the future, and to report
the same to Us, to the end we may declare Our Royal Pleasure therein. In the
mean time, it is Our express Command, that Our Privy Council put a stop to all
Coynage till further Order from Us, so we bid you heartily farewell.

Given at Our Court at Windsor Castle, 25. August 1682, and of Our Reign the 34
year. By His Majesty's Command, Sic subscribitur Morray.

Octavo Novembris, 1682.
SEDERUNT, Haddo Cancellarius, Newtoun Praeses, Nairn, Tarbat Clericus
Registri, Collingtoun, Castlehill, Reidfurd, Pitmedden, Harcars, Saline, B^yne,
Drumcairn and Kemney.
THe which day the Lord Chancellor produced a Letter from His Majesty, direct
to him, which being read, the Lords ordained the same to be Recorded in the
Books of Sederunt; of which Letter the Tenor follows; Suprascribitur, CHARLES
R. Right trusty and right well beloved Cousin and Counselor, We greet you
well; Whereas by Our Letter to you, bearing date at Windsor the twenty fifth
day of August last bypast, upon Our hearing the two Reports sent unto Us by
the Commissioners, lately appointed by Us, for the Trial and Examination of the
State of Our Mint of that Our Ancient Kingdom, We did signify, that We had
removed the persons therein named, not only from their respective Places and
Offices in Our said Mint; but also from all other Public Offices and
Employments, which they did then enjoy under Us; And did likewise order you to
take care, that Our Council should Command Our Advocat to prosecute them before
competent Judges, either Civilly or Criminally, as accords of the Law: It is
now Our Will and Pleasure, and We do hereby Authorize and Require you, to take
care that Our Council command Our Advocat, to prosecute the therein mentioned
Lord Haltoun; now Earl of Lauderdale, Sir John Falconer, Alexander Maitland,
and Archibald Falconer, civilly before the Lords of Session only, and when We
shall have an account of the Result of that civil Process before them, We shall
thereafter signify Our Pleasure concerning any further matter that may be laid
to their Charge, in such manner as to Us in Our Royal Wisdom shall seem fit.
And in regard We did not in Our said Letter to you, of the 25 of August last,
make mention of John Falconer, the late Warden of Our said Mint,
notwithstanding of his Malversation (which clearly appears by the Report of Our
said Commissioners) during his long continuance in the Place of Warden
aforesaid; It is also Our express Pleasure, that he be prosecute in the same
manner and method, which We have prescribed for the Process against the persons
already mentioned: For doing of all which, these Presents to be Recorded both
in the Books of Our Privy Council, and of the Session (if needful) shall be to
you and them respective, and to all others who may be therein concerned, a
sufficient Warrant: And so We bid you heartily Farewell.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the 2 d day of October, 1682. And of Our
Reign the thirty fourth year. By His Majesty's Command, Sic subscribitur,
MORRAY.

Double of the KING's Letter, in favors of the Earl of Aberdene and Colonel
Grahame, 1683.
AT Edinburgh the eighth day of May One thousand six hundred fourscore three
years, His Majesty's Letter underwritten, direct to William Marquess of
Queensberrie, Lord High Thesaurer for the Kingdom of Scotland, and John
Drummond of Lundie, Lord Thesaurer-Deput, was presented and read, and ordained
to be Booked; Whereof the Tenor follows, Sic suprascribitur. CHARLES R. Right
Trusty and right well beloved Cousin and Counselor, and right Trusty and well
beloved Counselor, We greet you well. We have seen and fully considered the
Decree (bearing date at Edinburgh the 20 day of March last) obtained at the
instance of Our Advocat, against Charles now Earl of Lauderdale, Richard Lord
Maitland, and the other Officers of Our Mint, of that Our Ancient Kingdom, by
which they are found justly liable to Us in great and considerable Sums, much
above what We are informed they are able to pay, and are thereby fully
convinced that their Ma^versations, and Abuses of their Trust have been so
great, that they ought not (for the terror of others) to pass without severe
punishment: Yet out of Our Royal Goodness and Clemency, being unwilling to
ruin them and their Families, and calling to mind the forwardness of the said
Earl of Lauderdale and Lord Maitland in Our Service, in several other Stations,
and the many good Services done to Us and Our Royal Ancestors, by their
Predecessors; We have now thought fit to let you know, that seeing the said Earl
of Lauderdale and Lord Maitland, did fully submit to Our Determination, and
have since humbly begged, and Petitioned Our Favor; It is therefore Our Will
and Pleasure, that the said Charles Earl of Lauderdale and Richard Lord
Maitland, Dispone to Our Right Trusty and right well beloved Cousin and
Counselor, George Earl of Aberdene Our Chancellor, in the most ample Form and
Manner, that he can in Law require, all and whole the Lands of Dudhope, Benvie
and Balrudrie, and all others whatsomever, lying within ten Miles of Dundee,
which formerly did belong to the deceast Earl of Dundee, and have been since
possessed by the said Earl of Lauderdale, or the Lord Maitland; and also, that
they Dispone to the said Earl of Aberdene, all Houses, Tenements and Gardens,
lying within the Town of Dundee, or Bonnet-Hill, belonging to them, with all
the Right they have to the Passage on the Water of Tay, any manner of way, with
the whole Profits and Emoluments thereof; as also the Right of Patronage of the
Parsonage of Dundee, and all Superiorities and Fe^-duties, or other Duties
whatsomever, lying without the said Town, within the bounds aforesaid, which
formerly did belong to the said deceast Earl of Dundee, and were since possessed
by the said Earl of Lauderdale, or Lord Maitland, Make full Right of, and
Dispone to Our right Trusty and well beloved Colonel John Grahame of
Claver-house, The House of Dudhope, with the Garden, Orchard, Park and Planting
adjacent thereunto: as also the Office of Constabulary of Dundee, and all other
Jurisdictions, Privileges and Superiorities (and particularly the Rights,
Privileges and Emoluments of the first Fair) within the said Town; Together
with all other Rights, Profits and Emoluments therein possessed by the said Earl
of Lauderdale, or Lord Maitland, which formerly did belong to the said Earl of
Dundee, that are not there above particularly ordered to be Disponed to the
said Chancellor. Providing always that the said Colonel John Grahame pay to
Our said Chancellor twenty years purchase for one years Liferent that can arise
unto him by this Disposition, which at any time has been accounted for in the
Rental-books, as a part of these Lands, Disponed to Our said Chancellor: And it
is Our further Will and Pleasure, that the Rights of the said Lands, Houses,
Jurisdictions and Superiorities, and others generally and particularly
abovementioned, as well in favors of Our said Chancellor, as of the said
Colonel Grahame, be free of all Burdens and encumbrances whatsoever,
especially the Warrandice of the Lands and Estate of Craig, the Lady Maitland
her Jointure, and the depending Process at the instance of the late Earl of
Dundee's Creditors; Or otherways, That the said Earl of Lauderdale or Lord
Maitland, give such Warrandice as shall be satisfactory to Our said Chancellor,
and the said Colonel Grahame, for their respective Securities in the
Premises: Upon the performance of all which abovementioned, We do hereby
declare, That We will give a full and general ^ndemnity, Remission and
Discharge to the said Earl of Lauderdale and Lord Maitland, in as ample Form
and Manner, as in Law they can require, for any cause or offense, Civil or
Criminal, in any public Station preceding the date hereof: Declaring likeways
hereby Our express Will and Pleasure, That seeing We have now shown so much
Favor and Clemency to the said Earl of Lauderdale and Lord Maitland, they be
first obliged to Discharge and Renunce all such Claim and Relief, that they as
Generals of Our Mint, have, or could pretend against Sir John Falconer, late
Master, Mr. James Falconer, Son and Heir to the said Deceast John Falconer late
Warden, and the rest of the late Officers thereof. And for further Security, We
do hereby Assign and Dispone to Our said Chancellor, and the said Colonel John
Grahame, all Our Right, Title and Interest, in and to the said Decree against
the late Generals of the Mint, with full Power to pursue for, and recover the
Sums contained therein, until Our said Chancellor, and the said Colonel
Grahame shall be fully satisfied and paid of the sum of 20000 lib. sterling,
in manner after specified, viz. First 5000 lib. to Our said Chancellor, and
2000 lib. to the said Colonel Grahame, and thereafter 11000 lib. to Our said
Chancellor, and 2000 lib. to the said Colonel Grahame; Declaring nevertheless,
That upon the Earl of Lauderdale and Lord Maitland, their granting of the
abovementioned Dispositions, this Right to the abovementioned Decree,
granted by Us to Our said Chancellor, and the said Colonel Grahame, shall be
void and null. So We bid you heartily farewell.

Given at Our Court at Windsor-Castle. 1. May 1683. and of Our Reign the 35 th
Year. By His Majesty's Command, Sic subscribitur, MIDDLETON.


