The Copy of a Letter From Paris, the 24. Jun. 4. Jul. 1642. Upon the subject
of the CONSPIRACY: For the which the Marquess of Saint Mars, great Esquire
of France, Monsieur de Thou, Counselor of State, and Monsieur de Chauagnac,
are kept in prison.

With another Copy of a Letter from Narbon, serving to the clearing of the
business:

Wherein may be seen the mavelous deliverance of France, and of her
Confederates or Friends, but especially of England, Involved in that plot.

Printed at London for J. B. 1642.

A true Copy of certain Letters from Paris, and other parts: Declaring the
conspiracy of diverse great personages against France and England.
THe Conspiracy (for the which Monsieur le Grand is still kept strictly in the
Citadelle of Montpellier, and the Lords of Thou and Chauagnac in the Town of
Tarascon) was not tending only to the destruction of the Councels of Monsieur
the Cardinal Richelieu, and of his credit by the King, but to the confusion of
this State, and Confederates, and specially to the subversion of England. They
have been examined by the Lord of Choizi, and by this examen it appeared, that
they had already in some sort worked in the spirit of his Majesty, and that
without any notice to the great Cardinal; for the said Lord le Grand had
confessed to have written (by Order sealed by the King) to the Queen Mother;
and the Lord of Thou to have sent also, by order of his Majesty, by Letter of
Exchange, ten thousand Crowns, to Madam de Cheureuze.

Many Letters or Missives of the Queen of England, were found among the
writings of the said Lord le Grand.

The Duchess of Bovillon (which is suspected to be of the same party) had
withdrawn her self few days ago, from this City, to Sedan. The said Lord of
Thou, (being questioned again for the space of three hours, by the Lord of
Chauigni, Secretary of State) had declared among other things, that it was
resolved to kill the said Lord of Chauigny, which is a person mightily acting,
and confident to the service of his Majesty, under the said Cardinal, and that
it was he which had prevented that blow.

The King had confessed to the said Cardinal, that the Lords de Grand and of
Thou, had propounded unto him some Articles of Peace with the House of Austria.
This Peace was so plotted without any warning to his Eminency, persuading his
Majesty, that the said Cardinal for his own ends was repugnant to the
public tranquillity, and therefore that he was not to have any notice of this
negotiation: embraced by the highest Ladies, forged by the Jesuits, stirred up
by the violence of this primum mobile of Spain, which caused Madame de
Cheureuze to pass from Paris to Madrid, from Madrid to London, and from London
to Bruxels, and which had been choked or still-born, (in the point of the
execution.) By that supreme providence, the ordinary guide of his Majesty,
which had inspired him to perceive suddenly the danger of this precipice, and
to stick close, better and better to the good and male councels of the said
Cardinal.

By this Peace, the Queene-mother, the Princess, and other discontented
persons, exiled from France, were to be re-established; the houses of Savoy and
Lorraine reintegrated, and restaured, all that is of this side of Rhine
re-established; as it was before the wars. Catalonla, and other Countries and
places taken in Spain restored, the Cardinal of Richelieu and all his friends
destroyed, the Kings true confederates, (after the consummation or spoil of so
many men and money these many years ago, for their recovery) left desolate;
especially the house Palatine, and other Protestants, and France to the prey of
the house of Austria, the which only was to receive benefit, in this disorder,
by the vileness of his creatures, which under hope to rule therein, did
imagine to subvert the wise proceedings of his Majesty, and under him the
generous designs of that brave Cardinal, the repercussion of which blow was
to be fatal, and bringing ruin to England, notwithstanding whatsoever female
promises made to the Catholics there, and to their Adherents, blinded in this
plot, that by this Peace they should have their liberty, and that Kingdom
should be hereafter so absolute, as the liberty of the Subject has been there
great and happy until this time, under the privileges of the Parliament.

Now to show you clearly and by proof of fact, that the house of Austria
thought to destroy the said Cardinal, not for the public tranquillity, but
for the better advancing his own vast and prodigious designs; and that those
which directly or indirectly have any hand to it, do work out their own
confusion. I send you here annexed the Copy of a Letter written from Narbonne,
by a Minister of State, before the imprisonment of the said Lord le Grand and
others: In the which you shall perceive what has hindered this general Peace
to be desired.

From Narbonne the 22. of May. 1642.
THe last Avisoes that we have from Hamborough, make better and better known
unto us, how little sincere the proceedings are of the house of Austria,
touching the public tranquillity, whereunto she has no inclination. The King
of Hungaria has not only disclaimed or disallowed once the Lord Lutzall his
Ambassador, (which has signed the Tract of Preparatories, founded with full
power from himself) but he has employed him since, and the Earl of
Aversburg, which is also from his part in Hamborough, for to propound to the
Lord Salvius, Ambassador of Swede, one Tract of particular peace with the
Swedish, which does witness that he desires in no ways the peace of the
Commonwealth, but only to be free of some of his enemies, for to war still
against the others, and that he had not any good intention when he treated of
the Preparatories of Peace. Notwithstanding all this, his designs shall not
come to pass, seeing that the Crown of Sweden is not for to repugne to the
Confederacy made with France. By all this is to be discerned the wicked faith
of the King of Hungaria, and that nothing but strength of Arms is able to
bring him to Peace; In such sort that all the contribution of men and money
made unto him in these wars by Germany, is only one Sacrifice that she makes
to the advantage of the house of Austria, which shall bring forth nothing but
the ruin of the Empire.

FINIS.

