THE QUAKERS Cleared from being APOSTATES: OK THE Hammerer Defeated, And Proved
an Impostor.

Being an ANSWER to a Scurrilous Pamphlet, Falsely Entitled, William Penn and
the Quakers either Apostates or Impostors; Subscribed Trepidantium Malleus.

With a POSTSCRIPT, Containing some Reflections on a Pamphlet, Entitled, The
Spirit of Quakerism, and the Danger of their Divine Revelation, laid open.

By B. C.

LONDON: Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious Street.
1696.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
IF thou art moderate, Reading may do thee good, and inform thy Understanding;
and if thou will be just, thou ought to Read our Defense as well as Charge,
and seriously consider both: But if thou art rigid, perhaps thou may do with
Replies or Answers to thy Champion's Attempts, as Goliath did by David, Curse
it, and Despise it, but never give it an Impartial Perusal; the Common way our
Adversaries have taken with our Answers. The Design of this Preface, is chiefly
to let the Reader know what sort of Adversary I have to deal with; a Person,
that is said, by them that know him, to have been Mad through Pride and
Conceitedness, for which he has been under the Doctors Hands: So deeply had
Love-Melancholly seized him before his Marriage, that as he said himself, 'Twas
impossible for him to look upon a Woman, but he must of necessity Lust to be
Naught with her; but how it is with him since, I will not determine. He was one
while for exercising the Office of a Curate, in the Parish of Bursletown near
Bristol; but smelling so strong of Presbytery, he could not hold it there long:
So that his Residence has been mostly among the Presbyterians since, and how he
has Improved his Gift of Preaching among them, they can tell better than I:
But his Demands for Preaching have been so high (as I am informed) as to make
some of them uneasy under him. The Account I have had of his Conversation in
general, is such, that I dare say no moderate Presbyterian (as some such I know
there are) desires to hear more of it. That he has a little Learning, he need
not be told of it, for no Ape can be prouder of a Top-knot, than he is of it. A
little Rambling Wit he also has, but that, with a Spirit of Pride, has undone
him, since it has eat out all Charity, and filled up the vacancy with Prejudice
and Envy, even to such a degree that is not common. An instance of this thou
have in his Book, Page 71. where he says thus, Did they (the Quakers) know by
the Spirit of Discerning all the Priests and Jesuits that came among them,
whom they almost Adored? --. insinuating, That there were amongst the Quakers,
both Priests and Jesuits; which is as false and sly an Insinuation, as if it
came directly out of Scotland from the Reformers there, or with the last Ship
from Boston. But he goes on, Bedloe told my Brother how often Whitebread and
he, as well as other Papists, had been at Quakers Meetings; that Whitebread
Executed was a Speaker. Behold this Impostor in his Colors! Who that reads
this, and knew neither him that says it, nor the Quakers, but would believe
that Whitebread the Papist, Executed for the Popish Plot in Charles the
Second's Reign, was a Quaker, and a Preacher among them, which is so great a
Lie, that it is not possible for him to outdo it. But if you ask him, Whether
he meant so? And Charge it upon him, he may have a way (according to the
Cameronian Cant) to creep out, by saying, I said, that he and other Papists did
go to the Quakers Meetings (which perhaps may be true enough, as well as many
Presbyterians) and that he was a Speaker is true, for so he was, unl^ss Dumb;
but he did not say, that he was a Preacher amongst the Quakers. I must confess
when I saw that passage, I thought him too great an Impostor to be Honored
with a Confutation, (to use his own words) and had it not been for that his
Books is handed about, and sold, and extolled by many of that Fraternity in the
City of Bristol, I should have left him to Triumph in his Imaginary Victory, as
G. K. lately did in his; for such sort of Cattle are as ungovernable in their
Passions, when they dote on their own doings, as they are unsupportable, when
they see their own Folly, which rarely happens till all the World sees it first.

I have not replied to every particular Paragraph of his Book, since it is a
considerable part of it Tautological as well as Comical, not fit for a Sober
Man to take notice of; and another part is Collections out of the Snake in the
Grass, etc. which I have understood is Answering by another Hand, and to that I
refer; using as much brevity as possible. Another part of it is Directions to
his own Tribe; in which, though he has given me just occasion to detect him,
for his Vain and Foolish pretenses to Divinity; yet since it is to them, and not
me, I shall take little notice of it, (let them discover his Foolish Pretenses
if they please, and detect it too, or else the more will be their shame) but
pass it by in Silence; nor have I taken notice of all his Allegations against
the Quakers, since many of them are both Foolish, False, and Insignificant, and
too Apish for any Reply; but all his Capital Charges I think I have fairly
Confuted, and proved him the Impostor, by Clearing the Quakers of his Charge
against them.

THE QUAKERS Cleared From Being Apostates. etc.
AS Madmen are to be known by the places they are committed to for Cure, more
than by their Discourse at some times; since the maddest of Men may have their
lucid Intervals, and speak intelligible; so, had the Author of the Book
Entitled, William Penn and the Quakers either Impostors or Apostates, etc. but
put his Name to it, there had been little occasion for an Answer, especially in
those places where the Author is known. But since he conceals his Name, and
instead thereof Subscribes Trepidantium Malleus, and that being such an
Herculean Character, as if after this Club, Beetle or Hammer, the Quakers were
no more to hold up their Heads, I think my self obliged to Vindicate the
Quakers, and their Christian Principles, from the Abuses of this Hammerer,
whose Malicious Design seems to be no less than to set the Mob, (or his
Cameronian Brethren) to tear us (if it were in his Power) to pieces. But if any
should think, that I am obliged to Answer it Methodically, because an
Adversaries Book, I must take the liberty to tell them, that, as it is next to
an Impossibility to reduce a Mad-man's Work to method, so it cannot reasonably
be expected that I should exactly trace all his wild ranges, or be very
Methodical in a Reply to such; for to attempt it would show but little
Discretion: Yet nevertheless, lest any should object, That a Madman may
sometimes speak Truth, I shall therefore proceed to examine his Book.

To pass by his Humoursome Preface to his Humoursome Brethren, as he calls his
Readers, I found a long and tedious Rattle, as full of Noise, Scoffing and
Envy, as empty of Truth and common Sense, until I got to page 62. where he
expresses himself thus, Either what I have charged them with, is true or
false; if it be false, let me be accounted the greatest Defamer upon Earth, a
Persecutor, or what they please. If it be true, as I call Heaven and Earth to
record it is, and can justify before God and Man, I do say it upon mature
Consideration, and with great Composure of Mind, that Penn and the Quakers are
Impostors or Apostates. This I took to be the most sensible (since it was, if
you believe him, the result of mature Consideration, and great Composure of
Mind, which the rest wanted) and Rational though Malicious Sentence in all his
whole Book, and that led me more seriously to consider, Whether what he had
Charged the Quakers with, was or could be proved against them; since if it
could not, he so freely at one Cast Condemned himself for the greatest Defamer
upon Earth, a Persecutor, etc. Let us therefore now take a view of his Charges,
and see whether they be true or not.

Page 6. His first is against Lawrence Steel, for being lifted up with Pride,
and falling into the Condemnation of the Devil. A great Charge! But wherein was
his Pride, etc? The Reason he assigns for it was, his saying, Not that I am
perfect, would I were: As if to be sensible of Imperfection, and to wish to be
freed from it, were to be lifted up with Pride. But to this I shall say more
elsewhere.

Page 7. His next is by way of Query, Whether George Bishop of the City of
Bristol, a Scholar, was not a most deceitful Writer? Ans. He was not for any
thing that he has proved against him, but that he himself has cleared him from
being so, is most evident, from his acknowledging that G. B. has given a true
account out of these Authors, viz. Eusebius, Socrates, etc, and that Jerome, and
others, were against taking Oaths, as well as the Quakers; to prove which, was
one of the grand Designs of that Book. And that the Quakers were like them for
Suffering, he also grants: But so, says he, were the Protestants in Queen Mary
's Days. Now what is this, but to eclipse, if possible, the Glory of those
Martyrs? But he adds, So were the Papists in Queen Elizabeth 's Days, and the
Nonconformists in King Charles the Second's. That the Protestants suffered in
Queen Mary's Days, is true; and that they were Crowned with Martyrdom, is
equally true: As also it is, that the Quakers were the Objects of his Brethrens
hatred, who when they had the Power in their Hands, exercised so much Cruelty,
that it cost many of them their Lives; as also that they were exposed (after
their Joshua was turned out, and King Charles came in) to very great and
terrible Persecutions, as Imprisonments, etc. But that any of the
Nonconformists suffered at that time, was rare; I will not say none did, but it
was very few, for they found the same way for themselves, that the Pope found
for the Papists under Queen Elizabeth, which was, that though they did Conform
to the Church of England in outward appearance, yet they should keep their
Hearts fixed on him, and the Catholic Church, which was the exact practice of
our Conforming Nonconformists: Thus Papists, and such Noncons, agree upon one
and the same way to dissemble with God Almighty, and to Cheat the World, till
the first could furnish themselves with Tools to Blow up the King and
Parliament, and the latter to Murder their King; Remember Ryehouse. But that he
is so angry with Geo. Bishop, I do not wonder, seeing he has so effectually
laid open the Horrid Barbarity and Murder committed by those beloved Brethren
in New England, upon the Persons of many of the People called Quakers.

Page 9. He Queries, Whether the Quakers leaving their places of public
Worship, for fear of Confiscation of Goods, Imprisonment, etc. were not either
Notorious Impostors or Apostates? Asserting in their Printed Books, that it was
unlawful to leave their public Worship for any Persecution whatsoever; adding,
page 10. That they lived in the sinful omission of open Duties for many Years.
I Answer, Such Books, and the Quakers practice in the late Suffering Times,
abundantly proved their Unanimity; and whoever is Ignorant of it, must have
lived farther off than Moorfields Bedlam, and Box, places for Cure of Mad
People.
or Box either, unless Infants, Deaf, Dumb, or Idiots: But perhaps he expects
that the Quakers, to purge themselves from this Calumny that he has so
unreasonably formed against them, should produce a Catalogue of their
Sufferings; but that cannot be done without gratifying him and his Party, by
reflecting on the Instruments of that Work, that he may have the Satisfaction
to see them upon all Occasions stand Indicted: Against whom, as well as the
Quakers, he already has not omitted to throw some of his envious Darts, but in
this he is not like to be gratified, nor is it in any wise needful, seeing
their Sufferings are too fresh in the Memories of most staid Persons, to
require the Trouble to enumerate them, or any proofs to persuade their Truth:
And besides, that to recount but a small proportion of what they underwent for
their constant maintaining, and openly owning, in the hottest Rage of
Persecution, what they were called to profess, (far contrary to what he would
falsely suggest) would swell this piece too much beyond its designed Bulk. Or
another Reason that might induce him to urge so unjust a Charge against us,
might be a desire to alleviate that just one brought against themselves, of
being Deserters of their Cause in Times of Danger, by bringing the Quakers (a
People well known to exceed others for stedfastness in such Cases) upon the
level for Cowardice with himself and Brethren, and so render them as fearful,
and from thence as guilty as they, whose Principles and avowed Practice has
been to shift from Corner to Corner in Woods, remote and obscure Places, or any
where, to save their Bacon, supposing themselves not to be called to Suffer,
though to Believe; so that this Charge of omitting open Duties for many Years
together, he seems to have aimed at us, but directly hits at the Heads of his
own Fraternity, for it touches not the Quakers, notwithstanding his unheard of
Impudence in bringing it against them, and that for several Years too, though
when and what Years, there is not one word, nor in what particular place
neither, but generally all England over, it seems, which is so very false, that
almost every Parish where any Quakers lived, can give him the Lie.

And for Bristol, the place he so often with Indignation mentions, it is
Notorious, that when the Men and Women that constituted the Meetings, were
taken up, and committed to Prison, the very Children, by their constant
Attendance at the usual times and place, kept up the Meeting, till they also
were sent away with the rest, until the very Floors of the Prison, Tables and
Hammocks were so full, that it was scarce possible to crowd in any more, unless
they should stow them one upon another: At which time there was scarce a
Presbyterian to be found, that had Religion enough to think it worth Suffering
for: Nay, so far were they from it, that they were frighted out of the very
Profession, into a Conformity to that, which they esteemed little better, some
time before, than Idolatry; and in that Converted State they continued till K.
James his Toleration awakened them; for which Favor, by their Addresses to
him, they Mortgaged their Lives and Fortunes. Nay, so steadfast were the Quakers
to what they professed, that when by the great Heat and Fury that possessed some
Men, (who since, I hope, have seen the Evil of such violent practices) there
were Distresses of great Value made on them, and had their Meeting House rifled
and shut up against them, they continued their usual gathering at the Door, and
from thence were haled away to Prison, till Bridewell, as well as Newgate, was
filled with them, and yet even then they desisted not from their accustomed
Service for the Worship of God, though by the violence of the Keepers, they
often suffered great Abuses for it. Let him therefore prove that, instead of
omitting public Duties for many Years together, there was Omission in any part
of England, when their Persons were at liberty from Prison to meet; and till he
does this, he must stand Charged as an Impostor himself, and by his own free
Election assumes the Titles of the Greatest Defamer upon Earth, a Persecutor.
or what we please. But if he should find two or three, or a few Particular
Persons, prof^ssing themselves Quakers, did act such a part of Christian
Policy, as his Brethren did both practice and advise to, they therein declined
from their Principles, and from the Quakers general Practice: But this neither
affects the Quakers in general, nor their Principles at all; but thanks be to
God, there is no one thing they could have more belied us in: For as the Lord
by his Grace called us to believe, so also were we enabled to suffer for his
Name and the Gospels sake, and of our Faithfulness herein, we have (by the
Goodness of God who has helped us) given sufficient demonstration.

But the Devil commonly destroys his own Work at last, by some Folly or Lies,
he plunges his Vassals into, as is evident in the envious but false
Information, this Man gives of Lawrence Steel's deserting the Public Worship
of God, after his Releasment from Prison, which though true in a Sense, yet is
notoriously false and wicked in him, for this reason, viz. That though he never
frequented Meetings after; yet it was not either through Fear or Policy, but
only because of his great Indisposition and Inability of Body (through a
Complication of Diseases) that attended him some time before his Releasment out
of Prison, and afterward continued and increased upon him to the terminating
of his Days: So that it was not want of Will, but Ability of Body, that kept
him from it. And as for E. S. who he says, With one more, were the only
Persons that held out, is as false as the former, E. S. not being resident in
Bristol (but was several Miles from it) nor in any wise belonging to it, but
rather a Stranger in that respect. And that none but she and D. D. kept to the
Principles of the Quakers, is as true as his alleging, that on private
Conference with R. V. concerning the deviation of the Quakers from their
Principles, R. V. should tell him, That they had now changed their Minds, which
R. V. solemnly declares is a great Lie; for as he had no reason to say so,
neither does he remember he had Discourse with him on that Subject.

But if any were so weak and feeble, as not to be able to stand Suffering for
the Faith of Christ, it may be partly owing to the Intimacy they had with
Neighbors of his Persuasion, whose wheedles went a great way with too many:
For when the Fury of the Persecutors was vented upon the Quakers, (the others
being fled) it was common with them to come creeping, Ah Neighbors, the Lord
comfort you, and keep you; we pray for you that you may stand, but we are not
able, we hope we shall all be brought nearer together by these Storms; we have
all but one Head, our Ministers have left us, etc. Thus in Times of Suffering
there was great show of Love and Friendship, as likewise upon Occasion of
Elections for Parliaments, for then they use to allege, we have but one
Interest, and therefore ought to join together against the common En^my: But
when there is no turn to serve, nor fear of Persecution, but the Sun of
Toleration ^hines out, all those creeping Insects that lay lurking in Woods and
hollow Trees, got Wings, and became Hornets, if not flying Scorpions, to the
Annoyance of such that live near them. Thus was the Land of Vprightness, (New
England as C. M. called it) Infected with those Vermin, till from Whipping, and
cutting off of Ears, they came to Hanging, and yet they are the Lord's Dear and
Precious Ones of the Election of Grace forsooth.

But to proceed, page 12. he tells us a Story of Lawrence Steel, that for
refusing to Swear, he was committed to Prison, and after that never went to
Meeting more; and why pray? But because he Died. Is not that a great Argument
of his and the Quakers Apostasy? R. V. he says, did the like; what like? Never
went more till his Death, or never since, else it could not be like Lawrence
Steel; but that this is notoriously false, is evident, R. V. being still Alive,
and since that time has been at 500 Meetings at least, and frequented them at
that time, and suffered Imprisonment for it, being even then under a
Persecution on the Statute of the 35th of Queen Elizabeth, for not coming to
Church; and being by Habeas Corpus, and Writ of Error, removed from Newgate in
Bristol to London, at the King's Bench-Bar, he was legally Discharged, but
three Days after his return Home, his Father dying, and by his Will, the place
(where he Deceased, at Chew in Somersetshire) falling to R. V. he has ever
since had his Residence there, where it is well known, he has no more deserted
his Duty in frequenting Meetings, than he did while he lived at Bristol.

But all the rest, he says, did the like, except E. S. and D. D. and that they
wrote a Book, Damning in the Name of the Lord the rest of the Quakers, for
leaving their Testimonies. That this is false in Fact, the Book it self will
manifest, to which I refer. But all the rest, save these two, declined meeting,
from the time that Lawrence Steel was put out of Prison. If this be true, then
the Beetle has not belied them; but that he has, almost every intelligent
Person in the City of Bristol at that time knows, and can give him the Lie:
This is the Man that says, If what I have Charged them with be not true, let me
be accounted the greatest Defamer upon Earth, etc. which according to his own
Imprecation, he has drawn upon his Head.

Page 13. He insinuates as if G. W. and W. P. were as guilty of flying in Time
of Persecution, as the Presbyterians; and how they would set some to watch the
Informers, that so they might warily get a private Meeting: But this being all
of the same stamp with the rest, I return it upon him for a Notorious Scandal,
as helping with the rest more deeply to affix his former Titles, Defamer, etc.

His alleging the Quakers left Ministers because of their Learning, and yet
followed Penn because of his, shows his Ignorance, as well as Baseness, being
false in every part of it: For the Quakers never left any Ministers for their
Learning, but because they were Unlearned, viz. in the School of Christ: Nor
did the Quakers follow W. P. or any else, for their Humane Learning, but have
Reason to esteem them for their Integrity and Sincerity both toward God and
Man. And as to his saying, that a Friend of his told him that Mead should say,
That Penn 's Party were all Factors for Popery, and that he would spend his
Blood in the Service of the King. I take this to be like the rest of his
Stories; for in Matters of Fact, he generally takes Care, if he mentions any
Author, to mention such as are Dead, or else not Name them, and so are
incapable of detecting his Lies.

But he has, I perceive, a great deal of Charity for William Mead, as well as
Loyalty for the King; but I wish the latter a better Subject, as I do the first
a better Voucher. By the way, let him know, That as we have no Sect-makers
amongst us, so we are not for making of Parties, either for one or the other.

Page 15, and 16. He makes himself very Merry, about William Penn's being
little of a Scholar, as Somebody told him; but yet allows him to have some
Learning, Barclay more, and Fisher most of all; and then adds, And that makes
my Question deserve an Answer. But as he, (though by Malicious Reflections)
seems inclinable enough to assign that as no Reason for our following W. P. so
we can easily clear our selves from adhering to either R. Barclay, or S.
Fisher, or any other, upon the account of any Acquired Learning; though when
those Additional Helps of Knowledge are sanctified, we never reject them; but
till then, in Religion, we always accounted it useless and vain.

His Charge, Page 18. Of the Quakers bowing to Man in their common Practice,
after they have so often decried it, is altogether unjust; for though there may
be some professing themselves Quakers, that Humor this Practice too much: Yet
as it is neither allowed of at all, nor practiced in general, it is unfair in
him to bring it against the whole People, seeing those whose Natural and
Youthful Vanity incline them too much to imitate those idle Customs, pass not
unreprov'd for it, if under our Profession, and known. But his pretending that
the Quakers say, Scripture Examples have undone the World, is a most Abominable
Slander, and as such I return it upon him.

He asks, Page 19. Whether it were not unheard of Dissimulation, to tell O. C.
Thus says the Lord, I have put the Sword into thy Hand to destroy Idolaters,
the Stewarts and Malignants; and after all to tell King Charles the Second,
that all this was Rebellion, and that they gave their Testimony against the
Murder of his Father. I observe this is but one of his Questions; and until he
is positive that the Quakers did so say, I think not fit to gratify him with
an Answer; nor then neither, unless he brings better proof, than either his
empty say-so, or borrowed Reflections from the Snake in the Grass; since it
refers to Crisp and Bugg, etc. all which have been Answered, and sufficiently
Confuted many times over; but bray a Fool in a Mortar, he will be never the
wiser; nor will those Apostates study to be quiet, notwithstanding their Folly
has so often been Exposed and Corrected, and their Lies and Forgeries returned
upon them; but these are the Tools for our Beetle, and the Snake in the Grass.
Yet I must allow the preference where it is due, and therefore fix it upon the
Author of the Snake in the Grass, for more Wit (I will not say more Honesty)
than to avouch as this Hammerer does, p. 62. all he says against the Quakers,
with such an Imprecation; for as he without doubt knew it to be a Bundle of
Lies, etc. so for his Diversion he thought he might make bold to sport himself
with the Quakers, as other Comical Blades use to do. But, if it be his hard
Fate too, to have his Zipporah, which by Anonymus's telling is too common to
Men of his Coat, I am induced to believe he might have another design in it,
viz. to get some supplies for his Pocket unknown to her, and out of her reach,
to make Merry with among his Companions.

Page 21. He tells a Story of a Quaker in Cullompton, that Prophesied from the
Lord, that all the Women with Child this Year should Die in Childbirth. Now
why this should be a Quaker any more than a Presbyterian, I cannot imagine,
unless it was for want of a Black Coat, and little Band; for the same Creature
in his Ramble, was taken up at Bristol, and Examined before the Magistrates,
and amongst other things, demanded, Whether he pretended himself a Quaker, or
not? To which he replied negatively, adding, That the Quakers were the worst
Enemies he had; or to that effect.

In the same page he says, These Men condemned Humane Literature, and assert
Inspiration. Answ. The last is true, but the first is false, for we condemn it
not, when rightly used; but the abuse of it in Matters of Religion, when by
that alone the Scriptures must be Expounded, and esteem it absolutely
necessary, the Christian Faith must be understood thereby. What he affirms of
the Quakers saying, That if a Man speak through a Cane, it is not the Voice of
the Cane, though it pass thro^^h it, but the Voice of the Man; so it is not the
Voice of the Quaker, but the Voice of the Spirit, is upon the same Authority
with the rest of his Idle Stories, and therefore deserves the less notice. Yet
to detect him in his Folly and Falsehood, and the better to instruct others, I
shall briefly express our Sense therein, which is, That in both Prayer and
Thanksgiving, as well as Preaching, they are partly Passive, and partly Active:
Passive, in that they submit to the Divine Power and Spirit of God, to impress
upon their Spirits a grateful Sense of the Favors received, for which their
Hearts are filled with Thankfulness: And Active, in expressing such Thoughts as
the Spirit shall suggest to their Understanding, as suitable to the present
occasion. Thus for Thanksgiving, and for Prayer, it is the same thing; for
since it is the Spirit that quickens, how can a Man pray with a true Sense
without it? For till that quickens him to it, his Prayer is dead, dry, and
formal, which God will not hear; since it is his own, and not another Spirit, he
will hear. And in Preaching the Gospel, it is the Spirit that opens the
Understanding, and makes it fruitful in the Knowledge of God, and incites Men,
so qualified, to impress the same Image on others, which cannot be without
being Active as well as Passive.

A^^^r his Story of the Woman 22 Years since, that pretended to Fast Forty
Days, and Forty Nights, with the other, that pretended to fetch the Dead Child
to Life, with many more such, as in page 22, etc. I say, if there were ever any
such Persons, that so said, or so did, he ought in Justice to have told us
their Names, and where they lived, that we might know, as well as he, whether
they were Quakers or not; for wherever he can find any thing that is
Ridiculous, and a flying Story, he is very liberal to bestow it upon them, as
he did that of Cullompton. But to do him Justice, he has been kind to us in not
pretending himself a Quaker; for if he had, we should never have been able to
have defended him from Folly, Madness and Confusion, any more than we can such
as he tells of, if any such there were; though for my part, I see not the least
show of Truth in it.

What he says of Dr. Griffin, and Honest Mr. Blinman, as he calls him,
concerning Lawrence Steel, he seems to be safe in; seeing they are by Death put
out of a Capacity to detect him: but that he has Notoriously Abused and Belied
L. S. is most certain.

Page 16, 17, 18. He gives us undeniable Proofs of his Abhorrence of
Perfection, (unless it be of perfect Nonsense) for he says, p. 16. I wrote W.
P. I would not trouble him with one Question more. At first I thought (...) an
Error of the Press, considering what follows, but finding no Errata, I shall
leave him to Correct in his next. But in

Page 17, 18. He tells how he sent W. P. another Letter, and that he had more
Questions to propose to him; Ay, and to a public Disputation too: See the
Confusion of the Man; Are not his Questions like Hydra's. Poor Conceited Man!
that he should think W. P. had so little Sense, as to employ his Time and Parts
to Dispute him, or Regard his Nonsensical Clamours.

Almost every Page affords such a Rhapsody of Nonsense and Folly, that to
follow him would require a great deal more Pains than his work deserves.

Page 23, 24, 25, 26. is taken up about William Penn, his Letter to him, and W.
P's Answer, with his Reflection upon it, That Penn was a Roman Catholic; That
he was not able to Answer him; That he Saluted King James, commended his
Integrity; how he writ a Book, in which he said, There was not Papists enough
in London to make Coal-fires. But to what purpose is all this, unless to render
W. P. odious to the People? If he did Salute King James, did not his Brethren
do the same? And Address to him too, in such terms as I will not mention now?
Far differing from what W. P. did. But that W. P. endeavored, with the
Intere^^ ^e had, what he could, to prevent K. James from taking such Methods as
would undo him, and the Nation too, is better understood by many Persons of
Quality, than by this Hammerer. As to his Story of C. Niccolet's, the Licenser,
being turned out by W. P 's means, for Licensing a Book against Popery; if this
had come directly from C. N. there might have been some more show of Truth in
it, but when it is only Anonymus's Friend that will give it upon Oath, that C.
N. told him so, it is justly to be suspected; for you may know the Man by his
Company; and I shall only ask him this, Whether it was at Box or Bedlam his
Friend told him this Story? For W. P. affirms it is a great untruth in every
part of it.

Page 27. Hequeries, What the Quakers are? And then Answers himself, They are
the Sink of all Heresies; some are Socinians, and some are Sabellians, and what
next, but to revive the Writ, De Comburendo Haeretico? And then would not Old
England grow New, and Religion flourish, and the Elect rejoice? Perhaps he has
not forgot who it was, that Writ from New England to justify their Hanging the
Quakers there, as being according to the Laws of God, as well as Men: And also
who that Zealous Person was, that, because by one Vote another Quaker was saved
from Hanging, Preached against the Man, whose Charitable Suffrage had turned
the Balance, in these Terms, Because thou have let (...) the Accursed Man, thy
Life shall go for (...) But the Sink of Heresy, I find to be in this, their
denying the Divinity of Christ and the Trinity, etc. to which I shall reply in
its place, and detect his Falsehoods therein.

Upon all Occasions he is bringing in his Ridiculing Stories and Reflections,
in Derision of the Quakers, most of which are either false or foolish; and
among the rest he brings this, page 30. What says the Scripture, said one to
me, Every Tub must stand upon his own bottom: Now whether this is true or not,
I will not Dispute; for it is possible such a mistake might be committed, by
taking a common Maxim for Scripture, but what is this to Religion? I can tell
him of as great a mistake in one of his Fraternity, (whom I could name if I
pleased) that told me, That Christ foretold Deceivers should come in the last
Days; and that he said, By this shall they be known, they shall come fore, in
Gray Clothing, [but] your Friends the Quakers come in Gray Clothing, and
therefore, etc. Is not this altogether as gross as the former, or worse? And
yet for such lapses as these in particular Persons, to Condemn a Religion in
general, would argue but too little Christian Charity.

From p. 28, to 48. there is little, besides a Collection of such Idle Stories
is these, that he has picked up here and there to asperse others with* (...)
well as the Quakers: Nay, what shall one say of him that will foul his own
Nest? (for which see page 36, 37.) But that he should go about to Ape and
Ridicule the Churchmen and Quakers way of Preaching; and know that there is
such a Book as the Scotch Presbyterian Eloquence in the World, shows his
Impudence, and is Astonishing, if the Man were not known. However, I would
advise him to spend some time on that Book, and then let him tell me, Whether
it would not be more becoming him, to endeavor to clear his own Fraternity
from what they stand there charged with; and if he cannot, to endeavor their
Reformation, before he goes about to Ridicule others, with what his Imagination
suggests to him they are guilty of, though upon enquiry nothing more false.

What he says of J. M. is true, for he did Apostatize, and yielded to the
Temptation of the Devil; but I hope that he will not say much of such a Sin as
that, nor throw many Stones at him about it, for his own sake, as well as for
his Brothers, who (when the King's Guards came to apprehend him) was safe in
Bed, (with I need not say who) the Story is well known, and he may not be
ignorant of it, I suppose.

He says, p. 42. Mr. Speed and Mr. Vickris, that are Men of Parts, never speak
among them. Supposing it true, is every Man of Parts to be a Preacher? To use
his own Phrase, What a Dunce is he? Or what Dunces does he make of his Hearers
(if he has any) to infer so?

The next thing I take notice of, is, his Recommendation of the Snake in the
Grass, and Faldo's Quakerism no Christianity, who, he says, has done his work
Page 48.
like a Workman; such a Work, such a Judge, and both rare in their own Eyes,
the Book it self, with the Answer to it by W. P. sufficiently shows the
Excellency of the Workman, to which I refer, and go on to take notice of the
Whimsical Imaginations, the Man by his Envy has run himself into, till he
thinks the Quakers are the giddiest Generation that ever was Page 48.
upon Earth; like Children, that fancy Trees and Hedges run round, when they
have made themselves giddy by doing so.

After he has sported himself with his Welsh Letter, which he would persuade
the World is a pattern of the Quakers way of talking, (than which I affi^m
nothing can be more false) and is recovered out of his Apish and Comical Fits,
(by which he shows the Design of his Book to be rather that of Farce, to
occasion Laughter, by all the Ridiculous Nonsense that his wild Head could
gather up, or Malice invent, than to impress any Notions of Religion on the
Minds of his Readers) he at length begins to be more in earnest, though very
sour with it; pray hear him: I am not more sure of any one thing in Religion
than this, says he, that no Perfectionist, (scoffingly calling the Quakers so)
can be saved; which is of the same piece with page 40. where he says, I am not
more assured that Turkism is not of God, than that Quakerism is not, or than
that I have proved it in this Book. Answ. That he has no Charity for the
Quakers I do not doubt; and if it were in his Power to exclude them from
Salvation hereafter, and treat them as Turks here, there is no question to be
made but he would do it: But since his Knowledge of our Exclusion is upon the
same foot, with his Certainty in Religion, there is little reason to be in much
Pain about it, since I am very well assured, that he is certain but of very few
Points in Religion, if any, (for he will not pretend to Infallibility I hope)
and how he has proved it in his Book, That Quakerism is no more of God than
Turkism, I suppose every Reader of his Book is able to judge, and there I leave
it.

Page 42. He says, That G. F. would call Preachers Conjurers, which might be
true enough of some of them, and if he had called them Witches too, he might
not have wronged them, if C. Mather See C. M. of W --
be to be believed. But that G. F. used that as a common term for their
Preachers, he will not easily prove. But, says he, to do him right, he was
none: I am glad of that, but it is more than he dare venture to say of all them
that pretend to the Election of Grace; since it is so apparent that they have
Impeached and Prosecuted one another, and Executed some for such Crimes, or at
least for being suspected, though many think the greatest Witches are still
behind; others, that it is a Judgment for their former unrepented Murtherous
Practice, upon those Innocent Servants of Christ, whom they have not stickt to
asperse with the Infamous Character of Witches. But he adds, G. Whitehead that
has writ so much, is a Notorious Dunce, as proved before. I do not wonder at
his inserting his Welsh Letter; for if he had not writ much after that Copy,
how could he have been guilty of so many Absurdities, Inconerences and Lies? He
ought to have fixed it in the Front of his Book for a Sign, and Specimen in
gross of his whole Work (if it may be called so) and to have told his Readers
in plain terms, This is the part that I am acting; if you expect any solid
Sense or Reason, or any thing else, but much such as this; pray be pleased to
enquire elsewhere, for I am not furnished; it is true, I have a little in page
62. For if this were not the Poor Man's Case, can any one think he would have
here said, G. W. is a Notorious Dunce, as before proved, when but in two places
he mentions his Name, and then at the Head of Two Lies; the first is page 13.
where he insinuates, That G. W. fled in time of Persecution, notwithstanding
his Mocking of others. Now what shall one say to such a one, who whilst he is
Ridiculing the poor Welshmen (many of which would not be guilty of such
Nonsense and Folly as he abounds with) runs into the same Practice, as one of
them did, when he said Creen and Crey is all one? If a Man in his Senses affirm
that Green and Gray are two distinct Colors, this bawling unintelligible
Obstinate will never be persuaded to it, but must have his word for it, like
another ipse dixit, pass for Gospel Verity; for to pursue urging it, may bring
him into a Condition that will require half a Dozen Men to rule him: So though
flying and standing may not be all one with our Hammerer, yet standing is
flying; or else G. W. can never be proved guilty of flying. This is too
Notorious in the City of London, as well as other places, to be denied: And for
W. Penn's part, if I should say any thing to clear him, it would be as useless,
as his Charge is false, and will fail of Credit, seeing all that know there is
such a place as the Tower of London, and a Newgate, and concerned themselves at
that time with the enquiry into such Matters, may sufficiently know what a
share he had (though unjustly) in both* for no other Cause than for being a
Quaker; so that this is a Lie in Fact, that he will never be able to prove, no
more than he has done it here.

The next place where he mentions G. W. (and if any where it must be here) is
in page 20. where he says, he heard G. W. Expound Prove. 9. 1, 4. which is,
Wisdom has built her a house -- she cries, Whosoever is simple, let him turn in
hither, and for him that is void of understanding. Thus a simple thing, said
he, is a thing unmixt, pure, so he that is holy, has no Sin. Now to know who
is the Dunce, and Liar too, it will be sit to enquire whether or no G. W. did
thus Expound the Text, which seems to me to be this Hammerers part to prove, as
well as say, for G. W. denies it as a gross Perversion; and they that know G.
W. far better than this envious Scribler, knows he understands the Scriptures
better than thus to abuse them; and for my part, seeing that in none of his
Writings, any such incongruity is to be found, nor in all his Preaching that
ever I heard, which I have often done both in Bristol, and London, and
elsewhere, never was there any such incoherent Expression used by him: And for
his Knowledge of Scriptures, and Soundness of Doctrine, he is too far out of
the reach of any Impeachment, by such a vain trifling Adversary, to be wounded
by his Malice. -- And now, after so many Falsehoods and Forgeries detected in
him, with what Face can he think of his 62 page? I need but quote it, it is his
Doom. Oh horrid hardness and presumption, for a Man to call Heaven and Earth to
Record to the Truth of what he knows to be apparently False!

In his next Page he says, Know, Reader, says he, I have made no use of Books,
nor Men, to help me in this Work, and yet from p. 64, to 73. is little else but
Quotations out of the Snake in the Grass, and Pennyman's Papers, according to
his own Confession: And from page 63. backwards, no less than between 50 and 60
times has he told his Reader, what such an one told him, or what he has heard
or read concerning the Quakers, and yet after all this, has the Impudence to
tell his Reader, That he has made no use of Books nor Men in this Work. What
can be said of so grand an Impostor? Oh height of Impudence and Falsehood! This
is the Man that undertakes to prove W. P. and the Quakers either Impostors or
Apostates; and if he do not do it, desires that he may be accounted the
greatest Defamer upon Earth, a Persecutor, or what we please; which now,
according to his Imprecation, is fastened upon him. And though Apostasy I am apt
to think he was never guilty of, because it is reasonable to believe he was
scarcely ever good for any thing; yet Impostor is his Character, and that in
the highest degree, and with that I would leave him, were it not for a few
passages more, that I will proceed to take notice of.

Page 73. He queries thus, Are not the Quakers more Sober than once they were?
He Answers himself in the Affirmative: Well, since we are amending, it is to be
hoped we shall be mended at last; I am glad we are growing better and better:
But for his part, if he be sure of any one thing in Religion, notwithstanding
our mending, Page 60.
we shall never be saved, no, not one of us: Such Charity is suitable Page 71.
to his Principles. He queries again, Are they not temperate above others? To
this he Answers, Let every Man speak as they find; but a Quakers Wife next Door
to him at Bristol, confessed to him, that her Husband was a Notorious Secret
Drunkard. I will not descant on his Notorious Secrecy, since he pretends to be
a Scholar; but when he is in his Tantarums, I suppose, public and private,
open and secret are all one with him. But since he allows every Man to speak as
he finds; and seeing that is the easiest way to make up the Account, will even
leave it there: But then he should not speak contrary to what he had found,
which I dare say he did, not only in this, but in the Case of the
Strong-water-sellers; or else to be sure his Charity would not conceal their
Names, if publishing them might Reproach the Quakers; for it is apparent he
neither sticks at Persons nor Things, that he thinks will discredit the
Quakers: Nay, if he cannot find matter to asperse them with here, he will fetch
it from the other side of the Globe, but he will have it: Besides, any Man shall
straight have the Title of a Quaker thrown on him, that acts Ridiculously, if
from thence there may any Scandal arise, or it can yield any thing to Reproach
the Quakers, as witness the Cullompton Prophet mentioned before. But wet and
dry Quakers are a distinction, says he, in other places besides Bristol. And
what of all that? Suppose there were such, that use his, or his Brethrens, or
others Company, till they demerit the Name of a Wet Quaker, because they
frequent the Quakers Meetings: Does that Entitle the Quakers to their
Misbehaviour? Let him at this Day, or Days past, prove, that any Person so
Chargeable, was not dealt with, and followed by the Quakers, till they had
disowned him: Nay, though it were such an one, as after many Years, like the
Sow turned to the Mire again. This is too Notorious in Bristol to be denied,
and it would be well for his Brethren, if they did as the Quakers do in such
Cases, the Reproaches that are cast on Religion, would in a great degree be
taken off.

But besides, I admire he should bring this as a Charge against the Quakers;
for certainly in my Judgment, it makes more for their Credit than the contrary;
for that none of them can deviate from the strictness of the Rules they
profess, but they shall have presently upon it, a distinguishing Character fixed
on them, is a great Argument of the Peoples Temperance and Regularity in
general, above other Professors, among whom no such thing is to be found;
though the worst of these Quakers are seldom so Bad as Thousands of others of
most Professions, that nevertheless are suffered to pass in the throng.

But he queries again, Are they not very humble Persons? His Answer is
Negatively first, and then Positively, That they are more Proud of their
Plainness than others of their Bravery. All to me is, how Anonymous came to
know this, since Inspiration with him is Heresy? And to be sure, the Quakers
never told him so: But this is like the rest, a Birth of his own Fancy; and as
such, I return it to him. He queries once more, and that is, Whether the
Quakers are not more just in their Dealings than others, and careful not to
tell a Lie? To this he assents, though very unwillingly; but to make it as bad
as he can, (for this you know is but dry Morality: he yoaks us up with the
Turks in it: While he that is of the Election of Grace, is pleading for Lying
as no unlawful thing. -- But to prove G. B. a Liar, he quotes New England
Judged, for saying, The Persecutors of the Quakers there, whipped them so, that
the Flesh came off with the Whips. All his Argument to prove this a Lie, was
because Blinman professed he never heard of it; which whether he did or not, is
no ways material, since it is so Notoriously known to be true; and therefore
he, and not G. B. is the Liar. Yet I wonder how he came to add, That some of
them were put to Death too. But that his Brethren, that thought Hanging, and
cutting off Ears, too good for the Quakers, should pretend Ignorance of their
being so Whipped, when one had his Flesh beaten to a Jelly, and many others Whipped
for Miles together at the Cartstail, for no other Reason, but because they were
Quakers, is a strange degree of Impudence.

But before I go farther, I must step back to page 51. where he says these
words, And now William Penn, I once more declare to thee, and all the World,
that I am ready to meet with thee at an open Disputation, when thou will, to
Debate the Question before us, or the main Question, which is, Whether your
flying in time of Persecution, does not prove you either Notorious Impostors or
Apostates? I have been the more large in this Quotation, that his Shapes may be
seen the better; for how great a Fool was he to pawn his Soul with such an
Imprecation, as in page 62. for the Truth of what he Charges the Quakers with;
and yet in page 51. of the same Book, which he Intitles, William Penn and the
Quakers proved Impostors or Apostates; I say, in page 51. of his Book,
Challenges W. P. to an open Disputation to Debate the Question? Which implies
it is not yet Debated. And then how Monstrous is his Folly to pretend he has
proved it, and afterward Challenge him to Debate it? But he may soon Debate
and Determine too, according to the New Fashion G. K. lately showed him, (viz.
by himself) of whose Recovery with J. Pennyman's, he seems not a little Proud:
But by that time they have proved both, or either, as long as the Quakers have
done, they will find another Character for them, than Honest and Ingenious.

Where he says, That some are for countenancing a Lie now and then for Friends,
it is still of a piece with the rest; and what he is so far from being able to
prove, that I believe he scarce ever thought of it: But it is so much out of
Fashion now with him, to give us any thing of Truth in his Charges, that it is
scarce reasonable to expect it, or any sort of Proof for what he says: For,
more than wild Rambles and Forgeries, he is resolved we shall have but little.
But in that Address of his to William King of Pensylvania, page 83. where he
begins, May it please your Majesty, etc. he appears so very much himself, that
he leaves little room for wonder at any thing he has writ besides. Nor is it
any more strange, that a Man possessed with what he has been too deeply
Tinctured with, should Create Kings and Princes of other Men at pleasure; than
it is for them to fancy themselves so, and enjoy all the Imaginary Bliss too,
that such a state can afford, as he seems to do, of his fancied Victory over
the Quakers, something of which he expresses in his next words; where, Now
Friends, says he, how will you Answer me? I am sure no Sober nor Rational
Answer can be given. It Is pity there should, for sure it would be lost, if he
means to such Harangues as this, where his wild Fancy can start up Kings at
such a rate. What thanks he may have from Authority for this, I will not
conclude, but this is our Man of mature Consideration, and great Composure of
Mind. But one thing in his past Harangue, we must take notice of, which is, his
advising King William to keep his Subjects from Drunkenness, Whoredom, etc.
lest the Prophecy of Jo. Owen should be verified against Friends. Strange
Contradictions! Revelation and Divine Inspiration is ceased, yet Jo. Owen is a
Prophet, but then it is against the Quakers, and there it is Orthodox, though in
a Quaker rank Heresy.

But now he is for laying down his Hammer a while, and sets up for Doctor, to
give Directions for the Cure of Souls infected with the Spirit or Quakerism,
though I confess, I doubt his Skill in this, and his hammering are much alike;
for whatever his Doctrine be, his Confusion is the same throughout: But there
we will leave him, till he has wearied out himself, or his Patient, with his
Directions, only taking notice of the Squint Blows he aims at us as he goes
along.

The first is p. 97, 98. of our not only despising, but formerly rejecting the
Scriptures: In Answer to which, I must tell him, It Is like the rest, absolutely
false, for we neither now think, nor ever thought them other than Admirable
Writings, given by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and look upon it as a
great and wonderful Providence of God, that it was his Divine Pleasure to have
them preserved to this Day, for the Comfort and Instruction of his true
Worshippers, and to bear Witness to the Truth of what we profess, to the Glory
and Honor of his Immortal Name.

Again, p. 109. He says, Paul preached (...) Crucified Christ; but when do any
Quakers hear any thing of this in their Christless Assemblies? What a Malicious
Question is here? We own Christ, the Crucified Christ; we own the Scriptures
that bear Witness of this Christ; we Preach him as that Precious Sacrifice for
the Sins of the World, who opened the Way to our Eternal Salvation. With what
Face then, seeing he pretends to have frequented our Meetings, can he ask a
Question so full of Malice, and empty of Reason? But there are many others, as
well as Quakers, that sufficiently know the Falsehood of what he would here
suggest, as well as of that in his preceding Leaf, concerning Adam, Paradise,
the Fall, etc.

To prove the Lawfulness of playing at Bowls and Ninepins, (I will not say
Cards and Dice) he quotes Zach. 8. 5. and 2 Timothy 1. 5. When I call to mind the
unfeigned Faith, which first dwelt in thy Grandmother Lois, and thy Mother
Eunice; and I am persuaded in thee also. Behold our Expounder of Scripture, who
is so ready to find fault with others; is not this as excellently well done, as
another of his Fraternity did, who said, The best of God's Saints have a little
Tincture of Atheism, for which see Psalm. 14. 1. The Fool has said in his
Heart, etc?

Page 119. He says, The Quakers (some practically, and some in word) say, they
have no Sins to confess, nor beg pardon for; they need no Scripture, nor
Ordinance, nor Outward Christ to save them. All which is too Notorious an Abuse
in the whole, and in every part, to deserve to be taken asunder, and answered
distinctly; and though I shall not do it to gratify his Lying Spirit, yet I
shall have occasion to speak to it more fully before I end, and there I leave
it. But to the end of this Charge he adds, We may write over their Doors, as
over the Doors of them that have the Plague, Lord have Mercy on them. But what
then! This is but one of his Complements upon us, for he is sure we cannot be
saved, Page 60.
why then should he pray God to have Mercy on us? Is not this to pray not only
against Faith, but certain Knowledge too; besides taking the Name of God in
vain, which he so often exclaims against? But what can we expect different from
this, from a Man that seems to be made up of Malice, Forgeries and Lies, as he
appears to be through his Book.

But as for his Account of Hugh's of Plymouth, I wonder his Friends would
suffer him to overhale it in Print, unless the reviving of that Story would
take off the Imputation, which can never be, unless there were better Vouchers
for it than this Hammerer; no, nor then neither, but with such as knew not the
Man.

But being at length fully recovered from his Doctrinal Part, he falls in p.
123. into an angry Humor with Ministers Wives for giving some Quakers an
account of the ill Conditions of their Husbands: I take this to be the Story;
and if so, I say, it was not well done of the Women, to expose their Husbands
Infirmities, unless it were a Case of Conscience: Though many a Poor Woman pays
dear enough at Home, for being led abroad once a Week in her Topknot; but what
their Lot is, they must submit to, and wade through it, as they can. Yet if the
Women will Gossip, and tell of the Cheats of their Husbands, why should not
they be believed, as well as the Quaker's Wife he told of in p. 74. When it
becomes his own Case, he is not for hearing any Women's Complaints against their
Husbands; but then, he not only (if you will believe him) heard it, but has
also printed it; though never the truer for that.

He says he knew a Famous Minister, whose Wife broke his Heart; he advises
Ministers to keep their Ground; for if they do not rule, their Wives will: He
quotes many Presidents for being Henpeckt, which would make one suspect, that
he himself was too deeply affected that way: But on enquiry, I find his Wife
has the hardest side of it by far; and so according to the Proverb, The worst
Spoak cracks first. But to come to an end (for it is time nor had I been here,
but to clear the Truth, and its Professors, and expose his Folly; that, if
possible, he may be ashamed of it, and of himself for its sake) with a Parcel
of Verses, (though none of his) very well adapted to a Chiding Woman, and a few
Scoffs and Jeers upon She Friends, as he calls them, together with another
Ramble of unheard of Lies, which he pretends to deliver as the Sense of the
Quakers, he ends his Work, and lays down his Hammer, but not without a false
stroke to the very last, (lest it should any where fail of being all of a
Thread) which is thus; This Barclay, says he, tells us, if Infallibility be not
in his Enthusiasms, it is not lodged in the Scripture, but we must go for it to
the Chair of Rome. Here I cannot find a softer Expression than this, The Lake
is for the Liar, and the Liar for the Lake, and that is the Portion of all such,
unless they Repent; for R. B. no where in his Printed Books, says so, though
this Lying Adversary of ours has the Impudence to assert it; but the best of it
is, it is with the same Credit with the rest. But he goes on thus, Every thing,
Poor Robin, to its Center; thy Doctrine came from Rome, tends to Rome; and many
that knew thee, believe that thou were it not to be reckoned in the number of
Protestants. But why thus, Poor Robin? And once before, away Poor Robin, what
should induce him to call over his Name at this rate? I will not determine,
whether it was from his great Intimacy with Poor Robin's Almanacks, as part of
his Study, or with a design to lessen the Reputation of R. B. if it was the
first, he has shown himself an apt Scholar, by his Freaks, and Comical
Raileries. But if it be the latter, I pity him that he should be carried away
with such Whims, as to think that he was able to Impeach R. B. who was well
known by most Ranks and Degrees of Men, to be raised far enough above the Envy
of such a Whiffling, Petulant Adversary, as this Hammerer has all along
appeared to be. And now, Reader, having done, (for the present) with
Trepidantium Malleus, I shall Address my self to thee.

IT is not because I Love Controversy, or affect popularity, that I have
undertook to write the foregoing Reply, but because I would take off those
Bear-skins, this lurking Adversary has endeavored to wrap us in; nor indeed
had I undertook it, if many, or most of our Friends that are qualified for such
Services, had not declined it as a Scurrilous Libel, not worth their notice,
partly from the Matter it self, as being False, Idle, Comical and Vain, and
partly from the Knowledge they had of the Author, since he is so well known to
be out of his right Mind: But because he may not be generally known to be so
where his Book may come; and understanding that the Book is handed about from
one to another of the Brotherhood, and entertained with great Applause, as an
unanswerable Piece, I found my self concerned to Vindicate the Truth, against
his Malicious Slanders. I observe it is not his Case only, but many more of that
Complexion for many Years past, especially in peaceable Times, to be throwing
their Squibs at the Quakers, although in Times of Persecution they generally
are more quiet.

If they had any reasonable or just Cause to Reproach us for holding any
Erroneous or Hurtful Principles, it were something: But when we are Condemned
for Heretics, it is by their Forgeries, Lies and Perversions, which they would
insinuate was our Belief: One while we are Papists and Jesuits, although we
Challenge any of them to go as far as they dare, in any of the Negative
Doctrines of the Reformation. Another while we deny the Humanity of Christ, by
and by his Divinity. One while we cannot Pray without the Spirit, by and by we
expect to Merit Salvation by our own Works. One while we are for turning the
whole Scripture into Allegories, by and by Persecuted, because we keep to
Scripture words.

Their great News about our not Confessing our Sins, is as false as the rest,
though perhaps grounded upon our not doing it in the same Customary way and
manner that our Adversaries use: But what then, does it therefore follow, as he
wickedly insinuates, (page first) That we think our selves too good, and too
perfect, to ask a Holy God forgiveness for any imperfection, in Thought, Word
or Astion, by no means? Nay, see how Contradictory he is; he charge L. S. for
Pride, and falling into the Condemnation of the Devil, because he wished for
being in a perfect Estate, but acknowledged he was not so. But in another place
(if you will believe him) he tells you, We don't think of any Imperfection in
us, or desire of Forgiveness, or to that effect: But now L. S. don't pretend to
it, but wished he was so: Who will Credit such a Sayer and Unsayer? But as we
are exhorted to Confess our Faults one to another, and not to hide our Sins,
for then we shall not prosper, but confess and forsake, and we shall find
Mercy; so the Quakers believe, and also practice: And if he is Ignorant hereof,
it is his Fault, and not ours. In short, Confession we own, and know it to be
our Indispensible Duty, To God, for every Sin against him, either in Thought,
Word or Action: To Man, wherein we have Trespassed against him: To the Church,
wherein we have offended her. And when the Lord is pleased by his Spirit, to
draw forth any of his Servants and Ministers, into either an Acknowledgment of
Sins past, or Desire of Forgiveness, or both, in the exercise of their Gifts
amongst the People they represent, and on whose Behalf their Petitions are put
up; we are so far from disapproving hereof, or thinking our selves above it,
that it is exceeding Comfortable and Edifying to us. But this we shall never
deny, that those inward Pangs of a Penitent Soul, those Sighs and Groans, as
well as Words, that arise from a wounded Spirit, are more acceptable to God,
than such a Customary, Formal crying out, Lord, the best of our Performances
are Sin, yea, our Holy Duties are Sin; but do thou be merciful to us, miserable
Sinners; and so go, and so come, from Year to Year as if after such a
Confession, God Almighty was obliged to forgive; not considering, that it is
those only that Confess and Forsake, that shall find Mercy.

Then again, How often are we scofft and mocked at, and compared to the Pope,
because we assert, That Men ought to be Infallibly assured of their Duty to
God, and that the Spirit of God, a measure of which is given to every Man to
profit withal, is Infallible, and if minded, will so Infallibly assure them,
that they shall be beyond doubt, which is a tossed (but not Comfortable)
Estate? From this, it is common with our Adversaries to say, That the Quakers
pretend to Infallibility, and when once turned Quakers, are Infallible. Now
that we pretend to Infallibility is true, but it is as before expressed; not
placing it in Persons or Opinion, but the Spirit of God, which they themselves
cannot deny to be Infallible: And as Man is governed by that Spirit, he will
Infallibly be led out of all that which is Fallible and Erroneous, both in
Faith and Life: Yea, they themselves will (I hope) allow the Scripture to be an
Infallible Rule, and if so, the Spirit of God must be yet much more so, since
from it the Scripture came, For Holy Men of Old, spoke as they were moved by
the Holy Ghost. But for my part, I would not give a Rush for that Religion,
that is only Certain in Uncertainty, which is the state of all that has not an
Infallible Rule to walk by.

Again, about the Holy Scriptures, how abominably have our Adversaries abused
us, particularly this Hammerer, saying, It Is no Rule to us; and that we have
Cursed more than a Thousand times, those that call the Scriptures the Word of
God. This needs no Confutation from me, since every Body that know the Quakers,
know also that they use Cursing no more than Swearing; yet this is the Man,
that if he don't speak Truth of us, Desires to be Esteemed a Persecutor, or the
greatest Defamer on Earth, etc.

Now although we do not commonly call the Scriptures the Word of God, because
we distinguish between them and Jesus Christ, who is called in Scripture the
Word of God; yet it is not in the least to derogate from the Honor and Dignity
that is due thereto, but because it is an Attribute peculiar to Jesus Christ
the Word, although as they declare the Mind of God, with respect to us, and are
his Commands to us, they may in that respect be called the Word or Command of
God; and so the Quakers Own and Esteem them, and Rejoice in them, since they
afford such a Comfortable History of the Dealings of the Lord with his People
through many Generations, and of the Coming of his Son, our Lord Jesus Christ,
his Birth, Works, Doctrine, Miracles, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection,
Ascension, Glorification, and present Mediation, and of his Coming at the End
of the World to Judge both Quick and Dead, of the Resurrection of the Just and
Unjust, with many more Precious and Comfortable Doctrines, all which are
contained in the Holy Scripture, and Writ for our Learning, that by Faith in
Christ, the Man of God, through them, may be thoroughly furnished to every good
Word and Work.

And to that end we may have the true and right use of them, it is requisite
Men apply themselves to the Spirit of God in the reading thereof, which never
Contradicts its own Testimony in the Scripture, but Corroborates it, and makes
it much more Effectual for Edification and Comfort; as said the Prophet, Ezekiel.
36. 27.
I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and
keep my judgments, etc. and to this end we have direc(...) People to the Spirit
of God within them: For without the Assistance thereof, the Reader has not the
true Comfort of them; and therefore it is false in Fact, that the Quakers deny
the Holy Scriptures, and esteem them but Dirt, Serpents Meat, Death, and Dead
Letter, as this Hammerer, the Snake in the Grass, Crisp, Bugg, etc. says: For
we sincerely believe the Scripture in it self is very good and profitable for
Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness: That
the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works. 2 Timothy
3. 16, 17.
But the Best Instruments in the World put into the Hands of a Fool, or one of
no Capacity, is no more to him than those which are worse, unless to do
Mischief with; but in the Hand of an Artist, the Work is excellently done. 2
Pet. 3. 16.
Even so the Capacity for the right use of the Scripture, is the Qualification
of the Spirit, without which the Scripture is not of that advantage, though
otherways very excellent in it self.

Now as some part of the Scripture is Allegorically to be understood, as well
as some other Literally, and some both, as our Adversaries confess, so to turn
that to an Allegory, which is to be understood Literally, is equally Foolish
with taking that Literally, that is to be understood Allegorically: For the
right understanding hereof, can there be any better Method proposed, than for
Men to have recourse to that Spirit from whence it did at first flow? And in
that Gift of the Spirit, to wait with patience until the Matter is clearly
opened to them, and not be hasty to conclude, either with or against the
Resolves of Councils and Synods, etc. but being truly exercised in the Gift of
the Spirit, in Waiting, and Attention on it, as well as Prayer and
Supplication, it is most certain the Matter will be cleared up, and the Doubts
resolved, as it shall conduce to their Spiritual Advantage.

In short, it is not so much about plain Scripture Authority we differ, but
about the Authority of those Councils, Synods, and Assemblies of Divines (so
called) that have undertaken to Expound Scriptures, and Decree Articles of
Faith. For all our Confessions of Faith, and Acknowledgment to the Truth of
Christianity, in plain Scripture Terms, is little with them, but Cant, unless
it be in the Terms of the several Councils, or Westminster Divines, etc. and
yet they are the People that cry up the Scripture for their Rule, though they
make it a mere Nose of Wax to turn to every thing, that either Humor or
Interest trumps up: Thus one Council has Contradicted what the other has
Determined.

And another thing, in which it is common for these People to Abuse and Belie us
in, is about our Lord Jesus Christ, which this Adversary says, (page 80.) That
he was the Anointings of God, and when Dead, his Body turned to Dust, and that
afterward the same Anointings were in others. But who or when any Quaker said
so, he mentions not a word; and in Answer to it, I say, he would have as truly
represented the Presbyterians, as he has done tho Quakers: If he said of them
that they held Universal Grace, and that there was never any such thing in the
World as the Solemn League and Covenant, and no such Man as the Bishop of St.
Andrews Murdered, or that King Charles the First cut off his own Head, or that
they never Hanged Men only for being Quakers, or that their Brethren in
Scotland were for Universal Liberty, notwithstanding their Barbarity to the
Episcopal Clergy, and their Design to Excommunicate, the last Year, all Persons
that should Buy or Sell with, or Entertain a Quaker, which had took effect, had
not the Clemency of the King interposed to break their Mischievous Designs. I
say, as the Matters and Things abovementioned lie, are as true the one as the
other, so I Charge him for a Notorious Impostor, thus to abuse and deceive his
Reader; and under the specious pretenses of speaking Truth, to vent such
apparent Fals-hoods.

Now although I positively deny what Anonymus affirms, and put him upon the
proof, which I am sure he can never do; yet for the sakes of others that may be
deceived by this Lying Spirit, I shall freely express our Faith herein, since
that is the part which affords me the greatest Satisfaction in this
Undertaking: But if I should not do it in the Terms of the Schools, though in
never so plain Scripture Terms, perhaps it will find but little Credit with our
Adversaries, notwithstanding the great Talk and Boast they make about the
Authority of the Scripture.

But however, let them do as they please, I hope we shall not receed from the
Testimony of Holy Scripture. As to the Heresies of the Socinians and
Sabelleans, which he endeavors to fix on the Quakers, since so much has been
said already in Confutation thereof, so to reassume the Argument, and give it a
fresh Confutation, would swell this beyond my Intentions; but besides, many
others that has done it, I shall refer to one, that in this Author's Esteem is
both Honest and Ingenuous, whose word I hope then he will not question, and
that is G. K. in his Way Cast up; which was Written in Defense of us, and our
Principles, to which I refer the Reader; for though G. K. has changed his Mind
since that time, the Quakers have not, and therefore his Arguments in Defense
of our Principles, are as much in force against our Adversaries as ever, since
we did then, and do now approve of them, whatever we may do by the Man; for
many a Man has declared the Truth, and turned from it afterward; but Truth is
not to be denied, because of that. In short, besides G. K. and the many Quakers
that has Writ on that Subject, the Quakers believe the Substance of the Nicene
Creed, as truly as any of their Adversaries, which cuts up all this Hammerers
Allegations at the Roots, as it is reported by Socrates Scholasticus in his
first Book of the Ecclesiastical History, Chap. 5. Page 222. which I shall
insert the Substance of (save also the Curse at the latter end of it, upon them
that held contrary Opinions).

WE Believe in One God, the Father Almighty, Maker of all things visible and
Invisible, and in One Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Only Begotten Son
of the Father, that is, of the Substance of the Father, by whom all things were
made, both the things in Heaven, and the things in Earth: Who for us Men, and
for our Salvation, came down, and was Incarnate. He was made Man; He Suffered,
and Rose the third Day; He ascended into the Heavens; He shall come to Judge
both the Quick and the Dead: And we Believe in the Holy Ghost.

Now though we choose rather to express our Faith in plain Scripture Terms, than
in the Terms of any Council whatever; yet where Matters of Faith are laid down
in plain Scripture Terms by them, we never were so crossgrained to refuse an
Assent, because it was the Determination of a Council. But though the above
abundantly clears us from his false and wicked Charges of denying the Divinity
and Humanity of Christ, and the Trinity, yet we have more to say for the sakes
of those whose Innocence has been destroyed by such Impostors as this Adversary.

Know then, that as the Holy Scripture declared the Divinity of Christ, so we
as Faithfully believe it, according to Micah, But thou Bethlehem Ephratah,
though thou be little amongst the Thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he
come forth unto me, that is to be Ruler in Israel: Whose going forth have been
from of old, from Everlasting; or the Days of Eternity. Mic. 5. 2.
Again, In the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word
was God. The same was in the Beginning with God. All things were made by him,
and without him was not any thing made that was made. John 1. 1, 2, 3.
Again, Who is the Image of the Invisible God, the Firstborn of every Creature
-- Col. 1. 15.
Again, for by him were all things Created, etc. Ver. 16.
Who was the Root and Offspring of David; the Bright and Morning Star; Rev.
22. 16.
The Heir of all things; the Brightness of (God's) Glory; and the Express Image
of his Substance; who upholds all things by the Word of his Power. Heb. 1. 1.
2, 3.
And by whom also all things were Created. Ephesians. 3. 9.
And for his Humanity, according to the Hebrews, Forasmuch then as the Children
are partakers of Flesh and Blood; he also himself likewise took part of the
same, that through Death he might destroy him that had the power of Death, that
is, the Devil. For verily he took not on him the Nature of Angels: but he took
on him the Seed of Abraham. Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made
like unto his Brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest,
in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the Sins of the People.
Heb. 2. 14, 16, 17.
Again, For we have not an High Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling
of our Infirmities: but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without
sin. Heb. 4. 15.
And as to his Suffering both in Body and Soul, and thereby becoming a most
complete Sacrifice for the Remission of the Sins of the whole World, according
to Isaiah, Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief:
when thou shall make his Soul an Offering for Sin, he shall see his Seed, he
shall prolong his Days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his Hand.
He shall see of the travel of his Soul, and be satisfied: by his Knowledge
shall my Righteous Servant justify many: for he shall bear their Iniquities.
Isa. 53. 10, 11.
Neither by the Blood of Goats and Calves: but by his own Blood he entered in
once into the holy place, having obtained Eternal Redemption for us. How much
more shall the Blood of Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit, offered himself
without spot to God, purge your Conscience from dead Works to serve the Living
God. Heb. 9. 12, 14.
Again, Who gave himself for us, that he might Redeem us from all Iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works. Tit. 2. 14.
Again, For Christ also has once suffered for Sins, the just for the unjust:
(that he might bring us to God) being put to Death in the Flesh, but quickened
by the Spirit. 1 Pet. 3. 18.
Again, And walk in love, as Christ also has loved us, and has given himself
for us, an Offering and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor. Ephesians. 5.
2.
That I may know him, and the Power of his Resurrection, and the Fellowship of
his Sufferings, being made conformable unto his Death. Phil. 3. 10.
With many more; all which we as truly and as faithfully Believe, as any
Protestants whatever; and he must have a Face of Brass that will say, the
Quakers either deny or undervalue any part of it. And for the Trinity, (as he
calls it) we as much believe it, as the Scripture declares it, viz. For there
are Three that bare Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost:
and these Three are One. And there are Three that bare witness in Earth, the
Spirit, and the Water, and the Blood: and these Three agree in One. 1 John 5.
7, 8.
And as for the Body of Christ turning to Dust, is so great an untruth, that he
must set up for the Trade of Lying, that attempts a greater; for the Quakers
Believe according to the Acts of the Apostles, which says, Ye Men of Galilee,
why stand ye gazing up into Heaven? this same Jesus which is taken up from you
into Heaven, shall so come, in like manner as ye have seen him go into Heaven.
Acts 1. 11.
Again, He seeing this before, spoke of the Resurrection of Christ, that his
Soul was not left in Hell, neither his Flesh did see Corruption. This Jesus
has God raised up, whereof we all are Witnesses. Therefore being by the Right
Hand of God exalted, and having received of the Father the Promise of the Holy
Ghost, he has shed forth this, which ye now see and hear. For David is not
ascended into the Heavens, but he says himself, The Lord said unto my Lord,
Sit thou on my Right Hand, until I make thy Foes thy Footstool. Therefore let
all the House of Israel know assuredly, that God has made that same Jesus whom
ye have Crucified, both Lord and Christ. Acts 2. 31, to 37.
Again, Whom the Heaven must receive, until the times of restitution of all
things, which God has spoken by the Mouth of all his holy Prophets, since the
World began. Acts 3. 21.
So that as his Flesh saw no Corruption; he Ascended far above all Heavens, and
sits at the Right Hand of the Majesty in the Heavens, etc. Now of the things
which we have spoken, this is the sum: We have such an High Priest, who is set
on the Right Hand of the Throne of the Majesty in the Heavens. Heb. 8. 1.
And though Christ was Anointed with the Oil of Joy and Gladness above his
Fellow, (referring to his Manhood) which the Quakers readily confess, yet never
called it Anointings, as he says, for what reason I know not, unless to abuse
the Quakers. And that all Christians have a degree or measure of the same, the
fullness of which was in him is sound Doctrine, and to be believed and looked
for, since he that has not the Spirit of Christ is none of his, and since the
Hammerer don't expect it, no marvel he is so great a Slave to Satan as he is.

His Scoffs at Perfection, and Freedom from Sin, I shall next take notice of,
and answer as follows: That by Perfection, the Quakers never pretended to any
other than a being freed from Sinning, and of a growth from one degree of Grace
to another, to the perfecting of Holiness; Ephesians. 4. 13.
but a Perfection of the fullness of Knowledge, or of Glory, is what is not to
be expected in this World, nor did we ever pretend to it; but if a being
delivered from sinning, is not attainable, the Quakers are indeed Fools to
pretend to it, and our Adversaries are in the right to reflect on us for it;
but if it be, who is Fool then? And that it is, is most clear from Mat. 5. 48.
Luke 6. 40. 2 Cor. 13. 9. 2 Timothy 3. 17. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. Heb. 6. 1. or else
we must Charge an Absurdity on the Holy Ghost, for injoining what was
impossible to be attained to; and where will that Center?

And whereas he often reflects and abuses the Quakers for denying Prayer, and
particularly, Page 78. They must wait for the Spirit's Call to Prayer, says
he, then asks how they and the Spirit came to be such Strangers, that it calls
not to them all the Day, Week, Month, or Year long, to pray alone, or in their
Families: This also is like the rest, and what that is, is plainly made appear;
for it is a hard matter for him to speak Truth in any one thing, unless it be
where he can strike us in the Teeth with a Demas or Judas, an Alexander or
Hymeneus, or Philetu, or a Nicholas, etc. which that we should be without, is
more than can be expected, since the first Planters of Christianity were not;
yet that neither rendered the Christians Impostors or Apostates, nor their
Religion the Sink of Heresy, though our Hammerers Elder Brethren thought it
and them so, and prosecuted them accordingly, as their Rabbis did their Lord
and Master.

Now as to Prayer in Families, and alone, as well as in public Meetings, this
is the known practice of the People called Quakers; but because they have not
set hours for it any more than some of his Brethren has set forms, he infers,
though very unjustly, that the Quakers decline it. We do say, if Men pray, they
ought to pray with the Spirit, and with an Understanding also, and therefore we
say, all are to attend the Spirits time, in order to help them in the
production of what it has conceived; and it is certain, that they who are
intent hereon, shall not find themselves at a loss for want of the Spirit to
enable them, when the Circumstance of Time and Place calls for it; yet at all
times Men are to have their Hearts set on God, and to meditate on his Law; but
they are not always obliged to a Vocal Prayer, nor does God expect it, though
sometimes he do, that they may sanctify his Name by a Vocal Prayer, as well in
a private Family as a public Meeting, and this the Quakers own and practice,
therefore he is a Defamer, Persecutor, and Impostor for insinuating the
contrary.

In Page 51. Our Adversary is very Abusive, touching our belief of a Christ
within (which he falsely puts) in opposition to a Christ without, saying, This
Word outward is in great Contempt with them; but how this word Outward is so
contemptible with them, he has not assigned: That we are Contemners of the
outward Scripture, is false from what is said before: That we are Contemners of
Christ, viz. he that was Crucified, is as false; for we are well assured, that
by the Offering up of himself upon the Cross, he became a Propitiatory
Sacrifice for the Sins of the whole World, and by virtue of his Blood comes
Remission of Sins; and yet this Remission is no otherwise to be Experienced
than by Men's Repentance, and Belief of the Truth, and a Faithful walking in
Holiness of Life, with which, as an Ingenious Author said, we may, but without
which, we never shall be saved, notwithstanding Christ Died for us: The Design
of whose Death was not to make a good Life unnecessary, but to render it
efficacious and available; not to procure a Privilege of being Saved without
it (as some fancy) but that we might be Saved with it, etc.

After he has told his Reader, That Baptism and the Lord's Supper were Outward
Ordinances with them, he queries, But why does not these Men contemn outward
Meats, and Drinks, and Outward Clothing too? If they did, the Controversy
would soon be at an end: But for all his Scoffs he is mistaken, though by
ending the Controversy, he means we should be out of his way; I must confess,
I believe, it would be a joyful Day to him, and such as he. But pray let me
Expostulate with these People a little; Are not you for an inward Virtue from
Christ the Fountain, to Revive your Spirits, and Comfort your Souls under any
Affliction, as well as to Encourage you to Perseverance? Are not you for the
Marrow of the Scripture, as well as the Words and Sentences therein contained?
Are not you for sitting down in an Heavenly Place in Christ? Are not you
desirous of receiving the Substance of what Baptism and the Supper is, but the
Sign of? If you say Yea, may not I, if I would act the part of this Hammerer,
return it upon you, that you are (since you cry up the outward) all for the
outward, but not at all for the inward? Which I can with as much Justice and
Truth do, as he has Charged the Quakers for contemning all the outward, etc.

But what a poor Flurt was it to bring in outward Meats, and Drinks, and
Clothes too, and then the Controversy, he says, will soon be ended? But
that is not true, for we are against outward Meats, and Drinks, and Clothing
too, and yet the Controversy is not ended; and if he had not been blinded with
Folly, as well as Envy, he might have escaped such a Blunder: For where Meats
and Drinks are offered, either Superstitiously or Profanely, the Quakers are
against it, and refuse it: But what a comparison he has made! Here is Christ
without, the Scriptures without, Heaven without, Baptism without, the Lord's
Supper without, with outward Meats, outward Drings, and outward Cloating; and
what weight there is in that, pray read Col. 2. 17. and then let him tell me,
according to his own Comparison, what real ground there is for him, or any
else, to blame the Quakers for disusing the Two Great Ordinances, as they call
them, since according to his Comparison, they are but a shadow; and if People
have seen, and enjoy the Substance, and will follow it rather than the Shadow,
are they to be blamed for it, or called Heretics? But till the Substance is
known, those Shadows may have their Service, and we are not for pressing any to
decline it, till their own Convictions do: For I agree with the Apostles, who
said, Let every Man be fully persuaded in his own Mind: There has been many
Books writ upon this Subject of Baptism, I shall therefore say the less; the
greatest Argument I have ever heard brought for the Continuation of
Water Baptism, was from Acts 10. 48. which stands thus, Can any Man forbid
Water that those should not be Baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as
well as we; from which they argue, that if Baptism was not a standing Ordinance
since these had received the Holy Ghost, why was it here practiced? I Answer,
first of all, there was no mention of Water in the Commission, Mat. 28. 19, 20.
yet to teach Baptizing was; secondly, since John's Baptism was distinguished
from Christ's by Water, as that was from John's by the Holy Ghost, nothing can
be more plain, than that Christ intended his, and not John's Baptism.

And if the Apostle Paul was not behind (as he says he was not) any of the
Apostles, yet it is evident he did not understand Mat. 28. 19, 20. in the sense
our Adversaries do; for if Baptizing with Water was a part of the Commission
there mentioned, he never understood his Commission, if he had, he would not
have thanked God that he Baptized so few as he did, and positively declared,
that he was not sent to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel; but that he did
some, and Peter more, is true; but this neither proves it a standing Ordinance,
nor yet that it was by Command from God to be a standing Ordinance; but as in
the Case of Circumcision, Anointing the Sick, and diverse other things practiced
by the Jews, whose Religion was greatly Ceremonious, as the Gentiles was
Idolatrous; the Disciples of Jesus condescended, as in the case of
Circumcision,, that by becoming all to all, they might gain some; for to take
them off all at once, was not likely to be received by them, since by a long
Custom they had used themselves to such outward things.

But besides, John himself had before declared, that he must decrease, and that
Christ must increase, which plainly implied the decrease of his Ministry and
Baptism, not all at once, but gradually, as it did the increase of Christ's
Ministry and Baptism; for as the one decreased, the other increased, as the
Sun's light swallows up the Moon's; for as the Moon has its time of service, in
which Mankind is much benefited by its Light, although it be a borrowed one
from the Sun. even so was John's Baptism of great Benefit when he preached
Repentance to the People, and Baptized them in Jordan, as they confessed their
Sins, being the Preparer of the Way of Christ; for though he was a burning and
shining Light in his Ministry, yet he was but a Witness to bear witness of the
Light, that all Men through him might believe, who was the true Light which
lights every Man that comes into the World, John 1. 7, 8, 9. This is the Son
of Righteousness, this is the Lamb of God, this is the Baptizer with Holy Ghost
and Fire, who when he comes (the Lesser, the Witness, the Forerunner) the
Baptizer with Water must give place too. As when the Sun appears in our
Horizon, the Moon's light is so overcome, that we have no Advantage by it, by
reason of the more transcending Light of the Sun; so that it is very evident,
John and Christ's Ministry and Baptisms were as much two distinct
Ministrations, as John the Son of Zacharias, and Jesus of Nazareth the Son of
Mary, were two distinct Persons, or the Sun and Moon are two great, yet
distinct Lights; for the Moon is not the same Light that the Sun is, though she
has her Light from the Sun; nor is John the Baptist's Ministration the same
with Christ's, though he came from God, and had obtained such Credit amongst
the People for his time, that it was said, All Men mused in their Hearts of
John, whether he were the Christ or no, Mat. 3. 15.

Nay, they were by John himself declared to be two distinct Baptisms, as the
Text declares he shall, etc. I do, etc. mine with Water, his with the Holy
Ghost: See the Text, (Mat. 3. 11. Mark 1. 8. John 1. 15, to 34. and make the
Application.

But how preposterous is it to think, that Christ should send his Disciples in
John's Errand or Service, who was but the Forerunner; for so to do, was to set
his Disciples to run counter; and therefore, though the Disciples for the sake
of the Jews, and new Converted Gentiles did do it, it is plain they did it upon
the foot of Discretion, and not by Commandment; and when these Men of the
Circumcision, as well as the Gentiles, had received the Holy Ghost by the
Apostles Ministry, since Baptizing with Water was practiced amongst them from
John's Example, the Apostle did say, Who can forbid Water, etc. but that this
proves the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, and Baptism of Water to be but one
Baptism, I deny; as I do also that this Practice proves it to be of Divine
Institution, notwithstanding it was not then forbidden, but they went into the
Water, and were Baptized.

Again, there is a vast difference between receiving the Gift of the Spirit by
the Ministry of the Disciples, and a being Baptized by the same Spirit; for by
the Gift received, they came unto a Convinced Estate, which Convincement was
wrought by the Holy Ghost, through the Apostles Ministry, and was to them the
Glad-tydings of Salvation, if from that state of Convincement they pressed on to
a thorough Conversion: So that the receiving of the Holy Ghost mentioned in
that Text, may be very aptly compared to the Leaven in the Parable, Mat. 13.
33. Luke 13. 20, 21. which as it is subjected to, leavens the whole Lump, and
Plunges or Baptizeth the Soul, with all its Faculties, into its own Nature; and
this is the Baptism we own, it being that of the Holy Ghost.

But to wind up the whole matter, if Mat. 28. 19, 20. was a Commission to the
Disciples to Baptize with Water, then they were obliged to perform it in the
Terms of that Commission.

But they never performed it in the Terms of that Communion;

Therefore, etc.

Again, the Terms of that Commission, was to Baptize in the Name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost,

But the Disciples Baptized none with Water in the Name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost;

Therefore, etc.

And so I end this part, and shall only add, with respect to breaking Bread and
drinking Wine in a Sacramental way, (as they call it) that we have disused it,
because we do certainly know, that to us the Substance is come, the Heavenly
Bread and Wine of the Kingdom, to our great Joy and Refreshment, which are the
Principal Memento's to us of the breaking of Christ's Body, and shedding his
most Precious Blood for us: And as often as we are made Partakers hereof, we
show forth his Death, and bear in our Bodies the Marks of the Dying of the Lord
Jesus; which Marks are a Death to Sin, and a New Life to Holiness, (for he was
Crucified for our Sins, and Rose again for our Justification) as well as a
perfect Resignation to the Will of God: For though our Adversaries have set
times for the Receiving of what they call the Lord's Supper; and without doubt
such set times are to them the most Religious and Sacred part of their
Devotion, and we have not yet let it be known. to them, that there are certain
Times and Seasons that are more than in the common or ordinary way Sacred to
us, but these Times and Seasons are in the Father's Hands, and not ours, and
for them we wait in all our Religious Meetings; and though we do not always
Enjoy what we wait for, yet we meet with so much Encouragement, as to continue
our Waiting and Attention, until He we wait for, who is the Bread of Life
indeed, is pleased to make himself known to us, by a Spiritual breaking of
Bread, and therefore what need is there for such to use the Outward and Visible
Sign, when the Inward and Spiritual Substance is come? But for all those that
are not come to this Substance, but are Religiously and Devoutly Traveling
after it, and hope to get it with the Visible Sign; we are not for being
Censorious upon them, knowing that the Light of a Candle, Moon or Stars, are
serviceable, till the Suns light break forth and overcome it all.

I have but one Point more to speak to, and then I shall end, and that is about
the Light within, which our Adversary says, page 78. we commonly understand by
it Conscience; now that this Man should so affirm, when in page 79. he pretends
to have read R. B. upon it, shows his wilful Blindness, Ignorance and Envy, for
he that has read R. B's Apology, and shall yet say, That the Quakers understand
by the Light, Conscience, must be Mad, Envious or Foolish, but if he were not
all three, think you he would in page 78. say, They understand by the Light,
Conscience, and in page 79. say, Some Friends makes it God, but R. B. a
Substance, and calls it Vehiculum Dei; this is the Man that will not Belie or
Abuse the Quakers, if he do, let him be accounted the greatest Defamer upon
Earth, etc. But that they, the Quakers, do not understand it to be Conscience,
he himself has proved, quoting To. Barclay, calling it Vehiculum Dei, whose
Book is approved by the Quakers, and contains their Faith and Doctrine in the
Points Controverted, and thither I refer the Ingenious Reader for a more full
and ample satisfaction, but since that Book is large, and this being part of
our present Controversy in pursuing this Hammerer, I shall freely declare,
first Negatively, That by the Light we never understood it to be Conscience,
since Conscience is liable to be corrupted and hardened, as said the Apostle;
but this Principle of Divine Light is not obnoxious to any alteration or change
from its own pure and holy Nature, to any degree of Corruption whatsoever; nor
is it natural Reason, for there is an apparent depravity come thereupon. But
secondly, I declare Positively, That by the Light, we understand a glorious
Beam or Ray proceeding from Christ the Fountain of Light, displaying it self
into our Souls for the enlightening of our Understandings, and to put us in a
Capacity to distinguish between Object and Object; for as a Blind Man cannot
discern the difference in Colors for want of his sight, so all Men in their
natural Estate, are in as great a degree of Spiritual Blindness, until by this
Light they are in a degree enlightened; hence it is that all are called Children
of Wrath, and that there is none that does good, no not one; nor can it be
otherwise, for although Custom and Tradition may influence Men to do what they
think they ought to do, and deter them from what they have been taught to
avoid, yet till by a degree more or less of this Light, they are enlightened,
it is a Blind Zeal and Will Worship, which is not at all acceptable to God, but
is Iniquity, as is the Plowing of the Wicked, though otherwise in it self an
inoffensive Exercise; so that the sight and knowledge of what makes for Man's
Everlasting Happiness, depends upon this Divine Light, for without it we have
no sight, and consequently no Spiritual Knowledge, since Man's Natural Reason
is so depraved, that he can no more search into, and behold the glorious things
that relates to the Kingdom of God, and his Immortal State, they being too
Sublime for him, than it is possible for a Man to look into, and search out the
Matter and Nature of the Sun with his Bodily Eyes, which if he attempts, is
soon Convinced of his Folly, by being blinded by the inaccessible transcending
Glory and Light thereof; so that as the Apostle said, 1 Cor. 2. 11. For what
Man knows the things of a Man, save the Spirit of a Man that is in him? even
so the things of God knows no Man, but the Spirit of God. And in Verse 14.
But the natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. I say then, since Man in his Natural Estate is not able to know the
things of God, it is most certain, that he must, if ever he know them, come to
it by the help, not of a Natural but Divine Light, and such a Divine Light,
God, who is in Christ, Reconciling the World to himself; the Father of Lights
has sent his Son, the Light of the World, to bless the World withal, that by
believing in him, Men may come out of Darkness, and be turned, every one of
them, from the Evil of their Ways. It Is true, he was a glorious Light in his
Life, Ministry, Miracles, Sufferings, Death and Resurrection, and as such there
is no Dispute, but we are obliged to believe in him, and then we shall not
abide in that Darkness and Unbelief the Jews, etc. are now in; but that it
should be restricted to that, we deny, since himself promised to come again,
and to be in his, and with his, to the end of the World, to lead them into all
Truth, to Comfort as well as Convince them, and in fine, to dwell with them,
and in them, according to Jo. 14. 16, 17, 18, 21, 23. and 15. 26. and 16. 7.
with many more in the New Testament; so that notwithstanding a Belief of
Christ's Coming in the Flesh, and Suffering, and therein becoming a most
Complete Sacrifice for Remission of the Sins of the whole World; Men may live
and die in an unreconcileable State, and fall short of that Salvation Jesus
Christ has by his Blood purchased for them; for a bare Belief and Consent to
the Truth hereof, does not Entitle any Man to the Salvation therein offered,
unless he lives conform to the Will of God, viz. Repent of his former Life and
Vanity; Believes, viz. has Faith in God and Christ; and that holy Spirit sent
forth to purif^e his Heart, and submits to the Work of it, and leads a Life of
Godliness and Honesty for time to come; these are terms upon which Christ the
Savior is offered to every Man, and they that perform these Conditions, have
the Benefit of the Sacrifice of Christ, and for his sake God will look on them
as if they had never sinned at all: Now since to come to this Qualification,
where the Righteousness of Christ is truly to be imputed, requires a real and
effectual Change from Nature to Grace, from Darkness to Light, how is it
possible that this Change can be effected without a steady adhering to this
Divine Light, which as it is obeyed in all its Manifestations, leads out of all
Darkness and Death, into the Marvelous Light of Life; nor does this Principle
of Light that manifest whatsoever is reprovable, Ephesians. 5. 13. to that end it may
be relinquished, contradict the Light in the Scriptures; for the Commands of
the Holy Ghost in Scripture, are made by this Light much more Effectual and
Obligatory upon us; for we do not place the Authority of Scripture only, from
its being esteemed Canonical, but also from the Testimony of the Divine Light
in our own Hearts, which would have obliged the Believers therein, to have
believed the Holy Scriptures Sacred, and of Divine Authority, if no such Canons
had past to put a Sanction on them: How Unjust, Uncharitable and Wicked then
are our Adversaries, that stick not to say, We debase the Scripture to set up
our own Light.

In short, by the Light within we understand not Conscience, nor Natural
Reason, but that Light which from the Son of Righteousness Jesus Christ; the
Light of the World, shines into the Hearts of the Sons of Men, to give them the
Knowledge of the Glory of God, or that Spirit of Truth, that was promised
should Convince the World of Sin, and lead into all Truth, or that Word nigh in
the Heart and Mouth, to be heard and obeyed, or that still small Voice, that
says, This is the Way, walk in it, when turning to the Right Hand, or to the
Left, or that Grace that brings Salvation, and in order to it, it teaches to
deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lust, and to live soberly in this present World;
or lastly, We mean by it, that Great Mystery reserved for the Gentiles, which
is Christ within, the Hope of Glory, Col. 1, 26, 27. yet not in opposition to
his being glorified in the Heavens, as he is the Man Christ, or Heavenly Man,
or Advocate, Intercessor and Mediator with God for us; this is what we
understand by that Principle of the Light within. And whoever thinks to get
Heaven or Happiness another way, I wish them Repentance and Amendment of Life,
being assured, that there is not another Name or Power whereby Men can be
saved, besides the Name of Jesus, who is the true Light, that enlightens every
Man that comes into the World. And though many there be that do not own him, as
he is believed in, and confessed to by us, yet nevertheless are by him in some
degree enlightened, in whom, if they believe and live up to what they know to be
their Duty to God, and their Neighbor, the Lord will, without doubt, accept of
their Sincerity, though they are laboring under the Prejudice of Tradition and
Education.

And now, Reader, if I have not defended the Quakers from this Hammerers
Charge, and proved him the Impostor, I must confess I have neither understood
him, nor my self neither, as well as I have done my endeavor to remove those
Prejudices, many People have entertained against us, which they have received
one from another, not knowing us as we are; nor will they give themselves the
opportunity of knowing us from our selves, but without hearing or examining, if
Mr. such a one, or such a one, the Minister, say so, or so, we are at once
Condemned for Heretics, and then upon pain of Excommunication, or something
else, the People must not so much as Discourse with us; For is there among any
sort of professed Christians (save the Priests, Friars, etc.) a greater degree of
Dominion and Rule over the Souls and Consciences, as well as Purses of the
People, than is now reigning among our Presbyterians? And yet who but they for
exclaiming against the Hierarchy of the Bishops.

But to avoid Reflections as much as may be, I shall conclude with true desires
for his, and all the rest of our Causless Enemies, their Repentance to
Amendment of Life, that the Mercy and Favor of God, to the Remission of their
Sins, they may all Witness, through Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. And for
this Adversary, I shall desire him, if he thinks fit to write any Reply to
this, that he will do it under the Umbrage of some intelligent Person or other,
(if he can get any) that we may apply our selves to for Satisfaction for his
Abuses; or else let him conclude, that if he be not Replied to again, its not
because his Arguments are thought unanswerable, or that we decline it from any
Consciousness of the Weakness of our Cause; but because its not worth while to
detect him, since the Rhetoric of Bedlam, and his Welsh Letter, with a deal
more, as from page 43, to 46. and from 55, to 57. and from 83, to 88. are so
much alike, that it would be no Honor to any one to Reply to it, nor Benefit
for any to Read it, though such as that makes up a great part of his Book: And
for his Wickedness therein, as I have not called him, The Devil's Bloodhound,
etc. though he insinuated I would, yet I can in the Knowledge of our own
Innocence say, The Lord Rebuke him.

THE POSTSCRIPT.
SINCE the foregoing Answer was sent to the Press, I observe this Day another
Scurrilous Pamphlet is come forth by a Nameless Author, Entitled, The Spirit
of Quakerism, and the Danger of their Divine Revelation, laid open, in a
Faithful Narrative of their Malicious Prosecution of Henry Windor and his Wife,
at Carlisle Assizes. By Henry Windor. London, Printed for John Harris, 1696 In
p. 17. At the end of the Narrative, is Henry Windor again, July 9. 96. I
observe that H. W. owns the Narrative, and for that reason, is made Midwife to
this Monster, that shows its Teeth the Day of its Birth.

That Account of the Delusion of those s(...) Women, mentioned in the
Narrative, I s^^ long since in Manuscript, though never w(...) those
Aggravations, as now it appears with* and though 96. be the Date, thereby to
make the deeper Impression on the Ignorant, and (...) Amuse the Unwary. Reader,
and to En^^^^ the Multitude against Thousands of Innocent People, called
Quakers, that know no more of it than the Child unborn; yet 73. was the time
this Narrative Commenced; all which, with what is yet behind, shows the Malice,
Envy and Rage of our Adversaries, who cannot think us fit to have a Being in
the Land of the Living. What should be the Reason of their Intolerable Rage at
this time of Day, when we have for so many Years given such undeniable proofs
of our Peaceable and Inoffensive Conversation, I cannot think, unless this,
viz. since it has pleased the Lord to favor us with Ease and Relief, from
those Long and Cruel Persecutions and Sufferings, that did attend us for our
Conscientious Dissent, by the Particular and Extraordinary Indulgence the
Government has extended to us; for all which, as we are highly sensible of the
great Love and Favor of God to us therein, so are we truly and humbly Thankful
to the Government for the same, and Hope, Believe and Pray, that in all things
we may walk worthy of it, and by no means abuse so great Mercy: But this,
without Controversy, has extremely enraged our Adversaries, who, like Cain,
are Angry at our Acceptance: But my desire is, that none of these things may
move any of us, no, not so much as to the Desire of Revenge; yet Justice to our
selves as Christians, as well as Men, will not admit of Silence; I shall
therefore examine this present Adversary. Whether the Narrative be true or
false, I will not determine, without doubt it may be partly both; for I have
heard of such a Story, that Two Women did pretend they had a Dream or Vision,
that this H. W. had Committed such an Act; but what of all this? Did he ever
hear that the Quakers Embarked their Cause upon such a bottom? Or that they
owned or espoused the Imaginations of these Women? Yes, says he, page 23. Many
Friends was Concerned in it, Testified and Vindicated it at Carlisle Assizes. Oh
height of Impudence and Falsehood! What did they Testify and Vindicate? Was it
that these Women were in the right, and that the Spirit they, viz. the Quakers
professed, (which was the Holy-Spirit) was the very Spirit that Acted these Women
in their Impeaching H. W? surely no, but they did not immediately disown them
and their Spirit too: What then! Do it therefore follow that they must own them
and it? An Envious as well as Foolish Consequence. But to do him Justice, he
has, though Ignorantly, cleared, by his own Acknowledgment, all the Quakers in
the World, and that is in page 24. where he says, I freely declare, if any of
you sincerely value Scripture Light and Rule, and do not adhere to the Guidance
of this Mad Spirit; this Story, (meaning the Narrative) intends no^ Accuse you.

Now I say then, that all the Quakers in the World, that are owned as such, and
Members of that Community, are sincere Valuers of Scripture Light and Rule, and
as much detest adhering to the Guidance of this Mad Spirit, as the Author, or
any People in the World, and therefore we are, by his own Confession, Cleared;
so that the Man has only a Chimera in Charging it against the Quakers, and is
Fighting with he knows not what; but I have just Cause to question his
Sincerity in this free Concession, since he is so liberal to bestow more such
Stories upon the Quakers; but before I come to Examine them, I take notice of
his saying, The Devil it seems owed them a spite, by managing those Persons to
the shame of the Sect: That the Devil is spightful toward us, I believe is
very true, though they say he is kind to his own Children, the which, I am apt
to think, this Adversary may be qualified to give us an account of in his next;
but of his spightfulness to us, we have had large Demonstrations, not only by
seducing some that have pretended to be of us, to follow the Imaginations of
their own Whimsical Brains, or Melancholy Fancies, under the Apprehensions of
the motion of the Spirit of God, but also by filling such as this Adversary
with Malice and Envy against us, to Reproach the Holy Spirit of God, through
the Delusions of some few Persons.

I shall now take notice of some more of his Stories, and that is in page 26.
of one Peregrine Dalston endeavoring to swallow his Bedsheet, and Choking
himself; and of another at Durham, that pretended he came to Hobson 's House by
Revelation, etc. And page 27. of a Woman that Renounced her Husband, and called
him Dog, Devil, etc. and that she pretended to be a Mother to a Second Savior.
How unjust is this Libeller to upbraid Sensible Men with Actions of Mad People?
But whether ever there were any such Persons in the World, as these he here
mentions, is a question; and it is another, if ever any such thing was either
done or said? And another, Whether these People (if the two first be granted)
were reputed Quakers? For his saying so, will go but a little way with the
Impartial, since Lying and Abusing is his Practice, as I shall show in its
place; but supposing all this to be true, when or where did he ever hear the
Quakers give any Credit, or show Countenance to such things? He cannot be
Ignorant of the Quakers equally disliking any such practices with any
Professors of Christianity whatever: He may well say, page 29. Friends Memories
are not always perfect, for they never will, nor his neither, be so perfect as
to remember what never was done. But all these confirms what he said before,
That the Devil owed us a spite, and to show it, has made use of this Libeller,
with many others who has joined issue with the Devil in Spightfulness, to
Reproach, Belie and Abuse an Innocent People, because some that has professed the
same Way, has been Whimsical, Melancholy, Imaginary, or Mad. But his Profane,
Atheistical, Blasphemous Commentson these Stories, I shall not now undertake to
Reply to, for indeed I do not think it worth while, since it looks so much like
Tripedantium Malleus, rather than the production of a Composed Brain.

He tells Two Stories of Quakers in Bristol, The first going Naked with a Rope
about him into the Church, but when turned out, another went saying, Thus says
the Lord, Let the Man have his Rope again. If this be not a Lie of his making,
yet it is of his venting, for the Quakers of Bristol, who are most like of any
to know, deny it, that is, that no Quaker did so.

Some Quakers in the City of Bristol, yet Alive, do remember, (but surely the
Infernal Powers are at work in this Scribbling Age, to fill this part of the
World with Lies, as it did another lately with Witches) that about Forty Years
ago, there was one John Jones, a Reformed (as the Beetle called such as he)
Quaker, viz. one that like G. K. F. B. T. C. and J. P. had left the Quakers,
and set up for himself, which said Jones went Naked, (save only a Rope about
him) and if this be not the Story, there is nothing of Truth in it; but if this
is the Story, then Judge Reader, what an ungodly Man is he to lay that to the
Charge of the Quakers, which they as much disowned as himself. That another
should say, Thus says the Lord, Let the Man have his Rope again, is a further
Proof of the baseness of this Adversary; for though there were such Expressions
used by a Boy or Portar, yet it was only to Ridicule the Immaginary Naked Man;
and both of them no more Quakers than S. Y. or this Libeller.

But who that Great Prophetess is in Summerset-shire, that should say, I Will
tell thee from the Lord, Monmouth is as surely alive, as any of us, I know not,
but certain it is, if the Quakers did pretend to such Revelations, as these he
have told of, and this, such a great Prophetess, as he would Insinuate, we must
needs know her, though he takes care we shall not from him, but as an Effect of
his lying Spirit, I return it on him.

But he comes now to a particular Case, (viz.) That in the Year 1694. at
Bristol, (for his Story of 86. I take it to be the Fruit of his Scoffing, Lying
Spirit, rather than any appearance of Truth) he says, a Prophet pronounced,
that in a few Months that City should become a Pool of Water, except it did
Repent. This was declared amongst a Crowd of you, Published in the Streets,
owned before the Mayor, whose Courtesy to the silly Wretch others of you
Congratulated, Caressed the Man, Honored his Prophecy above the Bible, Copied
and hung it up in your Houses, etc. Now this falling within the Compass of my
certain Knowledge, made me the more willing to spend an Hour or two in perusing
(and for his Abuses) reflecting on this Libeller, for this I know to be a Lie
in Fact, as it is laid down by him: Let our Memories be as bad as they will, he
will find them too good to let his Lies pass undetected; but such as he, had
need of better than he seems to have; but something he has got by the end as he
thinks will Reproach the Quakers, and out it goes without Fear or Wit, Two
Stories jumbled together with great Additions and downright Falsehoods; and were
it not for that, I should gratify him too much, I would relate the Truth of
that Matter, that he has so confused himself about, that in Eight Lines has
told so many Lies, but perhaps shortly we may see his Reply to this, (for if he
have any Regard to his Credit, he is obliged to it, since I positively Charge
him for a Malicious Publisher of Notorious Falsehoods) and then it will be time
enough; in mean time I observe his Directions, (like such another Doctor as S.
Y.) a true Representation of the Author, viz. a Rambling Confused Adversary;
see it, page 46. Grieve not the Holy Spirit of Truth. Ah! where will thou run
when he ceases to lead thee? This in a Quaker had been rank Herefie enough, to
have had him write a Book to lay open the Danger of it, but in him Orthodox. In
the next Paragraph, and first Sentence of it, he says, Dread the Methods
whereby others are inveigled, viz. a Pretense to all inward Spirituality in
Religion. You may see what a Religion he is for, nothing of Spirit, but all
Flesh. But to fix the aforesaid Character upon him, read his next words, A Form
of Godliness, without Life and Spirit, God abhors, says he; 'twas well in one
respect, he did not set his Name to his Book, for if he should be known to be a
Member of any Society at all, we might, if we would, act like him, Accuse them
for Madness or Folly, since this Member has showed himself so in this Case; for
till he can reconcile the aforesaid Directions, viz. Dread Inward Spirituality
in Religion, (viz. Beware of it; don't pretend by any means to such a thing)
yet don't grieve the Spirit of God, for a Form, without the Spirit, God abhors;
I say, until he can reconcile these two opposite Directions, I shall not
forbear thinking him a Madman, or worse; but this is no more a wonder to me,
than his Envying the Quakers, both for the sake of their Religion, as well as
for their Temporal Enjoyments, since believing the Saving Grace of God in all
Men, is with him an Intoxicating Notion, one would think he was no better
acquainted with the Holy Scriptures, than he seems to be with the Principles of
the Quakers; for had he not been intoxicated himself, and a Stranger to both,
how could he have belied the one, or contradicted the other, as he has done?
And until he is better informed of both, I intend to leave him, or at least for
the present; since he is so foul and abusive from End to End, that hardly one
Paragraph is to be found free from Lying, Detraction and Perversion.

It shall suffice me, that all Men in their Senses, and that are of a good
understanding, will agree with me in this; that this Adversary has most
notoriously abused the Quakers, by Intituling them to the Mad and Foolish
Freaks that some silly People has run into. For who would think it just, to
charge the Church of England for Libertinism, because some Men, Professors of
that Communion, has been Convicted for Theft and Murder, etc? Or that the
Presbyterians Doctrine is Damnable, because some of their Members have Hanged
or Stabbed themselves? Or that the Baptists Religion is Lunacy, because some of
their Members has Drowned themselves? A very unjust and uncharitable
Conclusion. So let the sober Reader judge, whether supposing (but not granting)
many such like Idle and Foolish Stories to be true, concerning here and there
one, amongst many Thousands of a regular People, is our Christian Communion and
Society answerable for it? And our Principles Destructive, and we Heretics
because of it? The Answer, I hope; is easy.

In short, we know there has been much Industry used, and what Wit and Malice,
as well as Madness could rake up, has been thrown at us, to Reproach our
Christian Profession, and render its Professors obnoxious to the Government
that our Liberties might be, by a Legal Power, st^eightned: But Blessed be the
Merciful God, who has hitherto helped us by his Grace and good Spirit; that
though our Adversaries has not forborne, but with open Mouth has spoken all
manner of Evil of us, yet it is falsely; and we know it to be for the sake of
our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom we have believed.

Psalm 2. 1. Why do the Heathen Rage, and the People imagine a vain Thing.
Isaiah 37. 22, 23. The Virgin Daughter of Zion has despised thee, etc.
London, September the 12th. 1696.

FINIS.

