Carnal Prudence Displayed: OR THE Crafty Contrivances OF THE JESUITS Relating
to the POPISH PLOT, Discovered by way of LETTER from GAUNT TO Mr. Willmore IN
ENGLAND.

Jam saturati estis, jam divites facti estis, sine nobis regnatis.

Ep. Ia Paull ad Cor. c. 4. Qui Convenient in aliquo tertio, convenient
interse.

LONDON, Printed for B. Shirley, under St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet,
1682.

Carnal Prudence Displayed:
WE the Fathers of the Society now Convened at Gaunt, having been advised of
your late Proceedings, thought it our Duty to express our Cordial thanks to you
on that Subject; we therefore desire you to believe our whole Body in Flanders,
as gratefully sensible of the last great service you have done our common
Cause, as any of our Brethren whom the Nighness of abode might have given the
opportunity to prevent us in the like acknowledgment. And indeed we cannot
sufficiently admire and applaud the Christian constancy of those truly brave
Jurors, who, in acquitting the Right Honorable Lord Shaftsbury, have asserted
the Right and Property of Englishmen, as well in order to their Lives as
Estates, in spite of all the damnable Projections and Machinations of those
Belials called Tories. Oh! memorable Ignoramus Jury, which well deserves
Inscriptions on Monuments of everlasting Marble! Now as our correspondency with
you has hitherto been under the Rose, so we desire that it may be still; we
keep all things of this Nature out of the cognizance of any of our Subs, and
have reason to believe that you do the like: now to satisfy you, we will
demonstrate the possibility of setting our Horses together, as you said; nay,
it shall be made out from your own Confessions. If you remember, you said in
your last Letter, That if it could be made to appear that our Principles as
well in Religion as in Matters of State, did agree with yours, the Business
would soon be at an end. To perform what I promised, I shall lay before you
such matter of fact concerning our Allegiance to Princes, and Obedience to
Prelates; that if you are in your wits, you must needs confess, that all the
difference betwixt us is de nomine, and not de re.

FIrst then you must know, that having through our indefatigable Intrigues
discovered the Methods of the Romish Court, we new-molded our rule, so as it is
now altogether agreeable to the Maxims by which they steer; insomuch that they
look on us, as the most necessary to carry on their Designs and Contrivances.
In the beginning we were strangely serviceable, and obedient to that degree
that at length we carried all before us. Being come to a height of Power and
Riches, we were courted by Kings and Princes, into whose Cabinets when we had
humbly crept in, we so magnified to them the Pope's Power as well Temporal as
Spiritual, and the influence it gave him upon the Subjects of Christian
Princes, that we soon brought them on their knees, and now so far prevailed,
that no Catholic Prince thinks himself secure without taking some of ours for
their Confessor. Things now being by our unanimous endeavors brought to this
pitch, you must conceive we have a double game to play; that is, we must keep
in with Pope and Princes, a hard task you will say; and so it is. But however
we have made a shift hitherto, to play this game, ay and ply it still. To let
you see this, you must know that whenever there is a Pope made of our Faction,
then we make it our whole business to cry him up for a Saint, a learned and
wise Pope, to represent him to each Prince as one who espouses his (the
Prince's) particular interest; by our inducement, it is supposed; which obliges
him to acknowledge his sense of the Service in glorious Encomiums of us to his
Holiness, by whom and the whole Court, we are therefore judged the fittest
Spiritual Directors for Princes in the World, and consequently the main Pillars
of the Church. By this means, as our Employs are twofold, so are our Pensions
double; for Janus-like, we have one face toward the Prince, and another
regarding the Pope. Sirs, believe me, you cannot imagine in such a game as this
is, well played, how many occasions there are to bring grist to our Mill. Now
on the other side, if it fall out that a Pope be chosen, who, though a holy and
learned Man, yet, Si non pro nobis contra nos est, then what do we do? why we
whisper in the ears of our Penitents, and especially of the Ladies, that it is
much to be feared, that holy Father the Pope, is too great a favourer of
Jansenists and Blackloists, and suchlike Hetrodox men, and how they ought to
pray all such may be removed from his Holiness, lest being led away by these
Wolves in Sheeps-skins, the Orthodox, meaning our selves might be forgot, and
Catholicity left in a tottering condition: Now let the prejudice of Pope,
Bishops, and Clergy be never so great against us, all the devout Sex, both
Nuns, devoted Women, and Lay-women will buoy up our sanctity against them all:
and for this intent we have particular Prayers, Fastings, Meditations, and
Disciplines. Sirs, in good truth you cannot imagine how devout the Women are at
all this, and how they outdo even our selves in the performance of it: By this
means many Proselytes are got, and our fame is spread abroad in such a nature,
that in some Cities we Monopolize all the Faithful, except only the tagragg
folks or rabble; who if they are so impudent to approach our Confession seats,
we send them back with a powder to their Parish Churches, and if they argue the
case, we tell them it is their Christian Duty; but after all this, if some one
of them be found so wise, as to distinguish, then we admit him, rather than he
should instruct the Rabble against us; and truly it is a great matter for a
Community, whose aim is at governing the whole, to have the Rabble on their
side, especially when ad majorem Dei Gloriam, it will be necessary for the
carrying on the Cause to lay any one aside on point of good Name or Life,
according to the gravity of the Sin committed against the said Community;
besides this, it is very advantageous to have their good word, were it only upon
the account of the respect paid us by Children and old Women in asking our
Blessings, and in putting off their Hats, and such like honorary worship paid
to our Reverences: all this does undoubtedly distinguish us from all other
Priests or Religious, who, though they may have the simplicity of the Dove, yet
they fall short of us in the prudence of the Serpent, because they are so
silly, as not to know how to reconcile them; the reason is, because they
understand Religion, but not Government, and consequently they are ignorant,
how sometimes Prudentia carnis is meant by Prudentia serpentis, or that they
are identified. But after this, If the Pope be such an one as the present
Innocent 11. is, Viz. Laying us aside, condemning many of our Propositions, and
sodality Prayers to the Virgin Mary; yet we keep fair still as to the
Exteriors, but underhand we cut him out work enough; for at this time we have
set one of the most powerful of all our Kings upon his back, in revenge to his
prejudice against us, and although he has a mind to destroy our Order, yet he
dares not attempt it. The reasons are, for that all our Brother Jesuits out of
France remonstrate daily how they are concerned to see their French Brethren
violating their most sacred fourth Vow, by adhering to their King against his
Holiness in the concern of the Regalis; and they hope that he, his Holiness
will not punish the innocent for the faults of a few, that they are ready to
stand by his Holiness with all their Power and Interest with other Princes;
That the Jesuits of France, as well as the rest of Catholics there, never were
esteemed right for the Interest of the holy See: and a Hundred such reasons as
these, do they bring to amuse his Holiness from day to day, till he has spun
out the thread of his short life. Then shall the Jesuits of France club again
their Interest with all their foreign Brethren, and bring along with them their
powerful French King to set up another Pope, who under pretense of the French
Faction, shall quell the dispute concerning the Regalis, and the King in
reality shall be in statu quo prius: then, I say, shall all Suspensions and
Excommunications be taken off from some of our French Brethren, and from those
they have engaged in the dispute; and probably, nay, we have a moral certainty,
that his New Holiness will for his own quiet-sake make use of ours. Then I
pray, what advantages of Church and State will accrue to our Order, which
through our prudential Morals growing greater and greater, will in the long run
gull both Church and State, and then Goodnight to Popes and Kings who will not
be directed by us. Another Objection in your last was, That we allowed of
Bishops, which was contrary to the Presbyterian Institution; we allow of them
tacitly in those Countries where we cannot pull them down we grant: we allow of
them judiciously where we have Power to obstruct them; it is denied. For
instance of this great truth in King James his days, when His Majesty treated
with Spain to Marry Charles the First to the Infanta; the Tory Papists (as we
will believe) informed the Court of Rome, that the said King was disposed to a
tacit Liberty of Conscience, and that it would be necessary to give them a
Bishop; whereupon a Tory Bishop was made whose name was Smith; he came into
England with his Commission of totius Angliae and Scotiae Ordinarius. He was
reverenced by all of his Faction, insomuch that had he continued, all we
Presbyterians of the Society, must have truckled to him, to the loss of our
liberty, profit, and power, so as to have been subject to every Tory Priest
whom that Anti-Presbyterian Bishop would have set over us. In this conjuncture,
we not able to brook one man's Lording it over the rest, Convened, and it was
Resolved with a Nemine, etc. That there must be an Association of Catholics
(leaving out the words Jesuits or Presbyterians, to carry on the Contrivance
more Plausibly) in order to the opposing this burdensome Tory Prelateship. This
was no sooner resolved, then our Emissaries flew abroad like lightning, to tell
all the Wives and leading Women, that it was known that a Catholic Bishop was
come into England, and that if he were not persuaded to retreat beyond Seas,
the Protestants would be alarmed, and a dreadful and most dismal Storm would
fall upon us all; and in fine, that we should be ruined to all intents and
purposes. These and suchlike Arguments we made use of to bugbear the
pusillanimous; but a Pox on it, it would not do; their puny Tory Souls, were
oversway'd by Obedience to that thing called Prelacy. We Convened a second
time, and romaging up our Morals of Prudence, we at length found out an
expedient that would do, which was this, we perused a Catalogue which we had of
Protestant Bishops; and amongst them we pitched upon the Bishop of Lincoln, who
was in those days the greatest stickler for the Tory Protestancy. Then we
consulted whether a Member or Dependent of our Society should acquaint this
Bishop, that one Smith a Popish titular Bishop was come into England, with a
pretended Power over England and Scotland. And it was Voted with a Nemine and a
Member; for that it was a concern too weighty for a Layman to be entrusted
withal. Then was a most prudent Member singled out and Commissioned for this
great work, and ordered to go immediately to Lincoln, and acquaint the Bishop
as aforesaid; it was indeed thought convenient he should not take any notice of
his quality as then to the Bishop; but it is probable he might have known
shortly after who he was obliged to for the Intelligence. However his Lordship
immediately Posts to London, and acquaints His Majesty with what had happened,
and represents to him at large, that His Majesty had better break off the Match
with Spain, then that the Papists should gain such advantages which might
capacitate them to destroy the Protestant Religion. The King replied, That he
knew nothing of a Popish Bishop, nor did he intend any more but a connivancy.
The Spanish Ambassador was sent for immediately, and ordered forthwith to
acquaint his Master, That if the Pope did not cease to send Bishops hither, he
would break off the Match. The King of Spain hearing this, sent away one in
Post have to acquaint the Pope with what had past, and how prejudicial his
Holiness's proceeding were to the Crown; The Pope made answer, That nothing of
all this was represented to him, for he had made Smith a Bishop, before ever
the least mention was made to him of any such Treaty betwixt England and Spain;
and that he was so far from sending others, that he never intended more than
one, there being neither Maintenance nor Business for more, and if he thought
this one would have caused any disturbance, and thereby become prejudicial to
Roman Catholics, he would have desisted. Now you may object that we did not
state the Story right. It Is true we did not: and we must tell you that in so
doing we agree with you, for you know full well that men of our Principles must
state Matters so, as to procure our ends; for, as the Tory Prelate said, If we
had been sincere, we could never have routed him; which, by our prudent
management, was effected.

Now worthy Gentlemen, Pray tell us if we are inferior to your selves for
Presbyterianism? Verily Brethren, we are of the Opinion that in reality there
is none, and to let you see that there is not, let us most critically examine
each others Motto. Ad majorem Dei Gloriam, is ours; The Good old Cause, is
yours. Pray what can be meant by Good old Cause, but God's good Cause? and what
difference is there betwixt God's Good Cause, and the Glory of God; since to
advance God's Cause, is to advance his Glory? so now you see that there is no
substantial difference betwixt us. Another Objection of yours was, That though
we were Presbyterians, yet we were Papist-Presbyterians, and consequently as
such there would necessarily be some Je ne scay quoy, of that thing called
Loyalty inherent to the Presbyterian, which instead of bearing up the Cause, it
would sling it down, and such a one you call Presbyterian in Masquerade; we
must confess this is notably and prudently argued, you are satisfied then that
we are Presbyterians; but you are afraid that a Pope should lurk in the Belly
of such Presbyters: To let you see that you ought not hereafter to entertain
such Fears and Jealousies of your Brethren would-be, We adhere to the Pope
sometimes for interest, other times we oppose the Pope for interest, as is
clearly demonstrated in the precedent discourse; so that in reality we are
neither for Pope nor King. Do not you do the like when you cry, God bless the
King, and Preserve him from his Enemies? when you desire that the Militia
should be put into your hands, to defend the sacred Person of His Majesty, and
the Protestant Religion as Established by Law. I say, in reality at the same
time, do you not use our excellent mental Reservations, Restrictions and
Equivocations, when you intend to secure all for your selves, which once
compassed, the Monarchy and the established Religion must be destroyed, as
incompatible with your Principles, which are for holy Common-weals? So you see*
though you court the King, and magnify the Religion established, you are in
effect for neither. Now I think I have fully answered you with an Argument ad
hominem. But to show the Parallel further, you brand Church of England-Men with
Popery, and in the Fools coat of Papists in Masquerade, expose them to the
scorn and aversion of the Rabble. We do the like, calling all Anti-Jesuits (who
are indeed of the established Catholic Church) Jansenists and Blackloists,
names as odious and suspect to our Party, which we call the true Children of
the Church, as Heathen and Publican: Do we not deterr all from taking the Oath
of Allegiance, without giving any one a reason for it? But inter nos, we hold
that in some Cases a King may forfeit his Crown, sometimes to the Pope, when he
gives us good Pensions for teaching that Doctrine. Some of the Tory Papists
have discovered these reasons, but we deny them stoutly for all that: we have
more reasons yet besides these which we never yet discovered to any but to
those who believed strongly and with an implicit faith that our Presbyterian
Society is infallible in its Christian Principles. Therefore it is for your
entire satisfaction that we keep nothing hid from you. We do verily, and indeed
also believe, as a consequence from our infallible Principles, That a wicked
King breaking God's Holy Covenant, may by holy Commonweal-men be deposed, for
that the Spirit of the Lord is departed from him, and that he is no more
Anointed; and by consequence no King. Our Mariana and others have taught this
Doctrine with this difference only, that the Power of deposing was in the Pope,
and not in holy Commonweal-men; but the reason was; that he and the rest were
great Pope-Pensioners. Had they lived in our circumstances, they would have
asserted the same circumstantial Doctrine with us, especially having laid the
foundation of it in their infallible Principles. We cannot now imagine what
further objection you can make; if so, I know no reason why we should not clubb
together, for undoubtedly if we do, we shall go a great way in a little time.
It may be for all that, you make another Objection, viz. We being such
unheard of sticklers in carrying on our own Contrivances, that there may be
fallings out about the chief Places in the Commonweal. To rid you of that
scruple, how comes it to pass, that you are united amongst your selves? I
answer, because your Principles are alike; for the same reason, as I have
already made out, we must necessarily agree with you. O but you may argue again
That you are old standers in the Cause, and have already taken great pains in
laying Platforms of Government against the first day of the Golden Age, and
with great labors and indefatigable industry have brought things to this
height, as that you dare in the face of the Sun, contrary to the known
practices of the Land in all times bring in a Bill Ignoramus in spite of King,
Council, and Judges, nay, and Lord Mayor himself, whatsoever, and how many
soever the Witnesses are; and I think this no small Point to carry on the Good
old Cause. Verily, it is true what you say, and is but what we have already
praised you for; and will for ever admire and honor you, as in this being the
true lights to all solid Reformation. But lest you should still apprehend our
Presbyterian Society, by reason only of its coming in late, we unanimously
declare unto you, That we will have no share in the Temporals of the
Government, but only Spirituals, for you know no Government can stand where
there is not established Religion by Law. If you consent to this, and admit the
coupling our Presbyterian Societies, I know not what Power on the Earth can
resist such Principled men as we all are. Pray Sir, remember our hearty
Services to the Ignoramus Jurors. We expect your Answer to this unanimous
Declaration of our Minds, as soon as possible, whereby we may know what to
trust to. We do not at all doubt but we shall have free admittance into your
Clubb, whereby to become one Heart, one Mouth, one Man to carry on The Good old
Cause of God once again, for his greater Honor and Glory.

From our Assembly at Gaunt, March 1st. 1682. Worthy Sir, Your most hearty and
truly devoted humble Servant Ignatius Franciscus Philo-Presbyter.

FINIS.

