A SERMON Preached at ISLINGTON, Upon the 26th day of July, 1685, (In the
Afternoon.) Being the Day of Solemn Thanksgiving To Almighty God for His
MAJESTY'S late Victories over the REBELS.

By Shadrach Cook, M. A. Chaplain to the Right Honorable the Earl of
AYLESBVRY.

Behold their threatenings, Acts 4. 29. Rusticus es Corydon, nec munera curat
Alexis: Virg. LONDON, Printed by R. N. for Walter Kettilby, at the
Bishop's-Head in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1685.

To the Right Honorable ROBERT EARL of Ailesbury and Elgin, Viscount Bruce of
Ampthill, Baron Bruce of Wharlton, Skeleton, and Kinlos; Lord Lieutenant of the
Counties of Bedford, Huntingdon and Cambridge; Hereditary high Steward of the
Honor of Ampthill; Lord Chamberlain of His Majesty's Household, and one of the
LORDS of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
MY LORD,
I Humbly offer This to Your Lordship, not only as an acknowledgment of Your
Lordship's many Favors, and my hearty Gratitude for them; but also with a
design of craving Your Lordship's farther goodness in protecting This against
the clamorous opposition of unreasonable men: For by what I have already
experienced, I may easily guess at the unwelcome entertainment it is like to
meet with from some, for whom yet it bears the most Christian and Charitable
design. And though (of late especially) I have met with unkind usage, and very
severe reflections for doing my duty in speaking seasonable Truths, yet I
declare, I think I could not be more Kind and Charitable even to our Enemies,
than in Preaching against what they are most guilty of. And now the ensuing
Discourse is so far from railing, as they have termed it, (their usual
Character of what dislikes them) that I hope it will appear to Your Lordship to
have in it, a good natured and Charitable intention. For having before spoken
to the subject of Praise, for our late Deliverance (for which I was disturbed,
and belied in the very Church) I thought I could make no better improvement of
the late Solemn Thanksgiving, than in the design of the ensuing Discourse;
which I looked upon as peculiarly proper for the Afternoon, being so suitable to
that most pious Prayer (for our Enemies) therein appointed.

My Lord,

I shall forbear reflections on those, who make severe ones on this, and the
like, when they heard it from the Pulpit. Considering it would be no very
decent entertainment for Your Lordship: and a means, I hope, to make them more
candid Interpreters in the Reading, than they were in the Hearing of it.

Though in the midst of all, it has been, I must confess, no small support and
satisfaction to me; That I have had the particular signal Respect and
Encouragement of that Reverend Canon (for whom, Your Lordship has so great and
just esteem) for some of those Discourses that have suffered under the untoward
reproach of others. Now Your Lordship knows with what Authority I might term
Him one of the most Learned men, and best Preachers of this Age. And when I
consider This, together with the cool reception even He found among some, when
he urged them lately and so well,

To give unto Caesar, the things that are Caesar's: It Is well the case is no
worse with me. But I must consider, that minutes, now especially, are precious
with Your Lordship. And that high Place, to which a most gracious and
discerning Prince has exalted Your Lordship, suffers too much by this tedious
interruption.

And yet I have not performed what is the usual entertainment in these
Applications: Having given no account of Your Lordship's great Virtues and
Accomplishments. Nor should I need to do it if I could; all men's mouths being
sill'd with the Praises of Your Lordship and most noble Son (who would almost
convince us of the Natural, Parental Production even of humane souls) so
exactly resembling Your Lordship in untainted Loyalty and Goodness. And here I
enter on a large field; Your Lordship being the happiest of Parents, having a
truly Noble and most dutiful Offspring: And a Family, that for a strict
Conformity to the Church, and stanch Loyalty to the King, can scarcely be
matched or surpassed by any. I speak not these things out of design or
flattery, but can assert them from some experience, and dare challenge any that
know Ailesbury house to contradict me in the least particular.

Though I the less wonder at that strain of Goodness and Loyalty, which runs
through the whole Family, when I consider that it has Two such eminent
Examples, which shine so illustriously before it. And we all know that the best
way to obtain my Lord's and Lady's Favor, is to Fear God and Honor the King.
Which (by the Grace of God) shall evermore be the most hearty and constant
endeavors of,

My Lord, YOUR LORDSHIPS most Obliged, Obedient, and humble Servant, and
Chaplain, SHADRACH COOK.

IMPRIMATUR.

Jo. Battely, RRmo P. Dno Guil. Archiep. Cantuar. a Sacris Domesticis.

Ex Aedib. Lambeth.

Aug. 1. 1685.

A SERMON PREACHED On the 26. of July 1685. The day of Solemn Thanksgiving to
Almighty God for His MAJESTY'S Late Victories over the REBELS.
S. MATT. XXI. 32. And ye, when ye had seen it, repented not afterward.
WE are this Day to Bless and Magnify the name of God, who has manifested his
great goodness toward our King and his Kingdoms, in giving Him so absolute and
signal victories over the late Rebels.

And I dare say that there is no truly honest Loyal Soul among us, but does it
with a great deal of hearty Zeal and Cheerfulness; For tell me, did not your
Hearts burn within you? were you not wonderfully enlivened, and almost
transported at the first news, or certainty of that utter defeat and overthrow?
Though (which is very sad to think of) we could not but observe, nor can we
well forget, the quite different humor and behavior of too many among us, who
showed as much as men could, or dare, their open dislike of God's special
Providence in this matter. I need not tell you how brisk and pleasant they
would appear on every vain report (raised by their own Party) of the hopes or
success of the Rebels in both Kingdoms, and which is more prodigious, what
pains and industry they used to defame and discredit that good true news which
they had no mind to believe. Had we not seen it, we could scarce have imagined,
that men should thus resolutely oppose the Truth, and be so given over to
believe a lie.

But when this Goodness of God became unquestionable, and they were now utterly
confounded, and the Devil had no more lies in store to buoy them up with: Does
their belief and conviction now influence their heart, and that, their
practice? Since the Villainy is so plainly discovered, are they ashamed of, or
sorry for it? Does this goodness of God to others, lead them to repentance? Do
they lay these things to heart? Do they seriously consider, that these Rebels,
their Adherents and Abettors, are guilty not only of Imprudent, hot or rash
actions, but of mortal and damnable sins? and does it prompt them to suitable
acknowledgments and expressions in Mourning, Sorrow and Lamentation; for this,
which is to us a good day, a day of Joy and rejoicing, to such as these should
be a day of sorrow and humiliation, not as some may make it, because the
mischief did not succeed; but for their being any ways concerned or
instrumental in it: for it will be your most aggravated crime and condemnation,
if you yet continue your obstinacy. And ye, when ye had seen it, repented not
afterward.

So that this great goodness of God in our present most gracious deliverance,
should now at length prevail upon such, who were concerned in the Rebellion, or
any ways favorable to it, to be sincerely penitent for their great sin in this
case; Though God knows, and with sorrow we speak it, their obstinacy appears
even yet to be very great, and almost incorrigible. And ye, when ye had seen
it, repented not afterward. In speaking on this Subject, I shall consider,

I. What it is in the case before us that should prevail with men to repent;
where we shall remember the great mercy and goodness of God in some of our late
Deliverances.

II. The persons that yet continue Impenitent.

III. The little or no grounds or reasons we have to believe them Penitent.
Notwithstanding,

IV. The great cause they have to be so at this time or occasion.

V. We shall lay down the more particular signs or tokens of their Repentance,
which we may and do justly expect from them.

I. Were we to consider the several mercies, favors and deliverances God has
bestowed upon us, the time would fail us to speak of them. However we may very
usefully for a while entertain our selves on this point, by representing to you
some short account of those many and great deliverances, God has given us from
these Phanatical Republican Spirits, that are near at hand, or fresh in our
remembrance.

1. And here we might in the first place bring to Your minds the Great
Rebellion which some of you have known or been concerned in; which cannot but
call to our minds, the dismal Scene of a most distressed and unhappy Nation;
overwhelmed with Blood, Ruin and Confusion both in Church and State, and will
be evermore black and remarkable for that most horrid murder of the best of
Kings.

But how good and gracious was God toward us, even in the midst of this great
Calamity: for that good Prince who is lately gone to his long home; and our
present Sovereign, that were the great sufferers in those times, and chiefly
aimed at, were wonderfully preserved in great dangers by land and by water, and
at length brought to succeed and sit in their rightful Inheritance.

And indeed when we consider the present, we have great reason to call to mind
and bewail those rebellious times; for These among us have been some of the
very same men, that were then notorious for this villainy, and is no doubt the
self-same Phanatical Spirit that runs through all these designs, which is and
ever will be addicted to Treachery and Rebellion. So that we do in a great
measure owe all or most of our present Sects, Factions or Parties to those
times: These being the Tares now grown up, that the Devil did then sow among
the Wheat.

2. The next remarkable deliverance from this sort of men, is very legible in
that impious design of Excluding our present Prince from What was inviolable by
the strictest laws of God and Nature. A design full of Ingratitude and
Irreligion: Therein more resembling a Fanatic contrivance.

He that had suffered such hard things for his Countries good, and was banished
from his own home; He that had ventured his own life, and lost his dear Royal
Father in the defense of Truth and a good Cause; He who when restored to his
own Country and native soil, would yet again resolutely hazard himself in a
most dangerous Naval fight. He that has often ventured his life for the defense
of this Nation, must now for a requital be debarred from that his most undoubted
and inviolable Right in it. What an unparalleled baseness and ingratitude is
this? and such as will be a lasting shame to the Impenitent Promoters and
Abettors of it in all ages; Being withal most unchristian, profane, and
impious, contrary to our Solemn Oaths, and all the obligations both of
Scripture and Conscience. So that for the honor of our Nation and Religion
too, all honest Loyal Churchmen must look upon and bless God for our
deliverance, from that impious unchristian and truly Fanatic Conspiracy. 3
Which brings us to consider a Third Instance of their wicked designs and our
great deliverance.

That of the Rye Conspiracy being the result of their disappointment in their
former design; for when the pretense of Law would not effect their business,
now comes out That their black and hellish contrivance of Murdering the Royal
pair after a most dismal and horrid manner: which when one of the designed
Actors in it did openly confess, He acknowledges himself to be a Hearer of the
Baptists, Independents and Presbyterians.

Now we cannot but look upon this to be a most Providential and remarkable
Instance of Gods wonderful mercy and deliverance toward us; A sudden fire
hastening Their return before the Villans were ripe and prepared for that horrid
execution.

4 And now as a branch and consummation of that, and all their other Plots, let
us as behooves us, consider and reflect upon our deliverance from their late
horrid traitorous Conspiracy, that unnatural open Rebellion, for which we are
now especially to magnify the Lord and exalt his Name together. I shall not
need surely to spend much time in showing you the heinousness of all Rebellion,
and this in particular, having done it already in some late Discourses; only
let us remember that our Religion, our Prince, the lives of all honest men, and
whatever is dear to us in this world, were in danger, by the designs of these
ambitious, restless and blood thirsty men. To whom had God given us over as a
prey (as our sins most justly deserved) our blood would have been spilt like
water upon the ground, we must have lost all that is dear to us in this world,
and we should have been overwhelmed in a deluge of Sects and Heresies, of wars
and confusions, of which we could not have expected to see any other issue than
the final ruin and destruction of this Kingdom and God's Church among us.

This is in short the account of our deliverance, or the grounds of our Joy for
it; and certainly if any thing can make us truly cheerful and pleasant, and
heartily thankful to God, we have abundant reason to be so, for this his
present mercy and goodness toward us. Who has so graciously rescued us from
these most accursed and damnable designs, contrived and carried on by the
several Sects and Parties of pretended Religion, the known and avowed enemies
to the present Government and Constitution both in Church and State. Which
brings us to consider our second Particular.

II. The several Sects, Parties and Divisions among us being the great Authors,
Incouragers and Promoters of these most impious designs and practices, as being
most agreeable to the Principles or Sentiments of these men; for nothing can be
more plain and demonstrable, than that they have all of them made it almost
their constant endeavor in all their discourses public and private
(especially such as have been managed in a pretended religious way) to set
themselves all they could against the present Government and Constitution both
in Church and State. And were I at leisure to manifest this from what is the
usual way and method of proving men's Principles, I could abundantly confirm it
from their numerous writings and professions in this kind, the main drift of
all, or most of them, as to this particular, being to destroy the Church,
disturb the Kingdom, debauch men's Principles, and pervert the Scriptures; so
that I the less wonder at these practices, which are but agreeable to their
Profession, and the very constant design and natural result of these Schisms
and Factions; for a man cannot be a Fanatic or Schismatic, but he does and
must actually forfeit his duty to the Church and the King. Nor is this any more
than what is agreeable to former and present experience.

That they have been the constant disturbers of our Israel, is I think already
manifest, and might be more largely proved, were there occasion for it: And
look now into the very late Rebellion, and then tell me what you think of it,
whether it was not purely and solely Fanatical? that the several Sects and
Separatists from our Church were not chiefly or only concerned and engaged in
it? some of their pretended Ministers were actually in it, and most or all of
them knew of it? And as we before intimated, I do verily believe that they did
not act inconsistently to their own Ways or Principles (if they have any). And
had I been one of the Party or Separatists, I do not see how I could have acted
congruously to my own pretenses, or that Schism or Separation, had not I
consented, conspired or acted in these designs for promoting their True
Protestant Cause against pretended Popery and Arbitrary Power. Wherefore I do
more wonder that any should be exempted from it, than that all should be in it:
for I cannot see how a man could be a Fanatic, and could tolerably excuse
himself in this case. Nor do I think but that every one of them did as much
carry on the Rebellion, as all Loyal honest men were against it.

III. But did this need further proof; it is too plain and manifest from their
continued impenitency. Which is our Third particular. Which is too evident,
either first, from their own Profession; or secondly, their excuses for it; or
thirdly, their continuance in their former ways and practices.

A greater sin than that which these men have been guilty of, can hardly be
imagined, being (as I have showed you very lately) a complication of almost all
kinds of wickedness, bearing in it Treason, Sacrilege, Murder, and what not?
And now when such as are thus guilty come to reflect upon themselves, one would
expect and hope for in this case a most profound humility, and strict
repentance, but whether most or any of those that so justly suffered for this
Cause, have given sufficient demonstration of their extraordinary sorrow for
their designs and practices, let any impartial man consider. When men come to
dye, especially in their strength and vigor, they have then more abundant
advantages to consider and understand their Case and Condition; but have you
known them then to deal plainly and freely as becomes such a state and
circumstances? 2 or do we not find, in the Second place, Excuses and
Palliations instead of true sorrow and Repentance? and as is said of a great
one among them, we find enough (from them) to show their guilt, but not their
repentance. Now seeing that many or most of them are so industrious in excusing
themselves or others, and take hold of any little opportunity, either to
justify or extenuate their crimes; This is too great a sign of an impenitent
or relentless heart. For the true and sincere penitent, is more, industrious to
discover and aggravate, than to hide or lessen his sin; in This consists the
true nature and comfort of Repentance. If therefore you are Conscious to your
selves, or we find any to be given to the covering or extenuating these sins,
or the promoters of such horrid practices, this I think is an undeniable proof
to any sober judicious man, of their continued impenitency. 3 Especially if we
add to this in the Third place, The continuance in their former ways and
practices. Such people are not and cannot be accounted truly penitent, who yet
persevere and continue in their former courses which did really and actually
encourage and promote these rebellious designs. Whoever therefore are glad of
any occasion or opportunity to vilify the Church, and reproach Government; to
discourage such that do their hearty endeavors for discountenancing Schism,
Faction and Rebellion, that do herd among, or can think or speak well of such
that are known and professed enemies to the constitution both in Church and
State. This is a sign that such are so far from being penitent, that they are
rather hardened and obstinate in their impieties. IV. Though in the Fourth
place we shall find, that now especially, they have great cause to be truly
Penitent: Considering, I. First, That by these late actions, there is 1. given
to the world a plain demonstration of such men's guilt and impiety. Grant that
some or many of them did follow these people, or had a kindness for them out of
a presumption of the goodness of their Cause, or the strict piety of their
persons: Now upon this discovery and defeat of their Villainy, Men of any sense
or reason cannot but have other Sentiments, and must look upon themselves to be
miserably deluded or mistaken in them; so that now upon this better knowledge,
this through and indeed plain demonstration, you may recede very justly and
honorably, and not suffer your selves to be any longer deceived by them. We
may hope therefore, and do expect, that such who in the simplicity of their
hearts were led away and seduced by them, will now, if ever, come to
themselves; and if after such plain conviction and undoubted proof against them
as this is, they will still continue in the ways and courses of Faction and
Sedition, they can be accounted no better than incorrigible Rebels. 2. Seeing
withal in the Second place, the Result of their Designs, which is not any
longer, as some have been made to believe, for the love or fear of God, the
Protestant Religion, Tenderness of Conscience, Christian Liberty, and the like;
But, as you have heard and seen, the main drift and tendency of all is to
imbrue a Nation in War, and Tumults, Blood and Murder, to ruin our Church,
destroy our Prince, and all true Loyal men. Is not this sufficient cause to
make them look about them; and now at length seriously to repent of, and
renounce all such impious ways and practices? 3. Considering in the Third
place, That this seems to be both the greatest and the last means and method
God may use for the bringing these men to repentance, and a sound mind; for
what is there that can or will be prevalent with them, if this be not? If after
all those demonstrations God has given us of his mercy, and their impious
designs, you will not see and repent, you give the world too much reason to
believe, that you lie under that Pharisaical judgment, to have eyes and see
not, ears and hear not, hearts and will not understand. And therefore, Sirs, as
you will answer it to your Consciences now, and to God hereafter, be roused out
of this fatal Lethargy, and hearken to this awakening, and perhaps last call of
Almighty God; be not still perverse and obstinate to your utter ruin both of
Soul and Body: it is high time to look about you, and now at length having seen
all this, to show your Repentance; which we earnestly hope and desire to see,
in these following respects: which is our Fifth particular.

V. I. In an utter renouncing of your former ways and doings, those especially
that have had any manner of Aspect or tendency to the promoting or encouraging
these impious designs and practices; cast a serious sincere and impartial
reflection upon your late and your former actions, and see whether you have not
one way or other justified, encouraged, or promoted these designs; whether by
herding with the multitude against public Rule and Government, by
countenancing or speaking, or thinking well of them that did, by acting or
voting what you knew was displeasing to the King, and contrary to the practice
of undoubtedly Loyal men; by discouraging truly Loyal, honest, Orthodox
Preachers, that would tell you the Truth without guise or dissimulation, and
adhering to or thinking well only of such that you knew or fancied to be
otherwise.

In a word, Examine your own knowledge and Consciences, and make a through
search of whatever way, means, or actions, through fault or misfortune, you
have promoted the Cause and Interest of such as are thus Factious and
Rebellious; and be now at last convinced of your error, detest what you have
done this way, with zeal and heartiness. This is the first mark and token of
Repentance we desire and expect from you.

2. Hereupon ensues another very signal mark and token of your sorrow,
Repentance and true Conversion, and that is a sincere and hearty Loyalty to
your Prince. That you practice this your selves, and promote it among others to
the utmost of your skill and power; that whoever are in your families, under
your care, or committed to your charge, may be instructed in the sound
Principles of Loyalty and Obedience, according to the Doctrine and Institution
of the Church of England. And is it not high time seriously to enter upon this
course and practice, seeing the fatal designs and consequences of disobedience
and Rebellion, the works of those that forget or abandon their Duty and
Allegiance to their Prince; you will not, and cannot secure your selves from
such impious practices but by your being thus heartily and truly Loyal, in
Thought, Word or Deed, to the utmost of your Power: for if it be only in
outward formality or expression, or according to the indifferent and moderate
way and manner of some men; It Is such as will be neither acceptable to God,
serviceable to your Prince, or safe to your selves. Wherefore to show your
selves truly penitent, you must endeavor to be eminently Loyal, and remarkably
Obedient, and dutiful to the King for the future, which is the only opposite to
Faction, Sedition and Rebellion.

3. As another sign of your true Repentance, we do exhort you to, and expect
from you, a through and strict conformity to our Church; The best, if not only
Constitution, that does sincerely teach and promote true Loyalty and Obedience:
for you may take this as a sure rule, which you will find true by constant
observation and experience, the more any do dissent from, or dislike, the
present Constitution of our Church, the greater friends or promoters they are,
or have been of what either was, or tended to Sedition or Rebellion; against
which there is no prevention or security but by a firm and strict adherence to
the Church of England. And this besides other incomparable advantages, shows
the great privilege of those who are truly of it, and the miserable state of
such that are bred up in any other courses.

Wherefore to repent of what you have been or done, and to avoid or prevent
such designs or calamity, and to be heartily honest, Dutiful and Loyal for the
future; You must be sincerely conformable to the Church of England, studying it
your selves; and teaching others its Doctrines, and Principles, frequenting its
Communion, devoutly joining in its Prayers, and doing every thing that becomes
a sincere Conformist, and a true Churchman.

And thus, as you have heard, are you to manifest your Repentance, First, by an
utter renouncing your former ways and practices that have been any ways
Factious or Seditious. Secondly, to become heartily Loyal and dutiful to the
King. Thirdly, sincerely and strictly Conformable to the Church.

And as we just now prayed, may God to this end take from them all their
Prejudices and all their Passions, their confident mistakes, their carnal ends,
and their secular interests, and open their eyes that they may see (at least in
this their day) the things which belong to their peace, and soften the most
obdurate heart, into a meek, humble and docible temper, that they may no longer
resist the truth; bow down the stiff neck, and the iron sinew, take away the
brow of brass, and the whores forehead, sweeten (if it may be) the gall of
bitterness, and loose the bands of iniquity, and guide their feet into the ways
of peace.

4. After which, you will be fit and ready for the Fourth and last advice,
which is, to show your Repentance by joining with us in returning Praise and
Thanksgiving to Almighty God for this great Deliverance; for I dare say,
whoever is heartily thankful to God for this Mercy and Blessing, was either
altogether unconcerned in those horrid designs, from which we are thus
delivered, or does sincerely repent of them; Let us therefore with one heart
and voice glorify God by giving him the honor due unto his Name: The sole
glory of our deliverance. That we acknowledge it to be the Lords doing, and the
day which the Lord has made. And let us endeavor to express our gratitude not
only with our lips but in our lives, by giving up our selves to his service,
and studying to serve him all the days of our lives.

For the Lord your God, he it is that fights for you. Take good heed
therefore unto your selves, that ye love the Lord your God, Josh. 23. 10, 11.

And now I cannot instance in any one thing, that does so much manifest our
Religious Duty and Thankfulness together, as that of Charity and Beneficence to
the Poor; the great obligation of a Christian at all times, but peculiarly
necessary, and almost indispensable at a solemn time of Praise or Thanksgiving:
Were your Charity, which we now beg of you for our Poor, large or bountiful, it
would be but a slender return for this present Deliverance, and the Mercies we
enjoy by it. However it is an acknowledgment of God's goodness toward us, which
therefore we cannot omit without being insensible of his mercies, or ungrateful
for them.

May none of you therefore slight or neglect such a fair, seasonable, and
blessed opportunity of showing your selves

Thankful to God, Loyal to the King, and Charitable to the Poor.
FINIS.

