ERRATA.
EPist. to the Reader, line 6. for That of Rebellion, read That Sin of
Rebellion. L. 37. for where I been thus caught, r. where I had been thus
caught. L. 46. for did Lever see or hear, r. have I seen or heard. Sermon. p. 4.
l. 3. for some, r. such. ^ 10. put out either. l. 29. for had, r. have. P. 20.
l. 19. for son, r. Season. P. 24. l. 36. for necessary, r. necessarily. P. 26.
l. 37. for the Rulers against, r. the Rulers of the darkness of this World
against. Ibid. put out the darkness of this World, P. 27. l. 1. put out World.
Ibid. for on High Places, r. in High. Places. P. 27. l. 14. for Favor, r.
Honor.

AN EXHORTATION TO FIRMNESS and CONSTANCY IN TRUE RELIGION. IN A SERMON
Preached at St. MARY ISLINGTON, Feb. 2. 1689/1690.

By Shadrach Cook, M. A. Lecturer there.

Quemcunque fortem videris Miserum neges. Sen. Tr. Do well O Lord unto those
that are Good, and True of Heart, Ps. 125. Imprimatur,

Guil. Needham, R. R. in Christo P. ac D. D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacer.
Domest.
May 12. 1688.
London, Printed by J. Redmayne, 1689.

St. MARK 8.38. Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of Me, and of my Words, in
this adulterous and sinful Generation, of him also shall the Son of Man be
ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of his Father, with the holy Angels.


AT the 27th. Verse of this Chapter we find our Savior puts this Question to
his Disciples, Saying unto them, Whom do Men say that I am? Which Inquiry he
does not make for his own better Information, or Satisfaction, in this Case,
Because he knew all Men, John 2.24, 25.
and needed not that any should testify of Man, for he knew what was in Man:
But it was with Design, as we may see afterward, to set his own Disciples
Right and Orthodox in the Opinion or Knowledge of himself. For upon their
answering, Ver. 28. John the Baptist, but some say Elias, and others, one of
the Prophets: He says unto them, Ver. 29. Whom say ye that I am? Which
occasioned that Confession of Peter, in the Name of them all, Thou art the
Christ, the Messiah, the true Savior or Redeemer of Mankind. Whereupon our
Savior proceeds to give them a more full Account of the End of his Coming, and
of the Things concerning himself, particularly of his Death and Passion, Ver.
31. And he began to teach them that the Son of Man must suffer, and be rejected
of the Elders, and of the chief Priests, and Scribes, and be killed. Now Peter,
notwithstanding the Soundness of his late Profession, was so far from being
then Infallible, that he runs upon the most gross Error and Mistake; for he was
so scandalized at the News of a Suffering and Crucified Savior, that upon this
Account of himself, Peter took him, and began to rebuke him, Ver. 32. Whereupon
our Savior takes occasion to reprove him, and he does it smartly, Ver. 33. But
when he had turned about, and looked on his Disciples, he rebuked, Peter,
saying, Get thee behind me Satan, for thou savourest not the things that be of
God, but the things that be of Men; which seems to imply either, First, That
Peter was infected with that Opinion so common amongst the Jews, who looked for
such a Savior, as would be a great and mighty Prince, that should deliver them
out of their present Misery and Servitude, and reduce them and their Nation to
a most Flourishing State and Condition: Or else Secondly, and as a Consequence
hereof, He reproves that his Sensual and Carnal Spirit, and intimates to him
and all Men, that Suffering might be, as indeed it is, opposite and disagreeable
to all worldly Interest; but it is otherwise with him and all his Followers, for
he was, as you have heard, To suffer, to be rejected, and to be killed. And
herein he tells all his Disciples they were to resemble him, and must expect
and prepare accordingly, Ver. 34. And when he had called the People unto him,
with his Disciples also, he said unto them, Whosoever will come after me, let
him deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me. As Christ was a Man of
Sorrow and acquainted with Grief, did meet with wonderful Difficulties and
Afflictions: So his Disciples also must through much Tribulation enter into the
Kingdom of God And the enduring this to the utmost extremity (even to Death it
self) though it be our present loss, or disadvantage, is the certain way to
provide for and secure our future Interest: For whosoever will save his life,
shall lose it; but whosoever shall lose his life for my sake, or the Gospels,
the same shall save it, Ver. 35. And thus to procure the favor of God, and to
make a Provision for our immortal Souls in Heaven, (whatever we do, or however
it costs us) is both in it self more eligible, and of greater concern to us
than all things here below; and is withal such a Consideration as will make us
most firm and steady in this Holy Faith and Profession, or expose us to the
severest Displeasure of our Lord hereafter, if we are by any means dissettled
in our present Fidelity to Christ and his Doctrine; For what shall it profit a
Man, if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? Or what shall a
Man give in exchange for his Soul? Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me,
and of my Words, in this Adulterous and Sinful Generation, of him also shall
the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of his Father, with the
holy Angels.

From which Words I shall speak to these following particulars, which seem to
be the Natural result of them as now considered;

First, What that is which our Savior here warns all his Disciples against, or
what is meant by our being ashamed of Christ and of his Words.

Secondly, What are, or may be the Temptations thereunto.

Thirdly, The Aggravations hereof.

Fourthly, The Judgments or Punishments to be inflicted for it.

Fifthly, The Means to escape or avoid it.

Now in the First place, That great Evil which our Lord here speaks of, may
imply some, or all, of these following particulars.

First, An utter Rejecting or Renouncing of him, and his Doctrine.

Secondly, An external Denial or Disowning them.

Thirdly, A Recoiling or Aversion to some more difficult Parts, or duties of
Religion.

Fourthly, Some Actions or Proceedings that are contrary to the real Interest,
or Advantage, of true Religion.

The Evil of all which, we shall better apprehend by a distinct Consideration
of each particular.

First then, To be ashamed of Christ and of his Word, may imply an utter
Rejecting or Renouncing of him and his Doctrine; and so may either refer to such
our Savior speaks of, and threatens so severely, Matthew. 10.14, 15. Whosoever
shall not receive you, nor hear your Words, when ye depart out of that House,
or City, shake off the Dust of your Feet. Verily I say unto you, It shall be
more tolerable for the Land of Sodom and Gomorrha, in the day of Judgment,
then for that City: Which is meant of such who reject the very first overtures
of Grace and Salvation. And now if he pronounces their Case so desperate, how
much worse (if possible) may we conclude the Circumstances of those, who having
received, do shamefully desert that Holy Faith and Profession, and utterly cast
off or disown all their former share and interest in Christ and his Doctrine;
that is, in short, an utter Apostasy from the Faith of Christ, and a Renouncing
that their Holy Religion. Which Sin, with the self-same Note and Character of
it, as here expressed, is mentioned by the Apostle, Heb. 6. It is impossible for
them who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the Heavenly Gift, and were
made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and had tasted the good Word of God, and the
Powers of the World to come: If they shall fall away, to renew them again to
repentance: Seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put
him to an open shame. Where the Nature of this Sin, or the great Ingredient of
its Guilt, is the Crucifying Christ, as it were, a Second time, and so again
exposing him to shame. Whereupon, as the learned Annotator observes, That must
need^ conclude renouncing or denying of Christ, the looking on him as such the
Jews pretended him to be, when they Crucified him, that is an Imposture: That
is, in short, Men of Corrupt Minds, reprobate concerning the Faith, 2 Timothy 3.8.

Secondly, This Phrase of being ashamed of me, and my Words, may signify an
external Denial, or Disowning of Christ and his Profession, even when we have a
persuasion in our own Minds contrary thereunto; but we (upon some accounts to
be spoken to presently) do herein act contrary to the inward Sense and
Conviction of our own Minds and Judgments: And so we may hereupon explain or
interpret this Expression, or the Words here before us, from that parallel
Place Matthew. 10.32, 33. Where our Savior speaks to the same, or like Argument,
Whosoever therefore shall confess me before Men, him will I confess also before
my Father which is in Heaven. But whosoever shall deny me before Men, him will
I also deny before my Father which is in Heaven. Which Words do very plainly
refer to a generous Owning, or public Attestation of Christ and his Doctrine,
with the Condemnation of the contrary Faintness or Cowardice in those who yet
really own and profess his Religion. St. John 19 38, 39. c. 12. v. 42, 43.
And of this Nature was that Sin which the Scripture it self takes notice of in
Joseph of Arimathea, being a Disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the
Jews; and in Nicodemus, which at the first came to Jesus by Night. Among the
chief Rulers-also many believed on him, but because of the Pharisees they did
not confess him lest they should be put out of the Synagogue, for they loved
the praise of Men more than the praise of God. Where we see plainly, there may
be an inward Belief in Christ, or a full and thorough Persuasion of him, and
his Doctrine; when yet in show and appearance there may be no external Owning or
Confession of it: And such as was this may be the case of many Christians, who
may be too often prevailed upon to disguise or dissemble the internal Sense and
Dictates of their Minds and Consciences, and basely force their Tongues to give
their Hearts the Lie: But now to believe in Christ, and upon all Cases, and in
all Circumstances and Conditions, to assert, own, declare, and attest as much;
this is truly Generous and Christian, a Glory and an Honor to Christ and our
Profession; whereas to counterfeit or cover what we are, or what we believe, is
the basest Imposture, the most cowardly Hypocrisy, and is most certainly,
Being ashamed of Christ and his Words in an Adulterous and Sinful Generation.

Thirdly, An other thing implied or signified by this Expression, Being ashamed
of me and of my Words, is a recoiling, or aversion to some more difficult Parts
or Duties of Religion: That is, when Men will profess Christ, or own his Faith
or Religion, and go on fairly with him for some time; but shake hands, leave or
desert him when it comes to some extraordinary Stress or Difficulty. Thus it
was in the Case before us, Peter seems to make a fair Profession of his Faith,
When he said, thou art the Christ, Ver. 29. But we find he was strangely
startled, and mightily out of the way upon our Saviors informing him of those
great Troubles and Calamities that should befall him. The News of a Savior was
readily embraced by him, but he does mightily regret his distressed
Circumstances: Nor was this self-same thing a less Scandal to some other of his
Disciples; for upon our Saviors telling some, of his Giving his Flesh for them
to eat, and his Blood to drink (which he did by his Death and Crucifixion for
them) Many therefore of his Disciples, John 6.60.
when they heard this, said, This is an hard saying, Who can hear it? Some
things required of us to believe or do, that are easily observed or practiced,
do not, and indeed cannot much affect us. But this is an instance of our chief,
if not pure, observance to Christ, that we yield our selves wholly and entirely
to him even in those Things and Cases that are most abstruce, difficult and
uneasy; herein consists our chiefest Owning and most glorious Profession of
our Faith in him: And from such a practice he infers the Doctrine we are now
upon; for as it plainly appears by the Context, from this Duty or Principle
laid down, Ver. 34. Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and
take up his Cross, and follow me: I say upon this he infers, Whosoever shall be
ashamed of me, etc. As if he should say, He that will not hearken to me, or
accept of me on such Terms and Conditions, how hard soever they may seem to
him, is Ashamed of me, and shall fare accordingly. And he that takes not his
Cross, and follows after me, is not worthy of me, Matthew. 10.38. Our most
eminent and proper Owning of Christ and Profession of his Faith, is when we are
called by him to the greatest streights and hardest Duties. Does Job fear God
for naught? Have thou not made a Hedge about him, and about his House, and
about all that he has on every side? Thou have blessed the work of his Hands,
and his Substance is increased in the Land. But put forth thine Hand now, and
touch all that he has, and he will curse thee to thy Face, Job 1.10, 11. What
was here falsely applied to this good Man, is too often verified in many others.
We are willing to hearken to God, and to observe him on easy Terms and in
prosperous Circumstances; but if any thing thwarts this, like the young Man in
the Gospel, on the same Occasion, It makes us go away Sorrowful. Whereas now a
Sound and True Faith disputes no Commands, sticks at no Opposition; for the
greater the Hardship and Difficulty, the more our Duty and Obedience: So that
in short we may go a great way in a fair Profession of Religion, but if we
refuse or decline the difficult Parts, Duties, or Instances of it, wherewith
God may try and exercise our Faith. This is a Rebellion against, or a
Dissertion of Christ and his Doctrine, A being ashamed of him and his Words; for
every Christian should be ready to say with the Apostle, Romans 8.38, 39. I am
persuaded, that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor
Powers, nor Things present, nor Things to come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any
other Creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord.

Fourthly, Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and my Words, may signify such as
act contrary to the true Interest, and real Advantage of that Faith and
Religion which they profess. And this part or instance carries in it the guilt
of all the foregoing Evils, and goes a considerable step further; to make a
fair Pretense, and glorious Profession of Religion only to disgrace, abuse, or
betray it; is the most aggravating Circumstance of Guilt and Condemnation, and
seems to be the very case of Judas himself, who was one of our Saviors
professed Disciples, attended him constantly, heard his gracious Words, saw his
Miracles, and was a constant Partaker of his Goodness; yet who but this was the
Villain that betrayed him? And therefore our Lord upon that Occasion seems to
bespeak this Wretch in such a manner as methinks, goes home, and cuts to the
very quick, when he said, as it is St. Matthew. 26.50. and St. Luke 22.48. Friend
wherefore art thou come? Judas, betrayest thou the Son of Man with a Kiss?
Betrayest thou! who was so near to me, and so much obliged by me. If any wise
to injure or desert our Religion, or upon any account to be ashamed of Christ,
is infinitely dangerous; to promote or forward a contrary Interest, and to be
our selves helpful and instrumental to the ruin or prejudice of that our own
very Faith and Profession, is the highest Dishonor we can offer to God and our
Religion, and the utmost violation of all Honesty and Conscience.

And having thus given you an Account of this great and dangerous Evil, of
being ashamed of Christ, and his Words, and showed to you what it is, or
wherein it does Consist: Being 1. An utter Renouncing our Religion, 2. An
external Disowning of it. 3. An Aversion to some of its more difficult Duties.
Or 4. Such Actions and Proceedings as are contrary to the Interest of Christ
and his Doctrine. I proceed according to the Method propounded, to Consider in
the 2. Place, What are the Temptations to this so great and dangerous Evil. And
they are generally such as these.

1. Base and Unworthy Compliance. 2. Secular Gain or Interest. 3. The Fear or
Danger of Suffering.
1. This great Evil is too often occasioned through Base and Unworthy
Compliance: Though Religion, or the Concern of our Souls, is the most serious
and weighty matter in the whole World; yet nothing is so much trifled with, and
disregarded, and rendered plyant to every turn, and occasion; as if the mode of
the Times, eminent Examples, and profane Scoffs and Derisions, were to be the
Rule and Standard of what we were to believe or do in these great and momentous
Affairs; Men being too often become really ashamed of Christ and his Words in a
Sinful and Adulterous Generation: Wherein our Savior refers to the very Cause
or Occasion here laid down for their so doing, as if it were unseemly to own
and profess Christ and his True Religion, amidst a Generation of Wicked and
Sinful Men. Wherein they think it strange if you run not with them into the
same excess of Riot, speaking Evil of you, 1. Pet. 4.4. Great Examples and
Importunate Solicitations are very powerful with most men, who are too easily
carried away with the Stream, and follow a multitude to do Evil: But the
Temptations is as Unwarrantable as what it ends in. And such the Emperor
Constantius thought it to be in that memorable Case, which is thus related by
Eusebius. Constantius, the Father of Constantine, had this Device came into his
Head, that may be a paradox to hear as it was strange to practice; He put it to
the choice of all his Courtiers about him, even to the very Judges themselves,
or such as were placed in the chief Stations of Authority, Whether they would
Sacrifice to Devils, and remain in his Palace in their wonted Honor, or upon
refusal be removed from his Favor and Presence. Whereupon when the Court
became divided, and some went one and some another way, the Excellent Prince
discovering himself; Those that yielded he Reproached for their Cowardice, and
Hypocrisy, but greatly Approved and Commended those that kept their Integrity
to God; looking on those as Traitors to their God, and so not worthy the Favor
of their Prince: For how, said He, shall they be imagined to be Faithful to
their King, who are found False to God himself? And therefore utterly Banished
them from his Presence: But they that were Firm and True to God and their
Religion, such he did believe would be just and faithful to Himself. (...),
etc. He made them the Protectors and principle Officers of his Kingdom, saying,
They were worthy to be ranked in the number of his Bosom Friends and Dearest
Relations, and to be valued and esteemed above his highest Treasures. Herein
acting agreeable to that Prudent and Pious Resolution of David, Mine Eyes shall
be upon the faithful of the land that they may dwell with me: He that walks in
a perfect way, (or is perfect in the way) He shall serve me: He that works
deceit shall not dwell in my house, he that tells lies shall not tarry in my
sight, (or shall not be established) Ps. 101.6, 7.

This is the First Thing. Base and Unworthy Compliance is very frequently the
Occasion of Men's being ashamed of Christ and his Words.

Whereupon follows in the Second Place, as another great Inducement or
Temptation hereunto.

Secular Gain or Interest: Which our Savior has respect to in the Case before
us, as one Occasion of this great Evil, saying, as he does, Ver. 36. What shall
it profit a Man, if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? etc.
Intimating the great Prejudices and Discouragements against him and his
Doctrine, were the Solicitations or Temptations of Things here below: Which yet
in the greatest Enjoyments were no wise able to compensate the great Evil they
were thereby seduced to, of being ashamed of Christ, and his Words. Now secular
Wealth, or Greatness, is such a powerful Engagement against all kind of
Goodness, That the Devil reserved this Temptation for the last; and therefore,
it is like, looked on it as the greatest he could use: And which he hoped might
prevail even upon our Savior himself, For he shows him all the Kingdoms of
the Earth, and the Glory of them. And says unto him, all these Things will I
give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. Now what could not prevail
upon him, is God knows too powerful with many of us, who either through the
Ambition of our Spirits, or the Necessity of Nature, are by our secular
Interest too often carried beyond the bounds of our Duties, and hereby made
complyant to Unjust and Dishonorable Practices. And may not the Apostle seem
to have reference to the worst Consequences this way, in the 2 Pet. 2. There
shall be false Preachers amongst you, who privily shall bring in damnable
Heresies. And through Covetousness shall they with feigned Words make
Merchandise of you. But now we may the less wonder at that unhappy influence,
which this Vice has over Faith and a good Conscience; when we remember that
Covetousness, or the Love of Secular Gain and Interest did make Christ's own
Disciple shamefully forsake him, and basely betray him to his most Malicious
Persecutors and Murderers. One of the Twelve called Judas Iscariot went unto
the Chief Priest, and said unto them, What will ye give me and I will deliver
him unto you? and they covenanted with him for Thirty pieces of Silver, Matthew.
26.15. And if the value of about Three Pound Fifteen Shillings could prompt a
Disciple to this horrid Treachery, we may be apt to suspect at least, that a
more additional Temptation this way may have too much prevalency upon mean and
sordid Spirits; Wherefore Love not the World, neither the things that are in
the World. If any Man Love the World, the Love of the Father is not in him, 1
John 2.15. So powerful are the things here below to keep, or to withdraw Men
from a hearty Love and Regard of God and Religion.

The Third and Last thing prevalent to this most fatal Evil and Impiety is, The
Fear or Danger of present Sufferings. A Life of Ease, Pleasure and Plenty, is
grateful to all Men; whereupon many do readily embrace the smooth side of
Religion: But Suffering and Persecution are things contrary to Flesh and Blood,
and are indeed severe and terrible Trials, such as will even shake the most
steady and resolute Christian. Wherefore to speak with the Apostle, in this
Case also, Who is sufficient for these things? And whatever Men may now think,
or talk of it at a distance; yet if ever God should call us to this fiery
Trial, it will require a most steady Faith, together with extraordinary
assistance of the Divine Spirit, to carry us through such extreme Hardship and
Difficulty: Peter who was so constant with our Savior, and who was withal so
brisk, plain and generous, in his Profession of Christ, and so resolved as
nothing could be more: And who its reasonable to think was in his own Judgment
firm and immovable, was yet we know strangely surprised, and utterly
confounded when it came to the pinch; insomuch that hardly ever Man was guilty
of such a base and sudden Revolt. He found when Danger was very near and
threatening, quite different Judgments and Apprehensions of things then when he
considered it only at a distance; as will be the case of every Man whom God
calls to this most severe and difficult Duty.

There are great and unavoidable Prejudices and Reluctances in human Nature
against Torments or Sufferings, and very strange Perplexities and Misgivings of
Mind, in that great Change from this to another World: Besides there must needs
be unconceiveable Convulsions arise in us, from our Injury or Loss in those
things that are instrumental to our present Ease and Comforts; and therefore
our Savior might well put that Question, Are ye able to drink of the Cup that
I shall drink of, and to be haptized with the Baptism that I am Baptized,
Matthew. 20.22. This he tells us shall be the Portion of some; but upon this Rock
very many have made Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, having proved the
greatest cause of Men's being Ashamed of Christ, and his Words in an Adulterous
and Sinful Generation.

Having thus considered what that is which our Savior here warns us against,
by our being Ashamed of Christ, and his Words. And Secondly, What are, or may
be the Temptations thereunto; I proceed to consider in the Third place. The
great Guilt or Aggravation hereof; which will largely appear to us from the
Consideration of these following Particulars.

1. Thus to be Ashamed of Christ, and his Words, is the greatest Disservice and
Scandal to Religion: For if we consider the Expression, according to a mere
literal acceptance, That is ever more looked upon as most Base and Scandalous,
which Men are loath or ashamed to own, or acknowledge. Certain it is, That a
Disowning or Dissertion of Christ, and his Religion in whatever way or kind we
do it, is an open Declaration to the World of our great dislike thereof, a
plain Repentance of what we have professed, and as it were Advice or Precaution
to others against all future concern, or regard for God and Religion: The
Actions of such a Man do seem to speak the Sense of his Mind after this, or the
like manner; All the whole business of Religion is mere Noise, Cheat, or
Imposture. And whatever Men talk, or say about it, is all vain and
insignificant. Why should we wait on the Lord any longer? It is in vain to
serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his Ordinance? Therefore
they say unto God, depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.
What is the Almighty that we should serve him? And what profit should we have
if we pray unto him? In short, That Religion is not worth the Owning which a
Man cannot Suffer, Bleed, and Dye for.

2. And this brings us to a Second Aggravation thereof; That it is the highest
Indignity or Dishonor to God. Such is implied in the very Expression for it,
Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my Words: So that to be thus guilty is
to assront God, and is a perfect and open Defiance to Heaven it self; for it is
the peculiar and immediate Cause of God, who is the Author of Religion, for
whose sake and on whose account this is Instituted and Enjoined us: So that
thus basely to desert, or any wise to forsake or deny him, is not only a
withdrawing our Fealty and Allegiance from him; but the setting up a professed
Hostility and Rebellion against him, and a downright Declaration that we will
not have Him to reign over us. In a Word, This is the greatest Obstinacy, the
most daring Provocation, the highest Treachery, that a mortal Creature can be
guilty of, against the most gracious and almighty Being of God; and carries
every thing in it that may render it exceeding Sinful.

3. Another great Aggravation hereof is, That it is contrary to the Sentiments
of our Minds, and such as is an Injury or Violation to our own very
Consciences: For that Man has nothing to palliate or excuse his Crime, that
breaks through and violates the Sense or Persuasion of his own Conscience,
which is more to him than Ten thousand Witnesses. And therefore though Men may
be Deaf to this inward Guide, and by their Lusts or fordid Interest be
prevailed upon, to contradict or stifle those internal Sentiments, yet no Man
can think them happy, much less has any reason to envy them what they thus
obtain. For this Candle of the Lord (as is Solomon's Phrase for Conscience)
will sometime or other glare in their Faces, or burn them to the quick, and
torment them severely for being thus Unjust, Base and Treacherous, to
themselves. And though we see it, God knows too often, that Men Sacrifice
Peace of Conscience to base and unworthy Interest, as if worse than the unjust
Judge they did not regard God or Man, nor themselves; yet this Perplexity and
Vexation, which is inevitable hereupon, will be a perpetual Plague, and like a
troublesome Ghost, haunt and fret them wherever, or however they are. And a
Man is scarce capable of a greater Condemnation or Punishment than thus to
decry or reprove his own Actions. Happy is he that condemns not himself in
that Thing which he allows. Romans 14.22.

4. And which does ensue upon this, The Case which is here Condemned by our
Savior, is a Reproach even to humane Nature: Firmness and Constancy of Mind is
generous and manly, an Argument of a brave and courageous Spirit; such That is
always accounted which can bear it self up, and maintain its Integrity against
all Opposition and Allurements to the contrary: And therefore such resolute
trusty Souls have evermore had the general esteem and commendation of good and
wise Men. As on the contrary, its an undoubted proof and instance of an
unmanly, pitiful or dangerous Temper, easily to forgo or yield up our Truth and
Integrity, the greatest Glory of our Nature; so that he debaseth himself to the
vilest degree, and most miserable Condition, that debauches the noblest
Principle of his Soul, as is the case of such who are ashamed of God and a good
Cause. Another Aggravation that we may add to this, Is in the

Fifth Place, Even the present Insecurity of such Men, or of such a Condition,
as is here spoken of by our Savior: And this consideration added to the rest
cuts them clear off from all their holds: Such base Hypocrisy and
Dissimulation will not last long, and does but seldom answer such Men's designs
in it; for as Solomon says, The Lip of truth shall be established for ever,
but a lying Tongue is but for a Moment. Base complyances and such unworthy
practices in the cause of God and Religion, do frequently carry Guilt in their
Foreheads, and do sooner or later prove ineffectual and dangerous to
themselves, and very often spoil or frustrate their own Actions or Designs, And
then all Men that see them shall laugh them to Scorn: Whereas certain it is,
That Uprightness and Integrity, a closs and steady Adhesion to an honest Cause,
and a good Conscience, will be more approved of, succeeded better, for our
Interest, and carry us most happily thorough all Difficulty and Opposition;
while Base, Cowardice and Dissimulation, will render us Improsperous in all our
Designs, and make us every way Odious, and Hateful to God and Man.

From whence we proceed to consider, in the Fourth Place, The Judgment and
Punishment to be inflicted for it; Of him also shall the Son of Man be ashamed,
when he comes in the Glory of his Father, with the holy Angels. Where our
Savior, as you see, does consign the Punishment of such base Deserters of him,
and his Religion, to a future Judgment and Tribunal. Whereupon, by the way, we
may make these following Observations.

First, This threatening of a future Recompense, is not designed so as to imply
an utter Exclusion of all present Punishment or Judgment, to be inflicted on
such Men; they may be, and frequently are, met with and punished severely in
this World. The sting, or guilt of Conscience, will sometime fret and torment
them, for such base and unworthy Practices; they are frequently exposed to the
scorn of good Men, and the contempt of the World, and are no small Sufferers in
their present Enjoyments: These or the like Punishments do, or may overtake
such Offenders even now at present, it being a Practice that is frequently
injurious to Men's Secular Interest and Security, as we heard before. Thus, with
a future, this may also refer to or not exclude a present Punishment, as God in
his Wisdom may think fit and convenient. Though too in the

Second Place this may imply, what does sometimes happen, That wicked Men, and
among these, such as are thus guilty, may pass through this World with Ease or
Impunity; and perhaps, to outward appearance, meet with no Punishment, no
Retribution, for so great Impiety. For many good Causes God may, for a while,
forbear or delay their Punishment, to the great and general Day of Accounts,
when he will give to every one according to his Works. So that we are not to
judge from the present Impunity; or, which is more, the Flourishing and
Prosperous Condition of such Men, though so guilty against God, that he is
altogether regardless of them and his Honor: Though he does forbear, he does
not altogether forget them, but will (if not before) call them to strict
Examination another Day.

Whereupon we may observe again, Thirdly, That the mentioning of such a future
Retribution, may be, and doubtless is, with some design of showing or
representing the greater Judgment or Vengeance of God, that is treasured up
against them; as if such profligate Sinners could not be enough, or
sufficiently punished till Christ were invested with his Sovereign Power and
Authority. So that this is here mentioned as a very heightning Aggravation of
their Punishment, they may consider (and tremble to think on it) that their
Doom is reserved for that Great and Solemn Assize. Whosoever shall be ashamed
of me, and my Words, in this Adulterous and Sinful Generation, of him also
shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of his Father,
with the holy Angels. And its being thus expressed, may show the Punishment of
such to be very Severe and Terrible upon these following Accounts. As it does
imply, 1. Christ's utter Disowning of them. 2. After the most disgraceful Sort
or Manner. 3. At the most solemn Time or Season. 4. In Men's greatest Streights
and Necessities. And 5. A Consequence of most dreadful Ruin, and eternal
Destruction.


First, This threatening (here before us) does imply or signify Christ's utter
Disowning of them, and that is here represented to us these Two ways: First, By
his being ashamed of them; that is, such shall be rejected by him, and quite
disowned, from having any share or benefit in his Redemption, and the Kingdom
of his Father. Now, as God says by the Prophet concerning good Men, They shall
be mine, says the Lord, in that Day when I make up my Jewels: So contrariwise
may be here said, or intended of these, Christ at that great Day shall utterly
disown them, and cast them from his Presence for ever; as is still Secondly,
further implied and signified by the time here expressed for his so doing, When
he comes in the Glory of his Father, etc. At that great and solemn Day, which
is the final Consummation of all things, after which there is nothing to be
done, no more Accounts to be made, then shall he pass on them an irrevocable
Sentence of Condemnation. And is not this a most severe and affrightful Case,
that forebodes and threatens an eternal Banishment from the Divine Love and
Favor, and the procuring of God's utter Hatred and Displeasure, of which there
can be no repeal or recovery. To be thus rejected and abandoned by Christ our
Lord, who has shed his Blood for our Redemption, and has laid on us the
strictest Obligations imaginable to own and obey him, is a most heightning
consideration of Misery and Condemnation. To see, at that great Day of
Accounts, the gracious Savior of the World, thus utterly to reject and cast
off those for whom he shed his Blood; and instead of Reward or Redemption, to
pass a dismal Sentence of Punishment against them, is a cutting consideration
even now to think of, What will it be to experience another Day? Considering in
the

Second Place, That this will be done after the most disgraceful Sort or
Manner: Of him shall the Son of Man be ashamed, (Nec Lex est justior ulla.) For
it both represents the Equity of the Divine Proceedings, together with the
sharpness of the Punishment, as they have been ashamed of him, so will he be of
them; he will reject and disown them in the most Vile and Contemptious manner;
he will be even ashamed to look upon them, and will cast them from him with
Scorn and Confusion. Now there is nothing that does generally more affect human
Nature, than to be treated with Contempt; to a good and generous Spirit it is
most cutting and intolerable. And you cannot but observe from daily Experience,
that nothing goes so deep, or afflicts so much, as to be slighted and
contemned: From whence we may make a guess of the great Punishment of all such
Souls as shall be thus treated by Christ at that Day. There is even to common
Malefactors a kind of secret Pity and Commiseration, though Suffering for very
Notorious Crimes and Villainies; but those Men are prodigiously Guilty and
Miserable, that fall with universal Scorn and Derision: Yet such, and much
worse, is the Punishment here threatened, Of them shall Christ be ashamed.
However others may fare, these shall suffer Shameful and Unpitied, or one great
Punishment to be inflicted on them is, Shame or Contempt: And you know among
Men, That it is a great heightning, and sometimes indeed the utmost Aggravation
of a Suffering, to have the Ingredient or Circumstance of Shame or Scandal. And
what now shall we think of these, at that great Day, when whatever is really
Shameful and Scandalous shall be the Lot and Portion of such Sinners. For,

Thirdly, All this shall be at the most solemn Time and son, Of him shall the
Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of his Father, with the holy
Angels. Shame or Contempt is a relative Evil, that which does properly depend
on the view or apprehension of others, which is more and more heightened or
improved (that is rendered still the worse to bear) the more, and greater the
Objects we are thus exposed to; and therefore how great and intolerable is
this most Shameful Punishment like to be, that is executed or inflicted after
such a Serious and Solemn manner, bearing in it whatever may render it
Affrightful and Terrible, Of him shall the Son of Man, etc. that is, Christ who
was God and Man, this great God shall then be ashamed of him. And as if this
were not enough to superadd hereunto, it is Aggravated from the Time, Company,
or Circumstances here mentioned, When he shall come in the Glory of his Father,
with the holy Angels: Every Word bears in it a most cutting Consideration. This
shall be their Lot and Portion from him, when he shall appear in his infinitely
glorious Godhead after the most Solemn and Triumphant manner, and comes with
Millions of Angels to call all the World to Judgment, before infinite
Multitudes of such Pure and Holy Spirits, and before all the World he shall
pass such a dismal Punishment upon them. As if he should say, Men have very
great reason to be careful against this Evil, considering that such a present
denial, or being ashamed of Christ, shall be thus repayed hereafter. They that
disown him now before Men, in an Adulterous and Sinful Generation, shall be
shamefully rejected by him before the holy Angels. He that will be invested
with infinite Glory and Majesty, will for This be then ashamed of them in the
presence of these Pure and Immaculate Beings. And the consideration of these
Solemn Circumstances, is a most dismal Aggravation of that future Condemnation
and Punishment reserved for them against the great Day of Judgment. Considering
in the

Fourth Place, That this is in Men's greatest Streights and Necessities; Of him
shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of his Father,
with the holy Angels; a time of the greatest distress and danger. For the
future Day of Accounts, or Judgment, (whereof this is such a lively
Representation) will be the Season when we shall stand in most need of God, and
Christ our Redeemer: Then to have a share and interest in Heaven, and to have
favor with the great Judge of the World, will be our greatest, and indeed our
only Comfort. Nothing will then stand us in stead, or avail us, but such a
happy Provision as this: But oh! how miserable now must the contrary case of
such Men be, who have provoked him to the highest degree, and rendered him
their utter and implacable Enemy. To be conscious to our selves, that we have
done all we could to Affront and Abuse our Lord and Savior, as is too much the
Case of these Sinners, must strike the deepest Melancholy to our Souls. Then
when we have most need of Comfort, we shall have the the least of it; and
instead of Acceptance with God, have a Shameful and Bitter Sentence from him:
So that what Solomon says, (Prove. 1.24. --) may be fitly applied to the Case
before us. Because I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand,
and no Man regarded; but ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would none
of my Reproof: I also will laugh at your Calamity, I will mock when your Fear
comes; when your fear comes as desolation, and destruction comes as a
Whirlwind; when distress and anguish comes upon you. Then shall they call
upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not
find me: For that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord.
They would none of my counsel: They despised all my reproof. Therefore shall
they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices.
Whence we proceed to consider,

Fifthly, A consequence of most dreadful Ruin and Destruction; for the great
End and Design of that his most Solemn coming to Judgment, is to pass an
irrevocable Sentence of Happiness or Misery on all Mankind; and so accordingly
this here before us must signify, or imply, the most dreadful Case or
Condemnation of such Sinners at that Day. This then shall be their Sentence,
Depart ye Cursed into the Fire prepared for the Devil, and his Angels: And the
very worst place in this shall be assigned them, They shall have their Portion
with Hypocrites; for such they are in the highest Nature and Degree. They who
believe in God, and do thus shamefully Dissemble with him, or deny him in an
Adulterous and Sinful Generation, when it may be most Glorious or Necessary to
own or attest his Truth, strictly to maintain Faith and a good Conscience, are
the most Guilty, and shall be the most Miserable of all Men in another World:
Of him shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of his
Father, with the holy Angels. And having thus as briefly, and as plainly, as I
could, set forth the dreadful Punishment of such Men, especially as here
intimated, or represented by our Savior.

I think it may be very needful and requisite to propound, in the Fifth and
Last place, The means to avoid this so very Great and Dangerous Evil. In order
whereunto I shall lay down these following Rules or Directions.

1. Let us consider, The shortness and great uncertainty of this present Life.
This being a most likely means to prevent all Temptations to this Evil; which
are occasioned through Men's overmuch Concern or Fondness for this present
World. This (as we before observed) does too often make us withdraw our
Thoughts from God, and become Treacherous against him: Wherefore if Men would
learn to set a due Estimate on Things here below, and consider these Worldly
Pleasures and Enjoyments, as they are in themselves, mean and transitory; and
that as Solomon says, All is Vanity and Vexation of Spirit, We should be less
desirous or inclined to purchase them at so high a Price. Is a little temporal
Interest, that may soon come to nothing? Is a vain blast of Honor or Ambition,
or any thing that we can aim at in this World, Satisfactory and Lasting? Why
then should they any wise dissettle us in the great Concerns of Faith and
Religion? Can any Thing in this World be worth the buying at so dear a Rate?
The fashion of this World (says the Apostle) passes away. And would we but
esteem of it accordingly, it would induce us to have meaner thoughts of Things
here below, and set them upon Things above. And hereupon we should be fully
convinced, That Truth and Religion, were the only solid and lasting Comforts;
and that we have nothing here so valuable as Faith and a good Conscience. But
if we are still resolved to make Mammon our God, and to prefer the Pleasure or
Interest of this World before all Things, it is to be expected and not wondered
at, that Men should be ashamed of Christ, and his Words, in this Adulterous and
Sinful Generation.

2. Let us duly consider and reflect-upon, The great Concern and Interest of
our Soul: Which seems to be the very means or remedy here propounded by our
Savior himself, for the prevention of so great an Evil, Ver. 36. For what
shall it profit a Man, if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul?
Or what shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul? Wh^soever therefore shall
be, etc. Suppose we could promote the highest Interest here in this World, yet
this is not able to preponderate or make amends for, the Loss or Damage we
sustain thereby, or undergo for it. Our Souls or Spirits are of a most durable
and lasting Nature: Now Religion promotes their great and highest Interest; by
adhearing closely to Faith and a good Conscience, We procure the Love and
Favor of God, which is better than Life it self. We lay up an incorruptable
Treasure in Heaven. We secure our best part, That which is indeed only and
properly our selves. Let us then but value these our Souls at a due and
reasonable Rate, and we shall not be apt to be seduced, by unworthy
Compliances, to renounce or be ashamed of our highest Interest, and to cast
away our selves for ever. Would we thus frequently think of, and deeply
consider the great Value and Interest of our immortal Souls, it would happily
secure our falling into so great an Evil, and most effectually subdue all kind
of Temptations to it, unless Men were disposed to run themselves upon the most
apparent Ruin and Destruction. And this will bring me to a

3. Thing requisite thereunto: A due and frequent Examination of our present
Faith and Religion. It Is a duty plainly laid down, and strictly enjoined by the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the Faith: prove
your own selves: know ye not your own selves how that Jesus Christ is in you,
except ye be Reprobates. A firmness in Faith does necessary imply a precious
Knowledge and Understanding of it; for we cannot be said to be withdrawn from
what we do not first own and understand. Now it is much to be feared and
suspected, That too many, who seem to be very Resolute, and make a very great
Noise about Faith and Religion, do not rightly, if at all, conceive or
apprehend what they mean by them. For Men are apt to take up with Hearsay,
Education, or the like: Whereas that Faith is only and properly ours, which we
embrace upon our own Knowledge or Approbation. And now to prevent or avoid the
Evil before us, let us duly weigh and consider how we are disposed and
qualified in the great and weighty Matters of Religion. There is much talk, and
a great noise made about it in the World; But does my Soul rightly apprehend or
consider what is meant by it, or what is the design of it? Do I believe the
Word of God, and those great and mysterious Truths he has discovered to me? Am
I afraid of his Judgments, assured of his Promises, and convinced of his
Veracity in all Things? Do I trust upon his Power, Mercy, and Goodness? And am
I assured of his just Anger and Severity? Am I convinced and persuaded in the
Truth and Excellency of those Things I profess to believe? And is all this
firmly fixed and rooted in my Soul; Not in Word or in Tongue, but in Deed and
in Truth? And do I believe with all my Heart, with all my Soul, and with all my
Mind? Hereupon I may say with the Apostle, Beloved, if in these things our
hearts condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God. And this will be
such a Qualification as will keep us steady and immovable against all
Opposition: We shall have that Conviction from within, and those regular
Motions in our Hearts, as will dispose us to a suitable Behavior in all our
Actions: For as a good Tree cannot bring forth corrupt Fruit, so a Mind well
Principled and Endued, will be evermore happily disposed to Subdue and Conquer
whatever may tempt us to this Sin. And believe me, it requires a firm and well
settled Faith to bear us up against all those Hardships, and Difficulties that
oppose us in our Christian State. Whence you see how necessary and requisite it
is seriously and often to consider the Case between God and our Souls, to
become every day more and more confirmed and settled in the great and weighty
Concerns of our Faith and our Religion: And hereupon we may do well in our
present Circumstances to consider the Nature and Excellency of that Faith which
is professed among us, that we grow in it more and more, and be firm and
constant to it. For we enjoy, God be blessed, a Faith truly Orthodox and
Catholic, in the best and purest Church upon Earth: That does not prohibit or
lock up the holy Scriptures from any, but does enjoin and practice the constant
and daily Use and Reading of them: Where Sacraments are administered as Christ
enjoined them, in a most grave, solemn, and decent Manner: Whose Prayers are
most pious and heavenly, every way suited to our several Wants and Necessities,
and able to warm our Souls with a most fervent Zeal and Devotion. Let us study
to improve in the knowledge and practice of this Faith, which will happily
secure us from all dangerous Errors and Superstition. Here we are taught and
enjoined due Obedience to God, strict Loyalty to our Prince, Love and Charity
to all Men. Its Doctrins are Sound and Orthodox. Its Discipline Pure and
Primitive: And as many as walk by this Rule, peace be on them, and on the
Israel of God. And now having so Good, so True, and Sound a Faith and Religion;
if we desire and expect that God should preserve and continue it to us, Let us
hold fast this Profession of our Faith without wavering: That nothing prevail
upon us to injure, desert or betray, this truly Catholic and Apostolic Faith,
as professed in the Church of England. The more we consider of, or know it, the
better shall we like it, and become the firmer in it, upon a due and serious
Examination and right Understanding of it; We shall find it will both deserve
and instruct us in a firm Constancy and Resolution against all Opposition and
Difficulty whatever. Finally, my Brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the
Power of his Might. Put on the whole Armor of God, that ye may able to stand
against the Wiles of the Devil. For we wrestle not against Flesh and Blood, but
against Principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers against spiritual
Wickedness if the darkness of this World, on High places: wherefore take unto
you the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil Day,
and having done all to Stand, Ephesians. 6.10.

4. It may be again requisite herein to set before us the Pattern and Example of
Christ, who was eminent in all Perfections, but especially Remarkable for this;
insomuch that he himself tells us, For this end was I born, and for this cause
came I into the World, that I should bear Witness unto the Truth. Which he
never dissembled, but constantly asserted with the greatest Courage and
Resolution; I speak openly in the Synagogue. So far was he from Fear or
Cowardice, and so complete this Pattern that he underwent the extremest
Sufferings even unto Death for Truth, and a good Cause. This Captain of our
Salvation being so Brave and Generous, we are obliged both in Favor and Duty
to imitate and resemble his Courage and Constancy; and, like him, firmly
maintain Truth and Integrity, whatever it costs us. This will resemble us to
Christ at present, and bring us to the Enjoyment of him hereafter. Whereupon I
shall conclude with the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.13. I give thee charge in the sight
of God, who quickneth all things, and before Christ Jesus, who before Pontius
Pilate witnessed a good Confession, that thou keep this Commandment without
spot, unrebukeable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ.

5. For another prevention or direction against this great Evil, let us often
think and consider of that great and terrible Threatening here mentioned; And
that if we be ashamed of him, and his Words, in this Adulterous and Sinful
Generation, of him shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in the Glory
of his Father, with the holy Angels. And certainly frequent and serious
reflections on that great and glorious Appearance, and that his coming in such a
Solemn and Terrible manner to recompense Punishment on us, should preserve us
firm and steadfast in all holy Duties. For should it not make us even now
shrink and tremble to think with our selves, that he will call us to a strict
Account, and punish us most severely for these things another Day. How shall we
look, or what shall we be able to say, when we come to appear before him in
such Majesty and Honor? Wherefore if we keep the Thoughts of this so great and
terrible Appearance always fresh, and settled in our Minds, it will make us not
dare to be guilty of so great a Sin, as we will answer hereafter at our utmost
peril. For if we deny him, he also will deny us, 2 Timothy 2.12.

6. Let us be strict and sincere in all holy Duties, That we adorn the Doctrine
of Christ in all things, and walk worthy of our Profession. A good Faith is the
most of all endangered by an undue and irregular Practice. If by our ungodly
and wicked Lives we Dishonor our Religion, we make a very forward step toward
a denial of it, and it may be just in God quite to remove it from us. If
therefore we would consult the Interest of true Religion, and do design, or
would desire, the security and continuance of it; Let us walk conscienciously
by the Rule we profess, and not dare any longer to continue practices so
repugnant to all Piety and Religion, remembering what the Apostle threatens
some, Who because they received not the love of the Truth, that they might be
saved. For this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should
believe a lie, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.

But to complete, and perfect all, we must be sure to superadd in the Seventh
and Last Place, our most humble and hearty Prayers to Almighty God, That he by
his Grace, or Holy Spirit, would assist us against this great and fatal Evil.
That he would support us under all Dangers, and carry us through all
Temptations. That he would stablish, strengthen, settle us. That he would graft
in our Hearts the Love of his Name, increase in us true Religion, nourish us
with all Goodness, and of his great Mercy keep us in the same. That he being
our Ruler and Guide, we may so pass through things Temporal, that we finally
lose not the things Eternal. That so Christ our Lord may not be ashamed of us,
when he comes in the Glory of his Father, with the holy Angels. --

Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father, which has loved
us, and has given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through Grace,
comfort your Hearts, and stablish you in every good Word and Work, 2 Thessalonians.
2.16, 17.

FINIS.

