COPIES OF Some few of the PAPERS given into the House of PARLIAMENT in the
time of JAMES NAYDERS Trial there, which began the fifth of December, 1656.
To the SPEAKER of the PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND, these to be read.
FRIENDS,
ACt nothing contrary to that which does co^vince you, though bound with an
Oath, although you bring your selves in never so much disgrace in breaking your
Agreement; for in such a case you may reject the Counsel of God against your
own Knowledge, and so appearing to please the world that looks upon you, the
unjust acts against the Just; herein you will do despite to the Spirit of Grace,
wilfully acting that which he knows he should not: So here comes man's
condemnation just from God; therefore before you do act consider; and before
you do give Sentence fear; for Blasphemy proceeds from the root of
Transgression; and see that you be first out of it before you of it do judge:
There is no Blasphemy in the Light which is truth. And to witness the light is
not Blasphemy. And to witness the Prophets Life, and the Apostles Life that had
the Life of Jesus made manifest in his mortal flesh. And to witness the Life
of God, and God dwelling in man, is not Blasphemy. And to witness the second
Adam, the Lord from Heaven, and as he is, so to be in this world, is not
Blasphemy; but not to witness this, and to be in the transgression, he is in
the Root that will blaspheme; and for a man to say he witnesses these things,
and himself in the transgression, he blasphemes, and is the Synagogue for
Satan, who did transgress, and not abide in the truth, who is in the
transgression. Now it is not because men can speak the Scriptures of truth,
therefore they are able to judge of Blasphemy; for the Jews could speak the
Scriptures of truth, but judged the Truth Blasphemy; Now if you would know
what is Blasphemy, this is blasphemy, and these were out of the life of the
truth that judged the life blasphemy; and you do not read that any that was in
the life of Christ, did whip, banish, prison, put to death any for blasphemy*
Alas! here is blasphemy heard all up and down the streets, men professing what
they are not: Now the Jews which had the Scriptures, and out of the spirit of
Christ, did put to death for blasphemy: Now with this examine and judge your
selves, that you may not be judged of the Lord: Although Darius could not
change after sealed, yet 'twas much grief to him: consider what Act that was,
and Law that was not to be changed after sealed. And consider Herod's Oath
against John Baptist, and the counsel and chief Priests against Christ for a
blasphemer. Is Christ in you? Now where is this council and chief Priests
against him? It is better to judge of things which you truly understand,
pertaining to this life (but that you cannot) till you come to the Light that
enlightens every man that comes into the world, and so leads into the Kingdom
of God and Christ that is not of this world; for there is a Kingdom of the
world which is not become the Kingdom of Christ, which is in the transgression;
and there are the blasphemers in the transgression of the life which the
Scriptures of truth is given forth from, which judges the truth blasphemy. Now
wait in the Light that you may receive the wisdom of God which comes from
Christ, by which all things was created, that with it you may come to use the
creatures with the wisdom by which they were created to the Glory of God. I
know the Lord is striving, that innocent blood you bring not upon your heads,
and has opened your understandings for to see more then at the first; and in
many of you has he wrought a noble Principle of tenderness and moderation, in
which if you abide faithful to act what it requires, the arm of the Lord you
will see revealed, and great things brought to pass; and so will you be clear
(whatever becomes of the Innocent) in the day of Gods visitation when he makes
Inquisition for blood; you whose understandings the Lord has opened and moved
to plead the cause of the Innocent; be faithful to God; be your talent never so
small, take heed of hiding it, least your sin become greater then you will be
able to bear.

It concerns no man farther to judge then he is judged, and is in the truth.

This in tender love to all who are of an upright heart that sits in
Parliament, from Robert Rich.
There was several copies of the Letter given to particular Members, besides
this little paper given to many that had not the Letter.

In a Letter of mine given to the Speaker this morning (which I desire may be
read amongst you) is written at the latter end thereof these words, viz.

If I may have Liberty of those that sit in the Parliament, I do here at their
door attend, and am ready out of the Scriptures of Truth, to show, That not
any thing James Nayler has said or done is blasphemy, or worthy either of
death or bonds.

These were delivered the 15. of December, being the eleventh time the whole
House had set about this business; so when I had given the Speaker the Letter,
I waited at their door from the time they first sat till they arose, and then
I departed in peace.

ROBERT RICH.



To you that sit in Parliament, who own the Scriptures, are these ^^r, what is
writtten aforetime is written for our admonition, 1 Cor. 10. 11.
Quaery 1.
WHether those that said God was their Father, and crucified him so: blasphemy
that spoke the truth, were not (...), and of their Father the Devil, yea or
nay? read Ioh. 8. 41. and 44.

2. Whether liars, covetous or proud men are not the Synagogue of Satan? And if
such say they are the children of God, or Christians, whether (by the
Scripture) that be not blasphemy? Read Rev. 2. 9.

3. Whether the liar does not hate him that abides in the truth? Read 1 Ioh. 3.
12. and there see why Cain slew Abel. And as it was then, is it not so now?
Does not he that is born after the flesh persecute him that is born after the
spirit? Read Gal. 4. 29.

4. Whether they that have the spirit of Christ Jesus in them, punishes the
body, or puts any to death for words true or false? And did not Christ come to
save life and not to destroy it^ Read Mark 34. Matt. 13. 29, 30 John 8. 11.

5. Whether Christ Jesus has not been a stumbling stone, and a Rock of offense
throughout all Generations? Read and see Isa. 8. 14. and 18. Luke 2. 34. 1 Pet.
2. 7, 8. Luke 20. 17, 18, 19. Matt. 13. 55, 56. Luke 5. 30. and 33. (read these
Scriptures over And did not the very Disciples of Christ often stumble and were
offended at him? Read over these Scriptures and consider them well, Matt. 26.
8. to the 14. ver. and the 31. ver. Matt. 28. 17. Ioh. 6. 60. Luke 24. L 1, 15,
16, and 37. ver. Ioh. 11. 39, 40. Joh. 20. 15. Lu. 24. 32. And did not the
Prophets do many things that the wisdom of the flesh might count foolishness,
and to be rediculous? Read Isa. 20. 2, 3. Ier. 13. 3, 4, 5, etc. Ezekiel. 4. 1, 2,
3, etc. and Ezekiel. 12. 5, 6. Acts 21. 12, 13. Ios. 6. 6

6. Whether the Lord in all ages has not tried the children of men? Read
Psalm. 11. 4, 5. Rev. 3. 9, 10. And whether the day be not approaching that will
try every man's work? 1 Cor. 3. 13. And whether all men be not either the
children of God or of the Devil? And whether by their fruits they are not made
manifest? And whether those that are the children of God be not lead into
moderation, Gentleness, patience, mercifulness, meekness, love, etc. And
whether the Devil leads not his into wrath, envy, hatred, emulation, varience,
strife, etc? So in this thing you will make your selves manifest which spirit
leads you, and whose children you are. Search the Scriptures, and see if these
things be not so.

Robert Rich.

AFter the tares appeared, then came the servants of the householder and said
unto him, Will thou that we go and gather them up? But he said, Nay, lest while
ye go about to gather the tares, ye pluck up also with them the Wheat: Let both
grow together until the Harvest, Matthew. 13. 26. etc.

This is the Doctrine of Christ Jesus our Lord.
Such care has Christ Jesus of the Wheat, that he will not that his Servants
pluck up the tares until the Harvest, the end of the world, lest they pluck up
the Wheat with them; this is his wisdom,

But some men pretend such care for the wheat, that they will have the tares
plucked up before the Harvest; this is their wisdom.

Now mind whose wisdom you follow, and whose Doctrine you obey; for you can do
Christ Jesus no service in going contrary to his own Doctrine, though some may
think they do, Ioh. 16. 2, 3. They shall think they do God service when they
are killing his servants, mistaking them for his great Enemies, for else they
would not kill them to do him service.

My desire is, that you may be found in the counsel and Doctrine of Christ
Jesus, which is safe, and keeps from that danger of shedding innocent blood.

Will. Tomlinson.

You have called him a blasphemer, we desire that you would publish what his
blasphemy is, that we may know it and take heed of it. Christ Jesus himself was
called a blasphemer, because he said, I am the Son of God; and says John, 1
Ioh. 3. 2. Now are we the Sons of God.

W. T.

THE near relation between Christ Jesus and his Father being owned by him, was
counted in him blasphemy, because he said, I am the Son of God.

Take heed lest the near relation between Christ and his Members whom he calls
Brethren, be not now counted blasphemy where it is owned.

And consider these Scriptures.

Now are we the sons of God through Christ, says John, 1 Ioh. 3. 2. If a son
then an heir of God, says Paul, Gal. 4. 7. If sons, then heirs, heirs of God,
and joint-heirs with Christ, Romans 8. 17. Him that overcomes will I make a
Pillar in the Temple of my God, and I will write upon him my new Name, says
Christ Jesus, Rev. 3. 12, 13. He that has an ear let him hear what the Spirit
says unto the Churches.

If you be able to see these things, do; but if not, take heed what you do,
least you bring innocent blood upon your own heads.

There Is none able to judge of these things before the lusts of the flesh, and
the lusts of the eyes, and the pride of life be judged and overcome in them,
and the love of the world.

That Is blasphemy for a man to say he is a Jew or a Christian, and is not, but
still is in the old nature, that was a murderer from the beginning; he
blaspheams the Name of God, Rev. 2. 9. for God has no such children in the New
Covenant. As it was then, he that was born after the flesh persecuted him that
was born after the spirit, so it is now, Gal. 4. 29. But he that is born after
the spirit never persecutes him that is born after the flesh.

W. T.

FRiends, your hands have hitherto been held from shedding of blood; consider
what it is that has withstood you, and kept you from it, and do not go on to
strive any longer against the Lord; but remember David how glad he was that he
was prevented from blood, when he was going with a full resolution, and the
thing was gone out of his mouth to destroy the House of Nabal, 1 Samuel 25. 22,
32, 33. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel (says he) which has sent thee this
day to meet me, and has kept me this day from coming to shed blood, and this
was but the blood of a wicked man. So Friends consider, and strive not against
the goodness of the Lord, which has hitherto withstood you, and kept you off
from shedding of blood, and that with little force. It will be no grief of
heart to you that you have not shed blood, but to shed it may lie heavier upon
you then yet you are aware. To let the tares (if tares) alone with the wheat,
according to Christ's own Doctrine; this will not repent you, because it is his
own command; but under pretense of plucking them up, to pull up one of the
least of his Lambs, this will be a burden too heavy for you to bear; and
though you may think you do God service therein, yet he accepts it not. To seek
the harm of one that would not hurt an hair of your heads, consider whence this
is, and what acceptance this would have with God, seeing he says, He that
touches you (the innocent lambs) touches the apple of mine eye; therefore
touch not mine anointed, do my Prophets no harm, says the Lord; and blessed be
their work who are made tender of them, for what is done to one of the least of
those that belong to Christ, is done to him.

William Tomlinson.

They are very confident, who kill Christ's Lambs, to do God service, that those
they kill are not his Lambs, but his Enemies, else they would not kill them to
do Him service; for they could not think it service to God to kill his
children: yet see how far their confident zeal is mistaken, while they think
they kill his enemies, they kill the children of the Kingdom. Thus it happened
to Christ, the zealous Jews were very confident he was a Blasphemer, and
Seducer of the people, and therefore they durst say, His blood be on us, and on
our children; upon the same account the members also of Christ always suffer,
as Blasphemers, as Heretics, as Seducers of the people. You are now upon this
danger, and trial of your spirits. Now why is it that in this confident zeal
they kill his Children, taking them for enemies? It is ( says Christ Jesus)
because they know not the Father nor me, Ioh. 16. 2, 3.

Now examine your selves you that are for killing, or hurting; Do you know the
Father? Do you know the Son? Have you communion and fellowship with them? Is
the Son begot in you? Is He formed in you? Are you come into His innocent
nature? if not, your confidence and zeal will deceive you, and you stand in
that nature that will kill children for enemies; for you cannot know them til
you know his nature brought forth in you. And if His Nature be once brought
forth in you, you will find a saving spirit raised up in you, not a destroying
spirit; for Christ and every measure of Him is a Savior, not a Destroyer; and
so from Christ the Savior spring up many Saviors, Obad. v. 21. He that is the
destroyer and persecutor, is yet in the old Covenant, Hagar, He is but the son
of the bondwoman* which is yet in bondage with her children, and is to be cast
out, Gal. 4. 22, to the end. And if ever you come to witness the new Covenant,
and the Law of God writ in your hearts, and the nature of Christ formed in you,
you will find the persecutor in you cast out, and that it enters not the
Kingdom; for there is nothing hurts nor destroys in all Gods Holy Mountain,
Isa. 11. 9.

Will. Tomlinson.

Was not the appearance of Christ when He was born glorious, when that the
voice was cried Hosanna to the Highest? Was not this to the astonishing of the
beholders, and amazement of the world? did it not stir up all chief Priests,
and Herod, was not He puzzled about His Birth, and they troubled at his coming?
did not the Chief Priests and Rulers gather against Him who was full of grace
and truth? did not the glory of Him show it self forth when He went up unto
Jerusalem, when the high voice was spoken, and the songs to him sung, the
strength ordained out of the mouths of Babes and sucklings? and was not
Jerusalem the highest place of Worship? and did not the strength which was
ordained for the Babes and Sucklings, set the Priests and Rulers on rage
against Christ, that they crucified and slew him? and did not that make Herod
and Pilate friends in the highest place of Worship? did not He say, and tell
his Disciples, He would come again, the Hosanna, Him that was cried Glory to
the Highest? And did not He come again to his Apostles according to his
promise, and make his abode with them, and sup with them? Did not the Apostles
say to the Saints that Christ was in them the mystery, the hope of glory; and
if He was in them, the body was dead because of sin? did not the Apostle say,
Examine yourselves, prove yourselves, Know you not that Jesus Christ is in you
except you be Reprobates, [mark] Jesus Christ in you, the Emmanuel, the
Savior, the Lamb of God, the Hosanna; Is not his appearance in the Spirit as
glorious in his second coming, as it was at his first? is it not as much to be
admired in the world as it was ever? Answer these things, and satisfy your
selves: To the Light wherewith Christ Jesus has enlightened you all, I speak,
that with it you may see when you act against him where he is manifested.

To prison them contrary to the Just is to make them to grow, and to banish
them is to shame your Religion, and not to own the thing the scripture speaks
of, and to put them to death, is to destroy your selves.

George Fox.

Whether or no you will suffer Christ to have as much honor in the earth, and
the world, as the Devil has? Where Christ is manifested, whether or no he
shall not have more honor, or as much, where he is manifested? And whether or
n^ it is offense to bow to man, or to kneel before a Judge in the world?
Whether the^ be offensive to the world, amongst the world, to bow before such,
and among such the truth is not in? And whether or no it would not be offense
to such, to bow to Christ where he is manifested, and persecute such as do bow
where the thing is in the truth; whether or no such a thing may not be done in
the truth, and be a figure to all the bowings of the earthly Powers which be
out of truth, which has reigned above the seed of God? An example to you all:
Therefore take heed and consider, before you act any thing or judge, lest God
judge you afterward, for be assured He will. Whether bowing in the Truth may
not be a figure, that the seed of God shall rise, and reign above the Earthly
Powers, and they shall bow to it? And how know you but such things as these may
be trials to you, whether you will persecute another, for taking that which
is acted among you to your selves, in another way different from this? Now come
to do as you would be done by, and do not persecute that in another that is
acted in the world, though it be professed otherwise in the intent, and come
to the true measure and weight: and act nothing in your own wills, nor out of
the counsel of God, to judge the just upon earth in this world, the just you will
be judged by, that is of the world to come, without end. I receive not Honor of
man; Whether or no if any do persecute the seed, which does take the honor of
God, which is over the world and it They themselves do take the honor of the
world, that persecutes the contrary. Are these things judged with a just
measure, and weighed with an equal balance, yea or nay?

George Fox.

DID not Christ wash the Disciples feet? Did he not do that as a pattern and
example to those that came after him, that they should do so to one another?
Have you washed one another feet? Have ye anointed one another with oil that
stumble at these where they are acted? Are not these the expressions of love to
one another? And are not these things to be acted amongst the Disciples of
Christ? Are not these things wonders amongst you that do not wash one another
feet, that be out of the example of the Lord? did not the Disciples wash one
another feet according to Christ's example? Were not the Prophets feet washed?
Did not Peter desire his head to be washed? Do not wonder and strange at these
things where they are practiced: Were not the Saints to salute one another with
a holy kiss? and was not Peter to be carried whither he would not? Was there
not a time that he girded himself? And is it not the Prince of the air that
rules in the children of disobedience, if it be not the Prince of Peace and the
Lamb of God? And is it not an expression of love and honor where there is the
washing of one another feet? And for the washing or kissing of feet, it is but
an expression of love and humility? And is not this a pattern and example to all
you to judge you all how far short ye are of washing one another feet, or
kissing one another feet; and do not wrong one another about these outward
things, but to come to know the Seed of God, which bruiseth the Serpents head,
which would destroy and set one at enmity with another; that crusheth down
these outward things, and reigns over these outward things; which seed of God
comprehends all strife, and comprehends the world; which seed the promise and
blessing of God is to; in which seed is the unity, and not the enmity, for that
is it which is bruised with it. Therefore do not show your selves in enmity
against these actions, where they are acted in the seed of God in
righteousness, not in the world, out of the enmity; not as justifying the
wicked in these things, nor condemning the righteous. Mind consideration
before you do judge of such as are moved to act these things, whether or no
they be not examples to you all, to try you all, whether or no you will
persecute, or lift up your hands against such; and an act whereby you may
search your selves, and see how far short ye come of a Disciple: And come to
that good in you all, that is of God, that with it you may overcome, if there
be any thing that is evil, and the heaping the coals of fire upon that which is
the adversary: And whether or no there be not such things to be acted in
righteosunesse and simplicity, as washing the feet of the Disciples, or that
some may be carried whether they would not go; and if any should kiss the
feet, or wash the feet of another in love and simplicity, is that such a crime?
And for Jesus and Christ, and the prince of life and peace; if Jesus Christ be
within, the second Adam is witnessed, God with us, which is Jesus; and be not
offended with this, if any do witness the State reconciled to God, who has
witnessed the State drove from God, the first Adams state, who witnesses the
second Adams state, the Emanuel, God with us. Again, Now be not ye offended at
this, least you do manifest your selves to be in the first Adams state, driven
from God, not witness Jesus Christ, God with you, reconciled to God again. But
if you stand against this, it shows your selves to be in the transgression,
standing against the Emanuel, which is God with us: Be not hasty in acting
these things, but examine and consider before you do act.

Except ye see signs and wonders ye will not believe; but this is come to pass
that the Scriptures might be fulfilled, that says, the time will come, that
they shall think they do God good service when they kill you.

Remember the Scripture which says, His face is more marred then any man's,
Isa. 52. 14. And whether this be not the same that gave his Cheeks to the
Smiter, and opened not his mouth? And see now who tbey are that have spit upon
him; but what evil has he done.

Notwithstanding all these warnings, yet on the 17. day of the tenth month,
the major part of the House pronounced Sentence on him.

FINIS.

