THE COPY OF A PAPER Found on the Speakers Chair, JANVARY 16. 1689.
ENTITLED, An Act of INDEMNITY and Free PARDON FOR JAMES STEWARD Late King of
England.
WHereas the late King James the Second, without any Evil Counselors, Wicked
Judges, or Ministers, through Folly or Wickedness, has been misled into
Arbitrary Designs against the Government and himself, thereby becoming
obnoxious to the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom; and the said King having
broke the Original Contract between King and People, for which he Abdicated the
Government, and the Throne thereby became Vacant. And, Whereas it is incident
to Kings and Princes, being got on the Throne, to thirst after Arbitrary Power
by the help of Flatterers, to their own Ruin and Destruction: And for that,
though strict Enquiry has been made after his Accomplices, yet none of them
can be found out; and it appearing plain, that the said late King did all on
his own Head, for the destroying of Charters, and murdering his Subjects
contrary to Law; Therefore, forasmuch as doubts may arise about the matters
aforesaid, and to the End, that the wonted Clemency of the English Nation may
be perpetually had in Veneration, as well Abroad as at Home:

Be it Enacted, by the King and Queen's Majesty, by and with the Consent and
Advice of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same; That the said late King
James be Pardoned, Indemnified, and Saved harmless from all Pains, Penalties
and Forfeitures whatsoever, for, and by reason of any Misdeeds, or Omissions by
him made heretofore, contrary to the Laws of the Land whatsoever, until the
25th of December last past: And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that
it may be lawful to and for their present Majesty's, not only to Retain, and
Keep in their most secret Councils, Places of Trust, and Offices, whatsoever,
any of the late King James's Servants, Counselors, or Officers whatsoever;
but also, the said King James, (if their Majesty's shall think fit) for the
more secure Settling and Confirming Their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary,
in the Government of these Kingdoms, against Popery and Arbitrary Power, to
entertain the said late King James, in any Place of Trust, or Profit
whatsoever, Provided, the said King James, and all his Friends and Relations,
which shall be Employed by Their Present Majesty's, shall take the new Oaths,
mentioned in an Act of this Present Parliament.

Sir, Since the Generosity of the Nation is such, as to forgive such small
Offenses as Parliament Pensioners to Sell the Nation, to Introduce Popery and
Arbitrary Power, to Destroy the Protestant Religion, Surrender Charters, to
Root out Corporations, and thereby the Ancient Constitution of these Kingdoms;
Evil and Wicked Counselors did all that in them lay, to Assist the late King,
to make this Nation as France, and to forgive the very Actors in Murders by a
pretense of Law, and to make King James the only Scapegoat run into the
Wilderness, Incurring the Sins of the whole Nation. It seems to me reasonable,
and I doubt not, it will be so to you, that an Act of Indemnity may pass in
this House, this Sessions, for the late King James; and therefore, as an honest
man guided by Trust and Justice, I have sent you ready drawn a Bill of
Indemnity for him, as well as for the rest, and do hope it will, by the good
favor of this House, pass into a Law; in order to which, I hope you will lend
your helping Hand, and Communicate the same to the House; and if you find any
bawl at it, as some may do, get but a Ballotting Box, and I will warrant you,
the major part of this House will be for passing this good Bill.

Your Humble Servant, (...)


