BELIEVERS Mortification. Of SIN by the SPIRIT: OR, GOSPEL-HOLINESS Advanced by
the Power of the Holy Ghost on the hearts of the Faithful. Whereunto is added
the Authors Three last Sermons, on Genesis 3.15. By the Learned and Pious Mr.
Alexander Carmichael, formerly of Scotland, and late Preacher of the Gospel in
London. Published by his own Copy.

LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman, at the Kings-Arms in the Poultrey. 1677.

To the Christian Reader; especially the Godly and Reverend Allies and
Acquaintance of Mr. C. deceased.
Dear Sirs,
T This little Posthume (left very fairly Transcribed, yet not intended for the
Press) humbly begs your Patronage, shall I say, or rather perusal; When our
Friends are gone down to the Chambers of Darkness, we are then apt highly to
value their Pictures, when we cannot enjoy their Persons. And why then may not
these Papers find grace in your Eyes: for in them you will find worthy Mr. C's
very Picture drawn to the life? Here, Sirs, you have the genuine offspring of
those two great burning, shining Lights of yours, Knox and Gillaspy, exactly
Lim'd out by his own Pencil ( Sic occulos, sic ille manus, sic ora ferebat.
Whoever intimately knew the Original, will easily conclude these to be the
Copy, the real Transcript both of his Brain and Life; the most Lovely pourtrait
both of judicious Learning, and mortified Conversation. As to the Work, it
needs neither Bush nor Paint: Let it be but seriously perused by a person
really versed in that great and Heavenly (though now horribly neglected) Work
of Mortification, and it will certainly be prized at no little Rate. As to the
truly Worthy Author himself; It had been impossible for me so far to have
curbed in my Zeal, as not to have attempted at least a display of those many
and great Excellencies, which with so much modesty and humility he endeavored
to conceal from the World; but that his dying breath fixed a Lock upon my lips,
and utterly denied me the liberty of being but just in his Commendation. Only
this he left as his grand Depositum with me, to be faithfully declared by me,
That he died with very great peace of Conscience, with full satisfaction of
Soul, in those ways of God wherein he had walked, and wherein he died: in
particular, That God as a gracious Father had abundantly made good to him that
faithful Promise, Matthew. 19.29. Mark 10.30. Thus for him that is gone before. As
for that flesh of his flesh, and the fruit of his Loins: as for that Ruth and
Gershom that he has left behind him, I question not, but so long as the Saints
among you continue to bear your old Name Philadelphia (so the old Puritans of
England have used to style you) you will not, you cannot forget to show
kindness to Mephibosheth for Jonathan's sake. No more but the Psalmists prayer
for every one of the faithful Brethren in the whole Church and Nation, Psalm
122., 6, to the end: with his Amen, Amen, Who is,

Your real Brother and Companion in the Kingdom and Patience of Jesus Christ,
Tho. Lie.

ROMANS VIII. 13. If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye
shall live.


HEre is Life and Death laid down before you, If ye walk after the flesh, ye
shall die: a dreadful word, spoke even to those who are in Christ, and to whom
there is no Condemnation, who yet need to be warned of their danger.
Conditional-threatnings may be mustered to them, without bringing them back to
a spirit of bondage; and the Lord works on their fear, as well as on their love
and will have them keep one eye on Hell, and another on Heaven: or rather, he will
sometimes have them look behind them, that at the sight of Hell and Wrath, they
may fly the faster to the Hope that is set before them: do not deceive your
selves with an opinion of your Privileges.

Well then, What must we do that we may be saved? the words of the Text tells
you: where mark, that the Apostle is speaking to such as are in Christ: If ye
ask what an unrenewed man should do to be saved? the Scripture Answers, Believe
in the Lord Jesus Christ, Act. 16. 1 John 3.23. Get into Christ. But if ye ask,
What the man that is in Christ shall do? the Text tells you, which takes in, or
rather supposes holy walking, or walking after the Spirit; for as light comes
in, darkness goes out: so that Mortification is one part of the Condition upon
which we attain the possession of eternal Life, though it be by faith, by our
first believing, that we acquire a right to it.

Now in the words, we have, 1. The Act enjoined, Mortify. 2. The Object about
which it is conversant. 3. The way or the means by which this is to be
effected, through the Spirit: 4. The Promise annexed, Ye shall live: 5. The
Conditionality of the Promise: If, etc.

For the first, What it is, we shall after show; only now the Original word
signifies, to slay, to pursue to Death. Sin is not at once slain, itgets a
deaths-stroke, by the first saving-work of grace: it never recovers that; but
yet it dies but lingringly (therefore called a Crucifixion); and its a great
part of the Christians work to follow it to death, to be driving nails into it,
and keep it bleeding till it expire.

For the second, Let us observe the various Scripture-expressions: as 1. Flesh,
so frequently in this Chapter; this sometimes signifies the state of the
natural man: he that is in the flesh cannot please God; so John 3.6. Sometimes
the remainder of sin in the Regenerate, Gal. 5.16. And so we read of the works
of the flesh, Gal. 5.19, these are the deeds of the flesh. 2. Sin is spoke of
as a body, as in the Text; sometimes called a body of sin, Romans 6.6. Sometimes,
the body of this death, Romans 7.24. It Is a Body, not a Phantasm, we are to
conflict with: it is not to beat the air we are called to: its weight is not
found, because it is in its place, in its Element. Now this Body has various
Members, these we are to mortify: Col. 3.5. The stump of sin cannot be got
out, but we must be daily mutilating it, and cutting off its members: the stump
we cannot pluck up; the body and mass of in-dwelling sin we cannot discern, nor
reach; but its deeds and workings we feel. And albeit Gods faving-work upon the
Soul (wherein we are passive) does wound and weaken the Body, sin: yet any work
of grace wherein we are active, does immediately only strike at the members of
sin, and at the deeds of it: therefore says the Text, If, etc. mortify the
deeds of the body. 3. Sin is called a Man, an old Man, to hold forth the
strength and cunning of it, and its interest in the soul and body of a man.
It Is not a dead Carcass; nor is it seated only in the outward members of a man:
Now we read of the deeds of this old man, Col. 3.9, Lie not one to another,
seeing you have put off the old man with his deeds: these are the same with the
deeds of the Body.

3. By the Spirit, is here understood, first and mainly the Holy Ghost; by
whose immediate Efficiency this work is effected: yet, 2. May be taken in also,
the graces of the Spirit, by the acting of which this work is carried on.

Now from the words, I shall take occasion to speak to these particulars in
short: 1. What Mortification is. 2. What Is the Object and extent of it. 3. The
necessity of it. 4. What is the work of the Spirit in it. 5. I shall apply the
whole.

For the first: It Is necessary in the first place, to show you some
bastard-kinds of Mortification, whereby ye may know what it is not. The first
is, A Philosophic mortification to such things as are seen by the light of
Nature to be empty and unsatisfactory, for Reason may go far here; hence some
of the old Philosophers seemed to contemn Riches, and to be above trouble for
outward changes, as Diogenes, etc. Yet they were either but Dissemblers, as
Seneca, who writes against Avarice, and tells us, That Nature was satisfied
with water for Drink, and with a house of Turf; yet he was a Covetous man. So
was Cicero an aspiring man, for as much as he writes against Pride, not by the
Spirit and the Cross of Christ, but from mere moral Considerations, as that of
the old Pagans (revived again by some who call themselves Christians) who
taught men to moderate their inordinate desires and passions, by the precepts
and habits of moral Virtue. This especially flourished among the old Family of
Philosophers, called Stoics, who pretended to be without all passions, which
(said they) were not incident to wise men. If they met with any extraordinary
mischance, they thought a wise man might step out at any door he would, into
their imaginary heaven and happiness. Hence Cato, who was the Worlds-Wonder for
his Wisdom, stabbed himself; and his Servants finding him, bound up his wound,
which when they were gone, he teared open again: yet not expiring soon enough,
he was forced to use some other violence to himself. So Seneca and others. Now
this way of Mortification, all who deny the necessity of special Grace (as
Pelagians, Arminians, Quakers) must needs fall into: for whatever different
names they give to any word, principle or power; yet if common to every man,
it is still but Nature, which is capable of improvement: and indeed how far
common Reason may be improved to the regulating of a man's passions, is plain
from the manifold instances of old and late Moralists, to the shame of many
called Christians.

Yet plain it is, that they did but keep under their lusts, and not mortify
them: and that by their depressing one lust, they did but exalt another; as
those who died for their Country, and forfook all for mere love of Learning;
But what avails it (says one) to be dead to a bit of Clay, and alive to
Vainglory, which is indeed the life of Sin, and of the Old Man. Pride
especially did grow upon the ruins of other lusts: so that their seeming
Self-denial and Motification, was really but Self-magnifying. Yea, to that
height of Pride did some of them grow up, that Lucretius and Seneca endeavored
by Argument to exalt their virtuous men above their gods: in as much as these
were necessarily good; But men were such voluntarily and by choice and whoever
now they be, who would lessen ^^^^tural pravity and misery, and who oppose the
imputed Righteousness of Christ, and Justification by Faith, (whatever their
seeming mortification and moral endowments be) they must needs fall into the
same Condemnation; for ignorance of these grand Truths, was the root that the
Pagan Arrogance grew upon: as for that inward Tranquillity that followed the
moderation of their passions, it was but a Lie.

2. A second Bastard-way of Mortification, is that of the Papists, it stands in
some outward severities: as lying on the Earth, whipping themselves, going
barefooted, with Ropes about their waists begging: living in Cells,
Hermitages, Vows of Poverty, and single life. They suppose, says Luther, That
when they enter their Cells, that they are crucified to the World, when indeed
they are crucified to Christ, and Christ to them, Pride and Self-righteousness
being thereby quickened. We may as well sacrifice our lives, as shed a drop of
blood, in such a way as Baals Priests did, which had the same ground and bottom
that Popish-whippings and Penances have. But what Pride, Epicurism, and
monstrous lusts have been, and are cherished under these pretenses, I need not
tell you. We grant, That to keep the body in subjection, is a part, and a means
of further mortification. But this is not to be done by rigor and cruelty: But
by the sparing-use of outward Comforts, and refusing to gratify the inordinate
desires of the flesh. Some such severities, as going naked, etc. some Quakers
have also espoused, but this is not through the Spirit to mortify, etc. These
means of men's devising, do but cherish Self-righteousness and Pride. Satan is
not so easy as to be beaten or buffeted out: were he to preach, he would
preach such Doctrine as this, and prescribe such Methods: witness some Pagans,
who in these have out-gone Papists.

A 3d false way of Mortification, is that of the Antinomians, who place it in
the want, or suppressing of all challenges of inward sense and trouble for sin;
these they cry down as Legal, and the ground of this is another no less Error,
viz. That what is sin in others, is none in them: suppose even gross outward
wickedness. But our Lord came to redeem Sinners, not sin: He justifies our
persons, not our sins: this were the way to vivifie sin, and to mortify
holiness. Sure David knew not then what mortification meant, Psalm. 51.3. But I
will not rake into the ashes of this (I hope) buried Error.

The 4th false way of Mortification, is that which lies in refraining from
ourward impieties: whereas the first motions of sin, if not consented to, are
pleaded not to be sin. Thus Papists and Quakers: for these last have espoused
this among other Popish Errors: and if they fall not into gross impieties,
they blasphemously father them upon the holy Spirit. But are not the first
motions, the deeds of the body? do they not flow from some evil principle or
habit in the Soul? if they do, they are to be mortified: if you say, we
mortify them, when we consent not to them: I answer, Mortification imports
more, even the extirpation, and as much as may be, the supression of them; for
their very being in the Soul is irksome to the godly man: the new creature
cannot bear them, Romans 7.24, 25; and were it not for Christ, we should be
condemned for them. Chap. 8.1. They foolishly tell us, that these motions are
from Satan; James tells us, they are from a man's own lust, Chap. 1.14. Our Lord
says, They are from the evil treasure of the heart, Luke 6.45, so that they are
plainly the deeds of the Body. But hence we see, what friends these people are
to inward holiness; and that the perfection they boast of, is but a Cheat: even
suppose they were altogether free of outward acts of sin, which yet they are
too blind and credulous that believe it.

A 5th false way of Mortification, is the laying sin asleep. Now a sleeping
man, looks as if he were dead: so does sin, till upon some occasion it be
awakened; yea and it grows thus stronger than before. Saul, one would think,
had now overcome his wicked malice, when he cries out, My son David, thou art
more righteous than I; but it grew upon him, and soon broke forth with more
violence. It may be, that for want of opportunity, of a temptation, or
provocation, thou may think thy corruption mortified, when its only like
waters bound up, or like fire under the ashes.

A 6th false way, is the letting of sin die alone, or of its self: as youthful
lusts, vanity, prodigality, revenge, etc. Either sin kills thee, or thou must
kill it: but when it dies alone, it is an evidence, that it has undone thee; and
now like a victorious Champion, it dies in peace on its bed, and is not
vanquished by thee. O Sinner, shall thine Enemy die in peace? will thou not
pursue it to death, and be avenged on it for thy two eyes, for thy two hands,
etc. for all the miseries, sorrows and woes, that it has wrought thee?

This is a sort of natural and necessary mortification arising from impotency
to sin, and to fulfill the lusts of the flesh. Children have no passions for
Treasures, Houses and Lands, etc. yet that is not mortification, there is a
living seed of sin there. There is as much Fire virtually in every bit of flint
as would burn a City: and there is as much sin in seed, in every Infant, as
would set on fire the World. So in the aged, all the actings of the man are
blunted: that which Barzillai says of himself, may be in the letter of it truly
said of some that have not mortified the deeds of the body, 2 Samuel 19.35. There
may be some deadness of actual lusts, yet Original sin lives: as the root of
the Tree is fresh, when leaves and fruit fail in the Winter: yea, it may be,
when the stock above ground, may be either cut or rotted; for the Soul is the
chief seat of sin, and it never waxes old. Hence Sins that are more special,
are often ripest in old age: so that the conversion of an old person is harder
and rarer: and for bodily sins, if the case be altered, it is from no change
upon the soul, yea, nor is sin gone out of the body; but as Flint or Steel have
Fire virtually in them, even when beaten into dust, though you cannot now
strike it out of them; So there is sin in the very dust of Sinners, for they go
to their grave with their bones full of it, and that not only in respect of the
guilt thereof.

7. There Is another sort of counterfeit Mortification, which is more occasional
and transient: The sight of a dying dear Friend, or an occasion of some great
loss by Sea or Land; the sudden fall of some great man; the burning of a
stately House or City, the pain and sickness, the miserable and ignominous end
of some Sinner, suppose some unclean wretch; these often excite abhorrence of
sin, some contempt of the World: how many unmortified souls can on such
occasions talk of the vanity of the World, and the mischief of sin! And such
may even die, with these or the like words in their mouth, O what is man! he is
like water spilt upon the ground. O this vain vexatious World: I would not live
again for a Kings Crown. Sore trials, especially of long continuance, breed a
weariness of the World, and a sort of carelessness of worldly concerns, which is
often mistaken for Mortification. Sometimes this transient mortification comes
from some common Convictions, from some awaking work, which is ordinarily
accompanied with some restraining-grace. Judas can now despise his thirty
pieces of Silver: when the smell of Hell comes up into a man's nostrils, it will
make him throw away his Idols. When Achan is to be stoned, he thinks not much
of his wedg of Gold: when under Convictions, Sin often couches and contracts
its self: and when these are over, it dilates its self. None of these occasions
are fit seasons for men to make a Judgment of their mortification. So much for
the counterfeits of Mortification: Amongst which I might have reckoned that
which naturally arises from men's Complexion, by reason whereof, some are more
meek, temperate, chaste than others: which when set off by Wit and Learning,
looks very like Mortification.

Come we now then to show what it is, having seen what it is not. Mortification
may be either actively or passively considered: considered actively, it is a
work of the Spirit; whereby the Soul strives not only to beat down the motions
and stirrings of every sin, but endeavors to destroy the body of it, and to
slay it in the root thereof: which in some measure every Believer does effect.
Mortification passively considered, lies in a deadness of the whole Man, in
order to things forbidden: and in some sense also to things lawful; the Soul is
taken off from sinful Objects, and from inordinate appetite of lawful Objects.

Now to speak to it in both these Considerations: Mortification actively
considered; it lies not in unconstant, uneven, and flashy fits of indignation
and opposition against some sin; as some take vengeance upon some sins, and
spare their prime lust, as Saul did the King of the Amalekites: but it is a
constant and daily warring of the Soul against great and small, especially
against our Idol-lusts, wherein the man not only endeavors to destroy the love
of sin, and delight in it, but the very being of it. And this leads us to the
second thing proposed, the consideration of the object of Mortification,
actively considered.

And this is first and chiefly the sin of our Nature; Paul calls it a Body of
Death, Romans 7.24. It was this that Paul had most in his Eye, it was this that
laid him low: it was the sight of Original Sin especially that first slew him,
Ver. 9. And after all his Seize, it is this that keeps him humble; and O,
how blind are they that see not this Body! and no man that sees it, but will
say of any sin, Am I a Dog to commit this? It will keep a man upon his
Watchtower, and help to maintain a holy fear and diffidence of self, and
dependence on Grace. It it right convictions of this, that advances the Souls
esteem of Christ; of his redemption, and of free grace, yea, of the
all sufficiency of grace: O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me! as if
he had said, If ever grace or strength were posed, it would be in delivering of
me, etc. but I thank God through Jesus Christ, ver. 25.

And indeed the sinfulness of Sin, the exceeding sinfulness of Sin, the
mystery of it is never understood, till the Original pravity of our Nature be
seen, Romans 7.13. Sound Convictions discover the evil of actual sins, but they
let us see more malignity in this, than in all the sins of our life: yea, than
in Murders, Adulteries, Lying, Swearing: it is a fruitful womb that has millions
of sin in it, and would be eternally bringing forth, though there were no Devil
to tempt, nor to Midwife it into the World. And finally, they let us see, that
its being transmitted to us, and not contracted by us, does not lessen the
guilt nor danger of it.

Here then Mortification must begin: it will be in vain to dam up the streams,
while the Fountain runs, it will either carry down the dam and run the more
impetuously, as is evident in the case of many, who have been a while under
restraints; or it will run out some other way, and find out another Channel for
it self.

And indeed men's devised false methods of Mortification, serve only to dam up
sin, or to lop off its branches: it is the light of the Spirit accompanying the
Word, that only discovers this, Romans 7.7, I had not known, etc. and it is by the
Spirit only that this is mortified, as the Text shows: hence it is only the
true Believer that does any thing to purpose in this; and the more the Believer
is exercised in the mortification of Original corruption, the weaker and
fainter are the acts of Sin, and the stronger and the purer are the actings of
his Grace; for it is the strength of this that does sensibly weaken the actings
of Grace, and does secretly and insensibly weaken the principle of Grace. Now
this corruption of our Nature is sometimes called, 1. A body of sin, to hold
out the greatness of it; and 2. A body of death, because it works death, and
has Death and Hell in it, and because of its being loathsome and burthensom to
the Believer. 3. It Is called Enmity against God, Romans 8.7, to show its
desperate and dangerous Nature: 4. It Is called Sin that dwells in us, Romans
7.17, to show its nearness to us, and its access to hurt us. 5. It Is called The
law of sin in our members, Romans 7.23, to show what usurped Authority it has
over us. 6. It Is called The old man, Col. 3.9, to show its Skill and Cunning,
and because it has the first possession of us, and in the Regenerate is waxing
feeble. 7. It Is called The flesh, Romans 8.1. Gal. 5.24, to show (as some think)
how it is propagated, and how it is cherished viz. by Flesh-pleasing Objects,
and how it inclines to Flesh-pleasing courses, and puts the flesh in the room
of the Soul. And finally, to show how dear it is, even as our flesh. 8. It Is
called Lust that intices, to show its restless Activity; it will not let thee
alone, though thou would forbear it, James 1.4. 9. It Is called A root of
bitterness, Heb. 12.15, to show its hidden Nature, and its fixedness in the
Soul; and that as in its Soil (it is not ingraft or inoculated in us); so does
it influence our Actions: there is no sap in the Branches but what comes from
the Root: but O the bitter fruits of it! there is no true sweetness in the Root,
nor in the Branches: Lamentation, sorrow and woe grow upon it! Now, how this
should be mortified, may come to be spoken to in the Application.

2. The Effects or Actings of this Original Corruption, are also the Objects of
Mortification actively considered. This bitter Root has many Branches: this
Body has many Members: These Paul calls our Members which are upon earth, Col.
3.5, that though differing among themselves, yet make up one entire body of
Sin, and does execute what the law of sin commands. They are formed in us, as
soon as hand or foot of our natural Body, and grow up as the outward members
do; and by these members, Sin fights and wars against the Soul; and yet are
they as dear to us as a right Eye, or Hand, or Foot: Finally, it holds out to
us, how sin is seated in every member: and so powerful is the law of sin in our
members, that they may be called members of sin: they are so animated as it
were with sin, Romans 6.13. Sometimes these be called the lusts of the flesh,
Romans 13.14. Gal. 5.16. 1 Pet. 2.11. The Apostle speaks of the Kind and Species
too, Romans 6.12, and Romans 7.8. He insinuates great variety of Lusts; 1 John
2.16, we find three especial Lusts mentioned: sometimes these are spoke of as
acts of the mind and heart: hence it is called the imaginations of the heart;
walking in the vanity of their mind. And sometimes taking in mind and
affections too: hence called the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, Ephesians.
2.3.

Now though these Original Corruptions have originally the fame interest in the
man, yet by reason of some accidental advantages, as a man's natural Complexion,
Education, Employment, etc. some get above the rest, and prevail so, as to make
other lusts Lacquey them, and upon every occasion to give place: Sometimes the
lust of the Eye, that is Covetousness: sometimes that of the Flesh, or
Voluptuousness: sometimes Pride. Sin is as a great King, and these are its
three chief Princes, that command all men under it: they are universal lusts;
some call them Sins, or the Worlds Trinity; and these admit many subdivisions:
some of these may more properly be called the lusts of the flesh, that have the
sensual and brutish part of men only or mostly for them, at least engage only
men's corrupted affections; some of these are more subtle and refined, and are
called the lusts of the mind: when they gain not only our affections, but our
Judgment to be for them. Men by their prudence may disguise their Pride, their
Covetousness, their Prodigality (especially when it runs not on sensual
Objects) and hide it not only from others, but from themselves. Indeed,
ordinarily the Affections are first entangled, and these bribe, and bias and
corrupt the mind, and engage it first to contrive the fulfilling of their
lusts, and then to justify them. And one would wonder to see men rational in
other things, and so much blinded in the matter of their predominant lusts. Now
these must be mortified: and this is held out to us, by plucking out the right
Eye, etc. they that are Christ's, must crucify the flesh with the affections
and lusts thereof. 1. We must not fulfill the lusts of the flesh: we must not
let Sin bring forth. Nay, 2. We must not let it conceive: much of this Duty of
Mortification lies in beating down the first motions of Sin, and the first
risings of corruption in the heart: be it of Pride, Covetousness, or Unbelief;
as soon as the evil tendency of any Thought or Imagination is discovered, or as
soon as the least influence of any tempting Object upon the mind, or heart or
affections is perceived, it should be checked, and some Act of the contrary
grace excited and put forth.

And indeed it is (comparatively) easy to conquer the first motions of Sin:
and were we making conscience of this, we should prevent much labor and
sorrow: a little spark is soon quenched, yet may it burn a City. It Is storied
of Archimedes, That he framed such Engines as could pull the strongest Oak up
by the root; and that with the wind of his Mouth, he could set them on work:
Truly Satan has such Engines in men's hearts, and there is need humbly to
recognize our Debt to Divine Grace upon every advantage, even against the
faintest motions of sin: and to beware of Pride, which can rise and get up upon
every Molehill: O, were we under right impressions of the exceeding sinfulness
of sin, our hearts would start back at the first appearance of it; or, were we
living near God, and in a holy heavenly frame, we would abhor every hellish
suggestion, James 4, compare 7, with 8 ver. If you be afar off, you will begin
to parley with Satan, and by degrees he prevails: and by frequent viewing of
sin, tenderness wears off, and hardness comes on, and the conscience is
defiled, which when kept pure, smites a man for every sin. There Is need of
watchful diligence, for this piece of Mortification is a laborious work; sin is
so active and stirring continually, and we naturally idolize our ease: and when
we give up our selves to it, we become as Cities without walls. But O, how many
deliverances from sin, does the watchful Christian Observe! And how many stones
of Remembrance does he set up! and how much sweet communion with God, has he in
this hourly resistance and mortification of sin.

In the next place, let us speak to Mortification as passively considered; and
I shall show you to what we must be mortified. In general, we must be mortified
to Self: the Apostle speaks of his being crucified to the world, Gal. 6.14, but
it is only to the World as it feeds and maintains Self; man has fallen from God
to himself, so that Self is now the god of this world, and selfishness is the
life of sin, it runs like blood and Spirit through every sin. Now Self is
either Natural, Moral, or Religious: we must be dead to all.

1. For natural Self, we must be mortified to it: and, 1. To all natural
Abilities and Accomplishments; to Strength: Strength is the glory of Behemoth,
and is subdued by Age; the Rose and the Lilly has more Beauty than thou. Blood
is a borrowed good, its the Parents glory, not thine; we must be mortified to
Strength, Beauty, and Blood, and honorable Birth; yea to life it self; this
was eminent in Paul. To be mortified to Life, is to have Life: for Christ's
mortification to life, is our victory in suffering-times, Rev. 12.11. Love of
life is the life of sin, when it is not loved in God. 2. To the Mammon and to
the Pleasures of the World; Paul says not only as Samuel, Whose Ox, etc? 1 Samuel 12.3. but, I have coveted no man's silver, or gold, or apparel, Acts 20.33,
and Lev. 26.36. Deuteronomy. 38.65. What is Courage, when he can make the shaking of a
Leaf, bring on fear, and terror, and fainting? there is a secret Confidence men
have in Riches, which is the life of Covetousness: Job purges himself of this,
Chap. 31.24, 25, If I have made gold my hope; or have said to fine gold, thou
art my Confidncee; or have rejoiced, because my wealth was great. A poor man
that wants bread, may be he is not tempted nor troubled with vexing desires of
shipfuls of Gold, hunger and want being his door-Enemy, and lies between him
and the hope of great Riches; and yet there are often delightful Speculations,
and tumbling-waves, and floods of wishes for such Riches: so that the heart is
not mortified to the love of Bread, nor of Riches either.

Indeed, the desire of Food and Raiment is natural and lawful, but it is the
unmeasurable, the doubtings, anxious, diseased desire that must be mortified:
the feverish man calls for drink, but it is not so much the man, as the disease
that desires it; for it helps not the man, but the disease. 2. There must be
deadness to Pleasures: Voluptuousness is the most lively lust in some, the
flesh is the master in most men: the wretched Soul must serve and lacquey it,
must plot and contrive to satisfy it; must think, and will, and love as it
pleases: and in most men it yiedls a willling subjection to sinful flesh, and
is pleased when it can please the flesh. What disorder has sin made? some groan
under it, others cherish it: O the delicacy and softness of some! some make a
god of their Belly, others of their Beauty, and bestow their cost and labor
upon a piece of painted Clay! Is this to mortify the flesh? will such endure
burning quick, or sawing asunder? Many stumble and fall here, Luke 14, I cannot
come; the mortified is dead to all his senses, to the pleasure of seeing,
hearing, tasting, smelling, touching: he has his Eye under Authority, Job 31
(unmortified looks speak an unmortified heart): he can in the vigor of youth
say as Barzillai, 2 Samuel 19.35, Can I taste what I eat, or hear the voice of
singing men, or women? he is dead to Sporting, Jesting, Laughing, Eccles. 2.2.
Penitent Solomon says, its mad: But were not Solomon (before that) and David,
mortified men? Answer, It Is true, they were: but though in the mortified man;
sinful habits and principles are broken, and weakened, and reduced, confined and
contracted as it were into Corners, into langushing inclinations: and though
Original corruption be impaired, yet the old man is put off but by degrees; and
the Lord withdrawing, and some strong temptation assaulting, this broken and
dying principle may put forth strong acts of sin, which gives some reprieval,
yea, a sort of resurrection to Original sin in the man. So that David and
Sololomon, for a while, seem not to be the same men they were: and this tells
us, that Mortification is not a days nor a years work.

3. This part of Mortification takes in deadness to a man's friends, to his
Country, to his Fathers house, to a House, Lands or Estate of our own. Our
Country, may be, cannot bear us, nor our words: Father and Mother may forsake
us, Isa. 49.15. Friends, yea all our friends, yea our inward bosom friends, may
not only forsake, but abhor us, Job 19.19. 2 Timothy 4.16, Then eease from man;
there must be a ceasing also from, and deadness to outward peace and
tranquillity, to days safety, and nights rest; to Horses and Chariots, to
trading by Sea or Land, to fair and wellfurnish'd Houses, to rich, populous and
stately Cities; for the Day of the Lord may be, and has been upon these; and
the hand of the Lords Anger is yet stretched out.

2. There must be a deadness to Moral-self. There must be a deadness to Wisdom
and Gifts, and Moral Excellencies; to natural and acquired parts: for the
wisdom of this world is but folly; Learning and Books are but vanity: I gave my
heart to know wisdom and folly, this also is vanity, Eccles. 1.17. Riches,
Grandeur, and Greatness, are not so apt to blow up an ingenuous man, as
Learning or Virtue; Knowledge puffs up, who excel in Learning; who admires not
the birth of his Mind, his Writings, Discourses or Notions? who would not have
every one reverence them, were they never so ridiculous; Where it even (as one
says) to hold, that there is a World in the Moon? Men love to be called Rabbi;
but my Brethren, be not many Masters: the mind must be mortified to the mind, 1
Cor. 8.1, 2, and so must be to all Moral habits and Actions: the old
Philosophers that could trample upon Riches, were yet vainly elated with this:
When Zeno heard, that his ship he used to Trade by, was broke; Well done
Fortune (said he) quae nos intra palliolum compellis, who compels us to go
within our Cloak: he meant, to live upon the glory of Learnning and Virtue. A
man may bear to have his Face spit upon, and to be trod upon, that cannot
endure to have his Gifts, or his Morals vilified: But Heart-risings for
Injuries of any sort, bewray want of Mortification.

3. There must be a deadness to Religious Self: that is, 1. To our Graces and
spiritual Excellencies. Our Lord Jesus has a Noble Self, yet was he above it,
Romans 15.3, he pleased not himself. Mortification sets us above Renewed Self,
Gal. 2.20. Grace is a pleasant and fragrant Flower, but it is not Christ; it
grows out of him, and cut it off from him, it would wither: we must not trust
in New-self, more than in Old, 2 Cor. 1.9. We often look to it with a neglect
of Christ; and think that when we are once set right in the way to Heaven, that
we can find out our way henceforward. But the mortified man sees not himself in
what he is; he admires not, loves not, delights not in himself, nor in his
graces, as they are in him, but as they are in Christ; he looks on them as
drops of his fullness, as Rays and Beams of his blessed Perfections and
Excellencies: hence Paul is dead to his knowledge of Gospel-mysteries: he was
not rude in knowledge, yet would he not glory in it, 1 Cor. 13.2. Let us not
boast of our Gospel knowledge; and let us not hope in our hope, nor believe in
our Faith as some do, who fetch their peace and joy, not from Christ, but from
their own faith, or their own act of believing. But a little more as to the
Mind: we must be dead to our Light; this Quakers make an Idol of: I do not
mean, that we ought to despise it; or that a man ought to act against it: but
we must be dead to it so far, 1. as not to prefer any corrupt dictate of our
Mind, to plain Scripture-Truths or Duties: we ought to judge of it by the
Scripture, and not e contra. 2. So far, as not to lean to it in times of Trial,
or when in some doubt, though thou have been well guided in former times. It
betokens evil, when one says or thinks there is no hazard, I Will do well enough,
for I have gone through great Trials ere now. 3. Thou must be so far dead to
thy Light, as not to follow it to the offense of others, if it be in things
indifferent: Paul was clear enough, that he might eat flesh, yet, etc. 4. So
far as to be willing, if the Lord so will to lead thee blindfold, thou must
depend upon him, when thou cannot see a foot before thee.

2. Thou must be dead to thy forwardness and zeal, 1. So far as not to venture
on a seen snare or temptation, because you find your heart in a good frame.
Peter was a resolute man, but he had nothing to do in the Highpriests Hall. 2.
So as not to trust thine own heart, nor to learn to thine own strength: 3. Thou
must be dead to all thy Graces and Duties: 1. so far as not to rest in any
measure of Grace, or liveliness in Duty; may be when in a good frame, thou may
readily say, I were a happy man, if I could hold up at this rate of praying,
mourning, believing, etc. When Paul was at his best, he reckoned not upon it:
not as if I had already attained, etc. 2. So far as not to attribute what we
are, or do, to our selves, 1 Cor. 15.10, By grace I am what I am: and not I,
but, etc. Isa. 45.24. 2. In point of Acceptance, either as to thy Duties, or as
to thy Person: for the former, thou must not attribute it to thy Graces, or
Duties themselves, or to the liveliness or spiritual manner of doing them. We
are apt to say of Prayer (for instance) when answered, it must have been so, I
or he was so fervent and enlarged in it; hence some pray fervently for a mercy,
and confidently look for it, and yet are disappointed: and why? because not
dead to praying and believing, but lay more weight on Faith in God, and praying
to God, than on God himself, or on Jesus Christ. Some believe in their
believing, and pray to their prayers. And then, 2. Thou must be dead to these,
as to the acceptance of thy Person, and as to the matter of Righteousness,
Romans 7.4. 1 Cor. 4.4. I know nothing, etc. Psalm 3.8, 9. Paul counts all dung,
etc. And here lies the greatest difficulty, but it is the right Art of
well-doing, for one to work and to labor as hard, as if they could earn
Heaven: and when all is done, to be so far dead to it, as to account it Dogs
meat as to acceptance with God; and that it weighs not a feather in the
reckoning of our Righteousness.

2. This deadness to spiritual-Self carries in it a deadness to spiritual
Comforts: some are more alive to Comforts, than to the Comforter; But the Rays
and Beams of the Sun, are not the Sun: That Is the true light of Mortification,
when one is alive only to their objective happiness; when one is dead to
sensible feelings and actual Comforts: It Is true, that feeling, and sensible
Comforts, are in themselves sweet and desirable things: But herein we are to
blame, when our Comfort arises either from our own act of Love, Joy, Desire, or
from the effects of Gods love to us, more than from the God of all Comfort. Now
some may think much of this; yet it is plain, that we must be dead to these: 1.
so as not to Question the love of God, only for the want of them: 2. So as not
to be angry with him, when he withholds them. It Is necessary we be sensible of
it, but it is sinful when we charge him foolishly for denying of them: for as
the Night and Eveningshadows are good for Flowers and Herbs, and better than a
continual hot Sun; so are desertions of special use, they feed humility, and
quicken hunger and thirst. 3. So as to maintain an humble hardiness in
believing under angry like dealings, especially when we have ground to think
they are only for trying and humbling us; indeed, when sin has smoaked out
Christ and Comfort; That Is like a Boil (says one) on each side, that a man
cannot ease himself on either. 4. So as not to be socure when we have them.
Some carry, as if heavenly Comforts could maintain themselves, Song. 5.1, 2. 5.
So as to be in case to mourn with them that mourn, and not so to be taken up
with your personal Comforts, as to be untouched with the Concerns of Christ, or
the afflictions and sufferings of his followers. See Dan. 9.23. Compare with
Chap. 10.2, 3.

On the other hand, a mortified man is dead as to the sense and feeling of
great outward and inward trouble: if it be agood time with a child of God in
common, he forgets his own private sad exercise. 2. In as far as his trouble
and sorrow may weaken his heart or his hands in Duty. 3. In as far as they
incline you to quarrel with the holy Majesty of God; rather forget your sorrow,
and cease thinking on it, when you cannot do it, without reflecting on God.

3. This takes in a deadness to Privileges, to a flourishing Church State; if
the Lord will plow Zion like a field, we must say Amen to the word of the Lord,
as the Prophets of old did; we must be dead to godly Rulers, (indeed this is
not the temptation of the day: though I doubt not but many now alive have
faulted in this kind, and are smarting for it) to sudden and miraculous
deliverances; to the glory of Martyrdom and sufferings. True, now few exceed in
coveting this, yet many have: Finally, to Ministers and Ordinances: for Judge
and Prophet, Isa. 3, and teaching-Priest may be taken away, and Vision may
cease; the Ark and the Tabernacle, and the Temple, are not God; the Temple may
be burned, -- and the Sanctuary profaned, and such as enjoy them, need not
glory over others, as the unmortified remnant who abode in the Land, and in the
City, gloried over their captive Brethren, Ezekiel. 11.15, Get you far from the
Lord, unto us is this Land given in possession.

We do not mean, that men should be mortisied to the presence of God in
Ordinances: you cannot be lively enough in following of God in Ordinances, but
you must be dead to the purest Ordinances (though the choicest outward mercy)
externally considered so far, 1. As not to hang and depend too much upon them:
how many of these Nations that were lately as the Garden of God, are now like a
parched Wilderness? who have now instead of pure Ordinances, and sweet
Gospel-Preachers, only dumb-Dogs, and dead forms. 2. So as not to pay too dear
for them, nor to buy them at the expense of Truth or Holiness: no sufferings
are too much; but any sin, any wrong to God or Christ, is too much for them. 3.
So as not to limit the Lord to them: we often sinfully tie Gods presence to
preaching, praying, breaking bread, etc. and have a carnal zeal and liveliness
to means and naked Ordinances. Some tie their Faith, and Edification, and
Comfort so to an Ordinance, or to one man, as they cannot be content if they
get not their desire. A godly Minister may be too much alive to Preaching, and
bear restraint with sinful Impatience; and a private Christian may be too
eager, and hang too much upon one man's mouth: But so much of God and Christ,
and the substance of the Gospel, must be overlooked, as Means are idolized. 4.
Then we must be so far dead to them, as humbly to submit to the want of them,
and not misdoubt God, but to believe that he will make them up to us; He will
be instead of a Sanctuary, and Ordinances, and Ministry, if we do not sinfully
put them away: or if we be duly sensible of his displeasure, and humbled for
our Church-desolating sins: He can restore them, and in the mean while afford
subsistence another way: yea, if it were to feed us with a Rod; for some have
thriven better by a sanctified Rod, than they have done by lively Ordinances.

In the third place, we come to consider the necessity of Mortification: this
the Text does plainly hold out to us. The Question then is, Upon what grounds
is it necessary? I Answer, 1. More generally: It is necessary by virtue of the
Command of God: this the Text points out, and it is express, Col. 3.5. And
indeed, wherever Holiness is commanded, this is; for, Mortification is a great
part of Gospel-holiness: for the Covenant of works, it takes no notice of this,
for it supposes no sin to mortify. Now in the Gospel-command, take notice, 1.
of Gods Authority; He has right to Command, and Authority to punish
Disobedience: look to it, for your allowing your self in any sin, imports some
forgetfulness or neglect of this Authority. And it should be a Christians care
to keep up the sense of this, especially such things and occasions wherein ye
are most like to neglect it; as in secret Retirements, and Enjoyments, and
Temptations: or in your con^^^^ with others, may be, ungodly persons, whereby
casting off the sense of this, we often cast the honor of our profession to
the ground, and by out sinful neglects or compliances, unframe our selves: or
in the matter of our Trade, wherein many allow themselves in some thing less or
more, that is of such secret use and gain to them, that no sense of Gods
Authority can move them to relinquish or mortify it.

2. Let us consider, that Mortification is the killing of our Disease, of that
which would kill us: it is the cure of the depravation of our Nature, which thus
came to pass: Man not being contented with his Estate, would be as God; and by
this means fell from what he was, and became like unto the beasts, 2 Pet. 2.12.
Man has now more of the bestial, than of the Divine Nature; and men out of
Christ, have not only to answer for the enormities of their Actions, but for
the debasing of their Nature. But let us consider this corruption of our
Nature, not as it renders us obnoxious to wrath, but as it is our misery; for
Man is now like a condemned Malefactor, that has also a mortal Disease upon
him; and that needs not only a Pardon, but a Physician. And then Mortification
must be our cure; It was the great result of Solomon's fearch, that he found
that at first Man was not of the same make and mould that now he is of, Eccles.
7.29. Sin has now corrupted and blinded the mind, and debauched the whole Man,
and brought him under the power of his diverse lusts: he is now become flesh: if
any remainder of light peep out, but smothers, or blows it out: What disorders
have men's lusts filled the World with? see some hint of Nature, Romans 3.13, 14,
15, 16. It Is not the outward man he intends only, but especially the power of
men's lusts, and the inward readiness of the mind to all ill. The thousand part
of what is plotted there, breaks not forth: for one man can contrive more
wickedness, than all the World can Act. See some account of man's inward
wickedness, Genesis 6.5, Evil, only evil, continually evil; Men's lusts are
insatiable; such as have the greatest opportunities and advantages for
satisfying them, do but increase them; and this is men's sin and plague both,
and issues into men's ruin: and the less men know or feel this, the greater
their misery, so that Sinners heaven is indeed a part of Hell in them, for
their lusts even now do torment them: and all their relief is in their various
sinful Objects, which feed their lusts, and increases their misery.

Now Mortification only can cure this; true, some are naturally of a sedate
temper, and not subject to such perturbations and enormities as others. But
there may be more dirt and mud at the bottom (says one) where there be fewest
Waves: and a River may run with great strength, when yet it runs smoothly and
without noise. Some are ingeniously educated, which may a little polish the
outward and inward man both; but refining of lusts, is not mortifying them:
there is no recovery from our misery and servitude, and disorders through our
Corruptions, but by the putting off the old man, and mortification of the body
and its deeds.

Let this then be a second Consideration, which shows the necessity of it, viz.
That it is the cure of our sin and misery, which lies in the frame and actings
of corrupt Nature. If any say, That those who set themselves to mortify sin,
do but raise tumults and disorders in the Soul: who has less inward quiet than
Paul? Romans 7. Some that are well Educated, and of good natural Tempers, seem to
have the better of many who pretend to Mortification.

I Answer, 1. The peace of unmortified Souls, is much like that in Hell among
the Devils: they are all combined against God, and are not divided amongst
themselves. If this sort of peace please you, you may have your fill of it in
Hell. 2. Other men's peace proceeds from their (...) of servitude, rather than
to endure the trouble of a Conquest-World; If the Believer give the Tyrant Sin
it is will, he should have peace with it, but he chooses the trouble of a
constant War with it, rather than to War with God and his Conscience. Sin
Reigns over others, and keeps all quiet: but Grace Reigns in the Saint; and Sin
rebels and breeds some disturbance; but never is able to ruin and dissolve the
Government of Grace. 3. It is indeed no trouble to the godly man to oppose sin,
for he does it with delight; he has peace with God, and joy in his heart, when
he is in the midst of his Conflict with sin; and the more vigorously he opposes
sin, the greater is his peace: he is heartned and animated, when he remembers
what he contends for, and when he thinks on his Assistants: And more, when he
feels strength renewed, he is put on frequent acting of Faith, and there is
some inward pleasure in every act of Faith: yea, and when sin is too strong for
him, he is drawn forth in Acts of godly sorrow; wherein the Believer has a real
pleasure; the trouble of others for sin, is but the beginning of sorrow, and of
the same kind with that which is in Hell: therefore they would fain flee from
them, but sorrow for sin is the bitterest fruit of these Conflicts, yet it is
mingled with Joy. Outward Joys have a sting and a wound in them, and the
mortified man is uneasy under them; But godly sorrow has a sweetness in it,
therefore the Believer by all means seeks to cherish it. Finally, Every
advantage he gets against sin, raises his heart; and the hope, yea, the
assurance he has of a final Conquest, does so far animate him, that he can
antidate Praises, and sing a Triumph in the sight of Victory, Romans 7.25. He
finds, may be, some strong Lust so rooted in his natural Temper (which one well
resembles to the mire, without which the Rush cannot grow) which has often
prevailed; and to the acting of which his own heart prompts him, and Satan also
solicites him; yet when he looks to Christ, to his strength, and grace, and
redemption from the guilt and power of sin, Romans 7.25, and to the sure word of
Promise, Romans 6.14, he is heartned to oppose it.

May be, some will further say, that many who pretend to Interest in Christ,
and to have the Spirit; are yet proud, vain, passionate, envious, unpeaceable,
revengeful; How then does Mortification cure the distempers of our Nature?
Answer, If any who pretend to have the Spirit, be such, the more shame to them;
these are unlike to the fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22.

But many lay claim to that which they have no right to: and by reason of such,
is the way of God evil spoken of, What has given so much occasion to men to
Preach and Print, That Nonconformists are the worst Parents, Masters,
Mistresses, Wives, Neighbors, etc. If there be such, or if any pretend to the
Spirit, who do not thereby mortify, etc. Let us rather question or deny their
Religion, than that Grace or the Spirit does not mortify sin. 2. Some need
more Grace to mortify sin than others: Some have as much as others, yet not
enough (if I may say so) for themselves. Some have a harder task than others in
mortifying the deeds of the Body: Sin has greater advantages in some than in
others: some are under worse circumstances than others, such as raises and
draws forth their corruptions, 1 Samuel 1.6, Her Adversary provoked her sore, for
to make her fret. Some have fuel daily laid in for their Corruptions; and it
may be want of this, that makes others corruptions look as if dead: as Fire
wanting fuel, and when under ashes, looks as if it were gone out: So it may be
ordered for the trial and humiliation of some. What Saint almost seems more
impatient than Job? yet who more mortified than he. Finally there is in every
Believer, a spiritual principle that is working toward the death of all sin.
But for the expediting the matter, our utmost diligence is necessary, 2 Pet.
1.5. Sin is at first really wounded, but not at once killed: and when we pursue
not our advantage against it, it recovers some strength, and rages, and is
exasperated more, than where it was never touched.

3. Let us consider, that it was our Lords Errand into the World to destroy
sin, which is the work of the Devil: it was sin that crucified and killed him:
and it ought not to live in us; but by his Death he slew and vanquished sin,
and by the virtue of Christ's Cross must we mortify it, Gal. 6.14. It Is a chief
Blessing we have by Christ; to be able to overcome sin. What was Christ's mind
upon the Cross set upon? it was the purging away of sin, Ephesians. 5.25, 27. See
wherefore God sent him, Acts 3.26. Now he turns not only from, but against sin:
by Converting-grace he turns from sin; by exciting and Assisting grace he
promoves in us the death of sin; They have most of Christ, and are the best
Christians, who have their corruptions most mortified. Value this more than
talking, more than a plausible way of praying, etc. yea, more than Raptures.

It Is our sin and shame, that we improve not our Christianity more to the
destruction of sin, and that we do not more promote the glory of Christ: by his
holy spotless life he bore witness against sin, and condemned it; and by our
Imitation of him, we ought to glorify his holy life; by our sins we bespatter
it, and others are apt to think such a one was Christ. By his Doctrine he has
also cried down and condemned sin; he preached and prayed against it, John
17.17. He rejoiced at the sight of the ruin of it, John 12.30. His Word is a
Glass to see it in: his Promises and Threatenings are so many Methods against
it; and by eschewing sin, we adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior, Tit. 2.10.
Moreover, As a Priest by his death, he condemned sin in the flesh, and we ought
to condemn it over again. His blood purges from sin: in Baptism we covenant
against it; in breaking of Bread, etc. Christ's death is set forth to us, not
only as a Propitiatory, but as a Pattern to us to die to sin: we despise his
blood, and render his Cross of none effect, when we yield to sin. Mortification
would make us look like Christians: Ah! we spare our selves, and cry out of our
Impotency, and the strength of sin; we spend our time more in fruitless
complaints, than in endeavors. Though Christ as King, Priest and Prophet,
takes away and destroys sin, think not he will cure you as by a Charm. Must he
condemn it, and you Absolve it? Must he kill it, when ye cherish it? must his
Spirit assist you against it, when ye betray your selves into its hands? when
under a Temptation, and his Spirit stirs in you, he puts it to your choice, If
Christ or sin shall reign over you: and indeed it is, whether will you be
Christians, or not?

A 4th Consideration showing the necessity of it, may be taken from verse 12,
We are not debtors to the flesh: as for our bodies, we are debtors to them by
the necessity of Nature, so far as not to famish them: they may challenge a
right to what God allows; but for corrupt Nature, which inclines to please the
flesh more than God, and to care for it above the Soul; to this we are not
debtors. And the Context shows that we are debtors to the Spirit. It Is the
Spirits work too, to convince of sin, to witness against it, to restrain from
it, and to mortify it. Our new Nature inclines to it, our Privileges obliges
us to it: We are debtors for, and to the Spirit; and this debt we own in
Baptism, wherein we renounce the false Trinity, and dedicate our selves to the
true, Romans 6.11, Reckon not your selves, etc. Baptism is a vowed Death to sin:
hence the Apostle argues against living to sin, Romans 6.3, 4, and ver. 2, He
argues not ab impossibili, but ab incongruo. Compare that verse with Col. 3.3,
Ye are dead: yet ver. 5. Mortify, etc. Sin is dead in Vow at our entry to
Christianity. Now the Apostle Peter, 1 Ep. chapter 3.21, tells us, That it is not
the external part of it, viz. the putting away the filth of the flesh, that
effects this; but the answer of a good Conscience toward God. God puts this
Question to the Conscience: Do ye renounce sin and Satan? the good Conscience
says and does it. Now every Oath of Dedication implies an execration or consent
to a curse in case of failing, etc. Neh. 10.29. Now he is the only true
Christian, who makes conscience of paying this debt: If sin get any power over
him, it is not of right, he owes nothing to it: and this may be his Answer to
the flesh, when it tempts, I owe thee nothing.

5. Consider the necessity of this in order to the Souls communion with God,
who is a holy God; yea, glorious in holiness. May be, the reason ye are kept at
the door for many days, is your filthy garments: ye must fight every step of
nearness to God, and must conquer 'em before the Triumph, Romans 7.24, 25. and
8.1. As Life is ensured in the Text, to Mortification: so the more that one
mortify sin, the more of the beginnings of this Life have they here; he that
overcomes, eats of the hidden Manna, Rev. 2.17, and he is admitted to read his
Name in the book of Life; he gets a white stone, and in the stone a new Name;
Compare Rev. 2.17, with Romans 8.8, 14. A Christian intermitting the exercise of
Mortification, cannot keep up Communion with God, nor the faith of his interest
in God. If we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness (that is,
in ignorance and sin) we lie, 1 John 1.6. God is light, and in him is no
darkness: he is not a God that has pleasure in wickedness. Unmortified souls
must needs have base thoughts of God: as the more profligate Heathens painted
their gods in ugly and lascivious forms: but generally Nature taught them
something of the purity of God; and such as have no mind to be like him, will
think or wish he were like them.

Now, 1. This is necessary in order to our recovery of the Image of God; it was
sin obliterated this, and by the death of sin we recover this, and become
capable of divine Delight and Complacency, Col. 3.5. Compare with 9 and 10 ver.
2. Without this, we can have no intercourse with God, nor acceptance with him;
your Duties affords no glory to God, and convey nothing from him to you. Of old
there was no polluted thing to be brought before him: Ye cannot serve the Lord,
says Joshua, Josh. 24.19, where he speaks on supposition of their abiding in
their sins. Preaching and Praying are great Duties: but to the wicked he says,
What have thou to do, etc. And when ye stretch forth your hands, I will not
hear, Isa. 1. O what madness is it for the love of some lust, to forfeit all
the fruit of your Duties? See that some unmortified sin be not a Moth in them:
look what it is that distracts you most in Duty, and be jealous of that. 3.
Without this, you shall not, nor cannot live for ever with God; ye are not meet
to inherit Heaven, Rev. 21.27, in no wise. Your hopes and pretenses to Heaven,
are but so many Reproaches cast on God and Heaven. Heaven is not a place for
mortifying sin, nor can you expect that your sins should be all killed at once:
nay, indeed a man that desires not, and seeks not the death of every sin,
cannot without a contradiction be said to desire or seek Heaven; nay, put an
unmortified man in Heaven, and it would be a Prison to him, as a stately Palace
would be to Swine. Seneca brings in Nero knocking at Heavens-gate: Answer is
made, That there was nothing there wherein he delighted; whereupon Hercules is
ordered to beat him away with his Club. It Is by our success in Mortification,
that we make our access to, and acquire a fitness for Heaven: Can ye love and
cherish sin here, and think to hate it in Heaven? Ye mistake Heaven, if ye
think it stands so much in freedom from trouble, as in freedom from sin: and
indeed, the successful practice of Mortification will clear more what Heaven is
to you, than all your studies and speculative Contemplations of it.

If any Object, that if sin hinder our Union, Acceptance, or Communion with
God; how can any on Earth enjoy these, since every sin is not actually slain in
any Soul? Answer 1. The Soul wherein sin lives and reigns, can have no
fellowship with God: that of 1 John 1.6, does hold all you say of it, and
expect of it, as a lie, and will prove such. 2. While sin, the dreg of our
Disease, remains with us, there is no perfect Communion with God, nor is the
Soul so completely united and sodered to him, but there is some disjuncture, as
it were; and what makes eclipses in the Soul, but the interposition of some
sin? 3. Our Union and Communion with God in Christ, is by the new Nature,
through the Spirit; it is only in so far as we are freed from sin. Now whatever
sin be in the person, there is none in this new Divine Nature; the seed of God
is pure and undefiled with sin. 4. While we are pursuing sin to death, there is
no remainders of it that debars us from Communion with God, according to the
Covenant of Grace. None were cut off of old from the congregation for being
defiled, that did not neglect the appointed Purifications. Hear the rule of our
acceptance with God, and of continued Communion with him; If ye through the
Spirit do mortify, etc. Finally, the Christian that makes conscience of
Mortification, is helped in his work by his Union and Communion with God in
Christ; there is some Union necessary to the taking away of sin: and there is
some that is the reward of Mortification. Our Lord took not his Church to be
one with him, to be his Spouse, because she was pure, but that he might make
her so, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. In a word, we cannot have full nor immediate Union
and Communion with God, till we be like the Angels in Heaven: nay, till we be
like God; which is the highest description of Heaven. 6. Ponder the weight of
the first word of the Verse, If ye live, etc. Compare with Col. 3.6, which
shows the necessity of it. Finally, Consider the necessity of it in order to
Eternal life; Ye shall live, Compare the Text with Col. 3.4, 5. Mortify
therefore, etc.

In the fourth place, we should consider what is the Spirits work in
Mortification. Of this a word only. I Answer, 1. The Spirit discovers sin; sin
is the fruit of Ignorance, Acts 26.18. Satan's Kingdom is a Kingdom of darkness:
Sin reigns by Deceit, it entices, James 1.14. There the Apostle speaks not of
outward Objects allureing. Now the Spirits Light makes sin manifest, Gal. 5.18,
19. It discovers that to be sin, which the light of Nature never charged a man
with, John 16.8. 1 John 2.20. Now discover sin once, and you ruin it, it
cannot abide the light; this sets a man a-work to War with it, and destroy it.

2. The Spirit affects with shame and sorrow for sin; it lets the Soul see sin,
not only in the glass of the Law, but of the Gospel, as it is against Christ
and the love of God; and this imbitters it, and raises the heart against it.
The Soul cannot endure that that which was the death of Christ, should live in
it, Zech. 12.10. The Spirit also lets a man see sin practicing and warring
against his Soul, plotting and acting against his life: and so true self-love
sets a man to seek its death, 1 Pet. 2.11; yea, and lets him taste so much
bitterness in it, and gives such experimental knowledge of the malignant nature
of it, that makes a man weary of it, and seek to extirpate it.

3. The New Nature which is born of the Spirit, cannot bear it: the Spirit
hence is said to lust against the flesh, there is a contrariety between them,
that like Fire and Water in the Cloud, make a thunder in the Soul: the man that
wants the Spirit has no principle in him that opposes sin, as sin; or that
seeks the death of sin.

4. By the Spirit we are united to Christ: and by virtue of this Union with
Christ, we are enabled to overcome sin, we thereby receive strength and
supplies of Grace, and are made conformable to him: we are crucified with him,
and die with him, and rise with him, Gal. 6.14. The Soul sees not only a
Pattern of Holiness and mortification to sin, in Christ, but is made partaker
of the same holiness that is in Christ, and so has the same abhorrence of sin;
and the nearer it be to the Soul (the Lord Jesus had no sin in his person) the
more it loathes it. That which put him on destroying the works of the Devil,
prompts them to seek the destruction of sin.

5. The Spirit promotes Mortification, by actuating, assisting, and
strengthening Grace in us; the Spirit excites the exercise of Grace. Now says
Paul, If ye walk after the Spirit, ye shall not, etc. Gal. 5.16. Compare it
with John 7.38. The exercise of Grace engages the Spirit to assist his own
work; and this he will do, if not grieved. And thus the Spirit does not only
hinder the fulfilling or bringing forth the lusts of the flesh, but also marrs
the conception of them: the Spirit by filling with the fruits of holiness and
righteousness, leaves no room for the works of the flesh, Gal. 5.19, 21. Phil.
1.11. 2 Pet. 1.9. Now these Acts of holiness, etc. the Apostle calls the fruits
of the Spirit: for these the Spirit excites and produces, not by moral means
only, but by an internal immediate effectual work, for which end especially he
dwells in them, viz. to cherish his own work, and to excite the actings of
Grace; as in the old Creation, the Spirit moved upon the waters, etc. and they
brought forth living creatures: so does he move upon the New Creature in the
Soul, and it brings forth fruits: which for this reason (I say) are called the
fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.19. The Spirit draws forth godly sorrow, and that
is like poison to sin; the Spirit draws forth Acts of Love, and this kills the
love of sin, which is the life of it.

But this the Spirit does more especially, by exciting Acts of Faith, which do
in a peculiar way destroy sin, Acts 15.9. We can never advance holiness, nor
ruin sin, by mere multiplying of Duties. Indeed, we are said to be purified by
obeying the truth through the Spirit, 1 Pet. 18.2. But the Apostle means
thereby, believing, as appears from ver. 21, (which is called the obedience of
faith, Romans 1.2.) Hence the unbelieving and the defiled are the same, Tit.
1.15, But unto them that are defiled and unbelieving, is nothing pure, but even
their mind and conscience is defiled. Now Faith does expel sin, not only as it
is a part of the Image of God renewed in us (for such the habit of Faith is,
though indeed in its actings it answers not to any divine Perfection, at least
as it imports trust, confidence and dependence on another) and a part of our
inherent holiness. Nor only as it excites and brings into exercise other graces
that tend to the mortification of sin in us. But

1. And especially, as it is the Mean whereby the Spirit unites us to Christ,
and which receives and applies the blood of Christ, whereby we are cleansed
from sin; it is called a cleaving to the Lord, Deuteronomy. 4.4. Acts 11.23, which
infers a separation from sin: and if the woman by a touch of Christ did fetch
Virtue from him, for drying up her issue of Blood, how much more shall the Soul
derive Virtue from him to heal its plague by a constant cleaving and sticking
to him by Faith? it keeps the Soul near the Fountain that washes away sin; it
lays sin close under the stroke of him who came to destroy sin, and to save
from it.

2. The Spirit does, by drawing forth the exercise of Faith, let into the Soul
the efficacy of those means that are subordinated to the blood of Christ, and
have their efficacy from it, for the taking away of sin. As 1. There is the
Word, hereby we are made clean, John 15.3. and sanctified, John 17.17. and
healed, Psalm. 107.20. It is the sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.17, whereby the
Spirit wounds and kills sin: It Is quick and discerning in finding out of sin,
Heb. 4.12; and powerful for preventing sin, and rescuing from it. The Spirit
brings the Word seasonably to our remembrance, and also puts life in it: The
Spirit brings the Command with Authority upon the Soul, when the Commands and
Prohibitions of the Word come in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit;
they come with power, 1 Cor. 2.4; When the Commandment comes as to Paul, Romans
7. sense of sin may live, but sin is really wounded: he that is the father of
sin could not withstand Christ's Word, for it was with power, Luke 4.32. None
despise the Word, but such as never felt this Power. 2. The Spirit puts an edg
on the Threatenings: they are Corrosives to sin, when the Spirit fastens such a
Word as this: If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; it is as a Nail driven
into the Temples of sin: Better that sin die, than I die, says the Soul. 3. The
Spirit makes the promises of the Word effectual to work out sin, 2 Cor. 7.1.
Who would not zealously oppofe sin, and throw it away, that he may be
interested in such precious promises? or, who that knows his interest in these
promises, would not study the greatest possible freedom from sin? who that
knows that God is his God and Father, and will dwell and walk with him (2 Cor.
6.16, 17.) will beg or borrow from Satan or the World: or think to better his
Condition by the honors, profits, or pleasures of sin? Who that knows, that he
is the temple of God, will profane himself with Idols? and who that knows he
is the member of Christ, will make himself the member of a harlot; and who that
has the hope of eternal life, would not purify himself, 1 John 3.3? Now it is
by exciting Faith, that the Spirit makes either the Commands, or Threatenings,
or Promises of the word available to the furtherance of Mortification.

3. The Spirit renders these Ordinances, we call Sacraments, effectual for the
mortification of sin. 1. For Baptism: It Is not only the sign of our dedication
to Father, Son and Spirit; but it is a sign of our fellowship with Christ in his
death, Romans 6.3, Know ye not that so many of us, as were baptized into Jesus
Christ, were baptized into his death, ver. 4: therefore we are buried with him
by baptism into death, ver. 6, Knowing that our old man is crucified with him,
etc. ver. 7, For he that is dead, is freed from sin, ver. 11, Reckon, etc. Now
it is the baptism of the Spirit that effects this, John 1.33. Acts 1.4; and
this John calls Baptism with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, Matthew. 3.11.
probably alluding to the live coal which the Seraphim took from the Altar, and
wherewith he touched the Prophets lips, saying, Lo, thine iniquity is taken
away, and thy sin is purged, Isa. 6.6, 7. Now it is by Faith that the efficacy
of this Ordinance is taken in: sometimes at the time of the Administration of
it, sometimes afterward: what Faith Infants have, I shall not debate: I see not
why some sort of actual Faith may not be admitted in them; and why a
supernatural instinct may not carry them forth to Christ, as well as a natural
instinct prompts them to seek the Mothers breast. John Baptist leaping in his
Mothers womb, at the salutation of Mary, etc. does seem to confirm this, Luke
1.41, which did not proceed merely from the Mothers joy, as appears from her
words (being filled with the holy Ghost) in ver. 44. For lo as soon -- the Babe
leaped in my womb for joy; and though there may be something extraordinary in
it: yet it plainly says, that Infants are capable of some spiritual Acts, as
well as of natural: so

2. For the Lords Supper; The bread we break, and the cup of blessing -- is it
not the communion of the body and blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 10.16? therein we
have fellowship with him in his sufferings: and all our Communion with Christ
is through the Spirit, 2 Cor. 13.14. Hence now there is required in such as
partake of this, a more especial separation from sin: for we cannot drink of
the cup of the Lord, etc. (that may be said of other Sins, as well as Idolatry)
1 Cor. 10.21. And the abuse of this Ordinance, we see in a special manner
punished, 1 Cor. 11.30. Sometimes Satan goes down with a Sop, and it feeds sin:
but when Christ is indeed received by Faith, the evil Spirit goes out: and
there comes in a new recruit of power to expel sin.

4. The Spirit sanctifies Providence, and renders them of use to the
mortification of sin: as for instance, The observation of Gods severity upon
others, more especially our own afflictions: they are Gods Furnace, he threshes
us, that our husk may go off, Zech. 13.9. Isa. 31.15, and 48.15. 1 Cor. 3.13.
Materially, all afflictions belong to the Covenant of Works; but by the Cross
of Christ they are transferred to the New Covenant; they are thereby made
healthful, as the Tree that Moses cast into the waters, took away their
bitterness (which some think was a type of this); Afflictions are bitter, and
men murmr at them, as the Israelites at the bitter waters; but the Cross of
Christ makes them wholesome waters: they are like Salt to the Sacrifices, Levit.
2.13. They consume men's excrementitious and corrupting humors: we are apt to
taint and corrupt, to settle on our Lees, therefore we are emptied from vessel
to vessel: Roots of bitterness spring up, that defile, Heb. 12.15; so
Afflictions like Salt, pierce and macerate a Man; and we must be macerated ere
we come to Heaven; and what is Mortification, but the quashing and macerating
of the Irascible and concupiscible faculties of the Soul? More particularly,

1. Afflictions are witnesses of Gods displeasure against sin, yea, they are
sensible demonstrations of the bitterness of sin: for God would have us lay all
at sins door, Jer. 2.19, Thine own wickedness shall correct thee -- know
therefore and see, etc. how Gods anger at sin, and the felt evil of it, sets
the Soul against it. 2. They dissolve that wretched union between our
corruptions within, and tempting Objects without us: such an Union is this,
that they never present themselves to our corrupted faculties, but they excite
and draw out some sinful Act: we never let out our hearts upon the Creatures,
but we are corrupted by them: we cannot think of filthy Lucre, or sensual
Pleasures, but they defile us. Now the Cross crucifies us to the World, and it
to us, Gal. 6.14. (Many take the Cross there metanymically, for what we bear);
the heart now is not so inclined to commit Lewdness with them: as Rebukes from
the Lord makes a man's beauty to consume away like a Moth, Psalm 39.11; so it
takes off in the man's eyes, that beauty and desirableness in the Creature, that
drew forth inordinate desires: and it does enervate the strength and vigor of
the affections, that used to stir at the first seeing or hearing of any thing
that was desirable. 3. Afflictions open a door to the Word, and lays the Soul
open to its smitings and woundings: for when God speaks in men's prosperity,
they hear not: Now he does not spurn at reproofs of sin, but is content to have
it exposed. 4. Afflictions, quicken the actings of Grace, of Faith, of love,
submission, hope, etc. and these do secretly wound and work out sin. It is an
ill sign, when there is no notable acting of some Grace, at least, or when
Affliction is gone off, and no sin wounded or slain; when we are consumed with
Affliction, and no sin consumed, Jer. 6.10; when the work is over, and done,
and we purged from no sin, and made partaker of none of the holiness of God,
Heb. 12.10. Tremble at the thoughts of this. O dreadful! to be burned up with
the fire of affliction, and sin not touched; to be wounded, and sin whole; to
be broken with affliction, and not a bone of the body of death broken: it is
sin, it is your corruptions, that the holy Lord aims, and levels his strokes at:
But foolish we, interpose and venture our Souls to rescue and save sin; for
which of it is evil Offices is it that you will make war with God, and die for
sin? It Is for some Sheba that God besieges thee, and batters thy wall, as Joab
did the City Abel, 2 Samuel 20.15, deliver him up, cut off his head, and he will
retire, ver. 21.22.

Now all this is the Spirits work, hence called a spirit of judgment and of
burning, Isa. 4.4. By Afflictions, the Spirit judges, condemns and executes
sin, and helps us to judge, and condemn, and destroy it. When God has taken his
Spirit from Saul, he runs to Endor in his straits. Some are consumed, some pine
away: some are hardened when the Spirit is not at work. And finally, it is by
Faith, that the efficacy of afflictions is let into the Soul: for it sees them
coming from God, and that according to his Word; and it sees what they aim at:
and sometimes can look upon Gods chastning, as his proper dealing with sons,
Heb. 12.7.

We come now to the Application.

Use 1. For Trial: the Scripture tells us, there are but two sorts of Men, two
Principles, two Ends, two Ways, and two eternal states of Men: And it does also
plainly tell us to which of these we belong: we need go no further than the
Text; to the same purpose is that, Gal. 6.8, He that sows to the flesh, etc.
If you think Marks be tedious, and that some have too much multiplied them;
here is a short Trial. And were men but serious in applying this, they might
easily divine what shall be their eternal state. But here lies the
difficulties: There are so many Counterfeits of Mortification, and by the power
of Self-love, some are so passionately carried forth against some Sins, as
contrary to, and inconsistent with their happiness; And on the other hand,
where sin is routed, yet it keeps some broken feattered Forces on foot: and
where it is mortified, it is not nullified; That it is not easy to satifie the
sincere Soul, nor to undeceive the pretender only: Sin sometimes goes out, when
it is not cast out; it is often asleep, when it is not dead; it often retires,
when it is not defeated. Or, if in some particular it be resisted, it is either
gratified some other way, or it reinforces its self, and then prevails. Yea,
how many Professors keep up a green and flourishing profession, that know not
what Mortification means; and it may be are clean in their own eyes, yet are
not purged from their sins? And I doubt not also, but that for some time there
may be some increase of true fruits, where there is no growth downward, no
advance in Mortification. Indeed, it will be hard for any long time to keep up
a green Profession when the root is withering, or when a man is going back in
the secret part of Religion; If the roots of sin be lively and strong, it will
be hard to keep it underground.

Now in short, There be these things which speak out the strength and
liveliness of sin in a Man: 1. When a man makes a mock of sin, and thus bids a
defiance to the Almighty; and says Aha to his Trumpets! 2. When a man has much
pleasure in sin, and sins with greediness, Ephesians. 4.19, and does evil with both
hands earnestly, Mica 7.3: when a man seeks to extract all the pleasure that is
in sin, and would suck out the heart of it. 3. When a man solicites his own
heart to sin, Prove. 1.12, 13, and 7.18, and complains as it were of his
slackness in it: he is not surprised, nor overtaken, but devises iniquity, Mic.
2.1. compare with ver. 3.4. 4. When a man makes provision for his lusts: when
he plows wickedness, and sows iniquity, and is at a great deal of pains to
satisfy and gratify his lusts. The Christian is not at half the toil in
mortifying lusts, that others are in satisfying them: if the one be hard work,
the other is impossible: so that the poor Creature is tormented between the
restless and impatient cravings of his lusts, and the weakness and scantness of
the means he has to satisfy them. 5. When a man sins under a small temptation,
or none at all: some are like Powder and Flax, set on fire by a spark: yea,
some draw on temptations, and then out-go them, Isa. 5.18: they are not dragged
by a temptation, but draw, and pull, and pain themselves to sin: they meet the
temptation midway, and are glad of it, as the Jews were when Judas offered to
betray his Master unto them, Mark 4.10, 11.6. When one is got above Convictions
of sin, and above shame: Prove. 30.20, the adulterous Woman says, she has done
no wickedness. Jer. 8.6, and 6.15, Were they ashamed, etc? Jer. 3.3, Thou had
a whores forehead: or, 2. When one sins after frequent convictions of the folly
and hazard of sin, Isa. 57.10, Thou wast wearied in the greatness of thy way,
yet saidest thou not, there is no hope: when a man will adventure to wade
through wrath to satisfy lusts, and overtake his Idols: when Divine Commands
and threatenings (which to the godly man are more than Angels with drawn-Swords)
are no lets nor banks to sin: when the Omnisciency, and Holiness, and Justice,
and Power of God, even when actually represented to the man, yet does not
restrain him from sin. It Is said of some, that they did evil in the sight of
the Lord, 1 Kings 21.20. 3. When one hates Convictions, and endeavors to hold
them out, or to kill them. 4. When one is under Rebukes for sin; yea, may be,
under terrors for sin, yet goes on, as Isa. 57.17. Isa. 22.13, 14. Jer. 2.25,
Thou said, there is no hope, etc. Ezekiel. 33.10.

These things show forth the absolute power of sin in the Soul. But now in the
second place, there are some things that are evidences of great shortcoming in
Mortification: yea, even in the Regenerate.

1. When a man is under continual indisposition to Duties, and wants a
readiness of Soul to them, and is much distracted or diverted in them: When sin
is mortified, and Idols thrust to the door, a man will be at more leisure to
pray, and meditate without disturbance, and the spirit will be more composed: a
mortified man has more power over his spirit, he is not like a City without
walls: but for the unmortified, he has many to please: this Idol must have a
look, and this must have a word, and he cannot serve God without distraction,
nor with all his Soul, nor with delight: nor does he thrive by his Duties, for
his Idols consume and eat up the profit of them: think on this, you who
complain of distractons in Duties. Indeed, sometimes the heart is carried away
by more trivial Impertinencies: but ordinarily it is our Idols that come in so
freely and unseasonably: and may be these more trivial diversions have some
respect to them, at least they proceed from want of a deep sense of the Majesty
of God upon the heart, which also evidences some notable defect in
Mortification: for as much as we die to sin, we are alive to God. Finally, When
a man wants freedom and confidence in his Approaches to God: a Child that is
often faulting, cares not for the Fathers presence; sin makes a shyness to God,
less or more it does secretly estrange the heart from him. When the North Wind
of the Spirit has killed sin, then the Spouse is inviting Christ, Song 4.16:
then the Soul is saying, O when shall I appear before thee? But when a
temptation to gratify carnal ease prevails, then the Soul cares not for his
Company: it has no eyes, nor hands, nor legs, Song 5.2, 3, 4.

2. An habitual unwillingness to die, shows the power of some sin: there may be
some unwillingness at certain seasons, proceeding from some other cause, but
ordinarily this is it; a mortified man is like a ripe Apple that comes away
with the touch of a hand; or as a loose tooth, that comes out with a gentle
pluck. Moreover, the more a man exercises himself in Mortification, he is the
more afflicted with the remainders of sin: and the more successful he is in
mortifying sin, the more feeling he is of every motion of sin: hence he is
often crying out, I am oppressed, underdertake for me: or with Paul, Romans 7.24.
This Captive-exile does lawfully hasten to be delivered: this Prisoner is
looking out at his Windows till Christ come and knock off his Irons: and this
makes him groan earnestly for his full freedom from sin, and he cares not how
fast the outward man decay, if the inner-man be renewed, and if sin decay as
fast: it is easy to die, when sin is first dead; but if there be any lust
lively, the guilt of it makes a man dread Eternity, and the Judgment to come;
and the strength and liveliness of it, makes him dread death; when the Soul is
strongly united to any Idol, Death is like the rending of one member from
another: But a mortified Soul does leave the body as cheerfully, as a man
throws off an old torn ragged suit of Apparel. 2 Cor. 5.1, He is much in
longing for, and in rejoicing in the hopes of Heaven; and Heaven is Heaven to
him, rather for it is freedom from sin, than for it is freedom from troubles that
now annoy; whereas an unmortified man has cold thoughts, and faint desires of
Heaven: why do ye not lift up your heads? it is either from unbelief, or some
prevailing lust: were you fighting for your life, the news and assurance of
Victory would anticipate the Triumph; for the man is no further carried out
after the true happiness, than he is taken off the false. Hence one that is
wholly under the power of sin, cares no more for the true perfection of the
Soul, than a beast cares to be a man; yea, and the regenerate man that is under
any prevailing-lust can hardly keep up his assurance, at least he has no actual
aptitude and meetness for Heaven; and no wonder he long not much for it; but
see what a Song that is in, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8, I have fought the good fight of
Faith, etc.

3. When the Soul is in a continual restlesness and vexatious anxiety, when
there are many inward perturbations and disorders in the Soul; may be, sin has
not the throne, yet is it breeding great tumults, and making many and great
insurrections against grace in the Soul: the guilt of them fills the Soul with
fear; their opposition and contrariety to grace, makes them painful to the
Soul, in so far as it is sanctified: and then there is that Torment, which is
unseparable from all corrupt inclinations and lusts, which proceeds from the
impossibility to satisfy them; It Is upon the account of this lust, especially,
that the man that is defective in Mortification, is troubled; partly also in
respect of the guilt of sin.

For the second, The more success in Mortification, and the livelier Grace be,
the more feeling has the Soul of every stirring of sin, and the more pain it is
to the new Creature; and indeed, the more that sin be struck at, the more it
struggles: the Old man has a strong heart, and is loath to die; and our lusts
being as a right hand, cannot be cut off without pain; but that which is
painful to the Old man, is a pleasure to the New: It Is the strength of
remaining sin that afflicts the New man. The more the Soul be delivered from
sin, the more it thinks it thinks it self a captive, and the fuller freedom it
breathes after, Romans 7.24, the remainder of sin in the midst of his highest
comforts, are worse than Water amongst Wine: so that the poor Believer needs a
Banner, even when he is taken into the Banqueting House, Song. 2.4. How
pitifully does the poor Spouse speak, Song. 6.13, in the beginning of the ver.
Return, return, O Shulamite: return, return, that we may look upon thee; see
her Answer, What will you see in the Shulamite? as it were the company of two
Armies: Alas! What will you see in me, but War, and Blood, and Rebellion? when
the poor Christian thinks he has cut off one head of sin, there starts up
another, or more: the more you make it your work to mortify sin, the more
discoveries you shall have of sin; and the more ye will lie in wait to discover
it, the more of the Spirits light shall you have to see sin: That which is but
a shadow to others, is a Body to Paul, it was once otherwise with Paul, Romans
7.9. He was as whole and sound as any man: he was as little troubled with sin
as the Pharisees of our time, who with disdainful pride scoff at the humble
bemoanings, and self-abasing confessions of serious Christians, and will not
admit that Paul, Romans 7, speaks of himself, as Regenerated. I wonder what such
think of their own Liturgy, which frequently teaches them to call themselves
miserable sinners: at which the Quakers were wont as foolishly to Triumph, as
now they do at us for the like humble acknowledgments of sin.

4. When the reflecting upon, and remembering of former lusts and Idols, do
excite our affections, or is accompanied with delight, or does provoke new
desires, Ezekiel 23.19, she multiplied her whoredoms, in calling to Remembrance
the days of her youth; or as it is ver. 21, The lewdness of her youth: this is
an acting over of sin. It Is sad when we cannot look upon the Picture: nay, nor
read, or hear the name of our Idol-lusts, but we bow down our head, and our
affection is kindled, or some corrupt passion stirs: where sin is mortified,
every remembrance of it revives our sorrow for it; it is like a new stroke upon
an old wound, especially after the Soul has been held over Hell for it, and may
be under much outward trouble also: for its indeed some unmortified sin that
ordinarily brings on desertion and trouble, Isa. 57.17, when the Moon (an
Emblem of this World) is under our feet, Rev. 12.1, there can be no eclipse of
the Sun, and no storms. The Lord may for his own holy ends, exercise the most
mortified Christian, but its ordinarily some root of bitterness springing up
that he strikes at: And O what a Sea of temporary wrath does our indulgence to
some sin expose us too! yet how hard is it to bring us to lay all at the door
of a beloved lust! it were easy to cure most men's inward troubles, were they
but faithful to themselves.

5. When one is not constantly underfelt-need of Christ, not only to save from
the guilt, but the power of sin. The man that labors in Mortification, he is
hourly calling on his Aid, he cannot live without Christ, sin is sin indeed to
him; and Christ is Christ indeed to him: he cannot exalt Christ enough, nor
magnify the grace of God enough: he sees it is no little help he needs, and
that no common aid will serve his turn; (I do much question if such as oppose
the doctrine of special Grace, ever knew what Mortification was) he speaks with
another spirit than the Pharisee, when he thanks God that he is not like other
men, Luke 18.9, 10. (You see the Free-willers (as you vulgarly call them, for
such were the Pharisees) in Christ's time owned the necessity of some Divine
Assistance); how warmly does Paul speak, Romans 7.25, as he had with much feeling
bemoaned himself? Ver. 24. He seems to want words to exalt God, and stops as it
were in the middle: his thoughts are over-matched; thus praise waits, or is
silent for God; it is silent to other things, and it waits to be employed about
him, Psalm. 65.1. The Believer is often put to a Nonplus, in crying up the
grace of God, and wants words to express its greatness; yea, to answer the
elevation of the thoughts: the heart indites a song of praise, but he cannot
tune it. The Apostle is stopped as it were through admiration (which is Silentium
intellectus); for when the mind can rise no higher, it falls admiring: hence
some say, God is most exalted with fewest words. The experience of the supplies
of Grace for overcoming sin, is one of those mercies that uses to provoke the
Soul to cry out, Exalt thy self, O Lord! worthy art thou to receive Blessing
and Honor, etc. But thou art above all Blessing and Praise! Others make no
great matter of this.

6. When a man's heart is pierced through with sorrows, when his Idols are
blasted and smitten: when in the time of trouble, fear and sorrow sill the
heart: when our Idols are fallen, or when our lusts outlive their Objects. As,
suppose a man's Estate be decayed, or his dear Friends be dead, before
inordinate love to them be decayed, or dead; we are apt to sit down upon the
graves (as it were) of our buried Idols: and cry out, Ah my Lord! Ah my
Comfort! Ah my Hope!

But how does a mortified man carry in reference to the lawful things of this
World? Answer, 1. With a great indifferency: If he live, if he be rich, if
full, if he abound, it is well: and if he die, if he be poor or empty, it is also
well. If David be on the Throne, it is well, he can then also pen Songs of
praise; If he be at home in his house, in the Sanctuary, it is well; if banished
and chased from the house of God, it is well. Hezekiah is Victorious, the
Assyrians are slain, it is well. Isaiah prophecieth that his Treasures shall be
spoiled, and his Children carried captive, this is good too. Our blessed Lord
is the same, when the people sing Hosanna, and when they cry, Crucify him, and
spit in his face. The mortified man is peremptorily about nothing here: he
trembles at such a word, as, give me children ere then I die: nay, Children or
no Children, Riches, or no Riches, that is well; or when one loves, rejoices,
weeps, as if not, etc. 2. The heart goes slowly and faintly out after
Creatures: if any thing work upon the mortified man, it affects him not much,
Acts 20.24. Peter will not have the Saints burning quick, strange to them, 1
Pet. 4.12. Psalm 131.2, as a weaned Child: Grace makes the heart move leisurely
to all things beneath God. A mortified man is as a Sea that has no winds, that
ebbs not, and flows not, Psalm 62.2, He only is my Rock, I shall not be greatly
moved. The mortified man sings, and is not light; and weeps, and is not sad; is
zealous in Gods cause, and yet composed in spirit: he is not so eager on any
thing, but he can quit it for God: Ah! few can act, but they over-act. There Is
often in young Converts too great and fervent outgoings of the Soul even after
spiritual created Comsorts; this is some way childish: Mortification is a
gracious well-composed grave temper of Soul, as for God: the man weeps, as if
he weeped, etc. the Soul goes forth in its full strength. 3. The actings of the
mortified man in reference to the Creatures, are in some sense no actings:
rejoicing, etc. is as no rejoicing; things here are but shadows and pictures of
being (God only is); therefore our affections should be but affections, Psalm
35.12, They speak mischievous things: ver. 13, But I as a deaf man heard not.
Psalm 39.9, I was dumb, etc. Eccl. 2.8: he cannot find in his heart to sing and
dance at shadows. Grace longs at nothing: it shouts, admires, wonders at
nothing: it weeps also at nothing. The mortified man he is dead, he is
crucified with Christ; pleasant sights and sounds work not upon him.

Now for you in whom sin lives and reigns, we have but heavy tidings to tell
you: The Text lays a heavy burden upon you: if it was the Gospel that Paul
preached, this Gospel condemns you; you are dead, while alive: your right-eye
that you will not pluck out, and your right hand that you will not cut off,
shall be the chief seat of your pain; there shall the fire begin, and never
cease burning, and these shall be as fuel to burn the whole body: Out of these
shall the worm that never dies, grow.

And for you, Christians, that are slack and negligent, and not strenuous and
successful in this work of Mortification; you mar your own mercies: it is this
that renders you incapable of Divine Comforts, and it is this that multiplies
your sorrows; you may be first in profession, in knowledge, and gifts, in doing
of works of holiness and righteousness, and first and chief in sufferings for
the Gospel; and yet be last in Gods reckoning, and least in the Kingdom of
heaven above: thou may with much difficulty get through the Needles-eye, and
through the strait-gate, but thou losest thy hundredfold here: and for any
thing thou know, puts everlasting life to a venture; you mar and blur this
great evidence for Heaven in the Text; you cannot read your name in the
Promise. If sin be not your death, yet it blackens, lames, cripples and wounds
you, and keeps you weak, and your Soul always a bleeding; any unmortified sin
marrs your freedom with God: it is like a weight upon the Soul, that thou cannot
run thy Race, Heb. 12.1, 2. Or it is like a thorn in the foot: it is like a Wound
in the working-hand, it leaves a print upon every Duty; any unmortified lust
brings on deadness and formality; and Duties are rather Ornaments, than meat
and drink to the man. Or upon the bearing shoulder; It is hence that some real
Christians bear afflictions with more trouble and impatience than some others;
afflictions wound our Idols, and these are as pieces of our selves: they are
like David's forked arrows stuck into our right hand, or right-eye, we have a
quick sense of these: God would have us pluck out the eye, and let all go; or
cut off the arm, and we should not feel the arrow; but we pluck at the arrow,
and tear our flesh: What is it but our loathness to let our Idols go, that
makes affliction bitter? It Is not poverty, or want of Estates, Trading,
Relations, that in themselves afflict; for we see many contentedly want these:
but it is our unmortified corruptions, our inordinate love and desire of these,
this in less or more is common to some godly, with others. 2. The holy Lord
does by afflictions often bring forth men's secret unmortified lusts, and writes
them on their foreheads, Ezekiel. 16.36, 37. Sometimes by the kind of their
afflictions, sometimes by their carriage under it. But 3. There is besides this
in the Believer, a quicker sense and apprehension of Gods anger than in others,
and this makes afflictions sit the sorer to them: Hence comes such Complaints,
as Lam. 3.1. This bystanders do not consider, but observing their trouble,
think it comes from the same cause that the trouble of others proceeds from.
Ah! its our short-comings in Mortification, that makes men confound us with
others, that darkens our difference from the World, in every state of life we
are in: If under wants, we are perplexed and thoughtful as others; if we
abound, we are vain, and frothy, and proud, and supercilious as others. This is
the bane of many Professors, for this the Name of God is spoke ill of; for this
the imputed Righteousness of Christ is reproached; for this, the Spirit in his
in-dwelling and workings is reproached by the Rabsheka's of the time: for this,
Free Grace and Gospel-faith are reviled: did we not put this sword in our
Enemies hand, they should have no Weapon wherewith to fight against Truth or
us: this may indeed wound us, though it wound not Truth: Reproach has broken
my heart, says David; it would not have done so, had he not given occasion for
it. Our works does not justify our Faith; the fruits of the Spirit are not
manifest as the fruits of the flesh are: our deeds are not so different from
others, as our principles and profession are different from theirs.

Yet something I must say for the encouragement of such as are sensible of
their defects and short-comings in Mortification. 1. I must offer you Paul's
Relief, Romans 7.25. for however successful he was, yet the encouragement is such
as may serve every Soul that does heartily fight the Battles of the Lord,
though not so successively: the poor Believer is often crying out as Elisha's
servant, Master, What shall we do? But were our eyes open, we should see more
for us, than against us: the Father, the Son, and the Spirit, are engaged too,
through this blessed Work; ye have right to the same aid (if ye will but use
it) that Christ had in his contest with, and conquest over principalities and
powers, Ephesians. 1.19, 20, so that our impotency can be no excuse to us; Faith
gives the Soul the greatest resemblance of Divine Omnipotency. 2. Take that
word, Romans 8.1, You feel and know that there are many things condemnable in
you; yea, enough to condemn millions of Men or Angels: But O the mysterious
depths of Free Grace, that should divide and separate between Condemnable and
Condemnation. Indeed, the more Conscience one makes of mortifying sin, the more
sense and assurance of their Absolution and Indemnity. If sin be prevailing,
it is hard to maintain the sense of this; yet in some cases one may: as when the
Soul is under a deep afflicting sense of prevailing-sin, and solicitously
striving against it, Psalm. 65.3, Iniquities prevail against me, etc. You may
yield to the Antecedent, and deny the Consequence: yea, you make the prevailing
of sin an Argument in prayer for Pardon, Psalm 25.11. Those same Iniquities
that set Justice a-work, Genesis 6.5. He can make an Argument for mercy, Genesis
8.21. Indeed, if one keep up any persuasion of their freedom from Condemnation,
it is a great doubt if they can keep up the comfort of this persuasion too; for,
these are often separated. David has his Absolution, 2 Samuel 12.13, yet does he
afterward beg the comfort and joy of it; or at least a closer Application of
it. 3. Know that oft-times Satan and Corruptions stir most where they have
least possession, and real power; and also that they make most ado, when they
are nearest to be cast out.

But if you enquire, why the holy Lord does suffer sin to prevail so much over
some of his own? I answer, The Captain of our salvation knows how to bring his
followers to Glory; and he knows that it is better for some to be kept sighting
(even though often foiled) than to be Triumphing. The rising of some is their
falling, and the falling of others is their rising; Success is sometimes worse
to carry under, than a Defeat; Pride and Self-righteousness often get up upon
our Trophies over sin: and for this end sometimes the Lord suffers some sin to
prevail: If he see a Soul enclining to establish its own righteousness, Ezekiel.
33.13, If he trust to his own righteousness, and commit iniquity. Pride often
rises upon the ruins of other lusts: but thus the Lord suffers not the foot of
Pride to get up, he keeps the Soul under a deep impression of its exceeding
sinfulness and vileness; indeed, it is a trial to Faith, when the Soul sees
nothing in it self, and yet can believe; and then is Faith purest, when others
reckon upon themselves as the worst of Sinners. David reckons himself as a
beast, Psalm. 73: And he not only mourns for sin, as a man; but he roars as it
were like a pained beast, Psalm. 32.3. He seems fitter for a Wilderness to cry
out, than for a secret Chamber to weep in: at other times he can water his
couch in the night, now he roars all the day-long: at other times his moisbure
is dried, now his bones: the pillars of his house shake and wax old.

2. Thus the Lord lets the Soul see its need of constant supplies of Grace, and
so keeps it in a closer dependence on himself: were we always victorious, we
should not know so well our own insufficiency, nor the sufficiency of Grace.
Some are kept Cripples, because they would either run away from him, or neglect
him. It Is evident, that we are oftnest with God, when we have most need of him;
how often does necessity prompt us to Duty, more than love, or conscience of
Duty? hence we pray seven times, when we praise once.

3. The Lord often punishes his people by this: letting them know the
difference between Christ's yoke, and sins.

4. He manifests his power in their final Conquest, after so many foils: On
this account Paul glories in his infirmities, 2 Cor. 12.9, 10: thus also he
manifests the riches of his Grace. The Conversion of the Soul from sin to God,
is a wonder of Free Grace; but the Conversion of some is a greater wonder.
Mortification of sin in any Soul is a mavelous work of the Spirit, but more
mavelous in some; where sin was deeper rooted and more fortified, and where
the name of lusts was begun: even so, the salvation of the most mortified Soul,
is a new wonder of Free Grace: but the salvation of some Souls, is a
supereminent act of superabounding-grace; the High-praises of God shall be in
all their mouths: but the songs of some shall rise higher than others: were not
the holiest so much in admiring how themselves were saved, it might be an
astonishment to them to see, may be, some in Heaven, whom in their thoughts
they have sometimes reprobated: how much sin do some bring to Heavens-door with
them? At Heavens-gate is the grave and burying-place of many strong
Corruptions: Death, which is the wages of sin, is made the grave of sin. And
what the Red Sea was to the Egyptians, these Corruptions that keep poor Souls
in bondage, and that still pursue them, they shall see no more the certainty of
your final Conquest. Is it not good news from a far Country, that the Captain
of your salvation stands engaged for you? and it is more his concern than
yours, that you be victorious. And O what Hosanna's shall be sung to him, when
he shall ride in Triumph through the streets of the new Jerusalem that is
above, with his triumphing followers, each having a Crown on their head, and
Harp in their hand; his Conquest is a pledge of yours, John 16. You are often
thinking that some day you will fall by the hand, etc. You have had as good aid
engaged to save you, as Christ had, Ephesians. 1.19, 20: and you being so nearly
united to him, he reckons not his Conquest complete, as long as you are in a
Militant state: If you be fighting the good fight, Christ is upon his way to
relieve and fetch you off victorious; Know you not that he has said, I will
that they be where I am? he knew his Trust, and that it was the Fathers will;
and well it is for us, it depends not on ours.

Use 2. What we have said, does speak sadly to such as either neglect this
great Duty, on which the Text lays so much stress: or who think to mortify sin
by mere moral means, or considerations. For the first sort: 1. There be some
that instead of mortifying sin, cherish and feed it, and make provision for it:
that are in league with it, that have common Friends and common Foes with it:
yea, to some it is as themselves. It Is as a right hand, etc. yea, it is their
life; wound their lusts, and their heart dies: speak to such of Mortification,
and you may as easily, and more, persuade them to stab, or at least to lance
themselves. Hence men have found out so many counterfeits of Mortification,
they will rather kill thousands of Rams and Bullocks, yea, their sons and
daughters, ere they slay sin; What severities have some used to themselves, to
save their sins? What vast sums have some given to redeem the life of their
sins? This has enriched the Popish and Prelatick Clergy, more than ever their
own, or the Benefactors Piety or Zeal have done.

2. There be some that seem to be grieved with the power of sin, that are daily
poring upon their sins, but never are able to come out of them; that are much
in complaining of the power of sin, but never able to mortify sin. Now here I
shall show 1. What it is that ordinarily hinders the mortification of sin. 2.
How it comes that convinced Souls that are often complaining of sin, yet take
up short of Mortification.

For the former, let us consider, 1. The frame and corrupt Habit of the mind of
Man. There Is in it Ignorance, Atheism, Inconsiderateness and Unbelief. First,
There Is Ignorance, the god of this world has blinded men: and then he makes
them grind in his Mill. Sinners see no Enemy to fight with, they see no harm in
sin, they feel no sting or poison in it: and instead of crucifying it, are apt
to say, Why, what evil has it done? for sin is marvellously tame, where it is
kindly used. It Is Satan's policy to teach men to call evil, good, and so to
advance it: and to call good, evil, and so to persecute it: thus we see him
carry on the mortification of Holiness. 2. There Is Atheism: whether there be
any speculative Athesm, I enter not upon. I am apt to think, that if there be a
head-Atheism, it proceeds from heart-Atheism: But certain it is, that when men
have blotted out all sense of God upon their mind; sense of sin must needs be
gone too (no doubt, it is from the prevalency of Atheism in these days, that
some have denied any real difference between good and evil): did men live under
the impressions of an infinitely holy, just, sovereign Majesty, they durst not
so affront his Law and Authority, nor maintain his Enemies, which he would have
slain. 3. There is Inconsiderateness. Sinners do not count the cost and charges
of sin: they see not the hook, the poison that is in it; consider not what
bitterness it will be in the latter end, when they shall mourn at the last,
etc. Prove. 5.12. Many suffer more for it, even in this life, than the godly
does for holiness; but the latter end of it is another thing. Now what men have
in Oblivion, they consider not, or look upon at a great distance: To the godly
man, Judgment and Eternity are near; therefore he deals with sin, as he would
do if he heard the last Trumpet, or saw the great white Throne set, and the
Ancient of days sitting upon it, etc. 4. There Is Unbelief; did men believe what
evil were in sin, what it is in its Nature and Effects, and Consequents, their
hearts would rise with indignation against it; they would seek to extinguish
their lusts and passions, as men do fire, when it breaks out in their houses.
Now the remainders of these are in the Regenerate.

2. There is the engagedness of the heart and affections to sin: the heart is
the chief seat and strength of sin. There Is a heart-union between a Sinner and
his Idols, such as resembles that between a Man and his Wife: hence, men's Idols
are called their Lovers: and the backsliding of Professors, is called Adultery
and Whoredom; hence instead of killing their lusts, they love them, and cherish
them as their own flesh. To mortify sin, were to mortify themselves: Will a
man slay the wife of his Bosom, the desire of his Eyes, or thrust through his
intimate Friend? Sin is as meat and drink to them, they drink it as the Ox does
water: It Is as Air to breathe in, it is as spirits and blood to them; Kill me,
says the Sinner, and restrain me from this or that: when we speak against sin,
men take it, as if we spoke against themselves: when we cry out against sin,
it is to them, as if we were reproaching them: where the eyes are full of sin, a
man cannot cease to sin; much less when the heart is full of it: love does
strongly unite the heart to it; there is a League, a Covenant of friendship
between the heart and sin. Now sin may in a sort keep true to the man for a
time, viz. while it is conceiving and growing; but when it is perfected, it
brings forth death. When one, as Ephraim, is joined to Idols, there is little
hope of him.

3. There is the strength of sin: our Natures are leavened with sin, not
colored with it: But sin is like blood and spirits (as is said); and as we
grow up, sin increases and grows up, till at length we be wholly inslaved to
it. Sin is a great King: Pride, and Covetousness, and Sensuality, are its three
great Princes: each of them have millions of slaves. How many Kings and
Princes, are but Lacqueys to the lust of the Eye, or the Flesh, or to the pride
of Life. The greatest Conquerors of the World have been in bondage to these:
such as affected the utmost sovereignty over men, have been absolute slaves to
their lusts: O the violence of men's lusts and passions! It Is a hard task to
vanquish those usurping Tyrants, especially where they have had long
possession; such are too hard for a man to mortify; the more strength, and the
longer possession any sin has had, the more difficulty to overcome it.

4. This proceeds from the deceitfulness of sin, and Satan; he often paints Sin
in the color of Virtue, and it escapes free; and he blackens Holiness, and we
strike at it, and seek to mortify it: Or sometimes, when we are angry at sin,
it sneaks away and couches in some corner: and when our anger is over, and the
strength of the Conviction which bred it, worn off, sin comes forth again, and
its peace is made, there is no more of it: yea, such is the deceitfulness of
sin, that it can advance it self by the want of tempting-Objects, as well as by
the abounding of them. Hence, as the richer and higher some grow, Pride and
Avarice grows: So the poorer and the more despised some grow, the more Pride
(as appears in Achitophels case) and Covetousness increase. So Lust oft-times
grows most, where there be fewest temptations to blow it up; It takes life upon
the withdrawing of the Object (as the blasting or absence of men's Idols often
increases their Idolatry with the memory of them): the want of the Object does
feed Lust more, than the having of it, as appears in Ammons waxing lean day by
day, for love of his sister; and aftewards how did he hate her? O the depths of
Satan, and the cunning of Sin! how many policies does it use to preserve it
self: it promises so fair, and smiles so upon a man, that he cannot find in his
heart to slay it.

5. That which also hinders the mortification of it, is the suitabless of it to
our corrupted Natures: there is something in Applause, that gratifies that
Self-exalting principle in man. Men find pleasures sweet, and they cannot but
believe their senses, before any testimony from without: they see, and feel,
and taste some sensible good in sinful Objects: and it is hard to dispute a man
out of his Senses. Nature craves something, and the things of this World have
some subserviency and suitableness to Nature, in its pure primitive
Consideration. And Sinners cannot now distinguish between purely Natural, and
inordinate desires: and indeed the pleasures of sin are now as suitable to our
corrupted Nature, as poor natural delights were suitable to Adam in Innocence.
Now look what pain it is to have Nature starved or oppressed; such pain it is
to have sin mortified.

6. The splendid Condition of some, and the merry life that Sinners lead, makes
men in love with their way: they who deal most kindly with their sin, and
indulge and satisfy a proud and sensual disposition, they live the gayest
lives, and with their blustering Jollity they carry the voice, in the opinion of
most men, who have no Sanctuary-light. As for Mortification, they think it
dispirits one, or makes a man a Mope; and that to mortify sin, is to mortify
all Pleasure and Mirth.

7. Libertinism, or perverting of the grace of the Gospel; some have
doctrinally, and others practically, made that a Sanctuary for sin, which God
has made a City of Refuge for penitent Sinners. Some think it improper to speak
to Believers of sin, or mortification, at least that we should not to them
preach against any sins, but such as argue them to be in a good state (as there
are some diseases that argue a good constitution of Body) and that we should
urge love and gratitude only, and not Hell nor Wrath; but whose doctrine is the
Text? and to whom is it directed? This pretended heat of Spirituality, has
often issued into looseness and prophanity. This practical Abuse of Grace, is
that wherein all unsound hearts do really conspire. Antinomian, Libertine, and
Ranting principles, are the most immediate inferences and conclusions that
natural hearts draw from the doctrine of Free Grace; which, were not men
strangely biased, and prejudiced by their lusts, may easily appear to be
horrid perversions of the Gospel. Thus he that came to destroy sin, is made the
Savior of sin.

For the second Question; Whence it is that some complain of the power of sin,
yet rest in something short of the mortification of it? (...). 1. Some are
convinced of the power of sin in them, and are troubled at it, but hope that
Duties will weaken it, and wear it off; when alas, they never hurt it. Or, 2.
That time will do it; that when temptations are over, and fuel withdrawn,
lusts will die of themselves: and that when they are got out from under such
and such circumstances, Corruptions will not have such advantage against them:
when alas, sin can live without temptations, and has fuel enough within, and
can create temptations to it self. Or, 3. Upon every inconsiderable resistance
to, or advantage against their sin, they begin to hope well of themselves: as
Micah foolishly concludes that God will bless him, seeing he had a Levite to be
his Priest; so do some dream of Heaven, upon every little success against a
temptation to sin, or upon every passionate wish to be freed from sin, as
inconsistent with the hope of Heaven; though such wishes do often grow out of
Nature, and self love. Or, 4. Such satisfy themselves with mere complaints of
sin; trouble for sin does sometimes secretly harden in sin, and issues in
secure despair (as burning, though it be painful, yet it stops bleeding); or
else such satisfy themselves with some common Comfort, and are all on a sudden
as Jovial as ever; (There Is a great deceit in folks coming out from under
Soul-trouble) or if they can get some tears to bewail their sins, these are to
them as good a Plaster as Christ's blood; O the deceitfulness of tears, when
they are not the juice of a broken heart: they do but water sin, and make it
more fruitful. Or finally, By their passion^^^ Complaints, they get the pity
and prayers of others, and are well liked of, and looked upon as the Mourners,
and brokenhearted, whom our Lord has blessed: and the prayers and good-likeing
of others, does insensibly work them into a good opinion of themselves.

In the second place, They deserve Reproof, who think to mortify Sin by their
own endeavors, or by mere moral means: No endeavors no Duties, no
consideration of Sins opposition to, and inconsistency with our happiness,
without the influence of the Spirit, can mortify any one Sin. The Apostles
manner of urging this great Duty, deserves a Remark: on the one hand, he will
not have people think that the Spirit was to do all, and they to do nothing; or
that they are to be merely passive in the business of Mortification; If ye
mortify -- and on the other hand: he will not have them think that there is
any power in them to mortify Sin, but that it is through the Spirit. It is the
Spirits special work: and hence we may be instructed, how to press all
Gospel-duties so, as to avoid Enthusiasm and Antinomianism on the one hand, and
Arminianism on the other. For there is nothing more common, than for people to
apprehend some sufficiency of power in themselves to obey, when they hear
Gospel-obedience pressed: and on the other hand, to grow sloathful and secure,
and to expect such a power as will kill Sin, and carry them through Duties,
without their concurrence (or may be, knowledge); when they are told of their
Impotency, and of the necessity of the Spirits special assistance; whereas in
respect of dependence, humility and self-denial, we should carry as if the
Spirit acted all; but in respect of diligent endeavors, we should act, as if
we acted all; and not the Spirit.

Use 3. Of Exhortation; If you would escape the second Death: if you desire or
hope to live with God, and to be eternally happy in the enjoyment of him; set
about the mortification of sin. 1. Original corruption must be mortified, the
root of Sin must be killed: lay the ax to the root of the tree; one stroke at
the Root will do more harm to the Tree, than many strokes at the Boughs. In the
Doctrinal part, I hinted at the necessity and usefulness of this. I shall only
now point a little at the way of mortifying the Body of Sin. 1. A through sight
and discovery of it is necessary: I do not mean, that any man can fathom or
comprehend the heghth and depth of it, Jer. 17.9, Who can know it? Now the
deceitfulness of the heart is but a branch of the corruption of it: It Is a
Mystery that we cannot now unfold; yea, and without the Spirits teaching, we
cannot have such a discovery of it, Romans 7.7. Some Heathens have seen, and
bewailed it as their disease, which yet they thought curable by moral Habits:
but they never saw it as sin, nor in its deadly damning Nature; Nay, nor did
ever any common work of the Spirit give such a discovery of it, as is necessary
to the mortification of it; the Hypocrite sees no more of it, than what he
thinks some common work sufficient to cure. Hence it is, that all such as
advance Nature, are depressers of Grace; and that such as extenuate original
Corruption, make no great business of Conversion. And e contra -- hence it is
also, that we find not a Hypocrite in all the Scripture, complaining of this
original Corruption, as we find Paul and David doing, Romans 7, and Psalm 51. Now
in order to this sight of Sin, 1. Thou must be much in the study and
observation of thine own heart, and of the secret motions of sin there; they
are strangers to their own hearts, who may not find every sin there, even such
as they never heard named: or as the gracious heart complies with such Duties,
as may be, it never heard to be such; so does the corrupt heart incline to such
sins as are not to be named; or upon the mention of every sin there is some
inward stirring to it, especially if it be plausibly spoke of. 2. Study the
spirituality of the Law; there thou may see the holiness of God, which will
not admit of the Jest motion to Sin: and there also thou may read thine own
Impurity and sinful Impotency. 3. Seek the Spirits light, it is the Spirits work
to discover Sin: let it be thy Souls desire, that he would open some door or
window, and let thee see more inward, greater and greater Abominations, and
what is doing in the secret Chambers of the Imagery of thy heart; and when thou
have discovered the depths of Sin, and the exceeding sinfulness of in-dwelling
sin, sit down and bewail thy felf, and mourn over it. And alas, two months will
not sufficiently bewail it, Judge. 11.37, Thy seventy or fourscore years are too
few for thee to go up and down the Mountains with thy Companions. Now godly
sorrows break the heart of Sin; tears that are squeezed and wrung from a man,
and that come only from some inward Compunction, and pricking of the heart, may
fortify and feed Sin; but when they are the juice of a broken heart, or flow
from a contrite heart, that is melted down by the heavenly warmth of Divine
love, they stifle and extinguish Sin. Sin can dwell with fear and horror, for
these are the native fruits and products of it: and when Sin shall be perfected
in Hell, so shall these: but it cannot bear with godly sorrow, nor can this
sorrow tolerate it; or it strikes at the root and fundamental evil of Sin.

2. Cherish Grace in the heart: the two inward principles of Grace and Sin work
upon one another, as Fire and Water: Sin is like a strong malignant humor in
the Body. Now the way to expel it, is to corroborate and help Nature in its
operations: as the New man grows up, he wears off the Old out of doors; Put on
the Lord Jesus Christ, and be clothed with humility, love, long-suffering,
mercy and brotherly-kindness; and pride, anger, wrath, malice will vanish away:
See Col. 3.5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 12, 13; as Light comes in, Darkness goes out. Bend a
crooked stick straight, and its crookedness is gone: Grace and Sin are always
acting against other, and no Conflict can be long in equal terms; either Grace
or indwelling Sin is upon the growing hand: Vivification and Mortification (the
two parts of Sanctification) do advance equally.

3. Observe and trace every Sin, and run it up to the heart, from whence it had
its rise: then drag your heart before the Lord, and cry, Lord here is the
Atheist, the Unbeliever, the Murmurer, the injurious person, here is the Rebel
and the disobedient person. The poor Believer, even many times would tear his
heart in pieces, and is ready to say, Except I had a better heart, I would I
had none; had I only drunk Poison, I might be pitied: but when the poison of
Asps is in my Nature, I deserve to be abhorred: did I hide the Lords Enemy in
my house only, I were a Traitor to him; much more, when I hide and nourish Sin
in my heart. Bring the body of death before Gods Tribunal, and cry for Judgment
against it: and say, Lord, here is thine and mine Enemy: life for life, and
blood for blood.

4. If thou would mortify Original Sin, thou must be sure to mortify Self;
for selfishness is the soul of Sin. This is the great Idol that all others
truckle under: Man's first sin was self-exaltation, and self-satisfaction; and
that depravation of our Nature, which is the punishment of this first Sin, does
mostly appear in our self-willing, self-loving, self-seeking, self-pleasing.
The Natural man beholds himself, apprehends some excellency in himself;
believes himself, loves himself, pleases himself, designs himself, and that as
his last end, wherein he rests. Hence the first step of our recovery to God, is
self denying, self-abasing, self-loathing, self-annihilating; and the lower
self be, the weaker is the body of Sin: the more a man is emptied of self, and
dead to self; the more he is filled with the fullness of God, and alive to God.
When Christ is all, and Grace is all, the Old Man and indwelling Sin are at the
lower ebb; when self is nothing, and Christ is all the man's light and life:
All, to the Judgment, heart and affections; all the man's wisdom, all his
righteousness, all his sanctification, all his redemption, and all his
strength, this stabs Sin at the heart. Arminians and Jesuits, no wonder, they
oppose the doctrine of Original Sin; for their principles, as they are the very
issue of the body of Sin, so they feed and cherish it. Self-exaltation has
begot their Tenets, and they honor and advance Self as their Father.

5. As Self is the soul of this body of Sin, so Pride, Worldliness, and
Voluptuousness are the chief members of it: the lust of the eye, and of the
flesh, and the pride of life, are, as it were, the head and heart of the body
of Sin: a wound in these is deadly; mortify these radical lusts, and you
mortify the body of Sin: knock down pride, and you dash out the brains of Sin.
Bring the flesh under a due subjection unto the Spirit, so that it bear no
sway, nor act any thing against the Government and interest of Christ in the
Soul, and you wound the heart, and stop the breath of this Body of Sin.

This leads us to a second Branch of the Text, viz. To mortify your most
prevailing lusts: your Idol-sins, which your Condition, Calling, or
circumstances do often expose you to. And O what a hard task is this,
considering what the power of Sin is in some! (as I have formerly shown) what
interest it has got in them: in their judgment, their heart and affections,
that it often engages them in open rebellion against God to maintain it: yea,
some to wish that there were no God, and no Law to oppose it. What vigorous
resistance do some make, to all those means that God uses to discover and
destroy Sin? Sin has strong Holds in the man's heart: every man's Idols are
fortified with Walls and Bulwarks in his bosom, and O what ado is there to
storm them; for the Old man is watchful, and cannot be surprised: hardness of
heart is the Armor of Hell, wherewith sinners beat back the strokes of word
and Providence; they will give up any thing, ere they will give up their
Idol-sin; they will cry out of any thing, ere they ever name Sin; they will be
beaten to powder, ere they be beat from Sin. Hence that is the doom of many,
they are joined to Idols, let them alone: be it unto you, even as you will: you
will not forsake Sin, let it bear you company for ever.

Are there not some here, who never gave a harsh word, nor an angry look to
their Idols, who never spent half an hour in this warfare with Sin? the
strong-man reigns in them, and he keeps watch and ward, and guards every pass:
and none go out, or come in without his leave: every Moral or Religious action,
every thought and word, pays Custom, Toll and Tribute to him. Now, 1. I shall
show you what are the prejudices the Soul sustains by every predominant lust.
2. What are the advantages that come by mortifying these Sins. 3. I shall show
by what means such Sins may be mortified.

For the first, If you be under the prevalency of any Sin, you will never be
free of fear and doubts; you make the issue of your war with Sin doubtful. It Is
but rare, that one under the prevalency of any Corruption, can take any comfort
in that word (or the like), Romans 16.20, And the God of peace, etc. you fight
but dubio morte. What the Apostle says of not advancing in godliness, 2 Pet.
1.9; We may say of such as do not vigorously carry on the mortification of
every Sin, He that lacks these things, is blind, and cannot see afar off, and
has forgotten that he was purged from his old sins (It Is sad, when any Sin is
so far reinforced, that a man forgets how bitter once it was to him, and how
he was graciously delivered from it, and can see little difference between his
unregenerate and regenerate state): Sin puts out a man's eyes, and stops a man's
ears, that he cannot see the Land that is afar off, nor can he hear the voice
of joy and gladness, Psalm 51.8. Such a man can see no more through the
Promises, than if they were stone-walls; any prevailing Sin clips the wings of
Faith, that when it is sent out, it returns not with one Oliveleaf in its mouth.
Scarch and see, if it be not some prevailing Sin, some carnal interest
incroaching upon Christ's interest in your Soul, that sills you with fears: It Is
the nature of Sin to breed fear and trouble; and the Lords Evangelick Justice
requires that ye should taste of the bitterness of sin, and of the fruit of
your doings. Should he speak comfortably to you, when not only your warfare is
not accomplished, but you are in league with some Enemy of his? Nay, he will
write bitter things against you: if you will not do justice upon your Idols,
they shall cost you dear: if when the lot is fallen upon them, you refuse to
cast them overboard, you may row hard, but you shall never come to shore; the
wind shall increase, and the sea shall work and be tempestuous. Where is the
man or woman amongst you, that is not under some rebuke from the Lord? let them
stand forth? Is there no gall nor wormwood in your Cup? are there no broken
bones amongst you, nor teeth with Gravelstones? Are none of the arrows of his
Quiver entered into your Reins? Are there none whose Soul is filled with
trouble, and removed far from peace, and are feeding upon affliction and
misery? Do you not know how to father your Afflictions? how long shall it be,
ere you will avenge your selves upon your Idols, ere you will pluck out the
Dart that wounds you, and that keeps you bleeding? Will you not do justice upon
the Achan that troubles Israel? Come to God, and bring with you words, and say,
I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, etc? I can make no amends, but I Will
be avenged on my Idols for my two Eyes, and two hands, and for all the trouble
they have caused to me.

You will say, 1. Are not some under the prevalenty of some sin, and yet have
more freedom from fears and doubts, than some that are more mortified than
they? I Answer, Some men's peace is their plague, at least their punishment; and
the solicitous fears of some, are their mercy, and help to keep them awake:
it is better to be in a Fever, than in a Lethargy. 2. There is some peace and
comfort that flows from the death of sin, and the increase of holiness, by way
of natural reluctance and emergency; and there is some trouble that flows from
sin by the same natural necessity: sure the more of the former, the more peace;
and the more of the latter, the more trouble: and if the wicked be as the
troubled Sea, sure the more that sin work, the more trouble there will be. 2.
There is some inward peace that follows Mortification by way of Reward, over
and above what naturally follows from it, as that which comes by the Testimony
of the Spirit, etc. and the more that sin be mortified, ordinarily the more of
this; the more you walk according to the law of the New Creature, the more
peace shall be upon you: so that there is some trouble that is the punishment
of unmortified sin, over and above what it naturally breeds; and ordinarily,
the more lively that any sin be, the more trouble and sorrow in the Soul, and
the more of Hell here, except the Conscience be seared, or the Soul be smitten
with stupidity as a greater plague. Indeed, as sometimes Gods comforts do not
keep peace with our measure of Mortification, but sometimes exceeds it: so
sometimes one that is not habitually so much under sin as another, may yet have
more inward trouble.

2. Is the greatness of outward trouble an argument of the strength of sin, or
the liveliness of any lust? Do not we see, that the most mortified, are often
most afflicted? I answer, It Is hard taking the measure of ones Mortification,
and to judge how another heart stands affected to this, or that: One may be in
great measure dead to pleasures or worldliness in the gross sense, and yet
alive to some near Relations: and one may be dead to the dearest Friend, and
yet alive to some spiritual lust, may be, spiritual pride in gifts or graces,
etc. Or if the man be dead to these, yet may he be too much alive to spiritual
comforts: I do not say, that the Lord would have the Believer content to lie
under the impressions of wrath (much less content to be damned), but he would
have the man lie at his feet under chese, and bear witness to his holy Justice,
when under outward or inward troubles. Now the more spiritual men's sins be, and
the more refined these lusts are, they are the more provoking. 2. As the sins
of Believers are in some respect more exceeding sinful than the sins of others:
so the more grace one have, his sin is proportionably aggravated. Moses suffers
more for a word, than many others for deeds. 3. As afflictions are
Covenant-mercies, and fruits of fatherly affections to all the children of God,
so the more dutiful any child of God be, the greater may his Corrections be
when he does fault, and so God is most gracious to him; yet the more a man
tolerate any sin, if he be not more afflicted than others, there is at least
more anger in his afflictions, which is the soul and spirit of afflictions, or
the more spiritual are his punishments. Finally, The reason why some eminently
godly are under many outward afflictions, may be, because they have some time
or other (may be) dishonored God by some public sin, whether before or after
conversion: and as they are provoking to God, and scandalous to others, so he
manifests greater severity on such; this is plain in David's case, so that it is
still some unmortified sin that brings on trouble.

A second prejudice that comes by the prevalency of any Corruption, it keeps
the Soul lean and low, and makes it a Cripple in Duties: it not only mar^
Confidence and Cheerfulness in Duties, but diligence and activity also, for
these may be separated: yea, it insensibly hardens the heart. What a fearful
security and stupidity brought on sin upon David? Where was David's tenderness
now, when he can plot Vriahs death? it is as sickness to the Soul; for sin is
the Souls disease that does enervate its strength, and make it languish. What
is said of whoredom and wine, is true of every sin: they take away the heart,
yea, and the hand too; the man, as he is like a silly Dove, without heart, he
cannot behave himself a right in Gods presence, so he cannot speed at Gods
work, for he works cum laesis facultalibus, his foul hands blackens holy
Duties, his fingers drop much sin upon them: the old man leaves the print of
his heels upon them. O, what is it that keeps you out of Heaven, at least from
seeing it afar off! it is some sin that besets you, and hinders your motion
Heavenward: how few paces have you advanced for these many days, Heb. 12.1, 2?
Whence is it, that you see not so much as the top of the Towers of the new
Jerusalem? How come many that did begin after you, yet to get before you? some
weight presses you down: some corrupt affection, like a long-garment, entangles
you, or you stumble and fall often in the way. It is not so much external
Duties, as the secret exercise of Mortification, that keeps grace lively; and
when this is neglected, and any sin prevails, Grace withers, and often the Lord
blasts a man's gifts also; or, if gifts be entire, they are left for a share, as
Eccles. 2.9. It was Solomon's snare, that when he was pursuing vanity; My wisdom
remained with me (says he): It is the Curse of many this day, and that which
hardens them in their ill way, that their Gifts and Learning remain with them.

3. Think what loss of Communion with God, you sustain by your Idol, or your
unmortified corruption. Sampsons Delilah cost him his two Eyes, his Liberty,
and at length his Life: But the departing of the Spirit of the Lord was the
saddest of all; by letting the king of your lusts live (as Saul did Agag) you
hazard your Crown of Glory, at least you have little of Heaven upon Earth. Tell
me, Christian, when was you last in Heaven? it may be, not for many days: and
know you not, what keeps you out? It Is a sad word, Ezekiel. 14.5, They are all
estranged from me through their idols: Isa. 59.2, Your iniquities have
separated betwixt you and God, and your sins have hid his face from you: yea,
and oftentimes prevailing-sin does blot out the impression; and sometimes the
remembrance of that solacing sweetness that the Soul had in his Company, begets
some satisfaction in this dreadful state of distance from God; thy Idols of
Jealousy separate thee from thy chief Friend; by this means thou wears out thy
intimacy, if not thy Acquaintance: may be, thou make not a visit to Heaven in
many days: and if the Lord at any time come to thee, thou art not at leisure,
but busied, entertaining thy Idols. Ah! have you no sense of these things? I
need not tell you what is the mournful moan and ruful complaint of many Souls:
Ah! it was well with me till such a time. O, how many good days had I? what a
Heaven upon Earth had I? what Communion with God in Prayer, in the Lords
Supper, and other Ordinances, till I did begin to dally with such an Idol, till
such a Corruption began to get power of me: but since thou intermitted the
vigorous exercise of Mortification, where are thy Trophies and Triumphs? where
are thy Bethels, thy Penuels, thy Eben-ezers? And it is well for thee if ever
thou recover this. Distance from God and indisposition to Duty, grows more in
one day than thou can make up, or wear out in many. I doubt, if ever David's
bones were as sound as before; if ever he had such Joy and gladness in Gods
Company, in the Sanctuary, or elsewhere, as before; or that ever God appeared
to Solomon, as he had done twice before his fall. I doubt, the holy Lord deals
with many of his people in this life, as he did with the Levites, Ezekiel. 14.44,
who had gone astray from him after their Idols: they were to be keepers of the
charge of the House for the service thereof (as keeping the Gates, and slaying
the Sacrifices), but they shall bear their iniquity, and they shall not come
near unto me, to do the office of a Priest unto me: nor come near to any of my
holy things, in the most holy place, etc. See ver. 11.12, 13, 14: He will not
put thee out of doors, yet may never let thee come where thou have been, and
never set thee so high on this side of Eternity.

4. Any Idol or unmortified lust will clip the wings of Prayer, and intercept
the return of it, Isa. 59.1, 2, The Lords hand is not shortened, nor his ear
heavy, etc. But, etc. Ezekiel. 14.3, 4, and 20, 31, As I live, says the Lord, I
will not be enquired, etc. Psalm. 66.18, If I regard iniquity in my heart, the
Lord will not hear me: the man that has his Idols set up in his heart, he
grieves the Spirit who helps our infirmities in Prayer, etc. if he has any
pleasure in approaching to God, yet he has no pleasure in God: he comes not to
him as his exceeding Joy, though may be, he cannot pass evening and morning
without saluting him in a formal complementing way, in such a manner as men use
to many they care not for: and indeed many know no other use of their prayers,
than of their formal Salutes and Complements, viz. to keep fair terms with such
as they care little for; yet are not willing to disoblige. Is it any wonder
that God regard not such prayers? any unmortified sin shuts Heaven, and lays an
Arrest upon the profit of thy Duties: there is no profitable trading between the
Soul and Heaven, there is no profiting by Means or Ordinances: if thou would
lose the Arrest, mortify thy sin, give up thy Idol, cast over board thy
Jonah's: If thou have any suit depending before the Throne of Grace; if in the
mean while thou offend God, or grieve his Spirit, thou art like to lose thy
cause; who will provoke the Judge when his cause is before him? Hence that word,
Deuteronomy. 23.9, When thou go forth against thine Enemies, then keep thee from
every wicked thing. When a man has some special dependence on God, and has some
special expectation from him, it is unseasonable then to provoke him to
Jealousy.

5. Think what thou would do in a dying day: how will you look upon your
Idols? What will you do in the day of Visitation? where will you hide your
glory? How would you look upon a Temptation, or upon the tempting Objects of
your darling lusts: all your sweet morsels, and stolen waters, will then be
bitter; but the more sweetly any sin went down, the bitterer will it be when it
comes up again: may be, your Idols and you were pleasant in your lives, but
they are sad Company in the valley of Death: Can the Camel go through the
Needles-eye? nay, if there were no more to hinder but the bunch upon his back,
he could not; Can you go through the strait gate? if there were no more but one
unmortified lust, you cannot, Can you think to leap into Heaven, warm and
smoking with sin; as many times you come to speak with God, when the last word
you spoke was with your Idol? Can you sing that sweet triumphant Song, O Death,
where is thy sting! O Grave, where is thy victory! 1 Cor. 15.55? For lo, here
sin that is the sting of death, and the victory of the Grave, sticks in thee;
when others shall be singing Hallelujah, and harping with Harps. Death is no
dark shade to the Son of Right ousness, having lightened it, by his passing
through it; thou shall be little better than the Hypocrite, whom fearfulness
surprizeth, etc. If the Master knock, when thou art either asleep, or wasting
his goods, or eating and drinking with the drunken, thou will be afraid to go
down and open; he must break open the gates if he get in: O what sad work will
any living lust make, when thou comes to die!

Let us now mention a few advantages you shall have by the mortification of
sin, especially your most potent sin: 1. The mortification of your most
predominant lust, will be a great evidence to you of your sincerity, Psalm
18.23, I was also upright before him, etc. When any lust is strong, or when any
Idol has a great interest in the Soul, the heart is as 'twere divided: and then
cannot know whether Christ's interest, or its, prevails, and bears most sway in
the Soul: but where there is no competition, the case is clear; when one can
say, If any thing interfere with Christ, it is this: If any thing render my case
suspicious, or entrench upon Sincerity, it is this Corruption, this Idol; But
sure I am, this is so far under, that it cannot disprove my integrity; when the
Lord tryes his peoples sincerity, he uses to hit their sore, to prove them in
their Idols: (indeed, when he intends to discover their weakness, he puts them
to trial in the grace they excel most in; as Peter in his Courage, Moses in his
Meekness); if thou can deny thy self in this; if thou can offer up thy Isaac;
hereby thou may know thou fears God, and that thou loves God. Now the
knowledge of this fills the Soul with exceeding Joy, 2 Cor. 1.12. O the sweet
Calm it brings in, it is better felt than can be told: whereas the prevalency of
any Corruption, deprives you both of the Testimony of the Spirit of God, and of
your own spirit.

2. If thou can mortify thy predominant lust, thou may with the more ease
mortify other Corruptions: Commonly, all a man's lusts are made subservient to
some one (though indeed sometimes they thwart, as pride and covetousness, pride
and sensuality, or covetousness and sensuality), if you can kill that, the
greatest difficulty in Mortification is over: if you can take the strong City,
all the Villages and Country about will be subject to you. If Goliath be slain,
the Philistines will fly: may be you complain of many things, and innumerable
evils compass you about: but see if some one unmortified Corruption do not
maintain them all, and you cannot conquer these, till you have subdued that
which sets these on work, and which feeds and recruits them: this would ease
you of many evils you complain of; the cutting off one member of sin, will
weaken the Body of sin: they are so united, that it will make all the other
members of sin to languish, and does help on to a through Conquest.

3. Consider, that there is more real satisfaction in mortifying lusts, than in
making provision for them, or in fulfilling them: There Is more true pleasure in
crossing and pinching our flesh, than in gratifying it; were there any true
pleasure in sin, Hell would not be Hell: for the more sin, the more Joy; you
cannot satisfy one lust, if you would do your utmost, and make your self never
so absolute a slave to it; you think if you had your hearts desire, you would
be at rest; you much mistake: they had it, Psalm 78.29, but yet they were not
estranged from their lusts, ver. 30. How many a man, in the fullness of his
sufficiency, is yet in pain for more? Job 20.22? O, but the mortification of
that sin, makes a Jubiles, in the Soul; Who are they that sing Triumphs here,
and set up Trophies of Victory, and divide the spoils, when others are living
under troubles without and within, and have their Soul removed far from peace?
who shall wear Crowns on their heads in Heaven, and Palms in their hands, and
have High-praises in their mouths, but they who turn the Battle to the Gate,
who have overcome their Enemies? Would you be able to sing a Triumph, even when
drawing your last breath? See what is the Tune, what is the matter and the ground
of Paul's Song, 2 Timothy 4.8: and with what a Transport of Spirit he sings it; (as
on the other hand it tells us, that it is faint or unsuccesful warring with sin,
that makes men unmeet to die). He goes in at the Gates of Heaven with flying
Colors, and has an abundant Entrance ministered unto him; how much more will it
make a man joy in Tribulation? It Is some unmortified Corruption that makes the
Cross heavy, that makes a man uneasy under affliction or suffering. O, what
Dust will a lively lust raise? what confusion and combustion in the Soul? When
the hand of God falls heavy upon a Man while he is dandling some Idol, or
pursuing some carnal Interest, the man is out of measure amazed; every
unmortified Corruption makes even the thoughts and apprehensions of trouble,
full of horror: and no wonder, for it is fearful when God comes to take
vengeance on men's inventions, even when he forgives their iniquity. It Is true
in such cases, when the Lords people are meeting with trouble from men for his
sake, he makes not his quarrel visible; he often scourges their Conscience,
when he does not visibly contend with them, (and one lash from his hand, is
sorer than Paul's 39 from the Jews): indeed, he sometimes suspends his quarrel,
when he does not bury it. And sometimes Adversaries wrath does as it were
mitigate his, Deuteronomy. 32.27. Now a mortified man cannot be moved by any thing: If
there be no lust alive, no trouble or affliction can come wrong.

In the next place, let me offer you some Directions how to carry on the
mortification of prevailing Corruption.

And first in general, Get a clear sight of your sin, or else you cannot level
your strokes at it aright: be content that God should by his Word and Spirit,
light upon your Idol, and wound it. And if any man will tell you of sin, your
Enemy, count him thy Friend; say as Saul to the Ziphites, when they told him
where David was, Blessed are you of the Lord, for you have had compassion on
me, 1 Samuel 23.20, 21: that which you can least endure a Reproof for, is your
Master-sin; as likewise, that which you are most partial in, seek most to cover
or excuse, which you wish were no sin, and are readiest to pardon your self
for, or else are most sorrowful when it cannot be dispensed with, Matthew. 19.21,
22: that sin which rises and goes to bed with you; which haunts you when alone,
or in Company; when in your shops, and in your Closets, which you are at the
greatest toil for, which you do or suffer most for; that is the sin, that like
the man of sin, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8, exalts it self. O look to Heaven, and see what
work it made there: how sin cast so many Angels out of their first habitations,
and thrust them into chains: those evil Spirits that now solicit thee to sin,
are dreadful Examples of the mischief of sin: it is a wonder they have a face to
tempt to sin; it is as if Murderers hung up in Chains, should solicit Men to
murder. Look to Paradise, and see what desolation it made there; it had almost
in a moment ruined the whole Creation. Look to Golgotha, or Mount Calvary, or
the Garden, and see what sad work it made there, Look into Hell, and hear what
a howling it has raised there! Alas, we paint it, and then play with it as
Children do with painted Lions: And when thou has seen it, then thou cries out,
O the exceeding sinfulness of sin, and of my sin! And let one sin set thee in
quest of more: but never think thou sees all thy sins, nor all the evil that is
in any one sin: O, comply with the Spirit, and do not defeat his firk Work,
which is Conviction; and when thou has seen thy sore, hold thy finger upon it,
and cry to him who is the sovereign Physician of Souls, to make incision there:
cut off this hand or foot that gangrenes; yet keep not both thy eyes upon it,
lest it should overwhelm thee with horror.

2. Get your hearts broken for Sin: your hearts are as fallow-ground; you
cannot pluck up your thorns; they must be plowed up; you must rub and reinse
your Souls seven times in the waters of Marah, in tears of godly sorrow, ere
thy Leprosy die; but see thy tears bathe not sin, instead of drowning it: and
beware thy throws go not off, when thou art even about to be delivered from it:
it is a token of the strength of sin, the Soul is at a low ebb, when trouble for
sin is gone, when sin has made its peace again. Some men's troubles do not kill
sin, but only break some bone of it, which when healed again, is stronger than
before: therefore when thou has got a Nail fastened into the Temples of the old
man, or into the heart of the body of death, drive it to the head; when the
Spirit brings home any word, and smites Sin, follow home the blow, and
endeavor to maintain the warmness of that word, and the power of it upon thy
Spirit, till thy Soul be drenched with tears of Contrition, till thy heart be
melted, and the dross go away.

3. If thou would mortify Sin, thy heart must be filled with distaste of it:
thy sorrow must be attended with hatred, and this seeks the life of Sin; this
will make a man defile the covering of his graven-Images of Silver, and the
Ornament of his molten-Images of Gold; nothing less will serve thee than the
death of thy Sin, thou will pursue it in thy self and others: as Haman's hatred
sought Mordecai's life, yea, and the life of all the Jews for his sake. Hide
not thy Idols, as Rachel sat upon hers: search thy heart and thy way, that
thou may find all out; and what thou can not find, pray, the Lord may find
for thee, Psalm. 39.34: leave no Corruption which Satan may fit and brood upon.
These things must needs be previous to Mortification.

Now more particularly for the means of carrying on this great business of
Mortification. 1. Prayer, especially private Prayer, is of singular use (I
mention only this at present, not being solicitous of Method): I say, private
Prayer; for, your secret Sins and particular Corruptions may shelter, and
shroud, and hide themselves from all your prayers in public, or in fellowship
with others (and alas, many who are others mouths to God, have enough to do to
mortify pride, and vanity, and selfishness in praying with others: let it be,
by their prayers to get other Corruptions mortified, or to get pride and
selfishness in other things mortified): Prayer, and Lusts, or Corruptions, are
like Moses and the Amalekites: when Moses hands are up, Israel prevails: when
they fall down, the Amalekites prevail, so is it in this case. It was Paul's
Relief, 2 Cor. 12.7, 8: when Satan was working on the remainder of some
Coruption: For this, I besought the Lord thrice, and he was helped. It may be,
sense of some prevailing Corruption has sent you to your Closet, and put you
upon your knees: and you have found Relief, and then you have lest off praying,
and your Corruption has prevailed again. Hence, after the Apostle has armed the
Christian for his Conflict, Ephesians. 6. He adds, ver. 18, Praying always with all
prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all
perseverance; Set-times for Prayer, are as necessary as constant Set-meals of
meat for the Body: How often, I determine not; the fewest we find, is twice a
day, Morning and Evening: Daniel prayed thrice a day; yet it is not right, when
we limit our selves to times, were it seven times aday. We find Daniel, Chap.
9.1, 2, setting himself to pray, as if his three times a day had been nothing.
There are special Occasions that call for more fervent praying, as our Lord
conflicting in the Garden, and being in an Agony, prayed thrice: and prayed yet
more fervently. Now this is a special season, when attached by any Corruption,
we should sound an Alarm to Prayer, and let every Prayer be as an Arrow shot
against Sin: and never think thou prays to any purpose, but when thou wounds
some Corruption. O, but blunt Prayers will never draw blood of sin: nor will
sleepy prayers hurt sin; therefore thou must watch unto Prayer, and must awake
thy gift, and thy grace, and thy tongue too: (as the Psalmist does in praising,
Psalm 51.8,) for that may further the fervor of the Spirit; and some have
judged mere mental Prayer, in some cases, to be a quenching of the holy Spirit
of God. It Is true, that sometimes a poor Believer, when buffetted by Satan, and
in an Agony through the power and violence of some Corruption, cannot put his
troubled thoughts into words, when yet his unexpressible sighs and groans may
make the old man groan as a deadly wounded Man. Look to this, inveterated
Diseases, strong Corruptions, will not go out without much praying.

2. You can mortify no Corruption without exercising Faith, much less your
strongest Corruptions; for you must not think first to mortify Sin, and then
believe; you must be in Christ, and be a Believer, before you can mortify one
Sin: Nature prompts men to pray in every exigence: but praying without
believing, will not do, but no Corruptions can stand before Faith; it can
remove Mountains, it can bring down strongholds: it can put to flight Armies
of Aliens, of lusts; it can quench the greatest Combustions in the Soul,
kindled by Satan's fiery Darts: hence, says the Apostle, Above all things, take
unto you the shield of faith, Ephesians. 6.16. The Lord lends Faith his power (so
to speak) This is our victory, whereby we overcome the world, even our faith, 1
John 5.4. Now what this World is, see 1 John 2.16, For all that is in the
world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, etc. Now, how does Faith
assist against these?

Answ. 1. Faith gives a true judgment of them, and values all things aright,
when others are cheated by their corrupted Senses. 2. By Faith we see into
Eternity, and what will be the fruit of gratifying our lusts; what will be the
reward of Sin. A carnal Heart that had seen Dives at his sumptuous Table, and
in his gorgeous Apparel, and Lazarus at the Gate, and the dogs licking his
sores, would have blessed the one, and saved himself from the other: But Faith
at first sight can see the one in Heaven, and the other in Hell, Psalm. 73.17,
18. 3. By Faith we see, that the best things of this World cannot further our
Happiness, nor the worst things of the World hinder it: that worldly Honors
and Pleasures are not all akin to everlasting Honor and Joy. 4. By Faith, we
see, that the design of Temptations is to deprive us of our Happiness; and that
Satan and the World, who work upon our corrupt passions, and minister fuel to
our lusts, have no good will to us, even when they are courting us. 5. Faith
does not only assent to what God and Christ, and Heaven and Holiness are; but
it makes proof, and gets experimental discoveries of these: and this makes a
man despise the painted Beauty and sweetness of the Creatures, the sight of
Christ's matchless Beauty and Excellency, all a man's Idols are divorced. When we
see the Sun with our own eyes, we believe the Moon is not the most glorious
light, it looks but like a clod in the Firmament: many can speak contemptibly
of the honors, and riches, and pleasures of the World, who are not mortified
to them, but with all their might pursue them: nor indeed will you ever be able
by all the rational discoveries of the vanity of these, to mortify inordinate
love to, and delight in them, till you taste and see something that is better:
and this taste and sight, Evangelical Faith can only afford. No experiences of
the Worlds vanity, no Contemplations of an Immortal state, can do it; for Sense
will still object, Where can you do better? and mere Contemplations breed only
Notions: this brings in the substance of things into the Soul, Heb. 11.1.

6. Faith does more especially contribute to the mortification of our
Corruptions, by its engaging the assistance of Divine Power. It Is on this
account that there is a sort of Omnipotency attributed to Faith. You do not
doubt but the Lord Jesus is able to help against your strongest Corruptions;
But how shall we have his help? I Answer, You need not say, Who shall ascend to
heaven, and bring him down, etc? Romans 10.6, 7. This thou may do by Faith; But
how does Faith do it? Answ. 1. Faith does it, as it is an assent to the
Promises. The Promises, hold forth the power of Christ for subduing of Sin, 2
Pet. 1.3, compared with Romans 6.14. Now we are interested in these Promises, by
believing, Heb. 4.2: when we believe that it ^^^ll be as he has said; this some
count a Phanatical point: But is it fantastic or phanatick to rest upon an
honest Man's word, much lesser? sure this gives more glory to God, than all our
endeavors to mortify Sin; yet takes not men off other subordinate means, but
puts them upon the use of them: especially upon Prayer, That it may be as he
has said, Romans 6.14. Man fell at first by taking Satan's word before the Lords.
And it were our wisdom, in all Insinuations of the like nature, to suspect the
hand of Satan. Now Faith does not only assent to the truth of the Promises, of
strength to overcome Sin; but it rests and relies upon them; all Grace comes
through the Promises. And indeed, the first recumbency of Faith, is a great and
proper act of it: and as they are blessed who have no assurance of their
interest in the Promises, and yet can resolutely rely on it; for as those that
seek the Lord are bidden to rejoice, Psalm. 105.3, though they have not yet
found him, because of the Promise, Isa. 45.19. So may those encourage
themselves in the hope of success against Sin, who rest upon Gods Word, though
they have not yet obtained the victory; for the Lord takes pleasure in them
that hope in his mercy, Psalm. 147.11. The recumbency of the Soul upon his Word,
ingageth both the honor of his Mercy and his Fidelity.

2. And so does also effectually engage his Power; it is by this power through
Faith, that we are kept from what would hinder our Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5.
Divine Power strengthens Faith; and by Faith we derive Divine Power: by faith
Christ dwells in the heart, Ephesians. 3.17. And now we have one in us, stronger
than he that is in the world, who takes his Armor from him, etc. that is,
takes those things from him wherewith he fortified himself, and secured Sin.
Satan sometimes serves himself of men's Wisdom, Reason, Thoughts, Affections:
these Christ brings into captivity to his own obedience; our members which were
the weapons of sin, are made instruments of righteousness unto holiness: Riches
and Gifts, which were fuel and provision for lusts, are consecrated to Christ.
Would you then have greater advantage against the old man of sin? sit not down
complaining of your impotency, and the strength of Sin, and your hard
circumstances: but by Faith strengthen your Union with Christ, and make his
strength yours.

Finally, It is by Faith that you must make use of all your other spiritual
Armor: that word, Ephesians. 6.16, Above all taking the shield of Faith, etc. seems
not only to give Faith the pre-eminence, but to point out the universal
usefulness of it, for securing and right using all the other parts of our
Armor. 1. As for Truth; if you take it as relating to the Mind, for soundness
of Doctrine, this is a fruit of faith, Acts 24.14. If you take it for
Sincerity, it is believing (which makes God near, and sets him before us) that
advances this, Genesis 17.1. So, 2. For Righteousness; if you take it for the
righteousness of Christ, which as a breast plate secures the Heart and
Conscience, Romans 8.33. (If the heart be found, a wound elsewhere may be healed;
if the Conscience be whole, we may bear other infirmities). Now it is Faiths
work to improve this: or, if we take it for Inherent-righteousness, that is a
fruit of Faith. 3. Whatever Furniture the Gospel prepares for us, it is of no
use without Faith. Nor, 4. Can the sword of the Spirit be weilded without it.
5. The Helmet of salvation, which is Hope, (as is plain, 1 Thessalonians. 5.8), the
Grace that secures our head from Error, or which keeps our head above water,
that we faint not, that supports Faith: its work is to look for the fulfilling
of the Promise, which Faith believes. 6. Prayer must needs take it in: hence we
see, why our Conflict with Sin and the World is called the fight of faith, 1 Timothy 6.12.

3. Be much in the meditation of the sufferings and Death of Christ, and of
your own approaching dissolution, and of what follows on the back of that.

For the first of these, Peter presses Holiness from thence, 1 Pet. 1.18, 20.
But, let us consider Christ first as a Pattern: he made it his work to destroy
Sin (though he had none in himself), all his Offices struck at Sin; and you are
none of Christ's, if you study not conformity to him in this. It Is true, the
Prince of this world had no part in him, yet was he molested with his
Temptations: and when its so with thee, think with thy self, What would the
Lord Jesus Christ have said in this case? 2. Look on suffering Christ, as
meriting and procuring his peoples final Conquest over all their Enemies. We
may in this case apply that, Rev. 12.11, They overcame by the blood of the
Lamb; his blood by Faith applied to the Soul, is like a Refiners fire and
Fullers Soap. It Is the only Purgatory for taking away Sin; Satan has carried
most of the World from the law of Nature, into Paganism; and others from the
Law of Christ, into Antichristianism: and in both these Apostate states, Satan
has endeavored to substitute something in the room of what God had appointed
for purging away Sin; and under both he seems more zealous against Sin; than
God, and would seem to outdo Gods way: if God appoint Beasts to be slain and
offered up, he will have their Children to pass through the fire; and now once
offering up of Christ, must not serve; it must be done every day. So for
purging out of Sin: Satan had among the Heathen his Lotions and Lustrations,
and has now his Sprinklings and Whippings: and, to complete all, has made men
hope, that what these do not, Purgatory-fire will do. And truly, Sin may say,
Aha to these: as Satan does to these Exorcisms. But indeed, Satan's diligence
and industry in taking men off the true way of purging away Sin, ( viz. by the
blood of Christ) and substituting. Mockmeans in its room, may tell us what
weight the Lord lays upon this way. Now, how by Faith we come to find the
efficacy of this blood, I have already shown.

3. The sufferings of Christ may further Mortification by way of Argument; and
here we must take in the greatness of his sufferings, the hand our sins had in
them: and the love that moved him to engage and go through with all: Oh, would
not you burn the Spear that pierced him! how would you look upon the Sword that
slew your dearest Friend? See how Paul argues, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15, The love of
Christ constrains us: for we thus judge, That if one died for all, then were all
dead, that we should henceforth no more live to our selves. And Peter on the
same ground presses Mortification, 1 Pet. 4.1, 2, For as much then as Christ
has suffered for us in the flesh, etc. Had you been witness to his wrestlings
in the Garden: Had you heard these words out of his own mouth, If it be
possible, let this Cup pass, etc. Had you seen his drops of blood. Had you
known the trouble of his Soul, when upon the sight of his sufferings, he knew
not well what to say (to speak with Reverence), John 12.27. Had you seen him
Nailed: and heard him crying out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
Would you not have vowed a Revenge on Sin? Could you have loved and hugged the
Soldier, and been sond on the Spear that pierced him; Thou art the Man, and thy
beloved Lust is the Spear. And will you act this Soldiers part over again? Your
other sins are as the Nails, but this is as the Spear that made a great wound
in his Side, and went nearer his Heart: and who shall save thee, if thou
crucify him afresh? Who shall comfort thee, if thou grieve his Spirit, by thy
indulgence to sin?

2. I mentioned the serious Meditation of your own death, as a Mean to help on
Mortification. It were good for us we were oftener among the Tombs, and laying
our selves in our graves: the Rich man's skul is not gilded there, nor has the
delicate persons any better color, or smell; nor has the proud man any
precedence there: their dust and skuls, and dead bones are not distinguishable:
yet what is the business and labor of most unmortified Souls, but to adorn, or
pamper, or honor this corruptible, sinful, and burthensom flesh? we never live
like Christians, till we can trample upon it, and it be under our Souls feet:
and till we live as if we were the next moment to die; and till we deal with
sin as we would do, when a-dying. One would think that wise Solomon's sad
Retractations might be a warning to the Fools of following generations: How
many gain little more by all their labor and care, than the Horse does by
carrying rich Commodities, a sore back and weary legs perhaps? but a fore
galled gangrened Conscience when you come to die, is sorest of all; you who
minister to your lusts, and never offended them: you who make provision for
them, you are but plotting a cruel and tormenting death to your selves, at
least you are making provision for endless sorrow: you are preparing Axes and
Saws, and carrying faggots and fuel to your Fire; and you that tread upon the
heels of such, you lose your dying comforts, and Hell shall tread upon your
heels, and come as near as can be: If you be saved, it shall be with more
difficulty, and as it were by fire; O learn to look on Bosom-sins in health, as
you will do in sickness: of all sins, these will be the ugliest, filthiest and
bitterest; this is that which has undone me, says the poor Soul, I know whence
all this trouble is come.

4. Watchfulness is of singular use to such as would be successful in this
business of Mortification: you must fight with Sin, ere you can mortify it,
for Sin is not so tame as to made no resistance. Now would you prosperously war
with it? our life is a warfare; and in time of War, all places keeps watch and
ward: You must first then watch its motions when it begins to move: Sin makes
sudden sallies; and O how suddenly is a Temptation formed! it sometimes comes
like a fiery-flame, or lightning, we know not whence: yea, even temptations to
that sin which under some strong Conviction, etc. seems to yield, or to fly;
and that corrupt affection that is strongest, is soonest set on fire: there is
need of most care that no fire come near the place where Powder or Flax lies.
2. There Is need of Watching, in order to the improving the advantages we at any
time have against our Corruptions, whether by afflictions, or by some
providential Rebuke, respecting that sin; or by some strong Conviction upon the
Mind, or by some special recruit of fresh inward strength and liveliness of
Soul; or by some sensible success against sin, and sins of falling as lightning
from heaven, etc. The watchful Christian discerns and makes good use of these:
any seen advantage does encourage the Soul to keep up the Warfare, and also
hearten it to pursue it is advantage. 3. It keeps a man under continual sense of
weakness and impotency, and need of borrowed strength; the more a man makes
conscience of conflicting and warring with sin, he cannot but the more
experience these. Now, much of our strength lies in an humble sense of
weakness: hence says Paul, When I am weak, then am I strong: this puts the Soul
on praying and believing; when any Grace grows faint, and Sin gets ground, the
watchful man observes this, and calls in Prayer and Faith to his assistance; he
engages him in whom is everlasting strength; he lays over the business on him,
and then the Battle becomes the Lords: as, 2 Chronicles. 20.5, 6, etc. with ver. 15.
The watchful Christian observes when, and where he is weak, and what
disadvantages he is at, and what is the craft and policy, and power of his
Adversaries, and he makes an Errand to God; yea, and an argument of each of
these in Prayer: and indeed, the watchful Christian sees himself never out of
danger, and so never wants matter of Prayer; as he dare not cast off Prayer, so
wants he not work after Prayer: hence Watching, and Praying are so often
coupled together: Watchfulness discovers the danger, and Believing Prayer
prevents it; it lays the matter at Christ's door. The reason why some are so
seldom victorious over Temptations, is, because they are seldom on their knees,
or their hands are a short while up: and the reason why they are seldom at the
Throne of Grace, and have little to say, or soon tired, is, because they are
seldom on their Watchtower.

Under this Direction, I may take in the cutting off the occasions of that sin
especially, that oftnest prevails with you: this cuts off intercourse between
Satan and the Soul. Whthhold fuel from thy lusts: without this, you do
nothing, all your labor is in vain. If there be fuel in thy hand, or thy
house, and there be daily occasion to sin ministered, so much as to the eye,
thou cannot be safe; seek by all means to starve thy Idols: as in War, when an
Army can do no more, they demolish the Enemies places of strength, and
endeavor to obstruct their Recruits, and to stop their provisions: do thou in
like manner with sin; whatever thou have used as an occasion to the flesh, fee
that in that thou afflict thy self: and cut off that occasion, as Mary Magdalen
did with her Hair, Luke 7.39. Run away from a Temptation, and go not to the
outmost borders of thy liberty: and venture not upon what some others may
lawfully do, being in other circumstances: study moderation in things lawful,
use not thy liberty as an occasion to sin, etc. Suspect things that are
pleasant to thee: there is danger, where thou finds delight. Solomon is
frequent in pressing the avoiding of snares. Prove. 5.8. and 23.31. That
Prohibition, Deuteronomy. 25.13, is memorable to this purpose, Thou shall not have in
thy Bag divert weights, a great and a small. So Deuteronomy. 12.13, You shall not
enquire how the Nations serve their gods.

Now in pursuance of this, 1. You must keep a strict guard upon your senses,
and double your guard when there is need: it is by the senses that inordinate
affections are kindled: the Wanton is infected and enticed, by gazing upon
another Beauty; the Drunkard and the Glutton, by seeing or tasting the Cup, or
some pleasant food; Silly effeminate Souls are tempted by the sight of gaudy
fashions: the sight of Pomp and Magnificence kindles Ambition; the Covetous
cannot see Money, nor fine Buildings, nor rich Furniture, nor a pleasant Field,
but his heart aches with Ahabs disease; Take an account of all that comes in by
your senses, for you must give an account: suffer not any of your senses to
stir without leave: or if they do, let them not fix and settle without leave.
If the Door shall stand always open, the House will certainly be robbed;
therefore pray and practice that, Psalm 119.37. 2. Look also narrowly to your
thoughts, these are the Shop in which sin is forged: Do you not feel what
advantage Satan has against you in these? If you feel your thoughts stepping
out, then call them in, and examine them, as Elisha did to Gehazi; be sure your
hearts will be such as your thoughts; you cannot have a serious heart, if vain
thoughts lodge within you, Jer. 4.14. 3. Fly the society of such as are sick of
that disease thou dreads most, and which thou art aptest to be infected with:
It is not good fighting against the Devil (says one) in the midst of his own
Camp: Men's bold venturing on this, has often brought them off wounded. It Is
hard to keep up a due abhorrence of sin, that we daily see and hear; some ill
savor at least will stick to us, if it bring you not to a compliance, yet it
abates your zeal against it; therefore shun such Employments, Occasions and
Company, as may draw forth thy Corruption. It was Peter's snare to be in the
Highpriests Hall; and Judas's, that he carried the Bug. It Is hard for Powder
and Flax to be near Fire, and not kindle.

The 5th Direction: Improve Afflictions for the mortification of thy sin: by
these the Lord takes away sin, and makes us partakers of his holiness; the
finer any Vessel be, and the more used, the oftener it is scoured, and the more
it be rubbed, the cleaner it is, Lev. 6.28, and 11.33, The earthen pots when
they were fouled by boiling of the Sacrifices, they were to be broken in
pieces; but the brazen pots were to be reinsed with Water, and scoured and
cleaned: the oftener you are on the fire, the cleaner should you be. Now when
God is wounding your Pride, your Covetousness, your Sensuality, take the
advantage of slaying these lusts: when he makes thy right hand, or Eye to ache,
then pluck it out, etc. Can thou love the World when it pinches, and
straitens, and desames, and reproaches thee? Can thou love thy flesh, when
pain and grief have taken up their dwelling in it, and when it is such a trouble
to thee? Will you not now cry out upon all as vanity and vexation, when your
sense and your Experience tells you so, when you feel the bitter fruits of sin?
you have now great advantage against your sin, and to help on the mortification
of it, when sense and Experience disparage and decry it, and your very flesh is
convinced of the folly of flesh-pleasing; O that you would take this advantage,
and use this World, as it does or will use you; and use your sins as they do,
or will use you. There be indeed some unmortified men, who when they suffer by
sin and by the World, will speak hardly enough of them: but their friendship
(which is rooted in their Nature) is soon made up again: But should it not
heighten your Enmity with them? the Lord makes your sin buffet, and abuse, and
rend, and wound you; that by the pain, and smart, and sorrow it breeds, he may
maintain and increase your enmity, and excite diligent endeavors to destroy
it: he had rather that sin should pain you here, than torment you in Hell; and
he would have sins stroke to fall upon it self: as sin killed it self in
killing Christ, so he would have it in his people: Let your afflictions, let
the death of your Creature Comforts, be the death of sin. If it turn your very
breath into groans, let these groans be against sin: if it turn your Joy into
mourning, your Songs into sighs, and cries, and tears, let all these be against
sin; and so your Life, and your Light, and your Comfort shall rise out of the
ruins of your sin. O let sin gain nothing by the hurt it does you; If it has
brought a cross upon thy Person, or Family, take it, and crucify it upon this
Cross, else thou losest the benefit of it: if thus thou dealest with it, it is a
happy Cross, and thou have fellowship with Christ in his Cross, on which sin
suffered. Many have been convinced of the ill of Sin, that have fought but
faintly with it, till it has wounded them.

And now, let me a little enquire if this has been the fruit of your personal
or Family-afflictions, or of the sore astonishing Judgments of God upon this
place: You have seen many Houses and Streets burnt down in fewer days than they
were hundreds of years in building. You have seen Riches that were many years
in gathering, scattered, or may be in a few hours consumed: and the Lord knows
how many have lost their Souls, and forfeited eternal happiness to build, and
furnish, and gather that which a few moments pulled down, scattered and
consumed: and yet when you have but a little intermission and breathing-time,
are you not as eagerly at it again? You have seen or heard of what desolations
God did make, and what a Cry was almost in every House: not the cry of Egypt,
not the firstborn only; but as a man emptieth a Dish, and turns it upside
down, so did God with many Families, and many Houses: Have the dismal Looks and
Outcries of these days mortified you to carnal Mirth? Have you learned
Righteousness? Have you made your dwellings Bethels? You have seen or heard of
but a few years ago, many as delicate Persons as your selves, whose Carcasses
were carried out in Dung-carts, and thrown into pits, heaps upon heaps? and
will you yet please and pamper such Carcasses? Will you gather and patch up (as
it were) their rags to adorn your Bodies with? Ah! the ashes of London, and the
dust of those dead Bodies, shall be witnesses against the present Inhabitants:
Does your Houses, your Tables, your Apparel speak any growth of Mortification?
the highest Turret or Pyramid, is but a poor childish Memorial. Is there a
Memento written upon each of these? But alas, what then means your ceiled and
well-furnished Houses, while the House of God lies waste? What means your
strange Apparel, and sumptuous Tables, while, may be, there be few Backs or
Bellies of Christ's Disciples that are blessing you?

Have you not fallen into Old London's sins, sooner than men took up the Old
Worlds sins? Noah did indeed for once border upon the sin that God had buried
in the Waters: And are not many Professors more guilty in reviving sins that
God has burnt up (to speak so)? Ah! Will you break through, not only Armies of
Ordinances, but Armies of Judgments? Will you in your pride of heart, and in
your practice, also say, the Bricks are fallen, and we will build with hewn
stone; the Sycamores are cut down, but we will exchange them into Cedars? Will
you say, we will have better Houses, and finer Clothes? If you have forgotten
what your Eyes have seen, and your Ears have heard, come and behold yet the
works of the Lord, and see what desolation he is now making amongst others! Not
only London, but other places, that were like the Vinetrees amongst the Trees
of the Forest, God has given them to the fire for fuel, Ezekiel. 12.20. He has
made Lebanon to open its doors to the fire, to devour the Cedars that are
fallen; and the Fir Tree howls also: yea, the Oaks of Bashan howl, Zoch. 11.1,
2. He makes these smart, that others may fear: But Oh, shall such things as
happen for Examples, and are worthy to be recorded for Admonition to the end of
the World, have no effect upon th^se to whom they happen? Shall the same
generation repeat, yea, outdo their former sins? Can you with grief remember
your Losses, and with no regret remember your Pride and Covetousness? Will you
frustrate Reproach, and defame Gods Methods of Judgment, and proclaim to the
World, that his design has miscarried upon you, and that you will not be
healed? Shall the Rod in Moses's hand cleave the Rock, and shall it in Gods
hand cleave no hearts? Must the Lords Ministers with grief of heart, go and
complain against you to him, and say, Lord, Thou have stricken them, but they
have not grieved; thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive
Correction; they have made their faces harder than a Rock: This is a Nation,
and this is a City that obeys not the voice of the Lord, nor receives
Correction. And O that we could sigh for this, even to the breaking of our
Loins. Now, how can you weep with them that weep, that have forgotten your own
afflictions, or rather never could weep aright for your selves? Or, if there be
any Mourners among you, yet sure I am, you are far from Sackcloth and Ashes.
But do you think that God has done with you? there is a dreadful word, Ezekiel.
15.6, 7, I will set my face against them; and they shall go out from one fire,
and another shall devour them: Has he not strange punishments for the Workers
of Iniquity? If London's sins be greater now than before the Pestilence, or
before the Fire, what Wonder, if greater Judgments from God come? If God shall
give you up into the hands of bloody Papists, it will be worse than Fire or
Pestilence, in David's reckoning, as we see by his choice; and yet better have
fallen into the hands of the Philistines, or Ammonites, or any Enemies David
had, than into the hands of Antichristian Butchers: And for any thing we know,
we are not half a hand-breadth from it. I pretend not to any extraordinary
Discovery of Gods Counsels: but as we may Prophecy from sin to punishment, so
from greater and stranger sins, to greater and stranger punishments.

I might mention other Directions, as the engaging all thy might against that
sin that prevails most over thee, 2 Chronicles. 8.30: and the endeavoring to grow
particularly in the opposite grace. Finally, the Consideration of Christ's
second Coming, Col. 3.4, with ver. 5. 1 John 3.2, with ver. 3. Will you wallow
in sin when Christ is so near? Must thou be made like to him, and wilt now let
thy Soul swarm with noisome lusts? Can thou look for him, and not mortify what
crucified him. But I proceed to speak in the third place to the mortification
of the first motions of Sin.

Now here I shall, 1. show the sinfulness of these. 2. I shall show whence it
is, that they abound so much with some. 3. I shall press the mortification of
them from several Considerations. 4. I shall mention some helps to this.

For the first, That every motion arising from the Corruption of the Heart, or
from habitual Lust, whether it has a particular Object, or be but a vagrant
Imagination, though not delighted in, nor consented to, is sin before God, will
easily appear; if we consider, 1. That they arise from a sinful Principle: they
are born of the flesh, and are of the nature of Original sin; and if the Tree
be corrupt, so must every bit of the fruit. 2. They are disconform to the Law
of God (and so must be sinful in their Nature, as well as in their Rise) they
lust against, and oppose the Spirit, Gal. 5.17. and so must oppose the Law of
God; If they be against the Law in the heart, they are also against the written
Law: Though you should crush them, yet once they were; if they had no
inordinacy in them, why were they crushed? If there be any disorder or
inordinacy in them, it is from us they have these; and so they must leave a
guilt upon us. 3. Their sinful tendency and effects prove this. To instance but
a few: 1. They are incitements to sin, and promote obedience to the law of sin,
and the fulfilling of its commands. 2. They make way for other sins, beside
what they do immediately and directly tend to: they open the door, and keep it
open, for temptations to gross sins, and gives Satan access to blow up the
Cole. 3. They keep out good Motions, and so must obstruct Duties, and unfit a
man for them. 4. As they are contrary to right Reason, and not answerable to
that Angelical Holiness and Purity that should be in us: so they cannot but
leave some blot and defilement behind them: let these Motions be never so
passing and transient, and run never so swiftly through us, they must needs
taint us, by reason of our corruption, that in less or more still sideth with
them: they have always the virtual consent of the will, in as far as not
regenerated, and so cannot simply be said to be involuntary (which is the great
Objection made against this Truth), though they be against the renewed Will,
which Paul speaks of, Romans 7. O how many vile sins are stirring in the heart,
that are not deliberate nor explicitly consented to, yet are voluntary,
because they have their seat and rise in the Will, as well as other faculties.
5. They hinder our Communion with God; do you think, that if he had his due,
there would be any room left for these? Have they any place in Heaven, where
the Saints enjoy full Communion with God? and if they be inconsistent with
that, they must be a hinderance to this.

Now it is upon these accounts, that the faintest Motions and stirrings of sin,
are grievous to the godly, especially when it is best with them. The tender
lively Christian, as he groans under a body of sin, so it never stirs but he
feels it, and is pained with it: the most sudden vagrant motions of the Mind,
Heart and Affections, are burthensom to him: and that not only as they bewray a
living principle of sin in his Soul, but as they are sinful gaddings, and in
some measure whorish departings of the heart from God, and inconsistent with
that entire and uninterrupted delight the Soul should have in him; and that
continual affectionate working, and out-going that should be in the Soul toward
him. It may be indeed, he delights in the Law of God after the inward-man, yet
he cannot reach full conformity to it within, more than in his practice
outwardly: when he resolves on some good, ere he be aware, his heart is
wandering a hundred ways, and so ill is present with him.

O be convinced of the sinfulness of this: how often is your Mind stirring and
roving? (for it is a restless thing) and how rarely can you say that these
motions are conformable to the Law of God, or subservient to any spiritual
good. What Armies of vain Imaginations that are unaccountable? you know not how
they come in, nor how they go out; infinite are the occasions that excite
these; You can see nor hear of nothing, but habitual Corruption may some way
stir: yea, you think of nothing, whether existent or not, but it excites some
inordinate Motions: hence they are called the Imaginations of the heart, Genesis
6.8, The wandering of the desire, Eccles. 6.9. It Is true, this is a further
degree of sinful stirrings in the heart, when it entertains wild Imaginations,
and pleases it self with idle Fancies, that give rise to many sinful projects.
Indeed, Nature it self teaches this to be a sin, and it is an evidence of a
discontented frame of spirit; for ordinarily these fantastic rovings of
heart, respects some other persons Condition, or something at least that we
want: the delight that accompanies these, is enough to prove them sinful; but
it is plainly something less than these that Paul speaks of, Romans 7: for it is
something he had not known to be sin, but by the Law. Now men by Natures light
know that inordinate motions consented to (though not acted); yea, or but
delighted in, are sinful. But it is the Scriptures-light only that convinces of
the sin of these first stirrings in general: and it is the Spirit's
Saving-light, that affects the heart with godly sorrow for them in particular.

For the second thing proposed, viz. Why they abound so much with some, more
especially that they are exceeding frequent with all, I think none that know
themselves will deny; and what swarms of them do men's busie-Minds and
Imaginations bring forth? How hard is it to bring every thought inconsistent
with that Duty and love we owe to God, and that we owe to Men, into subjection?
It Is hard to expel them when they come in, and much harder not to suffer them
to come in; such is the cunning and activity of sin, such access has Satan to
work upon us, and so Leavened are our Imaginations and Minds with sin.

Yet in some they are more frequent than others: the best groan under them, but
some are almost smothered with them (to speak so) and their grace almost
suffocated with them. Habitual Corruption is a fruitful Womb, and this is
livelier in some than in others: and the same person is nearer God, and in a
livelier frame, and has more inward serenity, and composure of spirit at one
time than another: and so is like a City with Gates and Bars. At other times a
man is at greater distance from God and out of frame; and then he is like a
City broken down, and without Walls, and the heart is haunted with Satyrs and
Owls. When the heart is in an ill frame, it is like damp Tinder to divine
Motions: but it is like dry Tinder to every spark of a temptation that comes in
by the senses, or by roving Imagination; yea, it takes fire of its self: and if
it be not well watched, would quickly come to a flame. Indeed, it is no easy
task to keep out these, there is so many several passages they come in at, and
they can creep in at a small rent or hole: therefore there is need of the utmost
watchfulness and diligence to keep them out, and to knock them down when they
come in.

For the third thing proposed, viz. Some Considerations for pressing the
mortification of these first stirrings of our Corruptions: 1. I shall mention
some Aggravations of the sin and sad consequences of these. 2. I shall mention
some advantages the Believer has by mortifying these. For the first of these,
Consider, 1. How frequently by these you incur the guilt of sin: O the
numberless multitude of these inordinate motions! When are you free of them?
When is the body of death asleep? not when you are asleep, for waking and
sleeping, these inordinate motions are some way stirring: and it were easy to
prove, every inordinate, extravagant, lustful, covetous, ambitious motion, even
when asleep, and dreaming, to be sinful and defiling: and indeed, what proves
the first motions of sin, when awake to be sinful, does also prove them such
when asleep; and the more power a Christian when awake, has over them; the more
holy he be, the less is he troubled with these: and it is manifest that they
are the flowings out, the bublings, and springings up, or emanations of our
Original Corruption, or the imperfect motions of vicious principles or habits:
for as Innocent dreams follow the sinless constitution of the body, so sinful
dreams follow the vicious constitution of the Soul, which possibly a man's
natural temper of body has advantaged; and so are gross outward acts of sin
also, which yet does not prove them to be no sins. We cannot think that our
Nature in the state of Innocence would have brought forth any such inordinate
motions, sleeping or waking: so that the Apology some make for them, as being
Natural, is naught; they are in no other sense Natural, nay, nor necessary,
than the same motions when one is awake: If any shall say, they are from Satan's
injections which render us not culpable:

I Answer 1. This is the same with what the Quakers say of the first risings of
Corruption, when one is awake: the contrary of which our Lord tells us, Luke
6.45. And James tells us, they are from a man's lust, James 1.14. And truly, I
think we do often sinfully transfer our guilt over to Satan, when there is not
sufficient ground for it, no not so much as Eve had, though her plea was not
relievant. Ordinarily we attribute horrid, blasphemous, or other abominable
thoughts or Imaginations to him, when we cannot apprehend how such or such a
thought should arise in us: so, whatever we think unaccountable, we lay at his
door, when indeed the height and depth of our Corruption is unmeasurable, and
its subtilty, and activity, and way of operating, is unaccountable. 2. It is
not Satan that thinks or wills in us: he may represent Objects, but the
acts are ours: he can dart in a Temptation, but it is through our sin and
Corruption that it takes fire in the least: indeed such is now our
Constitution, that a temptation cannot enter, but there is something within
that complies with it, and is excited by it: and this is one great reason why
we ought to pray, not to be led into temptation; were there no Corruption in
us, Satan's temptations would be like little sparks of fire thrown into a Sea of
water; and indeed, Satan would not be so busy with his Injections into our
Minds, when sleeping or waking, did he not intend thereby to defile us with
them, and involve us into sin: his design cannot be merely to afflict men with
them, for they are no grief nor affliction to many that are yet filled with
them. It Is true, the Saints grieve more, and are more affected with them, and
humbled for them, than for many afflictions that in themselves are more
troublesome; but this inward trouble of Conscience for them in the godly, does
rather prove them sins, than mere afflictions.

If any say, That these Motions when asleep, are not acts of our Reason, but of
mere fancy and Imagination, and so not sinful. I answer, 1. The holy Law of
God reaches to the whole man, even the Imagination: and we cannot suppose but
that imperfect holiness, and persect holiness in Heaven, extends to every
faculty of the Soul. 2. They are not mere acts of the fancy, for the Mind has
some use of Reason, though more imperfect, even when asleep: Hence there is
some correspondence ordinarily between men's thoughts waking and sleeping; and
sometimes one asleep, will reject a temptation upon rational and solid grounds:
I do not indeed think there is so much guilt in these Motions asleep, as when
awake, because of a more perfect use of Reason in a waking man.

2. Consider the innumerable Objects of these sinful Motions, and so into how
many several species or forts of sin these Motions engage and involve you in.
You cannot see nor hear of any thing: you cannot think of any thing, whether it
have a being or not, but it may minister occasion to some inordinate motion.
Innumerable are the occasions of these; what stirrings of desires, and wishes,
and sometimes how pleased with idle Imaginations.

3. Consider what pretenses men have to evade Convictions of the sinfulness of
these Motions, when not consented to, nor may be delighted in, especially when
the object of these is some lawful thing, much more when its some spiritual
good; the Spirit that is in us, does often lust secretly to envy others: when,
may be, discontented or envious thoughts are not perfectly formed: these are
but little observed in us. 4. Consider, that not mortifying of these, is the
way not only to further sin, but it does insensibly bring on hardness of heart;
when the heart is habitually haunted with these, it is hard to expel these
swarms that have had quiet possession: they do exceedingly wear out tenderness,
and the sense of the sinfulness of Sin in every degree of it. 5. They do
unframe the Soul, and unfit it for spiritual Duties: Thus, when we would do
good, evil is present with us; they justle out holy Meditations, at least they
weaken and divert the Soul in it, and cause many interruptions in it: they mar
fixedness of heart in Duties, and they not only polute them, but eat out the
life of them: they are like ravenous Birds upon our Sacrifices, that are not to
be suffered to light upon them. Finally, What a woeful tendency have they, and
what an inlet to temptations, and to further degrees of Sin? they even invite
Satan to tempt, Satan and Sin never say they have enough: every conception of
Sin is in order to a Birth: and every stirring of Sin, is for the carrying on
its war against God and thy Soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. But of this already.

Now 2dly, A little of the advantages of mortifying the first motions of Sin.
1. This is the way to prevent much Sin; and were we making conscience of this,
we should find Mortification a much more easy work: An Oak, when a plant, is
easily pulled up; a little spark is soon quenched: you complain of the strength
of your Corruptions, but you are first to blame that you have suffered the
habits of Sin to grow so strong, and then that you crush not the first actual
Inclinations of these corrupt habits; If you suffer them to proceed but a
little, they may be indeed too hard for you. O foolish Souls, who put off this;
Is it hard to mortify the first motions of thy heart to Sin? and does thou
think it will be easy to mortify Sin at once, when it is increased into
thousands, and fortified with strong holds? If thou cannot tell the first
thoughts of it, how will thou do when it has got thy hearty consent, thy love
and delight, and long possession? 2. This is the way to keep the Conscience
pure and clear: a renewed Conscience will charge guilt upon thee, upon the
account of these; and no reasoning or extenuations will satisfy it, till thou
be truly humbled before the Lord for these; and vigorously also setting thy
self to suppress them. A tender Conscience has a deep Impression of the
sinfulness of these, as Paul had, Romans 7.24: and thou cannot maintain thy
peace, nor assurance of thy freedom from Condemnation, nor keep up thy glorying
in God, but by dealing with them as he did. Oh, how small a matter (if I may so
speak) will break a tender Christians peace! less than a wrong look or word
will do it; he cannot let half a thought away without a challenge; he has but
one eye upon his privileges and comforts, and a little Cloud will darken that.
What makes a man go without much light or comfort, in whom yet you can see no
spot nor flaw, and who also are not under the power of any particular, inward,
or heart-sin; the Spirits Comforting-work, and Witnessing-work is easily
marred. Oh, but the man that is daily keeping or beating down the first risings
of Sin, may glory as Paul, Romans 7.25, and 8.1; He thus preserves a sweet
serenity, and calm within: he suffers no Clouds to gather, he dissipates the
malignant Vapors that arise from within, and suffers them not to unite; He
crushes Satan's design against him in the very Egg.

3. This will keep the Soul in case for conversing and walking with God; in
case for speaking to him, and for every spiritual Duty: every inordinate
Thought or Imagination is a looking away from God, and imports a heedlesness
and a listlesness to him. Walking with God requires an holy, even, uniform
frame of Spirit: And O how much would this raise and spiritualize Prayer,
Meditation and other Duties? then are our Sacrifices holy and untainted, when
neither Birds nor Flies are suffered to light, at least not to sit upon them.

4. This were the way to weaken and destroy the very body of sin: When a Tree
is cut down, the living Root sends up a great many sprouts and small twigs: But
if you will pave the place where the Tree stood, or make a Highway over it,
the very Root will die, which otherwise would have preserved it self; So after
Sin is sore smitten, yet the Root abiding through the seat of waters, that is,
Satan's Influences, it may spring: But when these first shootings up are nipt,
when the Root of Sin cannot put forth it self, it dies: this does as it were
stop the breath of Sin: this makes the old man pant and die, even as Grace
languishes, when the actings of it are obstructed.

Now in the fourth place, take a few Directions: 1. For preventing these
stirrings of sin within, and 2. For compressing and laying them, when they are
up.

For the first of these, take these Directions: 1. In general, what is formerly
said of Watchfulness, is of use here, more especially; sometimes Temptations
seize upon our Judgments, and sometimes upon our Affections unawares: and when
they have tainted the Affections, they have easy access to the Mind, and need
to be carefully watched. Look to the first springs of Sin: when we are asleep,
the Enemy is sowing tares, and they quickly grow up; Temptations do often
suddenly assault, and the thoughts and motions of the Heart are nimble, they
are swift and instantaneous: a spark of fire does no sooner kindle Powder, than
a Temptation does excite some inordinate motion of the Heart; If all the doors
and windows of the Soul be not kept close, there will be fiery dants flung in,
and some sparks of temptations will take fire, and thou can never shut doors
and windows so close, but when thou have done all, thou have need to watch:
Satan can espy a passage into thy heart that thou did not think of; he has a
party, and thou have an Enemy within thee, that will let him in. If thou be
asleep, it may be indeed thy severity to indwelling sin will irritate it, and
provoke it to mutiny, and so occasion greater confusion in thy Soul: but dread
not this, nor ever look for good from thy indulgence and tenderness to thy
corrupt lusts or affections, their war is better than their peace: suspect that
inward quiet that comes from any favor to sin, or connivance at it.

The Apostle tells us, Romans 7.8, That sin took occasion by the Commandment,
etc. One great hinderance of Mortification, is, that sin is thought not so
noisome as it is; but when the Commandment comes: when the Word beats down that
conceit, by exacting thorough Obedience, upon the highest peril, and laying
bonds on the very thoughts, this inrages Corruption, and it grows more unruly:
It is not the proper effect of the Law to stir up sin, more than the impetuous'
running of water is the proper effect of a Bank of Earth, which was made to dam
it up; nor is it the proper effect of diligent endeavors for mortifying all
inward motions, to excite them and make them more tumultuous. Sometimes strict
watching of sin makes it more cunning: sometimes it provokes an eruption of it,
and then the poor Believer is apt to think his case worse than before. But was
it worse with Paul, Romans 7, than formerly? Indeed, it is hard to keep Corruption
in close Prison, and to mar all communication between Satan and it, to suffer
none to go out or come in: But Watchfuln ss will do much, thoughts will be
stirring, and affections will be stirring; therefore it were our wisdom, to ask
them whence they come, and whither they go? if from Satan, or from the flesh?
if from Heaven, or from the Spirit? and arrest what have an evil aspect, or
tendency or favor, and do Justice upon them: what are dubious, keep them
Prisoners, till thou has further examined them; for Satan's messengers oft-times
come disguised, and with Christ's Word in their mouths; and the motions of sin
are often mistaken for spiritual motions: as the Porters stood continually at
the door of the Temple; to keep out the unclean of all sorts, so must you do
with all that defile, or is like to defile, if you be holy Temples to God to
dwell in. Yet for all that I have said of them, a Believer must not be too much
in examining of them, so as to be taken off more profitable work; nor indeed
can we ever keep account of them, they are so innumerable: should we ever be
pursuing and tracing them, there should be room for no Duty else. And finally,
because as they come suddenly, so often they fly as swiftly away.

Now under this Head, I would commend unto you a careful search into, and
intimate acquaintance with thy own heart, that thou may know where thou art
weakest, and what advantages Satan has against thee: What sin does most
entirely beset thee: which is the soft place of thy Soul, which Satan's darts do
with most ease enter into? What corrupt passions and affections are most easily
kindled in thee. And where thou sees the greatest danger, keep the strongest
watch: and do not only keep at distance from such occasions and temptations, as
may most likely draw out thy Corruptions; but keep thy very thoughts at the
greatest distance from these: suffer not thy self to think of them, except it
be to reproach them, or to provoke greater abhorrence of them: and this also
must be prudentially managed.

2. Endeavor to keep your hearts under a deep sense of the sinfulness of Sin,
even of these first motions: a Natural man is not troubled for the sin of
these, or for the disconformity of them to any Law (though he may for outward
actings of sin) because Natures light does not discover the sinfulness of them:
though it may be, he may be angry at them as they molest him, or tend to
something that he abhors: and here lies one difference between the truly godly,
and others; yet we must grant that oft-times the godly think but too meanly of
these, and do not apprehend so much ill in them as there is: and hence guard
not sufficiently against them, nor yet do sufficiently bewail them; may be, you
are easily satisfied with your Repentance for these, and think general
confessions and complaints sufficient: Do you use to make an Errand to God, to
confess these, and to beg a particular pardon for them. Peter makes a
Peradventure of the forgiveness of Simon Magus's thought, Acts 8.22. True, that
^^s a more deliberate approved thought, but an exercised Soul will many times
make a peradventure to it self, of the forgiveness of a more imperfect and
rejected Thought.

I would not grieve such: but for others let me ask you, Do you not know that
God is a Jealous God? Jealousy amongst men, imports an aptness to suspect an
Jnjury; a Husband, viz. is jealous when he is apt to suspect his Wifes want of
love, or loyalty to him upon small circumstances, without evident ground so to
do; and withal, it imports indignation against the smallest ground of
suspicion: this it cannot endure, viz. Any thing that looks like the
inclination of the heart to another: says Joshua, You cannot serve the Lord;
for he is a holy God, Chap. 24. ver. 19. It Is true, He has manifested this
especially in the matters of his Worship and Institutions, according to his
threatening annexed to the second Commandment, as in the instance of Aaron's two
Sons, and Vzza, and the Bethshemites, etc. But may we not think that God is as
jealous of the heart as of any thing, and that he will take notice of every
motion of it, and will resent every disloyal glance of the thoughts, though it
come not the length of a purpose: nay, nor any deliberation in order to a
purpose or resolution? Is there not more sin in many sudden-passing thoughts
(though rejected) than in Vzza's hasty catching hold of the Ark, or in the
Bethshemites looking into it? or is the Lord less jealous now than he was? Does
his clearer coming under the most kindly and condescending Relations, any way
abate it? Nay, they rather heighten it, though they may occasion some change in
his way of resenting injuries, and expressing his displeasure, Jer. 2.14. The
Lord deals with his people now in a more Son-like way; he chastizes them as
much or of tner than formerly, but not in that manner: he will keep up his
Sovereignty, even when he is owning thy Soul; he will have thee know that he must
be thy Lord, and thou must worship him, Psalm 45.11. so shall the King greatly
desire thy Beauty: for he is thy Lord, etc. He will not have his kindliest
Relations diminish his Honor, nor wear out our inward awe and fear, lest an
unsuitable frame, or any unholy motion of heart should provoke his jealous Eye.
It Is a remarkable word, Deuteronomy. 28.58, He will have his people fear this glorious
and fearful Name, The Lord thy God; may be you think Thy God, a sweet name and
a kindly; ay, but he glories in it, and so may thou, and yet ought to be
also a fearful Name. And truly a Conscientious care to prevent the very first
stirrings of sin in the heart, is the most genuine fruit, and the most
satisfying evidence of this fear, and of our Covenant-state: Other things may
influence and incline us to oppose sin in its further proceedings; as on the
other hand, an awful Impression upon the heart of God, as God, and as our God,
is of great efficacy to keep out sinful Imaginations: It will make the soul not
only tremble at yielding to such a sin as Joseph was solicited to, but even
shrink at the first touch of the smallest temptation: and this leads to another
direction.

3. Endeavor to keep thy heart in a holy, tender, heavenly and lively frame.
What Is the reason that temptations and suggestions from Satan do at the first
excite some sinful motions in the heart? the fundamental reason is, our
remaining Corruption that they work upon: But the nearest reason is, an ill
frame; when Satan finds us as dry tinder, he strikes fire, and every part
catches and kindles. 1. Then maintain a tender frame, and this will make thee
feeling and sensible of every inordinate motion of the heart. It will grate
upon the Conscience, and thou will be loath by these to grieve the spirit, as
well as by consenting to, or acting of them, to quench or resist the Spirit:
for as the eye is hurt by the smallest dust, or smoaks, and if it were aware,
would shut it self against them, so is it with a tender Conscience; and if any
dust has got into the eye, it is not at ease till it has wept it out, or till
it be wipt out: so is it also with the man who has true tenderness of heart. 2.
Maintain a lively Spiritual frame; let thy heart be always bending and working
toward God: stir up holy thoughts and affections, and let thy soul be filled
with these, and there will be no room for sin to get in; do you not find that
sometimes when the heart is strongly ca^^ed out to God, that sinful
Imaginations dare scarce present themselves: for as we use to say, that
liveliness in duties is the way to prevent wandering thoughts in them; and that
Birds will not light upon burning Sacrifices: so it is in this case. But when
the heart is dead, and cold, and empty, and idle, then Satan and indwelling sin
take their opportunity and fill it, and busy it; he comes and warms it, and
kindles fire in it: when therefore any thing is offered to thy eye, or thy ear,
or thy taste, or thy thought, that may excite any inordinacy in thy heart, or
in the least measure raise thy Corruption to stir, antidote thy heart, and
prepossess it with some gracious Acts. Let the understanding, the heart, the
affections, the memory; yea, thy senses and outward man, be filled with the
fullness of God, then shall sin be some way out of doors: you shall not fulfill
the lusts of the flesh; yea, there shall be no room to the lustings of the
flesh. If thy soul be exercised in holy meditations and affections, and thy
hand be much in heavenly work, if thou converse in heaven, and live near God,
and dwell on High; were the soul always upon the wing, and flying heavenward,
and were God every way thy all, Satan durst not offer to force thee in the
presence of thy Lord and Husband; Satan shall not have such access to thee: and
this poor world, and its gilded nothings, should not work upon thee: and if the
body of death should stir, you might with the more ease, at least, beat it
down. When the Soul is as it were in Gods presence always, Satan will not
venture so to force it, (as it were) Esth. 7.8. Yea, the body of sin it self
would shrink into a corner: when the virtue received from the Loadstone is worn
off, the needle wavers hither and thither: but when new touched, it bends
steadily Northward. So it is with the soul that is under fresh influences, and
that is near God.

But, 2. How shall we do with these first motions of sin? how shall we deal
with them in their first attempts upon us? Ans. 1. If any sin begin to stir in
thy imagination or mind, look well it get not into thy heart, or affections,
for that will instantly weaken thy Judgment. 2. If thou would keep thine own
Vineyard well, pluck up every weed as soon as it appears, else it will quickly
be overgrown; as soon as thou feels sin stir, let thy heart recoil, and start
back with abhorrence: indeed sin is so often stirring, that thou may possibly
weary to be always watching and warring with it: and the heart does so easily
and naturally move that way, that it may possibly be a pain to thee to oppose
it. Therefore thou must be armed with a great deal of resolution, not to hear
the pleadings of the flesh, nor to parley with a temptation: and know, that
when ever sin stirs in thee, thou art under an actual temptation to more sin.
3. Protest and bear witness against every motion of sin in thee: enter thy
dissent from it. And though this cannot absolve thee in the Court of
strict-Justice, yet the Court of Grace shall acquit thee. This was Paul's
Gospel-plea, Romans 7.15, 19. and from this he infers, ver. 17, and also ver. 20,
Now then it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me: What thou
do not own, and do not consent unto, God will not charge upon thee, so as
to condemn thee (even as what thou have consented to, if thou have retracted it
by repentance, he will not bring it in, in judgment against thee). I do not
mean as if there were no need of repentance for these, for thou cannot
sincerely protest against them, if thy heart be not penitent for them. (It Is
one of the loose Doctrines of the times, that for lesser sins there is a pardon
in course, and that there needs no repentance); and if thou have wilfully
betrayed thy self into such occasions as drew forth these acts of sin, these
first stirrings of Corruption, thy subsequent dissent, and crushing them, will
not serve without more particular and solemn repentance. I mean therefore such
motions of sin as are excited by the suddenness and subtilty of temptations,
and such as are the natural and necessary effects of the body of sin, and the
hourly breathings of it. If thou with tears protest against them, God will not
charge them on thee: yet finally, every dissent from, or dislike of them, will
not discharge from the sin of them: some may dislike them for their tendency,
and others as they are troublesome; But I mean a dislike of them for
themselves, and protesting against them, as provoking God, and polluting the
soul.

4. Ejaculatory prayer (as its called) is a notable expedient for crushing the
first motions of sin; we formerly commended secret prayer, for the
mortification of predominant lusts: But its impossible one can have opportunity
for solemn addresses to God, every time they find Corruption stirring in them:
these sudden motions of sin must have some speedier cure; they may be opposed
and smuthered by sudden ejaculations and desires sent up to heaven, which no
straitnedness as to time, place, or business need to hinder. They may be in a
prisoner before his Judge, in a Courtier when he is standing before his Prince,
Neh. 2.4. This way of praying, is more especially necessary, 1. When thou have
no opportunity of retiring in secret, so that thou needs not say thou wants
time or place, though I fear some does without necessity restrain private
prayer under the pretext of this. 2. When there is a good motion started in thy
heart, that it may be cherished, that a good purpose may be kept in the heart
for ever. 3. Upon every change of thy Company, and upon lesser change of what
business thou art about, when thou goes out and comes in, when thou comes from
Company to Solitariness, and e contra: when thou visits thy friend, reproves or
advises him; yea, when ever thou opens thy mouth in Company, or ever thou
resolve on, or promise any thing, though it seem small and nothing disputable:
many such occasions might be instanced. But, 4. That which is to our purpose,
is, when any spark of a temptation comes in; when Habitual Corruption begins to
stir, when any corrupt affection does in the least begin to take fire, this is
a good way to quench it. This the godly man finds true in frequent experience;
but if this does not, then get into thy secret Chamber; this is an honest
errand to the throne of Grace; cast thy self down at his feet, and tell him,
That if he will trample upon thee, let him do it, thou will lay thy hand upon
thy mouth, but let not thine enemy and mine oppress me, and tread me under:
Lord I would not sin against thee, but thou see how I am oppressed, O
undertake for me. Lord, I rather dye at thy foot, than live as Satan and my
corrupt heart would have me. Worm Jacob that prevailed with him, did not
wrestle upon an honester account than this is. If thus thou betake thy self to
him, thy bow shall abide in strength, and thou shall find him to be strong and
mighty in Battle, Psalm. 24.7, 8. In the secret of his tabernacle, in his
Pavilion shall he hide thee, and set thee as upon a rock. Psalm. 27.5. O do not
yield to Satan, nor to indwelling-sin, for it may be ere you rise off your
knees you shall have help (to allude to 1 Samuel 11.9). I am sure he is faithful
who has promised, etc. and never any that took his appointed method, that were
overcome by a temptation, 1 Pet. 5.7.

5. Take the method prescribed in the Text: You cannot rightly mortify sin in
its rise, or after some progress: you cannot mortify Original sin, nor your
predominant lusts; nay, nor the first motions of sin, but through the spirit:
If you walk in the Spirit, you shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh, Gal.
5.16. Sin shall never conceive nor bring forth. Now in the beginning I told
you, that by the Spirit we may understand the graces of the Spirit, by the
acting of which, mortificaon is carried on. But, 2. And more especially, The
Holy Spirit, by whose immediate efficacy sin is mortified: for the former, I
did commend the cherishing of grace in the heart, in order to the mortification
of Original sin, and habitual lusts; and did also mention it as necessary to
the mortification of predominant lusts, That one should endeavor to grow,
especially in, and to cherish that grace which is most directly opposite to
that sin. If it be pride, set thy self especially to study humility; if
worldliness, heavenly mindedness, if passion, study meekness; look what sin is
most advantaged by your natural temper (for ordinarily that is the
predominant), and set your self especially against that, else it will mar the
luster of any grace or excellency that may be in thee, and it will keep thee a
dwarf in Religion all thy days, and like Reuben thou shall never excel; indeed
a little grace when any way advantaged by education, or the natural
disposition, will go far, and this makes it hard to judge of the comparative
degree; (at least) of other men's graces, and oft-times makes men mis-judg
themselves, or think too highly of themselves. But when grace is to roll
against wind and tide both, it had need to be strong; when Original corruption
is so and so advantaged in any of its particular members.

But as to our present purpose: when any Corruption begins to stir in you, if
you would through the Spirit (in this sense) mortify it, put thy heart
instantly upon the acting of that grace which is most opposite thereunto. So
the Psalmist, At what time I Am afraid, I Will trust in thee: correct carnal fear
by hope and holy confidence in God. If inordinate worldly sorrow be stirring,
labor to beat out of thy heart some spark of spiritual joy. If thy wants or
losses begin to afflict thee, endeavor to unlock the Cabinet where thy Jewels
and treasure lies; come study, and behold an All-sufficient God, and an All in
all Christ. See if thou misses House, or Land, Son, or Daughter, Brother or
Sister here. If thy heart be inclined to run out in carnal, frolic mirth, let
deep and serious reflections on the sufferings of Christ, without which a
sinful thought could not have been pardoned on a dying hour; and the last
trumpet, and followng judgment, give check to it. If pride begin to stir, go
and abase thy self; thus sin shall be a loser by every attempt it makes.

2. If thou cannot come this length, if thy heart and affections will run out
so and so, then endeavor to alter the objects of them; turn the stream a
little aside into another channel, if it will not run in a contrary way; and by
this means thou shall also mortify them. If thou find thy heart inclining to
passion at others, turn it to an holy indignation against sin. If inclined to
sorrow upon any worldly account, endeavor to turn it into sorrow for sin, or
for the afflictions and sufferings of the people of God; let these have their
due, and thou will not have many tears to spare for other things. If thy heart
be inclining to exceed in frolic mirth, endeavor to get thy mirth and joy to
run into another channel, to turn it into holy joy in God, in Christ in his
goodness to thee, and to his people. Indeed there may be much deceit in this,
that thou had need to guard against; for as a good disposition sometimes passes
for a sanctified nature; so does these, for sanctified acts and affections; and
as the former, when advantaged with grace goes far; so these high affections
when tinctured with grace, pass for high spiritual motions of the soul: many
under affliction mistake their carnal sorrow for Spiritual sorrow; and others
mistake their natural and occasional cheerfulness, for Spiritual joy; and the
reason is, because they judge of these acts only by the objects, which they
thought last upon; as for instance, May be one under great sorrow, intermingles
with other things, some thoughts of sin, and then he thinks his sorrow to be
godly sorrow; or when in a cheerful frame, or in some good mood (as you call
it) he intermingles some thoughts of God, of Christ, of Heaven, and then it
passes for heavenly joy. Nothing is more ordinary than this: A pregnant
instance we may have of it in the public prayers of our formalists, who having
by Organs and Musical Instruments excited in themselves some natural
affections, put to (may be) some thoughts of God and of the joys of Heaven, and
thus these motions of their hearts that are excited by mere natural causes, and
their own endeavors, pass current for high sublime raised affections; and this
is all the holiness, and heaven too, of some. But here lies the deceit; men
look only to the Immediate casual object of their acts, and not at all to the
principle of them; nay, nor to the object that did at first excite these acts,
viz some outward loss, or some outward good (I mean ordinarily). When therefore
you would turn natural or worldly sorrow into Spiritual, (and so with joy) you
must look well that there be a change, not of the object only, but in the very
nature of the acts or affections; for the object alone is not enough to
specify an action; a mere change of the object will not render a natural
affection, or passion, Spiritual. There may be much natural Carnal joy in a
spiritual and supernatural object, as Heb. 6.4; even as there may be a
spiritual joy, when the immediate object is natural, and so of other
affections. If you Object the difficulty of this, and ask, What advantage one
has by following this direction? I Answ. 1. You have the advantage of being
diverted from sinful objects, and from inordinate motions, toward lawful
outward objects. 2. You have this advantage, that when the affections are
lively, they move with a greater facility toward spiritual objects, though
indeed this contributes nothing to their spirituality; sin and grace they are
seated in the same powers and faculties of the soul; and when sin commands, the
more lively these powers and faculties be, the more are the actings of sin
advantaged; and so it is also when grace is uppermost, whether in the
understanding, or the will, or the affections. As on the other hand, when the
natural vigor of the soul, especially of the affections, is gone, or any way
obstructed, the actings of grace in them are not so sensible, and seem low and
faint; hence many aged persons and others, are apt to conclude hardly against
themselves, at least to apprehend a decay of grace when there is none.
Therefore when you find any of these vigorous and fresh, let grace set them on
work; and if there be any particular affection more lively and stirring than
another, heavenly wisdom directs us to see that that be well employed; and if
it be in the hand or possession of sin, to redeem and rescue it unto its proper
use: whatever principle or object did first move, excite, or draw it forth; the
powers of the soul, and all their operations are capable of good or evil, as
they are used: as a strong Castle or sharp sword may be well or ill used; yea,
suppose an usurping enemy helped to fortify the Castle, or sharpen the sword,
if they can be taken from him, they may be used to the more advantage against
him.

Now 2dly, I told you, that by the Spirit in the Text, was especially to be
understood the holy Spirit, by whose special assistance Sin is mortified in the
Believer: If ye through the Spirit, etc. set about this with the Spirits aid,
and in a compliance with the methods of the Spirit; which imports, 1. Our own
impotency: Never think to mortify any sin in thy own strength: how small a
temptation will overturn us when we stand upon our own legs! and how strong
temptations and inward lustings are we helped to withstand and mortify, when
we engage the Spirits assistance! 2. It imports the ineffectualness of mere
rational or moral Considerations, Motives, and Means to mortify sin; the
Consideration of the turpitude and infamy of sin, of its debasing our Nature;
of that distraction and disorder that inordinate passions and affections breed
in the Soul: the weakness and transitoriness of the Creature comforts, the
impossibility to recover our loss by inordinate grief, etc. These may restrain
or refine sin, or change the Channel it runs in, but can never mortify it.
Nay, nor 3. Will any means of Gods appointment do it without the Spirit;
neither meditation of Death, nor Judgment, nor of the death and sufferings of
Christ. Nor will Prayer, or Word, Promises, or Threatenings, or Sacraments, or
Afflictions, if separated from the Spirits influences and assistances; This is
so sadly verified every day, that I need not prove it. They that want the
Spirit, cannot mortify one sin: and they that improve not an indwelling
Spirit, cannot by other means mortify sin.

If any object, That sin does grieve, and vex, and quench the Spirit, and
provoke him to withdraw; how then does the Spirit mortify sin in us? I answer,
It Is true, that even the sins of the godly do grieve, and some way quench the
Spirit, But what sins are these? or how do men quench the Spirit? It Is by their
opposing the Spirits sanctifying and mortifying operations. I grant, this may
be done by opposing his witnessing and comforting Work, but mostly the former,
which is the chief work of the Spirit. 2. The godly do never so grieve the
Spirit, as to provoke him altogether to leave them, Psalm 51.11. There remain
some motions and assistances of the Spirit, which if hearkened to, and improved,
may recover the Soul again, and bring back more plentiful and greater
assistances of the Spirit. First then, beware of marring the Spirits work. 2.
Learn to comply, and actively to cooperate with the Spirit in all the methods
and ways whereby he destroys sin. 3. When sin is not allowed, the Spirit is not
grieved, so as to withdraw or suspend his operations.

For the first, Resist not the Spirit, else the bonds of your sins shall be
made strong: Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is Liberty, 2 Cor. 3.16.
This is not a Liberty of speech only or mainly, he works out our freedom and
Adoption; but when he is resisted or opposed, he brings under bondage to fear
(for both these, Romans 8.15, 16, are the effects of the same holy Spirit) and
brings Adoption under debate again, Jer. 3.19. 1. O do not counter-act nor
counter-work the Spirit: when he discovers sin, do not you shut your eyes, or
wink hard to hold out his light; some will not know Sin, because they have no
mind to leave it, much less to mortify it; they put out the Candle, that they
may sin the more freely; such Ignorance does highly aggravate guilt: how many
defend their ignorance of Truths and Duties, Errors and Sins, against the
Spirit of God? and thus for some base lust sell Truth and Holiness, which are
glorious Beams of God; and at the highest rate and peril, make a Conquest of
Error or Sin, which are the excrements of the Devil and of Hell. Oh, to what a
height of sin in this particular, have many arrived at? who instead of
complying with what Light and Convictions the Spirit does minister to them;
will have the Spirit comply with their darkness, their Sins and their Errors;
when men study the Scripture to seek a cover for them: or get to themselves
Teachers after their own lusts, after the manner of Achab, as ordinarily great
men especially do their Ministers and Chaplains. Thus men would make the Spirit
of God of their own mind, and to approve Sin: some are angry at the Light, as
it mars their carnal Mirth, and as it opens the eyes of others to think of
them, what they would not be thought. How many also do with the Spirit within,
as they do with the Spirit in his Ministers, and as the Jews did with Jeremy,
Chapter 44, They seek Light, but are determined in their mind, only they would have
the Spirit to serve their turn. 2. Do not not oppose the Spirit when drawing
the heart off Sin, when engaging and raising purposes in the heart against Sin,
or when arming the passions against it; as many do, who thereby render outward
helps for Mortification, and also the inward workings of the Spirit, powerless
and ineffectual; and thus when God would heal them, they discover their
iniquity as Ephraim, and as those do, who not only call evil, good, etc. but
draw iniquity like Cart-ropes: who the more they are striven with, the more
they stretch themselves forth to sin: this is ordinary with the unregenerate.

But 2dly, Do not grieve the Spirit (this is more common to the godly). Now you
grieve the Spirit, 1. When you covet his Comforts more than his sanctifying
Operations, and his killing of sin in you. It Is worse to be under the power of
Sin, than to be under terrors for sin. 2. We grieve the Spirit by every act of
sin, by the least indulgence to sin; the very first motions of sin, they are
lustings against the Spirit: and the further they proceed, the more they grieve
the Spirit; If they be delighted in, or consented to, which is the conception
of sin, much more if they be brought forth, and amongst sins: the more
spiritual any sins be, the more it grieves the holy Spirit, as leaving upon the
Soul the character and resemblance of the contrary evil Spirit: As for
instance, Pride; and the more spiritual Pride be, and the more excellent the
object of it be, the more provoking it is; though indeed in some respect
sensual pleasures and bodily sins, may be said to grieve the Spirit more, in as
much as they not only defile his Temple, but also polute the Soul (which should
be the inner Temple, and therefore kept more holy), with sensual affections
which alienates the Soul from the Lord, and which also weaken the Soul, Hos.
4.11. Hence see the opposition, Ephesians. 5.18. Jude 19: and which are a real
service and proper tribute to the flesh: whereas we are debtors only to the
Spirit, Romans 8.12: and it cannot but exceedingly grieve the Spirit, when we pay
our liveliest affections as tribute to his great Enemy in us.

For the 2d Direction mentioned, viz. Compliance and Cooperation with the
Spirit: You must not think that the Spirit will mortify sin when you are
asleep, or without your own endeavors, much less when you are actually
indulging and giving scope to it: If ye through the Spirit do mortify, etc.
But ere I press this more particularly, let me exhort you to endeavor as much
as in you lies, to keep your Souls in such a frame as is fit for the holy
Spirit to work upon, an humble, meek and ductile frame of spirit: the best
frame will not enable to mortify any sin: but when the Lord finds the Soul in
a good frame, he works suitably upon it, Psalm 27.14: but when there is nothing
to work upon, or when the heart is like clamp Tinder: either heavenly sparks
are withheld, or they die out.

And when the Spirit does his part, then be true to yours: when thou art
conflicting with sin, and the Spirit comes in and takes thy part against it,
happy thou, if thou can improve it. But Oh, sin not away such blessed
assistance; may be, thou sinds not much of it at first, for he uses to try us
with a little, ere he trust us with much: and as we refuse or close in with his
first offers, so does he deny, or afford us further assistance; he gives a
little to make way for more. Now, the prejudiced Soul discerning that such a
motion is levelled at its beloved lust, which is its life; and foreseeing the
difficulty and pain of Mortification, does reject the motion, and refuse this
assistance; Even as some wretches (says one), mar their conceptions, to prevent
the pain and inconveniences of Childbearing: But O, do not hold out these
Messengers, nor murder these Births of the Spirit, that would assist thee in
the killing and mortifying of thy sin. Oh hide not, and plead not for thine
Enemy, when the Spirit comes to avenge thee on it, for all the injuries it has
done thee: go not forth against it in thy own strength, nor yet refuse to
follow him when he gives the Alarm, or the Signal for Battle: hastily buckle on
thy Armor, and thou shall prevail; but if any Temptation meet thee all alone,
thou art weak as water: or had thou been as strong as Sampson, if thy locks
be shaven, and the Spirit be gone, thou will be as other men, any Cords will
now bind thee: Satan will put out thy eyes, and make thee grind in his Mill.

But more particularly, I told you, The Spirits first work in reference to the
mortification of any Sin, was a particular conviction of it; therefore thy
first care must be to welcome and entertain Convictions of Sin. Take heed of
holding out, or smuthering divine Light: none so hardened in sin, as such who
have opposed most the Spirit's Light; there is more hope of a man that has
only Natural light, than of him that has opposed much Divine light; and in
such oft-times God puts out Natural light; when Men refuse the greater light,
the Lord blows out the lesser: If they will not see with the Sun, he often
blows out their Candle; the Gospel Maranatha extinguishes it. Hence some that
have been once enlightened, turn prodigiously profane; and Sin is never so
secure nor strong, than where it has repelled and out-striven most Convictions:
And alas, Is not the godly man's faint assent to, and compliance with the
Spirit's light, when convincing of sin in them, the reason of many a
disconsolate hour? for when Satan comes to question our state, and the truth of
our Grace, we run to a trial with it, and often can find nothing to repel
Satan's allegations with; we can see nothing but sins set in order before us:
these stare us in the face, especially our injurious dealing with the holy
Spirit of God. And is it any wonder, that when we comply not with the Spirit's
light discovering sin in us, that he deny light, to let us see Grace in us? and
without his light, we cannot make a clear and comfortable judgment of our
state. If we comply not with his Convincing and reproving Light, we shall not
have his comforting Light; and it is upon this account that many poor Souls
under trouble and exercise, are not able to discern any gracious fruits of the
Spirit in themselves, but their eyes are held poring upon the fruits of the
flesh, upon those sins especially whereby they have grieved the Spirit; when
the Spirit says to the Soul, as Reuben did to his Brethren in their strait,
Spoke I not unto you, etc? You are now in trouble and under terrors; But did
not I tell you? did not I admonish you? the Spirit helps our spirits to repeat
the good motions and the charming-Arguments that we repelled: and be sure Satan
will not fail to act his part at such a time.

Oh say not to the Clouds, Drop not; and to the Winds, Blow not; and to the
Seers, See not; and to the Prophets, Prophecy not; and to the Spirit, Convince
not, Reprove not. For the Spirit not only admonishes men of sin, but argues
with them: as the word imports, John 16.8. But some other listen not, or else
endeavor to answer the Spirit's arguments, or to oppose carnal Reasons to them.

But if thou would through the Spirit mortify any sin, cast open thy doors and
windows to the Spirit's Light; the Spirit often darts in Beams of Tormenting
light, whether men will or not: but he does not mortify sin, whether men will
or not. Oh be thankful for heavenly Light; put thy finger now upon thy sin, and
hold it there: may be, thou have formerly known such a thing to be a sin, but
now thou have an opportunity to know the exceeding sinfulness of it. And truly,
the Spirit's light does leave that impression of the sinfulness of sin (as the
first effect of it), which if lost once, is not easily recovered again: And if
this impression upon the Mind be lost or lessened, it will be so with any
effect left, or impression the Spirit made upon the heart or affections, or any
further endeavors to mortify sin.

2. Comply with the Spirit of God, when he begins to affect the heart with
godly sorrow for sin, Zach. 12.10. The first kindly effect of a through
Conviction, and of a right sight of the sinfulness of sin, is sorrow; the
Conviction of the Righteousness of God, and of the guilt of Sin, breeds fear;
the Convictions of the holiness of God, and of the ugliness of sin, breeds a
holy shame; the Convictions of the graciousness of God in Christ, and of the
injuriousness of sin to the grace of God in Christ, breeds godly sorrow,
according to that passage, Zach. 12.10, 11: where this sorrow is mentioned as
the first eminent and sensible fruit of the pouring out of the Spirit. Oh,
beware you lose not that first Impression that a thorough sight of sin makes:
all thy smiting and hammering upon thy heart will not recover it. And according
to your measure of this, so may you judge what measure of the Spirit you have:
you who are whole and unbroken, you have none of the Spirit; and it is a sign
the body of death is whole and found: I do not mean you, who may be cannot
mourn; deep sorrow sometimes causes deep thoughts of heart, when less sorrow
will have more tears; therefore look you miss not this proper and kindly effect
of right Convictions: let not the Spirit's work stop here. Some leap over this
step, they are moved by some Convincing work of the Spirit's to forsake and
relinquish sin; but sin cannot be mortified, till the heart be imbittered
against it: the Spirit affects the heart with a fense of sins accession to
Christ's death, and puts the Soul to seek a Revenge, and nothing but the death
of sin will satisfy it. Oh, cherish godly sorrow, if you would morifie sin;
think it not a legal frame, when the Spirit moves thee to go alone, and makes
Company and business burthensom to thee, and begins to melt thy heart: take
hold of the opportunity, thou knows not the meaning of the Spirit; when there
is some sorrow seeking a vent, fall thou to pump it out: yet think not that
tears will drown sin, they sometimes feed it, and make it more fruitful: but
where they flow from a broken heart, they tend to the death of Sin.

3. When the Spirit moves thy heart against Sin, and excites hatred, distaste
and indignation against sin, and stirs up thy anger against it, blow upon the
Coal. Some let not the Sun go down upon their anger at it, such are not true to
the Spirit of God; his Controversy with sin is like that with Amaleck, for
ever. When the Spirit is lusting against the flesh, and the flesh against the
Spirit, join thou with the Spirit: Now thou have an advantage against sin,
which if thou improve, may tend more to the death of sin, than many months or
years of thy single endeavors, or fruitless formal Complaints. Pursue the
advantage thou have, and press hard upon sin; If the new Nature in thee cannot
bear sin, and when its weak, and the Spirit comes into its assistance, how glad
should thou be, and how welcome should this aid be, when the Spirit discovers
sin, excites the heart and affections too against it? If you will now awake
your self as the Psalmist, when his heart is fixed, and when he has awaked his
tongue and his harp, Psalm 57.7, 8, I my self also will awake; You may cut the
sinews of your predominant sin: but if you shrink back, and comply no further
with the Spirit than your carnal ease or interest will admit, you cannot but
look for the withdrawing of the Spirit, and the prevalency of some evil Spirit.
And suppose you only resisted the Spirit in some things, you cannot but think
it righteous, that he should not afford you his assistance in other things: but
leave you to your own lusts, and to the swing of your own hearts.

When the Spirit then does animate thee against any sin, has bended thy heart,
and raised or corroborated holy resolutions against it: maintain them (for the
heart is naturally like a miscarrying womb); pray as 1 Chronicles. 29.18, and fall
instantly on the mortifying of that sin. Holy endeavors strengthen holy
purposes: and if these be vigorous and strong, thou may now get over the
difficulties that used to hinder the mortification of that sin, and may do so
hereafter: that is, may hinder hereafter, if through delays, or neglect of
present endeavors, you let not your purposes cool or slacken; whereas
probably, if this difficulty be overcome, thy Conquest of sin may ever after go
better on: But do not think, that when you are aided by the Spirit, you shall
meet with no difficulties, or that because of sins vigorous opposition, you are
not influenced or aided by the Spirit. There is no War without trouble, and
difficulty, and danger; the Spirit does not altogether remove difficulties: the
lusting of the Spirit does not extinguish the lusting of the flesh; yea, the
Spirit may be stirring the heart, even when the flesh is prevailing: the groans
of a holy Soul, even when overcome by sin, are from the Spirit; but it is the
Spirit's work to help over these difficulties which were otherwise insuperable;
and this he will do, if there be no failing on our part. But ah! the Spirit's
aid meets with such opposition and reluctance from the Soul in so far as it is
unrenewed, that neither spiritual purposes nor endeavors can be mantain'd and
kept up without striving and earnest contending on our part: and this must be
done, maugre our ease, humor, and the mighty opposition of the body of death.
He that would not be worsted by sin, must (...). Luke 13.24, Strive as in an
Army: there is no striving with other things that will put the Soul in an Agony,
set aside Sin: there is no difficulty besides this in the way to Heaven; see
Heb. 12.4. The power of sin will put any sensible Soul in an agony, as well as
the guilt of it; Paul seems acquainted with it, Romans 7.24: and no doubt he had
much of the Spirit, even when he thus cried out. Do not then expect such
assistance from the Spirit, as will kill thy Corruption at one stroke: the
truer thou art to thy help, the more thou shall have; and the more the Spirit
does, the more thou must do.

4. When the Spirit (who is a spirit of supplication) does strongly influence
thy heart in Prayer, improve it unto the mortification of sin, for the
necessity and usefulness of Prayer in reference to Mortification, I have spoke
to already, and now urge the improvement of the Spirit's assistance in Prayer,
as one of those ways whereby through the Spirit we are to mortify sin. And in
order to this, whatsoever measure of the Spirit's aid and assistance thou have,
let thy Prayers be chiefly levelled against sin: and that not only nor mostly
against the guilt of sin, but especially against the power of sin. Nature may
raise the desires of freedom from guilt high, which may be mistaken for the
influence of the Spirit It is true, that Natural self-love may also draw out
strong desires of freedom from the power of sin, as their passions and corrupt
contradictory lusts and affections do molest and trouble them: but especially
as they know them to be inconsistent with any well-grounded hope of Heaven; as
for unregenerate men's usual formal Petitions for deliverance from temptations,
and from the power of their sins, there is ordinarily not so much as moral
sincerity in them (even when that may be in their Prayers for Pardon) they
really would not that God should hear them, and are sometimes afraid he should;
so that what Augustine confesses of himself before his Conversion, is indeed a
Common Case.

But to return, When the Spirit makes intercession in thee, helps thee to make
intercession with groans which cannot be uttered: Let these groans be against
sin, rather than for Divine Comforts. Groan rather for Redemption from sin,
than from any other misery: do you (...) with the Spirit, as the Apostle
beseeches the Romans, for the love of the Spirit, to do with him, Romans 15.13;
we render it, Strive together: the Spirit makes intercession with groans, as if
he were in an Agony; O for the love of the Spirit, strive together with him,
etc. And when the Spirit gives greater enlargement, and mightily draws out the
heart in Prayer; know, that then the Lord is saying to the Soul, as it were,
What is thy Request? Thou have now got the King's Ear, then let thy Request be
the death of thy sins: and amongst all thy sins, especially, that he would give
thee the head of thy greatest lust that has most dishonored God, and done the
most mischief, that has often left thee wounded and groaning. Now thou have an
opportunity to be rid of it, and avenged on it, pursue thy advantage, and
return not from the pursuit till thou have divided the spoil: thou may now get
more ground of sin, than by many years praying against it in thine own spirit;
when your prayer is (...), as the word is James 5.16: that is, full of the holy
Ghost, or Prayer, wherein the holy Spirit puts forth his Power and Energy, and
sets the whole Soul on work; (...), signifies, one possessed with, and acted by
a spirit. If it do not instantly kill sin, and deliver thee from such a
Corruption, yet it avails much to the death of it: and if continued in, thy sin
shall not so far prevail, as to mar thy acceptance with God; or Communion with
him, or darken thy evidence for Heaven.

5. If you would by the Spirit mortify sin, comply with the Breathings and
influences of the Spirit in Ordinances, in the Word and Sacraments: This were
the way (says one) to make Ordinances, and the times also glorious; the Apostle
uses the dwelling of Christ, and of the Word in us, promiscuously; men grieve
the Spirit when they despise the Word, or any helps that God has given them,
Isa. 7.13: they are the means whereby the Spirit discovers sin, purges it away,
or kills it, Psalm 119.9, and 107.20. John 15.3, and 17.17. Heb. 4.12: Render
them not powerless to your Souls, by letting the Impressions that the Spirit
has made by them, wear out: Has the Lord by his Word and Spirit discovered sin
to you? fix your thoughts upon it, and pry more and more into the sinfulness of
it. Muse upon it till your heart be hot within you: and till your heart be
fired with anger, indignation and zeal against it; and when the Word makes your
heart burn within you, blow upon the Coal that it die not out again; you must
(...), the Spirit sometimes wounds the Soul for sin, and makes some word like
an Arrow, pierce the heart: but Sinners pluck it out again, and lick their
wound whole again, and thus sin is whole again; sin puts the Soul between the
stroke and it: whereas, when the Spirit by the Word smites, we should expose
sin to it, and be content to have it not only discovered, but beaten and left
dead upon the place; be content to find the Word as a two-edged sword; and love
those best, in whose mouth is the sharpest sword; and hold up thy sins to its
strokes when they are found out; Be content that the Word be as a
Corrosive-plaister to thee, and keep it close upon the sore place.

O how many have their judgments enlightened by the Spirit in Ordinances: but
they imprison Light, imprison Truths, and suffer not the power of them to reach
their hearts and affections. True, some find also the heart shaken and troubled
for sin, and resolutions raised against it, yet it is not mortified, all
miscarryes: and why? Truly, because in some these have no root; and for others
that are truly godly, they yet take not pains enough with their own heart, to
maintain what the Spirit by the Word has wrought in them: they labor not to
drive the Nail to the head, and to keep the Bow in bent. Slothfulness is a
slighting of the Spirit, and provokes him to withdraw; and when the Sun is
gone, light and heat is quickly gone. When the Spirit does by any Ordinance
animate you against sin, and fix it upon your heart to seek the death of any
sin, give it no reprieval for an hour: give not Satan time to tempt thee, nor
sin time to prepare some charm to entice thee again: let not these things that
use to choke the Word, deface and obliterate spiritual Impressions; if when the
Spirit by the Word has heated your affections, you immerse your self in your
business, this like frosty Air will soon cool you; if you do unwarily meddle
with it, it will quickly take off your edg; and they are the most dangerous
colds that come after great heats: hence many not only abate their zeal against
sin, but sin is advantaged by this means; the heart like the earth which in
Winter is thawed by the Sun at Noon, freezes the harder the next Night. 6.
Observe, and comply with the Spirits motions and methods when under affliction,
which is a special season of the Spirits teaching and working: afflictions use
to be the Seal to Gods Instruction, Job 33.16. Seals give weight and authority
to Writings; the Spirit now sets Instructions home. Therefore consider what sin
thou have most need to mortify, and what the Lord does especially aim at in
afflicting thee: and in order to this, observe what his Spirit did charge most
upon thee before affliction came; and mark how the Lord follows affliction: the
Spirit uses to bear in some sin more especially, and to make a man's Conscience
deal impartially with him; hear what that says especially after Prayer; and
when the Spirit by afflictions does humble thee, and cause heaviness in thee, 1
Pet. 1.5, let not sin raise up it self; for thou can never rise again, but
upon its ruins; and when the spirits work tends to the stirring up of Grace, in
all thy acting of Grace, have an eye upon the sin that has most endangered
thee, and comply with the spirit, especially when thou art moved to the acting
of that Grace that is most contrary to thy strongest Corruption. It Is a token
of a sanctified affliction, when thy sin is discovered in its sinfulness: when
there is fixed purposes of heart raised against it, and when there is some
notable acting of the Grace that is most opposite to it excited.

And now when the lot is fallen upon it, do not spare it, do not think to roll
it to shore, and save it alive, do with it as the Jews did with Paul, Act.
21.28, They laid hands on him, crying out, Men of Israel help, This is the man
that teaches the people against the law, and has polluted this holy place.
Labor to fix your thoughts, and purposes, and affections you now have; and
afterward be often asking thy soul, what is become of them? and deal with sin
as then you wished you had never done.

I shall in the next place answer some Objections against what has been
delivered. And, 1. May be some see nothing in themselves that need to be
mortified; they can say as the Pharisee, Luke 18.11, yea, can bless God that
they are free not only from such gross things as the Pharisee mentions, but
even from such abominable thoughts and motions of heart, and from such horrid
temptations and suggestions as some complain of.

Answ. 1. Was it any better with the Pharisee for his foolish opinion of
himself? but would thou see thy self as in a glass? See Rev. 3.17. Look thou be
not like a standing Pool, that has more mud and dirt at the bottom, than the
raging Sea; and indeed sin is never more stirring than when it seems asleep, or
moves smoothly: thou art not yet come the young man's length, Mark 10. who may
be has outdone thee in every thing, yet saw there was something lacking; and
indeed besides faith in Christ, there was mortification to the world wanting.
2. How came thou by this freedom from sin, and so much inward quiet? thou must
be in League with Hell; sure I am, the holiest Christians make sad complaints
of sin within, and temptations without, and seldom want some exercise; but it
seems you let sin live, and sin lets you live. 3. It Is a token that sin has
never been irritated, much less slain; we know thou art not pure by nature,
more than others; nor can education purge out sin, though it may qualify it;
and we know that it cannot be mortified with much ado, such an interest has it
got in the soul. But here it is, the Commandment has never come in its
spirituality and power to thee; till then Paul troubled himself as little with
sin as thou do: sin prevails in the heart, yet is not grievous, because
there is nothing in thee that is contrary to it, to oppose it. It Is but a short
way that a natural Conscience goes; it charges no man with Original corruption,
nor with the first motions of sin, that the body of sin breaths out every
moment, and which the smallest temptation will excite. And in many, reason, and
conscience, and affection, and all is in bondage to sin; and there is nothing
to present its proceedings, but there is a thorough satisfaction with its
servitude. Sin is in thee, as in its proper place, and therefore feels not
heavy. 4. Thou may easily mistake, when thou compares thy self with others,
whose Corruptions some sharp trials, or strong temptations, has brought forth;
there may be much more sin at bottom in thee. 5. Know that such as Satan has
possession of, he does not so much trouble them, he cares not how peaceably
they come to hell; he lashes few till they begin to turn out of his road; he
cares not how neat a way they come to hell, nor how swept, and clean the house
be, and how well garnished. There may be access and room for the more evil
spirits. And truly I think, that Satan may be as careful to keep temptations
from some, lest they should be discovered to themselves and to others, as he is
to multiply temptations to others; here is the misery of many: God binds them,
and Satan binds them, and they cry not: God blinds men, and Satan blinds men,
and they feel not, discern it not, and will not believe it, Joh. 9.39, 40. He
hardens them, and they know not how; the stone in the heart grows as
insensibly, as the stone in the bladder.

2. Some Carnal hearts may object the pain that is in mortifying a sin that is
dear and useful; and that to mortify sin, is to mortify mirth. This has been
formerly obviated. In short, you must know, 1. That this is not the proper time
nor place for mirth, Joh. 16.20, Ye shall weep and lament, but the world shall
rejoice; and when we rejoice, our mirth must not be akin to theirs. We read
but once, that Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and that was not with the joy of this
world, Luke 10.21. He was a man of sorrows, and it becomes not his Disciples to
be men of mirth. I speak this the rather, because that under pretense of
removing an occasion of offense, and stumbling of some at the way of God, many
drown themselves in Carnal mirth. No man comes leaping and laughing to heaven;
then, and not till then shall all tears be wiped away; were there none, there
needed no wiping; as long as sin is not thoroughly purged away, sorrow must not
fly away. 2. There is indeed pain and trouble in mortifying sin, as there is in
cutting off a living member of the body, and as there is in the rending of the
soul from the body; for sin cleaves as close to the soul and to the body, as
the soul and body does to one another. Yet, 3. This pain is only, or at least
more especially at some times; as when a man first sets about the mortification
of sin: But when sin has once begun to fall before him, he is heartned, and his
work goes more easily on, and difficulties fly away. 4. It is the being of sin,
and the strength of sin that breeds trouble, and grief, and pain to the godly
man: not so much the mortifying of sin, for that relieves him. 5. As we
formerly told you, there is a great deal of more pain in serving and satisfying
any lust, than in mortifying it, Job 20.22. Psalm. 78.29, 30. Would you set
about the mortification of sin, and make trial, you should find it so: The
reason why men think not their lusts burdensome, is their love to them; and
their being habituated to them, disingages the affections to them, and they
torment a man; that which makes them sweet, is the vicious constitution of
their souls and bodies; when a man is recovered of his disease, they are like
gall and wormwood to him; that which lessens their trouble and pain in serving
of them, is their imputing it to the scantness of provision for them; whereas
when they have multiplied and diversified the objects of them, they are never
the nearer satisfaction in them. 6. Man is born to affliction, as the sparks
fly upward; and if the godly man find pain and trouble in mortifying sin, he
has rest in the evil day to compensate that. If sin be mortified, it is easy to
bear a cross; if sin be dead, it is easy for a man to die. Whereas others are
uneasy under afflictions, and on a death bed, unmortified sin makes a man
feeling of affliction; the trouble and pain of it is more than the pleasure of
sin, and more than the pain of mortification; and how much more does the pain
and sorrow of hell exceed these? Will you choose to pine away in pain, rather
than let a gangrene Limb be cut off, or a broken Limb be set again? Will you
lie a million of years in torment, ere you endure a moments pain? the odds is
not so great, as between time and Eternity. 7. Where there is a principle of
true Grace, it is greater pain to the new man to sin, then to mortify sin. 8.
It is no pain or trouble to a man, in so far as he is renewed, to oppose and
mortify sin; he does it with delight, and the more effectually he do it, the
more is his peace and joy. 9. If at any time sin prevails, the heart is drawn
forth into acts of godly sorrow, and indeed the godly man chooses that before
the worlds mirth, and therefore cherishes it; whereas the trouble and anguish
others have, is a kin to that of hell, which makes them shun it, and fly from
it. Yea, 10. The very trouble which the mortification of sin breeds to the old
man, is a pleasure to the new; then one rises upon the ruins of the other: and
when he considers what assurance of a final conquest he has, he is heartned, he
knows that the death of sin is his life, that if he through the spirit mortify
sin, he shall live; he can bear to have a right hand cut off, when his life is
at the stake; and if he feel pain, and trouble, and complain of it, as Romans
7.24, he checks himself next word, and turns his moan into a Song, Act. 25. and
8.1.

3. Some object the impossibility of mortifying such and such Corruptions; some
will acknowledge a self-denyed and mortified life to be the best life; but say
you, No body knows my temptations, and circumstances; there is such a woeful
proneness in my nature to such and such things, that I know not how to
withstand it, though I have prayed, and resolved, and hoped against it.

Answ. It Is true, thou art utterly impotent, and by thy own endeavors thou
cannot mortify any sin; but art thou a Christian, and have no faith? or in
Christ, and have thou not the spirit of Christ: Have thou Christ in thee, and
the Spirit of the living God in thee, and yet no strength, or cannot mortify a
beloved lust by it? But does not this excuse them that want the Spirit, and his
special assistance? Answ. No, 1. Because some such, at least, think they can
resist and overcome many sins, and yet do not; why do they put off Repentance
and Mortification, with express purposes some other time to repent, and
mortify sin? and why do they, when under outward trouble, or inward terrors,
cry out, O that I had known this. 2. They will not so much as try whether they
can mortify sin or not. 3. The natural man does not only freely and willingly,
but cheerfully fulfill the lusts of the flesh, without regard to, or sense of
his Impotency to do otherwise, or any necessity he is under, saving what he
lays upon himself: they could not do it more freely, supposing there were no
power above them determining even^^ (...) could not do it more cheerfully no^
(...) supposing it were the true happiness: (...), though deceitful, will tell
us so, viz. (...) is not from any compulsion to sin, nor (...) ability to do
the contrary, that we sin; (...) a willingness and satisfaction in so doing:
and thus they do willingly consent to the want of the Spirits assistance,
that is necessary to the mortification of sin. And, 4. They are even willing
that there be insuperable difficulties in their way, that they cannot mortify
sins; they are so in love with their lusts, that they are content to have their
ear bored, and to be servants to them for ever; they love to have it so, Jer.
5.31. and are grieved when their crazy bodies cannot serve their sinful,
Ambitious, Covetous, Vindictive souls; yea, it may be they are glad that they
have this pretense of impotency to plead for themselves; and it being so
universal, they think their plea will be the more relievant.

But, 5. That which may stop every mouth is this, You do not what you may do,
for the mortification of sin; sure I am, If you cannot get the better of a
vain, proud, light heart, you may yet restrain your tongue, and rectify your
garbs. But O, when poor Ministers cannot prevail with you, for Christ's sake, to
cut off the superfluities of your own, or others hair, and to forsake sinful
and foolish fashions, which any may do with much ease: how shall we prevail
with you to cut off a right hand, to abandon what is as dear to you as your
life, and what cleaves closer to you than a girdle does to the loins of a man,
or the soul does to the body?

In a word, how much might you have done to the mortification of such or such a
lust, that you have neglected? so that this pretense of Impotency, is but a
froward Objection of the flesh: for (as an excellent man says) the Spirit is
ever beforehand with us, preventing us with some knowledge, and some ability,
which if we join with, the Spirit is ready to increase, and carry us further.
If the Lord concur to those works to which he does not previously move the
heart; how much more to those works which he excites, and is the first mover?
The holy Lord follows the worst of men, a great way; but they will have none of
him; so that the Question, Whether God will condemn the man that did his
utmost, ought to be out of doors, for no man out of Christ, ever did all that
he could by common assistance of the Spirit.

But is not the godly man heartily willing to be rid of sin, when yet he
cannot? Answ. As the unrenewed will is Christ's greatest enemy, and Satan's
greatest strength; so indeed, much of the strength of Grace lies in the renewed
will, and in the new man. It Is Christ's greatest friend, and sins greatest
enemy, Romans 7.17, 23, The heart may be willing, when the flesh is weak. And
when there is some defect and short-coming in the executive powers of the soul,
our diligence in duty and actual opposition to sin, seldom or never answer the
desires of a willing mind, or of an enlarged heart. Yet, 1. Know, that there is
some willingness; were the will perfectly set against sin, a man should be
perfectly holy. Paul, Romans 7, speaks only of his renewed will, or his will in
so far as renewed; for its certain his will was in part for evil, else he could
not have done it; true, there was force as it were on the renewed will
(therefore he pleads Not guilty in some fense); but this was by the unrenewed
will, in part, though more especially by the inferior soul. 2. The believer, if
he quench not the Spirit, yet is often grieving him, and so provokes him to
suspend his assistance. And I judge we may say, This the holy Spirit rarely or
never does, but after some unkind usage. 3. None of them are destitute of all
assistance against sin; and they are culpable in so far as they improve not
these, and in as far as they do not conscientiously shun all provocations to
sin, and use all Gods appointed means and methods, with which the spirit uses
to concur, and whereby he conveys supplies of grace and strength to the soul.

If any ask how this necessary assistance of the Spirit may be obtained? I
Answ. 1. Negatively, Do not resist the Spirit. 2. Quench not the Spirit. 3.
Grieve not the Spirit. 2. Positively, 1. You must be convinced of your utter
impotency to mortify any sin. 2. You must highly prize the Spirit's
assistance, and thirst and hunger for it, as a child for bread to nourish him.
3. You must pray for the Spirit, Luke 1.13, Your heavenly Father will give the
Spirit, etc. See how the Disciples were busied, Act. 1.14, Prayer brings down
the Spirit, and the more of this Spirit, the more prayer. Or the Lord will have
such as have none of the Spirit, yet to seek him by prayer, Ezekiel. 36.27.
compared with v. 37. Indeed there is no promise that God will give his
sanctifying Spirit, to every unrenewed man that asks him: that of Luke 11.13,
concerns only children, and a further measure of the Spirit. But if thou have
any thing of the Spirit, the way to get more is by believing-prayer. I say, by
believing-prayer: compare Act. 1.4. with 8.14. See also Isa. 40.30, 31. though
thou find not much of this, yet believe the promise, and wait. O it is not known
what advantage there is in believing promises! Joh. 11.20. There is some
present strength that accompanies this, and more that certainly follows it. 4.
Improve what measure of the Spirit you have, were it but on the account of that
general promise, Matt. 25.21. and Prove. 1.23, Turn ye at my reproof; and
behold, I Will pour out my spirit upon you: be content that the Spirit should not
only dwell in you, but influence and act you. Walk after the spirit, that what
Paul says of Christ, you may say of the Spirit, Gal. 2.20. and of Grace, 1 Cor.
15.10. Think it no bondage, but true liberty, to be led by the Spirit; happy
they, who are ever in such a frame as are fit for the Spirit to operate upon.
Indeed it requires careful attention to observe, and much humility and
selfdenyal to walk by the Spirit. O let not convictions cool, nor holy motions
die; turn every motion against sin into a purpose, and every purpose into
endeavors against sin. Attend diligently on Ordinances, Act. 10.44, While
Peter yet spoke these words, the Holy Ghost fell on all them that heard the
word. But mark what is said, ver. 33, Now therefore we are all here present
before God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God. Thou must see
thy self as in the presence of God; and get a heart ready to receive his
Instructions or Commands.

Finally, If thou have lost that aid of the spirit that thou wast wont to have,
search how thou came to lose it; If there be not some secret lust that thou
wast willing to spare: this may not only undo thy comforts, but universally
mar the Spirits operations. May be there is some old reckonings which were
never distinctly counted for, nor scored off, which the Spirit has brought to
your remembrance, and yet you will needs bury them. But ordinarily its
something in thy present frame or way, and may be it is something that you think
but little of (often the cause of Gods Controversy with a land, or with a
particular person, is that which we would little suspect); may be a fretful,
unbelieving, or injurious thought; take heed to the first motion of sin; for
sin has no bound (says one), but what the Spirit puts to it, whom therefore we
should not oppose, but kindly entreat; therefore look to thy thoughts, and to
thy words: (see the Gonnexion, Ephesians. 4.29, 50.) especially in carnal company,
whose converse mightily cherishes these sins in us which we should mortify;
and by complying with, or gratifying their spirits, we often wound our own, and
grieve Gods Spirit; and thus give sin some reprieval. We cannot converse with
such, but they will either afflict us, or defile us; look diligently then into
thy carriage, and remember when and where the Spirit began to withdraw his
usual aids: and when you have found out the cause, 1. You must by renewed acts
of rerepentance, and faith, be reconciled to God through Jesus Christ: for the
bestowing of the Spirit is an eminent fruit of the satisfaction of Christ, and
of the favor of God, and is not given to dwell in the soul, and habitually to
assist, till one be first reconciled to God; and expect no new gift of the
Spirit, till thou have made up thy peace again with God through Christ. 2.
Beware of that way, in the beginning of which thou found the Spirit begin to
leave thee: if thou think that this requires great circumspection and
heedfulness, it being a matter of such infinite advantage to thy soul, thou
needs not think strange that it should; especially considering how careful thou
art to keep some friend here, and what diligent endeavors thou uses to provide
or secure a little of this worlds goods, that will not go far with thee; and
wherein thou have not such assurance of success: for thou may rise early,
etc. and eat the bread of sorrow all the day.

In the last place, Let us speak a little to some few cases: And I begin with
that touched upon in the third Objection, viz. the case of such as complain of
the strength of their corruptions. If their mortification of sin be so
necessary to salvation; alas! what shall I think of my self, who am so much
under the power of this or that corruption?

Answ. There are several degrees of the power and prevalency of sin. 1. The
highest degree of it is, when men voluntarily yield themselves as servants to
it, Romans 6.16, Know ye not that to whom ye yield your selves servants to obey,
his servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether of sin unto death, etc. when men
are agents in resigning themselves up to sin; as servants tender their service
to their master, they do not explicitly intend to be captives, but it
necessarily follows, and they are willing sufferers or patients under it: the
word used for Christ's giving himself for us, Ephesians. 5.25. and committing himself
to God as judge, 1 Pet. 2.23. is used of some men's giving themselves over to
Lasciviousness, to work uncleanness with greediness, or in abundance, (...),
Ephesians. 4.19. this is the case of unrewed man, whose heart and will is for sin,
and who do manifest an utter want of mortification: from this degree of sin the
Apostle acquits the Romans, ver. 17.18. 2. There is a lower degree of it, 2
Pet. 2.19, Of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought into bondage.
This being overcome, imports some opposition, yet not what is sufficient. 3.
Another degree of the power of sin we find, Romans 7.23, I see another law in my
members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to
the law of sin, which is in my members. Where we see the law of sin is not in
the mind or will, but in the members; that is, the carnal affections. Grace has
beat sin out of the higher powers of the soul, and it has fortified it self as
it were, in the affections, and in the nether part of the soul. And observe,
that here the Captivity is not a leading to outward acts of sin, but a bowing
down the power of the mind, and a weakening of the actings of Grace in the mind
and will, and impeding the lively effects of Grace in the heart.

Now judge which of these is your case: the first cannot be the case of any
godly man: such as are under it, mortify not sin, but the Convictions of
Conscience, and the common motions of the Spirit; and herein they are often
successful: whereas a Believer accuses himself, and joins actively with the
Spirit, to convince of sin, and to mortify it, Psalm 51.1, 21. Dan. 9.5, 6.
Convictions come on them, and they tremble and seek to be rid of them. For the
third case, it is common to the holiest among Believers, to such as are most
exercised, and most successful in Mortification. It is the second case then
that is doubtful, there is some opposition made to sin (so that this case
differs from the first) but without success: yet are they servants to sin (and
so this case differs from the third): the Mind is not only bowed down,
oppressed and captivated, but a man is carried to the outward actings of sin,
and the fulfilling the lusts of the flesh, or the desires of the body of sin.
Now this is the case that many poor souls complain of: And 1. What ought we to
judge of it? How may a poor Soul be helped out of it? will appear in what we
shall speak to this Case.

For the first of these: I Answer, That in some cases a poor Creature may make
use of Paul's encouragements, even when the body of death prevails much more
than it did with Paul, Romans 7: and does not only inwardly lust against the
Spirit, but the power of it breaks forth in words, or deeds, as when thou
do not make way for these, nor open a passage for them: but sets thy self to
oppose first the rising of them in the heart, and then the out-breaking of
them, as Paul did. If thy heart strive and gainsay, and not only does not
regard iniquity, but opposes it and protests against it; And when it is leading
thee captive, thou would even then be glad to be rescued from it, and can bless
the Lord as David did Abigail, when thou art kept back from sin; his heart
relented: whereas Saul commands to kill the Lords Priests; his servants refuse;
but there is no back-going, nor heart-smiting in Saul; he finds no fault with
himself; and sometimes such as he are glad of provocations, and temptations to
sin. Judas offers himself to betray Christ, and the Highpriests are glad: but
where there is any thing of true Mortification, the heart is afraid of a
temptation, and trembles at the thoughts of it, though perhaps it may be
carried away with it; but the renewed Will never consents; hence the Believer
has little pleasure in sin, in the acting of it; but when he is sinning, he is
sighing, and suffering, and much more does he sigh and suffer, when after
sinning he is come to himself: he feels what Paul felt when he cried out, Romans
7.24: and is led to prize and make use of Christ as he was, ver. 25, to see the
need of his blood to make an Atonement, and also take away the blot of sin;
when sin is prevailing, Grace is often saying, O that it were otherwise! O
captive that I am! this sat forer to Paul than all the crosses he ever met
with; all his sufferings never occasioned such a Complaint; and if Faith in
Christ be not kept up, this is enough to sink the Soul into despair.

If any say, That this does not answer the case, because such as never
mortified one sin, may yet make opposition to many sins: as that place, 2 Pet.
2.19, imports; where it is clear, that such as may some way oppose sin, may yet
be so far overcome, as to perish in it. I Answer: That indeed every opposition
will not prove that there is the least degree of Mortification. The common
principles of Nature may engage a man against some sins; Morality and Education
may further this; the common operations of the Spirit may heighten this
opposition, and also extend it to more sins. The Question then is, How shall I
know whether my opposition to sin, be from a common or saving-work of the
Spirit? And indeed, the knowledge of the difference is of great and universal
use; for upon the one hand, natural men finding some conflict in themselves,
apprehend there is some grace in the opposing sin: There Is none (say they) but
have Corruption in them, and hereupon please themselves, if they find any thing
in themselves, like opposition to it. On the other hand, the Believer is in
doubt, whether his opposition to sin be such as Paul speak of, and his doubt is
increased when he perceives his Conscience upon natural grounds and common
reasons opposing sin; not considering that the Spirit in mortifying sin, may
make use of common sense and reason, as well as gracious or supernatural
Considerations: for the supernatural opposition to sin, does not destroy the
natural; as Reasons aversion to what is contrary to Nature, does not destroy
the Aversion in our senses to it.

I answer then to the Question, That the common operations of the Spirit, does
not change the inward principles, and motives, and ends that men in Nature act
from, and by. 1. Then, the difference appears in this, that the inward
opposition that Natural men make to sin, proceeds from some common, low,
selfish principle. Nature or Education may have imprinted some faint Notions of
the ill of sin: but there is no antipathy nor contrariety of Nature to sin, as
in the godly man, who hates sin as God hates it. One wicked man may hate and
oppose another: but there is no rooted contrariety in their Nature, as there is
between a wicked man and a godly, Pro. 29.27; it is in sound only, one sin
striving against another; refined sins oppose gross sins, or the same lust
seeking itself diverse ways: as Herod was sorrowful, because he was in a strait;
and whatever he did, was a dishonor.

2. The Natural man, his motives be also mean and mercenary: It is not love to
Holiness, nor a desire to please God; it is not the contrariety of such or such
a sin to the holiness of God, or to the holy Law of God, or the injuriousness
of sin to the love of God, or Christ, or the inconsistency of it with Communion
with the Father, Son and Spirit, that sets him on work against sin: Were there
no strange punishments here to the workers of Iniquity, and no Hell hereafter,
the Natural man would enlarge himself in many things: It would be a Jubilee to
him, to hear there were no Hell; some sins are against a man's interest and
honor, and no wonder there be much opposition to them. Herod beheads John
Baptist with reluctance; but whence came it? not because it was against the
honor of God: but partly, because to murder an Innocent man, was a torment to
his Conscience. A natural Conscience never opposes sin, in favor of the
spiritual Law of God; for the carnal mind is enmity in the Abstract. I grant,
that takes in the Will: yet it shows that there is no true friendship to God,
even in the Mind or Conscience; so that nothing the Conscience says, or does,
is purely for God; and its arguments and motives are always Carnal, Carnal
fears or hopes; or if the object of fear or hope be spiritual, yet they are
apprehended, and so influenced in a Carnal way.

3. As the unrenewed Man opposes no sin, out of hatred to it as sin, so it is
only against some sins that his opposition is levelled: more especially gross
and scandalous sins, that are infamous or contrary to Moral honesty, or
contrary to his natural disposition. A Natural Conscience will tremble at
Murder consummated, but not at every degree of it: not at secret inward sins,
nor at the first motions of sin; not at Lucritive sins, and such as a profane
age has made an honor, in the vulgar esteem; especially not at unbelief. It Is
true, a Natural man may be sensible of the sin of his thoughts, and of inward
disorders, by some common illumination of the Spirit, and may be troubled at
them, as they disturb his quiet, or lead to something which he abhors. But 1.
It is not with every degree of every sin; if he be convinced and troubled at
Unbelief as it excludes him from Heaven, yet it is not at every degree of
unbelief: Nor 2. Is it for the sinfulness of these motions, but the importunity
and tendency of them; and as they evidence him to be yet in nature, and so
without hope, he looks on them as the disease of his Nature, and not his sin.
3. If he be displeased with the acts and stirrings of sin, yet not with the
root of them; If he can restrain the acts, he could let the body of sin dwell
contentedly in him. But it is far otherwise with the godly; for as sin opposes
every gracious act, so Grace opposes every known sin: yea, and does secretly
(though not so sensibly) resist every sin, whether known to us to be such, or
not; Grace in the heart feels that to be sin, and contrary to its nature, which
knowledge in the head does not discern to be sin (the Law written in the Heart,
goes farther than what is in the Head): as eating of what one has antipathy
against, will cause trouble, though the man knows not of it; but more, if he
does.

4. As the Natural man is not uniform in opposing all sins, so he is not even
as to all times, he seldom or never pursues sin, but when God or his Conscience
are pursuing him; and he is never so eager in his opposition to sin, but he
will admit of a treaty with it, and is easily induced to grant a cessation of
Arms: he is content to hear what can be offered, to reconcile such a thing to
the Law of God, and for showing the consistency of it with peace of Conscience
here, and with the hope of glory, at least with his interest and honor in this
World; the new man is deaf to any motion of a parley, and stands out to the
last, and fights upon his knees, and is sometimes overcome, but never treats
nor yields: the Natural man opposes sin as a flowing Tide does a Vessel going
down a River: but straightway the Tide turns, and helps the Vessel. But the
Conflict in the renewed man, is like that between fire and water: there is no
yielding nor cessation of Arms till the one be overcome; nay, not then. True,
the Believer often intermits vigorous opposition to sin, and may lose more
ground in an hour, than he can regain in many days: yet Grace never gives over
entering its dissent and protestations, nor intermits all opposition to sin,
even when its worsted.

5. The unrenewed man never strives lawfully against sin; he goes forth against
it in his own strength, not in the name and strength of the Lord, 1 Samuel 17.45,
46: He seeks not to engage the Spirits assistance: he considers, or knows
little the strength of spiritual Adversaries: and hence is easily overcome.

6. In Natural men, the conflict is between the Conscience and the depraved
Will, or corrupt Passions, which is like a foreign War: but in the renewed,
it is like an Intestine War (as one calls it), the renewed Conscience against
the unrenewed; the renewed Will and Affections against the unrenewed. There Is a
Will, and a Will-not, in a Believer: hence the Notion of a double person, Romans
7.15, 19, 20: there is no such division in others, they may do what Conscience
approves not, but cannot say, that they would not; the godly hate the evil they
do, and love the good, they do not; whereas the Natural man does hate the good
(the spirituality of it) he does, and loves the evil which he does not; and may
be, dare not do. In Natural men, there is some sparks of light in the
Conscience, but there is no sanctified light in it; the Will and Affections are
totally corrupted, so that there is nothing in them as a principle to set them
against themselves: but in the renewed man, there is flesh and spirit in every
faculty (so that the fight is more close): and in every gracious, and in every
sinful work, they both put forth themselves: and as the flesh weakens the acts
of the Spirit, so the opposition the Spirit makes, weakens the acts of sin in
the Believer (for division weakens): and so a Believer never sins with all his
heart, as other men do; the renewed part never gives over all resistance. And
it is upon this account, 1. That the sins of Believers are not so great as the
sins of others. It Is true, Gods electing Love, Redemption, and Regeneration,
lay special Bonds upon the Believer which highly heightens sin, and adds many
degrees of guiltiness to it: But if we look to the principle of sin, and whence
it immediately proceeds, the unregenerate man's sin is greatest, for it is with
all his heart, there is not a bit of the man that be-friends Christ; there is
nothing in such of you that holds with him. As for what opposition the
Conscience makes, it is not with your will, if there be any made at all; it is
grievous, but no pleasure to you: so that you seek out shifts and means, either
to stifle it, or bribe it, or bring it over to be for that which the will and
affections are for. Some think the Believers sins are more heinous, because
against more Light: indeed, this were a good Argument, if the Mind were the
only principle of our actions, and not the will, or elective faculty. But let
none abuse this: for truly sin is so dreadful in both, that it is not easy to
tell in whom its worse. Hence, 2. We see the reason why the Believer has not
so much pleasure in Sin as others have, having two parties in him: whatever
pleases the one, displeases the other; the natural man having but one, is more
pleased at heart with sinful objects: the opposition the Conscience makes,
hinders not: but that he deliberately choose, and delightfully act it, and
obstinately persist in it. The Believer is sometimes tasting of the forbidden
fruit, but Grace marreth the result of it: and the more he finds he is pleased
with it, the worse he is pleased with himself.

7. The Natural man's opposition does not any way break the power of Sin, nor
does continue till the man get up again; if he fall, he lies still: whereas the
Spirit in the Believer, ceases not to strive till he be got to his feet again:
Sin was painful to him in the going down, but its more bitter in his belly, and
he rests not till he has vomited it up again: the Conscience will cease to
strive, but grace never; yea, the godly man often rises by his falling; he
grows more humble, and watchful, and dependent: the grief which sin breeds,
consumes the Sin that bred it. Whereas the natural man, when he overcomes, he
is overcome; he grows proud and conceited; the seeming mortification of one
Sin, does vivifie, or give life and strength to another.

8. The Natural man's opposition tends only to restrain or keep in Sin, not to
mortify it: if Sin will be quiet and peaceable, he can let it live; the
Believer seeks the death of it, the extirpation and abolition of it. If you
ask, how we shall know when a Sin is mortified, and when restrained only? or
what is the difference between restraining and mortifying a Corruption? Answer
1. When any Corruption is mortified, one is thereby advantaged against all
other Corruptions: for the killing of one member, or any branch of Original
Sin, does weaken the whole; whereas the restraining of any Sin does not weaken
the body of sin: for when it is only restrained, what the body of sin loses one
way, it gains another way. Try then, Art thou universally advantaged against
every Sin? 2. Is thy mind, will, and affections, dead to that Sin? mortifying
sin is a metaphorical expression; and this death that it implies, is not only
nor principally the ceasing of the acts of Sin, but especially a deadness in
the Soul as to Sin: 1. In the Mind and Judgment, Sin has lost the man's good
opinion of it. 2. In the will and affections, he cannot think nor hear of it
without abhorrency; where Sin is only restrained, a man can yet with pleasure
roll it in his Mind, the inclination to it is not broken; many a man likes and
loves the Sin which he does not; the mortified man hates the evil which he
does. 3. Thou may know by what went before, and by what follows: 1. Did thou
come easily by this power over Sin? It Is true, there is often difficulty in
restraining Sin: but what, means did thou use to compass this, and overcome the
difficulty? Was it by Prayer and Fasting, and after much wrestling with God,
and by the blood of the Lamb, that thou overcame? Or, was it by other means, or
by the mere force of an obstinate resolution thou took up? 2. After the
mortification of any Sin, there is a new Song ordinarily put in the man's mouth:
and the Soul is not only some way eased, but is filled with Joy. There is some
Joy that flows natively from the mortification of Sin, and there is more that
follows by way of reward: as for a Natural man, if he have any Joy upon
restraining the acts of Sin, it is but a spark of his own kindling: or it
results merely from the nature of the thing; the travel and labor the man is
at in suppressing Sin, does more than counter-balance that, and is but the
scant fruit of the testimony of his natural Conscience; it will not bear him
out to challenge Death and the Grave, it heartens not a man against them: some
such may die securely, but never one, I think died triumphantly. Men's delusions
may suspend the horror of Hell from them for a while, when a-dying; but it is
some true Faith, true Holiness, true Mortification, that fills the Soul with
joy unspeakable. 5. Sins that are only restrained, do ordinarily break forth
again, and that with more force than before: as waters bound up, that do
fortify themselves, and then carry all down before them: but a Sin that is
mortified, as it rarely recovers; so if it do, yet it is so broke, that it is
but half an act.

But here may come in two other Cases: 1. What is to be thought of the case of
such as relapse into Sin? 2. What Is to be thought of the case of such, as after
some serious Essays to mortify, feel their Corruptions more lively than before?

For the first, That a godly man may commit an act of that Sin, which is in
some measure mortified, is past all doubt, else it were impossible he could sin
at all; for the first sanctifying saving work of the Spirit does strike at the
root of every Sin: and so begins the mortification of every Sin; but this does
not nullify or wholly extinguish Sin. No Believer is absolutely secured from
any particular act of Sin, pro hic and nunc, except from the great
Transgression.

2. When one is in the state of Grace: as after their particular Repentance for
some particular Sin he is fallen into; so after special endeavor, yea, and
success too, in mortifying that Sin, he is not absolutely secured from every
act of it for the future: for though a man's Pardon (as it imports a freedom
from eternal Condemnation) be perfect, yet neither is Repentance nor
Mortification perfect. Now to clear this, Let us consider, 1. The gracious
encouragements God has given to such, Jer. 3.1. Isa. 55.7, compare with ver.
3. His Covenant does not secure against every Relapse, but it secures the
multiplication of pardon, Jer. 3.14, 19, 23. Hos. 14.4; Backsliding supposes
some former recovery: Mark there the ground of what is promised, I Will love them
freely; the falling into such Relapses is the highest provocation to God, and a
Sin against most love; and Recovery from such, is the notable effect, and
Signal discovery of the greatness and freeness of Gods Love. Consisider, 2.
That the mortification of such a particular Sin, gives a man a greater
advantage against that Sin, and puts at some greater distance than from other
Sins; yet this advantage against this, and distance from it, is only gradually,
more than against or from other Sins, and so makes the return of it not so
probable or easy (and if it return, do aggravate it), but not impossible, more
than the return of any other Sin; especially, when we consider, that that Sin,
which by the first sanctifying work of the Spirit was in a special manner
opposed and mortified, may yet recover. And 3. The advantage that the most holy
man has over the most mortified Corruption, is of the same kind: but for
degrees, much below the advantage that Adam in Innocence had over every Sin,
and so is not able to secure it self; the strongest Grace cannot preserve it
self from the most mortified Corruption. Hence the Believer must watch and
pray, and depend for asstance against it, else he should more easily fall into
it, than Adam did into sin. It Is true, there are Promises ascertaining the
Believers preservation from the dominion of Sin, and his final Conquest over
Sin: (whereas Adam in Innocence had no promise of the like nature) but there is
no word (I know of) in the Bible, that ascertains the Believers preservation
from every act of that Corruption, which through the Spirit he has particularly
mortified.

4. There wants not Examples of the Saints relapsing into Sins: as Sampson,
Judge. 16.1, 4; Abraham's twice denying his Wife; the Disciples twice contending
for Supremacy; Jehoshaphats instance is remarkable, 2 Chronicles. 18.1, 2, 31, 32,
and 19.2: yet chapter 20. v. 35, he Relapses. Not to instance several things
related of Peter. These Examples, though they do not answer in every
circumstance to the case proposed: yet by plain consequence they confirm our
Position. For if a Believer may act contrarily to that grace which is strongest
in him, and may be overtaken with that Sin, or an act of that Corruption which
is weakest, and that over and over again (as was Abraham and Peter): then there
is no degree of Mortification that secures him from repeating an act of that
lust that is mortified. If any say, that though Mortification do it not, yet
true Repentance does it? I answer, If true Repentance does it, it is either from
the nature of Repentance, or some special promise of Grace made to the
Penitent: Not the former: For 1. The nature of Mortification should rather
secure from it. 2. If true Repentance at first Conversion do it not, why should
it do so afterward? Not the 2d: Let that Promise be produced: what ever Promise
(that I know of) can be produced, will plead as much against a Believers
falling into any Sin, which at his first Conversion he did truly repent of.

But to prevent Abuses of what is said; Let me admonish you, 1. That there are
some Sins, which Paul calls dead works, Heb. 6.1; Peter calls them men's old
sins, viz. which they had lived in before Conversion, Ephesians. 2.1, 9: and the
pollution of the world, 2 Pet. 2.19; in these the whole World wallowed before
Christ's Coming. A Relapse into these he speaks of as dangerous, Ephesians. 2.2,
19, 20, 21. Much debate there was about this of old: and many utterly refused
to re-admit such into their Communion, as in times of Persecution did comply
with Idolaters, and returned to Idolatry; which was the chief of these old Sins
that Peter mentions, 1 Ep. 4.3. And I doubt not, but in the debate that arose
thereupon, there were extremes on both hands: those that fell upon the one
hand, were many, and by their multitude helped to carry the decision of the
Question in their favor: and the promiscuous readmission of such, tended to
the Corruption of the Church ever after; yet on the other hand, I dare not
deny, but a godly man may be entangled again in some act of these old sins,
through the force of some great or sudden temptation. Yet I must add, that it
is a rare case; the fixed bounds how far, and how often, God does not
determinately set in his Word; I think the Lord does not ordinarily suffer his
people to fall again and again into those gross acts of Sin: though we cannot
say, but they may be overtaken with Passion, Pride, inordinate love to the
World, which though no less sinful in their own nature, yet in their inward
actings are not so scandalous, nor such occasions to others to blaspheme. Nor
can we deny but that there may be, and will be some lustings toward the gross
actings of these old sins: But the acting over of them, I think rare. A man may
fall into some other heinous sin of another nature with more ease: for
mortification of a particular lust does in an especial manner advantage a man
against the return of that; though it weaken the whole man of sin, yet it
weakens that particular lust in special. Hence there is often a change of the
godly man's greatest Corruption, and he gets some special advantage against that
which sometime did most prevail, and another lust comes in its room, which
shows the strength of the body of sin: yet disproves not the truth of the
mortification of the former prevailing lust.

For the 2d Case mentioned, viz. of those who after some serious endeavors to
mortify Sin, find their Corruptions more lively than formerly. In answer to
this Case: 1. If Corruptions break forth more than formerly, it is the same with
the former Case: and thy safest course is not to stand disputing thy state
before that, but to study acquaintance with the depths of Sin in thee, and in
the humble brokenhearted sense thereof, to fly unto Jesus Christ for pardon
and for grace to sanctify thy Soul, and to mortify Sin. If they be only more
stirring inwardly than before, and so seem more strong; it is a Case commonly
incident to such of the people of God, as before their regeneration were
careful to walk blamelesly, and were morally educated, and such as were formal
in Religion. And 1. This may proceed from the malice of Satan, who when his
interest in the Soul, was not brangled, made no great noise; Now as the Dog is
put to the Door, he howls to be in again; so he blows the Trumpet to an
insurrection and intestine war in the Soul, and if it were possible would have
possession again, or have the Soul back into bondage again; and this the holy
Lord suffers, to manifest the strength of his Grace, and that he may, having
brought forth the strength of indwelling sin, have occasion with more
observation to discomfit them. As sometimes Rulers, in policy let some
discontented party break out, on purpose to ruin them more effectually.

2. It may be, thy inward Corruption is not stronger than it was, but spiritual
light and gracious tenderness may be growing; the Spirit now may be opening up
the depths of thy Corruption. And this the Lord usually does by degrees, as he
dealt with Ezekiel in a like case, Chap. 8.6, 7, 9, 12, 13, 15. (where mark,
that they had put a wall between God and them), he is showed greater and
greater Abominations; so the secret Chambers of Sin are opened up, and thou
sees that which makes thee tremble, and abhor thy self more than ever: for the
first saving-Conviction does not convince to the utmost; the first saving-light
shines not into every Corner (or at least not so brightly, that the man can
dive into all the mystery of Sin within) but leaves room for after-discoveries:
such Complaints as Paul's, Romans 7.24, are rather the fruit of
growing-discoveries of Sin, and growing Mortification, than of the growing
power of Sin; Bless the Lord for such discoveries, for they are necessary to
the mortification of Sin.

3. It may be, thou wast going about to establish thine own righteousness; and
the Lord sees it meet to fright away such thoughts, by suffering Satan to rake
up the Dunghill of thy Corruptions: when thou art aiming at such a measure of
holiness, and freedom from Sin, in the strength of thy own endeavors, and with
a secret neglect of the imputed Righteousness of Christ; and when thou will not
make use of that, till thou have overcome such a Corruption, and will not
maintain thy Justification without such a measure of Sanctification, and
Mortification; I think not strange, if God should let open the sluice of thy
Corruption, to constrain thee to hold by the righteousness of Christ for
Justification, and also on his Spirit for the mortifying of thy Corruptions,
and to live by faith in Christ, both for Righteousness, and Sanctification or
Holiness; and to seek neither of these, nor any part of them any other way: for
it may be, if thou be not proud of thy Righteousness (to thy own sense) yet
thou may think too much of thy own strength (indeed the one is rarely or never
really separated from the other: for wheresoever a man thinks he has one of
these, he seeks the other also. Hence, there are none erroneous in the point of
Free Will and Grace, but they err also in the doctrine of Justification, and e
contra, Isa. 45.24,) and lay too much stress on the strength, at least of the
sincerity of thy purposes and endeavors against Sin. These can no more secure
thee against Sin, than a single thread can hold a Ship at Anchor in a storm; the
Lord will teach thee the necessity of this Method in the Text, by the Spirit to
mortify Sin.

And this leads us to an Answer to that great Question; How it comes that the
godly are so strangely entangled in sin, after so many Promises to God, and
purposes against Sin? They decree the death of Sin, but it is not established:
Here the matter lies; they take not in the Spirit's assistance, in their
promises and purposes, nor in their endeavors, to answer their promises:
there is some tang of self-sufficiency, that marrs all such vain brags as Peter's
are, Cords that are easily broken: and his opinion of self-ability discovered
it self by his supposition, Though all men should deny thee; He might well have
said, Lord, I would deny thee, though all men should: But he speaks, as if
there were some peculiar Ability in him to resist Temptations, and his purpose
was like Sampson's green withs: such suppositions are hazardous and suspicious,
though useful, if managed with humility. It Is a great mystery (says one) to
purpose so, as yet to believe we can do nothing: and also to believe, that
Christ's strength is as effectual for mortifying such a lust, as if it were our
own. And I add, 3. To endeavor as industriously, as if we could do all alone:
and indeed, it is through ignorance or neglect in all these that our purposes
miscarry; Pride hinders the first, Unbelief the second, and Sloth the third.
There are other reasons also: therefore let me ask you, 2dly, Do you think that
Purposes or Promises, yea, or Vows, can break the inclination to sin, of
themselves? or break the cursed union that is between the heart and Sin? They
are ordinarily the effects of strong Convictions, which do always disingage the
heart and affections to sin: and when these are not loosed from Sin, no bonds
will be strong enough.

I have formerly shown you, that Convictions may make a man purpose; yea, and
pray also against Sin, when the heart and affections may secretly dissent and
desire that God should not hear; and if the affections seem at any time to
conspire with an enlightened Judgment against Sin, yet they are exceeding
mutable and unfixed: and when they are low, or rather biased the other way, no
wonder our purposes be ineffectual. 3. They sometimes miscarry by reason of
some sinistrous ends: may be you are ashamed of your passions, or you are
afraid your corruptions should make some eruption, to your disgrace and
infamy; or you intend to bottom your hopes upon the grave of such a lust; or
you design freedom from such an impetuous lust, rather for your own ease and
quiet, than out of love to holiness, or hatred to sin. And some resolve and
engage against sin, only to shift, and for the time put by a present challenge
for what is done, without any more of it; or to be an excuse for letting a good
frame of spirit go, or at least to ease the mind, as if engaging were
performing.

But it may be some have such experience of the treachery of their hearts, that
having purposed so often, and yet failed, they think it in vain for them to
take up new resolutions; yea, having broken their promises that they made, to
abstain from such a sin, they think it better to promise no more, and come
under no more engagements against sin. Answ. 1. It is not Arbitrary to us to
bind our selves against sin: we are obliged to fortify our selves against it,
as strongly as we can, and to fortify our resolutions, by promises to, and
Covenants with God, against sin. And sure such as do not so, are more easily
prevailed against, and are sooner entangled: If many Cords bind you not, the
one of a simple resolution will not; but may be two or three will, when one
will not. If you purpose to mortify sin, be sincere: why will you not
corroborate it? but here appears the treachery of our hearts; we will certainly
sin, think we. And since it must be, we endeavor that it be as little trouble
to us as may be, that our sin may want those aggravations which make it biting
and stinging to our Consciences.

Finally, I doubt the Lord lets the man fall that will not engage, because
his refusal says as much, as he trusted not God for his assistance to perform
or keep his engagements.

But is not sin after special engagements against it, more heinous than if
there had been none? Answ. 1. He is more accessory to his own sin, in not using
all Gods ways for preventing it; and he sins more unexcusably in omitting that
which was in his power to do; as on the other hand, the man that performs his
engagements to God, is more acceptable to him than he that simply forbears sin,
inasmuch as it manifests a greater abhorrence of sin, and manifests a regard to
a double Command, viz. of abstinence from such a sin, and of keeping our
promise or vow to God; the simple forbearance of sin is a compliance with a
single Command, and does not manifest so much of the man's aversion to sin.

If any ask then, how shall we purpose and engage against sin, so as we may be
disintangled of it, and effectually get it mortified? Answ. 1. Be sure you be
sincere in them. 2. Be sure your affections concur with your judgment, else
they will entangle you yet. 3. See that you be also deliberate, and that your
resolutions and engagements against such a lust be not only from the present
heat of affections. 4. Strive to keep such a frame as you had when you engaged
that awe of God, and that hatred of sin you then had; and be often thinking on
your engagements, humbling your selves for the least breaches of them, 5. Take
in the Spirit's assistance in your purposes and endeavors. 6. If one
engagement bind not strongly enough, we must renew and multiply them. If one
knot hold not (says one) we must cast more, that we may never want some bond
over our head. And whereas our breaches aggravate our sin, we must bring the
aggravations, together with the rest of our sins, to Jesus Christ, for pardon,
and maintain our peace (says he) rather by repeated acts of Faith and
Repentance, and by often washing our selves from the filth of these sins, than
by pleading no breach at all; and see that you suffer not the guilt of the
smallest breach to lie for any while unrepented of, lest it make way for more
and greater breaches. Thus you see how a poor creature may keep up his hope of
eternal life, and assurance of interest in God, when he is under convictions of
many breaches with God, and great short-coming in mortification.

I add another Consideration to this: know that our engagements against sin, do
not tie us to be altogether without sin: (though the holy law of God does) such
purposes and engagements were foolish and impossible; but they oblige us
honestly and sincerely to wrestle with, and oppose sin: we cannot oblige our
selves to overcome it, but to use the means which are in our power against it;
and to leave nothing unessayed, that we think to help will mortify it. And
therefore a believer may plead, he has not broke his engagements,
notwithstanding many infirmities, and many stirrings of a Corruption; yea, even
when there is some visible out-breaking of it, seeing we do not, nor cannot
absolutely oblige our selves as to the event: he may even in this case say, (in
an Evangelick sense) that he has not broken with God, Psalm. 44.17. his
Conscience bearing him witness, that he dealt not falsely with him. And that he
bound himself to nothing, but what he intended to perform, and what he had
actually endeavored in some measure to perform; and when he is overcome by
sin, he yields not, consents not, approves not, delights not in it; But
dissents, protests, and cries out, as a chaste woman when forced, and is made
more watchful, and more fearful to be overtaken again, every time he gets up;
and knowing the treachery of his heart, dreads it: as one recovering from a
dangerous disease dreads the return of it, when he had rather dye than return
again to it: when his heart bleeds for the abuse of Gods Grace. In this case
thou may maintain thy peace, and there is ground of hope, that Grace shall in
the end be victorious over thee. I speak to such as are ready to dispond (if
others will needs abuse it, upon their peril be it) Shall I sin and break with
God, and repent and engage anew? and again break, and again engage? shall I
defile my self, and wash? and again defile and wash? If this be not to cast my
self out of Covenant with God, and abuse his grace, what is it? can this
consist with begun-mortification? But know thou not, that every sin against
God, yea against thy Covenant with God, does not dissolve the Covenant? Jer.
3.1, 4, 12, 13, 14, 19, 23. See 1 John 2.1, 2. It answers thy case fully: his
mercy is not narrower than ours, which should extend beyond seventy-seven
times; he heals backslidings more than so many times.

The last Case I shall speak to, is that of such as are in doubt about their
condition, because they find not mortification growing, but the strength of sin
is much the same it was long ago. Answ. Some are sinfully curious in enquiring
after the measure of their progress in holiness and mortification, that they
may glory in it; but for a man to search out his own glory, is not glory, Prove.
25.27. And sometimes to prevent this, the Lord hides the advantages they have
over sin, from some of his people; he draws a vail over their graces and
seize, and discovers the strength of their sin, that he may necessitate
them to make more use of Christ, both for righteousness and sanctification. And
indeed, according to the usual chance of war, there are so many turns and
vicissitudes in the success that sin and grace have against each other, that
one can hardly judge of the measure of his mortification: for he that is
victorious one day, yea, one hour, is led captive the next.

I did formerly give some discoveries of shortcomings in mortification: Now if
thou would know thy progress in it, 1. How stands thy heart affected to the
things of the world, that feed sin within? are they lower in thy esteem? the
weak Disciples were contending for precedence the night their Master was taken
from their head; yet after, we find even the Apostle born out of time, counting
that and all things loss, etc. Phil. 3.7. Know thou better how to part with
them? can thou distinguish between complaining of God, and complaining to him
for want of them? Angry Jonas evidenced little mortification. 2. How carry you
in reference to others, or to the society you are in? Flattery, Contention, or
Envy, (the ordinary diseases of unmortified souls) bewray want of
mortification, or great short-coming in it. 3. How carry you in reference to
temptations, especially when they come in time of duties? does the heart rise,
recoyl? is it frighted at them? or is it easily set on fire, at least brought
to treating-terms. 4. How carriest thou in reference to reproofs? a mortified
man will bear well with them, whether they be well managed or not. Asa bewrayed
much want of mortification; it argues strong corruption when a reproof wakens
it, and occasions more sin.

But take some marks of further proficiency in mortification, 1. Have thou a
fixed resolution to seek thy hearts ease, rest, and satisfaction in God alone,
and that in the heaviest and most calamitous time? Heb. 3.18. Is thy
expectation purely from him? and if thou have a competence, or may be,
abundance of the good things of this world, yet are all thy springs in him? and
when thou want, can thou take Gods bill of exchange, and believe that all
will be answered either here, or in the land where holiness and glory dwell? 2.
Do thou put thy mouth in the dust, when under Gods rod? do thou adore the
wisdom of God, in choosing such a rod for thee? does private afflictions melt
thee, or break thee? Impatience argues a great degree of Impenitency, and
unmortifiedness. If the liveliness of sin be thy grief, thou will be content
that he should rid thee of it, and make thee partaker of his holiness, any way
he will; can thou submit to desertions, I mean, so as to keep up thy love to
God, and thy purpose to call on him night and day, and in the morning to
prevent him with thy prayer? Psalm. 88. and 22.1, 2. Can you wait the Lords
time? can you after the greatest earnestness in prayer, make a reference to his
good pleasure? does the case of the Church of God afflict thee more than thy
private case? or can thou not sit down quiet with thy personal
accommodations, when thy conscience tells thee that thou art accessory to the
common calamities of others, as David? 3. Can thou retrench thy self in what
God allows thee, when the using of thy liberty is like to be a stumbling to the
weak? 1 Cor. 8. Romans 15. 4. Are spiritual pollutions as loathsome to thee, as
bodily sins? or rather, is thy greatest care to keep thy heart pure. O, but
those who cannot overcome the bordering-Towns or Castles of a Land, are sar
from overcoming the whole Land.

I shall shut up all with some uses that we should make of these remainders of
sin in us; which by our utmost diligence we cannot fully mortify. 1. When thou
observes the strength, even of the broken forces of sin, which thou would
earnestly expel, and yet art not able; thou must needs see cause to ascribe the
begun destruction of sin, and conquest over it, not to thy own ability or
free will, but to the grace of God; and indeed, if every man have sufficient
power to cast down sin from its dominion, and to give it a deadly wound, it is
strange that no man should have power totally to destroy it, or to kill it
outright: for he that may do the greater, may do the less. The Hypothesis of
effectual grace, does easily solve the doubt, and refers the reason that sin is
not destroyed wholly in every believer, to the good pleasure of God: but the
Hypothesis of freewill and sufficient-grace will never do it. 2. Let the
feeling of the relics of sin, further self-denial, and humility, and hide
pride from thine eyes, 2 Cor. 12.7. Let them provoke the lively exercised, and
train thee up in prayer. ver 8, For this I besought the Lord, etc. and in
dependence, ver. 9, My grace is sufficient for thee, etc. Admire the freeness
of his grace, and the greatness of his power in carrying a poor weak Creature
to heaven, which is more wonderful than the carrying of a small burning Candle
through the tempestuous and blustering air. 3. See the ugliness and the
treachery of the old man, and the misery that Christ came to deliver from. If
you credit not what the word says of it, see it in your selves: see the enmity
that is in your nature to God. If you see not evil enough in one lust, look on
more: had you only seen this at your first Conversion, you might have forgot
the sin and miisery the Lord has delivered you from. 4. Let this provoke
compassion to such as are in bondage to sin; and meekness to such as through
weakness fall and are entangled with sin, Gal. 6.1. Tit. 3.2.5. Let this
confirm you also in the doctrine of Justification by free grace: all natural
men go about to establish their own righteousness; and in the renewed man
there is often some Inclination to it, and some neglect of Christ's righteousness
(this inclination may rise when other lusts are almost buried. It troubled Mr.
Knox when he was near to die, yet was quickly overcome) even when we have most
need of it: And hence our confidence grows, as inherent righteousness grows. O,
what then would we have done, were there no sin in us, nothing to necessitate
us to fly to Christ's righteousness; if as it is, there is some inclination,
either to set up our own alone, or in conjunction with Christ's! The Lord will
have his people looking both on their Justification and sanctification every
day, as new gifts; and that song to be daily in our mouths, Psalm. 103.1, 3.
Lastly, Be longing for the coming of Christ, and for thy full redemption;
welcome him for this final deliverance from sin: Let this commend heaven to
you, and make it heaven indeed.

Mr. Carmichael's Three last Sermons
GENESIS III. 15. I Will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed
and her seed: it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel.


THE poor man's head was now upon the block: and lo, here is the first intimation
of Relief. Sin and misery was now got into the World, and mankind was now in a
hopeless and helpless condition; and here is the first break of day, and dawning
of Deliverance, and the first discovery of Compassion, grace, and tender mercy
of God to Sinners.

In the words we have, 1. A Promise of deliverance wrapped up in a Threatening
against the Serpent. 2. A hint of the manner of man's deliverance, and of the
Serpents Ruin.

For the Explication of the words: 1. They are directed to the Serpent, by
which is to be chiefly understood, Satan, called the old Serpent, the Devil:
for, though some part of the Threatening belong to the Instrument he used, ver.
14: yet it is plain, from comparing the Text with Romans 5.11, 12, 13, and 16.20.
1 John 3.8. Rev. 20.2, 3, that Satan is mostly meant. It cannot be conceived,
how (...) ^^eature should have been capable of such a Plot against the glory of
God, and the happiness of Man; nor how it should have managed it with speech,
and so much seeming-Reason. Some say, That God endued the Serpent with Reason
and Speech for that season; but that is no small reflection on God; indeed,
being used by Satan as the Instrument, it is involved in the Curse, and is
become hateful to man: there is an enmity between man and it; and the sight of
it, ought to quicken our enmity against Satan: yet every one of them have nor
their head bruised, and but very few of mankind have their heel bruised by that
Creature: so that we must not understand it literally. By the Woman, is not
meant Evah only, or one individual; hence, some infer that there is a bitterer
enmity between Satan and the Woman, than between him and men, that Sex being
the weakest and most subject to fears and suspicions, and so the apter to
conceive hatred. By the seed of the woman is to be understood, 1, and
especially, Jesus Christ, in the same sense, that he is called the seed of
Abraham, of David. Sometimes seed is taken collectively for a Multitude;
sometimes for a single or particular person, Gal. 3.16, To Abraham and his seed
were the promises, made: he says not, and to seeds, as of many: but of one,
and to thy seed, which is Christ. It was Christ then that was mainly meant by
seed, in the promise to Abraham, Genesis 12.1, 2, 3, and 18.18. and 22.18: which
places are explicatory of this seed in the Text, and a confinement of this
Promise to the Family of Abraham. Here he is called the seed of the woman: It Is
like with some respect to his taking flesh only of a woman, Isa. 7.14. Yet
here, 2. We must also take in Christ's select Seed, Heb. 2.13, compare with
Romans 16.20. For they are parties in this quarrel and enmity: they have their
heel bruised, and they bruise Satan's head, Romans 16.20. And seeing all that is
here said of the woman's seed, agrees to all the Elect: why should we not think
them included in this seed? yet in a different sense, the enmity and victory
are perfect in Christ, not in us. It Is remarkable, that when the Promise is
made concerning the seed, the believing Parents are included; hence Genesis 22.17,
I will multiply thy seed: Heb. 6.14, I will bless thee, and multiply thee: even
so when the promise is made to the believing Parent, the believing seed are
included. Hence Genesis 12.3, In thee shall all the families of the earth be
blessed, Acts 3.25; the Apostle expounds it, In thy seed shall all the kindreds
of the earth be blessed: the enmity then is not only between Christ personal
and the Devil, but also between Christ mystical, etc. And the victory over
Satan is promised, not only to Christ personally considered, but to Believers
who are his seed: yet in a secondary sense only, Romans 16.20.

By the Serpents seed, are meant the Reprobate World: for so they are called,
Matthew. 3.7. Matthew. 23.33, Generation of vipers. John 8.44, Ye are of your
father the devil. Acts 13.10, Child of the devil. 1. Joh. 3.8, He that
commits sin is of the devil; and to them agree what is spoke of the Serpents
seed, viz. their enmity and opposition to the godly, as far as in them lies.

By the Serpents head, is meant his craft and power, his cunning: he had
contrived man's ruin, this policy and power is to be bruised or crushed: the
word is used only here, and Job 9.17, He breaks me with a tempest: this is
expounded Joh. 12.31. Col. 2.14, 15. 1 John 3.8. heel, or footstool, a
figurative expression; also intimating the ineffectualness of Satan's attempts
against Christ and his seed: he may wound them, but not mortally; he had a hand
in bringing Christ to the Cross, thereby he wounded his heel, his Humane
nature, but that brought him under Christ's feet: some think it, (Musculus) not
proper to attribute bruising to Satan, and therefore render Conouliel, he shall
smite his heel. Tunius thinks there is nothing here attributed to Satan, as if
he could hurt Christ or his Kingdom: but that the word imports only Satan's
cunning and indirect attempts, as Genesis 49.17; and that when he is just about to
bite, Christ shall tread upon him, Isa. 25.8. 1 Cor. 15.53, 57. Some think the
Psalmist has an eye to this Promise, Psalm. 49.6, 26.

2. We have in the words the manner of our Deliverance pointed out, 1. Whence
it has its rise; from infinite Wisdom and Mercy, I will put. 2. How will he do
it? He Will break that league and friendship that sin had made between Man and
the Devil; from this their sin and misery had it is rise. Now this does import
the recovery of Man to favor with God, and to the Image of God; for while man
abides in sin, this friendship lasts, John 8.44, His work he does. But what
shall be the event and issue of this Enmity and War? I Answer, This seed of the
woman shall conquer Satan, and destroy his Kingdom; but first he must suffer by
Satan's means, and have his heel bruised. In the latter part of the words, the
singular number is used, he and they, rather than thy seed; because Christ was
to vanquish the old Serpent, who seduced our first Parents: and he being
destroyed, his seed perish with him, John 12.31. and 14.30. Now it is
observable, that though first the woman's seed is mentioned, which means all
the godly which were to come of her: yet the Pronoun it, or he, as it is in the
Hebrew, does plainly denote some single person, viz. Christ; the vulgar Edition
has it, ipsa, as if it respected the Woman, not her Seed, or any one to come of
her.

This was the first, and for ought we know, the only Declaration of Gods
Purpose about our Redemption made to our first Parents: This was all that the
faith of the people of God had for some Ages to live upon; and this was the
soundation of all the Religion of succeeding Ages, and to which all the
Sacrifices from the beginning had respect.

There be some that would hence infer, the Covenant of Grace to be as large as
the Covenant of works, and the one to be made with all mankind as well as the
other; and that all mankind had some Revelation of Christ in their first
Parents: and thus they think to weaken that Argument against universal
Redemption, taken from the non-revelation of Christ to most of mankind, seeing
we connot suppose God to have really intended the salvation of all by Christ;
and not have given all a sufficient Revelation of him.

But 1. Adam is never spoke of in Scripture as a public person in respect of
the second Covenant, as he is in respect of the first, Romans 5.15, 16, 17, 18;
had Adam been guilty of Unbelief, and so have forfeited the benefit of the
second Covenant, that had not prejudged his posterity of the good of it. Now it
is certain, that this Revelation of Jesus Christ was in a few Ages utterly
lost; and no wonder, considering the obscurity of it, and man's proneness to
corrupt all divine Revelations and Institutions. Indeed, all the Superstition
and Idolatry which the Apostate world fell into, was founded on an Opinion,
That there was some way for attaining to the favor of God; but what that way
was, they were in a few Ages as ignorant, as if there never had been any such
Revelation: and the knowledge of it not being transmitted to Posterity, or there
being no Revelation made of it to them, by no Law were they bound to know it,
and so shall be judged only by the Covenant of works. And for the Heathens
Notion of a possible way of recovering the favor of God; whatever it was
founded on for some Ages at first, it does now, and did partly then, proceed
from the mistakes and carnal apprehensions of God, and then ignorance of their
exceeding sinfulness; for we see that when Adam has any fresh and lively sense
of it, he runs away from God, Indeed, it is natural to apprehend a Natural love
in God (which Arminians call Antecedent love) strongly inclining him to the
salvation of all: which destroys Freegrace, and is as unsuitable to the nature
of God, as the Jewish Fables of Gods afflicting himself in a secret place for
the burning of the Temple, and for their Captivity: And that for these he
smites his breast, and pours two tears into the Ocean every day; so the
Heathens made Jupiter to lament the Destinies which he could not mend; and the
Alcoran makes God wish well to Mahomet, but cannot free him from death.

But to conclude this; Gods discriminating love is plain from this first
promise: there is the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the Serpent. The
Messiah is not promised to all: Christ the seed of the Woman, is not promised
to the seed of the Serpent, nor suffers for that seed; Jesus Christ broke the
Serpents head, and destroyed Satan as a public person for the whole elect
Seed, but not in the room and stead of the seed of the Serpent: yea, you see
that in the very first promise of Christ, there are some excluded, viz. all the
Reprobate, called the Serpents seed: their enmity is foretold as soon as Christ
is promised, and their ruin is foretold as soon as the salvation of the elect
Seed; and indeed if we observe the words, and consider the Context, they are as
much threatening to the one, as they are a promise to the other.

The Text affords great variety of weighty matter: I shall only touch upon it,
and give some truths from the words. We see that there is an established
enmity, and irreconcilable feud between Satan and his followers on the one
side, and Christ and his followers on the other: Satan gets power to vex and
trouble the Church of God, and to leave some marks of his malice upon them,
both in their inward and outward condition; but Christ with his followers shall
at length utterly overthrow and crush him. And O, what a sweet Scripture is
this, and how much to be studied! here is the Marrow of the Old and New
Testament, and the first out-breaking of Gods Eternal Council, and glorious
Contrivance about fallen Man!

Observe. 1. That God did not leave all Mankind to perish in their Apostasy from
him and in their contracted friendship with Satan -- The salvation of Sinners
was now as near to an Impossibility as could be; Satan knew the threatening, and
concluded, That if he could entice man to sin, he had ruined and involved him
in as remediless Wrath, as himself was under: he knew man could not, and
supposed God would not interpose; or if he would, he could not die, nor suffer;
therefore Christ must be Man and God both, that he may suffer and triumph also.
Satan was at his first fall cursed; he is again for his accession to man's sin
cursed, and the Beast that was but the Instrument, is cursed, ver. 14, The
earth is cursed for his sake; ver. 17, yet himself is not cursed. And here
appears the kindness and love of God our Savior; (he will not have us looking
only to the kindness of Christ our Savior, but chiefly to the Fountain-love of
God), Tit. 3.3, 4, 5. Here is opened up the Sealed-fountain of his heart, which
no sin could dry up: Man is now wholly at Free-graces courtesy, and yet unmeet
for mercy: but Mercy unasked, and no doubt unexpected, steps out, when they had
no Confidence to ask it. It was in contemplation of this promised seed, that
they were fot a moment reprieved, that the sentence of Death did not
immediately after they had sinned, take place, and this was all they had to
quiet their fearful Consciences with. The woman's seed dies (which upon the
account of the lowness of his Humane nature, and his overcoming of Death, is
called but the bruising of his heel) and bruiseth the Serpents head, which
carries in it the destruction of Death, for thereby he destroyed him that had
the power of death; see Heb. 2.14.

Observe. 2. That albeit this be not a personal satisfaction made by the guilty
man, yet it is a legal satisfaction according to Gods own Law -- By which the
near kinsman was to redeem the last Inheritance: he is our near kinsman, Job
19.25. Heb. My kinsmen, the seed of the woman. God did not alter the first
Covenant or Law, nor the Sanction of it, for Unbelievers are yet under it, John
13.36. Some say, there was here a Relaxation of the Law in the Translation of
the punishment to another: Indeed, all positive Laws are relaxable, and the
admitting of this, infers no change in God: for he can abrogate Laws, which is
more (as he has done the Ceremonial), supposing he had not declared he would
not do it, and this without any change in himself. Some say, that in reference
to the Elect, the Obligation to death first and second, was declared null by
the Promise in the Text; but neither is this true: for before they are in
Christ, they are obnoxious to it, Ephesians. 2.3. Some choose rather to call it a
Declaration of the meaning of the threatening, which in Gods intention and
purpose was purely legal, viz. in respect of the Reprobate, that they should
actually and eventually die the first and second death, except that God
intended in many to suspend the present execution of it, and that upon Christ's
account also, and that it was in respect of the Elect partly Evangelick, In the
day thou eatest, thou or thy Kinsman; or, thou and all thy Children, shall die
the first and second death; or else I must substitute one in thy room. It Is
true, Adam was not to believe this exception, till it was revealed; nor was he
bound to believe that God would not provide a Remedy; he was not obliged to
despair between his fall and the promise in the Text, but to believe that God
was able to save him, and to rely upon that according to the law of Nature; for
the Threatening did only show what God might justly do, not what he absolutely
would do; so Adam was not absolutely to believe that he should die, nor yet
that he should not die, as the Serpent would have persuaded him, Genesis 3. If any
say, May not Sinners hope that all his Threatenings against them, in reference
to this life, and that which is to come, may admit of Tacit Conditions? I
answer, Gospel-Threatnings are not only declarative of what sin deserves, but
also of what shall be the event: they are not simple Threatenings, but certain
predictions; or they are such Threatenings as are confirmed by an Oath, and so
declared to be irrevocable: and this may also obviate a doubt which some may
have about the Promises; Why may not the Lord relax them, or have some secret
Condition (that I know not of) in his Promises, as he had in this first
Threatening? for in the Promises, we have all the evidences that can be of the
certainty of them as to the event. And indeed, there is a great odds between
Promises and Threatenings in this respect, that Promises give to the party a
right to the thing promised, and he cannot be loosed without the parties
consent; a mere Threatening does only declare the desert of sin in the person
sinning: yet when confirmed by an Oath, as Heb. 4.3, or Heb. 3.11, 18, And to
whom swear he, that they should not enter into his Rest, but to them that
believe not? or, has any other Declaration of Gods purpose annexed to it as
irrevocable as his Promises. We might hence draw many useful inferences.

Hence, what support to our Faith! and what answer to make to the Law! our
kinsman was bruised, etc. We may learn with what boldness all the seed of the
woman may now come to Christ, as being some way in kin to Christ; he was the
Churches comfort in all their straits of old, in case of sin, as in the Text:
and in case of outward distress, the renewing of the Promises was the great
encouragement that God would not destroy them, Isa. 7.14. Mic. 5.5. and still
it is so to us. Now his Divine Nature is the great support to our faith and
comfort; yet his being of our flesh, is a great inducement to come to him, and
a help to our faith and comfort. Without his Divinity, it will be comfortless;
but as united to his Godhead, its a rich Mine. May we suppose you had a Brother
in any Court, that were in as much favor with the King, as he is with God, and
whom you could acquaint with your case, as easily as you can do to him, would
you not be often at Court, and would you not come more freely; at least be
often sending thither? Are the promises far off to you? Is pardon, grace,
peace, healing, righteousness or strength, far off from you? Why are they
strange to you? Why are you strange to Christ? Will he hide himself from his
own flesh? Rich and poor are equally near to him. May not this help our
weakness in coming to God? Of old few Seafaring men ventured on the Ocean, but
coasted along the shore for want of skill: the Godhead is a boundless Ocean,
you dare not venture on it: here is a safe and easy shore, by which you may
come at God without being swallowed up. And learn hence to plead your part in
him; plead this relation to him, till you get a nearer, as the people plead a
general relation to God, Isa. 64.7, 8. David took it well of the men of Judah,
but Christ will take it better: he will not scorn thee, as some do their poor
kindred.

It was one great end he had in his assuming our nature, that he might be a
merciful High Priest: the Angels would have made greater Highpriests, but they
would not have had such bowels as one man has to another, Heb. 5.1, 2. Every
High Priest taken from among men, is ordained for men: who can have compassion,
etc. So Heb. 2.16, 17. (and now he cannot more cease to be merciful, than he
can cease to be man, or dissolve the union of his Natures which shall never
be); in the Greek it is (...), that he might be made merciful. The expressions
of his compassion there used, cannot be merely metaphorical, as often such
words are, when attributed to God under the old Testament: for the words import
such mercy, or rather being merciful, in such a way, as being God alone, could
not have been. Indeed God cannot be made more merciful by taking on our nature:
But thus he became merciful in a new way, and in a manner more comfortable to
us, even as man. Nothing can be added to the greatness of Gods mercy; and
there is no mercy in the humane nature, but what it had from the Divine; and had
he not had the mercy of the Godhead to enlarge his compassion to sinners, his
mercy could never have held out: But the assumption of the seed of the woman,
adds a kindliness and naturalness (as one says) to his mercy to us: so that
what is metaphorically spoke of, is liberally true of the Mediator. And though
now in heaven he has no afflicting passions, nor what imports infirmity and
frailty, as he had on the earth; yet for the substance they are the same, and
instead of that afflicting frailty that was in them, there is now a greater
largeness and liveliness of affection, which does as effectually prompt him to
relieve us. Sure our High Priest laid not aside his love pity and compassion,
when be entered within the holy-place. You will say, That though he was the
seed of the woman, yet not having experience of sin as I have, What can his
humane nature further his compassion to me? Answ. 1. What makes a gracious soul
pity them that are fallen, but it is Conformity to Christ? Gal. 6.1. 2. He felt
the guilt of more sin, and in a livelier manner than ever thou did; he knows
what desertion for sin is, what a wounded heart is, and what the bitterness of
sin is. And, 3. He was grieved for the sin of others, and so knows how to
compassionate those who are grieved for sin in themselves. And finally, why may
we not say, That as when he healed the sick, he used to take their sickness as
it were upon himself, Matt. 8.16, 17. and some way to afflict himself, Joh.
11.38. by sympathy, though he was never sick? so being to satisfy for the
elects sin; when he saw any of them sin, he might be said to be affected with
it, as if it had been his own; some think this the meaning of that obscure
place, Matt. 8.16, 17. Let none say, What is all this to me? Christ is not
promised to the Serpents seed; and what know I but I am one of these, I find
such enmity to God and Christ? and thus I obviated the last occasion. Only now,
1. You may be among the other seed, for ought you know, as well as they, and a
may-be is much in this case. 2. They are not all the serpents seed, who have of
the serpents seed in them. 3. Is thy enmity thy burden? Art thou willing to
lay it down, and to come over to Christ's side?

3. Obs. That the recovery of lapsed man is Originally and solely from God; I
will put, etc. Adam did not propose, nor devise this, but was flying and
hiding, when this news overtakes him. Man he was not called to counsel, Isa.
40.30. Nor was so much as in speaking-terms with God; there is neither Merit,
nor Motive, nor Impulsive cause in man; his misery could be no cause, for the
fallen Angels were no less miserable: and indeed this is a plot worthy of
infinite wisdom, as well as mercy, and which the quickest finite understandings
were so far from being able to find out, that when revealed, they cannot
comprehend it, 1 Pet. 12, but are yet at School, and Learning it: and indeed it
had been blasphemy for Men or Angels to have spoke it, before it was revealed.
Jerome makes Isa. 63.1, 2. to be the words of wondering Angels. And no doubt
the words of the Text made the Devils amazed.

The plot it self, the designation of Christ for this business, the manner of
carrying it on, the stability of this promise, the choice of the seed to whom
it is made, was solely of him and he himself revealed it: Adam was not thinking
of it when it was first mentioned. God will needs carry the first news of it
himself; had he sent Angels, guilty consciences might likely have misdoubted
them. It Is true, he sends news of this to us by men gifted of purpose for such
tidings: But till he himself reveal this mystery to our hearts, it is not
understood nor revealed, Matt. 13.11. and 11.25. And finally, it is his proper
work to break the sinners friendship with Satan, and to reconcile them to
himself: and all that is here promised is the effect of his grace.

Use. See your self scored off from all sharing in the glory of your own
Salvation. Grace, appears in the whole contrivance, and in the Application of
it: you may read fallen Adams case, and your own too, Ezekiel. 16.3, 4, 5, 6. It Is
true, that is spoke with respect to Abraham, and his Idolatrous extract; but is
applicable to every Nation, and to every particular person; does that promise
in the Text reach you? know, you were in no better, if not a worse case than
Adam, when it took hold of you. Therefore, 1. Own him in the whole business of
your Salvation, from first to last, in the revealing of it in the Branches and
Contents of it, and in bringing you to close with it, and making you to cleave
to it; in breaking your friendship with Satan, and bringing you over to his own
side. 2. You that are yet on Satan's side, and are beginning to weary; Employ
him to bring you over to his party: employ himself to reveal this mystery to
you contained in this great promise, Matt. 13.11. To reveal Christ in you, and
to rescue you effectually from Satan; to engage you in this warfare, and to
make you successful in it.

But more particularly: Let us consider this enmity, and war, and the event of
it, and that with respect to ones inward condition. 2. Or with respect to sin
and holiness, with respect to your outward. For the 1st, Satan has spued sin,
his seed, into our first Parents, and they have transmitted it to all their
posterity. Now those who are begot again by Jesus Christ, they have his seed in
them: Grace, or the Divine Nature is called the seed of God, 1 John 3.9. Not
exclusively of Christ, this is that which makes us like Christ; and to
represent him as a Child does the Parent; hence called, Christ formed in us;
even as sin makes one resemble Satan, 1 John 3.8, and may be called Satan's
seed: some speak ignorantly, as if there were the material seed of the Devil in
men; which may be they fetch from the Turks Alcoran, which says, that there is a
drop of black blood in the middle of every ones heart, which they call the seed
of the Devil; and which they say, the Angels having opened up Mahomet when a
child, washed out of him. Nor is their notion much unlike that of the
Cartesians, about their glandula pinealis in Cerebro, from the motion whereof
proceeds all inordinate desires. But, 2. The godly have a party without to
conflict with: from the whole observe, 1. Some thing supposed, viz. that sin
having entered the world, all men are on Satan's seed, and in enmity with God,
till this promise take effect on them. 2. That Satan's interest is not at once
destroyed, nor are the elect at once perfectly saved: Satan has a party still
in the world; yea, he has some part in every man here. None can say as Christ,
Joh. 14.30, The Prince of this world comes, and has nothing in me; he is at
perfect variance with Satan; Satan could get nothing in him to fasten his
temptations upon; he has some party and some footing in the godly man, his seed
is not at once purged out, but is still stirring and conflicting, and
counteracting Christ and his interest in the soul. It Is so ordered by the holy
Majesty of God: Satan begot this enmity, and God in his holy providence suffers
it to remain in part. Now for the 1st, It is supposed that there is nothing in
men, but enmity to Christ, and a heart working against him. There was nothing
else in Adam when this promise began to take effect on him; and there is nothing
else now in sinners when it begins to be fulfilled on them; this is the nature
of sin, and the best notion we can have of it, enmity to God, and to Christ,
and to his Image; It Is contrary to him; It Is an enemy to his being, and makes
the sinner wish God were not, Psalm. 14.1. And it is pleasing to him to think,
May be there is none: this enmity in the abstract is in every natural man's
mind, Romans 8.7, much more in the heart and affections; and all the members of
the body are employed as weapons to fight against him. Men hate him not indeed,
as Creator or Preserver, etc. but as Holy and Righteous, as a Lawgiver and
Judge; and this is for no wrong on his part, but they have wronged him, and
would be rid of him: this was manifest in Adam. And O that this notion of sin
were more fixed in our hearts: it must be in every true penitent. In Hell
there is no repentance, because there is nothing but enmity to God there: in
heaven there is none, because there is nothing but Amity: here there is something
of both in the godly; indeed in the natural man there is only enmity. Now, Romans
6.12, 13, 14. Lev. 26.40, 41, the penitent bewails that he has walked contrary
to God: there is nothing at all that befriends God in the natural man; he is
wholly for Satan; there is no spark of pure light within, for the mind and
Conscience are engaged against God, and conspire with Satan, the foundation of
whose Kingdom is laid in darkness: may be the natural man trembles at a sight
of the Devil, as being in a sort a creature of another world, and being
represented as an enemy to Mankind. But is it not apparent how much sinners
conspire with him, in his enmity and contrariety to God; some there be that
Covenant with him, some expressly, some virtually; in many places of the world
he is familiarly conversed with; yea, and worshipped; and did not evil spirits
frequently and familiarly haunt houses in times of Popery, and seemed to do
good offices unto them; and were called by the vulgar, Faries, Brownyes, by
some Familiars, good Neighbors? and how well affected many are yet to Satan,
appears by their application to him, or his instruments, in case of lost or
stolen goods, or the like doubtful cases: But what a secret power and interest
has he with thousands where he is not so discreetly owned? how many do merrily
dance when he pipes to them? how many willing, loving slaves has he? his power
with them is manifest, by their acting such prodigious wickedness sometimes, at
which even corrupt humane nature in others is made to tremble. Others he deals
more gently with, and puts them not on such hard service; they are at peace
with him, and for a while he keeps peace with them; they trouble not him, and
he troubles not them: he has a claim to them, partly by his own request, partly
by their own consent, one way or other, and partly by the Lords holy and
righteous giving them up to him, as a just punishent of man's first breaking
with him, taking himself to Satan. And not only has he a claim to them, but he
has possession of all out of Christ (and one would think that this were enough
to waken sinners): may be some of them at some times take up some dislike of
their state; but, yet are easily reconciled to it again; or make some little
breach, or fall at some odds with the Prince of this world, but soon reconcile
themselves again.

Now when this promise comes to take effect on any soul, the Lord comes and
casts out Satan, and he seizes on the soul: this is called his apprehending it,
Phil. 3.12. Satan is loath to lose the sinner. But Jesus Christ, that is
stronger than he, casts him out, and he must bring down and demolish strong
holds ere this be done, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5, 6. and put forth that power whereby he
is able to subdue all things to himself: Satan pulls, and Christ's draws, and
the Father draws: Satan and the sinner join all their strength together: he
does with sinners, as the Turks do with their Galley-slaves, that make them
serve against their friends, and such as would set them free: Only here is the
difference, these do it by constraint, but sinners do heartily join issue with
Satan, and resist Christ, as if he were about to hurt them. Now at length Satan
is cast out, and the sinner yields, 2 Chronicles. 30.8. Romans 6.12, 13. Both places
allude to such as are besieged or assaulted: hence Conversion is called a
turning from Satan unto God, Act. 26.21. Colos. 1.14. 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. See the
manner of Christ's Conquering fouls, Luke 11.21. Matt. 12.29. 1. He binds the
strong man, puts some restraint on Satan; he takes away the power he had to
lead the man Captive, does as it were cancel his Commission: Satan cannot come
and go as he did; he was wont to come as a man to his own house: Now he comes
as a thief or a robber; he cannot set such a lust on fire, nor blow up such a
Corruption, nor send on such an Errand, nor employ the man's Eye, or Ear, or
Tongue, or Hand, or Foot as he did, he must have Christ's leave. Now, 2. He
spoils Satan of his goods: the members of the body, and the faculties of the
Soul, Satan made a purchase of them in Paradise; there they were marred and
spoiled, and unfitted for Gods use, and fit only for Satan's: First, Christ
recovers them to the right owner; he first makes them meet for him, and then
restores them to him; he retrieves the Mind from ignorance, error, and
diabolick light: sets the Will at liberty from lusts, breaks the refractoriness
of it, and makes it sweetly yield in the day of his power, Psalm 110.3: and so
all within and without, are now yielded as weapons of righteousness unto
holiness. 3. He takes away his Armor, that wherein Satan trusted: Satan,
though he had secured his interest in the Soul by customary sinning, which had
strengthened the habit of sin, and hardened the heart in it, and made the man
bold in sin; Christ comes as a Prince, and makes the man tremble: he gives
repentance, and breaks the stone in the heart. May be, 2. Satan had corrupted
man's judgment, and fortified his interest with carnal reason; when the true
light comes, the man sees himself a fool; Or, may be, 3. He has strongly
engaged the affections in sin, and trusted to that: Christ disintangles them.
Or, may be, 4. He had fitted them with suitable temptations: for, as there is a
malignant influence and energy in all Satan's temptations, so he uses to choose
out suitable temptations, from pleasure perhaps, riches or honor; Christ
imbitters these, and debases them; they lose their operation. And now having
destroyed the power of sin, he destroys Satan's reign in the Soul: for all the
title Satan has to Sinners, is by means of sin, which is his feed.

Christ had done all this meritoriously upon the Cross, as a public person in
the Elects stead, according to the promise in the Text: there he judged and
cast out Satan, John 12.31. He was formerly judged and cast out of Heaven; but
becoming head of sinful men, he is again judged and dethroned by Jesus Christ;
see this at length, Col. 2.13, 14, 15, He spoiled principalities and powers (in
Greek, stripped them): Hence Isa. 53.68, He shall divide the spoil: he made a
show of them openly (an allusion unto Conquerors, who for a Trophy use to hang
up the Armor and Ensigns of their conquered Enemies: so that Satan was
outwitted in putting Judas on betraying, and the Jews on crucifying him,
triumphing over them in it: he led Captivity captive: and as Conquerors used to
bind their Captives to their Chariots, and lead them in Triumph; so did he on
the Cross: and by virtue of this Conquest, the Elect are preserved and kept
alive, and also kept from sinning irremedilesly, or unto death, before their
Conversion; and in due time are actually rescued from Satan, and set against
him.

Now we come to the second thing observable, viz. That this enmity to God, is
not all removed at once: Satan's head is not bruised at first, either in his
person or in his seed: he that has decreed the enmity between the godly and the
wicked, has also decreed the enmity between Grace and sin; what is of Christ,
and what is of Satan, in the same Soul; there is something in the man who is in
Christ, whereby Satan has access to trouble and molest the Soul: he makes the
poor Believer go halting, and makes all his spiritual motions uneasy and
ungrateful; were it not for this, had not Satan some part within us, we might
laugh at his assaults: and were it not for this, the World could not defile us,
1 John 1.15. It Is true, Satan invaded man, and prevailed, when he had no part
within him: but he has now further advantages against us; we cannot hold him
out, though we would, as man might then have done; he has some within to open
the gates to him; he has a party still in Arms for him within us, a whole body
of sin that has many members, and these all under the law of sin, and stir when
ever Satan will, Romans 7.23, 24: And O how fierce are the assaults of this body
of sin? It made Peter swear against Christ; It made Asa rage against the
Prophet; It made fierce dissension between Paul and Barnabas: and there is no
reconciling this enmity, Romans 8.2, 7; it will not, and cannot be sufficient,
etc. The old man may be slain and mortified, but will never yield.

Observe. 3. That all who side with Christ, must resolve to maintain enmity and
war against Satan, and that party that Satan has in them. From the day that one
is born again, there is a war begun; there is two parties in the man: and there is
nothing the one does, but the other opposes; so that neither good nor evil can
be done with full consent, or with the whole Soul: If Satan's side carry it,
Christ's party dissents, and protests, and bears witness against it. If any good
be set about, the old man shall either make the work to cease, or else some way
mar it. Satan shall have his soul fingers on every Duty: all who lay claim to
Christ, are bound to maintain this war, and hold up this enmity, and think it a
mercy, that God will let you call the better part in you, you your self; and
the worst part, but your flesh, Romans 7.25. So then with the mind I my self
serve the law of God, but with the flesh the law of sin.

Obs. 4. That Satan and indwelling sin are limited and bounded; the guilt of
sin shall not outlaw the Believer: if the Serpent sting you, yet your wound
shall not be deadly. Satan may leave his marks upon you: and indeed, were it
not for him who was lifted up after the manner of the brazen Serpent, every
bite of this Serpent were mortal: this remaining inward enmity will be working,
and Satan will be sneaking about your heels, and seeking to entangle your
affections (which are as the feet of the Soul): but he can come no higher than
your heel; he may darken your light indeed, but it is by corrupting your
affections; and when he has done all, he cannot extinguish Divine Light.
Indwelling sin may raise Sedition, and cause much opposition and disturbance to
Christ's Kingdom within, but it shall not be able to dissolve his Government.

Obs. 5. That all who side with Christ, and maintain this enmity against Satan
and his seed, shall in the event be victorious; Christ in them shall bruise
Satan's head: for we must not think to hold our own, much less to overcome
without him. Now concerning this Victory: 1. See that it is no fancy to think
that the weakest follower of Christ that is often foiled, yet shall conquer
Satan through Christ; you shall not die of your wounds: you may trust to this
first Gospel-promise, that to this day has never failed. 2. That when Satan is
doing you most harm, and getting most advantage against you, he is nearest his
overthrow: when he is bruising your heel, he hazards the crushing of his head;
this is Christ's fittest way to destroy him: thus he makes Temptations work for
good, yea, and defeats Satan; he makes them strong by their falls: this is a
part of the Mystery of Christ, yet is an established and experienced Truth; he
would never let Satan touch your heel, but that thereby he might to the greater
glory of his Wisdom and Grace bruise his head. 3. Though this be a certain
Truth that he will bruise Satan, yet has he not told us when, nor what way he
will do it; may be not now, nor a month, nor a year hence: may be neither this
way, nor any you can think of: It Is enough for us to know that it is decreed,
and that Gods faithfulness is in pledge for it. The day is coming that you shall
be Victors: and the Apostle tells us, It shall shortly be, Romans 16.20.

Use 1. You that are out of Christ, see your misery: you are on Satan's side,
are slaves to him, under chains, curse, servant of servants; he has a Throne in
you: he fills your heart, as Ananias; he entices to your ruin, as Achab, his
will you do; you eat, and drink, and sleep, and work for him: who shuts your
eyes against Gospel Light, But he? 2 Cor. 4.4. Who opposes and repels our
pleading for Christ? who furnishes you with cavils against Christ, but he? they
are certainly brutish that engage in the service of Tyrants, and that kill
others, and daily oppose their own lives to promote the ambition of others; or
may be for their bread, or a name among such fools as themselves: how much more
those who to gratify Satan, war against their own souls? Oh, is it nothing to
you to be under the malignant influence of Satan: he has some brutish pleasures
to entice you, but they are only pleasant poisons.

Use 2. Hereby prove your selves; you are either fighting on Christ's side, or
against him; you cannot be at peace with Satan and Christ also: What know you
of the Conflict between the flesh and the Spirit? Are you cheerful actors in
sin? or are you sufferers by it, Romans 7, beyond what you ever found in any
other thing? Or, is there any protestation entered in Christ's behalf, or in
behalf of the spiritual Law of God? Is the heel or your head bruised by Satan?
No doubt you find something within you ready to join with what comes from
Satan; but do you also find any thing within that is ready to comply with what
comes from Christ, that falls in with Truth and Duties, with the motions and
assistances of his Spirit? Finally, his seed and servants you are, whose work
you do, Romans 6.16, 17. Romans 8.13.

Use 3. You that are in Christ, think not to be free of Satan's enmity: I speak
not now of Enemies without, but look that he fire not the house within; expect
an intestine War; you have bosom, restless Enemies; Satan can muster many
corruptions within: Atheism, Pride, Worldliness, Sensuality, Unbelief: these
all stand for Satan, and you are in more hazard of them, than all Enemies you
have without you, 1 Pet. 4.14. Then be not secure: this had almost undone
Peter; keep watch and ward, especially when you know that the Enemy is within
you, and examine all that come and go to and from thy heart, for it is time of
War: (There be some who at their Conversion are zealous and vigorous in their
conflicts with indwelling sin, who are much in Prayers and strong cries, etc.
but soon abate; and why? not because Satan and sin are quite defeated and
expelled, but because they are weary to keep up a continual conflict with
themselves, and therefore at least make a cessation of Arms: Satan lets them
alone, and they let him alone: they go on smoothly in Duties, they find no
comfort in them, yet find no trouble: sin in the heart prevails, yet is not
grievous, because not opposed, so that there needs a new Conversion and a new
Conquest (such as we have spoke of), Matthew. 12.29.

4. Hence we see how poor weak Creatures come to be victorious, Romans 8.36,
through him, etc. Were it not for Christ, he that overcame Adam in innocence,
would easily defeat us. It Is not for want of Adversaries that some get to
Heaven, and not others; it is not for want of Temptations: the Angels had not
these, yet fell; and some now have them; and yet perish not by them. It Is not
for want of sin within: Satan had no part in Adam, yet overcame him; he has a
part in the Believer, yet cannot overcome him. It Is not from our willing, or
working, or vigorous warring with sin that we overcome, but it is through him
who is the seed of the woman: yet not as such, or considered merely as a man;
strength of inherent Grace secured not Paul, the aged and experienced Soldier
of Christ, Romans 7.24.25. 2 Cor. 12. Christ is Captain of the Lords Host: Angels
could not keep themselves: were it not for Christ, we should soon be as fishes
in an ill net. We see what a small matter made Asa rage, Jonas fret to death
almost, Peter deny Christ, and curse.

5. You that are on Christ's side: be encouraged, he has already condemned sin,
and undone the condemning-power of it; and if you be his, it is dying in you:
indeed he inflicts a lingering death on it, Gal. 5.24. Where it reigns, it
kills, therefore he breaks his power at first stroke: which makes young
Converts so tender, and so severe to it in themselves and others: if at any
time it make head, he knocks it down again, yet not wholly; for he manifests
the sufficiency of his Grace now more in keeping up the conflict, than in
conquering: And you have more cause to fear the sins you are at league with,
than those you war with. It Is true, the best side is sometimes worsted; but
it is so ordered, that the success Satan gets, tends to his overthrow, and the
Believers Conquest, Romans 8.36; for Christ will not lose his own in the
Believer, he never loses possession, Romans 7.18, 19. He sins, yet consents not:
and in time Christ turns the Battle, and by little and little carries on a
complete Victory.

Is not this good news to you that are in Christ? Sin may vex you like the
Midianites, but it shall not be your ruin; he has not exempted you from trouble
for sin, nor from war with it: and may be, when one head is cut off, as with
Hydra, another starts up: yet it shall not outlaw you, nor separate from
Christ, nor be gainer in the War, though it may in some Battle. What hinders
then your joy? is it because you see not your sins lying dead (as the Isaelites
saw the Egyptians? for God has promised to cast them into the bottom of the
Sea, alluding to this, in the Red Sea of Christ's blood) and are afraid that one
time or other they will undo you? but it shall as soon fetch Christ out of
Heaven, as keep any of his seed out of it; and shall as soon bring Christ to
the Cross again, as send any of them to Hell. It Is true, If you live after the
flesh, you shall die, Romans 8.13. But it is true also, that the Believer cannot
live in it; for how can we that are dead to sin, live in it? Romans 6.2.

Now, may be some will say, It Is indeed good news, that God has promised a
Deliverer; that in the Volume, or in the Head, Beginning (for so the word
signifies) of the book it is written of him, Psalm 40.7: (which some think
relates to that first Promise). And it is good to hear that Christ shall subdue
and defeat Satan and sin: But what is that to me? how shall the unworthy apply
this Promise? Now to obviate exceptions of this nature, there are several
things considerable in the first circumstances of the Promise, which may meet
with your case: 1. The Promise was made to as sinful Creatures as ever were
any; To Adam and Evah, who sinned against the greatest Light, the greatest
Obligations and Favors, against the fairest warning; who sinned most heinously
against first and second Table; who sinned with a design to dethrone God, and
make themselves like to him, to the overthrow and ruin of their posterity: and
all this by the motion of Gods greatest Enemy, and that in the appearance of a
creeping beast, which bid eat that which God had forbidden; a sin which all
mankind may be ashamed of; yet notwithstanding all this, they have this promise
made by the Lords own mouth to them. 2. It was made when no means were essayed,
in order to the obtaining of it; it never came in their heart to cry for mercy;
but when they were running away, then did these good tidings overtake them:
then thou who art begging for mercy, may hope for it. If you say, you are not
using means for it: I would not encourage the neglect of them; yet would not
lay too much stress upon them: they did not reject the Promise upon such an
account: it is but a temptation to think thou cannot make use of this Promise;
art thou content of all the parts of it, to war with Satan and Sin, as well as
to have a Redeemer to fight and conquer for thee? If thou like Christ, and be
satisfied to be on his side, certainly it will belong to thee: thou must be of
one of those two sides. Now, which like you best? 2. This promise is made, as
to great Sinners, so to such as were as little sensible of sin as could be:
there was no kindly sense nor heartbreaking for it: they hid themselves for
fear and shame: yet when arraigned and accused for sin, they will not take with
it; Adam turns it partly over on God, and partly on his Wife: she turns it over
on the Serpent; were they like to have such a promise made to them? then let no
poor Soul be discouraged for little sense of sin; seek it, but be not troubled
about the measure of it; we must preach Christ and Free grace to all: may be, a
Gospel-poomise will work that sense of sin, which otherwise thou cannot get. To
conclude then, If you have need of this Promise, take it; but be sure you take
it all together, that you side with Christ, and war against Satan, and know,
that the words have also the force of a Command, and that to the whole Church,
to all that hear the Promise; for so the expression imports, Exodus 20.3, 4, 5.

Now let us in the next place speak to the words, as they relate to man's
outward state; and concerning this, let us lay down some Doctrinal Truths from
them:

1. That there is a decreed and stated Enmity between Satan and his followers
on the one side, and Christ and his followers on the other: Now, 1. For the
parties; Satan he is the head of those that oppose Christ and his Ided, he is
always spoke of as the party, Rev. 12.7, who the Dragon is, see ver. 9. Rev.
12.13, The Dragon persecuted the woman, etc. So ver. 17; Others do but war
under him: they derive their malignity and enmity from him, and have as it were
their Commission from him, Rev. 13.2, The Dragon gave his power, his seat, and
authority unto the Beast: that is, to Antichrist; Satan had his seat there
before, and the idolatrous Heathen persecuting Emperors were his great Vassals
and Deputies. Now those failing him; he gives his power to the Pope, and he
becomes the Devils great Lieutenant. Inferior persecuting Princes and Prelates
are either Antichrists underlings, or they have their power from Satan the same
way that Antichrist has. If you say, Are not all powers of God, Romans 13.1? And
what power has Satan to give? I answer. No doubt the Antichristian powers is
from God as a punishment to the World, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10: yet it is from Satan. If
we consider the nature of it, the very Office it self of Popes and Prelates
being contrary to the word of God, or the things wherein he arrogateth power.
And also, if we consider the way of his coming by it, and his blasphemous and
tyrannical manner in exercising it, of all which Satan is the Author, as he is
of all the exorbitances of every Government that are to the prejudice of the
godly; hence, as the worshippers of Antichrist are said to worship the Dragon,
who gave power unto the Beast, Rev. 13.4: so the allowers and admirers of any
wicked Constitution in Church or State, or any power that is levelled against
Christ and his feed, do in so far own Satan the God of this World; and in so
far declare themselves to be on his side, and join issue with him.

If any object, the horror and hatred men have naturally at the Devil, how then
came they to be on his side? I Answer, Whatever hatred natural men have to the
Devil, and horror they conceive at his appearance, as a Creature of another
Order, and as a powerful Spirit, represented also as malicious and envious at
the good of mankind; yet it is clear, that they conspire in their enmity to God,
and Christ, and his seed: There Is a fundamental friendship with him, even when
they are blessing themselves from him, and speaking against him, even as there
is a radical enmity in Sinners to God; though Custom or Education has taught
them to speak well of him. Satan is the god of this World; and though he be a
Tyrant, and keep Sinners in bondage, and rules them at his pleasure, yet
sometimes he personates a servant to them: and ordinarily employs them in such
work as is suitable to their corrupted nature, and takes such ways with them as
are pleasing to the flesh; so that there needs no force to keep them in
servitude: they are so well-pleased with their Lord, that his fetters are as
Gold-chains to them; yea, some of them are so far transformed into the spirit
and image of the Devil, as to commit such prodigious acts of wickedness, that
one would think humane Nature corrupted as it is, should tremble at it: and, in
nothing has this appeared more than in the prosecution of this Enmity in those
horrid and diabolical methods, and arts of violence and cruelty, that have
almost in all Ages been invented and used against the godly; and as for that
Dread men commonly have at his appearance, it is known how easily they are
familiarized; yea, he has taught men to call evil Spirits, Familiars, good
Neighbors, etc. And how many are in express Covenant with him? There Is no man
can deny this, but with the same breath he denies Christ, the Scriptures, and
experience (it is credibly reported of 17 Popes, one after another): And in
most, if not all places of the World he has been, and in many yet is visibly
worshipped, and has a Neighborhood, or rather a visible Kingdom among them.

2. Against whom, and what is this enmity of Satan and his seed levelled? I
Answer, Primarily against God; he is an Adversary to God and holiness, and so
to Jesus Christ as God, and also as man; because he had so much of God in him,
more than any man: and to the Saints, because of their relation to God and
Christ: his enmity to God appears in his whole design and business: more
particularly in his blasphemous injections into the minds of poor Creatures,
and in his using the tongues of some that he possesses, to blaspheme God; and
indeed, his enticing of men to war against Heaven with their tongues, in
cursing and blasphemous Oaths, where there is neither profit nor pleasure to
allure them, is a sufficient evidence, both of the Devils and of man's enmity to
God. 2. This is levelled against Jesus Christ; how early stirred he up
persecution against him as soon as he was born, and did all he could against
him? and such enmity has he to his Name, and to the very shadow of
Christianity, that he will admit none unto a strict consederacy with him, till
they have renounced Christ, and the sign of their dedication to him. And Oh,
what an astonishing meditation is it, to think that Spirits once so holy and
wise, should have fallen into such deeps of sin, or risen into such a height of
indignation against infinite holiness and goodness, that now their only scope
and delight should be to dishonor God, and to mar his work in the World, and
his Image in man! And what an astonishing witness is this of the patience of
God! we wonder he bears so long with men that are Vessels of wrath, who are but
like grass on the house-tops: whereas he has suffered Satan for several
thousand years, to range and tyrannize up and down the World, and yet this mars
not the luster and beauty of Gods wise Government of the World. 3. This Enmity
is also levelled against the followers of Christ: all the actings of evil
spirits in the World have a tendency to men's hurt (whatever friendship they may
pretend): and it is not any outward concern of men's, that they especially
intend to ruin, and are at pain and labor to undo; It is the great and eternal
Concern of their immortal Souls that they level at; they envy them that
happiness which they are out of hope of; or their hatred to God and Christ is
heightened from their passing by them, when they chose and redeemed some of lost
men. Now, as the Lord designs his peoples good, by all the seeming contrary
dealings with them; so does the Devil by his contrary methods intend to hurt
them: whether he tempt, or forbear to tempt; whether he solicit Peter to
hinder Christ's sufferings, or prompts Judas to further them: when he seems
asleep, and when he rages, there is as much enmity in his peace, as in his war;
If he keep truce with such as are explicitly or implicitly in Covenant with
him, it is but for a while. Now this Enmity is chiefly against the Church or
Churches, where he can get a true visible Church, Rev. 12.13. It Is with the
Woman; where we see also that Gods special preservation of his Church, and
disappointing or frustrating hellish designs against a Church, does greatly
gall Satan, and exasperate him against them; when the Dragon saw that he was
cast down to the earth, he persecuted the woman, etc. And ver. 17, The Dragon
was wrath with the woman, the earth having helped her (sometimes God makes
carnal men helpful to his Church, and restrains their Enmity). Why? the Woman
had done him no wrong, was only escaped: and this diabolick disposition, we may
clearly see in his seed: there is nothing pains some so much, as that they
cannot do mischief to the people of God. Do we not see some acted with fury and
unsatiable cruelty against the people of God, without the least provocation,
beyond what men express in other cases, and beyond what men's natural enmity to
Truth and Holiness does ordinarily carry them? even such fury as discovers some
violent excitement from Hell, and carries a lively resemblance of the Devil?
Now, ver. 17. We see also, that when Satan cannot find a visible pure
constituted Church, then he bends his malice against single Professors, that
keep themselves pure from the corruption of the place they live in, they are
there called the woman's seed: he went to make war with the remnant of her seed.
The description of these are worth our observing, ver. 17; they are such as
keep the Commandments of God: that is meant in opposition to those whose
Religion lies most in obedience to Customs, Traditions and Commandments of men,
whereby they make void the Institutions and Commands of God.

2. They are such as have the Testimony of Jesus; that is, that bear Testimony
to him in all his Offices, in opposition to those, who by their Ceremonies,
Humane satisfactions and self-righteousness, deny Christ to be come in the
flesh; and also to those who deny, or incroach upon any of his Offices: These
two contain much of the distinguishing Characters of the true Church, and true
members of Jesus Christ, from the false.

3. As for the Nature and properties of this Enmity between the two seeds: 1.
It Is for no private particular quarrels; Oh, what a bitter Antipathy do men
manifest, even to those from whom they never received any personal injury;
their own hearts must tell them, that it can be from nothing but the appearance
of the Image of God in them; their pretending to hate their Hypocrisy, is
vain. For 1. Under this pretense, Christ and the godly of old were persecuted,
2. Why do they not hate the openly profane, who yet call themselves
Christians, and are angry when denied outward privileges, and the Seals of
Christianity. 3. How comes it that the holiest and sincerest are most hated?
and that the looser any Professor be, he has the more favor from them: let
them run with them to the same excess of Riot, and they can be one with them;
let them but see you have no more Religion than they have, and you may gain
their friendship. Some pretend their disconformity to the public Laws; and
indeed, on this foundation were all the persecutions, almost of former times
bottomed; the wiser Heathens even in the Primitive times brought it to this.
But 1. Whence is it that Laws comes to be enacted and levelled against the
godly? What disturbance does the purity of Religion create to the public
peace? Is there no prejudice to the public by Comedians, and Stage Players?
and is there so much from Ministers preaching Jesus Christ? Are Meetings for
the worship of God the only dangerous Assemblies, when yet our Adversaries do
not so much as pretend that there is any thing in our Worship contrary to the
Scriptures? 2. Whence is it that everywhere these Laws that are levelled
against Christ and his followers, are with more care and severity executed than
other laws? yea, than laws against such things and persons that are apparently
dangerous to the Public? whence is it that ordinarily men outdo in the one,
and come short of the Law in other cases?

2. This Enmity is universal; in all the seed of the Serpent, against all the
seed of Christ: it is not lately taken up, but has showed it self in all the
Ages of the World, and in every place where Christianity has been, or is known.
Parents transmit it to their Posterity, and the Children show themselves heirs
to it, and consequently to all the effects of it, from, Cain, etc. Matthew.
23.35. And is it not apparent that the calmest of them, and such as have been
much polished and civilized by Religion, yet have a bitter prejudice and secret
working of heart against the power of it, and will upon occasions break forth
in rage against it where it appears; there wants not clear evidences of this,
even in the most calm and peaceable dispositions, and such in whom this enmity
is most restrained, and who profess great friendship and favor to Christ and
his followers, yet cannot endure the shining and condemning-Light that is in the
truly godly: but reproach, censure and hate them, for having that which
themselves would be thought to have, Mal. 3.1, 3: Yea, such is this Enmity,
that let the godly be never so quiet and peaceable, and useful in the Societies
they live in, it is never the less: yea, such is it, that no natural Bond nor
Relation can extinguish it: no Friendship, and no Bond in Nature so firm, but
it can break and dissolve. No sooner gets Christ a little footing in a Family,
or Town, or Village, but there is discords and jarrings: Satan and his party
takes the Alarm; as soon as any thing of Christ appears in one, he is as a sign
and a wonder to a profane generation: the World is like a Stepmother, and
nearest Friends change their countenance.

3. This is an irreconcilable Enmity; this Controversy could never be taken
up nor composed; the hatred is so rooted, that the wisest and greatest
Reconcilers and Peacemakers, could never yet unite these two parties, no more
than they can alter men's Natures. It Is folly to think or talk of reconciling
them; this Decree of Heaven is stronger than the Decree of the Medes and
Persians: Men may talk of Accommodations, and Comprehensions, and
Condescensions: they may talk of prudence and moderation, and mutual
forbearance, and dispensing with some things for peace-sake; But can light and
darkness, can Heaven and Hell agree? There may be healing methods found out for
uniting the godly, when differing in some particulars; their having one spirit
and new Nature, is a good foundation for agreement: but for the unsanctified,
the godly differ from them, not so much in opinions and outward practice, as in
their spirit; so that though they should unite so far, as to profess the same
truths, and worship God in the same outward manner; were there never so much
uniformity in these things, yet can they never sement, nor come to the kindly
union of spirit.

And all this we may see in our day, this Enmity was never more manifest:
there is a party driving Satan's design; there be various forms amongst them; but
all conspire against the truly godly, as Edom, Ammon and Amalek: and there is a
party that maintain Christ's cause, that keep the Commandments of God, and have
the Testimony of Jesus, though under diverse denominations also; and that the
others quarrel with them, is merely from the old Enmity, were easy to make
out. It is manifest, that whatever different notions men have of forms of
Worship and Church Discipline, yet the matter lies not there; for how unlike
are they to many godly persons of the former generation, and to some yet in
outward Communion with them, who professed the same principles? And what a
kindly sympathy and warm side have they to the profane, and to Papists, from
whom they would seem in their principles to differ more than from us. Oh, see
here your temper and state by Nature, and bless God if he has slain this enmity
to Christ, and brought you over to his side.

What remains in the Text, I shall in a few words absolve. 2. Then observe,
That as the Lord had decreed this Enmity, so he has decreed that Satan shall
vex Christ and his followers, he shall bruise their heel: think not to get to
Heaven without some hurt, or something that will make thee halt; reckon upon
it, to bear the mark of Satan and his seeds malice.

Observe. 3. That God has bounded the vexation that Satan and his party shall
give to the godly. Fear no great hurt from them, their wound is not deadly, it
comes not near their heart: indeed, they are said to make war with the Saints,
and overcome them, Rev. 13.7: but that is only in their outward concerns, and
over their bodily lives; the Lord would not have you to think much even of
that, but count temporal death as a hurt only in the heel: compare that with
Rev. 12.11. and Romans 8.37. Psalm 44.17, 18, 19, 20; see the worst Satan and his
party can do, you are above them: if they bite your heel, it is no great damage.

Observe. 4. That Christ and all that side with him, shall certainly be
victorious. Satan's head, and the head of all his followers shall be bruised: as
sure as they now hurt your heel, their head shall be bruised. Think on this,
you who are ready to say, That it is but folly to essay to withstand the spite
of the time, and therefore would either yield when trials are sharp, or would
be at composing matters, and complying a little with Satan's party, for it is
certainly decreed, that they shall lose the day: and that Christ and his
followers shall be the last in the Field; and who will join with a party that
are sure will be broke, whatever success they may seem to have for a while? Let
this help your faith; shall Satan and his party prevail? shall they extinguish
the light of the Gospel, or hinder the progress of it? shall they pluck the
stars of the Churches out of Christ's hands? any, no more than they can hinder
the Sun to rise, or the Moon from giving its light, or the Sea to flow: then
fear not Papists, or Prelates that shall die, and wither like the grass.
Antichrist and all his party, they are now ripening fast, and are like fuel
drying for the fire. Tophet is prepared of old for them: yet a little while and
they shall blaze and flame, the Breath of the Lord like a River of Brimstone
shall kindle them; their Enmity is chiefly levelled against Christ, and it is
against the godly for his sake; and you doubt not but he is able to conquer
Satan; and shall not the Saints share in his Conquest? You need not doubt of
Satan's overthrow, since Christ is his chief party.

Observe. 5. That the most compendious way for Satan and his parties ruin, is
their attempting against Christ and his followers, the biting of their heel:
when they are doing most mischief, they are nearest his stroke, they are now
within his reach: this was clear in Christ's sufferings, wherein Satan and his
party were active, by his death he slew him that had the power of death, he set
his foot on the Serpents neck: when they bite his heel, he will strike out
their teeth, he will trample on them with his feet of brass, and break them with
his Mace of Iron like a Potters-Vessel: when you see the Serpent busiest,
biting the heel of the godly, you may say, now God is about to set his foot on
the neck of his Enemies: he takes the shortest and the wisest way to ruin them.

Observe. 6. From the time that this Promise of the Enemies overthrow was given
to the Church, that deliverance waits not for our good frame. Adam and Evah
were lying securely in sin without sense of it, unwilling to take with it,
using no diligence for their relief; there is little regret for sin amongst us,
and small appearance of the ruin of the Churches Adversaries; yet, who knows
how soon the vengeance of the Temple may overtake them? That Promise could not
be but a perfect surprisal, and so is ordinarily the accomplishment of it also:
both as to the spiritual Salvation intended in it, and as to the outward
deliverance of the Church that it contains.

Now to conclude: You see here that in this one expression, given forth as in
one Breath, several things inseparably connected together: here is the first
intimation of a Redeemer, and of Redemption; and at the same time we are told
of a warfare with a wicked party, with whom we must debate, and from whom also
we must suffer; these we must by no means separate: you must be content to
contend with Satan and his party, and resolve to have your heel bruised by
them; you must defy the worst they can do, else you must quit Christ and his
party; cleaving to Christ, and warring against them, are joined in one Article:
yea, are the first clause in the Gospel Writings: if you account Christ's Cross
your Crown, you shall have part and portion with him. If you will not debate
with Satan and his party, and fight under Christ, then think not to get any
good by Christ. You see the Terms then, clause you which of them.

FINIS.

