King Charles his Case: OR, AN APPEAL To all Rational Men, Concerning His TRIAL
AT THE High Court of Justice. Being for the most part that which was intended
to have been delivered at the Bar, if the King had Pleaded to the CHARGE, and
put himself upon a fair TRIAL. With an additional Opinion concerning The Death
of King James, The loss of Rochel, and, The Blood of Ireland.

By JOHN COOK of Gray's Inn, Barrester.

Justice is an*excellent virtue:
Reason is the life of the Law.
Womanish pity to mourn for a Tyrant,
Is a deceitful cruelty to a City.
London, Printed by Peter Cole, at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil,
near the Royal Exchange, for Giles Calvert, at the Black Spread-Eagle at the
West End of Paul's. 1649.

To the READER.
THe righteous Judge, whose judgment is not only inevitable, but infallible,
must shortly judge me, and all that concurred to bring the capital Delinquent
to condign punishment; but in the interim, I desire to be judged by all
understanding men in the world, that suffer their judgments to be swayed by
Reason, and not biased by private Interest, Whether ever any man did so much
deserve to dye: Cain for the murder of one righteous Abel, and David for one
Uriah, had been men of death, had not God pardoned them: Those thirty one Kings
which Joshua hanged up, and Saul's seven Sons, which were 2 Samuel 21.
but at the worst (as it seems to me) Evil Counselors; were they not innocent,
nay Saints in comparison of this man? Those that crucified Christ did it
ignorantly, For had they known him, they had not crucified the Lord of Glory.
The Saints under the ten Persecutions suffered by the hands of Heathens; the In
1571.
Sicilian Vespers, the Parisian Massacre of the Protestants, and the
Gunpowder-Plot, were acted and intended by Papists, out of a conceit of Merit;
But for a Protestant Prince, styled, The Defendor of the Faith, in a time of
light, that had sworn to keep the Peace, received Tribute to that end, and
might have had the very hearts of the People, if they could have given him them
without death (the strongest Engagements;) I say, for such a one so long to
persecute the faithful, destroy and inslave the People by oppressing cruelties:
And when Machiavel could not do it, to levy a War to that wicked end, which
never any of his Ancestors durst attempt; that might at any time with a word of
his mouth have stopped all the bleeding veins in the three Kingdoms, but would
not; and for the satisfying of a base lust, caused more Protestant blood to be
shed then ever was spilt, either by Rome, Heathen or Antichristian. Blessed
God, what ugly sins lodge in their bosoms, that would have had this man to
live! But Words are but Women, Proofs are Men; it is Reason that must be the
Chariot to carry men to give their concurrence to this ludgement: Therefore I
shall deliver my thoughts to the courteous Reader, as I was prepared for it, if
Issue had been joined in the Cause, but with some addition for illustration
sake, desiring excuse for the Preamble, because there is some repetition in
matter.

An Appeal to all Rational men, that love their God, Justice and Country, more
then their Honor, Pleasure and Money, Concerning the Kings Trial.
May it please your Lordship,
MY Lord President, and this High Court, erected for the most Comprehensive,
Impartial, and Glorious piece of Justice, that ever was Acted and Executed upon
the Theater of England, for the Trying and Judging of Charles Stuart, whom God
in his wrath gave to be a king to this Nation, and will, I trust, in great
love, for his notorious Prevarications and Blood-guiltiness, take him away from
us; He that has been the Original of all Injustice, and the Principal Author
of more mischiefs to the Freeborn People of this Nation, then the best
Arithmetician can well enumerate, stands now to give an account of his
Stewardship, and to receive the good of Justice, for all the evil of his
Injustice and Cruelty. Had he Ten thousand lives, they could not all satisfy
for the numerous, Horid and Barbarous Massacres of Myriades, and legions of
Innocent persons, which by his Commands, Commissions and Procurements (or at
least all the world must needs say, which he might have prevented; and he that
suffers any man to be killed, when he may save his life without danger of his
own, is a Murderer) have been cruelly slain, and inhumanely murdered, in this
renowned Albion; Anglia has been made an Aceldama, and her younger sister
Ireland a Land of Ire and Misery; and yet this hard-hearted man, as he went out
of the Court, down the stairs Jan. 22. said (as some of his Gnard told me and
others) That he was not troubled for any of the blood that has been shed, but
for the blood of one man (peradventure he meant Strafford) He was no more
affected with a List that was brought in to Oxford of Five or six thousand
slain at Edgehill, then to read one of Ben: Johnsons Tragedies: You Gentlemen
Royalists that fought for him, if ye had lost your lives for his sake, you see
he would have no more pitied you by his own confession, then you do a poor
Worm; and yet what heart but would cleave, if it were a Rock, melt, if it were
Ice, break, if it were a Flint, or dissolve, if it were a Diamond, to consider
that so much precious Protestant blood should be shed in these three kingdoms,
so many gallant valiant Men of all sorts and conditions, to be sacrificed and
lose their lives, and many of them to dye so desperately in regard of their
Eternal conditions, and all this merely and only for the satisfying and
fulfilling of one man's sinful lust and wicked will; a good Shepherd is he that
lays down his life, or ventures it to save the Sheep; but for one to be so
proudly wedded to his own conceits, as so maliciously to oppose his private
Opinion, against the public Judgment and Reason of State, and to make head
against the Parliament, who acknowledged him to be head thereof, so far as to
give him the Honor of the Royal Assent, in settling the Militia and Safety of
the People: I say, for a Protestant Prince, so beloved at home, and feared
abroad, that in love, and by gentle means might have had any thing from the
Parliament, for him to occasion the shedding of so much blood, for a pretended
Prerogative, as hereafter will appear nothing in effect but to fix and
perpetuate an absolute Tyranny; I can say no less, But, O Lucifer, from whence
art thou fallen, and what heretics are they in politics, that would have had
such a man to live? much more that think his Actions to have merited love and
praise from Heaven and Earth. But now to diffect the Charge.

1. That the kings of England are trusted with a limited power to govern by
Law, the whole stream and current of Legal Authorities run so limpid and clear,
that I should but weary those that know it already, and trouble those that need
not know the particular cases; for it is one of the Fundamentals of Law, That
the king is not above the Law, but the Law above the King: I could easily
deraign it from 1 Edward 3. to the Jurisdiction of Courts, That the king has no
more Power or Authority then what by Law is concredited and committed to him;
but the most famous Authority is Fortescue, Chancellor to H. 6. (and therefore
undoubtedly would not clip his Masters Prerogative) who most Judicially takes a
difference between a Government wholly Regal and Seignoral; as in Turkey,
Russia, France, Spain, etc. and a Government Politic and mixed, where the Law
keeps the beam even between Sovereignty and Subjection, as in England, Denmark,
Swede, and Poland; the first, where the Edict of a Prince makes the Law,
resembles an impetuous inundation of the waters, whereby the Corn and Hay, and
other Fruits of the Earth are spoiled, as when it is Midwinter at Midsummer;
the latter is like a sweet smooth Stream, running by the pleasant Fields and
Meadows: That by the Law of England the King ought not to impose any thing upon
the people, or take any thing away from them to the value of a farthing, but by
common consent in Parliaments or National meetings; and that the people of
Common-Right, and by several Statutes ought to have Parliaments yearly, or
oftener if need be, for the Redress of public grievances, and for the Enacting
of good and wholesome Laws, and repealing of old Statutes of Omeri which are
prejudicial to the Nation: And that the king has not by Law so much power as a
Justice of Peace, to commit any man to Prison for any offense whatsoever,
because all such matters were committed to proper Courts and Officers of
Justice: And if the King by his verbal command send for any person to come
before him, if the party refused to attend, and the messenger endevoring to
force him, they fell to blows; if the messenger killed the party sent for, this
by the Law is Murder in him, but if he killed the messenger, this was
justifiable in him, being in his own defense, so as to sue forth a pardon of
course; these and many other Cases of like nature are so clear and well known,
that I will not presume to multiply particulars.

That the king took an Oath at his Coronation to preserve the Peace of the
Nation, to do Justice to all, and to keep and observe the Laws which the people
have, himself confesses: And it was charged upon the late Archbishop, that he
Emasculated the Oath, 1. Book of Ord. fol.
and left out very material words, Which the people shall choose, which
certainly he durst not have done, without the kings special Command; And it
seems to me no light presumption, that from that very day he had a Design to
alter and subvert the Fundamental Laws, and to introduce an Arbitrary and
Tyrannical Government; but though there had been an Oath, yet by special Office
and duty of his place, every King of England is obliged to Act for the peoples
good, for all power, as it is originally in the people (he must needs be
extreme ignorant, malicious, or a self-destroyer, that shall deny it) so it is
given forth for their preservation, nothing for their destruction; for a king
to rule by lust and not by Law, is a creature that was never of Gods making,
not of Gods approbation, but his permission; And though such men are said to be
Gods on Earth, it is in no other sense then the Devil is called the God of this
world: It seems that one passage which the king would have offered to the Court
(which was not permitted him to dispute the Supreme Authority in the Nation,
and standing mute, the Charge being for High Treason, it is a conviction in
Law, was, That 1 Samuel 8. is a Copy of the kings Commission, by virtue whereof,
he as a king might rule and govern as he list, that he might take the Peoples
Sons and appoint them for himself, for his Chariots, and to be his Horsemen,
and take their Daughters to be his Confectionaries, and take their Fields and
Vineyards, and Oliveyards, even the best of them, and their goodliest young men,
and their Asses, and give them to his Officers, and to his Servants; which
indeed is a Copy and Pattern of an absolute Tyrant, and absolute Slaves, where
the people have no more then the Tyrant will afford them: The holy Spirit in
that Chapter does not insinuate what a good king ought to do, but what a wicked
king would presume to do. Besides, Saul and David had extraordinary callings,
but all just power is now derived from, and conferred by the people; yet in the
case of Saul, it is observable, that the people out of pride to be like other
Nations, desired a king, and such a king as the Heathens had, which were all
Tyrants; for they that know any thing in History, know that the first four
Monarchs were all Tyrants at first, til they gained the peoples consent. Nimrod
the great Hunter was Ninus that built Nineveh, the first Tyrant and Conqueror
that had no Title, and so were all kingdoms, which are not Elective till the
peoples subsequent consent, and though it be by descent, yet it is a
continuation of a Conquest till the people consent, and voluntarily submit to a
Government, they are but Slaves, and in reason they may free themselves if they
can: In France the king begins his Reign, from the day of his Coronation; the
Archbishop asks the people if he shall be King; the twelve Peers, or some that
personate them, say, yes, they girt the sword about him, then he swares to
defend the Laws: And is any thing more natural then to keep an Oath? And
though virtuous Kings have prevailed with the People to make their Crowns
Hereditary, yet the Coronation shows the shell, that the kernel has been in*
Samuel was a good Judge, and there was nothing could be objected against him,
therefore God was displeased at their inordinate desire of a King; and it
seems to me that the Lord declares his dislike of all such Kings as the
heathens were, that is, Kings with an unlimited power, that are not tied to
laws; for he gave them a King in his wrath, therein dealing with them as the
wise Physician with the distempered and impatient Patient, who desiring to
drink wine, tells him the danger of inflammation, yet wine he will have, and the
Physician considering a little wine will do but little hurt, rather then his
Patient by fretting should take greater hurt, prescribes a little whitewine,
wherein the Physician does not approve his drinking of wine, but of two evils
chooses the least. The Jews would have a King for Majesty and Splendour, like
the Heathens; God permits this, he approves it not; it seems to me that the
Lord renounces the very Genus of such Kings as are there mentioned, and the old
word Conning (by Contraction king,) does not signify power or force to do what
he will, but a knowing, wise, discreet man, that opens the Peoples eyes, and
does not lead them by the noses, but govern them with wisdom and discretion
for their own good. Therefore Gentlemen-Royalists, be not so mad as to
misconstrue, either the Oaths of Allegiance or Supremacy or any League or
Covenant that any man should swear to give any one leave to cut his throat;
the true meaning is that the King of England was supreme in this land, in
opposition to the Pope, or any other Prince or Potentate, as the words of the
Oath do import, that no foraigne State Prince or Potentate, etc. In case of any
foreign invasion, the King was by Law to be Generalissimo, to command the
People for their own safety, and so it was expounded by the Parliament in 13.
Eliz. which for some reason of State was not permitted to be printed with the
Statutes, besides God told those Kings whom he had formerly anointed, what
their duty was; not to exalt themselves overmuch above their brethren, to
delight themselves in the Law of God; out of which I infer that the Turks,
Tarters, Muscovites, French, Spaniards, and all people that live at the beck
and nod of tyrannical men, may and ought to free themselves from that tyranny,
if, and when they can; for such Tyrants that so domineer with a rod of iron* do
not govern by Gods permissive hand of approbation or benediction, but by the
permissive hand of his Providence, suffering them to scourge the People, for
ends best known to himself, until he open a way for the people to work out
their own enfranchisements.

But before I speak of the war, it will be necessary for the satisfaction of
rational men, to open and prove the Kings wicked design, wherewith he stands
charged. Now that he had from the beginning of his reign, such a design and
endeavor so to tear up the foundations of Government, that Law should be no
Protection to any man's person or estate, will clearly appear by what follows.

1. By his not taking the Oath so fully as his Predecessors did, that so when
the Parliament should tender good laws to him for the Royal assent, he might
readily answer that he was not by Oath obliged to confirm or corroborare the
same.

2. By his dishonorable and perfidious dealing with the People at his
Coronation, when he set forth a Proclamation, that in regard of the infection
then spread through the Kingdom, He promised to dispense with those knights,
that by an old statute were to attend at the Coronation, who were thereby
required not to attend, but did notwithstanding with in few months after take
advantage of their absence, and raised a vaste sum of money out of their
estates at the Council Table, where they pleading the said Proclamation, for
their justification, they were answered that the law of the land was above any
Proclamation, like that Tyrant that when he could not by law execute a virgin,
commanded her to be deflored, and then put to death.

3. By his altering the Pattents and Commissions to the Judges, which having
heretofore had their places granted to them so long as they should behave
themselves therein, he made them but during pleasure, that so if the Judges
should not declare the Law to be as he would have it, he might with a wet
singer remove them* and put in such as should not only say but swear if need
werethat the Law was as the king would have it* for when a man shall give five
or ten thousand pounds for a Judges place during the kings pleasure, and he
shall the next day send to him to know his opinion, of a difference in law
between the king and a subject, and it shall be intimated unto him, that if he do
not deliver his opinion for the king, he is likely to be removed out of his
place the next day, which if so; he knows not how to live, but must rot in a
Prison for the money which he borrowed to buy his place, as was well known to
be some of their cases, who underhand and closely bought great places; to elude
the danger of the statute, whether this was not too heavy a temptation for the
shoulders of most men to bear, is no hard matter to determine; so as upon the
matter, that very act of his made the King at the least a potentiall Tyrant;
for when that shall be law, which a King shall declare himself, or which shall
be declared by those whom he chooses, this brings the People to the very next
step to slavery.

But that which does irrefragably prove the design* was his restless desire to
destroy Parliaments, or to make them useless: And for that, who knows not but
that there were three or four National meetings in Parliament in the first
four years of his Reign, which were called for supply to bring money into his
coffers in point of Subsidies, rather then for any benefit to the People, as
may appear by the few good Laws that were then made. But that which is most
memorable, is the untimely dissolving of the Parliament in 4o. Car. when Sir
John Elliot and others (who managed a Conference with the House of Peers
concerning the Duke of Buckin ham, who amongst other things was charged
concerning the death of King James) were committed close prisoner to the Tower,
where he lost his life by cruel indurance. Which I may not pass over without a
special Animadversion: for sure there is no Turk or Heathen but will say that
if he were any way guilty of his Fathers death, let him die for it.

I would not willingly be so injurious to the honest Reader, as to make him buy
that again which he has formerly met with in the Parliaments Declaration or
elsewhere; in such a case a marginal reference may be sufficient. Nor would I
herein be so presumptuous as to prevent any thing that happily may be intended
in any Declaration for more general satisfaction; but humbly to offer a
Students mite which satisfies my self, with submission to better judgments.

How the King first came to the Crown, God and his own Conscience best knew. It
was well known and observed at Court, that a little before, he was a professed
enemy to the Duke of Buckingham; but instantly upon the death of King James,
took him into such special protection, grace and favor, that upon the matter
he divided the Kingdom with him. And when the Earl of Bristol had exhibited a
Charge against the said Duke, the 13. Article whereof concerned the death of
King James, He instantly dissolved that Parliament, that so he might protect
the Duke from the justice thereof, and would never suffer any legal inquiry to
be made for his Fathers death. The Rabbines observe that that which stuck most
with Abraham about Gods command to sacrifice Isaac, was this: Can I not be
obedient, unless I be unnatural? What will the Heathens say, when they hear
I have killed my only son? What will an Indian say to this case? A King has
all power in his hands to do justice; There is one accused upon strong
presumptions at the least, for poisoning that Kings Father; The King protects
him from justice; Whether do you believe that himself had any hand in his
Fathers death? Had the Duke been accused for the death of a beggar, he ought
not to have protected him from a Judicial Trial. We know that by Law it is no
less then misprision of Treason to conceal a Treason; and to conceal a Murder,
strongly implies a guilt thereof, and makes him a kind of Accessory to the
fact. He that has no nature to do justice to his own Father, could it ever be
expected that he should do justice to others? Was he fit to continue a Father
to the people, who was without natural affection to his own Father? Will he
love a Kingdom, that showed no love to himself, unless it was that he durst
not suffer Inquisition to be made for it? But I leave it as a riddle, which at
the day of Judgment will be expounded and unridled, for some sins will not
be made manifest till that day; with this only, That had he made the Law of God
his delight, and studied therein night and day, as God commanded his Kings to
do; or had he but studied Scripture half so much as Ben: Johnson or Shakespeare,
he might have learnt, That when Amaziah was settled in the 2 King. 12. 20. and
14. 1, 5.
Kingdom, he suddenly did justice upon those servants which had killed his
father Joash: he did not by any pretended prerogative excuse or protect them,
but delivered them up into the hands of that Justice which the horridness of
the fact did undoubtedly demerit. 27 Mar. 5. Car.


That Parliament 4. Car. proving so abortive, the King sets forth a
Proclamation, That none should presume to move him to call Parliaments, for he
knew how to raise moneys enough without the help of Parliaments, therefore in
12 years refuses to call any. In which interval and intermission, how he had
oppressed the people by encroachments and usurpations upon their liberties and
properties; and what vast sums of money he had forceably exacted and exhausted
by illegal Patents and Monopolies of all sorts, I refer the Reader to that
most judicious and full Declaration of the state of the Kingdeme, published in
the beginning of this Parliament. That Judgment of Ship-mony did upon the
matter formalize the people absolute slaves, and him an absolute Tyrant: for if
the King may take from the people in case of necessity, and himself shall be
Judge of that necessity, then cannot any man say that he is worth 6d. for if
the King say that he has need of that 6d. then by Law he must have it; I mean
that great Nimrod, that would have made all England a Forest, and the People
which the Bishop call his sheep, to be his Venison to be hunted at his pleasure.

Nor does the common objection, That the Judges and evil Counselors, and not
the King, ought to be responsible for such male-Administrations, injustice and
oppression; bear the weight of a feather in the balance of right reason. For,
1. Who made such wicked and corrupt Judges? were they not his own Creatures?
and ought not every man to be accountable for the works of his own hands? He
that does not hinder the doing of evil, if it lies in his power to prevent it,
is guilty of it as a commander thereof. He that suffered those black Stars to
inflict such barbarous cruelties and unheard of punishments, as Brandings,
Slitting of Noses, etc. upon honest men, to the dishonor of the Protestant
Religion, and disgrace of the Image of God shining in the face of man, He well
deserved to have been so served. But, 2. He had the benefit of those illegal
Fines and Judgments. I agree, That if a Judge shall oppress I. S. for the
benefit of I. D. the King ought not to answer for this, but the Judge, unless
he protect the Judge against the complaint of I. S. and in that case he makes
himself guilty of it. But when an unjust judgment is given against I. S. for
the Kings benefit, and the Fine to come immediately into his Coffers; he that
receives the money, must needs be presumed to consent to the judgment. But, 3.
Mark a Machiaveipolicy; Call no Parliaments to question the injustice and
corruption of Judges for the Peoples relief, And make your own Judges, and let
that be Law that they declare; whether it be reasonable or unreasonable it is
no matter.

But then how came it to pass that we had any more Parliaments? Had we not a
gracious King to call a Parliament when there was so much need of it? and to
pass so many gracious Acts to put down the Star Chamber, etc? Nothing
less, It was not any voluntary free Act of grace, not the least ingredient or
tincture of love or goodaffection to the people, that called the short
Parliament in 16* but to serve his own turn against the Scots, whom he then
had designed to enslave; and those seven Acts of grace which the King past,
were no more then his duty to do, nor half so much but giving the people a
take of their own grists, and he dissents with them about the Militia, which
commanded all the rest; he never intended thereby any more good and security to
the people, then he that stealing the Goose, leaves the feathers behind him:
But to answer the question, thus it was;

The king being wholly given up to be led by the counsels of a Jesuited Party,
who endeavored to throw a bone of dissension among us, that they might cast in
their net into our troubled waters, and catch more fish; for St. Peter's Sea
persuaded the King, to set up a new form of Prayer in Scotland, and laid the
bait so cunningly that whether they saw it or not, they were undone; if they
saw the mystery of iniquity couched in it they would resist, and so merit
punishment for rebelling; if they swallowed it, it would make way for worse;
well, they saw the poison and refused to taste it; the King makes war; and
many that loved honor and wealth more then God, assisted him; down he went
with an Army, but his treasure wasted in a short time* fight they would not for
fear of an afterreckoning; some Commanders propound that they should make
their demands, and the King grants all, comes back to London, and burns the
Pacification, saying it was counterfeit, they reassume their forts, he raises a
second war against them, and was necessitated to call a Parliament, offering
to lay down shipmoney for twelve subsidies; they refuse; the King in high
displeasure breaks off the Parliament, and in a Declaration commands them not
to think of any more Parliaments, for he would never call another.

There was a King of Egypt that cruelly oppressed the People, they poor slaves
complaining to one another, he feared a rising, and commanded that none should
complain upon pain of cruel death; Spies being abroad, they often met, but
durst not speak, but parted with tears in their eyes, which declared that they
had more to utter, but durst not; this struck him to greaterfears, he commanded
that none should look upon one another eyes at parting; therefore their
griefs being too great to be smothered, they fetched a deep sigh when they
parted, which moved them so to compassionate one another wrongs that they ran
in and killed the Tyrant. The long hatching Irish treason was now ripe, and
therefore it was necessary that England and Scotland should be in Combustion,
least we might help the Irish Protestants; well, the Scots get Newcastle, he
knew they would trust him no more, he had so often broke with them, therefore
no hopes to get them out by a treaty; many Lords and the City petition for a
Parliament, the King was at such a necessity, that yield he must, to that which
he most abhorred, God had brought him to such a strait, he that a few months
before assumed the power of God, Commanding men not to think of Parliaments to
restrain the free thoughts of the heart of man, was constrained to call one
which they knew he would break off when the Scots were sent home, therefore
got a Confirmation of it, that he should not dissolve it without the consent of
both Houses, of which he had no hopes, or by force which he suddenly attempted,
and the English Army in the North, was to have come up to confound the
Parliament and this rebellious and disloyal City, as the King called it, and
for their pains was promised thirty thousand pounds and the plunder as by the
examinations of Colonel Goring, Leg, etc. does more fully appear.

And here by the way I cannot but commend the City Malignants, He calls them
Rebels, they call him a gracious King; He by his Proclamation at Oxford
prohibits all commerce and intercourse of trade between this populous City
(the life and interest whereof consists in trade, without which many thousands
cannot subsist) and other parts of the kingdom, still they do good against
evil, and petitioning him so often to cut their throats, are troubled at
nothing so much as that they are not reduced to that Darlingrub.
former and a worse bondage then when there was a Lord Warden made in the City,
and the King sent for as much of their estates as he pleased. But surely the
Oxfordshire 15. Apr. 20. Car.
men are more to be commended; for when the King had commanded by his
Proclamation, that what Corn, Hay, and other provision in the County of Oxford
could not be fetched into the said City for his Garrison, should be consumed and
destroyed by fire, for fear it should fall into the hands of the Parliaments
friends; a cruelty not to be paralleled by any Infidel, Heathen, or pagan
King, nor to be presidented amongst the most avowed and professed enemies, much
les^e from a King to his Subjects; they resolved never to trust him any more.

But the great Question will be, What has been the true ground and occasion of
the War? which unless I clear, and put it out of question, as the Charge
imports, I shall fall short of what I chiefly aim at, viz. That the King set up
his Standard of War, for the advancement and upholding of his Personal
Interest, Power, and* pretended Prerogative, against the Public Interest of
Common-Right, Peace and Safety; and thus I prove it:

1. He fought for the Militia by Sea and Land, to have it at his absolute
dispose, and to justify and maintain his illegal Commissions of Array; and
this he pretended was his Birthright by the Law of England: which if it were
so, then might he by the same Reason command all the money in the kingdom: for
he that carries the Sword, will command the Purse.

2. The next thing that he pretended to fight for, was his Power to call
Parliaments when he pleased, and dissolve them when he list: If they will serve
his turn, then they may sit by a Law to inslave the People; so that the People
had better choose all the Courtiers and Kings Favorites at first, then to
trouble themselves with ludibrious Elections to assemble the Freeholders
together, to their great labor and expense both of time and coin, and those
which are chosen Knights and Burgesses to make great preparations, to take long
Journeys to London themselves and their Attendants, to see the King and Lords
in their Parliament robes ride in state to the House, and with Domitian, to
catch Flies; and no sooner shall there be any breathings, or a Spirit of
Justice stirring and discovered in the House of Commons, but the king sends the
Black-Rod, and dissolves the Parliament, and sends them back again as wise as
they were before, but not with so much money in their purses, to tell stories
to the Freeholders of the bravery of the king and Lords.

3. Well, but if this be too gross, and that the People begin to murmr and
clamor for another Parliament, then there goes out another Summons, and they
meet, and sit for some time, but to as much purpose as before; for when the
Commons have presented any Bill for Redress of a public Grievance, then the
king has several games to play to make all fruitless; as, first his own
Negative Voice that if Lords and Commons are both agreed* then he will advise;
which (I know not by what strange Doctrine) has been of late construed to be a
plain denial, though under favor at the first it was no more but to allow him
two or three days time to consider of the Equity of the Law; in which time if
he could not convince them of the Injustice of it, then ought he by his Oath
and by Law to consent to it.

4. But if by this means the king had contracted hard thoughts from the people,
and that not only the Commons, but many of the Lords, that have the same noble
blood running in their veins, as those English Barons, whose Swords were the
chief Instruments that purchased Magna Charta: then, that the king might be
sure to put some others between him and the peoples hatred, The next
prerogative that he pretended to have, was to be the sole Judge of Chivalry, to
have the sole power of conferring Honors, to make as many Lords as he pleased,
that so he may be sure to have two against one, if the House of Commons (by
reason of the multitude of Burgesses, which he likewise pretended a power to
make as many Borough-Towns and Corporations as he pleased) were not packed
also: And this is that glorious privilege of the English Parliaments, so much
admired for just nothing; for if his pretended Prerogative might stand for Law,
as was challenged by his adherents, never was there a purer cheat put upon any
people, nor a more ready way to enslave them, then by privilege of Parliament,
being just such a mockery of the people, as that Mock-Parliament at Oxford was,
where the kings consent must be the Figure, and the Representative stand but
for a Cipher.

5. But then out of Parliament the people are made to believe, That the king
has committed all Justice to the Judges, and distributed the execution thereof
into several Courts; and that the king cannot so much as imprison a man, nor
impose any thing upon, nor take any thing away from the people, as by Law he
ought not to do: But now see what prerogative he challenges.

1. If the King have a mind to have any public spirited man removed out of
the way, this man is killed, the murderer known, a Letter comes to the Judge,
and it may be it shall be found but Manslaughter; if it be found Murder, the
man is condemned, but the King grants him a Pardon, which the Judges will
allow, if the word Murder be in it; but because it is too gross to pardon
Murder, therefore the king shall grant him a Lease of his life for seven
years, and then renew it (like a Bishops Lease) as he did to Major Prichard,
who was lately Justiced, who being a Servant to the Earl of Lindsey, murdered
a Gentleman in Lincolnshire, and was condemned, and had a Lease of his life
from the king, as his own friends have credibly told me.

2. For matter of Liberty: The King or any Courtier sends a man to Prison, if
the Judge set him at liberty, then put him out of his place, a temptation too
heavy for those that love Money and Honor more then God, to bear; therefore any
Judgment that is given between the King and a Subject, it is not worth a rush,
for what will not money do?

Next he challenges a Prerogative to enhance and debase moneys, which by Law
was allowed him, so far as to balance Trade, and no further; that if gold went
high beyond Sea, it might not be cheap here, to have it all bought up and
transported: but under color of that, he challenges a Prerogative, that the
king may by Proclamation make Leather current, or make a Six pence go for
Twenty shillings, or a Twenty shillings for Six pence: which not to mention any
thing of the project of Farthings or Brass money, He that challenges such a
Prerogative, is a potential Tyrant; for if he may make my Twelve pence in my
pocket worth but Two pence, what property has any man in any thing that he
enjoys?

Another Prerogative pretended was, That the king may avoid any Grant, and so
may cosen and cheat any man by a Law; the ground whereof is, That the kings
Grants shall be taken according to his intention* which in a sober sense I
wish, that all men's Grants might be so construed according to their intentions,
expressed by word or writing; but by this means it being hard to know what the
king intended, his Grants have been like the Devils Oracles, taken in any
contrary sense for his own advantage.

1. R. In the famous Case of Altonwoods, there is vouched the Lord Lovels Case,
That the king granted Lands to the Lord Lovel and his Heirs males, not for
service done, but for a valuable consideration of money paid: The Patentee well
hoped to have enjoyed the Land, not only during his life, but that his Heirs
males, at least of his body, should have likewise enjoyed it: but the Judges
finding, it seems, that the king was willing to keep the money, and have his
Land again (for what other reason no mortal man can fathom) resolved that it
was a void Grant, and that nothing passed to the Patentee. I might instance in
many cases of like nature, through out all the Reports, as one once made his
boast that he never made or past any Patent or Charter from the Crown, but he
reserved one starting hole or other, and knew how to avoid it, and so merely to
cosen and defraud the poor Patentee. So that now put all these Prerogatives
together: 1. The Militia by Sea and Land. 2. A liberty to call Parliaments when
he pleased, and to adjourn, prorogue or dissolve them at pleasure. 3. A
Negative voice, that the people cannot save themselves without him, and must
cut their own throats, if commanded so to do. 4. The nomination and making of
all the Judges, that upon peril of the loss of their places, must declare the
Law to be as he pleases. 5. A power to confer Honors upon whom, and how he
pleases: A covetous base wretch for Five or Ten thousand pounds to be Courted,
who deserves to be carted. 6. To pardon Murderers, whom the Lord says shall
not be pardoned. 7. To set a value and price of Moneys as he pleases, that if
he be to pay Ten thousand pounds, he may make Leather by his Proclamation to be
current that day, or a Five shillings to pass for twenty shillings; and if to
receive so much, a Twenty shillings to pass for Five shillings. And lastly, a
Legal theft to avoid his own Grants: I may boldly throw the Gantlet, and
challenge all the Machiavels in the world, to invent such an exquisite platform
of Tyrannical Domination, and such a perfect Tyranny without maim or blemish,
as this is, and that by a Law, which is worst of all. But the truth is, these
are no Legal Prerogatives, but Usurpations, Encroachments and Invasions upon
the Peoples Rights and Liberties, and this easily effected without any great
depth of policy; for it is but being sure to call no Parliaments, or make them
useless, and make the Judges places profitable, and place Avarice upon the
Bench, and no doubt but the Law shall sound as the king would have it: But let
me thus far satisfy the ingenuous Reader, that all the Judges in England
cannot make one Case to be Law that is not Reason, no more then they can prove
a hair to be white that is black which if they should so declare or adjudge, it
is mere nullity; for Law must be Reason adjudged, where Reason is the Genus,
and the Judgment in some Court makes the Differentiae; and I never found that
the fair hand of the common Law of England, ever reached out any Prerogative to
the king above the meanest man, but in three cases: 1. In matters of honor and
preeminence to his person, and in matters of Interest, that he should have
Mines Royal of Gold and Silver, in whose Land soever they were discovered; and
Fishes Royal, as Sturgeons and Whales, in whose streams or water soever they
were taken, which very rarely happened, or to have tithes out of a Parish that
no body else could challenge; for says the Law, The most Noble Persons are to
have the most Noble things: 2. To have his Patents freed from deceit, that he
be not overreached or cousened in his Contracts, being employed about the great
and arduous affairs of the Kingdom. 3. His Rights to be freed from incursion of
time, not to be bound up by any Statute of Non*claim; for indeed possession is
a vain plea, when the matter of Right is in question, for Right can never dye;
and some such honorable privileges of mending his plea, or suing in what Court
he will, and some such prerogatives of a middle indifferent nature, that could
not be prejudicial to the people: but that the Law of England should give the
King any such vast immence precipitating power, or any such God*like state,
that he ought not to be accountable for wicked actions, or Male-Administrations
and Misgovernment; as he has challenged and averred in his answer to the
Petition of Right, or any such principals of Tyranny, which are as inconsistent
with the peoples Liberties and Safety, as the Ark and Dagon, light and
darkness* in an intensive degree, is a most vain and irrational thing to
imagine; and yet that was the ground of the War, as himself often declared, and
that would not have half contented him, if he had come in by the Sword. But
some rational men object, How can it be murder, say they, for the king to
raise Forces against the Parliament? since there is no other way of determining
differences between the king and his Subjects, but by the Sword, for the Law is
no competent Judge between two Snpreme powers; and then if it be only a
contending for each others Right, Where is the malice, that makes the killing
of a man murder? Take the answer thus, first, How is it possible to imagine
two Supreme powers in one Nation, no more then two Suns in one Firmament; if
the king be Supreme, the Parliament must be Subordinate; if they Supreme* then
he Subordinate: But then it is alleged, That the king challenged a power only
coordinate, that the Parliament could do nothing without him, nor he without
them: Under favor, two powers coordinate is as absurd as the other, for though
in quiet times the Commons have waited upon the king, and allowed him a
Negative voice in matters of less concernment, where delay could not prove
dangerous to the people, yet when the Commons shall Vote that the kingdom is in
danger, unless the Militia be so and so settled, now if he will not agree to it,
they are bound in duty to do it themselves: and it is impossible to imagine that
ever any man should have the consent of the people to be their king upon other
conditions (without which no man ever had right) to wear the diadem; for
Conquest makes a Title amongst Wolves and Bears, but not amongst men.

When the first agreement was concerning the power of Parliaments, if the king
should have said, Gentlemen, are you content to allow me any Negative Voice,
that if you Vote the kingdom to be in danger, unless such an Act pass, if I
refuse to assent, shall nothing be done in that case? surely no rational man
but would have answered, May it please your Majesty, we shall use all dutiful
means to procure your Royal Assent, but if you still refuse, we must not sit
still and see our selves ruined, we must and will save our selves whether you
will or no; and will any man say that the kings power is diminished because he
cannot hurt the people, or that a man is less in health that has many
Physicians to attend him? God is Omnipotent that cannot sin, and all power is
for the peoples good, but a Prince may not say that is for the peoples good,
which they say and feel to be for their hurt. And as for the malice, the Law
implies that; as when a thief sets upon a man to rob him, he has no spite to
the man, but love to the money: but it is an employed malice, that he will kill
the people unless they will be Slaves.

Q. But by what Law is the King condemned?

R. By the Fundamental Law of this kingdom, by the general Law of all Nations,
and the Unanimous consent of all Rational men in the world, written in every
man's heart with the Pen of a Diamond in Capital Letters, and a Character so
legible that he that runs may read, viz. That when any man is entrusted with
the Sword for the protection and preservation of the people, if this man shall
employ it to their destruction, which was put into his hand for their safety,
by the Law of that Land he becomes an Enemy to that people, and deserves the
most exemplary and severe punishment that can be invented: And this is the
first necessary Fundamental Law of every kingdom, which by Intrinsecal rules of
Government must preserve it self: and this Law needed not be expressed, That if a
King become a Tyrant, he shall dye for it, it is so naturally employed; we do not
use to make Laws which are for the preservation of Nature, that a man should
eat, and drink, and buy himself clothes, and enjoy other natural comforts; no
kingdom ever made any Laws for it: And as we are to defend our selves
naturally, without any written Law, from hunger and cold, so from outward
violence; therefore if a king would dedroy a people, it is absurd and rediculous
to ask by what Law he is to dye. And this Law of nature is the Law of God
written in the fleshly tables of men's hearts, that like the eldest Sister, has
a prerogative right of power before any positive Law whatsoever; and this Law
of nature is an undubitable Legislative authority of it self, that has a
suspensive power over all humane Laws. If any man shall by express Covenant
under hand and seal give power to another man to kill him, this is a void
Contract, being destructive to humanity; and by the Law of England any Act or
Agreement Com E* Leicesters Case.
against the Laws of God or Nature, is a mere nullity: for as man has no hand
in the making of the Laws of God or Nature, no more has he power to mar or
alter them. If the Pilot of a Ship be drunk, and running upon a Rock, if the
passengers cannot otherwise prevent it, they may throw him into the Sea to cool
him; And this Question has received Resolution this Parliament: When the
Militia of an Army is committed to a General, it is not with any express
condition, That he shall not turn the mouths of his Canons against his own
Soldiers, for that is so naturally and necessarily employed, that it is needless
to be expressed; insomuch as if he did attempt or command such a thing against
the nature of his Trust and Place, it did ipso facto estate the Army in a right
of disobedience, unless any man be so grossly ignorant to think that obedience
binds men to cut their own throats, or their companions: Nor is this any
secret of the Law which has lain hid from the beginning, and now brought out
to bring him to Justice; but that which is connatural with every man, and
innate in his judgment and reason, and is as ancient as the first king, and an
Epidemical binding Law in all Nations in the world: For when many Families
agree, for the preservation of Humane Society, to invest any king or Governor
with power and authority, upon the acceptance thereof, there is a mutual Trust
and confidence between them, That the king shall improve his power for their
good, and make it his work to procure their safeties, and they to provide for
his honor, which it done to the Commonwealth in him, as the Sword and Ensigns
of Honor carried before the Lord Major are for the honor of the city; now as
when any one of this people shall compass the death of the Governor, ruling
well; this is a Treason punishable with death for the wrong done to the
Community, and Anathema be to such a man: so when he or they that are trusted
to fight the peoples Battles, and to procure their welfare, shall prevaricate,
and act to the inslaving or destroying of the people, who are their Liege
Lords, and all Governors are but the peoples creatures, and the work of their
hands, to be accomptable as their Stewards (and is it not senseless for the
vessel to ask the Potter by what Law he calls it to account) this is high
Treason with a witness, and far more transcendent then in the former case,
because the king was paid for his Service, and the Dignity of the Person does
increase the offense; for a great man of noble Education and knowledge to
betray so great a Trust, and abuse so much love as the Parliament showed to the
king by Petitioning him as good Subjects, praying for him as good Christians,
advising him as good Counselors, and treating with him as the great Counsel of
the kingdom, with such infinite care and tenderness of his honor (a course
which Gods people did not take with Rehoboam, they never petitioned him, but
advised him, he refused their counsel, and hearkened to young Counselors, and
they cry, To thy tents, O Israel, and made quick and short work of it) after
all this, and much more longanimity and patience) from the Lord to the Servant,
for him not only to set up a Standard of War, in defiance of his dread
Sovereign, The People (for so they truly were in Nature, though Names have
befooled us) but to persist so many years in such cruel persecutions, who with
a word of his mouth might have made a Peace. If ever there were so superlative
a Treason, let the Indians judge; and whosoever shall break and violate such a
trust and confidence, Anathema Maranatha be unto them.

Q. But why was there not a written Law to make it Treason for the King to
destroy the people, as well as for a man to compass the Kings death?

Resp. Because our Ancestors did never imagine, that any King of England would
have been so desperately mad, as to leavy a War against the Parliament and
people: as in the Common instance of Paricide, the Romans made no Law against
him that should kill his Father, thinking no child would be so unnatural to be
the death of him who was the Author of his life; but when a child came to be
accused for a Murder, there was a more cruel punishment inflicted, then for
other Homicides: for he was thrown into the Sea in a great Leather Barrel, with
a Dog, a Jackanapes, a Cock, and a Viper, significant companions for him, to be
deprived of all the Elements, as in my Poor man's Case, Fol. 10. Nor was there
any Law made against Parents that should kill their children; yet if any man
was so unnatural, he had an exemplary punishment.

Obj. But is it not a Maxim in Law, That the King can do no wrong?

Resp. For any man to say so, is blasphemy against the great God of Truth and
Love: for only God cannot err, because what he wills is right, because he
wills it; and it is a sad thing to consider how learned men, for unworthy ends,
should use such art to subdue the people, by transportation of their senses, as
to make them believe that the Law is, That the King can do no wrong.

First, For Law, I do aver it with confidence, but in all humility, That there
is no such Case to be found in Law, That if the King Rob, or Murder, or commit
such horrid Extravagancies, that it is no wrong: Indeed the case is put in H.
7. by a chief Judge, that If the King kill a man, it is no felony to make him
suffer death; that is to be meant in ordinary Courts of Justice: But there is
no doubt but the Parliament might try the King, or appoint others to judge him
for it. We find Cases in Law, that the King has been sued even in Civil
Actions.

In 43 E 3. 22. it is resolved, That all manner of Actions did lie against the
King, as against any Lord; and 24 E. 3. 23. Wilby a learned Judge said, that
there was a Writ Praecipe Henrico Regi Angliae.

Indeed E. 1. did make an Act of State, That men should sue to him by Petition;
but this was not agreed unto in Parliament, Thelwall title Roye digest of
Writs, 71. But after, when Judges places grew great, the Judges and Bitesheeps
began to sing Lullaby, and speak Platentia to the king, that My Lord the King
is an Angel of light: Now Angels are not responsible to men, but God, therefore
not kings: And the Judges they begin to make the king a God, and say, that by
Law his style is Sacred Majesty* though he swears every hour; and Gracious
Majesty, though gracious men be the chief objects of his hatred; and that the
king has an Omnipotency and Omnipresence.

But I am sure there is no Case in Law, That if the king leavy a War against
the Parliament and people, that it is not Treason. Possibly that Case in H. 7.
may prove, That if the king should in his passion kill a man, this shall not be
Felony to take away the kings life: for the inconveniency may be greater to the
people, by putting a king to death for one offense and miscarriage, then the
execution of Justice upon him can advantage them: But what is this toa leavying
of War against a Parliament? never any Judge was so devoid of understanding,
that he denied that to be Treason. But suppose a Judge that held his place at
the kings pleasure did so, I am sure never any Parliament said so. But what if
there had in dark times of Popery been an Act made, That the king might
Murder, Ravish, Burn and perpetrate all mischiefs, and play Reaks with
impunity, will any man that has but wit enough to measure an Ell of cloth, or
to tell Twenty, say, That this is an Obligation for men to stand still and
suffer a Monster to cut their throats, and grant Commission to rob at Suitors
hill, as such and no better are all Legal thefts and oppressions: The Doctor
says, That a Statute against giving an alms to a poor man is void: He is no
Student, I mean, was never bound Prentice to Reason, that says, A king cannot
commit Treason against the people.

Ob. But are there not Negative words in the Statute of 25 Ed. 3. That nothing
else shall be construed to be Treason, but what is there expressed?

Res. That Statute was intended for the peoples safety, that the kings Judges
should not make Traitors by the dozens to gratify the king or Courtiers; but
it was never meant, to give liberty to the king to destroy the people; and
though it be said, That the king and Parliament only may declare Treason, yet
no doubt, if the king will neglect his duty, it may be so declared without him
for when many are obliged to do any service, if some of them fail, the rest
must do it.

Obj. But is there any president, that ever any man was put to death that did
not offend against some written Law? For where there is no Law, there is no
transgression.

R. It Is very true, where there is neither Law of God, nor Nature* nor positive
Law, there can be no transgression, and therefore that Scripture is much abused
to apply it only to Laws positive. For

First, ad ea quae frequentius, etc. It Is out of the sphaere of all earthly
Lawgivers to comprehend and express all particular cases that may possibly
happen, but such as are of most frequent concurrence; particulars being
different, like the several faces of men different from one another, else Laws
would be too tedious, and as particulars occur, rational men will reduce them
to general reasons of State, so as every thing may be adjudged for the good of
the Community.

2. The Law of England, is Lex non scripta, and we have a direction in the
Epistle to the 3. Rep. That when our Law Books are silent, we must repair to
the Law of Nature and Reason; Holinshed, and other Historians, tell us, That in
20 H. 8. the Lord Hungerford was executed for Buggery, for which there was then
no positive Law to make it Felony; and before any Statute against Witchcraft,
many Witches have been hanged in England, because it is death by Gods Law: If
any Italian Mountebanck should come over hither, and give any man poison that
should lie in his body above a year and a day, and then kill him, as it is
reported they can give a man poison that shall consume the body in three years,
will any make scruple or question to hang up such a Rascal? At Naples, the
great Treasurer of Corn being entrusted with many Thousand quarters, at three
shillings the bushel, for the common good, finding an opportunity to sell it
for five shillings the bushel to Foreign Merchants, enriched himself
exceedingly thereby, and Corn growing suddenly dear, the Counsel called him to
account for it, who proffered to allow three shillings for it, as it was
delivered into his Custody, and hoped thereby to escape, and for so great a
breach of Trust, nothing would content the people but to have him hanged; and
though there was no positive Law for it, to make it Treason, yet it was
resolved by the best Politicians, that it was Treason to break so great a Trust
by the Fundamental Constitution of the Kingdom, and that for so great an
offense he ought to dye, that durst presume to enrich himself by that which
might endanger the lives of so many Citizens; for as society is natural, so
Governors must of necessity, and in all reason provide for the preservation and
sustenance of the meanest member, he that is but as the little toe of the body
politic.

But I know the ingenuous Reader desires to hear something concerning Ireland,
where there were no less the 152000 men, women, and children, most barbarously
and satannically murdered in the first four months of the Rebellion, as
appeared by substantial proofs, at the kings Bench, at the trial of Maoquire.
If the king had a hand, or but a little finger in that Massacre, every man will
say, Let him dye the death; but how shall we be assured of that? How can we
know the Tree, better then by its fruits? For my own particular, I have spent
many serious thoughts about it, and I desire in doubtful cases, to give Charity
the upper hand; but I cannot in my conscience acquit him of it. Many strong
presumptions, and several Oaths of honest men, that we have seen the kings
Commission for it, cannot but amount to a clear proof. If I meet a man running
down stairs with a bloody Sword in his hand, and find a man stabbed in the
Chamber, though I did not see this man run into the body, by that man which I
met, yet if I were of the Jury, I durst not but find him guilty of the
murder; and I cannot but admire that any man should deny that for him, which
he durst never deny for himself: How often was that monstrous Rebellion laid in
his dish? and yet he durst never absolutely deny it: never was Bear so
unwillingly brought to the stake, as he was to declare against the Rebels; and
when he did once call them Rebels, he would suffer but forty Copies to be
printed, and those to be sent to him sealed; and he has since above forty
times called them his Subjects, and his good Subjects; and sent to Ormond to
give special thanks to some of these Rebels, as Muskerry and Plunket, (which I
am confident by what I see of his height of Spirit and undaunted resolution at
his Trial, and since acting the last part answerable to the former part of his
life; He would rather have lost his life, then to have sent thanks to two such
incarnate Devils, if he had not been as guilty as themselves) questionless if
the King had not been guilty of that blood, he would have made a thousand
Declarations against those Bloodhounds and Hell Hounds, that are not to be
named but with fire and brimstone, and have sent to all Princes in the world
for Assistance against such accursed Devils in the shape of men: but he durst
not offend those Fiends and Firebrarnds; for if he had, I verily believe they
would soon have produced his Commission under his hand and seal of Scotland at
Edinburgh, 1641. A copy whereof is in the Parliaments hands, attested by Oath,
dispersed by copies in Ireland, which caused the general Rebellion.

Obj. He did not give Commission to kill the English, but to take their Forts,
Castles, Towns and Arms, and come over and help him.

And is it like all this could be effected without the slaughter of the poor
English? Did the king ever call them Rebels, but in forty Proclamations wrung
out of him by force, by the Parliaments importunity? Murdering the Protestants
was so acceptable to him, and with this limitation, That none should be
published without his further directions, as appears under Nichols his hand,
now in the Parliaments custody: But the Scots were proclaimed Rebels before
they had killed a man, or had an Army, and a Prayer against them, enjoined in
all Churches, but no such matter against the Irish.

Well, when the Rebels were worsted in Ireland, the King makes War here to
protect them, which but for his fair words had been prevented, often calling
God to witness, He would as soon raise War on his own children; And men from
Popish principles assist him. Well: We fought in jest, and were kept between
winning and losing: The king must not be too strong, lest he revenge himself:
nor the Parliament too strong, for the Commons would rule all, till Naseby
fight, that then the king could keep no more days of Thanksgiving so well as
we: Then he makes a Cessation in Ireland, and many Irish came over to help him:
English came over with Papists, who had scarce wiped their Swords since they
had killed their wives and children, and had their Estates.

But thus I argue, The Rebels knew that the king had proclaimed them Traitors,
and forty Copies were Printed; and the first clause of an Oath enjoined by the
General Council of Rebels, wrs, To bear true Faith and Allegiance to King
Charles; and by all means to maintain his Royal Prerogative, against the
Puritans in the Parliament of England. Now is any man to weak in his
intellectuals, as to imagine, That if the Rebels had without the kings command
or consent murdered so many Protestants, and he thereupon had really
proclaimed them Rebels, That they would after this, have taken a new Oath, to
have maintained his Prerogative: No, those bloody Devils had more wit, then to
fight in jest. If the king had once in good earnest proclaimed them Rebels,
they would have burnt their Scabbards, and would not have styled themselves,
The King and Queens Army, as they did. And truly, that which the king said for
himself, That he would have adventure d himself, to have gone in Person into
Ireland, to suppress that Rebellion, is but a poor Argument to enforce any man's
belief, That he was not guilty of the Massacre: For it makes me rather think,
That he had some hopes to have returned in the head of 20 or 30000 Rebels, to
have destroyed this Nation: For when the Earl of Leicester was sent by the
Parliament to subdue the Rebels, Did not the king hinder him from going? and
were not the clothes and provisions which were sent by the Parliament, for the
relief of the poor Protestants there, seized upon by his command, and his men
of War, and sold or exchanged for Arms and Ammunition, to destroy this
Parliament? And does not every man know, That the Rebels in Ireland gave
Letters of Mart, for taking the Parliaments Ships, but freed the kings as their
very good friends? And I have often heard it credibly reported, that the king
should say, That nothing more troubled him, but that there was not as much
Protestant blood running in England and Scotland, as in Ireland. And when that
horrid Rebellion begun to break forth, How did the Papists here triumph and
boast, that they hoped ere long to see London streets run down in blood? and
yet I do not think, that the king was a Papist, or that he designed to
introduce the Popes Supremacy in Spiritual things, into this kingdom: But thus
it was, A Jesuitical party at Court was to prevalent in his Counsels, and some
mungrel Protestants that less hated the Papists, then the Puritans, by the
Queens Mediation joined altogether to destroy the Puritans, hoping that the Pa
pists, and the Laodicean Protestant would agree well enough togeth er. And
lastly, if it be said, that if the king and the Rebels were never fallen out,
what need had Ormond to m ache a pacification or peace with them by the kings
Commission, under the Great Seal of Ireland. Truly there has been so m uch
daubing, and so little plain dealing, that I wonder how there comes to be so
many beggars.

Concerning the betraying of Rochel, to the inslaving of the Protestant party
in France, I confess, I heard so much of it, and was so shamefully reproached
for it in Geneva, and by the Protestant Ministers in France, that I could
believe no less, then that the king was guilty of it. I have heard fearful
exclamations from the French Protestants against the king, and the late Duke of
Buckingham, for the betraying of Rochel. And some of the Ministers told me ten
years since, That God would be revenged of the wicked king of England, for
betraying Rochel: And I have often heard Deodati say, concerning Henry the
fourth of France, That the Papists had his body, but the Protestants had his
heart and soul; but for the king of England, The Protestants had his body, but
the Papists had his heart: Not that I think he did believe Transubstantiation
(God forbid I should wrong the dead) but I verily believe, That he loved a
Papist, better then a Puritan.

The Duke of Roan, who was an honest gallant man, and the kings Godfather,
would often say, That all the blood which was shed in Daulphin, would be cast
upon the king of Englands score: For thus it was, The king sent a Letter to the
Rochelers by Sir William Breecher, to assure them, That he would assist them to
the uttermost against the French king, for the liberty of their Religion;
conditionally, That they would not make any peace without him; and Mountague
was sent into Savoy, and to the Duke of Roan, to assure them from the king,
That 30000 men should be sent out of England, to assist them against the French
king, in three Fleets, One to land in the Isle of Ree, a second in the River of
Bourdeaux, and a third in Normandy: whereupon, the Duke of Roan being General
for the Protestanrs, not suspecting that the French durst assault him in
Daulphin (because the king of England was ready to invade him, as he had
promised) drew out his Army upon disadvantage: Whereupon the French king
employed all his Army into Daulphin against the Protestants, who were forced to
retreat, and the Duke of Roan to fly to Geneva, and the Protestants to accept
of peace upon very hard conditions, to stand barely at the Kings devotion for
their liberties, without any cautionary Towns of assurance, as formerly they
had, being such a peace as the Sheep make with the Wolves, when the Dogs are
dismissed. And the Protestants have ever since cried out to this very day, It is
not the French King that did us wrong, for then we could have born it, but it
was the King of England, a professed Protestant that betrayed us. And when I have
many times entreated Deodati and others, to have a good Opinion of the King, he
would answer me, That we are commanded to forgive our enemies, but not to
forgive our friends.

There is a French Book printed about two years since, called Memoires du
Monsieur de Roan, where the Kings horrid perfidiousness, and deed
dissimulation, is very clearly unfolded and discovered: To instance but in some
particulars, The King having solemnly engaged to the Rochelers, that he would
hazard all the Forces he had in his three Kingdoms, rather then they should
perish; did in order thereunto, to gain credulity with them, send out eight
Ships to Sea, commanded by Sir John Pennington, to assist the Rochelers as was
pretended, but nothing less intended; for Pennington assisted the French King
against the Rochelers, which made Sir Ferdinando Gorge to go away with the
great Neptune, in detestation of so damnable a plot; and the English Masters
and Owners of Ships, refusing to lend the Ships to destroy the Rochelers, whom
with their souls they desired to relieve, Pennington in a mad spite, shot at
them.

Subise being Agent here in England for the French Protestants, acquainted the
King how basely Pennington had dealt, and that the English Ships had mowed down
the Rochel Ships like Grass, not only to the great danger and loss of the
Rochelers, but to the eternal dishonor of this Nation, scandal of our Religion,
and disadvantage of the general Affairs of all the Protestants in Christendom.
The King seems to be displeased, and says, What a knave is this Pennington? but
whether it was not fained, let all the world judge: But the thing being so
plain, said Subise to the King, Sir, why did the English Ships assist the
French King, and those that would not, were shot at by your Admiral? The French
Protestants are no fools; how can I make them believe that you intend their
welfare? The King was much put to it for a ready answer, but at last thus it
was patcht up, That the French king had a design to be revenged of Genoa for
some former affront; and that the king lent him eight English Ships to be
employed for Genoa, and that sailing toward Genoa, they met with some of the
Rochelers accidentally* and that the English did but look on, and could not
help it, not having any Commission to fight at that present; wherein the
Rochelers might and would have declined a Sea Fight, if they had not expected
our assistance. But still the poor Protestants were willing, rather to blame
Pennington then the king; who in great seeming zeal, being surety for the last
peace between the French king, and his Protestant Subjects, sends Devick to the
Duke of Roan, to assure him, That if Rochel were not speedily set at liberty
(which the French king had besieged, contrary to his Agreement) he would employ
his whole strength, and in his own person see it performed; which being not
done, then the king sends the Duke of Buckingham to the Isle of Ree, and gives
new hopes of better success to Subise, commanding the Admiral and Officers in
the Fleet, in Subises hearing, to do nothing without his advice: But when the
Duke came to land at the Isle of Ree, many gallant English men lost their
lives, and the Duke brought back 300 Tuns of Corn from the Rochelers, which he
had borrowed of them, pretending a necessity for the English men, which was but
feined, knowing it was a City impregnable, so long as they had provision
within. I confess the Rochelers were not wife to lend the Duke their Corn,
considering how they had been dealt with: But what a base thing was it, so to
betray them, and to swear unto them, That they should have Corn enough sent
from England, before they wanted it: And for a long time, God did miraculously
send them in a new kind of Fish, which they never had before. But when the
Duke came to Court, he made the honest English believe, that Rochel would
suddenly be relieved, and that there was not the least danger of the loss of
it; but Secretary Cook, an honest understanding Gentleman, and the only friend
at Court to the Rochelers, laboring to improve his power to send some succor to
Rochel, was suddenly sent away from Court upon some sleeveless errand, or as
some say, to Portsmouth, under color of providing Corn for Rochel; but the
Duke soon after went thither, and said, His life upon it, Rochel is safe
enough: and the next day, Subise being at Portsmouth, he pressed the Duke of
Buckingham most importunately to send relief to Rochel then or never; the Duke
told him that he had just then heard good News of the victualling of Rochel,
which he was going to tell the King: which Subise making doubt of, the Duke
affirmed it by an Oath, and having the words in his mouth, he was stabd by
Felton, and instantly dyed: the poor Rochellers seeing themselves so betrayed,
exclaimed of the English, and were constrained through Famine to surrender the
City; yet new assurances came from the King to the Duke of Roan, that he should
never be abandoned, and that he should not be dismayed nor astonished for the
loss of Rochel.

But Subise spoke his mind freely at Court, that the English had betrayed
Rochel, and that the loss of that City was the apparent perdition and loss of
Two and thirty places of strength from the French Protestants in Langurdock,
Piedmont, and Daulphin, therefore it was thought fit that he should have a fig
given him to stop his mouth: Well, not long after, two Capuchins were sent into
England to kill honest Subise, and the one of them discovered the other; Subise
rewarded the discoverer, and demanded Justice here against the other who was a
Prisoner, but by what means, you may easily imagine, that assassinate Rascal,
instead of being whipped, or receiving some more severe punishment, was released
and sent back into France with money in his purse, and one of the Messengers
that was sent from Rochel to complain of those abominable Treacheries, was
taken here, and as the Duke of Roan writes, was hanged for some pretended
Felony or Treason, and much more to this purpose may be found in the Duke of
Roans Memorials; but yet I know many wise sober men do acquit the King from the
guilt of the loss of Rochel, and lay it upon the Duke, as if it were but a loss
of his reputation; they say that the Duke of Buckingham agitated his affairs
neither for Religion, nor the honor of his Master, but only to satisfy his
passion in certain foolish Vows which he made in France, entered upon a War; and
that the business miscarryed through ignorance, and for want of understanding
to manage so difficult a Negotiation, he being unfit to be an Admiral or a
General.

I confess that for many years I was of that Opinion, and thought that the King
was seduced by evil Council, and some thought that Buckingham and others ruled
him as a child, and durst do what they list: but certainly he was too
politic and subtle a man to be swayed by any thing but his own judgment;
since Naseby Letters I ever thought him principal in all Transactions of State,
and the wisest about him but accessaries; he never acted by any implicit faith
in State matters, the proudest of them all durst never cross him in any Design,
when he had once resolved upon it: Is any man so soft-brained to think that the
Duke or Pennington durst betray Rochel without his Command? would not he have
hanged them up at their return, if they had wilfully transgressed his Commands?
A thousand such excuses made for him, are but like Irish Quagmires, that have
no solid ground or foundation in reason: He was well known to be a great Sudent
in his younger days, that his Father would say, He must make him a Bishop: He
had more learning and dexterity in State Affairs undoubtedly, then all the
kings in Christendom: If he had had grace answerable to his strong parts, he
had been another Solomon, but his wit and knowledge proved like a sword in a
mad-mans hand; he was a stranger to the work of Grace and the Spirit of God, as
the poor creature confessed to Mr. Knowls after he was condemned; and all those
Maeanders in State, his serpentine turnings and windings, have but brought him
to shame and confusion; but I am fully satisfied, none of his Council durst
ever advise him to any thing, but what they knew before he resolved to have
done; and that they durst as well take a Bear by the tooth, as do, or consent
to the doing of any thing, but what they knew would please him; they did but
hew and square the timber, he was the Master builder, that gave the form to
every Architecture, and being so able and judicious to discern of every man's
merits. Never think that the Duke or Pennington, or any Judge or Officer, did
ever any thing for his advantage without his command, against Law or Honor.

Upon all which premises, may it please your Lorship, I do humbly demand and
pray the Justice of this High Court, and yet not I, but the innocent blood that
has been shed in the three kingdoms, demands Justice against him: This blood
is vocal, and cries loud, and yet speaks no better, but much louder then the
blood of Abel; for what proportion has the blood of that righteous man, to the
blood of so many thousands? If king Ahab and Queen Jezabel, for the blood of
one righteous Naboth (who would not sell his inheritance for the full value)
were justly put to death, what punishment does he deserve, that is guilty of
the blood of thousands, and fought for a pretended prerogative, that he might
have any man's Estate that he liked, without paying for it? This blood has long
cried, How long Parliament, how long Army, will ye forbear to avenge our blood?
will ye not do Justice upon the capital Author of all Injustice? When will ye
take the proud Lion by the beard, that defies you with imperious exultations,
What Is the House of Commons? what is the Army? as Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord?
and who is Moses? I am not accountable to any power on earth, those that were
murdered at Brainford, knocked on the head in the water, and those honest souls
that were killed in cold blood at Bolton and Leverpool in Lancashire, at
Bartomley in Cheshire, and many other places, their blood cries night and day
for Justice against him, their wives and children cry, Justice upon the
murderer, or else give us our fathers and husbands again; nay, should the
people be silent, the very stones and timber of the houses would cry for
Justice against him. But, my Lord, before I pray Judgment, I humbly crave
leave to speak to two particulars, 1. Concerning the Prisoner: When I consider
what he was, and how many prayers have been made for him, though I know that
all the world cannot restore him, nor save his life, because God will not
forgive his temporal punishment, yet if God in him will be pleased to add one
example more to the Church, of his unchangeable love to his elect in Christ,
not knowing but that he may belong to the election of grace; I am troubled in
my spirit, in regard of his eternal condition, for fear that he should depart
this life, without love and reconciliation to all those Saints whom he has
scorned under the notion of Presbyterians, Anabaptists, Independents and
Sectaries: It cannot be denied, but that he has spent all his days in
unmeasurable pride; that during his whole reign, he has deported himself as a
God, been depended upon, and adored as God; that has challenged and assured an
Omnipotent power, an earthly Omnipotence, that with the breath of his mouth
has dissolved Parliaments; his Non placet has made all the Councels of that
Supreme Court to become Abortives: Non curo has been his Motto, who in stead
of being honored as good Kings ought to be, and no more, has been idolized and
adored, as our good God only ought to be; A man that has shot all his arrows
against the upright in the Land, hated Christ in his members, swallowed down
unrighteousness, as the Ox drinks water, esteemed the needy as his footstool,
crushed honest public spirited men, and grieved when he could not afflict the
honest more then he did, counted it the best art and policy to suppress the
righteous, and to give way to his Courtiers so to gripe, grind, oppress and
overreach the free People of the Land, that he might do what he list (the
remembrance whereof would pierce his soul, if he knew the preciousnesse of it)
but all fins to an infinite mercy are equally pardonable, therefore my prayer
for this poor wretch shall be, That God would so give him repentance to life,
that he may believe in that Christ, whom he has imprisoned, persecuted and
murdered in the Saints; that he which has lived a Tyrant, and hated nothing
so much as holiness, may die a convert, and in love to the Saints in England,
that so the tears of the oppressed and the afflicted, may not be as so many
fiery stinging serpents, causing an eternal despairing, continual horror to
this miserable Man, when all Tyrants shall be astonished, and innocent blood
will affright more then twelve legions of Devils. All the hurt I wish to him
is, That he may look the Saints in the face with comfort, for the Saints must
judge the world; and however it may be he or this adherents may think it a
brave Roman spirit, not to repent of any thing, nor express any sorrow for any
sin, though never so horrid, taking more care and fear not to change their
countenance upon the Scaffold, then what shall become of them after death? Yet
I beseech your Lordship that I may tell him and all the Malignants now living
but this, Charles Stuart, unless you depart this life in love and
reconciliation to all those Saints and godly men whom you have either
ignorantly or maliciously opposed, mocked and persecuted, and still scorn and
jeer at, as Heretics and Sectaries, there is no more hopes for you ever to
see God in comfort, then for me to touch the Heavens with my finger, or with a
word to annihilate this great building, or for the Devil to be saved, which he
might be, if he could love a Saint as such: No, Sir, it will be too late for
you to say to those Saints, whom you have defied, Give me some of your
holiness, that I may behold Gods angry countenance; You can expect no answer,
but, Go, buy Sir of those Soul-hucksters, your Bishops, which fed you with
chaff and poison, and now you must feed upon fire and brimstone to all eternity.

2. Concerning my self, I bear no more malice to the Man's person, then I do to
my dear Father; but I hate that cursed principle of Tyranny, that has so long
lodged and harbored within Him, which has turned our waters of Law into blood;
And therefore upon that Malignant principle, I hope this High Court (which is
an habitation of Justice, and a Royal Palace of principles of Freedom) will do
speedy Justice, That this Lion which has devoured so many Sheep, may not only
be removed out of the way, but that this Iron Scepter, which has been lifted
up to break this poor Nation in pieces like a Potters vessel, may be wrested
out of the hands of Tyrants, That my honorable Clients (for whom I am an
unworthy Advocate) The people of England, may not only taste, but drink
abundantly of those sweet Waters of that Well of Liberty, which this renowned
Army has dug with their swords, which was stopped by the Philistines, the
fierce Jew, and uncircumcised Canaanite, the hopes whereof made me readily to
hearken to the call to this service, as if it had been immediately from Heaven,
being fully satisfied, That the prisoner was long since condemned to dye by
Gods Law (which being more Noble and ancient then any Law of man, if there had
been a Statute that he should not dye, yet he ought to be put to death not
withstanding) and that this High Court was but to pronounce the Sentence and
Judgment written against him: And though I might have been sufficiently
discouraged, in respect that my reason is far less then others of my
profession; yet considering that there are but two things desirable, to make a
dumb man eloquent, namely, A good Cause, and good Judges, The first whereof
procures the Justice of Heaven, and the second Justice upon Earth; And thinking
that happily God might make use of one mean man at the Bar, amongst other
learned Counsel, that more of his mind might appear in it (for many times the
less there is of man, the more Gods glory does appear, and hitherto very much
of the mind of God has appeared in this action) I went as cheerfully about
it, as to a Wedding; And that the glory of this administration may be wholly
given to God, I desire to observe to the praise of his great name, the work of
God upon my own spirit, in his gracious assistance and presence with me, as a
return of Prayer, and fruit of Faith, believing that God never calls to the
acting of any thing so pleasing to him, as this most excellent Court of Justice
is, but he is present with the honorable Judges, and those that wait upon them:
I have been sometimes of Counsel against Felons and Prisoners, but I never
moved the Court to proceed to Judgment against any Felon, or to keep any man
in Prison, but I trembled at it in my thoughts, as thinking it would be easier
to give an account of mercy and indulgence, then of any thing that might look
like rigor; but now my spirits are quite of another temper, and I hope it is
meat and drink to good men, to have Justice done, and recreation to think what
benefit this Nation will receive by it.

And now, my Lord, I must as the truth is, conclude him guilty of more
transcendent Treasons, and Enormous Crimes, then all the Kings in this part of
the world have ever been: And as he that would picture Venus, must take the
eyes of one, the cheeks of another beautiful woman, and so other parts to make
a complete beauty: so to delineate an absolute Tyrant, the cruelty of Richard
the third, and all the subtilty, treachery, deep dissimulation, abominable
projects, and dishonorable shifts, that ever were separately in any that swayed
the English Scepter, conspired together to make their habitation in this
Whited-wal; therefore I humbly pray, That as he has made himself a president
in committing such horrid acts, which former Kings and Ages knew not, and have
been afraid to think of, That your Lordship, and this High Court, out of your
sublime wisdoms, and for Justice sake, would make him an example for other
kingdoms for the time to come, That the Kings of the Earth may hear, and fear,
and do no more so wickedly; That he that would not be a pattern of Virtue, and
an example of Justice in his life, may be a president of Justice to others by
his death.

Courteous Reader, for thy full satisfaction in Reason of Law, how the late
King was by the Law of the Land accountable for his Tyrannous, and Traiterous
Exorbitances, I refer thee to my Lord Presidents most Learned and Judicious
Speech, before the Sentence read: And I have one word to add, That High Court
was a Resemblance and Representation of the great day of Judgment, when the
Saints shall judge all worldly powers, and where this Judgment will be
confirmed and admired, for it was not only bonum, but been; not only good for
the matter, but the manner of proceeding: This High Court did not only consult
with Heaven for wisdom and direction (a president for other Courts to begin
every solemn action with Prayer) but examined witnesses several days upon Oath
to inform their consciences, and received abundant satisfaction in a judicial
way (which by the Law of the Land was not requisite in Treason, the Prisoner
standing mute) as Judges, which before was most notorious and known to them, as
private persons, and having most perspicuously discerned, and weighed the
merits of the Cause in the Balances of the Sanctuary, Law and right Reason,
pronounced as righteous a sentence as ever was given by mortal men. And yet
what Action was ever so good, but was traduced? Not only by unholy men, but by
the holy men of the world; that professors should pray for Justice, and then
repine at the execution of it: Blessed Lord! How does the God of this world
storm, now his kingdom is shaking? An enlightened eye must needs see that it is
the design of Heaven to break all humane glory with an iron Scepter, that will
not kiss his golden Scepter, and to exalt Justice and Mercy in the Earth. I
confess, if the greater part of the world should approve such High and Noble
Acts of Justice, it might be suspected, because the most people will Judge
erroneously; but that Christians that have fasted and prayed many years for
Justice, should now be angry to see it done, what is it? but like foolish
passengers that having been long at sea in dangerous storms, as they are
entering into the quiet haven, to be mad with the Pilot because he will not
return into the angry Seas: but I shall observe one passage in the Lord
Presidents Speech, as a Scholar may presume to say a word after his Master,
concerning the many menaces and minatory dangerous speeches which are given forth
concerning this High Court: If men must be killed for the faithful discharge of
their duties to God and their Country, I am sure the murderer will have the
worst of it in conclusion, if he should not be known here (though murder is a
sin that seldom goes unpunisht in this world, and never did any Jesuit hold it
meritorious to kill men for bringing tyrants and murderers to Justice, or to
do such horrid acts in the sight of the Sun) It was a noble saying of the Lord
President, That he was afraid of nothing so much as the not doing of Justice:
and when he was called to that High place which was put upon him, he sought it
not, but desired to be excused more then once: not to decline a duty to God and
the people for fear of any loss or danger (being above such thoughts by many
Stories, as actions testify) but alleging, That of himself, out of an humble
spirit, which if others had said of him, I am sure they had done him a great
deal of wrong: And though he might have been sufficiently discouraged, because
it was a new unpresidented Tribunal of condemning a King (because never did any
king so Tyrannize and Butcher the People, find me but that in any History, and
on the other side the leaf you shall find him more then beheaded, even to be
quartered, and given to be meat to the fowls of the Air) yet the glory of God,
and the love of Justice, constrained him to accept it, and with what great
wisdom and undauntedness of Resolution, joined with a sweet meekness of spirit
he has performed it, is most evident to all, the Malignants themselves being
Judges. Concerning this High Court, to speak any thing of this glorious
Administration of Justice, is but to show the Sun with a candle (the Sun of
Justice now shines most gloriously, and it will be fair weather in the Nation;
but alas, the poor Mole is blind still, and cannot see it, but none so blind
as they that will not see it) however, it is not proper or convenient for me at
present, to speak all the truth that I know (the Generations that are to come
will call them blessed) concerning the Integrity and Justice of their
proceedings, lest I that a man servant should be counted a Sycophant, which I
abhor in my soul, as my body does poison; and this I will be bold to say (which
I hope God guides my hand to write) This High Court has cut off the head of a
Tyrant, and they have done well; undoubtedly it is the best action that they
ever did in all their lives, a matter of pure envy, not hatred, for never shall
or can any men in this Nation, promerit so much Honor as these have done, by
any execution of Justice comparable to this; and in so doing, they have
pronounced sentence not only against one Tyrant, but Tyranny it self;
therefore if any of them shall turn Tyrants, or consent to set up any kind of
Tyranny by a Law, or suffer any unmerciful domineering over the Consciences,
Persons, and Estates of the Free People of this Land, they have pronounced
Sentence against themselves: But good trees cannot bring forth bad fruits;
therefore let all desperate Malignants repent ere it be too late, of any such
ungodly purposes, and fight no longer against God. Every man is sown here as a
seed or grain, and grows up to be a tree, it behooves us all to see in what
ground we stand: holy and righteous men will be found to be timber for the
great building of God in his love, when Tyrants and Enemies to Holiness and
Justice, will be for a threshold or footstool to be trodden upon, or fit for
the fire.

Lastly, for my self, I bless God, I have not so much fear as comes to the
thousand part of a grain; it is for a Cain to be afraid, that every man that
meets him will slay him! I am not much solicitous, whether I dye of a
Consumption, or by the hand of Ravilliacks, I leave that to my heavenly Father:
If it be his will that I shall fall by the hand of violence, it is the Lord,
let him do what he pleases: If my Indentures be given in before the term of my
Apprenticeship be expired, and that I be at my Fathers house before it be
night, I am sure there is no hurt in all this: If I have but so much time left,
I shall pray my Father to forgive the Murderer; the blood of Christ can wash
away sins of the deepest stain, but when he sees his childrens blood sprinkled
upon the bloody wretch, he loves every Member as he loves himself. But know
this, ye that have conceived any desperate intentions against those Honorable
Justices, who have made you Freemen, unless you will return to Egypt: If God in
wrath to you* and love to any of his people, should suffer you to imbrue your
hands in any of their innocent blood, either you will repent or not; if you
repent, it will cost you ten times more anguish and grief of heart, then the
pleasure of the sin can cause delight, and what a base thing is it to do that
which must be repented of at the best? But if you repent not, it had been
better for you to have never been born. But let every man be faithful in doing
his duty, and trust God with the success, and rejoice in Christ in the
testimony of a good Conscience; for he that has not a soul to lose, has
nothing to lose: but blessed be God, I have no soul to lose, therefore I desire
only to fear him, whom to fear, is the beginning of wisdom: And for all
Malignants to come in, and join with honest men in settling this Nation upon
Noble Principles of Justice, Freedom, and Mercy to the poor, will be their best
and greatest understanding.

FINIS.

