MOTIVES OF CONVERSION TO THE CATHOLIC FAITH, As it is PROFESSED IN THE
REFORMED CHURCH OF ENGLAND.

By Neal Carolan, formerly Parish Priest of Slane and Stacallan, etc. in Mead.

Imprimatur,

Aug. 8. 1688.

Rad. Rule, R. R. in Christo Patri, ac Domino Domino Francisco Archiep. Dublin.
a sacr. domest.

DVBLIN, Printed by Jos: Ray, for William Norman in Dames-street, and Eliphal
Dobson at the Stationers Arms in Castle-street. 1688.

The Preface to the Reader.
IT is just and reasonable that every man that deserts the Communion of a
Church in which he has been educated, and embraces a Communion distinct from
it, should render some account to the world of the reasons of his change, that
so he might avoid the imputation of levity and rashness. This has been done by
many of the Protestants that have embraced the Roman Faith; namely, by Dr.
Vane, Mr. Cressy, Mr. Manby, and others, and by many Romanists, that have
embraced the Reformed Religion, by the Learned Archbishop of Spalato, and
several others, and being my self resolved to forsake the Communion of the
Church of Rome, and to embrace that of the Reformed Church of Ireland, which I
think more agreeable to the Word of God, and to the Primitive Antiquity, I look
on my self to be under the same obligations of satisfying others, in the
Motives of my change.

As it was my great happiness to be Baptized into the Christian Faith, so it
was my misfortune to be educated in that which is far distant from it (I mean
the Roman Faith) as it now stands since the determinations of the Council of
Trent: and I hope the Gentlemen of that Religion will not take it ill that I
call it an infelicity, since I can entertain no other apprehensions of it,
whilst I lie under the convictious that are at present upon my Spirit.

In the Communion of this Church I was admitted into the seven Holy Orders of
the Church in a weeks time, by Anthony Geoghegan, Bishop of Mead in the Year
1662, and in the month of August in the same Year I was sent to Paris, where I
was instructed in Philosophy in the College of Grassini, and took the Degree of
Master in Arts, in the University of Paris aforesaid, and after Writing my
Speculative Divinity in the College of Navar in the said University, under Dr.
Vinot, Dr. Saussoy, and Dr. Ligny, I finished my course, and took up a
resolution of returning to my Native Country, where I landed about June 1667,
and afterward continued about some two years teaching a private School in the
Borders of Mead, till in the year 1669, I was instituted into the Parish of
Slane, and Stacallan, by Oliver Desse, then Vicar General of the Dioress of
Mead, where I continued as Parish Priest for four entire years, to the no
small content and satisfaction of my Parishioners: from them in the year 1675,
I was removed to the Parishes of Pa^^stown, and Brownstown, and in the year 79.
commanded back again to my first charge in Slan^.

During this time, I had the opportunity of reading two Books that were most
especially recommended to the Clergy of the Province of U^ster, by the late
Primate Oliver Plunket, viz. Archdokins Theologia Tripartita, and the
Touchstone of the Reformed Gospel. The former of these he distributed amongst
us, at a certain price, when the first impr^ssion of it came forth, and the
latter we were required to purchase, as being very proper to confute
Protestants out of their own Bibles. I was no less forward in procuring the
Books, then industrious in reading them, and for a long time I thought them
unanswerable, till at length discoursing with some of the Reverend Protestant
Clergy of Mead, I found by them that the Touchstone, was only an old Book new
vampt up with a new Title, and some few Chapters added, and that it had been
long ago published, under the Title of the Gag for the new Gospel, and
learnedly been answered by the Reverend Bishop Mountague. Whereupon I procured
the answer to it, and upon perusal found that the Author of the Old Gag to New
Touchstone (call it which you please) had in many things basely misrepresented
the Doctrine of the Protestants, propounding it in such crude, and indifinite
terms as no sober Protestant does acknowledge it for their sense: as in his 2d,
Proposition he affirms, that Protestants say that in matters of Faith, We must
not rely upon the judgment of the Church, and of her Pastors, but only on the
written word. In the 3d, that the Scriptures are easily to be understood. In
the 4th, that Apostolical Traditions, and ancient customs of the Church (not
found in the written word) are not to to be received, nor oblige. In the 5th,
that a man by his own understanding, or private Spirit, may rightly judge and
interpret Scripture. In the 7th, that the Church can err. In the 32, that the
Saints may not pray for us, and so in others. None of which Propositions are
owned by Protestants, as their Doctrines without many previous distinctions and
limitations. I found also that in other things he had hudled together many
Propositions as the general sense of Protestants, which (if he had consulted
their learned Writings) he would have found to be no more then School Points,
and Problematical Questions; nay, which are still disputed as such by the best
learned men in the Church of Rome. Such are for Example, The Doctrines of
Freewill, in the 19th Proposition, The Impossibility of keeping the
Commandments, in the 20th Proposition, The Inamissibility of Faith, in the
23th, The Doctrine of Election, and Reprobation, in the 24th, The Doctrine of
Assurance of Salvation. in the 25th and The Doctrine of every m^n having his
Guardian Angel, in the 26th, most of which Points are matter of Controversy
between Remonstrants, and Contra-remonstrants amongst the Protestants, And
between the Jansenists and Jesuits in the Church of Rome.

This unfair proceeding, charging the Protestants with Doctrines, which they
either totally deny, or do not acknowledge without previous distinctions, bred
a dislike in me to the Book, and consequently put me upon an inquiry into those
Doctrines of the Protestants which the Author of it had so foully
misrepresented, and the more I read in their Writings the better I was
reconciled to their Opinions, and the worse I liked those of the Church of
Rome; some of whose Errors I shall briefly touch, as the Motives of my
Conversion, and occasion of my deserting her Communion.

Motives of Conversion to the Catholic Faith, as it is professed in the
Reformed Church of England.
CHAP. I. Of the Incharitableness of the Church of Rome.
THE first Motive thereof is her great Uncharitableness, not only to
Protestants, but also to all other Societies of Christians this day in the
World except themselves; and that in two things.

First, In confining the Catholic Church to themselves.

Secondly, In excluding all others from hope of Salvation that are not in their
own Communion.

It will be unnecessary to prove that these are the Doctrines of the Church of
Rome, since there is no Controvertist that does not affirm them, and they are
expressly defined in the Council of Trent, in her Anathema to every Article. And
Pope Pius IV. affirms in his Bull, That this is the Catholic Faith, out of
which no one can be saved. All the Clergy of Ireland, whether Secular or
Regular, are taught to say so; the Priests and Friars affirm it in their
Sermons now to the People more than ever: And it is one of the most popular
Arguments and common Topics of Conversion that they all use to the
Protestants, to reconcile them to the Church of Rome: That they are all
Heretics; That they are out of the Church; That there is no hopes of Salvation
for them whilst they are so.

The first of these particulars, viz. Confining of the Catholic Church to
themselves, is a Proposition so hugely unreasonable that I could hardly bring
my self to the belief of it. It seemed to me a very unreasonable thing, that
the Church of Rome, which is but a Member of the Catholic Church (and that
none of the foundest) should arrogate to it self the Name and Privileges of
the whole Catholic* Quia a dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter non
valet consequentia; Nec semper denominatio totius sequitur parts seperatim
sumptas. And I could find no Text of Scripture for the justification of it, nor
any sound Reason to prove it, nor any promise of our Savior on which to ground
it; and I concluded with my self, that the affirming it might prove a dangerous
prejudice to the perpetuity of the Church, and contradict our Saviors promise
concerning the Gates of Hell not being able to prevail against it, because it
was not only possible that the Church of Rome, as well as other Churches, might
err, but there are express Cautions given her in that particular by St. Paul,
Rom 11.18, 20. Thou bear not the root, but the root thee: Be not high minded
but fear, and if God spares not the natural branches, take heed least he also
spare not thee. In the Writings of the Primitive Fathers it appears, that they
never believed the Church of Rome to be any thing else but a particular Church.
Ignatius, in the Title of his Epistle to the Romans, styles it (...). And St.
Ambrose reckons the Roman Church in the same rank with the Churches of Egypt
and Alexandria: So that if they were particular, or topical Churches, the
Church of Rome must be so too. The same thing does Pope Apud Binium in Council.
Ephesino.
Celestine in his Epistle to John Bishop of Antioch, where he reckons up the
Churches of Rome and Alexandria as Members of the Catholic Church. Asseret se
(Nestorius) fidem tenere, quam secundum Apostolicam doctrinam Romana,
Alexandrina, and Catholica universalis Ecclesia tenet. Nay it appears by the
Epistle of Pope Innocent III. to John, Lib. 2. Epist. 200.
Patriarch of Constantinople, that in the 12th Century the Pope himself did not
believe it. Dicitur autem universalis Ecclesia, quae de universis constet
Ecclesiis, quae Graeco Verbo Catholica nominatur: (says he) Ecclesia Romana sic
non est universalis Ecclesia, sed universalis Ecclesiae pars.

Besides this, I find this very Proposition condemned in the Donatists, and
looked upon by the Fathers as the grand Fundamental Principle of their Schism
and Division; for they, as appears by the Writings of St. Augustine and
Optatus, did affirm that Christ had no Church on Earth, but in the parts of
Donatus: that the Church was perished in all parts of the World except their
own Assemblies, and that Salvation no where could be had but in their
Communion; they esteemed the rest of the Christians to be no better than
Pagans: they broke their Chalices, scraped their Altars, and washed their
Vestments, and the Walls of their Churches, pretending that all was polluted by
their touch of them. How much of this Spirit does reign in our modern Donatists
is easily observed by any man that will take the pains to compare their
Writings and Practices with those of their Ancestors, the ancient Donatists in
Africa. And indeed it is high time for every man to leave the society of that
Person that thinks himself alone to have reason, and all the rest of mankind to
be mad and out of their wits.

Nor is this Proposition only unreasonable, but is also very uncharitable, in
as much as it condemns not only Protestant Churches, but all the Christians in
the Eastern parts of the World that are not of the Roman Faith; the Greeks and
Arminians, the Jacobites and Nestorians, the Maronites and Abissines, and
Cophtites or Christians of Egypt, and for ever excludes them from hopes of
Salvation; which is in effect to unchurch the greatest part of Christians, and
condemn them to everlasting burnings; who are more in number, and more extend
in Territories then the Professors of the present Roman Faith can pretend to
be; notwithstanding all their brags of Universality. It may be perhaps said,
that the Eastern Christians and Protestants are Heretics: but I think it much
easier to say so than make it good; and if they were, yet the charity of the
modern Bomanists is much more straightened than that of St. Augustines was, De
Baptis. contra Don. l. 1. c. 10. l. 5. c. 27.
who durst not deny a possibility of Salvation, even to Heretics themselves.
For when the Donatists did object, that Heresio is an Harlot, that if Baptism
of Heretics be good, then Sons are born to God of Heresy; and so of an
Harlot. His Answer was, that the Conventicles of Heretics do bear Children
unto God; not in that wherein they are divided, but in that wherein they still
remain joined with the True and Catholic Church; not in that they are
Heretics, but as much as they profess and practice that which other Christians
do. Nay, according to the Opinion of the Roman Doctors they have no reason (if
they stand to their own Principles) to judge so severely of Heretics; for they
grant that the honor of Martyrdom is only peculiar to the Members of the
Catholic Church; and they cannot deny but it is possible for an Heritick to
suffer for the Christian Religion, and lay down his life in the defense of the
Faith of Christ: From whence it must inevitably follow, according to their own
confessions, that either Heretics may be saved, or else Martyrdom is not
proper to the Church and Members of it.

Nor are the Romanists only unreasonable, and uncharitable, in confining the
Catholic Church to themselves, but they are so in excluding also other
Christians from the hopes of Salvation that are not of their own Communion.
This will appear from two Considerations. First, they are more uncharitable to
them then they are to Heathens that never heard of Jesus Christ: for Lud. Vives
in Aug. de Civitat Dei. l. 18. c. 47. Andr. id. l. 3. At alii apud Casail. de
quadripli justit. l. 1. c. 12 and Collium de anim. page l. 1. c. 24. and l. 5.
c. 7, 8, 22.
many of their own Writers do grant a possibility of Salvation to the Pagans,
if they live good moral lives, and yet the Protestants, tho they believe in
Christ, and profess all the Articles of the Apostles Creed, and lead their
lives suitable to the Gospel, must be damned to Hell; only because they cannot
believe the Church of Rome to be their Mistress, nor call the Pope their Master
on Earth.

It seems that Infidelity is a lesser crime then Non-Communion with Rome; that
there is more hopes of Pagans, then of Protestants, to be saved, and that it is
more pardonable not to believe in Christ Jesus then to deny the authority of
the Church of Rome: In that many of them make so few things to be necessary to
be believed in order to eternal salvation, that upon their own Principles they
cannot exclude the Protestants from the hopes of it; and for those that enlarge
the Articles of Belief a little farther, they cannot deny Salvation to the
Protestants, if they believe all that they require as necessary.

Some men make the Belief of Jesus Christ, and submission to his Laws,
sufficient to bring a man to Heaven; and if so, it is very uncharitable to
exclude Protestants from it, that believe so much, as well as themselves.
Others add the knowledge and belief of those things that are contained in the
Lords Prayer, and the Ten Commandments, and Doctrine of the Sacraments. Now take
the explicit credenda, in which of these Notions you will, it is hugely
uncharitable, to exclude the Protestants out of Heaven, when they believe Jesus
Christ to be the Son of God, and submit to his Laws, and live according to his
Religion; when they believe all that is contained in the Creed, the Lords
Prayer, and the Decalogue, and assent to the Doctrine of those Sacraments that
are generally necessary for salvation.

CHAP. II. Of the Infallibility of the Pope.
THE second Motive is, The Doctrine of the Roman Church concerning the
Infallibility of the Pope; also concerning an Infallible Church and General
Council, and concerning the Infallible Judge or Guide in Controversies about
Religion, which the Romanists talk so much of, and pretend to have.

No man certainly that fully considers the various models of an Infallible
Guide which the several parties of Papists do describe and defend in opposition
to one another, will wonder that I have given this Chapter a manifold Title.
The great uncertainty and confusion of Opinions which I found in the Romish
Communion about this affair was not the least cause of my being discontented
with that Religion: It startled me exceedingly at the beginning of my inquiry,
to find the main Pillar of the Romish Doctrine (that is the Infallible Director
above mentioned) was only a name without any reality, for there is little or
nothing set up by one party under this name or title which is not strongly
confuted by another of the Roman Catholics; yet they all join to run down the
Protestants for having a Religion built upon no secure foundation; for all
Religion is so insecurely built (if we believe the Romanists) which is not
bottomed upon the Testimony of some visible Infallible director; whether that
be the unerring guidance or direction of the Pope, as some think, or of a Pope
and General Council together, as others do judge; or of a Council without the
Pope, and acting under an assumed President, as a third sort imagine. Now it is
true indeed, that our Faith, ought to rely upon an Infallible Foundation, and
the written Word of God is the thing, and the vain pretense of a visible
unerring Judge, or Guide; is nothing but mere conceit, as I shall hereafter
plainly show.

Therefore I look upon my self at present as obliged to acquaint the Reader,
how much I found my self mistaken concerning this Infallible Guide, which
heretofore I very much relied upon. When I entered into an enquiry, and would
very gladly have consulted him, and take his advice, immediately I found my
self lost in an endless wilderness of Disputes, dissentions, and inconsistent
Opinions concerning him: For the writers of the Roman Church are divided into
several Sects about this affair, and what one party of them sets up, another
party pulls down and rejects.

Most Divines that have dependence on the Court of Rome, and likewise many
others, maintain that the Pope is Infallible in his own Person; and that he
needs not the concurrence of general Councils, but can make Infallible Decrees
concerning Faith and Manners, by himself alone: yet they are not well agreed
about this neither.

Albertus Pighius (as it is reported by Cardinal Bell. lib. 4. c. 2, de Romans
Pont.) was of opinion, that the Pope could not become a Heretic, neither in
his private capacity, nor when he acted publicly by his Pontifical Authority.
Now the Cardinal, tho a great Assertor of Papal Privileges, yer condemns this
Opinion of Pighius for an extravagance. Thus

The third Opinion (for he had cited two before) is in the other extreme,
Tertia sententia est in altero extremo Pontificem non posse ullo modo esse
Haereticum, nec docere public Haeresin, etiamsi rem aliquam solus definiat.
Ita Albertus Pighius, lib. 4. c. 8. Hierarch. Eccl.
that the Pope in no way can become an Heretic, nor publicly teach Heresy,
although he defines some things by himself alone.

Nevertheless not only this Cardinal, but also Cajetan, and Baronius, most of
the order of the Jesuits, and in short, all the Divines of the Italian
Faction, do stiffly maintain the personal Infallibility of the Pope: In some
sense indeed more moderatly, and in some sense more extravagantly, then
Pighius; for they are more moderate in acknowledging that the Pope in his
private capacity may become a Heretic, and much worse. Yet they constantly
affirm, that in his public capacity, and when he makes use of his Pontifical
Authority, then he cannot possibly be in the wrong, nor teach any false
Doctrine: And this Position they endeavor to make good, by the best Arguments
they can get: Every little shadow of proof, that occurrs either in the holy
Scripture, or in the Fathers, is setched out in order to confirm this pretended
unerring privilege of the Roman Prelate. Amongst other things the Example of
the Jewish high Priest is thought to have some weight in it, tho some of those
were Idolaters; and one, that is Caiphas, by the same sentence condemned Christ
for a Deceiver, and the whole Christian Religion for an Imposture. Now the
Romish Doctors being urged with this mighty Scandal, and shame to Pontifical
Infallibility, do (some of them) give this answer; that Caiphas mistook the
matter of Fact, but not the matter of Faith. See Bell. Tom. 2. lib. 2. c. 8.
Council. de Authoritate Romans Pont.

And the wise Author of the Papist Misrepresented, page 46. brings this Example
of Caiphas upon the stage, not considering that it is so far from being any way
advantageous to the pretense of the Roman Pontiff, that it even disgraces the
very name of High Priest. This Author, c. 18. page 46. speaking of the Grace and
Assistance which God in some instances gave to Persons eminent in Office; and
particularly to Capiphas, when he judged it necessary that Christ should be put
to death for the conservation of the Nations: he says, With like helping Grace,
he doubts not but God generally assists the Pastors of the New Law, and more
especially the High Priest (that is the Pope) for the good of the whole Flock.
And therefore tho he were as wicked as Caiphas, yet he is ready to render him
all respect due to his Function, and to obey him in every thing concerning the
exercise of his Charge, not for any consideration of his Person, but merely for
the Office he bears. Let the Reader observe the words of this Author; what a
notable guide the Bishop of Rome is according to this man's description of him;
His extraordinary endowments in conducting Souls to Heaven is compared unto the
Grace which Caiphas had when he falsely and unjustly condemned our Savior for a
Deceiver; and consequently the whole Christian Religion for a deceit. Nothing
certainly can be more strange, unless it be what Cardinal Bellarmine says
concerning Papal Infallibilty, lib. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 5. he maintains that
the Pope has a privilege of being free from error, in making any public
Decree what ever relating to Faith or Practice; and he carrys the Assertion so
high as to say, that If the Pope should err by command ing Vices, Si Papa
erraret praecipiendo vitia, vel prohibendo virtutes, teneretur Ecclaesia
credere vitia esse bona, and virtutes malas, nisi vellet contra conscientiam
peccare. Lib. 4. de Romans Pont. Cap. 5.
and forbidding Virtues, the Church would be bound to believe, that Vices were
good, and Virtues evil; unless it would sin against Conscience. Wonderful
Doctrine.

Certainly no man of any reason or honesty but will abhor such a Position; and
accordingly Bellarmines heart smote him in his old age for having delivered
such a thing: And therefore in his Recognition upon this passage he minced the
matter, and partly recalled this wild saying, perhaps when he was near death,
and had no hopes to obtain the Papacy for himself; then he was content to speak
more soberly concerning the Power and Privileges of the Pope.

But above all men commend me to Costerus the Jesuit, for a wonderful Teacher
of Papal Infallibility. He says, It may come to pass, as we confess, that the
Successor of St. Fatemur fieri posse, ut Petri Successor Idola colat, apud se
forte de Fide non recte sentiens; adeoque Artibus Diabolicis operam navet. Sed
constanter negamus Vicarios Christi, Petrique Successores. Romanos Pontifices,
vel Haeresin alios docere posse, vel Errorem proponere. Cost. Enchirid. c. 3.
Peter may worship Idols, privately perhaps, having a wrong Opinion concerning
the Faith; and may consequently be a Studier of Diabolical Arts. But this we
constantly deny, that the Popes of Rome, Vicars of Christ, and Successors of
St. Peter, can teach Heresy to others, or propose an Error.

Whether Costerus, when he delivered this, had an eye to those Popes, who have
been accused of being Magicians, and invoking Devils, I cannot determine. But I
appeal to all persons endu'd with Reason, and let them judge whether I had not
just cause to grow very much dissatisfied with that Communion, whose Members do
first make it necessary for all Christians to bottom and ground their Faith and
Religion upon the credit of an Infallible Guide, and then they give the most
lewd description of him that ever was heard. One that may be an Idolater, a
Wizard and an Infidel, an Heretic in his private capacity, one that is
notwithstanding to be obeyed, if he command Vices, and forbid Virtues; and if
he command so, all Christians are bound to believe Vices to be good, and
Virtues evil: one that is an Infallible Guide, such as Caiphas was: one that
has as much security and certainty of being in the right as Caiphas had. Whence
it follows, that the Christians, who rely on the Pope, have just as much
certainty of being in the right, as the Jews in our Saviors time had of being
so, by relying on their High Priest; yet they, notwithstanding the infallible
Conduct of Caiphas, cried against Christ, crucify him, crucify him; and
release unto us Barabbas. Doubtless these men, who describe and prove the Popes
Infallibility after such a manner, as you have heard, are very blamable.
Methinks they should have more regard to the Honor of a Prince, than to have
characterized him as they do. I know it was not done out of any ill will, but
it is usual for too officious Servants sometimes to do their Masters as much
hurt, as if they were real Enemies.

Thus the Reader will fully perceive how little satisfaction I found in the
pretended unerring Guide, or Conductor, which the Italian Papists do propose.
It is manifest there is very little comfort or security in the Conduct of such
a Guide. But being disappointed in expecting infallible Guidance from any one
person, such as the Pope is, whom the Italian Parasites advance; I proceeded to
consider another unerrable Guide, which the French Divines set up in opposition
to the Italians, that is, a General Council. This indeed at first appeared unto
me to have the fairest pretension to be the Guide so much talked of. I suppose
it well known, that in France the Personal Infallibility is generally rejected
and decryed, as an untrue and groundless thing; and many large Discourses have
been written by the French Divines, in order to prove not only that the Pope
may be deceived, but also that he has been very often actually so, even in
matters of the greatest importance. The Discourses written by Gerson above 250
years ago are abundantly known to all men of Reading. Tract. An liceat in
causis Fidei a summo Pontifice appellare.
And in later times Launoius, a Sorbon Doctor, in many places of his Epistles,
not only declares his own Sense against the Personal Infallibility of the Pope,
but likewise the Sense or Judgment of the Gallican Church. He reproaches one
Baro, his adversary, for holding the Bishop of Rome to be incapable of erring,
and counts Baro to be a Traitor to the Gallican Church and Nation for it. I
shall produce one passage out of Launoius to this purpose.

Thus he inveighs against Baro, In Gallicanam grassatur Ecclesiam, quae Romanum
Pontificem submittit Concilio, and ei non errandi in fide, and moribus
privilegium abjudicat sed soli adjudicat Ecclesia, and Ecclesiam figuranti
Concilio. Launoius Epistolarum part 5ta. Epistola ad Fortinum, page 43. vide
etiam page 93.
He perniciously destroys the Church of France, which makes the Bishop of Rome
inferior to a Council, and decrees against his Privilege of not erring in
Faith and Manners, and contrariwise adjudges it only to the Church and to a
Council, the Representative thereof.

Here we have seen this learned Sorbon Doctor directly opposite to the Italian
Divines concerning this affair, which is under debate. It is likewise very well
known, that Richerius, another Doctor of Sorbon, and as good a Roman Catholic
as the best of them, has written his History of General Councils on set purpose
therein to run down and demolish the Personal Infallibility, and other
pretended Privileges of the Pope. But above all Monsieur Maimbourg (a most
inveterate Enemy to the Protestant Religion) has composed a Book designedly to
confute the vain pretense of Papal Infallibility; and in the sixth Chapter of
that Book abovementioned he alleges all manner of Authorities, in order to
convince mankind, that the Pope is not infallible; and he clearly makes out his
Allegations i^ 10 Chapters of the Book aforesaid, concerning the Prerogatives
of Rome and her Bishop. That which is very pleasant is, that Maimbourg finds
several Popes, who thought their Predecessors fallible, and some, though but a
few, who thought themselves so too, Among these Adrian VI. like a modest and
honest man, when he was actually Pope, continued to own in general, and without
exception, that the Bishop of Rome might fall into Error. Maimbourgs words are
these.

Adrian VI. in his Commentaries upon the 4th of the Sentences, says positively,
and in a most decisive manner. That he is certain, Cortum est, quod Pontifex
possit errare etiam in iis, quae tangunt fidem, Haeresin, per suam
determinationem aut Decretalem asserendo. cap. 15. page 183.
the Pope may err even in matters belonging to Faith, teaching and establishing
a Heresy by his Definition, or by his Decretal.

Hence it manifestly appears, that the French Catholics are in this regard,
opposite to the Italian Papists. Therefore Bellarmin will not let this French
Doctrine pass, it being very prejudicial to the Interest of the papal Chair at
Rome; but he contradicts it, lib. 4. cap. 2. de Romano Pontifice, and that very
severely, saying, (videtur erronea, and Haeresi proxima) it seems to be wholly
erroneous, and next in the world to Heresy. Here let the Reader consider how
those Doctors of the Popish Persuasion disagree and contradict each other about
their pretended infallible Judge or Guide in matters of Religion.

The French Divines and Pope Adrian VI hold, that the Pope is not infallible,
and they say, that the diffusive Church and a General Council is so. Then comes
Cardinal Bellarm with others like him, and gives them the lie; and then they of
the other side, not willing to dye in this debt, do the like to him and his
associates.

If it be said, that both parties had more manners than to tax one another with
the lie in express terms, that is true indeed, but yet they do the same in
effect.

Finding this great discord amongst them, I set aside the whole Italian Sect at
once, and could have been content, if the French party had been able to advance
a model of an infallible Guide with any concord amongst themselves, and without
contradicting one another.

But alas they also are full of Disputes and Dissentions, and the best model
they devise is liable to very great exceptions. As for Disputes and Controversy
the matter is thus; Some hold, that a General Council is the only infallible
Guide and Judge in things appertaining to Religion, but they allow the Pope
many great privileges in the Council. For example, a General Council (say one
party) cannot be called, but by the Popes Authority, or by his Consent. And the
opinion of these men is to be found in Petrus de Marca the late famous
Archbishop of Paris, lib. 4. de Concordia Sacerdotii and Imperii, cap. 5.
parag. 4.

Others affirm again, that the Civil Magistrate may call an extraordinary
Council, which was the Judgment of the University of Paris, publicly declared
by the Command of King Charles VIII. as may be seen in the 4th Book of the
History of General Councils set forth by Richerius above mentioned. C. 2. and
the same was likewise the judgment of the late Famous Archbishop of Paris. Lib.
6. C. 17.4. de concordia Sacerdotii and Imperii.

A third sort hold it not to be absolutely necessary that the Pope should have
any hand in constituting a General Council, or in presiding in it, or in
ratifying the Decrees of it. And this is the Opinion of Monsieur Maimbourg in
his Book concerning the Prerogatives of Rome, and her Bishop. Chap. 16. Page
188, 189. The same Opinion is likewise maintained by Richerius, Historia
Council. General. lib. 1. c. 5. For in two General Councils, that is the second
and fifth, the Pope neither presided by himself, nor by his Delegates; and the
same Richerius disproves the colors and pretenses found out by Baronius and
Binius, in order to make the World believe that the Pope had some presidency in
the Councils above named. Hitherto we find nothing in pursuit of this
Infallible Guide, but uncertainty and confusion, everlasting Disputes, and
endless Quarrels. This I considered, and was exceedingly troubled, to find my
self so mightily deceived in my expectation.

But let us proceed farther, and see whether any thing in the World be
consistent, and credible in this French Doctrine: concerning their model of an
Infallible Guide, I am content to set aside the manifold Disputes, concerning
the nature and constitution of a Council, on condition I may find them well
agreed for the rest. Notwithstanding, if they were perfectly agreed, and as
harmonious as Music, yet there lies very many exceptions against their
Opinion: for if a General Council be the only thing incapable of Error, then it
follows inevitably, that there has been no visible Infallible Guide upon earth
for these 120 years last past. For it is so long since any thing pretending to
be a General Council was in being. Therefore when the French Papists falsely
charge the Protestants for having no certain groundwork, or foundation of their
Faith, they do not consider that the Protestants may return the charge, and ask
those Papists, where their Infallible Directors is since the Council of Trent
was dissolved above 120 years ago.

If it be said, that although there is no Council now sitting, yet Records and
Writings, which contain the Canons and Decrees of Councils are yet extant, and
may be consulted. This makes a Writing capable of being a Guide or Director of
our Faith, which is a thing the Romanists will not admit of. For when the
Protestants affirm the written Word of God is only the Infallible Director,
then they except against all Writings, as incapable of being any certain
Directors, because they may be wrested by Interpretation to bear many Senses:
And upon this account they call the Holy Scripture a Leaden Rule and a Nose of
Wax.

Now for my part I cannot perceive but that the Canons and Decrees of dead
Councils are liable to wresting and misinterpretation as well as the Holy
Scripture. Methinks the Bishop of Condom's Book is a very strong proof of this;
and many instances of the like I could give, but I shall omit them, because it
is notorious that the sense of many Canons is exceedingly disputable. Thus I
plainly perceive upon the whole matter, that either Records of Councils are no
infallible or sufficient Guide, or if they be so, the Holy Scripture is much
more such. Whence it follows that the Protestants are in the right, by relying
mainly upon the Scripture.

Certainly, if a Writing can afford infallible direction, the written Word of
God has the best pretense in the World to that office: Therefore the Reformed
Church has reason in some respect to thank the French Papists; for although their
pretended unerring Director is not sufficient, yet it suggests to them where
they may find out one that is very sufficient. Such will be the consequence of
that model of an Infallible Guide which is advanced, and defended by the
Gallican Church, and by others that follow their method. But there are yet
farther Inconveniences in it, enough to dissatisfie any considerative person
whatsoever. I was content (as you have heard) to pass by the great Controversy
above mentioned, between the Italian and French men: I could have prevailed
with my self to have connived at the many dissentions under which the Gallican
Divines do labor, concerning the nature and constitution of a General Council.
Yet after all, I perceive it is impossible to get to an end of their
Controversies, in so much that I am afraid I shall incumber the Reader with a
tedious and long account of them. The thing that at present I shall consider,
is their dissension concerning the extent of that Infallibility which they
attribute to General Councils: For some extend the supposed Infallibility,
attending the Councils aforesaid, to all sorts of Decrees, whether they concern
Faith, or Practice; and this was the current sense of the University of Paris
145 years ago; as appears by their conclusions concerning this affair,
publicly agreed upon, and declared Anno Dom. 1542. by the Theological Faculty
of that University, Articulo 22. It is certain (say they) that General Councils
lawfully assembled, Certum est Concilium Generale legitime Congregatam
universalem representans Ecclesiam, in Fidei and Morum determinationibus errare
non posse,
and representing the Universal Church, cannot err in Decrees concerning Faith
and the Church.

But of late the Gallican Doctors sing a new song; they have departed from this
Opinion of their Predecessors, and restrained their imagined Infallibility of
Councils only to matters of Faith. And an account of this one may find, p. 9.
of the Reflections made upon the first Answer, given to the Papist
Misrepresented and Represented. Besides it is in every bodies mouth, that has
been educated in France, that in matters of Practice, Discipline, or
Government; General Councils are not Infallible. Thus at one stroke the French
Doctors of these last ages have cut off, at least, in nine or ten parts from
the extent of that Infallibility, which their Predecessors 145 years ago did
ascribe to the Decrees of Councils. For most certain it is, the Rules of
Practice appertaining to Christianity are (to speak within compass) nine or ten
times as many as the matters of Faith. So the modern French Clergy do hold a
much less extended Infallibility then what was heretofore held and taught by
the Theological Faculty of Paris above mentioned: and according to the modern
Position or Doctrine we are deserted by the unerring Guide in much the greater
part of Christianity, and may err and wander in all practical Points, and
scatter as much as any Heretics whatever.

Hereupon some perhaps will say, that although the Office of an infallible
Conductor be reduced to a very small compass, yet notwithstanding it is better
to have his help and assistance (as little as it is) than to want it. Truly
there was a time when I thought so too: but then I considered, that most of
those Points controverted between Protestants and Papists are matters of
practice: Therefore if the unerring direction of the Guide does not extend to
practical Decrees, it follows that most of the points aforesaid have not
hitherto been infallibly determined in savor of the Church of Rome. The
Worship of Images, the Adoration of the Gross, the Worship of Angels and
Saints, the half Communion, the Adoration of the Host, and several other things
are points of practice, and not properly matters of Faith. If it be said, that
the Decrees made by the Council of Trent concerning those things do virtually
and implicitly contain a point of Faith, by obliging us to believe the
lawfulness or expediency of doing them, I answer, that the case of other
Decrees about matters of Practice, Discipline, or Government is just the same:
In so much that either all practical Decrees must for this reason be reducible
to matters of Faith, or else the Decrees concerning Image Worship, half
Communion, and the rest abovementioned cannot be reduced to that kind, but must
be ranked among matters of Practice; and so are not capable of any infallible
Determination, if the Description of the Guide given by the French Divines be
true. But if any man will maintain, that all practical Decrees are reducible to
matters of Faith, for the reason aforesaid, then the deposing Canon of the
Lateran Council is reducible to the same kind, and is consequently established
in the Roman Church by an infallible Decree, which makes it an essential part
of the Romish Church. Now this is that great inconvenience which the French
Clergy do endeavor to avoid by restraining the unerring privilege of the
Councils to matters of Faith alone. They are sensible that several
Constitutions and Decrees of Councils are prejudicial to Rights of Sovereign
Princes, and injurious to the Libertis of the Gallican Church; they are aware
of the great mischief, which those Canons and Decrees made for deposing Kings
might bring upon them if their potent Monarch should perceive that such
Doctrines are judged essential to the Religion of Rome; and for that reason
they warily restrain the supposed Infallibility of Councils to matters of Faith
alone, and so give themselves room and scope enough to run down the deposing
Canons and Doctrines; and yet to pretend that they have an infallible Guide
still left in store. But this design will be quite ruined, if practical Decrees
are therefore esteemed to be infallible because they include or suppose a
speculative Doctrine concerning the lawfulness or expediency of things they
enjoin. For if such Decrees and Constitutions are infallible, then they are
essential parts of the Roman Catholic Religion, even the deposing Canons among
the rest. So that I plainly see the Frenchmen will be necessitated, by trusting
to the Conduct of their infallible Guide, either to own that Image Worship,
Invocation of Saints, etc. neither yet are nor indeed ever can be decreed
infallibly; or else they must own the Doctrine of deposing Princes to be
infallibly decreed, which is the thing they endeavor to avoid. The latter case
makes their Guide mischievous and dangerous, and the former makes him in a
manner unserviceable.

Thus we see what a miserable confusion these poor people have brought
themselves to, by pretending to find a visible Judge of Controversies incapable
of Error among mortal men. They have made the greatest part of Christianity an
uncertain thing (as far as in them lay) by removing it (as far as their
Opinions could remove it) from its proper and natural basis, that is, the Word
of God; and by grounding it upon the testimony of an airy phantome, called an
infallible Guide; but owned by themselves to be liable enough to Error, and to
have erred most grievously in matters of the greatest importance. They say,
this Guide cannot be mistaken in matters of Faith; but in the conclusion, they
cannot tell what they themselves mean by that term [matters of Faith:] for
although that term be of it self clear enough, yet they make the signification
of it obscure and uncertain, by confounding matters of Faith and matters of
Practice, being not able, according to their Principles (for as much as I
understand) to make any clear distinction between them. When I was brought to
this great uncertainty, and did not know on what foundation to ground my
Belief, or how to understand certainly the Commands of God, I remembered what
was said Deuteron. chap. 30. verse. 11, 12, 13, 14. The Commandment which I
command thee this day is not hidden from thine eyes, nor is it far off. It is
not in the Heaven above, that thou should say, who shall go up for us into
Heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it? neither is it
beyond the Sea, that thou should say, who shall go over the Sea for us, and
bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it? but the Word is nigh thee,
even in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou may do it. And the same thing
is repeated in the New Testament by St. Paul. Romans c. 10. v. 6, 7, 8. with an
application of it to the Christian Dispensation.

Having been thus taught of God, I understood that it was not necessary for me
to seek an infallible Guide either in Rome or France; God has provided
sufficient means whereby we may know his Will in all Christian Countries,
without going beyond the Sea to fetch the knowledge of it from afar off. His
written Word is a Guide, whose Veracity cannot be questioned; and there are
means to understand the true sense of it, which are abundantly sufficient, and
infinitely better than the Romanists have to understand their pretended
infallible Director: For that is a thing that no man certainly knows, neither
what he is, nor where he is, neither how he is to be consulted, nor how far he
is to be trusted; which, doubtless, are lamentable defects in a thing called a
Guide. The Word of God assuredly ought to be our Rule. And I am resolved to
follow it, according to the Direction given me by St. Augustine.

Let no man say to me, O! Nemo mihi dicat, O! quid dixit Donatus, aut
Parmenianus, aut Pontius, aut aliquis alius illorum? quia nec cum Catholicis
Episcopis sentiendumest, sicubi forte fallantur, ut contra Canonicas Scripturas
aliquid sentiant. Aug. de Unit. Ecclesiae, c. 10.
what said Donatus, Parmenianus, or Pontius, or any other of them? for neither
ought we to agree with Catholic Bishops, if perhaps in some cases they are so
much mistaken, as to entertain Opinions contrary to the Canonical Scriptures.

Thus we see St. Augustine prefers the Guidance of Gods Word to the Direction of
any one or more Bishops, although accounted never so Catholic. It seemed
strange to me, that a matter of such weight and consequence as this is, the
stay and prop of all Religion (as they term it,) and a thing that tends so much
to the preservation of Truth and Peace in the Church, should not be taken
notice of by the four Evangelists, who yet record many things of smaller
importance.

That St. Paul should hint nothing of it to that Church that pretends so
mightily to it. That in his Epistle to the Corinthians (where he takes notice
of their Schisms, one being of Paul, another of Apollos, and a third of Cephas)
he did not tell them, that they ought to require Cephas his Judgment for the
Determination of their Differences.

That Peter himself, giving all diligence to mind the Christians of what was
needful, before his departure, should forget to tell them of so necessary and
so important an Article as this. That the Scriptures so frequently warn us of
false Teachers, and false Prophets, that should arise; and yet tell us nothing
of this infallible Remedy; but rather put the cure of the evil upon the pains
and diligence of the Christians, in trying their Spirits. That the Asian
Bishops, in their opposition against Pope Victor, and the African in their
opposition to Pope Stephen, should either not know of this privilege of St.
Peter's Successors, or not acknowledge it if they did. That St. Augustine and the
Council of Carthage should be so ill instructed in the Faith, as not to
acknowledge it; but rather stand out so stiffly, as they did, in the case of
Appeals. That the Popes, in the contest with him, should be so ignorant of
their own privileges, as not to allege their Infallibity in the Point, (which
would have put a speedy end to the Dispute;) but rather take Sanctuary in a
pretended Canon of the Council of Nice. That so many Councils should be called
from distant parts of the world, to the expenses of the Bishops, and the hazard
of their Churches, when there was a Remedy so near at hand, as the consulting
of the infallible Bishop of Rome on all occasions. And lastly, that the Popes
themselves should so far disbelieve it, as to contradict and rescind the
Decrees of one another. These things seem to me such mighty prejudices against
this infallible Judge, that I know not how to answer them. To which I shall add,
that instead of putting an end to Controversies, and being a Cure to the evils
of Christendom (as is pretended,) it is the most expedient way to promote and
continue them, by possessing that Church (which has been the great cause of
Disputes) with an opinion of her own Infallibility, and consequently rendering
her incurable in her Errors, and incapable either of redressing them, or
satisfying the Consciences of them that dissent from her. Consequently St.
Augustine expresses the same thing in another place more largely than above in
his last mentioned passage, showing nothing to have infallible Authority,
except the holy Scripture, no not a General Council it self.

Who knows not (says he) that the holy Canonical Scripture, Quis autem nesciat
sanctam Scripturam Canonicam, tam veteris quam novi Testamenti, certis suis
terminis contineri, eamque omnibus posterioribus Episcoporum Literis ita
praeponi, ut de illa omnino dubitari, ant disceptari non possit, utrum verum
vel utrum rectum sit quicquid in ea scriptum esse constiterit? Aug. lib. 2.
contra Donat. cap. 3.
both of the old and new Testament, is comprehended within its own determined
limits, and that it is so far preferred before the more modern Writings of
Bishops, as that it is unlawful to doubt or to dispute about it, or to question
whether any thing manifestly written in it be true or right?

But he then immediately after tells us, that the case of Ecclesiastical
Writers, of National Synods, and General Councils is quite otherwise.

Who knows not that the Writings of Bishops, Quis autem nesciat Episcoporum
Literas, quae post confirmatum Canonem vel scriptae sunt, vel scribuntur, and
per sermonem forte sapientiorem cujuslibet in ea re peritioris, and per aliorum
Episcoporum graviorem Authoritatem, doctiorumque Prudentiam, and per Concilia
licere reprehendi, si quid in eis forsan a veritate deviatum est, and ipsa
Concilia, quae per singulas Provincias vel Regiones fiant plenariorum
Conciliorum Authoritati, quae fiunt ex universo orb Christiano sine ullis
ambagibus cedere, ipsaque plenaria priora saepe posterioribus emendani. Aug.
ubi supra.
which either heretofore have been written, or are at present in composing,
since the Canon of Scripture is established, may lawfully be reprehended by a
more ingenious Discourse proceeding (it may be) from a person skilfuller in
that affair, or by the more grave Authority of other Bishops, or the Prudence
of the more learned, or also by Councils? Moreover who knows not that
Provincial or National Synods do yield without delay to the Authority of
General Councils which are gathered out of all the Christian world, and that
General Councils precedent in time are often corrected by them that are
subsequent.

Here we see, that according to St. Augustine, nothing but the Word of God is
esteemed incorrigible or infallible, not so much as a General Council.
Therefore I am resolved to follow this Doctrine, and to adhere to the Word of
God, as my only Rule. And because I find that the Church of England in this
particular agrees most exactly with St. Augustine, for that reason I will
henceforth embrace the Communion of that Church.

CHAP. III. Of Transubstantiation.
THE third Motive of my Conversion is my dislike to the modern Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, and I may well call it so, because it was disliked by the
ancient Fathers, and was full 1215 Years before it could obtain the credit to
be defined as an Article of Faith; for it was not defined such till the Council
of Lateran held the above mentioned Year under Innocent III. and the
Testimonies of the Fathers and Councils (as hereafter you shall see) are so
decretory against it that the learned Archbishop of Paris does ingeniously
acknowledge it: Petr. Mar. Tract. de Eucharist.
And for the justification of it they have been forced to corrupt their Logic
and their Natural Philosophy, the better to season Young Novices for the
reception of it in Divinity, and maintain such Paradoxes in them both, that if
the Protestants had the ill Fate to take them up they long ago had been hissed
out of the Schools for defending them.

Such are the proposition of accidents existing without a subject, and the
possibility of one Body being in diverse places at the same time: they have
destroyed the nature of a Sacrament by taking away the Visible Sign, and have
stretched the words of Institution to a sense that many of their own Writers
did not believe before it was defined; and some have since been so candid as to
confess that they could not see the meaning of Transubstantiation in the Text,
if it were not for the authority of the church. They are forced to tell all men
loudly to their faces, that four of their Senses are mistaken about their
proper Object, when neither the Medium nor the Organ are indisposed. That there
is no Bread there at all, tho they see, feel, smell and taste Bread. That the
Senses of this or that man, are not only mistaken, (which is somewhat
pardonable) but the Senses of all mankind, at all times, and in all places,
whenever they receive the Eucharist, nay that they are engaged so fatally in
the mistake, that they are never like to be retrieved out of it, tho they use
their utmost care to detect the fallacy. They are forced to contradict the
common reason of mankind, and maintain Propositions, that sound Reason does
abhor in all other instances.

Sound Reason tells us, that one Body can be but in one place at one time, that
it must have parts extra parts, distant in situation, and impenetrable; that
it must have a quantity and extension; that Accident cannot subsist without a
Subject, that conversion of one Substance into another cannot be without a
change in the Accidents.

But in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation we are taught to disbelieve all these
Principles. The Body of Christ is at the same time in many places far distant
from one another; it is glorious in Heaven, and on Earth subject to a thousand
dishonours; it occupies a certain place there, but in the Host it takes up
none, but is (in manner like a Spirit) in an indivisible point: it moves in one
place, and rests in another: it is elevated in one place, and depressed in
another; and all at the same time and season. That the Body of Christ is
without quantity and extension; that there is length, and nothing long;
breadth, and nothing broad; roundness, and nothing round; thickness, and yet
nothing thick. That the Body of Christ does exist without its accidents and
essential properties; and the accidents, of Bread and Wine without a subject;
and yet these accidents shall do still the same seats, and serve a man to as
usual purposes as if the substance were with them; a man may seed upon them,
and be nourished with them, and have his Spirit cheered, and refreshed with the
color, and smell of Wine tho he drink not a drop of it. Lo these are the
paradoxes which the defenders of Transubstantiation must be forced to take up
for the justification of it; and they must still seem so to me, till I meet
with a clear and satisfactory answer to them. There was a time when I was
content to swallow them as well as others; the prejudice of Education and
Authority of the Church, had so great an influence upon me, that I did not
consider them as I ought; but, as by the blessing of God I have shaked off the
prejudice of the one, so I am still willing to pay a deference to the authority
of the other; if it can be made good that she has authority, to impose things
on my Belief that thwart my Senses, and contradict common Principles of Reason.

This monstrous, and lately framed figment of human invention, (I mean) the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, is so far from being Primitive and Apostolic,
that we know the time it began to be owned publicly for an Opinion; and the
very Council, in which it was said to be passed into a public Doctrine, and by
what arts it was promoted, and by what persons it was introduced.

For all the World knows, that by their own Parties, by In 4. lib Sentent. d.
11. q. 3.
Scotus, by ibid. q. 6.
Ocham, Le^t. 40. in can. missae.
Biel, Fisher Bishop Cap. cont. captivit. Babyl.
of Rochester, and diverse others whom De Euchar. lib. 3. cap. 23. sect. 2.
dicit.
Bellarmine calls most acute and learned men: It was declared that the Doctrine
of Transubstantiation is not expressed in the Canon of the Bible; that in the
Scriptures there is no place so express, (as without the Churches declaration)
to compel us to admit of Transubstantiation; and therefore at least it is to be
suspected of Novelty. But further, we know that it was but a disputable
Question in the ninth and tenth Ages after Christ; that it was not pretended to
be an Article of Faith till the Lateran Council in the time of Innocent III.
1215 Years after Christ; that since that pretended Venere quidem tunc multa in
confultationem. nec decerni tamen aperte quic quam potuit. Platina in vita
Innocent III.
determination diverse of the chiefest Teachers of their own side have no more
been satisfied of the ground of it than they were before, but still have
publicly affirmed that the Article is not expressed in Scripture; apud Suar.
tom. 3. disp. 46. sect. 3. loc. com. lib. 3. fund. 2.
particularly Johannes de Bassolis, Cardinal Cajetan, and Melchior Canus;
besides those above reckoned: And therefore if it was not expressed in
Scripture it will be clear that they made their Article out of their own heads;
for they could not declare it to be there if it was not; and if it be there but
obscurely, then it ought to be taught accordingly; and at most it could be but
a probable Doctrine, and not certain as an Article of Faith.

But that we may put it past Argument and Probability, it is certain, That as
the Doctrine was not taught in Scripture expressly, so it was not taught at all
as a Catholic Doctrine, or as an Article of Faith by the Primitive Ages of the
Church.

Now in order to make this appear, we have the Confessions of many Authors very
much esteemed by the Church of Rome, whose authorities have been most exactly
collected and examined by the learned Bishop Tailor, to whom I own my self much
indebted for my Conversion.

For the further manifestation of the incontroulable truth of this point, we
need no other proof but the confession and acknowledgment of the great Doctors
of the Church of Rome. Scotus says, That before the Lateran Council
Transubstantiation was no Article of Faith, as Bellarmine confesses; Lib. 3. de
Euch. c. 23 Sect. unum tamen. Sum. l. 8. c. 20.
and Henriquez affirms that Scotus says, It was not ancient; insomuch that
Bellarmine accuses him of Ignorance, saying, He talked at that rate because he
had not read the Roman Council under Pope Gregory VII. nor that consent of
Fathers which (to little purpose) he had heaped together. Rem Transubstantionis
Patres ne attigisse quidem, said some of the English Jesuits in Prison. The
Fathers have not so much as touched or meddled with the matter of
Transubstantiation. Discurs. modest. p. 13.
And in Peter Lombard's time it was so far from being an Article of Faith, or
Catholic Doctrine, that they did not know whether it were true or no: And
after he had collected the Sentences of the Fathers in that Article, he
confessed, He could not tell whether there was any substantial change or no.
His words are these. L. 4. Senten. did. 11 lit. a.
If it be enquired what kind of Conversion it is, whether it be formal or
substantial, or another kind? I am not able to define it: only I know that it
is not formal, because the same Accidents remain, the same Color and Taste. To
some it seems to be substantial, saying that the Substance is changed, that it
is done essentially; to which the former authority seems to consent: But to
this Sentence others oppose these things, if the substance of Bread and Wine be
substantially converted into the Body and Blood of Christ, which before was not
the Body, then every day some substance is made the Body and Blood of Christ,
which was not his Body before. And to day something is Christ's Body which
yesterday was not: and every day Christ's Body is increased; and is made of such
matter, of which it was not made in the conception. These are his words, which
I have remarked, not only for Arguments sake, (though it be unanswerable;) but
to give a plain demonstration, that in his time this Doctrine was new, not the
Doctrine of the Church. And this was written about Ad Annum 1160.
fifty years before it was said to be decreed in the Lateran Ad Annum 1215.
Council: And therefore it made haste, in so short a time to pass from a
disputable Question to an Article of Faith. But even after the Council Secund.
Buchol. An. Dom. 1271. sed secund. Volaterranum 1335. in 4. lib. Sen. tent.
did. 11. q. 1. sect. propter tertium.
Durandus, as good a Catholic, and as famous a Doctor, as any was in the
Church of Rome, publicly maintained, that even after Consecration the very
matter of Bread remained; and although he says, that by reason of the Authority
of the Church it is not to be held, yet it is not only possible it should be
so, but it implies no contradiction, that it be Christ's Body, and yet the
matter of Bread remain. And if this might be admitted, it would salve many
difficulties which arise from saying, that the substance of Bread does not
remain. But here his Reason was overcome by Authority, and he durst not affirm
that which alone he was able to give (as he thought) a reasonable account of.
But by this it appears that the Opinion then was but in the forge: and by all
their understanding they could never accord it, but still the Questions were
uncertain, and the Opinion was not determined at Lateran, as it is now held at
Rome. It is also plain, that it is a stranger to antiquity. De
Transubstantiatione ^anis in Corpus Christi rara est in antiquis Scriptoribus
mentio, De Heraes. l. 8. verbo Indulgentia.
said Alphonsus a Castro. There is seldom mention made in the ancient Writers
of Transubstantiating the Bread into Christ's Body. I know the modesly and
interest of the man, he would not have said, it had been seldom, if he could
have found it in any reasonable degree warranted: he might have said, and
justified it, there was no mention at all of this Article in the primitive
Church. And that it was a mere stranger to Antiquity, will not be denied by any
sober person, who considers that it was with so much uneasiness entertained
even in the corruptest and most degenerate times, and argued and unsettled
almost 1300 years after Christ. And that it was so, will but too evidently
appear by the stating and resolution of this Question, which we find in the
Canon Law. For Berengarius was by Pope Nicholaus commanded to recant his Errors
in these words, and to affirm, Cap. Ego Bereng. consecr. did. 2.
Verum Corpus and Sanguinem Domini nostri Jesu Christi sensualiter non solum in
Sacramento, sed in veritate manibus S^cerdotum tractari, frangi, and fidelium
dentibus atteri. That the true Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ
sensually not only in the Sacrament, but in truth is handled by the Priests
hands, and broken, and grinded by the teeth of the faithful. Now although this
was publicly read at Rome before 115 Bishops, and by the Pope sent up and down
the Churches of Italy, France and Germany; yet this day it is renounced by the
Church of Rome; and unless it be well expounded (says the Gloss) will-lead unto
Heresy. But however this may be, it is plain they understood it not, as it is
now decreed. But, as it happened to the Pelagians in the beginning of their
Heresy, they spoke rudely, ignorantly, and easily to be reproved; but being
ashamed, and disputed into a more sober understanding of their Hypothesis, they
spoke more warily, but yet differently from what they spoke at first. So it was
and is in this Question; at first they understood it not, and it was too
unreasonable in any tolerable sense to make any thing of it, but experience and
necessity has brought it to what it is. But that this Doctrine was not the
Doctrine of the first and best ages of the Church, these following Testimonies
do make evident. Advers. Marqion. l. 4. c. 40.
The words of Tertullian are these, The Bread being taken and distributed to
his Disciples, Christ made it his Body, saying, this is my Body, that is, the
Figure of my Body.

The same is affirmed by Justin Martyr; Contra Tryph. Judae.
The Bread of the Eucharist was a Figure, which Christ the Lord commanded to do
in remembrance of his Passion. In Dialog contra Mar. Collectis ex Maximo
tempore Commodi and Severi Imper.


Origin calls the Bread and the Chalice, the Images of the Body and Blood of
Christ. And again, that Bread which is sanctified by the Word of God, so far as
belongs to the matter (or substance) of it, goes into the belly, In Matt. 13.
and is cast away in the secession, or separation, which to affirm of the
natural and glorified Body of Christ were greatly blasphemous: and therefore
the Body of Christ which the Communicants receive, is not the Body in a natural
sense, but in a spiritual, which is not capable of any such accident, as the
Elements are.

Eusebius says, Demonstr. Evangel. l. 1. c. 1 and ult. h. 2.
that Christ gave to his Disciples the Symbols of Divine Economy, commanding
the Image and Type of his own Body to be made. St. Macarius says, that in the
Church is offered Bread and Wine, the Antitype of his Flesh, and of his Blood;
and they that partake of the Bread that appears do spiritually eat the Flesh of
Christ. By which words the sense of the above cited Fathers is explicated. For
when they affirm, that in this Sacrament is offered the Figure, the Image, the
Antitype of Christ's Body and Blood, although they speak perfectly against
Transubstantiation; yet they do not deny the real and spiritual presence of
Christ's Body and Blood, which we all believe as certainly as that it is not
transubstantiated, or present in a natural and carnal manner.

The same is also fully explicated by the good St. Ephrem. The Body of Christ
received by the faithful departs not from the sensible substance, De sacris
Anti och. legibus a pud Photium, l. 1. c. 229.
and is undivided from a spiritual Grace. For even Baptism being wholly made
spiritual, and being that which is the same, and proper of the sensible
substance, I mean of Water, saves; and that which is born does not perish.

St. Gregory Nazianzen spoke so expressly in this Question, as if he had
undertaken on pupose to consute the Article of Trent; Now we shall be partakers
of the Paschal Supper, Orat. 2. in Pasch.
but still in figure, though more clear than in the old Law. For the legal
Passover (I will not be afraid to speak it) was an obscure Figure of a Figure.

St. Chrysostom affirms dogmatically, Epist. ad Caes. contr. Haeres.
Apollinarii, cit. per Damasc. and Colect. Senten. Pp. contr. Severianos, edit
per Tunian. h. 23. in 1 Cor.
that be fore the Bread is sanctified we name it bread, but the Divine Grace
sanctifying it by the means of the Priest, it is freed from the name of Bread,
but is esteemed worthy to be called the Lords Body, although the nature of
Bread remains in it.

To these very many more might be added, but instead of them the words of St.
Augustine may suffice, as being an evident conviction what was the Doctrine of
the primitive Church in this Question: In Psalm. 98.
This great Doctor brings in Christ speaking thus to his Disciples; You are not
to eat this Body which you see, or drink that Blood which my Crucifiers shall
pour forth. I have commended to you a Sacrament, which being spiritually
understood shall quicken you. And again, Christ brought them to a Banquet, in
which he commended to his Disciples the Figure of his Body and Blood; (for he
did not doubt to say, this is my Body, when he gave the Sign of his Body; and
that which is by all men called a Sacrifice, is the Sign of the true Sacrifice,
in which the Flesh of Christ, after his Assumption, is celebrated by the
Sacrament of Remembrance.

But in this particular the Canon Law it self, and the Master of the Sentences,
are the best Witnesses, De Consecrat. did. 1. c. qui manducant, etc. prima
quidem, etc. non hoc corpus, etc. quid paras.
in both which Chollections there are diverse Testimonies brought; especially
from St. Ambrose and St. Augustine, which whosoever can reconcile with the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation; may easily put a Civet and Dog, a Pidgeon and a
Kite into couples, and make Fire and Water enter into natural and eternal
Friendships.

Theodoret and Pope Gelasius speak more emphatically even to the nature of
things, and the Philosophy of the Question; Christ honored the Symbols and
Signs (says Theodoret) not changing the Nature, but to Nature adding Grace,
Sentent. lib. 4. did. 11. dialog. 1. c. 8.
which Symbols are seen with the title of his Body and Blood. Dialog 2. c. 24.
For neither do the mystical Signs recede from their Nature; for they abide in
their proper substance, figure and form, and may be seen, touched, etc. And for
a Testimony that will be esteemed infallible, I allege the words of Pope
Gelasius; De Duabus Not. contra Eutych. and Nestor. videatur Picherel. in
Dissert. de missa, and expositione verbo rum Institutionis coenae Domini.
Truly the Sacraments of the Body and Blood of Christ, which we receive, are a
divine thing, for that by them we are made partakers of the Divine Nature, yet
ceases not to be the substance, or nature of Bread and Wine. And truly an image
and similitude of the Body and Blood of Christ are celebrated in the action of
the mysteries.

If the Patrons of this novelty be not yet satisfied by what is already said in
reference thereunto, let them see and diligently mark these following Councils;
Ancyranum anno Domini 314. Can. 2. Neocaesariense anno eodem Can. 13. Nicenum
1. an. 325. in act. lib. 2. c. 3. Laodicenum ann. 364. Can. 25. Carthagiense
ann. 397. Can. 24. Aurelianense ann. 541. Can. 4. Toletanum 4. an. 633. Can.
17. Bracarense ann. 675, C. 2. Toletanum 16. ann. 693. C. 6.
Constantinopolitanum in Trullo ann. 691. Can. 32. and if there be any shame in
them, they will never brag of Antiquity to patronize them therein: for they are
diametrically repugnant unto them in this behalf.

Now from these premises I am not desirous to infer any odious consequences in
reproof of the Church of Rome; but I think my self bound in conscience to
swerve from it, and judge it my duty to give caution and admonition to all
other well disposed Christians to do so likewise.

1. That they be not abused by the Rhetorical words and high expressions
alleged out of the Fathers, calling the Sacrament the Body or Flesh of Christ:
For we all believe it is so, and rejoice in it. But the Question is, after what
manner it is so, whether after the manner of Flesh, or after the manner of
spiritual Grace, or sacramental consequence? I, with the holy Scriptures, Jo.
6.36.
and primitive Fathers, affirm the latter, the Church of Rome, against the
words of Scripture, and the Explication of Christ, affirm the former.

2. That they be careful not to admit such Doctrines, under the pretense of
being ancient, since although the Roman Error had been so long admitted, and is
ancient in respect of our days, yet it is an Innovation in Christianity, and
brought in by Ignorance, Power and Superstition very many ages after Christ.

3. I exhort them, that they remember the words of Christ, when he explicates
the Doctrine of giving us his Flesh for Meat, and his Blood for Drink, that he
tells us, Ut supra.
the Flesh profits nothing: but the Words which I speak are Spirit, and they
are Life.

4. That if these ancient and primitive Doctors above cited say true, and that
the Symbols still remain the same in their natural substance and properties
even after they are blessed, and when they are received, and that Christ's Body
and Blood are only present to Faith and Spirit, that then whoever attempts to
give Divine Honor to these Symbols, or Elements, (as the Church of Rome does),
attempts to give a Creature the due and incommunicable propriety of God; and
that then this evil passes further than an error in the understanding, for it
carrys them to a dangerous practice, which cannot reasonably be excused from
the crime of Idolatry.

To conclude, this matter of it self is an error so prodigiously great and
dangerous, that I need not tell of the horrid and blasphemous Questions which
are sometimes handled by them of the Church of Rome concerning this divine
mystery. As if a Priest going by a Bakers Shop, and saying with an Intention,
Hoc est Corpus meum, whether all the Bakers Bread be turned to Christ's Body?
whether a Church-mouse does eat her Maker? whether a man by eating the
consecrated Symbols does break his fast? for if it be Bread and Wine he does
not, and if it be Christ's Christ's Body and Blood naturally and properly, it is
not Bread and Wine. Whether it may be said, the Priest in some sense is the
Creator of God himself? whether his Power be greater than the Power of Angels
and Archangels? For that it is so, is expressly affirmed by Cassenaeus. Gloria
mundi 4. number. 6.
Whether (as a Bohemian Priest said) that a Priest before he says his first
Mass be the Son of God, but afterward he is the Father of God, and Creator of
his Body? But these things are too bad, and therefore I love not to rake in so
filthy channels, but give only general warning to all them whom I wish well, to
take heed of such persons, who, from the proper consequences of their new sound
Articles, grow too bold and extravagant, and of such Doctrines, from whence
these and many other evil Propsitions frequently do issue. As the Tree is, such
must be the Fruit. But I hope it may be sufficient to say, that what the Church
of Rome teaches of Transubstantiation, is absolutely impossible, and implies
contradictions very many, to the belief of which no Faith obliges me, and no
Reason can endure.

CHAP. IV. Of the Half Communion.
THE fourth Motive of my Conversion is another piece of Novelty I was much
dissatisfied with, and that is, the Half Communion. And the more I inquired
into the Word of God, and the Sense of the primitive Church concerning it, the
more I found cause to dislike it. Certainly the common Reason of all men, that
are Christians, cannot but suggest unto them, that every Command, Order and
Institution of Christ ought to be accounted extremely sacred, and that whatever
he has appointed should be observed most religiously, without any deviation
from the Rule which he has delivered.

Now upon examination I found, that the Church of Rome had made a very
unwarrantable and a strange alteration in the Administration of the Sacrament,
by detaining the Cup from the people: and therefore (I hope) no rational man
can blame me for rejecting Communion with her, and adhering to that Religion of
the Reformed Church, where I saw the Command of our Savior carefully observed,
and his Institution most obsequiously followed. And because I do here enter
upon an Accusation of the Church of Rome, it is reasonable I should in the
first place set down what I apprehend to be the Doctrine of that party
concerning this matter, and then I will endeavor to demonstrate, that both the
Doctrine and Practice of it are repugnant to the Word of God, and to the
Doctrine and Practice of the primitive Church. It is pretended by the
Romanists, that they have made no change in any thing material or essential to
the Sacrament: For they resolutely affirm, that the giving of the Cup to the
people is an indifferent thing, and may be done or omitted, as the Rulers of
the Church shall judge convenient. Some of them proceed farther, and pretend
that receiving the Bread alone was less or more the practice of all ages, since
the beginning of Christianity. Many conjectures and surmises have been invented
by Bellarmin and others in order to make this seem likely, and yet all in vain:
For many learned men of the Roman Catholic party are ashamed of this pretense,
and ingenuously confess, that there never was any such practice approved
amongst the Ancients.

Alphonsus a Castro, asserting the lawfulness of the peoples communicating in
both kinds, has these words, (says he)

For I have learned from the Writings of many holy men, Nam olim per multa
saecula sic apud omnes Catholicos usurpatum esse, ex multorum sanctorum
scriptis didicimus. Alphons. titul. Eucharist. Haeres. 13.
that anciently for many ages it was the custom for all Catholics to
communicate so.

Lindanus a great maintainer of Popery affirms, that both kinds were generally
received in the Eucharist even till the year 1260. Panopliae lib. 4. c. 56. in
these words,

I now omit other things (says he) which make for this purpose, to wit, Omitto
nunc alia, quae huc faciunt, quod in aetatem usque Divi Thomae 1. ann. Domini
1260. utriusque speciei Communio fere ubique fuerir Laicis administrata, sed
non ubique; periculis forte and effusi Sanguinis Domini, scandalis una cum
populis negligentia, and pietatis detrimento increbescentibus paulatim
utriusque speciei Communio in unam degeneravit.
that till the age of St. Thomas, that is, till the year of our Lord 1260. the
Communion in both kinds was almost every where administered to the Laity, but
not every where; perhaps dangers and scandals arising from spilling the Blood
of Christ, together with the peoples negligence, and the decay of Piety
becoming every day greater, the Communion of both kinds gradually degenerated
into one.

Albaspinaeus, the late learned Bishop of Orleans in France, undertakes to
confute several of Bellarmins, Conjectures about the pretended Antiquity of the
Half Communion, especially his fancy that the Lay-communion, a thing sometimes
mentioned by the ancient Writers, was a custom of the peoples, receiving only
in one kind: and upon this occasion Albaspinaeus has these words following.

But if we grant that which by all means we ought to acknowledge, to wit, Atqui
si detur quod concedi omnino necesse est, quo tempore Concilia and Patres de
Communione Laica mentionem fecerunt, Laicos sub utraque specie communicasse:
sequitur non esse sub una specie Communionem. lib. 1. Observat. cap. 4.
that in those times, when the Councils and Fathers made mention of the
Lay-Communion, the people did partake of both kinds: it follows, that this
(i.e.) Lay-Communion is not participating of the Sacrament under one kind.

There are two remarkable places in Cardinal Bona, lib. 2, c. 18. de Rebus
Liturgicis, to prove that the Communion in one kind was not practiced till the
year 1200. and that all the precedent ages had the contrary practice, and gave
both kinds to the people publicly. He pretends besides, but indeed without any
considerable ground, that the Half Communion was privately practiced in those
ages. These are his sayings,

It is certain (says he) that all persons in all places, Certum est quippe
omnes passim Clericos and Laicos, viros and mulieres sub utraque specie sacra
mysteria antiquitus sumpsisse cum solemni eorum Celebrationi aderant and
offerebant, and de Oblatis participabant.
Clergy and people, men and women, did anciently receive the holy mysteries in
both kinds when they were present at the public Celebration, when they
offered, and did partake of the Offerings.

And a little after,

For always and every where, Semper enim and ubique, ab Ecclesiae primordiis
usque ad saeculum duodecimum, sub specii Panis and Vini communicarent fideles,
caepitque paulatim ejus saeculi initio usus calicis obsolescere.
from the infancy of the Church till the 12th age, the faithful received the
Communion under both kinds, of Bread and Wine; and the custom of the Cup in the
beginning of that age began by little and little to be disused.

Thus we see by the Testimonies already produced, that detaining the Cup from
the people was no ancient practice, but began about 460 years ago. These
Authors here cited being Papists are a sufficient proof of this, and many more
of the same Persuasion might be brought to confirm the same, which at present I
omit, that I may shun tediousness. But the thing which upon examination I found
my self obliged principally to consider, was not only what had been the ancient
practice in this matter, but also what the reason and ground was which moved
the holy Fathers and the primitive Church generally (as well Laity as Clergy)
to believe themselves most strictly bound to receive both kinds. For that they
had such a Belief, the Authorities which I shall hereafter allege will
convincingly demonstrate, and the reason and ground of this their Persuasion
was the Command and Institution of Christ. He had ordered in the Gospel, that
all should drink of the Cup, and they, with great Piety and Reverence to his
Command, accounted themselves all obliged to do what he enjoined them.

This certainly is nothing but what ought to be done. And I heartily wish the
Church of Rome had retained the like veneration and pious regard for the
Command of Christ; I should then have found no cause to blame her in this
particular.

Now because I have here in effect asserted, that the Command of Christ
concerning the Sacrament was that which had influence upon the Christians of
the eldest ages; I shall in the first place produce the Precept, and then
subjoin immediately the Sense of Antiquity to it, which will manifest that they
thought the obligation arising from the Divine Precept did extend to all
Believers without any discrimination; and if this be effectually performed, I
suppose, it will be unnecessary to advertise the Reader, that the same
apprehensions concerning the necessity of receiving in both kinds ought to take
place at all times, and in all Christian Societies. The consequence of which
is, that the Roman Church is a notorious transgressor of Divine Law in this
respect; and that the pretended indifferency of giving the Cup to the people,
or withholding of it, is a false supposition.

Our Savior, when he first appointed this Sacrament, delivered a Command,
Matt. 26.27. that all should drink of the Cup; and after his Resurrection he
reinforced all the Precepts which he had given to his Disciples, and
consequently this amongst the rest, Matthew. 28.19, 20. saying, Go, teach all
Nations; baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you. We see hence how express our Saviors words are, that all Nations should
be taught to observe whatever he commanded his Disciples; who would think (if
he saw it not before his eyes) that any Society of Christians, that will needs
be called the Catholic Church, should avowedly trample under foot this
manifest Command of God? They are so far from teaching all Nations to observe
what Christ commanded his Disciples, that they professedly teach the quite
contrary. Our Savior said, Drink ye all of it. No, says the Church of Rome,
all shall not drink of it, but a few shall, that is, consecrating Priests. One
would imagine that these Texts of holy Scripture above mentioned should make a
deep impression upon all men that pretend to have any regard for the Laws of
God, and they did so till 1200 years after Christ, when the practice of
detaining the Cup from the people began first to be introduced by a corrupt
custom, and was long afterward established by Pope Martin V. in the Council of
Constance. So new and late is this Point of Popery, that it was not conciliarly
decreed till about 272 years ago. And yet nothing is more usual with the Roman
Catholics, than to brag of the Antiquity of their Religion. I shall have an
opportunity hereafter of considering this late Decree of Pope Martin, when I
come to produce the ancient Canon of Pope Gelasius, made near 1200 years ago,
expressly repugnant, and contary to this late Decree of Martin: For Gelasius
declares receiving in one kind to be sacrilegious.

At present I shall proceed to allege the Testimonies of the ancient Fathers,
to show that they understood our Saviors words [Drink ye all of this]
agreeably to the Sense of the Reformed Church of England; that is, so as to
account all Christians, without exception, obliged to partake of the Cup. But
by the way, I cannot but observe, that Paschasius Corbeiensis, a man of great
credit in the Church of Rome, for his Invention of Christ's corporeal Presence
in the Host, about the year 830. did expound the words above mentioned,
contrary to the Sense of the present Church of Rome, and in favor of the
Protestants. His expressions are these.

It is Christ that breaks this Bread, Christus est qui frangit hunc Panem, and
per manus Ministrorum tribuit credentibus. Similiter and calicem porrigit eis,
dicens, accipite, and bibite ex hoc omnes tam Ministri, quam reliqui Credentes.
Paschas. be Coena Domini, cap. 14.
and by the hands of the Ministers delivers it to the Believers. Likewise he
gives them the Cup, saying, take, and drink ye all of this, both the Ministers
and other Believes.

Here we see Paschasius makes the Command to extend to all without any
difference; and it is a wonder to me, why the Roman Catholics do follow this
man so zealously in his Invention of the corporeal Presence of Christ in the
Eucharistical Bread, and will not admit of his Interpretation of this Command
of Christ, that all Believers should drink of the Cup.

But there are much more ancient and authentic Authors, who understood our
Saviors words according to the Sense of the Reformed Church of England, whose
Testimonies hereafter follow, and that in reference of proving that the Members
thereof do not expound Scripture according to their own private Judgment, as it
is falsely imputed to them by the wretched Author of Pax Vobis, Mr. Manby and
others, who (as I plainly find) never understood any thing of the Doctrine of
this Church concerning the Interpretation of Scripture.

The first ancient Writer, whose Authority I intend to make use of, is S.
Justin Martyr, one that lived not long after the Apostolic age, and lost his
Life for the Profession of the Christian Faith. He in his second Apology gives
an account to the Emperor of the method and manner of Divine Service amongst
the Christians, and coming to give an account of the Lords Supper, he does it
thus;

They that are called Deacons among us do distribute to every one present, Qai
apud nos vocantur Diaconi distribuunt unicuique priesentium ut participent de
Pane, and Vino and Aqua benedictis. Justin. Apol 2.
that they may partake of the consecrated Bread, and Wine, and Water.

It is remarkable, that he says, the Deacons gave both kinds to every one
present, and a little after he tells us, they did so; because our Savior in
the Gospel commanded them to do so. For (says he) the Apostles in the Books
written by them, Nam Apostoli in Commentariis a se scriptis, quae Evangelia
vocantur, ita sibi praecepisse Jesum tradiderunt. Justin. Apol. 2. ubi supra.
which are called the Gospels, have taught us, that Jesus commanded them to do
so.

Bellarmin pretends that this last expression of S. Justin, concerning the
Command of Christ, has only relation to the Gonsecration, not to the
Administration of the Sacrament. But any man by reading the place will sind the
Cardinals words to be groundless: For the Command of Christ is offered by S.
Justin as the reason of the whole procedure in celebrating the Sacrament, and
not as particularly respecting the Consecration of the Elements.

The second an^ient Author, whose Testimony I shall produce as an
uncontrollable Evidence in this behall, is St. Cyprian, who flourished
principally about the Yeat 250. and not many Years after was put to death for
his Religion. This Holy Martyr, in his Epistle to Caecilius, reprehends the
Aquarians, that were Heretics, so called, because in the Consecration and
Administration of this Holy Sacrament of our Lords Supper they made no use of
Wine, but used Water in stead of it. Now Sr. Gyprian reproves these Aquarians
upon two accounts: First in that they offered to Consecrate without Wine; and
secondly, in that they gave no Wine to the People; and in both respects he
taxes them with a very great tranfgression of the command and appointment of
our Savior. The former miscarriage and irrogularity of the Aquarians does not
concern the Roman Catholics; because they use Wine when they Consecrate: But
in the second point they are like the Aquarians, and therefore do fall under
the same censure with them. Let us hear what St. Cyprian says concerning this
whole affair: He begins the Epistle by telling Caecilius, That although many
Reverend Bishops did exactly observe our Lords Tradition (for so calls he the
Command or Institution of Christ) yet (says he) because some out of Ignorance
or simplicity in consecrating the Cup of our Lord, Tamen quoniam quidam vel
ignoranter, vel simpliciter in Calice Dominico sanctificando and plebi
ministrando, non faciunt quod Jesus Christas Dominus and Deus noster (hujus
Sacrificii Auctor and Doctor) fecit, and docuit: religiosum pariter, ac
necessarium duxi, de hoc ad vos literas facere at siquis in isto errore adhuc
teneatur veritatis luce perspecta ad radicem and originem Dominicae Traditionis
revertatur^ Cypr. Epist. 63. Pamilianae editionis.
and in administering it to the People, do not do that which Jesus Christ our
Lord God (the Teacher and Author of this Sacrifice) did, and taught: I judged
it to be agreeable to good Conscience, and necessary to write to you about this
matter; that if any one be yet possessed with this Error, he may, by seeing the
Light of Truth, return to the root and original of our Lords Tradition.

And thus having established his foundation, namely that nothing ought to be
done contrary to the Institution of Christ: in the first part of his Epistle he
proves the necessity of using Wine in the Consecration of the Sacrament; but in
the later part he comes to consider the great inconvenience and mischief to the
people that ensued from their being deprived of the Cup. And that which he
chiefly takes notice of, was a great decay and failure of Christian Courage,
occasioned (as St. Cyprian supposes) by this depravation of the Sacrament. For
in times of Persecution some learned (from the Aquarians) to abstain from
drinking the Consecrated Wine, least the smell of it should discover that they
have been at the Christian Meetings in the Mornings: St. Cyprians Words are
these. Caeterum omnis Religionis, et ve ritatis Disciplina subvertitur, nisi
id, quod spiritualiter praecipitur, fideliter observetur, nisi si sacrificiis
matutinis hoc quis ve retur, ne per saporem vini redoleat sanguinem Christi:
sic ergoincipit in persecutionibus a passione Christi fraternitas retardari dum
in oblationibus discit de sanguine ejus, et cruore confundi Cyp. Ep. 63. ubi
supra.
But the discipline and good order of all Religion and Truth is overthrown,
unless what was spiritually commanded be faithfully observed. But perhaps the
case is, that some persons in the Morning Sacrifices (or Sacraments) are
afraid, least by the savor of Wine they should smell of Christ's Blood, and so
by this means our Christian Brethren in times of Persecution begin to be slack,
or backward in suffering for Christ, while at the Celebration of the Sacrament
they learn to be ashamed of Christ's Blood.

And a little after the same Author says, Quomodo autem possumus propter
Christem sanguinem fundere qui sanguinem Christi erubescimus bibere.
How can we being ashamed to drink the Blood of Christ, spill our Blood for
Christ's sake.

Besides in another Epistle the same S. Cyp. writing to Cornelius the Bishop of
Rome concerning the restoring of certain delinquent Brethren (who in times of
Persecution had fallen into Idolatry, but by Repentance deserved to be
reconciled to the Church) urges the necessity of their being admitted into
Communion; because that since new Troubles and Persecutions were coming on, it
would be necessary to arm and fortify all Believers with the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper; and he insists particularly upon the necessiy of giving them the
Sacramental Cup. His expressions are these that follow,

For after what a strange manner do we teach and excite them to lose their
Blood in confessing the Name of Christ, Nam quomodo docemus aut provocamus eos
in confessione Nominis Christi sanguinem suum fundere, si eis militaturis
Sanguinem Christi denegamus? aut quomodo ad Martyrii poculum idoneos facimus,
si eos prius ad bibendum in Ecclesia poculum Domini jure Communicationit non
admittimus? Cyp. Ep 54. Edit. Pamel.
if we deny the Blood of Christ to them that are ready to undergo such a
warfare? And how do we make them fit for the Cup of Martyrdom, if we do not
admit them first by the right of Communion to drink our Lords Cup in the
Church?

It is observable that S. Cyprian here pleads for the peoples receiving the Cup
from the right of Communion, that is, from the right which accrewed to every
one, by his being made a member of the visible Church.

By this passage, and the rest before cited, it appears abundantly what the
Judgment of this holy Martyr was, that he thought all Christians obliged to
receive the consecrated Wine, and that the omission of it was a transgression
of our Lords Commandment, and the destruction of several Christian virtues,
especially of that courage and resolution wherewith all Believers ought openly
to profess the Name of Christ.

I might produce many more ancient Witnesses of great credit, to make good what
is here by me affirmed, but I shall content my self, for brevitys sake, with
two others, whose Authority doubtless ought to be past all exception with the
Roman Catholics; because they were Popes or Bishops of Rome: for anciently the
Title of Pope was given to any eminent Bishop. The first of these is Leo, the
first of that name that was Bishop in Rome; but before I produce his Testimony,
it is necessary to observe that although his words are levelled against the
Manichees, who superstitiously abhorred Wine; and therefore avoided receiving
the Sacramental Cup: yet Leo's words do abundantly show what his Judgment was
concerning that necessity, which as he thought did lie indispensibly upon all
Communicants to partake of the mystical Blood of Christ; Consequently (says he)
when they venture to be present at our mysteries, Cumque ad tegendam
infidelitatem suam nostris audeant interesse mysteriis, ita in Sacramentorum
Communione se temperant, ut interdum tutius lateant; ore indigno Christi Corpus
accipiunt, Sanguinem autem Redemptionis nostrae haurire omnino declinant; quod
ideo vestram scire volumus sanctitatem, ut nobis hujusmodi homines his
manifestentur indiciis; and quorum fuerit deprehensa sacrilegia simulatio,
notati, and proditi a Sanctorum societate Sacerdotali Authoritate pellantur.
Sermon. 4. in Quadrages.
they after such manner do comport themselves in partaking of the Sacraments,
that sometimes they very safely pass undiscerned; with an unprepared mouth they
receive the Body, but altogether avoid the drinking of the Blood of our
Redemption, which I would have you, holy Brethren, therefore to take no tice
of, that by these indications such men as these may be discovered to us; and
that they, whose sacrilegious dissimulation is sound out by being observed, and
detected, may be driven from the society of the Saints by the Power of the
Church.

Hence it is manifest to any man of reason, that St. Leo looked upon this
practice of the Manichees as a most wicked and sacrilegious thing, and he
decrees no less a penalty for it than Excommunication. Now it cannot be their
inward and invisible superstition that he would have notice taken of, but it
must be their external comportment in avoiding the consecrated Wine. Moreover
if receiving the Cup had been an indifferent thing, and esteemed so in Leo's
age, then the omission or declining of it, would have been no distinctive mark
to discover the Manichees from the Orthodox or regular Communicants: For both
might have done the same thing, and so the Manichees would have gone
undiscovered. Hence I could not but conclude that Leo, and all Orthodox
believers of his time, were of the same judgment in this point, with the
Reformed Church of England, since that Reverend Bishop looked upon receiving the
Cup, as a certain sign of an Orthodox and true Christian, and esteemed the
contrary practice an infallible mark of a detestable and sacrilegious Heretic.

And I am exceedingly confirmed in this Opinion, because I find that Pope
Gelasius (one who sat in the Episcopal Chair of Rome about Thirty years after
Leo's death) has in a most public, solemn, and authentic manner declared the
necessity of Receiving in both kinds and the contrary practice to be
sacrilegious; For he made a Canon against the corrupt custom of Receiving in
one kind, which some superstitious people were then endeavoring to introduce:
And this very Canon is to be found in Gratians Body of the Canon Law. De
Consecrat. did. 2. c. 12. It is in the Acts of the Councils. It is also in the
Annals of Cardinal Baronius ad annum 496. But in short there is no doubt of its
being the true and genuine Canon of Gelasius and consequently no man can
rationally deny this to be a very convincing proof; that the judgment and
practice of the ancient Bishops of Rome, was directly contrary to that of the
Modern Bishops, and Church thereof. I shall here produce the words of the Canon
it self; that the impertiall Reader may judge whether I had not reason to
conclude, that the present Roman Church is guilty of Novelties, and that the
Reformed Church of England, does punctually follow the sense of Antiquity.

But we find (says he) that some who having received the portion of the Holy
Body, do abstain from the Cup of the Blood. Comperimus autem quod quidam-sumpta
tantummodo Corpus sacri portione, a Calice Cruoris abstineant: qui proculdubio,
quoniam nescio qua superstitione docentur obstringi, aut integra sacramenta
percipiant; aut ab integris arceautur, quia divisio vnius ejusdemque mysterii
sine grandi sacrilegio non potest provenire. Gratian. de consecrat. did. 2. c.
12.
Let these men without all controversy (because they are informed against; as
persons possessed with I know not what superstition) either receive the whole
Sacrament or abstain from the whole: for a division or parting of the one and
the same mystery cannot come to pass without very great sacrilege.

This ancient Canon (I find) has given very strange disturbance to the modern
Church of Rome: great stir has been to avoid the force of it; if it were
possible to be done: And because it cannot be denied, that this Canon or Decree
was made by Gelasius almost 1200 years ago. Therefore many interpretations have
been devised to make it reconcilable, and consistent with their present
practice of detaining the Cup from the People.

The first device is to imagine and suppose without any manner of ground in the
world, that this Decree only respects the Priests consecrating the Host. Thus
we find the Author of the Annotations upon Gratian endeavoring to escape the
difficulty. But undoubtedly neither the Protestants, nor any rational man, has
any reason to regard this vain and idle supposition. Especially when so eminent
a man, as Cardinal Baronius has assured us; that this is a senseless and
foolish solution. He calls it frigidam solutionem ad annum 496 number. 20. and 21.
And says; he rejects it, and has no need of such foolery.

But there is another evasion which is commonly made use of by the Romanist, in
order to elude the force of this Canon; and because this evasion is most in
vogue amongst them therefore particularly I did consider it.

Many of their controvertists, do pretend that the ancient Decree of Gelasius
was only temporary and occasional, built upon the condition of the times; when
it was made. And therefore (say they) it might be abrogated without any
violation of Divine law; when the reason of it, by the change of the times, was
removed. Now it is pretended, that the reason or cause of it was this; In the
age of Gelasius (say they) the Church was exceedingly pestered with a copious
number of dissembling Manichees, who had a mind to be accounted Catholics; yet
out of a superstitious aversion to Wine, abstained from the Cup in the
Sacrament. And this, if we believe them, was the cause and reason of the Decree
against receiving in one kind, and not any Divine Precept enjoining both.

This I narrowly examined, and found it to be more idle and insignificant than
the former, which Cardinal Baronius called senseless and foolish. For whatever
the condition of those times was, the principal reason of the Canon is incorted
into the Canon it self, and it is this following, [Because a parting of one and
the same mystery cannot come to pass without very great Sacrilege.] Now I must
beg leave of my old Friends, to tell them that this is no temporary or mutable
reason: certainly, not to commit Sacrilege is a thing of unchangeable and
perpetual obligation, neither has it any dependence upon the condition of any
Age or Time: For let the Times change never so much, it will never be lawsul to
commit Sacrilege, and such is communicating in one kind alone, if Pope
Gelasius may be believed.

Thus it is plain, that this ancient Decree is directly contrary to the late
constitutions of the Roman Church, and these evasions, invented in order to
make it seem reconciliable, have not any plausible color of reason. Therefore
I doubt not, but the judicious and impartial Reader will be satisfied, that it
is necessary for all Christians that come to the Lords Supper, to partake of it
in both kinds; and that this necessity arises from the Command of our Savior,
enjoining all to drink of the Cup. The ancient Fathers did so believe, and
teach, as the Authorities already cited do clearly and satisfactorily manifest.
Herein I have Lindanus agreeing with me (though he was a great Defender of
Popery) in these words, when he had first shown what the Opinion of the old
Writers was, said,

After this manner the ancient Fathers, chiefly St. Leo, Hunc igitur in modum
illam ve tustissimam, planeque Apostolicam utriusque speciei Communionem
conservatam atque observatam populo Christiano cupiebant prisci Patres, Divus
Leo, Gelasius, and Patres in Concilio Turonensi.
Gelasius, and the Fathers in the Council of Tours did desire that that most
ancient and altogether Apostolical Communion in both kinds might be preserved
and observed by the Christian people.

Lastly. That the Reader may the better compare this ancient Doctrine and
Practice with the novel and late Rule set up by the Romanists, it is necessary
that I produce the Canon made by Pope Martin V. in the Council of Constance
about 272 years ago, which forbids administering the Cup to the people. Because
the Canon is long I shall only produce two clauses of it, and any man that
pleases may consult the whole, and judge whether I do any wrong. I am sure, I
intend to deliver nothing but what is truth. After a Preface containing the
reasons of their proceedings it is said, The holy General Council of Constance
defines, Concilium sacrum generale Constantiense definit, quod licet Christus
post Caenam instituerit, and suis Discipulis administraverit sub utraque Panis
and Vini specie, venerabile hoc Sacramentum (tamen hoc non obstante) etc. Acta
Conc. Constant. edit. Labb.
that although Christ did institute this venerable Sacrament after Supper, and
administer it under both kinds, of Bread and Wine, to his Disciples, (yet hoc
non obstante) notwithstanding this, it is first decreed, that the Sacrament
should not be celebrated after Supper. And then some things being brought in by
way of Preamble, to put a blind upon the matter, It is also decreed, that the
custom of giving only one kind to the people (though contrary to Christ's
Institution, and the Practice of the primitive Church) should thenceforth be
accounted Law. In the latter part of the Canon there is a clause directly
opposite to the Decree of Gelasius above mentioned. For whereas that ancient
Pope had declared, that receiving in one kind could not be without Sacrilege,
the Canon of Constance contradicts him after this manner; Therefore to say the
observation of this custom, or Law, Quapropter dicere quod hanc consuetudinem,
vel legem observare sit sacrilegum, censeri debet erroneum.
is sacrilegious, ought to be judged erroneous. Then it seems the Decree of
Gelasius ought to be judged erroneus. For that Decree affirms the custom or law
about receiving in one kind to be sacrilegious, as has heretofore been
abundantly shown.

Thus having found the Practice and Doctrine of the present Church of Rome
contrary and repugnant to the Word of God, and to the Judgment of ancient
Authors, of which some were Popes, publicly enacting the direct opposite to
what was lately decreed at Constance; I could not but conclude that I was in no
right way: And therefore took up a resolution to adjoin my self to the
Protestant Church, where I saw the Command of Christ carefully observed, and
the Sacrament in both kinds given to the people, according to his Institution.

CHAP. V. Of Image Worship.
THe fifth Motive of my Conversion is the Use, or rather the Abuse of Images.
There is none that pretends to the least knowledge of Antiquity, but knows that
the Worship of Graven Images is far from being either a Christian, Apostolic,
Primitive or Catholic Practice: and yet the Papists give to graven Images the
Worship due to God, to Christ and his Saints, tho they pretend otherwise. We
need not enquire what actions they suppose fit to be used in their
Image Worship: For these appear in their public Processions, their Incensings,
and Pilgrimages, their Prayers and Vows made unto them. Certainly the Worship
of a graven Image is plainly and frequently forbidden in the Old Testament, as
you may read in the Commandments uttered with Gods own Mouth, with Thundering
and Lightning on Mount Sinai, viz. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven
Image, nor the likeness of any thing, that is in Heaven above, or in the Earth
beneath, or in the Water under the Earth; thou shall not how down to them, nor
worship them. Which Thunder from Heaven the Guides of the Romish Church
discerning to threaten vehemently their dreadful Idolatry which daily they
commit, thought fit in wisdom to conceal the knowledge of the second
Commandment from the people, by excluding it from the Decalogue, and dividing
the tenth into two. And notwithstanding their Image Worship is so infinite a
Scandal to the Jews and Turks, and a Reproach to Christianity it self among all
strangers that live with them, and observe their Rites, and that it cannot in
the least be pretended to be lawful, but with the laborious artifices of many
Airy and Metaphysical Distinctions, which the people who most need them do
least understand; yet they use these and many other miserable shifts, and silly
evasions, whereby they labor to darken the Light of the true Catholic
Doctrine in this point, as has been manifested by many (of great capacity) to
the full, in their Comments on Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16. and other places of Scripture,
where you may see that the adoring of the very true God himself in or by an
Image comes within the compass of Idolatry, which the Word of God condemns:
and therefore that this whole Doctrine and Practice is contrary to the Law of
God I need not tell you. Let us hear what the primitive Christians held
concerning Images, first in their Councils, secondly in the Writings of the
primitive Fathers.

First then as to their Councils; For keeping of Pictures out of the Churches,
the Canon of the Eliberine Council (held in Spain about the time of Constantine
the Great) gives this direction; It is our Will, that Pictures ought not to be
in the Church, lest that which is worshipped or adored should be painted on the
Walls. Which words have so troubled the Wits of the late Church of Rome, that
Melchior Canus scrupleth not only to accuse the Council of Impudency, but also
of Impiety for making such a Law. In a Council of several Bishops in the year
of our Lord 730. under Leo the Emperor, titled Iconomachus, Images were
solemnly condemned. And in another Council held at Constantinople ann. 755. or
thereabouts, under the Reign of Constantine Copronymus, with great solemnity
they were also condemned.

Notwithstanding the several Decrees of these Councils enacted against the
Idolatrous Worship of Images, the second Council of Nice advanced
Image Worship. And that indeed was very likely to be the product of a Council
assembled by that most wicked Empress Irene, who was bred and educated in
Heathenism, and probably continued a Heathen in her heart all the days of her
life, if we may judge of her Religion by her actions. Certainly no person, that
had any sense of Christianity, would ever do the things that she did. Now by
the Authority and Interest of this impious Woman, and by the procurement of
Pope Adrian I. this Decree for Image Worship was obtained.

But this Decree, although it was not by many degrees so gross as what was
afterward invented by the Schoolmen of the Popish Communion, yet was rejected
as repugnant to the Doctrine of the Church of God by the Princes and Bishops of
England about the year 792. and afterward by Charles the Great, and the
Bishops of Italy, France and Germany, which by his appointment were gathered
together in the Council of Frankford in the year 794.

Thus much I thought needful to be alleged against the Worship of Images from
the Authority of Councils, some of which have better pretenses to be accounted
General, than either the second of Nice, or that of Trent can pretend to.

But then in the second place, if we consider the Testimonies of the Fathers,
we shall find them plain against Image worship. The sact of Epiphanius rending
the Veil that hung in the Church of Anablatha is effectual, to demonstrate what
an abomination it was in his days, and in his opinion, to worship Images; which
himself in his Epistle to John Bishop of Jerusalem (translated by St. Hierom
out of Greek into Latin) does thus explain.

I found there (says he) a Veil hanging at the door of the Church dyed, Inveni
ibi Velum pendens in foribus ejusdem Ecclesiae tinctum, atque depictum, and
habens Imaginem quast Christi, vel Sancti cujusdam; non enim satis memini cujus
Image fuerit. Cum ergo hoc vidissem in Ecclesia Christi contra Auctoritatem
Scripturarum hominis pendere Imagi nem, scidi idud, and magis dedi consilium
custodibus ejusdem loci ut pauperom mortuum eo obvelverent and efferrent.
Epiph. Ep. ad Joan. Hierosolym. Tom. 2. Oper. Hieron. Ep. 60.
and painted, and having the Image as it were of Christ, or some Saint; for I
do not well remember whose Image it was. When therefore I saw this, that
contrary to the Athority of the Scriptures, the image of a man was hanged up in
the Church of Christ, I cut it, and gave counsel to the Keepers of the place,
that they should wrap and bury some poor dead man in it.

And afterward he entreated the Bishop of Jerusalem, under whose Government
this Church was, To give charge thereafter, Praecipere in Ecclesia Christi
istiusmodi Vela, quae contra nostram Religionem veniunt, non appendi. Epist.
Epiphanii, ubi supra.
that such Veils as these, which are repugnant to our Religion should not be
hanged up in the Church of Christ. Had this holy Father now been arised from
the dead, and had seen the great number of Images not only hung in Churches,
and Oratories of them of the Communion of Rome, but also worshipped and adored
relatively (as their Disputants term it,) how much, Christian Reader, think
you, would he be amazed and astonished hereat? would he not rather judge them
to be the Churches of Baal, than of Christ? And yet these people brag of
Antiquity after this, and pretend to rely on the Authority of ancient Writers
in asserting the Lawfulness of Image Worship.

Let us hear in the next place what Lactantius says, Imagines sacrae, quibus
inanissimi homines serviunt, omni Sensu carent, quia terra sunt. Quis autem non
intelligat nefas esse rectum animal curvari, ut adoret torram, quae ideo
subjecta est, ut calcanda a nobis non adoranda sit? Quare non esse dubium, quin
Religio nulla fit ubicunque simulachrum est -- Divini autem nibil est nisi in
caelestibus rebus; carent ergo Religione simulachra quia nihil potest esse
caeleste in ea re quae fit ex terra. Lactant. lib. 2. cap. 17, and 18.
Those consecrated Images (says he) which vain men do serve, want all Sense,
because they are earth. Now who is there, that understands not that it is unfit
for an upright creature to be bowed down that he may worship the earth, which
for this cause is put under our feet that it may be trodden upon, not worshipped
by us? Wherefore there is no doubt, but that there is no Religion wherever
there is an Image -- There is nothing that is godly, but consists in heavenly
things. Therefore Images are things that have nothing to do with Religion (or
they are void of Religion) because nothing that is heavenly can be in that
thing which is made of earth.

St. Ambrose affirms, that in his days the Church was an utter stranger to any
thing like Images. He tells us, That the Church acknowledged no vain
resemblances, Ecclesia inanes ideas, and vanas nescit simulachrorum figuras,
sed veram novit Trinitatis substautiam. Lib. de Jacob and Vita beata.
nor any vain Figures of Images, but that it acknowledged the true Substance of
the Trinity.

When Adrian the Emperor had commanded that the Temples should be in all Cities
rendered clear of Images, it was immediately apprehended, that he had provided
these Temples for Christ; as Aelius Lampridius notes in the Life of Alexander
Severus. Which is a convincing Argument, that it was not in use with Christians
in those days, to have any Images in their Churches.

This, I suppose, is enough to demonstrate, that the ancient and primitive
Church was as great a Stranger to Images, and that it abhorred them as much as
the Church of England does at present. Many and large Collections have been
made by Protestant Writers of the Sense and Opinions of ancient Writers
concerning this particular, unto whom I must refer the Reader, because the
present occasion will not permit me to be prolix or tedious in reciting them. I
have examined several of these Collections, and find them to be accurate, and
this is one principal motive of my Conversion.

We see by what has been already alleged of what account the use of Images was
in the ancient and best times: Christians then would by no means permit them to
be brought into their Churches. Nay, some of them would not so much as admit
the Art it self of making them; so jealous were they of the danger, and careful
to prevent the deceit, whereby the simple might any way be drawn on to adore
them.

Now the Church of Rome does own that it is very abominable to worship an Image
absolutely, that is, to make it the principal or sole object of Adoration. But
their evasion here in is, that a relative Worship is not forbidden, nor falls
under the compass of Idolatry; that is to say, to worship an Image in regard of
him whose Image it is, and by reason of the relation it has to him, it is not
against the Commandment. To this I answer, that the Worship of it after that
manner does not excuse the Worshippers from Idolatry, since the Commandment is
delivered in general expressions, and has no limitation or restriction; but it
forbids, without exception, all bowing down to them, and worshipping of them,
of what kind soever the Worship be.

Had a relative Worship of Images been accounted lawful in the primitive ages,
certainly the holy Fathers and Councils would not have omitted to acquaint us
therewith. But we find the quite contrary: for when the Gentiles demanded of
the ancient Christians, why they had no known Images, they did not say, we have
Images to be relatively worshipped. But Minutius Felix returned them this for
answer; Quod enim simulachrum Deo fingam, cum ipse Homo, si recte existimes,
sit Dei simulachrum. Mi nut, in Octav.
What Image shall I make of God, when Man himself, if you rightly judge, is
Gods Image?

St. Augustine, discoursing about the Duties that arise from the first Table of
the Decalogue, has this following passage; It is forbidden that any similitude
of God should be worshipped in things contrived by humane invention; Prohibetur
coli aliqua in figmentis hominem Dei similitudo, non quia non habet Imaginem
Deus, sed quia nulla ejus Image coli de b^t nisi illa, quae hoc est quod ipse.
Aug. Epist. 119. ad Januarium.
not but that God has an Image, but because no Image of him ought to be
worshipped, except that one (meaning Christ) which is the same thing with
himself.

Here we see St. Augustin's Opinion concerning the Sense of the second
Commandment; he judges that worshipping any similitude of God by an invented
Figure is herein prohibited, and consequently relative Worship; according to
his Judgment, is a transgression of a divine Precept.

St. Ambrose agrees most exactly with him; He tells us, that God would not have
himself worshipped in Stones. Non vult se Deus coli in Lapidibus. Ambr. Ep. 31.
ad Valentin.
That is, in Images made of Stone, and I suppose the case will be much the same
if the Image be made of any other materials.

By these examples we see how far the ancient Writers of the Church differed in
their Opinion concerning Image worship from the present Church of Rome. The
ancient Writers agree exactly with the Protestants, and were altogether of the
same Persuasion with them, although the word or term of Protestant was not then
known, but is of later times invented to signify them that protest against the
Errors of the Church of Rome.

I shall add a few words more concerning the original of this wicked practice.
I find by St. Irenaeus, lib. 1. cap. 23. contra Heraes. and also by others,
that Simon Magus and his Disciples wore the first that brought Images into the
Christian Religion. If the Rominists will acknowledge these for their Patrons,
themselves can tell how much it will redound to their Glory. It is true that
this custom of Image worship was very ancient, but very heretical also, and
abominable. Simon Magus and his Sectaries were introducers thereof (as I said
before,) who had Images, some painted in Colors, others framed of Gold, and of
other matter, which they said, were Representations of Christ made under
Pontius Pilate, when Christ was here conversant among men. Whence it came to
pass, that Corpoorates and his disciple Marcellina (who brought this idolatrous
practice to Rome in the time of Pope Anicetus) having privily made Images of
Jesus and Paul, of Homer and Pythagoras, did cense and worship them, as
Irenaeus abovementioned does relate, lib. 1. contra Heraes. cap. 24. But
against this wicked practice the ancient Christians did zealously and piously
declare. Here is the eldest instance of Image Worship in any person that ever
pretended to be any thing of a Christian; and we may see how severely it is
censured, and marked with the infamous brand of Heresy; such then was the
first rise of Images among Christians: but there was another cause, that much
contributed to the advancement of their Worship, and that was this; Many simple
Christians nowly converted from Paganism could not unlearn the customs of it,
as it is observed by Eusebius concerning the image of Christ erected by the
Woman that was cured of the Bloody Issue, Eusebius l 7. Hist. Ecclesiast. c. 18.
It is no marvel (says he) that those of the Heathen, who of old were cured by
our Savior, should do such things, since we have seen the Images of the
Apostles St. Paul and St. Peter, yea and of Christ himself kept painted with
colors in Tables. For they (that is, converted Gentiles) of old were wont by a
Heathenish custom thus to honor them whom they accounted to be their
Benefactors or Preservers.

But by whomsoever they were first brought in, certain it is they proved a
pernicious allurement to the simple people, who soon went a whoring after them,
contrary to the Command of God, and the Doctrine of the ancient Fathers and
Defenders of Christianity.

This I find to be the true state of the whole affair concerning Image worship,
and I am heartily sorry that I understood, it not heretofore. But I hope to
obtain pardon, because I labored under great prejudices of my Education and
could not imagine that such grave and learned Doctors as have asserted the
Lawfulness and Antiquity of Image Worship, would have led me into so gross an
Error.

We are told by some of these Doctors, and particularly by the Archbishop of
Spalate. That the veneration of Images oven the most ancient, Ecclesiam
Christianam etiam antiquissimam, totam ac universalem summo consensu absque
ulla oppositione aut contradictione statuas ac imaginas veneratam esse M. Anton
de Domin de Consilio reditus sect. 23.
the whole and universal Church did embrace as a Doctrine of Faith; and that
with unanimous consent, and without any opposition or contradiction it did
worship Statutes, and Images.

Now for consutation of this shameless assertion, I appeal to the aforegoing
Councils and Holy Fathers; certainly I had reason to grow dissatisfied with the
Communion of Rome, when I saw that their great sticklers endeavored to defend
their Doctrines by such notorious and manifest untruth.

Concerning the Adoration of the Cross.
I Think the worship of the material Cross of Christ to be somewhat like the
worship of Images, and that is the cause why I have rankt it under this general
head, which I assign for my fifth Motive. But although the Devotions paid by the
Romanists to the Cross do in some respects resemble Image worship, yet in many
regards they are much worse: For the Romanists do avowedly give Latria to the
Cross, and although some of them do pretend that this is only given to it
relatively; yet if one examine their Hymns and Prayers directed to the Wooden
Cross, it will manifestly appear that their excuses are trivial, and their
pretenses vain. None doubts but that our Saviors Sufferings (which are often
called the Cross of Christ) do abundantly deserve our greatest regard, but then
to transfer this to the material and literal Cross is a wonderful thing, and I
am astonished at my self in that for so many years I never considered it, or
weighted this matter, as I ought to have done. But I shall proceed to consider
some of the pretenses, and excuses which Roman Catholics make in order to
defend the worship of the Cross

Bellarmin says lib. 2. de Reliquiis Sanctis, that the Cross ought to be
adored by the fame worship with Christ, because it was touched by Christ's
Sacred Body. But if this be true then it follows that the Blessed Virgin Mary
is to be worshipped by the same worship also, by reason she carried him nine
months in her Womb, she nourisht him etc. and his contact with her was natural,
with the Cross violent. But the Romanists deny such due to her, therefore of
necessity they ought to deny it to be due to the holy Cross.

If Latria (or supreme Worship) be due to the Cross for its contact with
Christ, it ought rather for that reason to be attributed unto the Ass, whereon
Christ rid with solemnity to Jerusalem; and to the several Beds, whereon He
lay, and Ships, wherein he wafted from Region to Region; because his attingency
in and with them was voluntary, with the Cross coactive. Nay they ought upon
the same ground to adore Judas his lips, the Officers hands, that apprehended
and bound Christ, the Scourges, whereby He was whipped, for they were instruments
of his passion as well as the Cross.

If they adore all other Crosses for their resemblance of the original Cross so
they ought to adore all Mangers, all Lances, all Nails, Thorns, Spittles, etc.
for these have the same resemblance to our Saviors Manger, and to those Nails,
Thorns etc. which were the instruments of his Passion.

They attribute more Honor unto Christ's Cross than to his Resurrection by
these words, We adore thy Cross, and commemorate thy Resurrection. Crucem tuam
adoramus, resurrectionem tuam recolimus They ascribe then (it seems) Adoration
to the Cross which is only proper unto the Divine Nature, and to the Cross
likewise (that is to the Wood) they attribute the redemption of the world, and
the reconcilation of mankind unto God the Father. vide Bellarmin lib. 2. c. 23.
sect. Ac primum. They also attribute forgiveness of Sins, and increase of
Righteousness to the Cross, they repose their hopes and confidence in the dead
Wood of the Cross, and beg remission of Sins from it; as may be seen in their
Hymns extant in the Roman Breviary, corrected and revised by the authority of
the Council of Trent, and set forth by several Popes, as may be seen in several
Editions of it, especially in that Printed at Paris anno 1662 whence I draw
this that follows. O Crux ave spes unica!
In hoc Paschali gaudio
Auge piis Justitiam,
Reisque dona veniam.
That is in English thus; Hail O Cross, our only hope!
In this our Paschal joy,
Increase the Righteousness of the pious,
And give pardon to the guilty.


Nothing, doubtless, can be more prodigious, unless it be what follows, O Crux
splendidior cunctis astris,
Mundo celebris, hominibus multum amabilis,
Sanctior universis,
Quae sola fuisse digna portare talentum mundi,
Dulce Lignum, dulces clavos dulcia ferens pondera,
Salva praesentem catervam
In tuis hodie laudibus congregatam.
Alleluja, Alleluja.
That is in English thus, O Cross! more bright than all the Stars.
Famous through the world, very lovely to mankind.
More holy than all other things,
Which wast alone worthy to carry the Ransom of the world,
Dear Wood, that carriest the dear Nails, and the dear Burden.
Save the present Assembly, which is to day gathered together for thy Praise.
Alleluja, Alleluja.


Great Complements, upon my word, for a liveless piece of Wood! for that they
mean the material Cross, (and not the Passion of our Savior) their words do
abundantly declare. We see here they repose their hope and considence in the
Wood; they beg increase of Grace from it, and ascribe to it a Power to forgive
Sins, which Attribute appertains to the Godhead only.

The Humanity of Christ, separated from his Divinity, is not to be adored with
divine Worship, as St. Augustine teaches, Homil. 38. de Verbis Domini.
Therefore much less his Cross, or any other representative Image of his.

The Holy Ghost is present in the Sacrament of Baptism; yet it is not to be
adored with the same Worship due to the Holy Ghost. Therefore that Wood whereon
Christ suffered, and other Blocks, or Stumps of Trees resembling it, are not to
be adored with the same veneration due unto Christ. Many consequences that may
be inserr'd from the Worship of the Cross, and of Images, are so prodigiously
absurd, impious, blasphemous, and so numerous, that if I endeavored exactly to
enumerate and prosecute them, I should never come unto an end. Therefore I
leave them to the upholders of these abuses, whence they are emergent, and also
these upholders to trust to their Images, like to like, for they that make them
(Psalm. 115.8.) are like unto them, and so is every one that trusts in them.

CHAP. VI. Of Prayers in an unknown Tongue.
THe Sixth and last Motive or Cause of my Declension from the Church of Rome,
is its lack of Charity, in robbing Christians not only of the superabundant
effects of our Lords Supper, by dismembring it, but also of that other
effectual Remedy, which Christ left unto them, as means whereby they might
attain unto Salvation, viz. the benefit of Public Service, or Common Prayers,
by hindering them to make use thereof in the vulgar tongue, intended by God and
Nature for all peoples edification. This Common Service, Prayers, Liturgy, or
Mass, which in effect are all one, the Conventicle of Trent in the 22th Sess.
and 8th chap. denies plainly to be expedient to use in the vulgar Tongue, or
Idiom: So Stapleton the Jesuit, in his English Book written against Bishop
Jewel, Artic. 3. p. 75. says inconsiderately, that Devotion is rather hindered
by using it in a known Idiom, than promoted. Bellarmine, in the second Book de
Verbo Dei, chap. 15. endeavors to prove, that anciently Common Prayers were
universally practiced in the Latin tongue by all Nations, and consequently now
ought to be so.

This self-ended and fabulous Natration of Bellarmines (I beg his leave for
saying it) is far from truth, and as contrary to Christ's Ordinance, to the
Apostolic Practice, and the general Custom of the primitive Church, as Fire
and Water, black and white, cold and heat are one to another. Which first I
prove by the Testimonies of Scripture. 2. By the undeniable Authorities of the
holy Fathers. 3. By the usual Practice of all other Christian Nations. 4. I
shall endeavor to prove that the Church of Rome has borrowed this practice
from such Authors, as it is a shame for her to imitate.

The Testimonies of Scripture produced to this effect.

1. What Christ commanded, that ought religiously to be observed in his Church:
but Christ by the mouth of his Apostle St. Paul commanded Common Prayers to be
used in the vulgar Idiom understood by the hearers, 1 Cor. 14.9. So likewise
you, except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be understood, how shall it be
known what is spoken? for ye shall speak unto the air. v. 14. For if I pray in
an unknown tongue, my Spirit prays, but my understanding is unfruitful. v.
16. Else, when thou shall bless with the Spirit, how shall he that occupies
the room of the unlearned say Amen, at they giving of thanks, seeing he
understands not what thou say? And v. 19. Yea I had rather speak five
words with my understanding in the Church, that by my voice I might teach
others also, then ten thousand words in an unknown tongue.

2. Whatever is done in the Church, that ought to redound to the edification
thereof. 1 Cor. 14 v. 26. How is it then, Brethren? when ye come together,
every one of you has a Psalm, has a Doctrine, has a Tongue, has Revelation,
has an Interpretation: let all things be done unto edifying. But an unknown
tongue edifies none. Ibid. v. 6. Now, Brethren, if I come to you speaking with
tongues, what shall I profit you, except I shall speak to you either by
revelation, or knowledge, or by prophesying, or Doctrine? v. 9. as above cited.

3. If the Minister prays in an unknown tongue, he is a Barbarian to the
people, and also the people to him, 1 Cor. 14. v. 11. Therefore if I know not
the meaning of the voice, I shall be unto him, that speaks a Barbarian, and
he that speaks a Barbarian unto me.

4. All things ought to be done in the Church with decency, and due order, 1
Cor. 14. v. 40. Let all things be done decently, and in order. But the use of
Prayers in an unknown tongue is, directly against this Rule: because when the
Minister so prays, the hearers understand not what he says, nor consequently
pray, nor say Amen to any effect; nay, the Minister only, who understands the
Divine Service, prays; and so the Prayers, which ought to be public, by this
means are become private, which is as opposite to the Decency, and right Order
of the Church, as Whoremongering to the seventh Commandment.

5. As the Prophets, Christ, the Apostles, and their true Successors have
solemnly ministered the Rites and public Office of the Church, even so now and
perpetually they ought (as far as is possible) in the same form, manner and
method, without alteration, to be ministered. But they ministered them in the
vulgar Language, according to the capacity of their Hearers, as St. Paul
abundantly witnesses in the aforegoing 1 Cor. 14. And besides many of the
Papists themselves own, that Prayers understood are far better, and more
available; as Lyranus on the first Epistle to the Corinthians 14. and Cardinal
Cajetan in Comment. on the same chap. Therefore the practice of praying in a
known tongue being better, and more effectual for edifying the people ought
still to be retained in the Church; whereas she is always to edi^ie, and not
destroy.

Though the whole stream of all the holy Fathers cannot more convincingly prove
the certainty of this truth, than St. Paul has done already; yet for the
further satisfaction of the Reader. I will produce a few Testimonies to the
same purpose, so pregnant as not to be avoided. Basil the Great in Epist. 63
has these following words; By the dawning of the day (says he) the Congregation
of the Faithful altogether with one voice, Illucescente jam die pariter un^
ore, ac cord omnes fideles, Confessionis Psalmum Deo offerunt, ac suis,
quisque verbis resipiscentiam. profitetur -- Quae consuetudines. omnibus Dei
Ecclesis consentientes sunt.
and one mind, offers a Psalm of Thanksgiving unto the Lord, and every one in
his own proper speech acknowledges his amendment of life -- Which practices
are consented unto in all the Churches of God.

How could this custom of using Common Prayers with one voice, or language, in
Basil the Great's time, in all Christian. Churches, be plausible amongst the
faithful, if their Liturgies (as Bellarmine feigns) had been customarily used
in Latin? For it cannot be properly said, that they offered una voce.
Thanksgiving unto the Lord, if they practiced diversity of Languages.

Saint Augustine affirms the same, l. 2. in Genesis c. 8. in these words, None can
be edified by hearing that which he understands not. Nemo (inquit) aedificatur
audiendo quod non intelligit.


And on Psalm 99. he says again, Blessed be they, who understand the
magnificient Praise of the Lord: Beatus populus, qui intelligit jubilationem:
curramus ad hanc Beatitudinem: intelligamus jubilationem: non eam sine
intellectu sundamus.
let us hasten to this Blessedness: let us understand it: let us not pour it
out, unless we understand it.

Hence follows, that few in the Church of Rome can attain unto this blessedness
of understanding the Lords Praise; because it cannot be compassed without
perfect knowledge of the Latin tongue, which cannot be acquired without a
tedious progress in the study of it; which progress is morally impossble for
the Commonalty, who make up the greatest number in that Communion: Yet they are
uncharitably, and that contrary to S. Augustines Admonition, excluded from this
Blessedness, by a new Commandment and Article of Faith, lately sabricated in
the Conventicle of Trent, to their utter destruction. For what profit can they
receive that hear a sound, and are strangers to the meaning of it? it were as
good that they were absent as present: and therefore Solomon calls this doting
kind of serving God Sacrificium stultorum, a Sacrifice of Fools; and so really
it is: For they that hear it are no further benefited thereby, than they have
capacity to apprehend it; as Azorius learnedly affirms in these words, Devotion
springs from understanding; Affectus consequitur intellectum; ubi autem earum
rerum, quae petuntur, aut dicuntur, nullus habetur intellectus, ibi exiguus
assurgit affectus, and consequenter valde exiguus fructus.
when there is no understanding of things that are sought, or said, there is
but little Devotion, and consequently very little benefit reapt by the hearer.

Indeed according to this grave Doctors opinion, it were as advantageous to
them that are not Latinists, to have a speechless Priest so say Mass mentally,
as one that has the freedom of speaking to say it loudly; for he that cannot
speak and has no speech, and he that has none to be understood is all alike
unto the ignorant, in regard of profiting them; which is a thing rarely well
confirmed by St. Augustine, in the 4th Book of his Christian Doctrine, the 10th
chap. exciting the people with a great deal of vehemence to refrain from the
perverse custom of praying in an unknown Language, which in no way (says he,
tends to edification. There is no cause (says he) why a man should speak at
all, if they for whose sake he speaks understand him not. Quid prodest
locutionum integritas, quam non sequitur intellectus audientis? Cum loquendi
nulla causa, si quod loquimur non intelligunt, propter quos ut intelligant
loquimur.

For God hears the Priests thoughts when he speaks not, as well as when he
speaks; he hears the Prayers of the Heart, and sees the Word of the Mind, and a
speechless Priest can do all the Ceremonies, and make the Signs, and he that
speaks aloud to them that understand him not does no more.

So the Author of the Exposition upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians, by
some thought to be St. Ambrose, chap. 14. says, If ye be convened to edify the
Church, Si ad Ecclesiam aedificandam convenitis, ea dici debent, quae
intelligunt auditores.
things ought to be spoken, which the hearers understand.

Which Doctrine is plainly seconded by Cassiodore upon Psalm. 46. in these
words, We ought not only (says he) to sing, Non solum (inquit) cantantes, sed
intelligentes psallere debemus; nemo enim quidquam facit sapienter quod non
intelligit.
but also to know and understand the sense and meaning of our singing; for none
can do any thing rationally, except he knows the meaning of it.

And likewise by Jacobus Faber Stapul. in his Comment. on 1 Cor. 14. who
affirms (rebuking the people for their Lewdness touchthis particular.) That a
great part of the world, now a days prays, Maxima pars hominum cum nunc orat,
nescio si Spiritu scio tamen quod non mente orat: nam lingua orat quam non
intelligit.
but whether their Prayers proceed from the Spirit of God I know not, but I
know they pray not from the heart, nor to any effect: because they pray in an
unknown tongue.

If the aforegoing incontroulable Authorities of these holy Fathers be not
sufficient to confute Bellarmines groundless Surmise, and imaginary Comment, by
saying, that in the former ages of the primitive Church Common Prayers were
generally practiced in Latin amongst the Faithful, and Professors of
Christianity; for his and his Sticklers Disgrace and Shame, I add Thomas
Aquinas on 1 Cor. 14. Lyra ibid. and Cassander Liturg. cap. 28. who, siding
with St. Paul, do frequently tell us, that Divine Service or public Prayers in
an unknown Tongue do not edify, and consequently were forbidden; as I have
shown evidently already? To this effect I might produce the torrent of the holy
Fathers, who flourished in the succeeding ages of the Church, but that I am
willing to shun prolixity. And so I go on to the proof of the third part of my
Assertion, which is, That the Practical Custom of all Christian Nations
anciently was, to pray in their own native Languages, and it is to this very
day.

Here Origin in his 8th Book against Celsus may come in as an impartial
Witness, testifying, that the Grecians in their Prayers use Greek, and the
Romans the Roman Language; and so every Nation according to his Idiom prays
to God, and praises him as they were able.

And Lyra seconds him thus, on 1 Cor. c. 14. affirming, that in the primitive
Church Blessings, our Lords Prayer, and all other things were done in the
vulgar tongue: nay, not only Common Prayers, but the whole Bible was anciently
by many Translations made fit for the peoples use; as St. Hierom. Epist. ad
Sophr. affirms, that himself translated the Bible into the Dalmatian tongue.
And Vlphilas Sozom lib. 6. Hist. c. 37. a Bishop among the Goths translated it
into the Gotick tongue. And that it was translated into all other Languages, we
are told by St. Chrysostom. Homil. 1. in 8. S. Joannis. By S. August. l. 2. c. 5.
de Doctrina Christiana. And Theodoret Sermon. 5. de Graecar. Affect. Curat.

Besides all these authentic Testimonies of the aforementioned renowned
Doctors, who indifferently acquaint all Christians, that in the primitive
Church the Priest and the People joined together in their Prayers, and
understood each other, and prayed in their mother tongue; I will produce for a
further and more palpable conviction of this Foppery, the words of the Civil
and Canon Law. Justinian the Emperor made a Law in these words; Our Will and
Command is, that all the Bishops and Priests do celebrate the Sacrament of
Oblation, and the Prayers thereunto added in the holy Baptism with a loud and
clear voice, which may be understood by the faithful, that thereby the minds of
the Hearers may be raised up with greater Devotion, to set forth the Praise of
the Lord God; for so the Apostle teaches, 1 Cor. 14.

And Innocent III. is most express herein, in the great General Council of
Lateran, (as themselves esteem,) held anno 1215. Can. 9. where he has these
words; Because (says he) in many places within the same City and Diocese the
people of diverse Tongues are mixed together, having under one and the same Faith
diverse Ceremonies and Rites, We strictly charge and command, that the Bishops
of such Cities and Diocesses provide men fit, who may celebrate the Divine
Office according to the diversity of their Languages, etc.

If you will inquire, why are they not as steadfast followers of Pope Innocent
in this point, as in that of Transubstantiation? I can give you no other
reason, but that (I am afraid) they will be called Libertines by their
ill-wishers, for making use of the Laws of God and Man (as they please) to the
advancement of their Self-ended Errors; and for impudently rejecting what is
contrary thereunto. Now if the usual Custom of the Prophets, Christ's
Institution, and exemplary manner of preaching, and teaching to say Prayers in
an understood Language; if the Words of the Apostle, the Practice of the
primitive Church, the Sayings of the holy Fathers, and Concessions of impartial
men of their own Communion, if the Consent of all other Christian Nations, and
the Piety of our Forefathers, if right Reason and the nature of public Service
it self, if the Needs of the Ignorant, and Condition of the holy Prayers, if
the Laws of Princes, and the Laws of the Church, which require all our Prayers
to be said according to the Understanding of our Auditors; if all these cannot
prevail with the Church of Rome, to do so much good to the poor ignorant
peoples Souls, as to consent they should understand what in particular they ask
of God; assuredly, there is great pertinacy of Opinion, and very little Charity
to those procious Souls for whom Christ suffered, and for whom they must give a
strict account.

And the Papists themselves own, that at this very instant of time the
Egyptians, Moscovians, Sclavonians, Armenians, Ethiopians, Moravians,
Bohemians, Hungarians, the Jacobites, Abassines, and all other Christian
Nations have, in and throughout the whole Universe, their Liturgies in their
own native Languages. And Eckius affirms, that the same practice, and no other,
is observed in the Indies in Asia, in Africa, or any other part of the world
amongst Christians. And that being so, it is strange that the Protestants
should not have the same privilege, without any peremptory Censure from the Sea of Rome of being Heretics, and damned, for doing nothing else but what
other Christians do.

As to the proof of the fourth part of this Assertion; This profane custom of
Prayers in an unknown Language, which the Church of Rome so closely sticks
unto, is derived,

1. From the Osseni Heretics, as Epiphanius affirms, Haeres. 19.

2. From the Heracleonites, of whom St. Augustine gives an account; saying,
That they taught to pray with obscure words, supposing that words in a
barbarous and unknown tongue might be more powerful.

3. (If we may give credit to famous Historians, both ancient and modern,) From
the Jews, who in their Synagogues, not only formerly, but at this very day,
read Hebrew, which the people rarely understand. And besides, from the Turks,
who in their Mosques read Arabic, of which the people know nothing.

The very consideration of these leading Patterns, which the Church of Rome
does so pertinatiously imitate herein, have been so prevailing with me, as to
forsake her Communion, and to embrace that of the Reformed Church, wherein
surer Guides unto Eternity can be demonstrated.

And now having given an account of the Motives of my Change, I have one only
Request to make to the candid Protestants; that they would not treat a new
Convert as the Christians did St. Paul on his first Change, Act. 9.26. by being
afraid of me, and not believing me to be a sincere Proselyte: for as I never
persecuted any of them in my life, but rather did them all good offices that
lay in my power: so I hope it will be some motive to them to believe my
Conversion real, when it is done at a time when they themselves are not without
fears and apprehensions of Disadvantage.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
BEcause that I (the Writer of the foregoing Book) am in some degree a stranger
to the English Tongue, I desire the Reader ingeniously to pardon my
unskilfulness in it, and not to be disgusted if he meet with some improprieties
in the Language; for although by the advice and direction of my Friends many
improper expressions were corrected; yet I suppose that some Errors of that
nature do still remain.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 22. read Armenians, p. 4. in the margin r. Andradius lib. 3.
Orthodoxarum Explicationum Resp. ad Axiom. 6. and alii apud Casalium lib. 1. c.
12. prim. part. de quadripert. justit. p. 6. l. 20. r. taken, p. 7. l. 25. and
afterward r. Cataphas, ib. l. 30. r. de Conciliorum Authoritate, p. 8. l. 4.
r. Nation, ib. in the Latin citation r. Ecclesia, p. 15. l. 18. r. Faith and
Duties, ib. l. 28. r. nine parts in ten, p. 16. l. 33. r. Romish Religion, p.
17. l. 1. r. to the rights, ib. l. 2. r. liberties, p. 30. l. 5. r. yet it
ceases not, ib. l. 18. r. for itu, p. 31. l. 28. r. he does, p. 33 in the latin
citation of Lindanus, r. id est anno Domini, p 35. in the latin citation of
Card. Bona r. sub specie, ib. r. communicarunt, p. 41. l. 8. r. necessity, p.
42. l. 13. of the latin citation r. sacrilega, p. 43. l. 31. r. impartial, ib.
l. ult. r. corporis, p. 44. l. 11. r. parting of one, p. 45. l. 25. r.
reconcilable, ib. l. 32. r. Lindanus, who agreeing, p. 47. l. 7. r. erroneous,
p. 51. l. 14. r. therefore, p. 54. l. 13. r. Haeres. p. 57. l. 3. r. Bell. lib.
2. c. 23. de Reliquiis sanctis.

Books Printed for and Sold by William Norman and Eliphal Dobson.
BIbles and Common Prayers in all volumes. Book of Homilies. Boltons Statutes.
Boltons Justice of Peace. Book of Rates. Plurality of Worlds. Prayers and
Meditations. Gawens Logicks. Mortons Devotions. Dr. Lakes Officium
Eucharisticum. Dr. Burnets Life of the Earl of Rochester. Tillotson against
Transubstantiation. Bishop of Corks Sermons. Silvius de Febribus. Mullineux's
Sciothericum Telescopicum. Discourse against Purgatory. Discourse against
Auricular Confession. The Interest of Ireland.

