A DISCOURSE OF THE RELIGION OF ENGLAND. ASSERTING, That REFORMED CHRISTIANITY
settled in its Due Latitude, is the Stability and Advancement of this KINGDOM.

LONDON, Printed in the Year M. DC. LX. VII.

THE PREFACE
REligion being deeply imprinted in Humane Nature, and having a great Power
over it, and being more notably displayed in the present Age, is become the
Grand Interest of States, and almost of all men, though not after the same
manner, nor upon the same Grounds and Motives. For this cause, whether it comes
in Truth, or in Show only, it is found to rule and turn about the great Affairs
of the World. And though many things of different nature, may have great
influence on the State of this Kingdom, yet Religion and Matters of Conscience
evidently appear to have the greatest. The distinguishing of Persons for the
favor or disfavour of the Times; yea, the very Names of Discrimination pass
upon the account of Religious Differences. The Active part of all sorts and
ranks of men, is hereby chiefly swayed in their Motions; and their Affections
move more importunately in this One, then in all their other Concernments.
Wherefore if a Settlement may be found out, which may accommodate all those
Parties or Persuasions, in which the Peace of the Nation is bound up, it will
prove the undoubted Interest of this State. And if such a Settlement be
likewise found to be the true and sound state of Religion, it must needs be
acceptable to the faithful Servants of Christ, and the true Lovers of their
Country.

Now the Adventure of this Discourse is to Assert, That Reformed Christianity
rightly stated, and settled in its due Latitude, is the Stability and
Advancement of the Kingdom of England. Nothing is here suggested for Politic
Ends, to corrupt the Purity, or enervate the Power of Religion, or to lessen
Charity; but the Fatherly Compassion of Rulers, and the mutual Brotherly
Condescension of all Christians, required by the Law of Christ, and some
Connivence in case of insuperable Necessities, and that for the Truth's sake,
is here propounded. Episcopacy is not undermined, nor any other Form of
Government here insinuated; only a Relaxation of the Prescribed Uniformity, and
some Indulgence to Dissenters of Sound Faith, and Good Life, is submissively
offered to the Consideration of our Superiors. All Pragmatical Arrogance,
presuming to give Rules to Governors, and to teach them what to do, is
carefully avoided; only the Possibility, Expediency, and Necessity of
Moderation, is represented. And it is humbly desired, That this Honest
Intention in pursuance of Peace, may find a favorable Reception.

The Contents.
SEct. 1. The Religion of this Realm, and Three different parties of most
important consideration, The Protestants of the Church of England, the
Protestant Nonconformists, and the Papists. Sect. 2. The Behavior and
Pretension of the Popish Party in these times. Sect. 3. That Popery disposes
Subjects to Rebellion. Sect. 4. That it persecutes all other Religions within
its reach. Sect. 5. That where soever it finds Encouragement, it is restless,
till it bears down all before it, or has put all in disorder. Sect. 6. The
Papists Pretension of Loyalty and Merit in the Kings Cause, examined. Sect. 7.
The result of the whole Discourse touching the Popish Party. Sect. 8. That the
Reformed Religion makes good Christians, and good Subjects. Sect. 9. The
Reformed Religion is the permanent Interest of this Kingdom. Sect. 10. It is
for the behoof of Religion and true Piety, and for the Interest of this State,
That Reformed Christianity be settled in its full Extent. Sect. 11. How
momentous in the Balance of the Nation those Protestants are, that dissent
from the present Ecclesiastical Polity. Sect. 12. The Extirpation of the
Dissenters is both difficult anaunprofitable. Sect. 13. The Representation of
this Difficulty is no threatening to Rulers, or intimation of Rebellion. Sect.
14. The settling of the Nation by an Established Order, a Toleration, and a
Connivence. Sect. 15. Of the Established Order in Religion, and the Moderation
therein required. Sect. 16. Whether the Dissenters are capable of being brought
into such a Comprehension. Sect. 17. Acquiescence in the widened Establishment,
is the safety of Religion. Sect. 18. Of Toleration and Connivence. Sect. 19.
Dissenters of narrow and rigid Principles, advised to Moderation. Sect. 20.
This comprehensive state of Religion, further considered, with respect to Three
Important Interests: First, To that of the King. Sect. 21. Secondly, To the
Interest of the Church and Clergy. Sect. 22. Thirdly, To the Interest of the
Nobility and Gentry. Sect. 23. The general Security that comes by this
Latitude.
ERRATA.
Page 9. line 2. read in King James his time. p. 5. l. 18. r. Arts of Rome. p.
31. l. 31. r. exacted.

A DISCOURSE OF THE RELIGION of ENGLAND.
SECT. I. The Religion of this Realm, and three different Parties of most
important consideration; The Protestants of the Church of England, the
Protestant Nonconformists, and the Papists.
THE Religion of England considered, not only as established by Law, but as
rooted in the Nation, and generally embraced, is that which is called
Protestant, and is no other then Christianity recovered out of the
Antichristian Apostasy, and reformed from the Corruptions of later Ages, after
the Primitive Purity; receiving the holy Scriptures as the perfect Rule of
Christian Faith and Life.

How beit, in this Realm there be three different Parties of most important
consideration: The first consists of those Protestants that zealously adhere to
the English Ecclesiastical Polity, and call themselves the Church of England.
The second sort is of those Protestants that receive the Doctrine of Faith
contained in the Articles of Religion, but are dissatisfied in the form of
Ecclesiastical Polity. These by their Adversaries have been usually called
Puritans. The third is of those that utterly reject the Reformation, and remain
united to the Pope as their Spiritual Head, and call themselves
Roman Catholics.

Hereupon an impartial serious Observer, respecting the Common Good, may be
induced to make inquiry, How agreeable or dis-harmonious each of these Three
are to the Public Weal; as also, What proportion they bear to each other; and
whether those under the Legal Establishment, or the Dissenters, preponderate in
the Balance of the Nation; or whether the Established preponderate in that
degree which is requisite in true reason of Government.

SECT. II. The Behavior and Pretensions of the POPISH Party in these Times.
THE Roman Catholics in England, considered not barely in their Number, but in
their Rank and Quality, being Rich and Powerful, and Strong in Alliances, are
very momentous, and seem to be capable of great Designs, especially in
conjunction with Foreign Interests.

In these times they have taken much Liberty and Boldness, with an undisturbed
Security, and lately have been observed to be more then ordinarily active,
jocund and confident of the effect of their Mutual Correspondencies; and
manifold passages of dangerous appearance have been every where spoken of; in
so much that the Nation has taken an Alarm, and the PARLIAMENT judged the
Matter worthy of their Search, and appointed a Committee to receive
Informations.

This Party has high pretensions of Merit toward the King, and all that are
called Royallists; and they seek apparently more then Indulgence and Safety,
even High Power and Trust, as if they were the true and sure Confidents of this
State. Such Claims as these, challenge a serious Debate. For a Charge of a high
nature (as themselves have taken notice) has been of a long time prosecuted
against Popery, viz. That it disposes Subjects to Rebellion. That it
persecutes all other Religions within its reach. That wheresoever it finds
encouragement, it is restless, till it bear down all, or has put all in
Disorder. Till they make a better Defense then the world has yet seen, we take
the just liberty of insisting upon this Charge, and examining first, How benign
or safe the influence of Popery is upon any State or Kingdom whatsoever; and
then how it does comport with the State of England, whose Basis is the
Protestant Religion, settled by Law, and by length of time generally spread, and
deeply rooted in the Nation, and solemnly and constantly avowed by Prince and
People.

SECT. III. That POPERY disposes Subjects to Rebellion.
What has been the constant practice of the Popes, who are the Head of the
Roman Faith, the Universal consent of History bears record. What continual
thundering of Excommunications has sounded throughout the Christian world in
all Ages, since the beginning of the Papal Reign, against Kings, Emperors, and
other Princes and States that presumed to dispute their Dictates, or cross
their Designs, to the loosing of Subjects from the Bonds of Allegiance, and the
deposing of Sovereigns? What unexampled Abasements has the Imperial Majesty
suffered in the Persons of sundry Emperors, by prodigious instances of Papal
Pride; which, though enough to stir up the indignation of mankind, are
applauded by famous Writers, Champions of the Court of Rome? The Popes Temporal
Dominions began and grew up in Rebellion and Usurpation, for which cause they
have nourished Factions, and filled the world with Wars and Tumults, and
maintained most outrageous and tedious Conflicts with many Emperors, even till
they had crippled and broke the back of the Empire it self.

And these practices are justified by their Decretals and Canons, and Divines
of greatest Authority, and some of their Councils, ascribing to the Pope a
Power of Deposing Princes that are Heretical, or favorers of Heretics. The
Jesuits Doctrine of KING-KILLING, has made them odious; and if some passages
can be alleged out of their Writings against taking away the Lives of Princes,
their declared meaning is, That a King deposed by the Pope, becomes Tirannus
titulo, and is no more a Lawful King, and then what follows, is easily
understood. Those of the Church of Rome that disavow these things, should mind
their contradiction to the Faith they own, in leaving their Popes, Divines and
Canonists in a point of such importance. But how potent the influence of the
Court of Rome, and the Agency of the Jesuits is for the diffusing of those
Principles into the most and chiefest of the Roman Catholics, is not unknown.

If the undisturbed Government of the Emperor, and of the King of Spain in
later times, be brought forth as an instance of the Loyalty of Popish Subjects,
or an argument of the soundness of Popish Principles; it must be considered,
That the House of Austria have made their devotion to the Sea of Rome, their
grand and appropriate Interest, and that See has a main dependence on those
Princes; and both it and they have the same active Votaries throughout
Christendom, the Jesuits and their Adherents. As for the Kingdom of France, the
State of Venice, and others acknowledging the Popes Headship, they have had
enough to do, and they would have more, if either themselves were weak, and
less formidable to the Pope, or the Popes lightning and thunder were now as
dreadful as in former Ages. Even in Popish Countries the abuses of Papal Power,
and the Intrigues and Interests of the Court of Rome are a little better
discerned; therefore those Princes and States can make the better terms for
themselves; yet if either the former degree of ignorance and stupid devotion to
that See, shall return upon their people, or the like occasions of embroiling
or breaking States, shall revive, they must accept the Popes conditions, and
submit to the former yoke.

But if the Princes of that Profession can in this our more knowing Age, with
much ado hold their Subjects in obedience, against the Acts of Rome; yet the
question concerning England remains entire, Whether a Protestant Prince can
with good reason confide or repose himself in the Loyalty of his Popish
Subjects? and more especially, Whether the forementioned Popish Claims do in
any wise comport with the State of England, whose Basis is the Protestant
Religion?

No other Religion gives the Priests such an Empire over the Conscience, as the
Popish does. The Principles of that Belief, and the Order and Frame of that
Church, are directed to this end, and the people are miserably inthralled to
the will of their Clergy. By Auricular Confession the Priests have a constant
inlet into the hearts of men, by injoyning Penances and works of Devotion, they
exercise a spiritual Dominion over them. Hereby they have daily opportunity,
and advantage enough to excite them to any notable Exploits for the Catholic
Cause; unto which kind of services they fix an Opinion of the highest Merit,
either for discharge from the pains of Purgatory, or for the acquest of a
greater Reward in Glory: Yea, dissolute persons may be easily drawn to such
Attempts, in hope of making compensation for a loose and lewd life; and when
they suffer for Sedition or Treason, they are held to acquire the glory of
Martyrs and Confessors. Add hereunto their Belluine hatred of Heretics, and
vile esteem of their persons: And in all this, their Church's supposed
Infallibility warrants this blind obedience, and brutish confidence. And to
make void all the security that can be given between Prince and people, the
Pope under pretense of Equity and Necessity, undertakes to dispense with Oaths,
and with all Laws both Civil and Divine. Besides all this, there is the Jesuits
peculiar Discipline, most exquisite for blind obedience and resolution, and
consequently, for any great and strange Attempts.

Things past may afford prognostics of thing to come. May Englands constant
Experience be taken for Evidence in the case In the Reign of Edward the sixth*
a formidab'e Rebellion was raised for recovery of the Mass.
. The Reign of Queen Elizabeth, after the Protestant Reformation had gotten the
stated possession of this Kingdom, was infested with a continued succession and
series of Treasons, for the re-introducing of Popery, carried on by the English
Papists with an indefatigable and implacable Spirit, proceedings from Causes
peculiar to that Religion.

During the first ten years, they conformed to the Church of England; but
afterward, to testify their union with the Pope, they became a divided party
in this State. For them the Queen being found unmovable, the Pope published
his Declaratory Sentence against Her, by which all Her Subjects were absolved
from the Oath of Allengiance, and an Anathema denounced against those that
thence forth obey Her. The Popish Rebellion in the North breaks out. Many
horrid attempts of Violence upon Her Majesty's Person, were plotted one after
another for many years together, as that of Dr. Story, of Parry, of Arden and
Somervile, of Throgmorton, of Babington and his Accomplices, besides the
concurrent Commotion in Ireland Dr. Parry confessed, that having promised at
Rome to kill the Queen, he was troubled in Conscience about it, till he had
read Dr. Allen's Book, which taught, That Princes excommunicate for Heresy,
were to be deprived of Kingdom and Life; which Book, he said, did vehemently
excite him to prosecute his Enterprise.
. In these several Treasons, many of the Seminary Priests were forward and
active. The great and settled Design, was the advancing of the Queen of Scots,
to the Crown of England; wherein were engaged the Pope, and Spaniard, and
French King, and Duke of Guise, in conjunction with the English Papists, making
use of her Title to set on foot those many desperate Enterprises against the
Queen.

After the death of the Queen of Scots, they raised a new Title to the Crown in
the House of Spain. The memory of Eighty Eight, will be an everlasting Monument
of Papistical Cruelty and Treason. Cardinal Allen the first founder or procurer
of the Foreign Seminaries, a person admired as well by the Secular Priests, as
Jesuits, penned a Treatise with all the Rhetoric he had, to excite the English
Catholics to join with the Spaniards. Among the Forces in the Low Countries
prepared for this Invasion, were seven hundred English Fugitives. After the
Spanish Armado was dissipated, the Jesuits had not done. They would have
stirred up the Earl of Derby to assume the Title of the Kingdom; they plotted
the poisoning of the Queen by Lopez her Physician; they excited Villains to
dispatch her by bloody hands, and they never left soliciting the King of Spain,
till he twice attempted another Invasion. In those times Parsons his Book of
Titles was famous, wherein he set up diverse Competitors for the Crown,
preferring the Infanta before all others, and slighting King James his Title,
as having but few Favorers, and little accounted by Catholics.

The Roman party could be provoked to these mischiefs by no other impulse then
the impetuous zeal of their Superstition. Some of their own did then publsh to
the world their important Considerations, to move all true Catholics to
acknowledge, That the proceedings of Her Majesty and the State, with them, since
the beginning of Her Reign, had been mild and merciful. In the several times of
those mischievous designments, though some priests were executed, yet those
that were found moderate in their Examinations, obtained Mercy, and a great
number of them that by Law were obnoxious to death, were spared from that
extremity, and only banished. It is true, that certain Secular priests did
impute all those Treasons to the Jesuits and their Adherents, and fully charged
them with all the aforefaid matters of Fact, in terms of highest aggravation,
acquitting all other Catholics. But it must be noted, that the Jesuits were in
greatest reputation, and had the predominant influence upon the English Papists
in general, and (as appears by the Seculars loud Complaints) had such a power
of disposing the Alms collected for their prisoners, and other sufferers, that
such as complied not with their purposes, were debarred of relief, and pined
for want. And by their counsels, the Foreign Seminaries, those Nurseries of
Disloyalty were wholly swayed. And it is observable, That the agrieved Seculars
never published their pretended abhorrency of these Treasons, till they were
over-past, and themselves, being driven to despair by the Jesuits potency, were
forced to take shelter under a great Prelate of the Church of England.

The same Spirit of Disloyalty was as active and vigorous in that Kings time,
who at his first entrance, found himself excluded from Title to the Crown, by
two Papal Breves, the groundwork of that Infernal Plot of matchless Villainy
and Cruelty, the GUNPOWDER-TREASON. After the defeat of which horrid
Conspiracy, the Projects of Rome proceeded not in such downright Rebellions,
which always miscarried; but in ways more secretly undermining Religion, and as
truly destructive to the Interest of King and Kingdom.

SECT. IV. That it Persecutes all other Religions within its reach.
THE second Branch of the Charge against Popery, is, That it persecutes all
other Religions within its reach. In the Church of Rome, for many bypast Ages,
the Meekness of Christ, and the Dove-like nature of his Spouse has not
appeared, but the Cruelty of that great Whore that was drunken with the Blood
of the Saints, and of the Martyrs of Jesus. All that cast off her yoke, and
disown her pretended Infallibility, are with her no better then Heretics,
though they entirely own all the Articles of the Christian Faith received by
the ancient Church. And Heretics are esteemed more vile then dogs; and it is
held meritorious to abuse and torment them. Her Laws have made their punishment
to be the sharpest kind of death, Burning alive inexorably inflicted. By this
Romish Wrath and Fury were Three hundred Martyrs sacrificed in Queen Mary's
time, for not believing the Sacramental Bread to be turned into the Substance
of Christ's Body, against the most clear and distinct perception and reason of
all Mankind.

But can humane Nature hear, without horror, the report of that direful
Consistory, called the Holy Inquisition, established in those Countries where
Popery is in full sway. Doubtless that Church whose Religious Orders in a
solemn and Sacred Judicatory, shall commit such horrid Outrages as are indeed
acted by those Infernal Judges, upon pretense of Justice and Piety, must needs
be a School of Universal Cruelty for all her Adherents.

The Popish has outgone the Pagan Cruelty. What Treachery and Villainy has
been acted! What barbarous Indignities have been offered in ways as immodest
and shameless, as outrageous and merciless, upon pretense of zeal against
Heretics! What varieties of strangely-devised Torments have been inflicted
upon the Servants of Christ, without sparing Age, Sex, or Condition! Nor has
such work been done only in our Age or Country, but in all Ages successively,
and Countries universally, that were imbued with Romish Principles: Witness the
huge slaughters of the Waldenses, the persecutions of the Bohemian Brethren,
and of many others throughout Christendom in the former Ages: And since
Protestant-Reformation, how have the Romish Zealots filled Europe with the
slaughters of Christians within their reach, in France, Germany, Spain, Italy,
England, Scotland, the Netherlands. In Ireland, Piedmont and Poland, their
Cruelty is fresh in memory. And the slain cannot be numbered for multitude; they
were killed by Thousands, Ten thousands, Hundred thousands, at one and the same
Persecution. And the Tragedies have been acted where the Name of Protestant was
well known, yea, where Protestants were under the shelter of the Law. For the
Jesuits uncessantly stir up the Princes to fall upon their people against Law,
and without provocation given, and after things have been settled, to break
their Agreements with them. And the Pope himself is the Contriver or Applauder
of these Mischiefs, and the succesful execution thereof, is received at Rome
with joy and triumph, as the Murderers in the Parisian Massacre were highly
extolled by the Pope, and rewarded with such spiritual Graces as his Holiness
uses to bestow.

SECT. V. That wheresoever it finds Encouragement, it is restless, till it
bears down all before it, or has put all in disorder.
MAy we judge by these things, how a Party devoted to the Sea of Rome, are to be
trusted and cherished in a Protestant Nation, who mind the securing of
themselves and their posterity, from the sharpest Persecutions; especially
considering the Third Branch of the Charge, That in any State, where they find
advantage, or fit matter to work upon, they are restless, till they bear down
all, or put all in disorder.

Popery has its formed Combinations, and se^led Correspondencies over all
Christendom, under the Supreme Direction and Government of the Congregation at
Rome, for the propagation of the Faith; which sent over swarms of Seminary
Priests, Jesuits, and Friars of all sorts, who made their Hives in England.

The several PARLIAMENTS of the later times of King James, represented to the
King how the Popish Recusants had dangerously increased their Numbers and
Insolences, having great expectation from the Treaties with Spain, and the
interposing of Foreign Princes for Indulgence to them; how they openly and
usually resorted to the Churches and Chapels of Foreign Ambassadors, their
more then usual concourse to the City, and their frequent Conventicles and
Conferences there; how their children were educated in many Foreign Seminaries
appropriated to the English Fugitives; what swarms of Priests and Jesuits came
into the Land; many Popish and Seditious Books licentiously printed and
dispersed. From which Causes, as from bitter Roots, most dangerous Effects both
to Church and State would follow. For the Popish Religion is incompatible with
ours; it draws with it an unavoidable dependence upon Foreign Princes; it opens
a wide gap for popularity in any who shall draw too great a party; it has a
restless spirit, and will strive by these gradations. If it once get
connivance, it will press for Toleration; if that should be obtained, it must
have an Equality; from thence it will aspire to a Superiority, and never rest
till it has wrought the subversion of true Religion.

In the several PARLIAMENTS of King Charles the First, not one Public
Grievance was more insisted on, then the Growth of POPERY. In the Third
PARLIAMENT of that King, at a Conference between the Lords and Commons about
Popish Recusants, one of the Principal Secretaries of State spoke thus: Give me
leave to tell you what I know, That These now both vaunt at home, and write to
their Friends abroad, they hope all will be well, and doubt not to prevail, and
win ground upon us: And a little to awaken the Care and Zeal of our Learned and
Grave Fathers, it is fit that they take notice of that Hierarchy, which is
already Established in competition with their Lordships: For they have already
a Bishop consecrated by the Pope. This Bishop has his subalternate Officers of
all kinds, as Vicars General, Archdeacons, Rural Deans, Apparitors, and such
like; neither are these nominal and titular Officers alone, but they all
execute their Jurisdiction, and make their ordinary Visitation throughout the
Kingdom, keep Courts, and determine Ecclesiastical Causes; and, which is an
argument of more consequence, they keep ordinary intelligence by their Agents
at Rome, and hold correspondencies with the Nuncio's and Cardinals both at
Bruxels, and in France. Neither are the Seculars alone grown to this height,
but the Regulars are more active and dangerous, and have taken deep root. They
have already planted their Societies and Colleges of both Sexes. They have
settled Revenues, Houses, Libraries, Vestments, and all other necessary
provisions to travel, or stay at home; nay, even at this time they intend to
hold a concurrent Assembly with this Parliament.

In Ireland a Popish Clergy far more numerous then the Protestant, was in full
exercise of all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, by Archbishops, Bishops, Vicars,
General Officiats, and a Vicar Apostolical. And they had a special Cardinal at
Rome for their Protector.

Among other Projects, a Consultation and Overture of reconciling England and
Rome, was set on foot. Some of Eminency in the Church of England, gave
advantage to the Project, by declaring, That only the Puritans among the
Protestants, and the Jesuits among the Papists, obstructed the Peace of
Christendom. Some prime Agent of the Pope, made a solemn offer of a
Cardinalship to Bishop Laud, at the time of his translation to the Sea of
Canterbury. Sancta Clara presumed to dedicate his Book to the King, wherein the
Articles of the Church of England were examined by the Roman Standard, and
distorted to the sense of the Council of Trent. The Pope had Three Nuncio's,
Panzani, Con, and Roseti, successively residing in England, to work upon this
State by advantage of the Project of Reconciliation.

This Faction had many Irons in the Fire, and many strings to their Bow. They
had their Agents in Court, City and Country. They had their Spies in the Houses
of great men, and such as kept continual watch over them that had the chief
sway of Public Affairs. Their work was to raise and foster Jealousies between
the King and His People, to cast things into the hurry of Faction, Prejudice
and confused Motion. And whether the Court or Popular Faction prevailed, they
thought it equally advantageous to their Designs, which was to unsettle the
present State, and work Mutations. Such Incendiaries are the Factors of Rome,
and such busy Engineers in the Confusions of Christendom. Can any that
considers the foregoing passages, doubt of the powerful and special Agency of
the Court of Rome, in the Commotions that followed. A Venetian Agent in
England, intimate with Nuncio Panzani, and privy to all his Negotiations, made
this Observation; If one may make judgment of things future, by things past,
this Realm so divided into many Factions in matter of Religion, and that of the
Catholic increasing daily, will in time be troubled and torn with Civil Wars.

SECT. VI. The PAPISTS pretension of Loyalty and Merit in the King's Cause,
Examined.
THE great Plea and boasting of the Romanists, is, Their pretension of Merit in
the King's Cause. The truth is, the Papists knew that the PARLIAMENT was fully
bent, and deeply engaged against them, and therefore despaired of any good to
themselves by a direct and open compliance with them, whatever undiscerned
influence they might have on their Counsels: So that Necessity made them to
serve the King in that War. And they brought neither Success nor Reputation to
His Majesty's Affairs; nor did He care to own their Assistance more then as
justified by the present necessity. And they have little reason to upbraid the
Protestants with the scandal of that War; for whatsoever was alleged in
defense thereof, by the PARLIAMENT and their Adherents, as much has been
written by very Eminent Schoolmen and Doctors of the Roman Church, for the
Interest of the people, and the Consent of the Cities and the Peers in
Defensive Arms. Which they have written over and above their peculiar Principle
of the Popes Universal Power of Deposing Kings that are unfit for Government.

As for the woeful Catastrophe of those Commotions, it has been manifested to
the world by such as undertook to justify it, when Authority should require:
That the year before the Kings death, a select number of Jesuits being sent
from their whole Party in England, consulted both the Faculty of Sorbon, and
the Conclave at Rome, touching the Lawfulness and Expediency of promoting the
Change of Government, by making away the King, whom they despaired to turn from
his Heresy: It was debated and concluded in both places, That for the
Advancement of the Catholic Cause, it was Lawful and Expedient to carry on
that Alteration of State. This Determination was effectually pursued by many
Jesuits that came over, and acted their parts in several Disguises. After that
execrable Fact was perpetrated on the Person of our Sovereign, if we may
believe most credible reports, there were many Witnesses of the great joy among
the English Convents and Seminaries, and other companies of Papists beyond Sea,
as having overcome their great Enemy, and done their main work.

Many of their Chief ones sought the favor of the Usurpers, with offers of
doing them service. One of great note among them, in a Book entitled, Grounds
of Obedience and Government, undertook the solution of the Grand Case of those
Times: That if a People be dissolved into the State of Anarchy, their Promise
made to their expelled Governor, binds no more; they are remitted to the force
of Nature to provide for themselves. That the old Magistrates Right, stands
upon the Common Peace, and that is transferred to his Rival, by the Title of
Quiet Possession. Conformably to these Principles, they address their Petition,
To the Supreme Authority, the PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth of England. They
affirmed, They had generally taken, and punctually kept the Engagement; and
promised, That if they might enjoy their Religion, they would be the most quiet
and useful Subjects.

Of their Actings since His Majesty's Restoration, and the Jealousies and
Rumors about them, let men judge as they find by the Evidences that are given.

SECT. VII. The Result of the whole Discourse touching the Popish Party.
AND now let it be duly weighed, Whether the Papists of these Dominions have in
later times changed their former Principles and Interests, or have only taken
another method of greater Artifice and Subtilty, as the change of times has
given them direction and advantage. The scope of the whole preceding Discourse,
is to call in question those high pretensions of theirs, and to cross their
Aims at great Power and Trust: But it is not directed against the Security of
their Persons or Fortunes, or any meet Indulgence or Clemency toward them. Let
them have their Faith to themselves, without being vexed with snares, or any
afflicted; the State always providing to obviate the forementioned Principles
and Practices of Disloyalty, and the diffusing of the leaven of their
Superstition. The Inference of the whole is this, That they be not admitted to
a capacity of evil and dangerous influence upon the Affairs of the Kingdom, or
of interrupting and perplexing the course of things that concern the public.

SECT. VIII. That the Reformed Religion makes good Christians, and good
Subjects.
AS true Religion is the most Noble End, so it is the best Foundation of all
Political Government. And it is the felicity of the State of England, to rest
upon this Basis, even Reformed Christianity, or the Primitive and Apostolic
Religion recovered out of the Apostasy of the later times, and severed from
that new kind of Paganism, or Pagano-Christianism, under which it lay much
oppressed and overwhelmed, but not extinguished. Its wholesome Doctrine
contained in its public Confessions, makes good Christians, and good Subjects.
It teaches obedience to Civil Magistrates, without the control of any
Superior or Collateral Power. Nor is it concerned, if dangerous Positions fall
from the Pens of some Writers. And notwithstanding the Adversaries Cavils, the
Divines of Authority and solid Reputation in the Protestant Churches, do with a
general Consent maintain the Rights of Princes and Sovereign Powers, against
all Disobedience. If any aberration in Practice, has been found in its
Professors, it is not to be charged therewith, because it condemns it; but the
general practice in this point, has been conformable to the Doctrine.

The Reformation in England, for its Legality and Orderliness, is
unquestionable. In Germany it was settled and defended by Princes and free
Cities, that governed their own Signiories and Territories, paying only a
respect of Homage to the Emperor. In Helvetia it began by the Senates of the
Cantons. It was received in Geneva by that Republic, after the Civil
Government had been reformed by strong Papists. In the Provinces of the
Netherlands it was spread many years before the Union against the Spaniard;
which Union was not made upon the score of Religion, but of State. The manner
of its beginning in Scotland, is by some attributed to a National Disposition,
the asperity and vehemence thereof, is said to be greater in times of Popery,
and to be much mitigated by the Reformation. For France, we may take the
Testimony of King JAMES, who was jealous enough for the Power of Kings. He
said, That he never knew yet, that the French Protestants took Arms against
their King. In the first Troubles, they stood only upon their Defense; before
they took Arms, they were burned and Massacred every where. The first Quarrel
did not begin for Religion, but because when King Francis the Second was under
Age, they had been the refuge of the Princes of the Blood expelled from the
Court, who knew not else where to take Sanctuary; and that it shall not be
found that they made any other War.

It is not for this Discourse to intermeddle with all the Actions of Protestant
Subjects toward their Princes, that have happened in Christendom: Let them
stand or fall by the Laws and Polity under which they live. Whenever they
have been disloyal, they have swerved from the known and received Rules of
their Profession. Through the corruption of Mankind, Subjects of whatsoever
persuasion, are prone to Murmurings and Mutinies. Sometimes Oppression makes
them mad. Sometimes a Jealousy of Encroachments upon their Legal Rights and
Liberties, raises Distempers and Contests. And sometimes an unbridled, wanton
affecting of inordinate Liberty, makes them insolent and licentious. But over
and above these common Sources of Rebellion, Popery has a peculiar one, and
that of the greatest Force, the Conscience of Religious Obligations, and the
Zeal of the Catholic Faith. Protestants have never disowned their King for
difference in Religion, as the most of the Roman Catholieks of France dealt
with Henry the Fourth, by the Popes instigation. And in their greatest
Enormities, they have never attempted the Stabbing and Poisoning of Princes
that stood in their way, which the Jesuits teach their Disciples.

SECT. IX. The Reformed Religion is the permanent Interest of this Kingdom.
AS the Protestant or Reformed Religion, is the true Primitive Christianity, so
it is the stable and permanent Interest of England, and the sure Foundation of
its Prosperity. The King of England is the most Mighty Prince of this
Profession, and becomes the more Potent over Christendom, by being the Head and
Chief of the whole Protestant Party: And it is well known, That by the Support
and Defense of this Cause, the Nation has increased in Honor, and Wealth, and
Power.

The Peoples rooted Aversness from Popery, is most apparent, and their
Jealousies work upon any more then usual Insolence or Confidence of the
Papists. The Royallists as well as others, have been Alarmed, and manifested
their Zeal against it. And His Majesty's Aversness from it, is so fully
declared by His Constancy amidst Temptations, in the time of His Exile, and now
since His Return, that for His Honors sake, it is made very penal for any to
suggest that He would introduce it; the Law presuming, That such suggestion
must needs proceed from an evil mind.

And what Prince that has cast off the Popes yoke, would willingly come under
it again? A Foreign Statesman of the Roman Profession, has observed it as a
Bar against the projected Reconciliation between England and Rome, That it
could not be effected without Concessions on both sides, contrary to the Maxims
of both parties. This Realm (says he) is perversely addicted to maintain its
own resolute Opinion of Excluding the Popes Authority. And the Court of Rome is
more sollicitous to remove whatsoever is contrary to its Temporal Grandeur,
then to extirpate such Heresies as this Realm is infected with. To instance in
that one point of the Approbation or Toleration of the Oath of Allegiance;
though some Catholic Doctors had with their Tongues and Pens maintained the
lawfulness of that Oath; yet thereby, and by opening some other points of high
consequence, they had so displeased the Pope, that could they have been
caught, they were sure to have been burned or strangled for it. But what
allurement is there to dispose the Monarchs of the Earth to subject themselves
to the Sacerdotal Empire of Rome, or to endeavor an Accommodation with it?
Has Popery its advantages to dispose Subjects to security and blind obedience?
So it has its advantages to loosen the Bonds of Allegiance, and foment
Rebellion in Subjects; when Protestancy seasons them with principles of
unstained Loyalty. A people nuzled in ignorance and superstition, are more
easily seduced from their obedience to Magistrates, and carried headlong by
those that have dominion over their Consciences. But Understanding and Knowledge
makes men considerate, and more easily manageable by a just and prudent
Government.

As for the Clergy's Interest, though the Protestant Religion does not affect
that excessive Pomp and Splendour of Churchmen, which the Popish does; yet it
is taken for granted, That neither Conscience nor Interest will permit the
Bishops and Clergy of England, to unite to the Sea of Rome. Their Doctrine is
too pure, and their Judgment too clear for a full compliance with Popery: And
they know what it is to come under the Papal Yoke, to divest themselves, and
receive new Orders from Rome, and to be displaced and set behind the Veteran
Soldiers of the Roman Camp, whose turns must be first served.

SECT. X. It is for the behoof of Religion and true Piety, and for the Interest
of this State, That Reformed Christianity be settled in its full Extent.
IF it be resolved, That Protestancy is the truth of Christianity, and also,
the stability of England; it follows, That this Profession must not be
straightened and lessened, but enlarged and cherished, according to its true
Extent; and the Rule and Square of the Ecclesiastical State, must be
commensurate thereunto. It should be the measure of all men's Zeal and Activity
in Rites and Opinions, whatsoever is necessary to its support and advancement,
is constantly to be asserted; and about things impertinent thereunto,
contention should utterly cease. This is to advance the Kingdom of God among
men, and to increase the Church's glory upon earth. But by needless Schisms and
Factions, to weaken the common Interest of Reformed Christianity, is to
dissipate the Church of God, and to defeat the great Ends of the Christian
Religion, which are, Sound and strong Faith in Christ and his Promises,
unfeigned devotion, purity of heart, innocence and integrity of life, common
charity, brotherly love, humility, mutual forbearance, and condescension,
unshaken peace and concord.

As this Latitude promotes the great Designs of Christ's Gospel, so it settles
this Nation, and is, for matter of Religion, its right and sure Basis. Every
good Foundation, lies adequate to the Building to be laid thereon: So any
Polity Civil or Ecclesiastical, should be proportionate to the people to be
governed thereby. The people that are of moment in the Balance of this Nation,
are, though not universally, yet more generally rooted in Protestantism, as it
is taken in its due latitude, and not as unduly restrained by the passions and
interests of men: For in this they are one, though divided about lesser things.

There has been much discord between men of several Persuasions, that
thoroughly accord with each other in the same common Faith, as almost to expunge
one another out of the List of Protestants. Surely this is a great error and a
disadvantage on all hands, as well to those that stand on the Vantage-ground,
as to others: For they that carry it after this sort, do weaken the Common
Interest of true Religion, and strengthen the Common Adversary that is
irreconcilable, and disparage themselves as a narrow Party or Faction. That all
those who heartily embrace the English Reformation established by Law, are
Protestants, will not be questioned by men of temperate spirits. And concerning
the residue, let the sober-minded judge, Whether they that assent to the
Doctrine of Faith contained in the Articles of the Church of England, and do
worship God according to that Faith, have right to be esteemed Protestants. Now
if Protestancy taken in its due Extent, does sway the Nation, and is able to
settle its Peace against the Competition of any Rival; should it not be
encompassed according to that Extent, as much as is possible, in the Polity of
this State?

SECT. XI. How momentous in the Balance of the Nation, those Protestants are,
that dissent from the present Ecclesiastical Polity.
Whether cogent Reason speaks for this Latitude, be it now considered, How
momentous in the Balance of this Nation, those Protestants are, which are
dissatisfied in the present Ecclesiastical Polity. They are every where spread
through City and Country; they make no small part of all ranks and sorts of
men; by Relations and Commerce they are so woven into the Nations Interest,
that it is not easy to sever them, without unravelling the whole. They are not
excluded from among the Nobility, among the Gentry they are not a few; but none
are of more importance then they in the Trading part of the people, and those
that live by Industry, upon whose hands the Business of the Nation lies much.
It has been noted, that some who bear them no good will, have said, That the
very Air of Corporations is infected with their Contagion. And in whatsoever
degree they are, high or low, ordinarily for good understanding, steddiness and
soberness, they are not inferior to others of the same Rank and Quality;
neither do they want the Rational Courage of English Men.

As for the Ministers of this Persuasion, some have called them Fools for their
Inconformity; others are reported to have said, That the Church should not so
easily be rid of them, as if their Conformity had been dreaded by them. Some
have pitied them, wishing that they would Conform; and others revile them,
saying, Conform, or not Conform, never trust them. Howbeit, they make Solemn
Appeals to the Most High God, That they dare not Conform, for Conscience sake;
and that it is not in the power of their own wills to relieve them. And
whatsoever their grounds of dissent be, they hold it out against all hopes of
Indulgence, whilst many of them live in Necessities, and most of them upon the
kindness of others.

It is now about Five years since a Full and Vigorous Act of Uniformity. at
once cleared the Church of the supposed Enemies of her Polity. All Corporations
have been New-model'd and changed as to the Principles and Tempers of persons,
for the better securing of the Government in Church and State. The Private
Meetings for Religious Worship (termed Conventicles) are strictly prohibited,
Deportation being the Penalty upon the Third Conviction. And for the breaking
and dissipating of the whole Party, it is provided by another Law, That the
Nonconforming Ministers be removed five miles distant from the places of their
usual supports and influences. Such care is taken, and such is the advantage
both of Law and Power, to strengthen the State, and restrain Dissenters*
Nevertheless, the State Ecclesiastical has advanced little in the esteem,
acceptance, or acquiescence of people. The Dissenters are still the same, and
are rather strengthened in their aversness. And those of them that repair to the
public Assemblies, retain their Principles of Reformation (as they speak)
without separation. The Indifferent sort of men are still indifferent, and it
may be have some kindness for the depressed Party, and pity them in their
Sufferings.

SECT. XII. The Extirpation of the Dissenters is both difficult and
unprofitable.
PEradventure some think their total Extirpation to be the surest way to
public Security and Peace; and that great Severities will do the work. But
Violent compulsion and Terror, comports not with the nature of Christian
Religion, which is a Rational Service, and seeks a willing people; and is not
at all in truth, where it is not received with judgment and free choice.

Besides, the success of such a course may be doubted of, since the Protestant
spirit is not like the Popish, Cruel and outrageous; and the nature of English
men is not bloody, but generously compassionate. Wherefore in this Land to
execute Extremity upon an intelligent, sober and peaceable sort of men, so
numerous among all ranks, may prove exceeding difficult, unless it be executed
by such Instruments as may strike terror into the whole Nation. The Civil
Officers in general, may not be found so forward to afflict their quiet and
harmless neighbors. Moreover, if severity used once for all, could extinguish
an opposite party, there might be some plea of Policy; but when Severity must
still be justified with more Severity, without an end, it is like to prove
unlucky to the undertakers.

Nor is the Nation like to grow the better by the subversion of this sort, if
it were effected. For in them no small part of the Nations Sobriety, Frugality,
and Industry does reside. They are not the Great Wasters, but mostly in the
number of Getters. In most places the displaceing of them has not increased
Civility and good Conversation among men; and it makes not for their dishonor,
that many will swear and be drunk, to declare they are none of them.

There is something of more importance. To purge the Nation of this people, may
be to purge out more of its Vitals then the strength of this State can bear. To
suppress those that are reckoned among the chief in Trading, and whose Commerce
is so general, may beget a general diffidence and insecurity in Traders, and
may help to drive away Trade it self, and send it to an emulous and encroaching
Nation. May we mind, without offense, the event of things among us? The
business of the Nation has not proceeded with the current and free passage
expected; nor does its Wealth and Glory increase. Trade languisheth, and
Traders fail in great Numbers; the Rents of Lands fall; there is scarcity of
Money in City and Country; the Necessities and Difficulties of private Estates
are common, and Complainings are general. And after a continued decay, things
are at last fallen and funk much lower in the Ruins of the City of LONDON. It Is
the Nations happiness to be re-established upon the Ancient, Legal Foundations;
but it is the right stating and pursuing of its true Interest, by which it
comes to a firm consistency, and proportionable growth.

But this sort of men are inquisitive, and therefore troublesome to Rulers, to
whom Obedience without disputing, is most acceptable. It is fit indeed they be
as humble and modest, as inquisitive. Yet these inquiring men stand much by
that main Principle of Protestantism, the Judgment of Discretion. Indeed, the
Churches Infallibility, and the peoples implicit Faith, may help against all
Disputes: but it cannot be so in England, whilst the people read the
Scriptures, and the established Doctrine of Faith remains with us: And if no
greater latitude can be allowed, then is at present, a Race of Non-conformists
is like to run parallel with the Conformists to the worlds end.

SECT. XIII. The representation of this Difficulty, is no Threatening to Rulers,
or Intimation of Rebellion.
SUch as take this Representation for a Challenge to the Higher Powers, and a
Demand of LIBERTY, and a Threatening, if it be not granted, are too far
transported with Passion. What can be of greater concernment to Governors, then
to discern and consider the state of their people, as it is indeed? And why may
it not be minded by Subjects, and spoken of without any hint or thought of
Rebellion? If Subjects use Arguments of Equity and Safety to Princes, it does
not presently speak a Demand: And it is no Threatening to say, That Rulers
themselves must be ruled by Reason, or do worse.

The truth is, should they whose Case is here argued, upon this score meditate
Rebellion and War, they were abandoned of their own Reason, and would hurry
themselves into a precipice of manifest Ruin. To rush into ways of violence,
evidently destroys their Interest, which stands in maintaining such works, and
providing such things as are profitable to the Commonwealth, that it may be
known that the public good consists by them, as much as by others. To abide in
their stations, to have patience under grievances, to sweeten their Governors
by humility and modesty, is their best security, who stand or fall together
with the true Interest of the Nation.

Nevertheless, though a peoples discomposure does not forespeak Wars and
Tumults, yet it may denounce Woe and Misery. Can nothing undo a Kingdom, but
Rebellion and Treason? Was there ever a greater Separation from the Church of
England, then now is? Was there ever less satisfaction among Multitudes every
where, that do yet frequent her Assemblies? A State, that is free from violent
Convulsive motions, may fall into a Paralytick, or Hectic Distemper, or an
Atrophy. The Current of Vital Blood may be stopped in its Veins. There be sullen
Mutinies, that make no noise, but may loosen all the Joints and Ligaments of
Policy.

SECT. XIV. The Settling of the Nation by an Established Order, a Toleration,
and a Connivence.
IF the Interest both of Reformed Christianity, and of this Kingdom, require a
more comprehensive state of Religion, the true Extent of that State will be no
impertinent or unmeet Inquiry. Such is the complicated condition of Humane
Affairs, that it is exceeding difficult to devise a Rule or Model that shall
provide for all whom Equity will plead for. Therefore the Prudent and Sober
will acquiesce in any Constitution that is in some good sor* proportionable to
the Ends of Government. All that are thought fit to abide with security in any
state, may be reduced to Three sorts: First, Those that are of the Established
and Approved Order. 2. Such as may be Tolerated under certain Restrictions. 3.
Such as may be only connived at. And accordingly the Settling of a Nation may be
made up of an Establishment, a Limited Toleration, and a Discreet Connivence.
To be comprehended within the Establishment, it is requisite not only to be of
importance in the Public Interest, but also of Principles congruous to such
stated Order in the Church, as the stability of the Commonwealth requires. As
for the two later, Toleration and Connivence, they must be regulated with
respect not only to common Charity, but also to the Safety of the Established
Order.

SECT. XV. Of the Established Order in RELIGION, and the Moderation therein
required.
AS for the Established Order, we presume not here to intermeddle with the Form
or Species of Church Government; but only to consider the prescribed Uniformity
of Judgment and Practice. Evident reason speaks, That this be not narrow, but
as broad and comprehensive as it is possible, that of it self, by its own
force, it may be chief in sway, and control all dissenting parties. On the
other hand, it must not be loose and incoherent, but well compacted, that it
may attain the Ends of Discipline, which are to promote sound Doctrine, and
godly life, and to keep out Idolatry, Superstition, and all wicked Error and
Practice that tends to the defeating of the Power of Christian Verity, Now
these Ends do not require a Constitution of narrower bounds, then things
necessary to Christian Faith and Life, and godly Order in the Church. These
things must be maintained, and clearly stated; but whatsoever is more then
these, may be matter of good intention and devotion to some, but an occasion of
stumbling to others.

If it be said, Who shall judge what things are necessary? This doubt might soon
be resolved, if passion, and prejudice, and private ends were vanquished. But
however, let it be put to the Reason and Conscience of the Church of England:
Why should not the great things of Christianity in the hands of wise Builders,
be a sufficient Foundation of Church-Unity and Concord? What need has the
Church to enjoin more then what is necessary to Faith and Order? Is not
Moderation and Charity far more excellent, then glorying in Opinions,
Formalities, and petty matters, to the regret of many Consciences? What if
those that question her Injunctions, should be weak, nice and captious? It is
about matters of Divine Worship, wherein God has proclaimed his Jealousy; and
therefore if they being over-jealous, do err, they deserve pity.

Our Eccleasiastical Superiors are here earnestly besought, Calmly and
seriously to review the prescribed Uniformity, and to consider how some parts
thereof, which at the best are but things indifferent, have been long disputed,
and by what manner of men, and what has been argued for and against them; and
how this Difference has held, and still increased, from Bishop Hooper in King
Edward's time, to the present Non-conformists; and then to judge whether a
rational and conscientious man may not possibly dissent from some of these
things, or at least doubt of their Lawfulness; and in case of such dissenting
or doubting, what he should do, seeing the Apostle says in the case of Meats,
He that doubts, is damned if he eat, because he eats not of faith. Can a man
by Subscription and Practice, allow those things which his Conscience
rationally doubts to be sinful?

It is Honor and Power enough for the Church, to be enabled by her Authority
to enforce Gods Commandments. She is observed and honored as a Mother indeed,
when by her Wisdom and Care, her Children walk orderly according to the
Christian Institution; and it may suffice her to chastise those of them that
walk contrary to Christ. Though she be of venerable Authority, yet she does not
claim an Infal^ibility; and therefore she cannot settle the Conscience by her
sole Warrant, but still leaves room for doubting. And in prescribed Forms and
Rites of Religion, the Conscience that does its office, will inevitably
interpose and concern it self; and it being unsatisfied, ^arrs and r^nts will
follow. Woeful Experience cries un^^ us* No more of such Injunctions then needs
must. The indisputable Truths of Faith, and the indispensable Duties of Life,
are the main object of Church Discipline; therefore an ill choice is made when
the vigor of Discipline is exercised about lesser and more dispensable things
of mere Humane Determination.

The Sons of the Church of England commend the Moderation used in the Articles
of Religion, being formed in words of that extent, that men of different
Persuasions about the Doctrines of Predestination, Divine Grace, and Free Will,
did alike subscribe them. Nevertheless, the present Orders and Ceremonies
inexorably imposed, have been as much disputed among the Godly Learned, as
those different Opinions about the Doctrines aforesaid; and yet who can think
they are of as much importance to the Substance of Religion?

Moreover, men might more easily agree in the use of these little things, or of
some of them, were their Internal Judgments spared, and Subscriptions not
enjoined. They may bear with others in the practice of some things, which
themselves cannot practice. They may submit to some things, which they cannot
approve; and that not for unworthy Ends, but for Conscience sake; and choose
rather to acquiesce in a Tolerable State, which for the main is sound and good,
rather then to endeavor a total Change, which may be mischievous, and at best
is full of hazard. Wise men know, That by hasty Changes they do not come to
rest and quietness, but only change their Old Grievances for New ones. If
Practice sufficiently uniform, that is to say, without any scandalous
difference, may be obtained from men of different Persuasions, Why should
Uniformity of Judgment be exalted, and men tempted in doubtful points, to set
their Consciences on the Rack? If any number of Dissenters were willing to do
their uttermost toward Compliance, why should needless Choak-pears, which they
could not swallow, be forced upon them? If the Church's Authority be had in
reverence, if Order and Peace be kept, what matter is it from what speculative
Principles such observance proceeds? Though a man so complying, be not of the
same mind with his Superiors, yet he may have this honest Catholic Principle,
To promote the common Interest of Reformed Christianity, and to dread the
weakening and shattering of it by needless Schisms. As for a narrowbounded
Uniformity both in Opinions, and petty Observations, it is no more necessary in
the Church, then Uniformity of Complexions and Visages in the same Civil State;
and is indeed no more attainable, where a generous Freedom of Judgment is
allowed.

SECT* XVI. Whether the Dissenters are capable of being brought into such a
Comprehension.
Whilst Reason is urged on their behalf that are left without the lines of the
present Establishment, some happily may ask, Will they themselves hearken to
reason? Be it supposed that some among them seem not reducible to a due public
Order; but another sort there are, and those of chiefest moment, whose
principles are fit for Government; the stability whereof has been experimented
in those Countries where they have had the effectual concurrence of the Civil
Powers. Their Way never yet obtained in England, nor were they ever favored
with the Magistrates vigorous aid, so much as for an Accommodation with the
Established Polity: But their difficulties have still increased; and how
straight soever the Terms imposed on them, were in times before, the
aftertimes have still made them streighter. Wherefore if they have been too
much addicted to their own Opinions, or have committed some errors in the
management of their Affairs, it is no marvel. It was not easy for them, being
destitute of the Magistrates influence, and lying under great discouragement
and disadvantage, always to keep stable and sure footing in such a slippery
place as Church Discipline. The asserting of their Discipline, is not here
intended; but the Inquiry is, Whether they be of a Judgment and Temper that
makes them capable of being brought under the Magistrates Paternal Care and
Conduct, to such a stated Order as will comport with this Church and Kingdom?

This is no undertaking Discourse, it presumes only to offer its Reason to
equal and impartial Readers. When a Divine of great fame, and of much esteem*
with the chiefest of the English Clergy, was taxed by the Jesuit his Adversary,
for being no Protestant, as refusing to subscribe the Nine and thirty Articles;
he judged it a sufficient Answer to testify his belief, That the Doctrine of
this Church was so pure and holy, that whosoever lived according to it, should
undoubtedly be saved; and that there was nothing in it that might give just
cause to any to forsake the Communion, or disturb the Peace thereof. Who, or
what is there almost, that this or the like Latitude would not encompass, when
hearty endeavors are put forth to gain men? The same Catholic Spirit may
dwell both in larger and stricter judgments. One that cannot subscribe to all
things contained in a Volume of Doctrines and Rules compiled by men subject to
error, may be ready to join with any Church not depraved in the substance of
Religion, that does not impose upon his belief or practice, things unsound or
doubtful, as the terms of her Communion.

The Presbyterians generally hold the Church of England to be a true Church,
though defective in its Order and Discipline; and frequent the Worship of God
in the public Assemblies. And many of those that press earnestly after further
Reformation, do yet communicate as well in the Sacraments, as the Word
Preached, and Prayer. And a way might be opened for many more to do as much, by
a safe and easy condescension of those in Authority.

The Ministers of the Presbyterian Persuasion, in their Proposals presented to
His Majesty, declare, That they do not, nor ever did renounce the true Ancient
Primitive Episcopacy, or Presidency, as it was balanced or managed by a due
commixtion of Presbyters therewith. That they are satisfied in their judgments
concerning the Lawfulness of a Liturgy or Form of Worship; and they Petition
His Majesty, That for the settling of the Church in Unity and Peace, some
Learned, Godly, and Moderate Divines, indifferently chosen, may be employed to
compile a Form, as much as may be, in Scripture-words; or at least to Revise,
and effectually Reform the Old. Concerning Ceremonies, they profess to hold
themselves obliged in every part of Divine Worship, to do all things decently
and in order; and to be willing therein to be determined by Authority, in such
things as being merely circumstantial, are common to humane actions, and are to
be ordered by the Light of Nature, and Humane Prudence, according to the
general Rules of Gods Word. But as for diverse Ceremonies formerly retained in
the Church of England, in as much as they contribute nothing to the necessary
decency which the Apostle required, and draw too near the significancy and
moral efficacy of Sacraments, and have been rejected together with Popery, by
many of the Reformed Churches abroad, and ever since the Reformation, have been
matter of endless Dispute in this Church, and an occasion of great separation,
and are at the best, indifferent, and in their own nature mutable, they desire
they be not imposed; and they heartily acknowledge his Majesty to be Supreme
Governor over all Persons, and over all Things and Causes in these his
Dominions.

Upon these Proposals, His Majesty in His Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical
Affairs, has thus graciously expressed himself: We must for the Honor of all
those of either Persuasion, with whom We have conferred, declare, That the
Professions and Desires for the advancement of true Piety and Godliness, are
the same; their professions of Zeal for the Peace of the Church, the same; of
Affection and Duty to Us, the same. They all approve Episcopacy; they all
approve a set-form of Liturgy; and they all disapprove and dislike the sin of
Sacriledg and Alienation of the Revenues of the Church. And if upon these
Excellent Foundations, in submission to which there is such a harmony of
Affections, any Superstructure should be raised to the shaking of these
Foundations, or the contracting and lessening of the blessed gift of Charity,
which is a vital part of Christian Religion, We shall think our selves very
unfortunate, and even suspect that We are defective in that Administration of
Government with which God has entrusted Us.

After these things, the Ministers commissioned for the Review of the Liturgy,
in their account of that Business, thus address themselves to His Majesty:
Though the Reverend Bishops have not had time to consider of our Additions to
the Liturgy, and of our Reply; We humbly crave that it may be considered before
a Determination be made. Though we seem to have labored in vain, we shall lay
this Work of Reconciliation at Your Majesty's feet. We must believe, that when
Your Majesty took our Consent to a Liturgy to be a Foundation, that would infer
our Concord; You meant not, that we should have no Concord, but by consenting
to this Liturgy without any considerable Alterations. And when Your Majesty
commanded us by Letters Patents, to meet about such Alterations as were
needful, or expedient to give satisfaction to tender Consciences, and the
restoring and continuing of Peace and Unity; We rest assured it was not Your
Majesty's sense that those tender Consciences should be forced to practice all
which they judge unlawful, or not so much as a Ceremony should be abated them;
or that our Treaty was only to convert either party to the Opinion of another;
and that all our hopes of Liberty and Concord, consisted only in disputing the
Bishops into Nonconformity, or coming in every Ceremony to their mind.

This is the Church's misery, That when any particular Interest grows in
Prosperity and Power, and can carry all before it, Condescension presently
cease on that side. And so the disagreeing parties in the several
vicissitudes of Public Affairs, tread down one another* and justify
themselves by the like miscarriages of their Opposites when time was. By this
means the Church's distempers and breaches are perpetuated, and Religion in
general suffers much damage and scorn. But it would be the glory of that party
that stands on the Vantage-ground, to give a leading Example of unconstrained
Moderation.

SECT. XVII. Acquiescence in the Widened Establishment, is the Safety of
Religion.
IF it be said, That a little yielding does but make way for further
Encroachments; we suppose that Governors know how far to trust, and what it is
fit to grant, if subjects know not what is fit for them to ask. Persons allowed
in the Public Service, may easily be kept in that dependence on the State,
which shall prevent the danger of an Anti-Clergy. We suppose likewise, that a
sound Church Government is not so weak and tottering, that the Abatement of
some Rigors in things at best but indifferent, will hazard its overturning.

The wiser sort of Dissenters, whose Conformity, were they gained, would most
avail, are weary of these strifes, and consider what is passable in the state
of England, and might settle this Church. They dread the Consequents of
Changes, the hurrying into other Extremes, and the wild excursions of some
spirits. They would not be left again to the late uncertainty, and continual
Vacillations in Government; and they have long since seen the manifold Errors
committed in the Policy of the late times. They know that such unfixed Liberty
would not secure them. And therefore it may well be thought, they would accept
reasonable terms, and rest satisfied therein.

But this Consideration is taken by the wrong Handle, if this sober and steady
part of the Non-conformists be slighted and judged the less considerable,
because they are cast into one condition as to the Law, with others that are of
more unmanageable and unstable Principles. For who can tell how time may work
out things, and frame the Spirits of the unsober to a greater soberness, and
dispose them to a better consistency among themselves? But howsoever, can it
make for the Public Weal, That the more discreet and moderate sort, that might
easily be brought in, should be enforced to continue the chief reputation and
strength of a divided Party?

SECT. XVIII. Of Toleration and Connivence.
LET Impartial Reason judge, Whether a swaying, or at least a momentous part of
those that close not with the present state Ecclesiastical, may not be
encompassed in an Establishment of such a latitude, as may happily settle this
Church, and consequently promote the Peace, Wealth and Honor of the Civil
State.

As for others that are of sound Belief, and good Life, yet have taken in some
Principles of Church Government less congruous to National Settlement, I would
never be a means of exposing them to Oppression, Contempt and Hatred, but would
admit their Plea, as far as it will go. For if God has received them, why
should their fellowservants reject or afflict them causlesly? Every true
Christian should be tender of all that love the Lord Jesus in sincerity.

Nevertheless, their Liberty pleaded for, is not to be inordinate, but measured
and limited by the safety of true Religion in general, and of the public
Established Order; which is not unpracticable: For the world wants not an
Experiment of the safety of a Toleration or Indulgence so regulated.

SECT. XIX. Dissenters of Narrow and Rigid Principles, advised to Moderation.
AS Authority may be too prone to err in the Severity of Imposing; so Subjects
may be too wilful in refusing to obey. As an explicit Assent and Approbation,
may by Superiors be too rigidly exacted in doubtful things; so the unreasonable
stiffness and harshness of Inferiors, may keep them from that compliance in
practice, which their Conscience (becalmed from Passion and Prejudice) would
not gainsay. A servile, fawning, temporizing Spirit, is vile enough; but that
which is sedate, castigate, and subdued to Reason, is not only pleasing to
Governors, but also of great avail for Public Peace.

Every Christian should be deeply sensible of the common Interest of Reformed
Christianity, which is incomparably more valuable then those private Opinions;
and little narrow Models, which may have much of his fancy and affection.
Well-minded persons may easily be deceived touching their private Sentiments in
Religion. They may think they are under the uncontrolable Sway of Conscience,
when indeed they are but bound up by Custom, Education, Complexion, or some
other kind of Prejudice. For ones own sake, one would gladly be rid of such
Confinements, and walk more at liberty: But much more should one strive to be
as comprehensive as may be, for the common safety, and advancement of true
Religion, which cannot stand by such uncertainty and multiplicity of petty
forms, but requires an ample and well-setled state, to defend and propagate it
against the amplitude and potency of the Romish Interest. The prudent and sober
should not easily settle upon such Opinions in Church Order, as will never
settle the Nation, but tend rather to infinite perplexity and discomposure.

Howsoever, I will not bear too hard upon any thing that may fairly pretend to
Conscience, which, though erroneous, should not be harshly dealt with.
Nevertheless, if (when all is said) some dissatisfaction does invincibly
possess the Judgment, in that case Christian Humility and Charity, as well as
Discretion, advises such persons to acquiesce in their private Security and
Freedom, and not to reach after that Liberty that may unsettle the Public
Order, and undermine the Common Safety.

SECT. XX. This Comprehensive State of Religion further considered, with
respect to Three important Interests; first to that of the KING.
FOR the removing of all con^^^ved Prejudices, let this desired Latitude of
Religion* be considered with respect to the several Interests of the King, of
the Church and Clergy, and of the Nobility and Gentry. First let it be examined
in reference to the Interest of Regal Majesty.

The Non-conformists, and other inclinable to their way, are by some charged
with such Principles as detract much from Kingly Power and Dignity, and tend to
advance Popular Faction. It is confessed, they have been eager Assertors of
Legal Liberties; yet herein they were not singular, but in almost all
PARLIAMENTS have had the concurrence of many good Patriots that were not
touched with the least tincture of Puritanism. They profess much affection to
MONARCHY, and the Royal Family; and think they have made it appear by their
hazardous declaring against the designed Death of our late Sovereign, and their
vigorous Actings for the Restitution of His Majesty that now is. They are so
well satisfied, as none more, in the Ancient Fundamental Constitution of this
Kingdom.

This Arraignment of their supposed Principles about Government, may happily
proceed upon Mistake. There is reason enough to think, That the many late
Disputes about Prerogative and Liberty, are Controversiae ortae non primae,
that they had their rise from something else, which lies at the bottom. Both
former and present time* do show, That the Anti-Puritan Interest, when occasion
serves, and the urgency of Affairs requires, can contest with Princes, and
pretend Conscience too, in crossing their Designs. Inclinations and Interests,
more then Speculative Opinions, will be found to have born the sway, and caused
those active motions on the one hand, and the other. These Dogmata or Problemes
about Obedience and Government, do but little, where men's Affections and
Concernments do not give them spirit and vigor. The practical Judgment of
Inferiors, has a bias in this case, according to their Superiors Benignity or
Asperity toward them. High strains of speech may easily proceed from such as
flatter their Governors, or know not themselves; but they are worthy of credit,
that speak credible things.

The wise man says, He that repeateth a matter, separateth very friends. A
looking back to former discords, marrs the most hopeful Redintegration. Acts of
Indemnity, are Acts of Oblivion also, and must be so observed. Let not the way
of Peace be barred by the framing of such Tests as may perplex the minds of
men, but add no real security to the Higher Powers. For as some set their wits
a work in framing, so do others in evading the designs of such Engagements. And
of those that devise how to evade them, some may deal seriously, and others
perhaps may trifle with Conscience; but the internal Judgments of both remain
what they were before. The common Evasions or Violations of such bonds among
all parties in our times, do show, That they are not the way to root out
inveterate Opinions. But there is a surer way to obviate the evil tendency of
such Opinions, and to render them ineffectual. For it is not this or that
narrow conception or notion, but some greater thing, that rules the actions of
humane life. The condition of the dissatisfied, may without damage, or just
scandal to any, be made such, That their far greater number shall not long for
changes, but gladly embrace present things; and then the implacably evil-minded
would want matter to work upon, and rest without hope of disturbing the Public
Peace.

Moreover, all Loyal Principles are not enclosed in some Positions, in which
may be much variety and uncertainty of opinion, and in which both Theological
and Political Casuists (and they great Assertors of Monarchical Government)
have written doubtfully. Men of different apprehensions in such things, may be
endued with the same prudence, soberness, common charity, love of Public
Tranquillity, reverence of Regal Majesty, conscience of Allegiance, and an awful
regard of Divine and Humane Laws. Men of nicer Judgments, may have as loyal
hearts as those of greater latitude. And why should the judgments of such men
be racked, and their spirits vexed with curious scrutinies? The ancient Sacred
Bonds of Fidelity, are not questioned; and if they do not, what others can
oblige and awe the Conscience?

The extent of Prerogatives Royal, of the Privileges of PARLIAMENTS, and of
the Peoples Immunities, is not matter fit for common disquisition, but requires
to be kept among the Secrets of Government. It might have been far better, if
these points had been more gently and warily handled on all sides. The English
(in general) are an ingenuous and open-hearted people; and if unlucky accidents
discompose them not, they are of themselves disposed to have their Kings in
great veneration; and doubtless their satisfaction and good estate, is their
Sovereigns true repose.

SECT. XXI. Secondly, To the Interest of the Church and Clergy.
IN the next place, let this Comprehensive state be examined, with respect to
the Interest of the Church of England. The Doctrine of Faith and Sacraments by
Law established, is heartily received by the Non-conformists, and it is like to
be the Basis of their standing in England, as long as Protestant Religion
stands. How far they approve Episcopacy and Liturgy, has been above declared.
Their dissent is in some parts of Divine Worship (as they say) not appointed of
God, but devised by men; also in the frame of the English Hierarchy, as it
differs from the Ancient Episcopacy; and they avow they are under no obligation
to extirpate or impeach that ancient Form. The Ministers of this Persuasion are
Godly and Learned, able and apt to teach the people; and no small part of the
Congregations in England feel the loss of them. Does the Lord of the Harvest
command that such Laborers be thrust out of his Service? And will the chief
Shepherd at his appearing justify this usage of his faithful Servants?

The Bishops and dignified Clergy, and those of their Persuasion, have the
advantage of Law and Power. But can they believe that the Church of God in
these Nations, is terminated in them alone? It is hoped that Christ has a
larger Interest in these Realms. Shall it be said of the English Prelacy, That
it cannot stand without the ejection of Thousands of Orthodox, Pious Ministers?
Or that it dreads a general diffusion of knowledge in the people? Or that this
is a Maxim thereof, No Ceremony, no Bishop; as if the Bishop's work were at an
end, and his office of no force, if Ceremonies were left indifferent? Is an
Ecclesiastical Government, that pleads Apostolical Institution, and Universal
reception, so weak and feeble, that godly and peaceable men, preaching only the
indubitable truths of Christianity, would undermine it? If any should preach
what is Schismatical and Seditious, they are liable to Restraints and Censures,
according to their demerits. Why will the established Clergy refuse their
Brethren, and set them at such a distance? Is it their honor, strength, or
safety, that such men should be numbered among their opposites?

The intrinsic and permanent State of Prelacy, is not advanced by these
present Rigors. It is not more rooted in the hearts of people, nor are many
gained over that would stick close to it in a time of trial. The dread, that is
of its Censures, arises from the subsequent temporal Penalties. And however it
be, its Chariot drives but heavily. It cannot measure its strength by the
number of Conformists, among whom there are many that are a reproach unto it,
and many that are very indifferent men; and there are the Latitudinarians, that
are accounted but lukewarm Conformists; and many that submit, may not like the
imposing; and men may think diverse Injunctions (that are not simply unlawful)
to be burdensome and inconvenient, and would be glad to shake off the yoke. A
great Prelate before the late Wars, is reported to say, That the Conforming
Puritan was the Devil of the Times. And of those that zealously affect the
established Order, there are not a few that disgust the behavior of
Churchmen, and are ready to upbraid them with the known moderation of many
whom they have ejected; yea, the more considerate Sons of the Church, do
observe and bewail such dangerous miscarriages by Simony, Pluralities,
Non-residency, and Profaneness, as threaten a second downfall. The world takes
notice what men are cast out; and what is the condition of multitudes that are
retained in the Service of the Church. There are a sort of men of great Worth
and Reputation in the several Orders of this Kingdom, that indeed affect
Episcopacy, but see the inconvenience and danger of this Severity, and would
have things carried with Discretion and Equity, and are ready to do good
offices for the depressed Party. If the Affairs of the Commonwealth should go
backwards, can the Clergy alone be at rest in their Honor, Power and Wealth?
Though of later times it has been said, No Bishop, no King; yet it is not
evident, That the present frame of Prelacy has an immutable Interest in the
Regal Name and Power.

The Religion of any State will sink, if it be not held up in its venerable
Estimation among the people; and it cannot be long held in reverence, if it
has neither the reality, nor appearance of Devotion and Sanctity. That which
is divested of the Disguises and Impostures of Romish Superstition, had need to
be spirited with Life and Power. Minds touched with Devotion, will look either
to the way of true and real Godliness, or to the Popish Bodily Exercise. It is
here sincerely wished, That the Clergy may hold their state in safety and
honor; That they may never be laid low for want of meet Revenue or Dignity;
That they may always preserve a reverend esteem of their Persons and Office.
But then the Bishops must not be the Head of such Ministers, as for ignorance
and lewdness are a scandal and scorn to their Neighbors; nor of such as
encourage profaneness, and deprave seriousness and diligence in Religion and
strictness of life, under the scandal of Puritanism, Fanaticism, or such like
names of reproach. They must so manage their Government, that under it the
sound knowledge of God may increase through the Land; that holiness and
righteousness may flourish; that their influence may dispose men to do those
things that are honest, and pure, and comely, and virtuous, and praiseworthy.
To this may be added the settling of the Church in a due extent, that it may
incompass so much as may enable it to vanquish whatsoever is inconsistent with
it; and to keep within compass whatsoever may be tolerated under it.

The great danger and damage which may be dreaded to ensue this moderation,
(which nevertheless may possibly not ensue it) is but the cutting off some
Luxuriances from some in the Highest Order; or the sharing among many what was
engrossed by a few. And the Church does not change for the worse, if some
diminution of greatness in a very few persons makes way for a more general
amplitude, stability and peace; and the Clergy enjoy an Estate of Power, Plenty
and Honor, with less envy and hazard of undermining.

SECT. XXII. Thirdly, To the Interest of the Nobility and Gentry.
THere is another Interest, that of the Nobility and Gentry, which is worthy of
regard in this Inquiry. The Latitude and Liberty here discoursed, is thought to
give too great advantage to the Citizens and the Commonalty; as also to make
all sorts more knowing, and less servile; and consequently, less obsequious to
the wills of great men. And the doubt is, whether the Nobles and Gentlemen of
England can maintain their Authority and Splendour, with the Freedom of Citizens
and the common people. Surely in the times of their Ancestors they were in as
much splendour and power, as they have been in the memory of this Age; and yet
in those times both Citizens and Yeomanry were rich and free, brave and worthy
in their own rank. And it may be the higher Degrees in England would never be
so advanced, as some have conceited, if the meaner sort were reduced to the
condition of the French Peasantry. For there is another Spirit in the English
People, which peradventure may not be vanquished at less charges then
dissipation of the strength and riches, and all the glory of this Land*
Besides, Trade which is the Life of England, must be managed by a people not of
a slavish and sordid condition. And in a Trading Nation, things do so pass to
and fro, and run from one hand to another, that New Men by their Wealth will be
always getting up into the rank of Gentlemen, and former Gentile Families will
be decaying. There is a Liberty for every Native to purchase Lands; and though
some of our Tenures began in the Vassalage of meaner men to great ones, yet
they are now by custom of later Ages, become so far free, that they are fit for
any ingenuous persons to take them up. Moreover, the English Gentry are
Commons, according to the main frame of this Polity; and that great Convention
where they meet in their chiefest Power, is the Commons House of Parliament, in
which they represent the universality of the Commons of all Counties, and
Cities, and Buroughs: And therefore the free Estate of the Commons, is the
true Interest of Gentlemen. And how groundless and fruitless is all evil
emulation between the Gentry and Citizens, or Traders! For they mutually uphold
each other, or both must fall to the ground. Many Gentile Families are the
Offspring of former Citizens; and many Citizens are the sons of Gentlemen. And
when the Estates of ancient Gentry are sinking, their Marriage with Citizens is
an ordinary means of underpropping them. And if Traders fail, the Revenue of
the Gentry must fail also; whose Lands did never bear that Price, nor yield
that Annual Rent that of late they have done, till the Nation became great in
Foreign Trade. If emulation of Gallantry be any matter of grudg between them,
the Citizens may leave the Gentry to their own Garbs, and retain a grave habit
to themselves, in which they may sufficiently express their Wealth, as their
Predecessors did before them. For it is generous so to do. And as for the
Nobility and Gentry, their Honor lies in upholding their Families, and bearing
sway in their Countries; and they do the one by discreet and liberal Frugality;
and the other by having and using greater Abilities then the vulgar, for their
Countries Service.

SECT. XXIII. The general Security that comes by this Latitude.
THE chief Prejudices have been considered; and these three Important Interests
being known aright, are found not to oppose, but to require this Latitude of
Religion. Furthermore, our common Security and Freedom, earnestly persuades it:
For the Severities of Law against Dissenters, may at length come home to them
or theirs, who take themselves to be far out of the reach thereof. And the
enforcing of those Penalties may need such ways and means, as may trouble them
who are tender of the Lawful Rights and Liberties of Englishmen. But the
Common Peace being once firmly settled in this Comprehensive state, all
Necessity of Powers and Proceedings extraordinary, will disappear, and vanish
away.

Finally, The more Pacifick we are at home, the more Powerful and Formidable
shall we be abroad. But our Breaches are too well known, and make little for
our Reputation or Advantage in Foreign parts. What can it avail, to disturb a
People that would settle in peace, and whose Peace is accommodated to the
Public Weal, and bound up together with it? It must needs be fruitless and
unfortunate, and cause perplexities and miscarriages in the chiefest Affairs of
State. It is a saying of the wisest of Kings, He that troubles his own House,
shall inherit the wind.

FINIS.

