A COPY OF AN AWARD Referring to the Public Markets of the City of LONDON.
To all Christian People
To whom these Presents shall come, Sir Nathan Wright Knt. one of His Majesty's
Sergeants at Law, and Sir Bartholomew Shower Knt. Send Greeting in our Lord God
Everlasting. Whereas Differences and Disputes have heretofore been between
diverse Butchers, Gardeners, Fruiterers and others, Resorting to the Public
Markets in the City of London, called Leaden Hall Market, and the Green-Yards,
with other Market-Grounds thereunto belonging, Woolchurch, alias Stocks-Market,
Honey-Lane alias Milk-Street Market, and the Market near Newgate, commonly
called Newgate Market, and Thomas Burdett and Thomas Kilner of London
Gentlemen, and others, Farmers of the said Markets, and the Profits thereby
arising, Touching diverse Fines, Sums of Money, Rents, Rates and Prizes,
demanded and taken by the said Farmers or their Agents, of the said Butchers,
Gardeners and others, Resorting to the said Markets for Stalls, Standings and
Room in the said Markets for Sale of their Wares and Commodities brought to the
said Markets to be Sold. And whereas several Indictments have been heretofore
Prosecuted, and yet are Depending against the said Farmers, or some of them,
for Extortion in Exacting and Taking several Great Sums of Money of several
Persons for Standings and Stalls in the said Markets, or some of them. All
which said Differences and Matters by the Rule of Court hereunto annexed, are
referred to the Arbitrament and Final Determination of us the said Sir Nathan
Wright and Sir Bartholomew Shower, as by the said Rule may more fully appear.

Now Know Ye, That we the said Sir Nathan Wright and Sir Bartholomew Shower
having taken the said Matters in Difference into our Consideration, and being
Assisted herein by Sir William Hedges Knt. one of the Aldermen of the said City
of London, and others the Committee, appointed by the Common Council of the
said City for the better Regulating of the said Public Markets, Do Adjudge,
Award, Order and Determine concerning the said Premises as follows: I. We do
Order and Appoint, That the said Farmers shall within Two Months now next
coming, Deliver up all Bonds and Notes, given to the said Farmers, or any of
them, or any other in trust for them, or any of them, by any Butchers or other
Persons Resorting to the said Markets, either by themselves, or by any other
Persons with or for them, for Payment of any Sum or Sums of Money for Fines or
Incomes, or advanced Rents, or for admittance or leave to Use or Occupy any
Stall, Standing or Room in the said Markets, or any of them, and that no
Proceedings shall hereafter be had or Prosecuted upon any of the said Bonds and
Notes for Recovery of any Sum or Sums of Money thereupon pretended to be due
and payable. II. We do Order and Appoint, That the said Farmers Thomas Burdett
and Thomas Kilner shall within Six Months now next ensuing, Pay or cause to be
Paid to Peter Parker Citizen and Stationer of London, and Isaac Grevil Citizen
and Mercer of London or Order, the Sum of Four Hundred Pounds of lawful Money
of England, to be by them Disposed of in such manner as herein after is
appointed (that is to say) the Sum of Sixty and seven Pounds, three Shillings,
six Pence part thereof, to be Paid to John Scott Gent. Thomas Goodwin, Robert
Roundtree and Bennet del Turner, Prosecutors of the said several Indictments,
in full for their Costs: And the Sum of Three Hundred Thirty and two Pounds,
sixteen Shillings and six Pence, residue of the said Four Hundred Pounds, to be
Paid and Distributed to and amongst the several Persons mentioned in a Schedule
hereunto annexed, in such Shares and Proportions as therein is appointed, the
residue thereof; being in foil satisfaction of all Sum or Sums of Money
supposed to be had or received by the said Farmers for Fines or excessive
Rents. III. We do further Order and Appoint, That from henceforth the said
Farmers, their Deputies, Agents or Servants, o^ any of them, shall not Exact,
Demand or Take any Fines or Rewards, Sum or Sums of Money for admitting any
Person to the Use or Occupation of any Stall, Standing or Room in any of the
said Markets, or for Rent of any such Stall, Standings or Room, Except such
Rents or Sums of Money as are appointed or allowed to be taken for the said
Stalls, Standings or Room, in the Act of Common Council made the seventeenth
Day of September, in the Year of our Lord 1674, and in the Mayoralty of Sir
William Hooker Knt. late Lord Mayor of the said City of London, Entitled, An
Act for the settlement and well ordering of the several Public Markets within
the said City of London. IV. We do Order and Appoint, That no Advance or
Increase of Rent shall be Taken or Received for any Stall, Standing or Room in
any of the said Markets upon pretense of any extraordinary Convenience or
Accommodation hereafter to be made, above or more than the Expense and Real
Charge of making such extraordinary Convenience or Accommodation, Saving that
where at the Request of any Occupier any greater number of Feet, or greater
Quantity of Ground shall be allotted to any Stall or Standing than is appointed
by the said Act of Common Council, Then and in such Case the said Farmers may
require and take and Advanced Rent proportionably, and in proportion to the
Rates appointed by the said Act of Common Council. V. We do Order and Appoint,
That the said Farmers, their Executors Administrators or Assigns* shall not
Remove any of the Occupiers of the said Stalls or Standings now being, of that
hereafter shall be by them thereto admitted* our of or from the said Stalls or
Standings without the free and voluntary consent of such Occupiers, Except for
the non-payment of The Rent appointed to be Paid for the same by the said Act
of Common Council, or Breach of the Settled and Established Rules of the said
Markets. VI. We do Order and Appoint, That the Occupiers of such Stalls or
Standings in any of the said Markets, shall not Transfer or Assign over the Use
or Occupation of any Stall or Standing in any of the said Markets, to any
Person or Persons whatsoever, nor shall Use or Employ the same otherwise than
according to the Laws and Constitutions of the said Markets. VII. We do Order
and Appoint, That when any Stall or Standing in any of the said Markets shall
be vacant, it shall be in the Power of the said Farmers to appoint such Person
or Persons to have the same, as they the said Farmers shall think sit, without
taking any Gratuity or Reward for preferring one before another or any Advance
or Increase of Rents. VIII. We do Order and Appoint, That no Person shall
hereafter be compelled to pay to the said Farmers any Rent or Sum of Money for
Weights or Scales, Except such persons as sell Flesh, or other Commodities
usually sold by Weight, And all Persons uttering Flesh or other Commodities
usually sold by Weight, shall pay such Rent or other Sum to the said Farmers
for finding such Weights and Scales as is appointed or allowed by the said Act
of Common Council, whether such Persons use the said Farmers Weights and Scales
or not, And the said Farmers are to provide a sufficient Number of Weights and
Scales for the use of the said Persons, and to keep the same in Public and
Convenient Places in each of the said Markets, for the use of the said Persons
and others Resorting to the said Markets. IX. We do Order and Appoint, That the
said Farmers shall not Let out the Stalls or Standings of the said Markets for
the Use or Exercise of any Trade, or Sale of any Commodities thereon, other
than the Provisions usually brought to the said Markets, and by the Laws and
Constitutions of the City of London allowed to be Sold there; And if the
Occupiers of any such Stall or Standing shall employ or use the same for Sale
of any other Commodities than as aforesaid, the said Farmers shall upon Notice
thereof, within convenient time, use their utmost lawful endeavors to remove
such Person from the use of such Stall or Standing. X. We do Order and Appoint,
That the Farmers shall hold their Markets only on such Days, and at such Hours
in the Day, as by the Laws and Customs of the said City of London for
Constituting and Regulating the said Markets are appointed. XI. We do Order and
Appoint, That the said Farmers shall not Let out the Streets and Lanes of the
said City to Hawkers or other People bringing Food or Victuals not coming unto
any Public Market, nor shall the said Farmers take any Money or other Reward
from Persons Hawking and Selling Roots, Green Pease, or other Provisions
through the said Streets or Lanes or any of them. XII. Lastly, We do hereby
Order and Appoint, That in Case the said Thomas Burdett and Thomas Kilner do
Pay the said Sum of Four Hundred Pounds, herein before appointed to be Paid by
them to the said Peter Parker and Isaac Grevil, according to the Appointment
aforesaid, Then all Persons Prosecuting, or concerned in the Prosecution of the
said Farmers of the said Markets or their Agents, for or upon account of any
supposed Exactions, Extortions, or unlawful Tolls, Duties, Fines or Rents, or
any other Matter or Thing whatsoever relating to the said Markets, done, had,
or committed, or supposed to be done, had or committed by the said Farmers,
their Agents or Servants at any time before the Day of the Date of the said
Rule of Reference, shall and do Declare their free Consent before Mr. Attorney
General for the Stay of all further Prosecution by reason of the Premises, and
shall and do use their utmost endeavors for the procuring a Noli Prosequi to
be Entered upon Record at the Charge of the said Farmers, to and upon all
Indictments, and Informations upon the Account aforesaid, found Exhibited or
Commenced, or hereafter to be Commenced or Prosecuted touching or relating to
the said Premises, for any thing done or committed therein before the Date of
the said Rule. In Witness whereof, We the said Sir Nathan Wright and Sir
Bartholomew Shower have hereunto Set our Hands and Seals the Tenth Day of June
in the Ninth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord William the Third, By the
Grace of God of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of the
Faith, etc. Annoque Domini 1697.


Nathan Wright. Bartholomew Shower.

Signed, Sealed, Published and Declared by the said Sir Nathan Wright and Sir
Bartholomew Shower for and as their Award, the same being duly Stamped in the
Presence of Randolph Stracey. Stephen Johnson.




The Rates, Tolls and Duties, as Settled and Appointed to be Taken by the Act
of Common Council, 17 September. 1674. which the Farmers in the Covenants of
their Lease are obliged not to Exceed, on the Penalty of Ten Pounds for every
Offense, are as follows, Viz.
FOR every Stall or Standing of Eight Foot long, and Four Foot broad, for Sale
of Flesh-Meat or Fish. 2 s. 6 d. per Week. For every Stall or Standing of Six
foot long, and four foot broad, 2 s. per Week. For every Stall or Standing of
six or eight foot long, and four foot broad, for other Commodities, 3 d. per
Day. For every Horse-Load of Provisions, not upon Stalls, nor under Public
Shelter, 2 d. per Day: For every Dosser of like Provisions, 1 d. per Day. For
every Cart-Load, with not above Three Horses, 4 d. per Day. For every Cart-Load
with Four Horses, or above, 6 d. per Day. For all Fruit brought by Land or
Water, and pitched in any of the Public Markets; for each Prickel or Basket,
holding not above one Bushel, one halfpenny per Day. For each Basket, Dosser
or Maund, holding above two Bushels, 1 d. per Day: To be paid by the People
that bring or receive them. For every Standing of six foot square, for the
Gardeners, 20 s. per Annum. For every Standing for the Poorer sort of Country
People, bringing Weeds and Physick-Herbs, of four foot long, and two foot
broad, 1 d. per Day. For every Standing for Fruit-Sellers and standing
Herb-Women, not above eight foot long and four foot broad, or six foot square,
12 d. per Week. For every Standing for Bakers and Ginger-bread Sellers, not
above sour foot long, and three foot broad, 6 d. per Week.
London: Printed at the Request, and for the Information of the Market-People,
1697.


