EYE SALVE FOR ENGLISHMEN, AND AN ALARVM TO THE LONDONERS: Wherein is
contained the Summary of Romes late designs against England, and the present
plots and enterprises in hand against London, so many as has yet come to the
knowledge of the Author Together with the opening of an effectual door, to the
happiness of this Nation.

Whereunto is annexed a Postscript containing Reasons and Motives to his
Highness and the present power in being, to grant us such a Committee which
has been long promised, and much longer desired and sought for.

Composed for the view of his Highness, and all the People of England, by
Jeffrey Corbet, Citizen and Grocer o^ London.

London, printed in the Y^er, 1654.

ENGLANDS Warning-Piece.
AWake, awake O England, and if thou art of the horns that must hate the whore,
and make her desolate! do it now or never: or else she will do it to thee, and
make thee desolate! Oh what a Lithergie has seized upon thee* sure thou have
forgoten thy name, and art become a stranger to thy self! thy dangers, thy
deliverances, thy vows, victories are buried in oblivion! the Councels of Rome
was at first thine Enemies, but now thy chiefest friends in Council; the plots
of Jesuits were then thy fears, but now thy favors and delights. As soon as
the Lord had plucked out the sword out of thine own bowels, thou did sheath
it in the heart of thine ancient friends of Holland: and no sooner is that
over, but thou ragest against thy friends at home. Awake and stand upon thy
guard, for thou art almost dru^k with the abominations of the whore; How is
the air infected with Oaths, and cursings, and perjuries? How are the streets
thronged with pride and drunkenness? How are thy Chambers infected with
ryoting, wantenness and gluttony? thou have not heard the voice that bad thee
vex the Midianites which vex the with their wiles? Thou have not heard the
voice that bad thee render unto them double? Yet the Lord has compassion on
thee, and cease not to give thee warning upon warnings. Surely Rome is the
Mother of harlots, and is drunk with the blood of the Saints, and the souls
under the Alter c^y aloud; A Religion delighting in, and laden with blood: a
Religion unsari^ble and unparalleled, not end(...)ring any but it self; yet
agreeing with hell it self, so the Pope be the head, making the word it self to
come, and lay down at his feet the Sword, an^ the Keys, and then he opens, and
cuts off what Scriptures he pleases, he arogating to himself more power than
the Devil, who promised but the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory thereof;
but he will promise. Heaven also with Hell, and a new created place, which was
never mentioned by God, men or Divils, even his own vast Territories of
Purgatory; therefore it is a small thing for him to dispose of Kingdoms and
Empires of the Earth. Are not there great animos^^ies against England till it
return to be disposed of by him? Look ab^ut and ^ee the sl^ughters he has made
in our neighbor Countries about us, wi^^^ss the M(...)icre of above 100000
Protestants a^ Paris, and the bloody Spanish Inquisi^ion, and the like; but to
come nearer home, let us remember the Spanish Armado in 88. which came with I
str^men^ of cruelty to M^ssacre all the Protest^n^s of England: and let us no^
forget ^he helli^^ Powaer plot, and the Spanish Fle^^ about 1639 laden also
with Instruments of cruelty (...) Mass-c(...), w^^ch were vanquished by the
Holland Fleet in the Down^; and after tha^ ^n the year 1640. when the Popes
firebrand the Queens Mother was in England, she brought over an Irish P^^est
who b^a^^ed that he was the chief contriver of the Massac^^, in ended to cut
off (...) the Protestants in England! and Ireland, and that he was by the P^pe
employed to all Catholic Princes, for their contribution toward that bloody
Massacre, and he gave it under his hand about August 1640* that their were
7000. men And when the Massac^^ was discovered they put another face upon it by
making a breacls between the King and Par liament thereby to decide the P^o^
^est^nts.
in private pay for the Massacre here: and that there were 500 Irish Soldiers
sent out of Flanders to guard the Tower under the Popish Lord Cottington, and
that the Queen would pawn the Jewels of the Crown, to supply them with ^^ny for
that bloody work, whereupon William O Conner was apprehended, and committed to
the Gate House, 3. of September. 1640. which was many Months before the Irish
Rebellion brake forth, and was kept prisoner above 5 years without any
prosecution, and then released by the old Parliaments connivance, and so the
blood of above 100000 Protestants that were murhered in Ireland in cold blood,
is brought upon your Highness and this Commonwealth, for justice nor being
speedily executed upon William O Conner, that others might hear, and fear, and
do no more so wickedly; therefore the hearts of his confederates were fully set
in them to do evil, so as they went on with that bloody design, and carried it
on wi^h an unnatural war. And when they saw the hand of God against them in the
war, they have ever since endeavored to carry on their long intended Massacre,
still deluding the Protestant Cavalier to strength* en their hands, in carrying
on the Popes design under color of the Kings Interest, when as the Popes
design is to destroy all Protestants whatsoever: and all the benefit which they
could possible gain by it, was to be last destroyed; and that will more clearly
appear in their intended Muss^cre in London, where all sorts of Protestants do
live, and for the greater number of them were their own friends. For first they
contrived some years since to Land foreign Forces at a distance from London,
to draw ou^ Army toward them; and then they were to cut off such of the State
as stood most in their way, and to surprise our Guards, and then to fire the
City in many places at once, and whilst the people were a quenching the fire,
then they would fall upon the cutting of all which will be proved by sufficient
testimony.
their throats. And for the more easy effecting thereof, the Spa nish
Embass^dor is, and has been for many years their ende^red friend, and has
entertained William O Conner, and Patrick Car an Irish Priest who was taken in
Arms against this Common wealth, and was app^i^ted their Captain General: and
also many other Priests and J^ suites, who do continually plot the carrying on
the intended Massacre, and do contrive from time to time the carrying on of
whatsoever may tend thereunto: as when the two Irish Traitors were in the
To^er, the Engines that were made for their escape, was contrived at the
Spanish Ambassadors house; and there they were sometime secured till the search
was over.

And when the Apprentices did make a ^umult in the City upon the Sabbath day at
night, then was his Gate open all night, and men in Arms passed in and out; and
diverse in Scarlet cloaks come (...) guire and Mac Mahone.
to those of them that were put into Newgate, and afterward boasted that the
Spanish Ambassador got them released: which shows what treacherous men were in
the old Parliament, that would thus gratify the peoples sworn enemies, and
hold continual familiarity with th(...); for Car has boasted, that he could
daily speak with them at the Parliamen^ door. And when Garret Dillon another
Irish Priest was appoin^ed to dispose of the Arms, and Ammunition which the
King of Sp^i^ had sent ov^r to the Catholics in England and Ireland, in the
year 1640 he was secured at the Spanish Ambassadors house, and from thence sent
out to the Kings Army, where he was s^ain. Therefore let all un^erstanding
Protestanis judge, whether he be fit to have liberty of residence within the
City of London or no? And for many in the old Parliament* who carried on the
same design, as may appear by their familiarity with the sworn enemies of the
Commonwealth; Which will be apparently proved.
and by their releasing of them frequently, and protecting of them to go
between the King and his Queen all the time of the Wars; and when they were
app^ehended at any time, did suffer them to escape, and punished the
discoveres; and from time to time have used all their art and power to stifle
all intelligence, and destroy all faithful intelligencers, and protecte^ S^ies
and Agents for the King, to fire the City of London: and suffered above six
score thousand pounds worth of Malignants goods to be conveyed away, to
preserve it from the fire when the City was to be burned: and likewise suffered
threescore thousand pounds to be conveyed to the King, which was in the hands
of a Popish Treasurer: and also concealed a List of about 60 considerable
persons in the City, who with their confederates, did constantly contribute to
the Kings Army considerable sums of money; All which with many other things,
does make it clearly appear, that they were resolved to uphold the wars between
the King and Parliament, until the Protestants were so destroyed that the
Papists might have their wills of both; And I hope by this time all the
rational part of our bret^ren the Cavaliers, and also all under all diff^rent
forms whatsoever, are clearly convinced of their error, in taking up Arms for
the Pope instead of a King; And therefore I do humbly entreat them, as they do
tender their own lives, liberties, estates, postereties, the good of their
Native Country and the Protestant Religion that they do never offer to stir
upon any pretense whatsoever, to t^k^ up Arms against the higher powers; for if
they do, they will but destroy themselves, and make the wound of the Nation the
deeper. And I am confident, that there were thousands of them if they had known
of the Papists ^esign, they would as soon have torn their own flesh off their
bones, as ever have taken up Arms against their Country; And truly I am sorry
for those that have a hand in this cursed design, which is in part discovered,
and for those of them that are undiscovered, if they shall out of conscience
come in and submit, and make discovery of what they do know. I dare engage my
life that a hair of their head^ shall not perish.

But some may Query why I do write in this manner? My answer is:

That for almost 10. years after my return from Ireland, my employment was as
little, as my Estate: so that I had nothing to hinder me from observing the
current of the times; amongst which I could not but take notice of the policy
of the Priests, Jesuits, and all the popish faction, and there accomplices in
playing their game on this manner. So long as the people are oppressed, they
will be discontented: and so long as they are disconteuted, they will fall into
Divisions, and so long as they are divided, the easier destroyed. And to this
end was the reins cast upon the neck of all corrupt Committee men to cheat by
thousands, and hundreds of thousands, and then hire Clarks to Copy out their
Books, to cover over their cheating, but these were of the better sort of them;
for they had some fear in them: but the rest of them has gone on with as
little fear as they had honesty. And so for ^ur corrupt Though many of them
will be proved faulty.
Treasurers, which of them has ever been called to account? And so for our
unjust Judges who have judged for a Reward, are they not yet unquestioned? And
for our Long-winded Lawyers, who can run races of 7. 10. 20. nay 40. or 50.
years long; and make the people dance after their long tayls, until they were
run so quite out of breath, that they had not a groat left in their purse^, ^^d
many of them gone with sorrow to their graves; but I hope to see God making
inqu^sition after the blood of these poor souls, which were so mercilesly
murdered. And for the corrupt Members of the first House, how did they sit
hacking and hewing at the two legs upon which this Common wealth did stand? I
do mean Men and Money; For Men, how have they been betrayed both by Sea and
Land? And how have they been discouraged some of them, by keeping back their
just and dearly earned wages? and others by long attendance, to receive
considerable sums which were And yet has obtained nothing.
by them disb^rsed, until some had well high perished, if not altogether, and
many of them languish in prison, while unworthy (...)lets can have good rewards
for there pretended good services: though indeed, they deserved to have their
heads taken ^ff for their unfaithfulness. And for Money, how has it been
consumed not only by the Monsters formerly mentioned, and many more of the like
nature; but I do believe it will be proved, that some of the Members has sent
out of the Land diverse millions at several times, besides the vast Estates that
some of them has scrued into their own hands by unjust practices; but to add
t(...) this, when I do consider the frequent recourse that the Irish Priests
and Jesuits had to some of them; and how frequently the Priests, Jesuits and
Irish bloody Rebbels were released from time to time, though their crimes were
never so heinous; and knowing how they boasted of their great friends that they
had in the House and Council, by which they were extremely encouraged; and upon
which their confidence was builded of carrying on of their cursed design of the
bloody Massacre, and clearly ^escerning that they had more friends there than
the Commonwealth had; for when they attempted to make a discovery of it, they
were betrayed into their hands; I could not but conclude, that the desolation
of the everlasting Parliament, was one of the greatest mercies that ever this
Nation received from God this many years; for if they had sitten a little
longer in all probability, they had accomplished their desires: which if they
had accomplished, then all mercies which God had ^ouchsafed us since these
troubles, had been drowned in a Sea of b(...)

And now my Lord, I beseech you consider how many parties has God overthrown
since these troubles fell upon us, as the Bishops, the corrupt House of Lords,
the late oppressing King and his potent party; yet notwithstanding all this
mighty work of God, our everlasting Parliament would not learn righteousness,
but went on in the same oppressing courses, if not greater, until they by
walking in the same paths with their Predicessors, come to the same shameful
downfall which befell them; for did not God cause their Sun to set at noon day:
and did not they go out like the snuff of a candle, and have left a foul stink
behind them? And how contemptible has God made them in the eyes of the people?
and although the action was so unheard of, and so contrary to the letter of the
Law; yet I did never hear one so much as mutter against it; for the people were
sensible of their pe^^idiousness in breaking of their trust, by neglecting to
seek the public good of the Nation, and seeking of their own particular
advancement, by unjust practices and bribery, and acting of several Treasons
against the Nation: as endeavoring to cut your Highness, and our Army, by
assisting of the late King, and endeavoring the destruction of this City, with
many other horrid villainies, (...)e releasing of the Priests and Jesuits, and
many bloody Irish Rebels: the countenancing of the sworn enemies of the Nation,
and discountenancing of the most cordial friends thereof, even to the
destruction of some of them; their ^^ocking to Goldsmiths Hall by 5, 8. or 10
at a time, to help delinquents to come of (...) an easy rate, which to me, did
then speak thus much, that they would have their Estates preserved, that so
they might be still able to carry on their wicked and hellish design against
this Nation.

But my Lord, this is that which does stick upon the spirits of the people,
that these men were never questioned for all their villainies committed by them,
that so there might have been a difference between the precious and the vild:
that those few that were found faithful amongst them might have been had in
singular honor; for God had a small handful amongst them of faithful ones, who
did spend their spirits to keep the Common w^al^h from u^ter desolation, and
did precu^e some good things for their Country: which I think did exceed all
that went before them.

But my Lord, I know not what to say to these things more than this, that God
does suffer it to be so that the Scriptures might be fulfilled, in saying, Let
God be tr^e and all men liars; and has not the Spirit told us, That because
Justice is not speedily executed (...) an evil work, the hearts of the s^us of
men are set in them to do evil, and that continually; for if Justice had been
executed upon Wi iam O Couner and his accomplices, all the villainies that were
committed by our perfidions Parliament, Committes and others, ha been
preve(...)ed: and if Justice (...) been done upon them, then the enemies du^st
not have contiived this destinction against you, and this Nation.

And I beseech you, give me leave by the way, to tell you, that it is
impossible to reconcile Christ and Antichrist together, and that you cannot
with safety put S^^pents in your b^som, and not be destroyed by them, until
their stings be pluck^ out; For can you remove that enmity which God has put
between the seed of the woman, and the seed of the Serpent: then you may with
safety close with them; but if you cannot, as I am sure you cannot, for it is
not in the power of men and Angels to do it: then take heed what you do; for if
you have any further to do with them it will be your destruction. Oh I beseech
you, call to mind the great and unparralel'd mercies which God has vouchiased
to you in England, Ireland and Scotland! for I dare say, you dare not think,
that you did atchieve them by your own strength or policy, or by the power of
your own arm; and if not, than it must need be by the power of the Lamb: and if
so, than certainly he has merited something at your hands by it; Therefore, why
do you so evi^ly requite him, and suffer all those mercies to be burie^ in
oblivion? Do you think that he did exalt you to the throne, for you to leave
him still sitting upon the Dunghi^? and suff(...) h^^ Members, and the friends
of the Commonwealth, to be still ^rampled upon, and destroyed by unjust
Judges, and Antichristion Lawyers, and such base varlets as dare without ground
imprison ^en at their pleasure, and constrain others to confine themselves to
their own houses, to the utter undoing of them, and their families, choosing
that rather than to be destroyed by mercyless blood-sucking J^ylors in stinking
prisons.

My Lord, I beseech you remember that you are sworn to maintain the Law; and I
am sure that all the juggling Antichristan Lawyers in England, are not able to
produce any Law for these things: neither can there be any Law made to destroy
the people, seeing that the safety of the people is above all Law: And now I
beseech you in the Bowels of Jesus Christ, not to suffer this unspeakable
deliverance, which does bring in the bowels of it all our former mercies; for
if the enemy had now prevailed, all the former mercies had been destroyed as if
they had never been^ Oh let it not be passed over as all the former has been!
but let it awaken you to works of justice and mercy, and to break off your sins
by repentance, and your iniquities by showing merey to the p^or, for God has
showed thee what is good; na^ely, to do justice, to love mercy, and to walk
humble with thy G^d. And my Lord, you have born the name of a religious man for
many years; and the Apostle James does tell us, that pure Religion, and (...)
filed before God and the Father, is to visit the fatherless and the window in
their adversity, and to keep our selves unspotted from the world. Now if God be
pleased to give this mercy such a setting on upon your heart, by the power of
his eternal Spirit, that it does awaken thee to hearken to the voice of the
Lord, then thou shall stand in despite of men and devils; but if thou do
refuse to hearken unto the word of the Lord, and walk perversely toward thy
God: I do then tell thee from the mind of God in Scriptures, that thou shall
fall and not stand, though all the Nations of the Earth should combine together
to prevent it; For I am sure that all the N^^ions of the earth are not able to
rescue one man out of the ^ands of Jesus Christ, when he shall seize upon him
to call him to an account for his perfidious dealing with him; Therefore be
wise O Princes and l^arned, O Rulers of the earth: Kiss the Son least he be
angry with you, and you perish in the mid way; For the Stone which is cut out
of the Mountain without hands shall break down all Powers, and shall be exalted
above the top of all Mountains. And I beseech you all consider, that God is
about his overturning work, and he will overturn, and overturn until the
Government be put into Christ's hands, and then we shall have justice; for the
Prophet says that he is just: We have had many overturns, but there is a
greater behind then any of the former; and I hope it will be but the overthrow
of all the corrupt powers of the Nation, with the overthrow of the corrupt
practice of the Law also. Man was happy so long as he acted the will of God;
but when he sell to acting of his own will, he made himself and ^ost^^^^ity
miserable. And I cannot but admire at men, that think to make themselves happy
by seeking of their own wills: Oh! when I do consider the actings of many of
the Magistrates of this Nation, who are men of great Estates, and yet do daily
break down the hedge of the Law, which God has set about them to preserve them,
and their Estates from the Sons of violence. I say, when I do consider their
frequent practice therein, it does make me tr^mble to think of the fearful
event which might ensue, if others should take example by them; therefore I do
earnestly beseech them all both for their own good, and the good of the whole
Nation, that they do now begin to act in the will of God; for in so doing, they
shall be blamless both in the eyes of God and man; for I am sure that man can
rever be happy, until he does return into that co^^ition wherein be was first
happy; and when our wills are bound up wholly in the will of our God, then all
contro^^^sie cease, between the Creator and his creatures, without which we
cannot be happy. And truly, when the new overturn shall come, I think the
wisest man alive cannot say what party shall be undermost. but this I am
confident of, that Christ will be uppermost; for Antichrist has had his day,
and the Sun thereof is a setting, and the day of Christ is a dawning; therefore
let all the Agents of Antichrist know, that they will suddenly know that all
their labor is in vain, although they have dug deep to hide their Council,
from the Lord, yea even to the bottom of Hell it self; yet let them know that
God is there, and that nothing can he hid from his All-seeing eye: and the woe
that God has denounced against them, shall assuredly overtake them speedily:
and I cannot but wonder at their blindness that they do not see the hand of the
Lord stretched forth against them, and how he has made good his promise, that
no weapon formed against him shall prosper; for if it could, certainly we had
been swallowed up long since. Oh that this Nation from the highest to the
lowest would hearken what this speaking providence of late years does say! and
that they would have their ey^ in their heads, to see how by a mighty and an
out stretched arm he has wrought salvation to his people, both in England,
Ireland and Scotland! Could any hand but the hand of Jehovah have done it? When
they had 20. nay, I am confident they had 40. for one; and yet God has carried
it against them, notwithstanding all the falsness of those ^at seemed to stand
for us. What treachery and perfideousness has, and may be discovered in some
that sat at the Helm?

Is the Popes Emissaries, would seriously consider the mighty wonders that God
has wrought since these troubles began, it would make them cease to endanger
themselves, and to perplex us; for though they have an excellent faculty in
fomenting, and continuing divisions amongst us: yet I must tell them, that they
do begin their work at the wrong end, for their divisions reaches but to the
creature: and so long as the Creator is not divided, the Trinity is still in
unity; for the Father is not against the Son, nor the Son against the Spirit,
nor the Spirit against the Father: but they are all one, and do set themselves
to carry on one design, which is to advance the Son; therefore until they can
work a devision in the Deity, it is impossible that they should ever
accomplish their design, and Iam sure God can never be divided in himself and
I do believe that a great part of them are convinced of it, and consequently of
the impossibility of their prevailing against the Members of Christ, but they
must show of what house they do come of, for they are like to their Father the
Devil, who knows he cannot prevail, yet he will do as much mischief as he
can, for he knows his time is short, and therefore he rages, and would not
have this Nation have a being, neither in England nor Ireland, and therefore
has he stirred up nustruments of cruel^y to raise such merciless taxes in
Ireland, as I think the like was never known in the world, but they that have
eyes to ^ee may see, that God is a consuming of Antichrist with the spirit of
his outh, and will shortly abolish him utterly with the brightness of his
coming. Therefore my c^unsell to all the Governors and Magistrates of this
Nation, is to close hands with Christ, in doing the will of the Father, for he
says, If he seeks his own will, his judgment is not just, how then can
they think that they do justice whilst they do seek their own wills, but let
them take heed for Christ will prevail, and he will have the will and the Law
of his Father established; therefore I beseech you close with him in it, for
all power in Heaven and Earth is committed into his hands, and he will prove a
burdensome stone to crush in pieces all those that shall be found to oppose
him, for he will make all his enemies his Footstool.

I could wish that the Governors of the City of London had in time thought of
these things, and then some of them would not have acted as they have done, in
binding over to the Sessions and good behaviors, and afterward commit him to
prison, that did discover to him the design of the Irish Priests and Jesuits,
to burn the City, and to massacre the people thereof; I think that God has
bereaved them the use of common reason, for could they think to escape any
better then other men, but there was more in it then I will commit to public
view at this time, yet I hope God will stir up the Inhabitants of this City to
importune our Grandees not to suffer those to have Government in this City, who
have brought off and acquitted the Plotter of the most dedesperate bloody
design that ever was set on foot in the world, and stiffled the treachery of a
dangerous Enemy of this Commonwealth, and have punished those that did discover
them: My Lord, I do once again entreat you, as you tender your own safety to
take heed of ^^attere^s, who cry peace and safety, even when that destruction
which they have plotted is ready to seize upon you, to the destruction both of
your person, this City and the whole Commonwealth; but blessed be the God of
m^rcies, that has carried you on to so deep a discovery of their damnable
design (and blessed be his name for ever) for regiving us all his former
mercies an^ deliveranci^s, for(...) the womb of this mercy were all his
fo(...) merc^es (...)pped up: But my Lord you are not yet come to the bottom^
of it; therefore I bese^ch you do not think that the danger is p^st, and
the^^upon grow secure, but rather streng^hen vour Guards, and your Army also
for I am confident that their des(...) does still go on, and I (...) I am able
to show unde^iable reasons for it; but I will ^^^bea^e to do it publicly, the
great God of Heaven and Earth (...) his mercy such a seuing on upon your
spirit, that it may awaken you, and make you to see wherein you have de^t
unfaithfully with your God, in not performing those engagements and ovenants
which you have made unto him in the time of your distress, can you think that
he has given you so many victor(...) and deliverances both in the field, and
upon your sick bed, and that he does expect no returns from you again: And
truly my Lord until you do establish Justice and mercy in this Not on, I date
say that you have done nothing for Go(...), no nor for your Country, For God
has showed thee Oh max what is good, and what he req(...)h of thee, and if we
will believe either the New or the (...). Testament. Religion does consist in
actions of this nature, and (...) in preaching, Heating, Reading, and Praying,
though these are not to be neglected; nay I could wish that they were ^uch more
used, notwithstanding our Savior calls verbal pra(...) bu^ ba^ling; and for
this Commonwealth. I beseech you consider what benefit we are like to receive
by all that which is done. whilst you receive into your bosom those that have
all along endeavored to dest^oy both you and this Commonwealth to the
desperate hazzarding of both, and so long as you do suffer our estates and
liv^es als(...)o lie at the mercy of merciless Lawyers and Judges, who (...)
Knights of the Post ^o ^requently in the Courts, and that bon^s of considerable
sums may be forged, and then proved by false ^aths. Oh my Lord it would make
you tr^mble, if you did know but the o^^ half of the villa(...)es of th^s
kind, how can any man's life or estate be in safety, so long as these are
suffered, I am sure that our Co(...)nsellors of the Law can show no Law for
these things, neither can they show any Law for keeping a widow in their
Courts, which fued for 80. l. until they have gotten above 200, l. in Fees,
and yet the money unrecovered, truly my soul can not but mourn for these
things, and also to think of the woeful misery which will assuredly fall upon
that Generation of men, for the woe was denounced by God himself, for binding
heavy burdens, and laying them upon other men's shoulders, and that struck that
has been so many hundredth years in coming, must needs be dreadful when it
comes. My Lord, Solomon was a wise man, and he could see nothing in any thing
under the Sun but va^ity and vexation, and he says, that he that comes after
him shall do nothing but what he has done before him, and certainly the more
our hearts are let forth after any thing under the Sun, the further we shall be
from being satisfied therewith, but experience tells me, that God can
satisfy the soul to the full without any abundance of outward things, and
that it is greater riches to enjoy him without carnal greatness or honor in
the world, then it can be to enjoy more of them then our hearts can desire
without him, For what does it advantage a man to win the whole world, and loose
his own soul Every building that is not founded upon a Rock shall fall, and I
know no Rock of stability, but the Rock of ages, therefore if you mean to stand
make God your stability by establishing Justice and Righteousness, and M(...)y
in this Nation, make Justice the Foundation, and Mercy the corner stone, and
then your building shall stand, and you shall have the praise and h^nour of a
wise Builder, and give me leave with Jethro, to say that the thing which thou
do is not good, the work is too great for you, and your Cou^^ell, It will
weary out both you and the people therefore I beseech you let us have a
Committee to examine, and, redress the grievances of the Nation, and leave the
weighty matters to you, and your Counsel, of such men as we shall (...), and
such as there can be no exception against, and then you shall see all the
secret enemies of your person and this Nation, discover the debts of the Nation
p(...), the minds of the people qu^eted and their hearts united together to the
great astonis^ment of all Christendom, and you shall have such a bank of
treasure, and public revenue, as shall make all the enemies of this Nation
afraid ever to attempt any thing against it, for what does or has in former
ages encouraged the Enemy, but our divisions, and the treacherous plo^s of the
popish Emisaries: therefore I think it unpossible for England to be in ^afety,
until they be transplanted, for are they not sworn to hazard lives, and all
that is dear to them to destroy those which they call Heretics; and has not
this Nation in past ages sound it to be their constant endeavor, and France
can likewise manifest their unsatiable thirst which they have after Protestant
blood, it is time for thee O Lord to work, for men have destroyed thy Law, and
unstead thereof has brought in a (...) Antichristiall Jugell which destroys
the people, only to enrich themselves. My Lord, what would you have of this
Nation? if Honor, then you shall have as much as you can stand under, it
Wealth, then you shall have more then you can tell what to do withal. only
gratify this Nation in this one thing of justice, and they will serve you for
ever, and that with fredome and checifulresse, you will not need to con^^raine
them, for they will be more careful of you then of their own lives, then will
the prayers of the poor continually ascend unto the Thion^ of (...), until as
I may speak with holy R^^^r^rce that they have surp^^ed the Almighty ^n your
behalf. And my Lord if you w(...) grant us this Committee, and give them full
power to p^oc^ed according to the righteous Law of God, an(...) of th(...)
Nation, then I will engage my life to pay all the Public Faith B(...) of the
Nation, with one moyetie of what w^ll be brought in by them, a(...)r the
discoverer has had his fifth part, and the other ^^oyiety shall go in to the
public Treasury to pay the Army, and to prevent the selling of the prise of
the poor S^^ld ers blood for naught, that so in time the taxes may be taken
off, only we shall desire liberty to attend the Committies, with liberty to
speak on behalf of the Commonwealth, and that you do afford us a speedy and
an effectual assistance, to remove any upon Just Cause, and to put in others
that shall be Judged faithful in their rooms, and that any three or more of
them to take any examination, and five or more of them to Judge any matter,
only leaving the weighty matters to be judged by you and your Council; this
you will quickly find will give such content to all sorts of people, that
there will not long be need of an Army in England, and after that, send an
Army where you please, only take the Word for your rule, and you shall see such
a presence of the Almighty going along with them, that they shall not meet with
any great opposition; but my Lord, if you shall refuse to hearken to the counsel
of thy God, then I could wish that God would provide me a place in the
wilderness, and feed me by a Raven as he did the Prophet, that so I might not
see the wof^l desol^tion that God will bring upon you, and your family, and the
misery which is likely will come upon this Nation; yet I am confident that God
will find out a way to lay you aside, and yet preserve his people, for he
has a people in this nation which he will not sell for naught: I beseech you
consider, what is it that makes any Action lawful or unlawful? is it not
Gods willing, or nulling of it? if so, then (I hope) you will say to us as Pope
Elutherius said to (...)lutius King of Britain, when he wrote to him to send
him the Imperial Laws to govern Britain by, he wrote this answer, The Roman
Emperial Laws were made by men, and might be excepted against: But says he. I
have sent you the Old and New Testament, out of which you may gather sufficient
Laws to govern by: And (I hope) that none in this Nation dares to be so
blasphemous, as to say, that there may be found out a juster or a more
righteous rule to walk by than that, if so, then what have we any longer to
do with that Antichristian Juggle, which has destroyed so many thousands of
this nation: but let Christ be our King and our Lawgiver, Oh! that I did know
what Argument to use that might prevail with you herein! For, I am ^ssured,
that so great will be the happiness that will come to this nation by it, that
for the obtaining of it, I could wish, that it were written with my heart
blood, rather than it should not be obtained. For the Spirit says, justice
and righteousness exal^eth a nation, and the fruit thereof shall be peace, and
I am confident, that if you had more wisdom than Solomon, and could speak with
the tongue of Angels, you shall never reconcile this Nation without justice; for
I do see that God has set it upon the spirits of the people of this Nation to
have Christ exalted by establishing justice: My Lord, you have strong guards
about you, and they are no stronger then need requires, and I could wish they
were stronger, yet my Lord remember, that except the Lord does keep the City,
the watchman waketh (...): Now my Lord, if justice be an Attribute of God,
G(...) (...) be divided, if injustice be found with you, assure y(...) that
God is not present with y^^, and if any thing or per(...) can stand without
God, judgye. I beseech you consider wh(...)s the downfall of your predecessor,
and do you think that God is changeable? would he destroy a King for the
injustice (...) was acted under him, and will he not destroy you for (...) far
greater injustice, especially considering that it is committed against far
greater light, and stronger engagements, and more public promises made before
God and man? I beseech you remember, that all that have fallen before you, when
they came once to live in the hatr^^ of the people, they were short (...), and
how you do stand in the hearts of the people, I will not gratify your and the
Commonwealth^ enemies, so much as to commit it to public view; but I must tell
you, that those that have your ears at command, and stops them from your
friends, those with the Gentlemen of the long robe, and others, with a
religious cloak upon their backs to cover their knaverie with all, will very
shortly render you far more odiou^ in the peoples eyes than ever were any of
those that fell before you. My Lord, it is not the Governor that the people
kicketh against, but the manner of governing; for if the people be governed
justly and righteously, they care not whether it be by OLIVER, Lord Protector,
or by a CHARLES, by the Grace of God, or Parliament: but if they cannot have it
from neither ofthem, then they will cease from them all, and lift up their eyes
to the Hills from whence their help comes, and give the God of Justice no rest
until the Government be put into the hands of Christ; therefore I beseech you
consider what you do, lest you be found a Fighter against him; for though God
has given you many victories, yet my life for it, he will not give you the
victory over his Son, but will exa^^ him in despite of a(...) the Kings,
Emperors, and Protectors in the world, and will suddenly call them all to a
strict account for their oppressing of his members; therefore remember what God
has promised, that if you(...) (...)ays please him, he will ma^e your enemies
at peace with thee, therefore take no care to please this party, nor that
party, but let thy care be to please thy God, by doing of justice and she wing
mercy to the poor, and then never heed what this man says, or what other men
say, for it is not the sayings of men, but the counsel of the Lord that must
stand; therefore take heed of making Christ thy enemy by quarrelling aganist his
members, for he takes any thing don't to them as done to himself: And my Lord,
I beseech you consider, that though a Guard is good to preserve you against a
(...)sible enemy, yet remember, that when that impartial ^e^j^^nt Death sh^^
come to arrest thee, I tell thee it is not an Army no^ Guard, nor Life, guard
that can keep him out, and then to whom will thou she for help? The creature
cannot help thee, and if thou shall think to go^ God, thy conssience cannot but
tell thee, that thou have not rendered to God according to what thou have
received from h(...); or he has done thee many favors, and such as made the
whole earth ring of them; but thy conscience and all this ^ation will witness
against thee, that thou have done nothing for him until thou have freed the
nation from the tyranny of the Gentlemen of the long Robe, notwithstanding that
God calls for it, his people has prayed and s^ught it at thy hands both by
writing and by word of m^uth: Oh my Lor(...)* ^b^^eech you consider what a
cloud of witnesses w^l come in against you, consider i^, (I say) before it be
too late; for ^ss^redly, if you will not do that work for which he has brought
thee unto this place, ^ssuredly he will suddenly lay thee ^side; I beseech you
consider that God has put power into your hands to establish I ^stice and
righteousness in this nation, and if there be a principle within you why is it
not don, I do profess it makes me to tremble to think how unanswerable it is,
both before God and man. And the late King did think himself, as far from being
questioned by man, as you can, yet you see what is become of him. I beseech you
remember that it is God that ordreth the spirits of men, it is he that subdueth
the hears of the people unto Kings and Governors, and it is he that raises the
spirits of the people against them when they do not govern* in and for the
Lord; and I do not know any ty or rule in all the Scriptures, no not in the
nearest relations that requires obedience, but in the Lord, then if
magistrates and governors will cast aside the will and law of God, and act in and
for their own wills, and by the corrupt Antichristian laws which were divised by
covetous men, with the help of the Devil, to enrich themselves by the ruin of
many thousand families, widows, and fatherless; I say if they do act, and
command, and govern in their own wills and by a Law which is so directly
opposi^e to the will and law of God, than no wonder though there be so much
murmurring and complaining in our streets, so much plotting and contriving the
ruin and destruction of our governors, for the thing is of God, though the evil
and bloody intention in them is from the devil and their own lusts, because
they cannot set up Antichrist and establish iniquity and all ungodliness by a
law, that so they might live according to their own lusts; this I say is of the
devil, yet I say the thing is of god, and that for most righteous ends, to make
governors afraid to act in their own wills, and by corrupt Antichristian laws;
for has not god promised that if our ways pleases him he will make our enemies
at peace with us; then my lord, what conclusion can be drawn, when not only our
enemies but our friends are at variance with us, and have sought our
destructions? the Lord said to one, if thou do well, shall thou not be
excepted? yes, thou shall be excepted with god, and excepted with man; then my
lord, who can hurt thee? who will plot any evil against the? nay, will not all
bless thee, and bless god for thee that ever he brought such a man to rule over
us? but my Lord, if thou do evil, sin lies at thy door, and certainly if
sin once lie there, Judgment will not be long absent, I mean judgment (...)h a
witness, for it is a Judgment to have the people ready to rebel and to rise up
against thee, but when it comes with a witness, it will take effect to the
sweeping of thee and thine off from the land of the living, therefore my Lord,
I beseech thee, lay it to heart; what will neither real mercies bestowed upon
thee nor judgments threatened and shaken over thee, awake thee, though timely
discovered to preserve thee? whereby god shows thee how he could have cut
thee off, but this he does to make further trial of thee, to see if thou will
be awakened and driven out of thy own will, to Act in the will and Law of thy god
that so he might be a shield and a buckler unto thee, and unite the hearts of
the people unto thee: Oh my Lord' I beseech the return to thy god and be safe,
make him thy stability by establishing justice, judgment, and righteousness in
this Nation: Oh! that thou woludst thus try God, and once in thy life keep a
true fast by breaking the bands of wickedness, by taking off every burden, and
letting the oppressed go free: Oh' I say, that thou would thus try god, and
see if he will not open the windows of heaven, and power down abundantly
blessings of all sorts, both upon thee and thine, and this whole nation, then
will the people bless thee, and when ever they do see thy face, they will make
the heavens to ring with their acclamations and strong cries, which they will
send up to heaven for thee, it will make the hearts of the widows and fatherless
to si^g in them for joy, I beseech you consider of the greatness of the good
which will come by it, for it will discover much more evil than I have, or is fit
to mention in a public way, it will procure far greater good to this nation
then my pen is able to express, for it will do the greatest part of your work to
your hands, and it will be done on free-cost, for they will act without any
sallery, so that the work will be done without any trouble to you, or charge to
the people, Oh, how will this unite the hearts of the people unto you! and it
will remove your desperate enemies far from you, which now are in your bosom. I
beseech you be no longer deluded by the Lawyers, to think that they will
regulate the Law, and see justice done to the oppressed of the nation, for is
it not their trade to oppress by their delatory proceedings, and putting fair
glosses upon foul causes, making good seem to be evil, and evil seem to be
good? whereby they do bring more detriment to the nation than all the cheaters,
pick-pockets, Highway-robbers, or all the charge of the whole Army; is it
possible that any which do live by the corrupt practice of the Law, should see
the evil thereof, so long as the gain thereof is as a gift, which the Spirit
says does blind the eyes of the wife? and these are wise men, they are wise to
do evil, but to do good they have no heart, I speak for the generality of them,
I include not all, for I do know a few, and but very few of them of whom I have
better hopes, but it i^ an easier work to make ten (...) Laws out of the
Scriptures, than to reform the old, which is so full frought with corrupt
juggles and deceitful tricks to make one shut beget ten others; but ^ethinks I
do see the lawyers, the traitors and the tyrants. flo^king about my Lord, (...)
him, that these men cannot de^ermin things according to J(...)ce, because they
are ignorant of the Law; to which (...) answer, that they are men that are very
well instructed in the Law of right(...)usness, which is the Law that must do us
and ^hi Nation good, my Lord, I beseech you observe those that are most
^olici^ous against i^, and you shall see them discovered to be no friends to
(...), nor to this Commonwealth; and now my dear countryme^ all, as I ^ave
earnestly entreated some of you never to stir (...) by way of hostility, for
truly they do destroy themselves and families, and endanger the whole
N(...)ion, for the sworn enemies thereof have made themselves as strong as
possible they can waiting an opportunity to destroy us all; therefore it
b(...)veth every man to have his eye about them, and to watch the movings or
these vipers, who do seek to eat out the belly of their mother, and so I do as
earnestly entreat you all to stir from every several County and City by
impo^^unate pe^itions to move the Protector to grant us this committee, and
then we shall see more good done in one quarter of a year, then ev^^ all the
Lawyers did since they were first created: And I beseech you give him no rest,
for I know that his melting heart cannot deny nor with hold so great a good
from this nation, for he cannot but see that it is a thing most acceptable,
both to God and man. And now a word to the poor scatteced Saints, who goes
sighing and mourning after their God, and thirsting after a more f(...)ll
^evelation and manifestation of the unchangeable love of the father unto or in
them, I do say to these, life up your heads, f^r your r^d^mption draws near,
the Lord whom you seek w^l come suddai^ly into h^^ Temple: Christ is even at
the doors to make himself glorious in his Saints, and admired in them that
believe, and no wonder though they do admire their God, to think that
notwithstanding all their wretched sinful courses, whereby they have provoked
God to his fa^^, and done as much as in them ^y to ungod him; yet not
^ithstanding, his love is continued still unto us, and all that he does to us,
either for matter of prosperity, or adversi^y, all is out of his love to win^s
back again unto himself though he be enforced sometimes to strip us of all our
lovers, that so we may at the last, he arken to the voice of our first love,
and then when he has allured us to hearken to him, and that he has spoken
comfortable unto us, he then proceeds to batter and break us all to pieces in
our parts, nay and in our graces also and makes us to know that we do not only
stand in need of the grace of God, but even of the god of grace, to bind us
up, and to cure us of all our incurable diseases; as pride, hardness of heart,
and unbelief; for it requires no less power to work faith in an unbelieving
soul, then it did to raise Christ from the dead; and if once we have found god
to be a faith working god, what cannot that soul trust god with? he can trust
him with all his graces and his righteousness, and be content to seek a
righteosness in him, who is the Lord our righteousness; and then when he leveth
in us, we shall act righteously, and Justly: And yet not we but the grace of
god in us, or rather the god of grace in us, these has fellowship both with the
father, and with the son. And they do go to the father, in the same unction
with the son, and can say, father, we know that thou hear us always; to
these I speak desiring to stir up their pure minds to be careful that when the
father draws them, they do run unto him, and by his own power surprise him,
and let him not go til he does bless this nation with the establishing of
justice, Judgment, and Righteousness, hold him fast I say and press him to it,
for god cannot refuse to grant his own desires, which he has stird up in us by
his spirit, for Father, Son, and Spirit are one, and all of one mind, and
desires in us of god, nothin^ but what is the mind of god, both Father and
Son, then why should we doubt but that Christ is at the very doors, for how
strongly does the spirit cry in his poor despised ones? and Christ says, when
the son of man comes shall he find faith on the earth, truly there is almost
none that can believe that Christ is so near his coming as he is, but do we not
s^e almost, all the scripture fufilled, which are to be fulfilled before his
coming, as the great abounding of in^quity and the like Oh! let us not doubt
but believe, for if we can believe, all things are possible, and truly I am
confident that for this work I shall stir up all the corrupt Lawyers, the
Papists, Priests, and Jesuits, and all the Traitors and Tyrants of this nation
to combine together to destroy me, and then will pursue me even as so many
eagles purfueth a partridg upon the mountains, but my god who is my father and
husband, can preserve me from them all, and receive me as he did the dove into
the Ark with the olive branch in her mouth; but whether he will or not, yet let
them know that I fear them not in the least, for the worst hurt they can do to
me is to break in pieces this vail of fl(...)sh which keeps me absent from my
God, but I am sure so long as my father has any work for me to do, they shall
have no power over me, and when I have finished his work, I shall be ready to
surrender that life which I have carried in my hands these five years, ready to
resign it into the hands of whom soever he shall ^end for it; for then I shall
enjoy the full fruition of that which he has given me but an earnest of; and
then I shall remain with him for ever, and see him as he is, Christ was obedient
to the will of the father even unto death, and therefore sin, hell* and death
were to weak to hold him, but was by the eternal spirit raised unto glory, and
he has given the same glory unto his members, and if thou will imm^^ate our
head, in doing the will of the Father, by establishing justice and mercy, then
all the bands of wickedness and snares of death wherewith thy f^^ttring enemies
have encompassed thee withal, whereby ^^ine ears are stopped from hea^ing the
cries of the poor, I say they shall all be broken, and be too weak to hold
thee, and thou shall be ^a^sed to a higher degree of glory then ever any mere
man that went before thee; for assure^ly the neighbor nations d(...) b^gin to
tremble at thee already, and if God shall once appear ^n England in justice,
judgment, and mercy, the I cell thee, they shall all fall before thee, and the
good that shall come to this nation, by Justice, will make all the commons of
other nations rather invite thee then oppose thee. Oh! therefore, do the will of
thy God, be faithful in a little, for what thou have yet is very little, to
what thou shall have, for he will make thee ruler over much, and over and above
thou shall enter into thy masters joy, which is greater happiness and treasure
then to possess the whole earth, My Lord, Christ in the 5 of John makes it a
thing of impossibility for us to believe while we receive honor one of onother,
and seek not the honor that comes of God only, and plentiful experience does
tell me, that when we do believe that God can and will give us and cast upon us
far greater honor for doing of his will, then all the great Monarks of the
earth can give us; then we will scorn to step forth to the creature for any
addition, for what is all the honor that all the great ones of the earth can
bestow upon thee? it is but titulary, and a mere shadow as nothing and ends
in trouble and horror; then much more that which thou did receive from thy
inferiors, and some of them did stand in more need of thy protection to keep
them from Justice, then thou did of that honor which they did put upon thee,
for thou wast much more honorable before, for assuredly they have given the
but a mere bubble. But now my Lord, I beseech you be awaked to act in the will
of thy God, and thou can not want true and lasting honor, which shall remain
with thee, and thy name shall be honorable to the ends of the earth, when thou
art dead and gone; the work which God has been about these many years past, is
to draw all good into himself, and to leave the creature empty, that so we may
see that all men, even the best of men are a mere lie, for we can no sooner
receive any good by the creature, but presently we cry out, good master!
whereas he tells us, that there is none good but God, for all good comes
from him, and is but handed to us by the creature, as the water through the
conduit- pipe, and yet we do rob God of his honor by ascribing that to the
creature which is only due to the Creator, but when God has taught us to cease
from man and to make God to be all in all, by ascribing the glory of all the
good we do receive unto God, who is the fountain of all good, then I doubt not
but God will recover many of those eminent professors of religion, who have by
their corrupt covetous and carnal actings, brought so great a blot upon the
profession of Religion, by making them to see how they have been catching after
the shadow, and lost the substance; and as I may say, have pierced the Lord of
life, I doubt not I say, but God will recover them, but it will cost them deer,
they must pass through the fire, nay even through hell it self, and the fire of
the spirit must burn up and consume in them the fleshly principle, that Dalilah
which has betrayed them into the hands of the uncircumcised: My Lord I beseech
you take care that none of the traitors of the old house, nor none of the
lawyers do creep into this house, for if they do, it is impossible that any
good can come to the Commonwealth.

My Lord, the hearts of the people are much rejoiced, to see that greatness
could not prevail with you to stifle Justice for the blood of one innocent man,
and does fill them with hope that you will not suffer the blood of an hundred
thousand men to go unexpiated. The Spirit of God never spoke any thing but
truth, and that has told us, that oppression makes wise men mad, and some of
this generation who is so mad as to act to their own destruction, did for a
time cease, and would have ceased totally, if they could have seen justice
established, but for want thereof did fall to their mad actings again, and were
cut off. I do not read throughout the Scriptures, where there are greater
promises made to any thing then to works of Justice and Mercy, nor greater
Judgments denounced against any thing than injustice and oppression: Oh! that
thou would hearken to the Commandments of thy God! then shall thy peace be as
a river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the Sea, and thy name shall not
be cut off, nor destroyed from before the Lord, but the Lord will do his
pleasure upon Babylon, and his arm shall be upon the Caldeans, and although the
oppressor or the oppressing City Babylon should mount up to heaven, and
fortify her self in the height thereof, yet from me shall spoylers come unto
her, says the Lord, and the violence which she has done to Sion, and the
blood of Jerusalem shall be upon the inhabitants of the Caldeans, and God will
plead Sions cause, and Babylon shall become heaps, etc. Oh therefore I beseech
you slay out of Babylon, and deliver thine own soul, and be not cut off in her
iniquity, for the time of the Lords vengeance is at hand, and he will render
unto her a recompense; therefore get thee into thine own country, for her
Judgment reaches unto heaven, and is lifted up even to the ^kies, and the
Lords device is against Babylon, to destroy it. Oh my Lord! I beseech you
consider that I desire nothing of you, but what God and this Nation calls for
at your hands, the doing whereof will so indeer the hearts of the Nation to you,
that it will secure you for the future, the neglect thereof will set both God and
the Nation at a distance from you, but the granting thereof will not only
procure all the good formerly mentioned, but it will make such plentiful
provision for the poor, that there shall not be a beggar in our Israel.

A POSTSCRIPT, containing Reasons and Motives to move the present powers to
grant us such a Committee.
1. Reason. THis, and this only, is the means to ease the peoples burdens,
and to satisfy their minds, whereby their hearts may be united in love one to
another, and to the present Government; for how can the people think that you
do fulfill the end for which God has set you over them, whilst they do see
themselves so abominably cheated in every corner of the Commonwealth, and vast
sums of money conveyed out of the Commonwealth, and can have no redress for it?

2. Reas. How can you think the wrath of God can be appeased toward this
nation, whilst the blood of above a hundred thousand protestants, who were
mass^cred in cool blood, is unexpiated, and those that had a hand in bringing
it upon us, were advanced for their so doing, and are in Government amongst us,
though it was discovered time enough to have had it prevented, and so to have
prevented all the wars and miseries that has since fallen upon these three
Nations? In this lies the core of Englands sore, and until it be drawn out,
it is impossible that this Nation can be cured.

3. Reas. How do you think that God can bless you, by making the people to love
and honor you, whilst you do suffer them to be destroyed by that abominable
cheat of the corrupt practice of the Law, and suffer them to be arrested and
laid in prison for many thousands, when there is not one penny due, and the
greatest part of the burden o(...) does light upon the cordi^l friends of the
Commonwealth, and suffer thousands of widows and fatherless to be destroyed in
their Estates by the Gentlemen of the long Robe, and by unjust sentences in the
Courts, and no man's car is open to hear their cries: Assuredly, if the
Scriptures be true, and if God be just, (as he cannot be otherwise) then he
will continue shaking and overturning all the power of this Nation, until
these things be remedied; therefore (...) beseech your Highness ^o take these
things into your serious consideration, and give your soul no rest until these
things be reformed, for God has p(...)ised that for the sighing of the poor
and needy, (...) will arise, and I am confident that there never was so much
sighing and crying of the poor and needy unto the Almighty in any age in the
world, as there is at this day. Some may object and say, that I am mistakes,
and that there can be no such discoveries made out, because there has been
several Committees appointed, and little or nothing could be made to appear. To
which I answer.

1. That the Popish An^ichristian party had so interwoven themselves into the
powers of this Nation, that they would not have any to be impowerd that would
suffer any such thing to be done, for fear left they themselves (or their
friends) should taste of the lash, and it is a thing impossible to persuade
blind men to see, and who is so blind as they that will not see?

2. I answer, that I have held correspondency with many intelligible persons
from all corners of this Commonwealth, who will make it good, and I am
confident that I can have hundreds of thousands that will engage in it, and if
it be not performed, let me die the death.

3. I do conceive that some in Authority may have some guilt of this kind upon
their cousciences, which may make them unwilling to grant us this power. To
which I answer, that the granting of this power will be so acceptable to the
people, that it will be look'^ upon as a sufficient means for whatsoever can be
objected against any of them.

4. My Lord, either you or the corrupt practice of the Law must of necessity
fall; therefore down with that abominable thing, and establish the Righteous
and Merciful LAW of our GOD, and then thou will be established in
Righteousness.

And now honored Senators, if there be any love unto Jesus Christ in you, or
any longing for his glorious appearing, then put on bowels of compassion
toward the poor and miserable oppressed of this Nation; for whatsoever is done
unto any of the Members of CHRIST, he takes it as done unto himself: And I
beseech you remember, that your own Posterities are concerned in it, and must
ta(...) of the Cup which you do provide.

FINIS,

