Set on the Great Pot.

A SERMON UPON Hospitality, Preached at a late Visitation at Tunbridg in Kent,
On 2 KINGS IV. 38.

By H. C.

LONDON, Printed for the Sons of the Prophets. MDCXCIV.

To the Worshipful JOHN CORNWALLEYS, OF WINGFEILD, Esquire One of their Majesty's
Justices of the Peace, and Deputy-Lieutenant of the County of Suffolk; And the
Most Virtuous Grace his Wife, The Author wishes all Happiness here, and
Eternal Glory hereafter.
I Read in the Holy Writ, that when St. Paul had refreshed himself at the House
of Onesiphorus, he expressed his Thankfulness to him in this Prayer, The Lord
have Mercy on the House of Onesiphorus: and not being content with that single
Prayer, he publishes another in his Behalf, God grant that he may find Mercy at
the last Day. He remembered him in his Prayers, and publicly acknowledged his
Hospitality in most of his Epistles. In the like manner, I that have often
refreshed my self at your Table, and have there been an Eyewitness of your
Hospitality to others, what can I do less for your free and generous
Entertainments, than become your Orator to God by my Prayers; your Herald to
the World, by dedicating this Sermon of Hospitality to you, to show to the
World I am none of those ungrateful Wretches that can receive a Kindness, and
immediately forget it.

Yours, H. C.

2 KINGS IV. 38. -- And he said to his Servant, Set on the great Pot, and
seethe Pottage for the Sons of the Prophets.


PErhaps the Repast that I am now about to deliver unto you may be thought too
gross for some nicer Palates, and the Text now read too light and airy for so
Reverend and Learned an Auditory: but if any think so, I shall not apologize
for my Text as long as I find it within the Verge of the Bible, and a Portion
of Holy Writ: Neither shall I matter any that disgust the Entertainment, since
it is the same that the Prophet Elishah affords his Guests, and they Sons of the
Prophets, and Clergymen too; and will you disdain what they accepted of?

I shall not here stand upon criticizing, and tell you how the Words are in the
Original, and read you the meaning in the Arabic, Chaldaic, and Syriac: this
would argue much Vanity in me; and to you it would be superfluous, and bode no
better than casting of Water into the Sea.

Neither shall I stand upon the literal Meaning of the Words, which every Cook
better than my self knows; but my Design is to extract something spiritual from
this corporal Viand, and present you with some Food for your Soul from this of
the Body.

The Words express Elisha's Hospitality and frank Disposition to the Sons of
the Prophets, and may afford us this useful Theorem.

That a kind and liberal Reception, neither niggardly sordid, nor extravagantly
profuse, first became the Sons of the Prophets.

Or else take the Meaning in these Words, viz.

That all Clergy men, especially the Elisha's of them, those Persons that
Nature and Heaven have so liberally bestowed their Favors upon, and loaded
with Riches and Greatness, ought to be hospitable and charitable.

I am now to preach to a mixed Congregation, made up of Clergymen and Laymen:
My Text, Janus like, has two Faces; the first respects you my Brethren of the
Clergy, the other of the Laity.

To you my Brethren of the Clergy that are this Day come to honor me with your
Company, I preach up Hospitality, not only from the Example of Elisha, but from
the Holy Word of God, which both commands and commends it to us.

To you of the Laity that are come with good and honest Hearts to hear my
Doctrine, I preach up Justice, that you should be so just in paying your
Tithes, that you may be hospitably and charitably received at your Ministers
Houses; for if you withdraw their Dues, how can they perform their Duty? if you
shut your Hands, how can they enlarge their Tables, and be given to Hospitality?

Now that Hospitality is a Duty injoined on all Christians, and consequently on
all the Preachers of that Doctrine, I Will prove by these three Arguments: 1.
From the Law of Nature. 2. From the Scripture. 3. From the Examples of good Men
that encourage us to perform it.


1. Then from the Law of Nature. They are not merely positive but natural Laws
that require us to be hospitable: these are Laws written in our Hearts and our
Minds, which will direct us to them; they are the easy and unforced Suggestions
of our Souls; and whoever he be that has been but a little conversant with the
Writings of the Heathens, will find that they practiced this Duty, and that
nothing was so detestable among them, as not to be civil to Strangers:
Inhospitu littora populus barbarus, were Appellations of the worst Sound in
their Ears; and every little Schoolboy that had been but some time conversant
with the classical Authors, will tell you how Homer brings in Nestor,
importuning Minerva and Telamaclus to stay with him: he tells them they leave
him as if he had no Entertainment for them, or that he could not lodge them; but
this he would never suffer so long as he kept a Servant.

The Grecians are observed by Historians to have two Tables for Strangers; and
the jus Hospitii was looked upon as a most sacred thing. This shows what
Hospitality they used, and what the Heathens themselves thought of it in those
old times in which they lived. So that indeed could we not find a Bible in our
Closets, neither had we the Will of God from Heaven revealed to us, yet the
Light of Nature will dictate to us this Truth.

And indeed it is a piece of good Nature, which so well becomes a Man, that it
is called Humanity: and therefore the Ancients called our Kindness to Strangers
by this name, Humanity; as if they then show themselves to have more of a Man
in them than others, when they were kind to Strangers: and those People that
wanted this Generosity, were ever censured by them with this Expression, to be
barbarous and inhumane. They banished inhospitable Men from the Society of
Mankind, and ranked them among the Wolves and Tigers: They were not fit for the
Company of Men, and therefore they ranked them among the worser sort of Beasts.

2. The Scripture. But besides the Law written in our Hearts, the Laws that we
have revealed to us from the God of Heaven, and written, as I may say, with the
Finger of the Almighty, I mean the Holy Scriptures, give us full Proof of it.

How often in that Holy Book is Hospitality enjoined? how often inculcated? how
much commended? and how severely is the Neglect of it censured and punished? as
may be proved both out of the Old and New Testament.

If at your leisure you turn over those Sacred Leaves, you will find that the
ancient People of God, the Jews, are in most plain Words commanded to use
Strangers well, not to oppress them, no not to vex them, but to love them as
themselves, Exodus 22.21. Thou shall do no Injury to Strangers. And also the
same Duty is in the 9 th Verse of the following Chapter, pressed again, and the
Command is backed with a forcible moving Reason, viz. why we should be kind to
them: and this was the Reason, because they were Strangers in the Land of
Egypt, and knew the Hearts of Strangers; they were put in mind of the Condition
they were once in, and of the Usage they wished from the Egyptians: And this
Reasoning supposes they would now deal with others as they once wished they
might be dealt withal themselves. And the same Duty is again injoined them;
Lev. 19.34. And if the Stranger sojourn with you, etc.

Why now I pray is this Duty so often inculcated? why are we so often reminded
of it, but because it is a Duty very necessary for all Men to put in practice?
But from the Jews let us now go to the Christians, and see how well they
practiced this Duty. And that you may not think this a legal Precept, and
abolished in the time of the Gospel, let us see what Proofs are to be met with
in the New Testament; and in Rom 13.12. you will find it enjoined the
Christians, and they are commanded to use Hospitality: And in Heb. 13. they are
cautioned not to forget it; which supposes that Christians are otherwise, both
by Nature and former Revelations, taught to do thus: And in Mat. 25. you will
find the Practice of it is not only good and fit, but necessary and
indispensable; which may appear from the sad Doom Christ passed on them that
neglected it, I was a Stranger, and ye took me not in. He does not lay this to
their Charge, that they were Whoremongers, Adulterers, Murderers, guilty of
those open Crimes which not only the Laws of God do threaten, but the Laws of
Men punish with Death; but this was the chief Sin that was laid to their
Charge, I was a Stranger and ye took me not in, that is, you were inhospitable.

3. And as it is commanded us in the Scripture, so also is it recommended to
our Practice from the Example of several eminent Persons that have performed
it: so that we have both Precepts and Precedents to oblige us to it. Rules now
are best learned when illustrated with Examples: the rich Storehouse of the
Scripture affords us Variety of Instances both in the Old and New Testament;
some few I will instance in.

In the Old Law we find it to be the Practice of Abraham and Lot, Men beloved
of God, and famous with us; for they were not only honored while they lived,
but are renowned among us to all Posterity: And in Genesis 18.1, 2, 3, 4. we may
find Abraham's Hospitality recorded, what he did, and with what Heartiness,
Alacrity and Diligence he entertained them, how free he was in it; they asked
not him, but he them: this was a Carriage that became the hearty Goodness of
those old times; and it was a Work worthy of and suitable to the great Faith of
that excellent Man. And also in the beginning of Chap. 19. we have Lot's
Hospitality recorded; he saw two Strangers, he went to meet them, bowed himself
with his Face to the Ground, addressed himself to them with all the most
obliging Civility; he would not be denied: but when they said they would tarry
in the Street all Night, he forced them into his House, entertained them
bountifully, and made a Feast for them. But was this his Kindness unrewarded?
how did they gratify their Host? why, the same Chapter tells you how they saved
his Life, and rescued him and his Family from those fiery Showers, fatal to the
rest of the Inhabitants. And as for his Brother Abraham, they so greatly
requited his Hospitality, that they gave him the News of a Son in his old Age;
and also such a Son in whom all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed.

We also find it upon Record in the New Testament, in Acts 28. that Publius
entertained Paul three Days courteously; and in Requital he healed his
Father-in-law of a Fever: And Onesiphorus having once or twice refreshed Paul
at his Table, he remembered him in his Prayers, and publicly acknowledged his
Hospitality in his Epistles.

But now to instance in an Example above all Examples, whose Example if we
follow not we can never go to Heaven, you may read Deuteronomy. 10.18. God himself is
said to love the Stranger, and to give him Food and Raiment: but we have a far
greater Proof of God's Love to Strangers than these; for us Gentiles that were
Foreigners has he visited with his Salvation: To us that had a long time sat
in Darkness, and in the Shadow of Death, has he given a Light; he has given
to us his Son, and treated us with all the Expressions of Kindness imaginable.

Now if this Duty be enjoined us in the Scripture; if it has been the Practice
of the best Men that ever lived; nay, if it has been the Practice of God
himself, let us then be hospitable, that we may be like unto God.

And indeed as you ought to be hospitable to Strangers, so ought you to be
charitable to the Poor: we have an express Mandate for it in Luke 14.13, 14.
When thou make a Feast, call the Poor, the Maimed and the Lame, and thou
shall be blessed, etc.

And it may well deserve our Observation to consider the great Care God took of
the Poor in the Mosaic Law; for besides what was given privately, God made
several Laws for the public and visible Relief of them.

When God Almighty had blessed them with Increase, and they came to reap their
Harvest, they were commanded to leave some uncut for the Benefit of the Poor,
Lev. 19.9. And besides every Year's Tything they had the third Year's Tithe,
which by God's Law was their due; and not only the third Year, but the seventh
Year the Land was to lie still, and they were to share in common the Fruits of
it.

Neither did the Primitive Christians fall short of the Jews in their Charity,
witness that ancient and primitive Institution of the Offertory in the
Sacrament, which was so considerable a part of it, that it gave Denomination to
the whole: and this I have read to be one reason why it is called the
Communion-Service, because every Sunday the Primitive Christians did
communicate to the Necessities of others.

Nay, we may learn this Duty from the very Heathens themselves, for they had a
Temple in Athens, and it was dedicated to charitable Uses: and it was the
greatest Reproach among them, to upbraid one with this, that they had never
been at the Temple of Mercy.

And what greater Reproach can it be to a Christian than to be churlish and
unmerciful. We read in the Mosaic Law, that the Shellfish was accounted
unclean; this I take to be one Reason, because the Meat was enclosed in the
Shell, and it was hard to come by. They indeed are to be reckoned among the
Unclean, viz. among the Wicked and Ungodly, that enclose their Estate within
the Shell of their Cabinet, denying others the Benefit of it; that, Hedg-hog
like, wraps up himself in a Bed of Down, and throws out his Prickles to all the
World besides. But besides the Command of God, and the Example of good Men,
common Gratitude may oblige us to this Duty; we are all born Beggars, and live
upon Alms, and all the Creatures do liberally contribute to our Necessities;
the Sun has not his Light for himself, but enriches the Earth with his golden
Beams: The Earth brings forth a fruitful Crop; one Creature gives us Wool,
another Silk; nay, all the Creatures, in some sort, administer to Man's
Necessities: and now shall every Creature be good to Man, and shall Man himself
be inhuman to his Neighbor?

But beside common Gratitude, our own Interest may oblige us to this Duty; it is
the best Money we can lay out, and brings to the Donor the greatest Advantage:
He that gives to the Poor, lends to the Lord, who gives double Interest for
the Money, and rewards us with temporal and eternal Blessings.

It was the Counsel of him that was the wisest Man that ever the Universe yet
bore, (our Savior Christ excepted, who was both God and Man) Cast thy Bread
upon the Waters, and thou shall find it after many Days. The word is not da,
give, but mitte, send; like a Person that sends an Adventure to Sea, it is lost
for the present, but yet he hopes it will one Day turn to a great Advantage.

Give me leave to superadd one Motive more: As Charity procures Blessings, so
also does it divert those Judgments that hang over our Heads. When
Nebuchadnezzar for his Pride had a Vision, that God would take away his
Kingdom, he consulted with Daniel what to do; and his Counsel to him was this,
Break off your Sins by Righteousness, and your Iniquities by doing good to the
Poor: as if his Alms could divert those Judgments that hanged over his Head,
and the practice of these could wash away his Offenses; and, like Celestial
Fuller's Earth, take the Spots of the Flesh from the Soul. We find it therefore
ranked with Righteousness in the Scripture, and they are promiscuously used one
for the other. And this put Job into such an Amazement, that his Afflictions
should befall him when he had been so merciful to the Poor. And indeed though
the Poor be counted a Burden to many of us, yet among the Jews they were
reckoned among their greatest Blessings. And this we find to be one of God's
Promises to them, that the Poor shall be always among them, that so they might
know what to do with their Wealth. Now that you may dispose of your Alms to the
best Advantage, take along with you these following Rules.

1. De nostris dandum. When Selimas the great Turk lay on his Deathbed, being
moved by Pirrhus to bestow that Wealth that he had wronged the Persian
Merchants of, upon charitable Uses, he made this honest Reply, Nay rather,
says he, let it be sent back to the right Owners. And shall not a Christian's
Creed be much better than a Turk's Alcoran? It Is a Will not pleasing to God,
nor yet good Men, when a Person on his Deathbed bequeaths his Soul to God, and
his ill-gotten Goods to the Poor. Neither can he be thought charitable that
robs perhaps an hundred Families to build an Hospital for seven Droans.

2. The second Rule is this; What you give must be done with a good Intention.
I have read of a Traitor, who being hired to imbrue his Hands in Royal Blood,
made his Attempt on the Royal Person, but by Accident only cut off a Wen, which
the Skill of the ablest Surgeon durst not venture; so that instead of
killing, he cures his Enemy. Now whether the accidental Good he did could
compound for the Wickedness of his intended Treason, I leave it to any sober
Person to judge.

3. The third Rule is this; Give as you are able: It Is not always necessary
that Alms should come out of a Sack; a Man may be charitable though he has not
an expanding Plenty. A little Purse contained that Mite which was the greatest
Gift in the Treasury, I mean the poor Widow's Gift, which was acceptable to
God, because coming from her who wanted it her self. But should the rich Man
take his Measures from hence, and give no more than she did, he would come as
far short of her Charity, as she did of his Wealth.

I am now come to address my self to the Laity; and to you do I recommend a
just and great Care of paying whatsoever the Laws of the Land have made the
Dues of your Ministers, and by no means to look with an evil Eye upon what is
allotted them as an Encouragement to discharge their Office. When St. Paul
makes it the Qualification of a Bishop, that he should be given to Hospitality,
(1 Timothy 3.2.) you may be sure that he did not, like the Egyptian Tyrant, enjoin
them to make Brick without Straw. He did not design they should build Castles
in the Air, and feed their Guests with thin Notions and Speculations only. And
without a Supply of these earthly things, it was not possible they should set
more than a Chymerical Table before them, as the Enchanter did before his Royal
Guests: no, he tells you, that no Man goes to Warfare at his own Cost; and he
that plants a Vineyard, eats of the Fruit of it; and he that keeps a Flock, is
maintained with the Profit of it. From whence he argues the Equity of Ministers
being liberally supplied by them in Temporals, whose spiritual Good they have
devoted themselves and their Labors to: and therefore, in pursuance of the
same thing, he adds, that he spoke not these things as a Man, as one that had
Reason, and might argue from thence for it, but he had the Institution and
Command of God to back him herein; Say I these things as a Man? or says not
the Law the same also? 1 Cor. 9.8. For it was written in the Law of Moses, Thou
shall not muzzle the Mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn. Does God take
care for Oxen, or says it altogether for our sakes? Was the Precept given in
regard to the Beasts alone, or rather had it not farther Reference to his
Servants the Priests and Levites, who prepared spiritual Food for the People?
For our sakes no doubt he spoke it, that he that plows should plow in Hope; and
he that thresheth in Hope, should be Partaker of the same Hope.

Nay he proceeds further, and shows how mean a Recompense this is for the
mighty Advantages we bring to the World, the immortal Glories and Happiness
that we, as Heralds, proclaim, purchased by our great Master the blessed Jesus
for you: If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great Matter if we
reap your carnal things? If we teach how to live and be happy for ever, is it
such a wonderful thing that you contribute toward our living, and being easy
for a time here? Do you not know that they which minister about holy things,
live of the things of the Temple, are maintained by the Offerings and Oblations
that are made there?

You know little of the Constitution among the Jews, if you think any opened or
shut a Door in the Temple for naught, Mal. 1.10. and if all the inferior
Officers had fair Allotments in proportion, much more they who attended at the
Altar were Partakers with the Altar, shared in all the Gifts and Offerings
which were brought thither. But why do I go about to light the Sun with a
Taper, and prove that to you by Reason, which is so manifest by the Word of
God? Perhaps my Sermon may make no Impression on your Hearts, because they are
the Words of a mortal Man; behold, I will turn you to the Words of the
ever-living God: I am a frail Man, and may err, but God is a God of Truth that
cannot lie, nor alter the thing that is gone out of his Lips; hear then what he
says by his Prophet Malachy, chapter 3.8, 9, 10. Will a Man rob God? yet ye have
robbed me: but ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In Tithes and Offerings. Ye
are cursed with a Curse: for ye have robbed me, even this whole Nation. Bring
ye my Tithes into my House, and prove me, whether I will not open the Windows
of Heaven, and pour out a Blessing, etc. In which Words we may observe, 1 st.
Their Sin, they robbed God. 2 dly. Their Punishment, they are cursed. 3 dly.
The Means to divert this Judgment, viz. to bring the full Tithes.

Will a Man rob God? It Is an horrible Wickedness to rob and dispoil our Parents
or Masters, to ravish their Goods and Maintenance from them; but to rob our God
is a Wickedness much more flagitious, a Sin so monstrous, that the Jews, though
then very much degenerated and corrupted, startled at the mention of, Ye have
robbed me: but they say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In Tithes and Offerings.
For God, the great Donor of all, had reserved these to himself, which he gave
to his Priests for their Service in his Worship; and withholding these, they
robbed him. Hear then the Judgment that he denounced against them, Ye are
cursed with a Curse. It Is bad to be cursed by Man: Elishah's Curse proved fatal
to the Children bred up in Idolatry, that called him Bald Pate. Now if the
Curse of Man prove so fatal, what is the Curse of God? But now what was there
to redeem them from this Curse? mark in the following Verse, Bring all the
Tithes into the Storehouse, that there may be Meat in my House. A mighty
Encouragement not only for them, but for all succeeding Generations, to have a
Regard for things sacred.

But now to draw to a Conclusion; Give me leave to make this short Address to
my Brethren of the Clergy, not to instruct them in their Duty, but to speak
their own Thoughts in my plain Words.

If the Laity be just to us, let not us be unjust to our Master, but let us
give according as we are able, to the Necessity of the Poor. Remember the
Levites were the least of all the Tribes, yet their Privileges and Revenues
were greater than any other of the Tribes, for they had not only the Tenth of
all the Fruits of the Land, but a share in all the Peace Offerings and
Free-will-Offerings of the People in their redemption of several things sacred
to God, (as the Firstborn) besides the many Cities and Lands which were set
apart in every Tribe for them, with numberless other things that belonged to
them. Nay, as I learned once by the Conference of an eminent Divine of the
Church of England, they had near the sixth Part of the Revenue of the Nation
allotted to them.

But now why, I pray, were their Privileges and Revenues greater than any of
the other Tribes? Why this I take to be the Reason, because they were not only
Priests, but Almoners to the other Tribes; and their Houses were as Hospitals
to the Poor.

Let us therefore, as the Apostles advise us, be given to Hospitality; and
following the Example of this great Prophet in time of Dearth and Famine, Set
on the Great Pot, and seethe Pottage for our poor Brethren that are in Distress.

I shall now conclude with this earnest Prayer, That you may never want Clergy,
Learned Persons, and Orthodox and diligent Workmen, that need not be ashamed,
daily dividing the Word of Truth; and, like good Stewards, breaking the Bread
of Life, and distributing to each, in their Families, suitable to their Needs
and Capacities; and by an holy Life may powerfully lead, as well as by sound
Doctrine safely guide them to Heaven.

And I do further pray, That these may never want a People teachable and
obedient, who may receive them as the Angels of God, the Ambassadors of Christ,
and the Glory of the Churches; and then there is no doubt but they will meet
with not only their legal Dues, but many grateful Returns for their abundant
Labors, reverencing their Persons, consulting their Reputations, contriving
for their decent and becoming Support and Maintenance; in a word, esteeming
them and theirs highly for their Works sake. This would make our Country a Land
of Delight indeed, the Glory of all Places, a little Resemblance and Figure of
Heaven, where Knowledge, Righteousness, Love and Unity, with all other Graces
and Virtues, would flourish and abound, to the Praise of him who has called us
out of Darkness to his infinite Light: which God of his infinite Goodness
grant, for the sake of his dear Son and our Savior Christ Jesus the Righteous,
to whom with the Father and Eternal Spirit be ascribed all Praise, Might,
Majesty and Dominion.

FINIS.

