THE KINGDOM OF GOD among Men; A TRACT Of the Sound State OF RELIGION, Or that
Christianity which is described in the Holy Scriptures; And of the things that
make for the Security and Increase thereof in the World; Designing its more
ample diffusion among Professed Christians of all Sorts, and its surer
Propagation to future Ages.

With the Point of Church-Unity and Schism Discussed.

By JOHN CORBET.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns at the
Lower end of Cheapside. 1679.

THE PREFACE.
A Disquisition concerning Religion and the State Ecclesiastical, wherein
several Parties are vehemently carried diverse ways, whether right or wrong,
according to their different interests or apprehensions, is apt to stir up
jealousy, and to meet with prejudice in a high degree, and therefore had need
be managed as advisedly as sincerely. It is humbly craved, that the present
management thereof may find a favorable reception so far as it has in it self
the evidence of its own Sincerity and Sobriety. This Treatise is not framed for
a present occasion or any temporary design; but insists upon those things that
concern the Church universally and perpetually. It aims at the advancement of
mere Christianity, and with respect to the common concernments thereof, it
leaves the things that are more appropriate to the several Parties and
Persuasions, to stand or fall. It ingageth not in the controversies of these
times, touching Forms of Church Government, but in any Form such depravations
or deficiencies are blamed, as hinder the Power, Purity, Unity, Stability, or
amplitude of Religion. Nothing prejudicial to Government, to the rights of
Superiors, and Civil Pre-eminences, or to Decency, Unity, and Order in the
Church, is here suggested. Sedition and Faction are evicted to be a
contradiction to this Interest, which can hold its own only in those ways that
make for the common good, both of Rulers and Subjects. Our design carries no
other danger than the more ample diffusion of true Christianity, and the power
of Godliness among men of all degrees, and the surer propagation thereof to
future ages. Here be some things that are the vitals of Christian Religion, and
cannot be removed; and here be other things of conscientious or prudent
Consideration, and let these so far pass, as they are found clear and cogent. I
had rather be charged with any defect or weakness than with uncharitableness,
and therefore am ready to renounce every line, and every expression in this
Book, that cannot stand with true Christian Charity in the utmost extent
thereof.

Let it not be taken amiss, that to obviate suspicion or prejudice I declare my
self in the things here following. I am one aged in the Ministry, and by
reason of age and experience am not eager for any Party, but mellowed with
charity toward real Christians of all Parties. I have vehemently desired the
union of the more moderate Dissenters, with the Established Order by reasonable
accommodation, as for others that remain dissatisfied about such Union, yet
believe and live as Christians, I do as earnestly desire an indulgence for them
within such limits as may stand with public Peace and Safety. Though I am cast
into the State of Nonconformity, yet I am willing to exercise the Ministry
under the present Ecclesiastical Government, if I were made capable thereof by
the relaxation of some injunctions. My principle is for a closing with things
that are good and laudable in any Established Government, and for a bearing
with things that are tolerable. And the Wisdom of the Governors of the Church
will direct them to turn away from such Principles, Orders or Practices, as
tend to the ruin or the great indangering of any Ecclesiastical Polity that
retains them, whilst the Apostolic Doctrine (as it is now Established in the
Church of England) is maintained.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THe nature of Christianity and the character of true Christians.
CHAP. II. Of things pertaining to the sound state of Christian Religion, viz.
holy Doctrine. CHAP. III. The ordering of Divine Worship suitable to the Gospel
Dispensation. CHAP. IV. The due Dispensation of Gods word, or public
Preaching. CHAP. V. The due performance of public Prayer. CHAP. VI. The right
Administration of Ecclesiastical Discipline. CHAP. VII. Religious
Family-government. CHAP. VIII. Private mutual Exhortations, Pious Discourse and
Edifying Conversation. CHAP. IX. The prevalence of true Religion, or real
Godliness in the Civil Government of a Nation. CHAP. X. Christian Unity and
Concord. CHAP. XI. A good Frame of Ecclesiastical Polity. CHAP. XII. Of the
corrupt state of Religion, and first externalness and formality. CHAP. XIII.
The Sectarian and Fanatical degeneration. CHAP. XIV. Of the way of preserving
Religion incorrupt. CHAP. XV. The enmity of the World against real Godliness,
and the calumnies and reproaches cast upon it considered. CHAP. XVI. Religions
main strength next under the power of God lies in its own intrinsic
excellency. CHAP. XVII. Religion may be advanced by human prudence; what ways
and methods it cannot admit in order to its advancement. CHAP. XVIII. The
Interest of true Religion lies much in its venerable estimation among men.
CHAP. XIX. The most ample diffusion of the light of knowledge, is a sure means
of promoting true Religion. CHAP. XX. The advantage of human Learning to the
same end. CHAP. XXI. The general civility or common honesty of a Nation, makes
it more generally receptive of real Christianity or Godliness. CHAP. XXII. The
increase of Religion is promoted by being made as much as may be, passable
among men. CHAP. XXIII. The observing of a due latitude in Religion, makes for
the security and increase thereof. CHAP. XXIV. The Care and Wisdom of the
Church, in preventing and curing the evil of Fanatical and Sectarian Error.
CHAP. XXV. The advancement of the sound state of Religion by making it
National, and the settled Interest of a Nation. CHAP. XXVI. Of submission to
things imposed by Lawful Authority. CHAP. XXVII. The surest and safest ways of
seeking Reformations. CHAP. XXVIII. Considerations tending to a due enlargement
and unity in Church Communion. CHAP. XXIX. Whether the purity and power of
Religion be lessened by amplitude and comprehensiveness. CHAP. XXX. Factious
usurpations are destructive to Religions Interest. CHAP. XXXI. Of leading and
following, and of Combinations. CHAP. XXXII. The Wisdom of the Higher Powers in
promoting the Religionsness of their People. CHAP. XXXIII. The Churches true
Interest to be pursued by Ecclesiastical Persons. The Conclusion,

A Book Entitled, The Interest of England in matter of Religion, in Two Parts,
formerly Published by the same Author.

Page 7. lin. 3. read Service, page 19. l. 11. read whereas, page 27. l. 24.
read So, page 28. l. 14. read is, page 29. l. 14. read regardable, page 31. l.
16. read this, ib. l. 18. read apposite, page 39. l. 14. read is able to make,
page 41. l. 31. read affect, page 53. l. 19. read For the, page 59. l. 5. read
face of, page 60. l. 12. read exercises, page 67. l. 3. read Religions, page
71. l. 12. read Sacraments, page 77. l. 3. read condescension, page 96. l. 22.
read orall, page 99. l. 2. read rites, page 116. l. 13. read abasing, ib. l.
25. read noting, page 117. l. 25. read transform it into, page 121. l. 21. read
Levities, page 144. l. 21. read exalt, page 149. l. 20. read effected, page
150. l. 20. read smatch, page 157. l. 13. read exercise, page 162. l. 7. read
vainly, page 163. l. 11. dele love, page 167. l. 9. read concerns, page 171. l.
3. read Enemies, ib. l. 9. read regulation, ib. l. 19. read and, page 189. l.
6. read be not, page 202. l. 22. read and are withal.

A TRACT OF THE SOUND STATE OF RELIGION, etc.
CHAP. I.
The Nature of Christianity, and the Character of true Christians.

THe Names and Titles, by which real Christians are in Holy Scripture
distinguished from other men, are not mean and common, but high and excellent,
as, a Chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar People,
the first fruits of Gods creatures, the household of God, children of Light,
children of Wisdom, heirs of the heavenly Kingdom, and the Title of Saints, was
one of their ordinary appellations. Doubtless the true difference between them
and others lies not in mere names, but in some peculiar excellencies of quality
and condition thereby signified. And so much is abundantly set forth in the
several expressions of Christianity, as, the Regeneration, the new Creation, a
transformation in the renewing of the mind, a participation of the divine
nature, the life of God, conformity to the image of the Son of God, and such
like. Thus from the Scripture style it is evident, that true Christianity is of
an other nature then that carnal, formal, and lifeless profession, with which
multitudes confidently take up; and that in its true professors there must
needs be found something of a higher strain and nobler kind; and which indeed
makes them meet for that holy and Blessed state to come, unto which it leads
them.

It is indeed an excellent name and nature, the regenerate State and divine
life, which is begun in the new birth, wherein the Soul retaining the same
natural faculties, is changed from a carnal into a spiritual frame, by the
sanctifying power of the Holy Ghost, and the word of truth.

In this change the mind is illuminated unto an effectual acknowledgment of the
truth which is after godliness, as containing the highest good, and appearing
in such evidence as makes earthly things to be seen (what they are indeed) but
as dross and dung in comparison thereof. The will is drawn by the force of the
truth, acknowledged to an absolute conversion and adhesion to God, as the great
and ultimate object of the souls love, desire, joy, reverence, observance,
acquiescence, zeal, and entire devotion. In this absolute conversion to God, is
included the renouncing of all self dependence, and of that perverse
self-seeking, which follows the lapsed state, and an unlimited self resignation
to God, which is the only true self-seeking and self-love. For God having made
our felicity immutably coherent with his glory, but subordinate thereunto, a
true Convert turning from poor, empty, nothing, self to the infinite God,
exchanges insufficiency, poverty, vanity and misery for immensity,
almightiness, all sufficiency and infinite fullness; and so he loses self, as
it is a sorry thing and a wretched Idol, and finds the blessed God, and
self-eternally blessed in him.

And forasmuch as all have sinned and fallen away from God, and cannot be
brought back to him, but in the hand of a Redeemer and Reconciler, our Religion
stands also in the sensible knowledge of sin, and of our deplorable state under
the power and guilt thereof, with an humiliation suitable thereunto; and in a
lively faith toward our Lord Jesus, the eternal Son of God made man in the
fullness of time, who gave himself for us to redeem us from sin and death to a
life of grace and glory. Which Faith is the worthy receiving of him in the full
capacity of a Redeemer, the entire and hearty acceptance of the grace of God in
him, the Souls resignation to him, to be conducted to God by him, and the
securing of all that is hoped for in his hands, with an affiance in his
all sufficiency and fidelity.

This Faith works by love toward God and man. For through faith we love God,
because he loved us first, and sent his son to be the propitiation for our
sins. And through faith we resolve, that if God so loved us, then ought we also
to love one another. And this love eminently contains in it all the virtues of
moral honesty toward men, as truth, justice, mercy, peaceableness, kindness,
faithfulness, humility, meekness, modesty, and toward inferiors moderation,
equity, and condescension, and toward Superiors reverence, and submission.

Christianity is a root of true goodness that brings forth its fruit in due
season, in the first place the internal and immediate actings of faith, hope
and love, which may be called radical duties, as lying next the root; then the
inseparable effects thereof, such as are holy meditation and prayer among the
acts of devotion toward God; and among the acts of charity toward men,
justice, fidelity, mercy, which are called the weightier matters of the Law.
And further, it shoots forth into an universal regard of Gods commandments in
all particularities, not slighting the lowest or remotest duties, which indeed
cannot be slighted without the contempt of that Authority, which enjoined the
greatest and most important.

The Spirit of Christianity is a spirit of Wisdom and prudence, that guides in
a perfect way. It sets right the superior governing faculties, and holds the
inferior under the command and government of the Superior. It awakens reason to
attend to the souls great concernments, to mind the danger of temptations, the
madness of depraved affections, and the mischief and banefulness of all sin. It
is no inconsiderate, licentious, presumptuous, dissolute spirit, but strict,
circumspect and self suspicious, solid serious and universally conscientious.
It is pure; grave, sober, shunning every unseemly speech, all foolish and light
behavior, and much more that which has a filthy savor, and smells rank of
impurity and dishonesty. It watches the motions of the animal life and
sensitive appetite, and curbs them, when they are extravigant, and renounceth
whatsoever things tend to vitiate the soul, and work it below its spiritual
happiness. It is a spirit of patience, and of true rational courage, and of
resolved submission to the will of God. It is above wordly riches and poverty,
and glory and ignominy, and fleshly pain and pleasure. But self-conceit,
excessive self estimation, asperity toward others, and domineering cruelty
over conscience, is no part of the abovementioned and commended strictness and
severity. For as it hates flattery and base compliance with others in
profaneness or lukewarmness, so it is ever qualified with meekness, lowliness of
mind, peaceableness, patience, that it may gain upon others and win them to its
own advisedness, steddiness, purity and soberness.

This new nature, while it is lodged in the earthly tabernacle, is clogged with
many adverse things, especially the relics of the old nature, which cause much
vanity of thoughts, indisposedness of mind, motions to evil, and aversations
from good, and sometimes more sensible disorders of affections, and eruptions of
unruly passion, and aberrations in life and conversation. The same divine
principal is in some Christians more firm, lively and active than in others,
yet it is habitually prevalent in them all; and it resists and overcomes the
contrary principle, even in the case of most beloved sins and strongest
temptations, and perseveres in earnest and fearful endeavors of perfecting
holiness in the fear of God. And whatsoever degree of sanctity is obtained, it
ascribes wholly to the praise of Gods grace in Christ, and the power of his
spirit.

Christianity being known what it is, it may easily be known what it is not,
and so the false disguises of it may easily be detected. Forasmuch as it looks
far higher than the temporal interests of mankind in the settlings of this life
(though it does not overlook them) it cannot be thought to have done its work
in making men merely just-dealers, good neighbors and profitable members of
the Commonwealth, for such may be some of them that are without Christ,
without the hope of the Gospel, and without God in the world.

Moreover, it cannot lie so low, as in a bare belief of the Gospel, and an
observance of its external institutes, accompanied with a civil conversation.
As for such as rest in these things, what are they more in the eye of God, than
the heathens that know him not? And wherein do they differ from them, except in
a dead faith, and outward form taken up by education, tradition, example,
custom of the country, and other such like motives.

Nor does it lie in unwritten doctrines, and ordinances of worship devised by
men, nor yet in curiosities of opinion or accidental modes of Worship,
discipline, or Church Government; nor in ones being of this or that Sector
party, nor in mere Orthodoxality, all which being rested in, are but the false
coverings of hypocrites.

It is not the lax and easy, low and large rule, by which Libertines, and
Formalists, yea some pretended perfectionists do measure their own
righteousness, who assert their perfectness by disannulling, or lessening the
law of God.

In a word, it is not any kind of morality or virtue whatsoever, which is not
true holiness, or entire dedication to God; and therefore much less is it, that
loose and jolly religion of the sensual gang, who keep up a superficial
devotion in some external forms, but give up themselves to real irreligion and
profaneness, and bid defiance to a circumspect walking and serious course of
Godliness.

And now it is too apparent, what multitudes of them, that prophess the faith
of Christ, are Christians in name only and not indeed. Their alienation from
the life of God, and their enmity against it, and their conformity to the
course of this world in the lusts thereof, does testify, that they have not
received the grace of God in truth. But Christians indeed according to the
nature of Christianity above expressed (which is now in them though not in the
highest, yet in a prevalent degree) do make it their utmost end to know, love,
honor and please God, to be conformable to him, and to have the fruition of
him, in the perfection of which conformity and fruition, they place the
perfection of their blessedness. In the sense of their native bondage under the
guilt and power of sin, they come to the Mediator Jesus Christ, and rest upon
him, by the satisfaction and merit of his obedience and suffering, to reconcile
and sanctify them to God, and accordingly they give up themselves to him, as
their absolute Teacher and Ruler and all-sufficient Savior. Having received
not the Spirit of the world, but that which is of God, they are crucified to
the honors, profits and pleasures of the world, and have their conversation in
heaven, and rejoice in the hope of glory, and prepare for sufferings in this
life and by faith overcome them. The law of God is in their hearts, and it is
the directory of their practice from day to day, by the touchstone of Gods word
they prove their own works, and come to the light thereof, that their deeds may
be made manifest to be wrought in God. They draw nigh to God in the acts of
religious worship of his appointment, that they may glorify him, and enjoy
spiritual communion with him, and be blessed of him, especially with spiritual
blessings in Christ: and as God is a Spirit, they worship him in Spirit and in
truth. It is their aim, care and exercise to keep consciences void of offense
toward God and toward men, and to render to all their dues both in their
public and private capacities, and to walk in love toward all, not excluding
enemies, and to do all the good they can both to the souls and bodies of men;
but those that fear God they more highly prise and favor. The remainder of
corruption within themselves they know feelingly, and watch and pray, and
strive that they enter not into temptation, and maintain a continual warfare
against the Devil the world and the flesh, under the conduct of Jesus Christ
their Leader, according to the laws of their holy profession, with patience and
perseverance. In the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, they endeavor
to be blameless and harmless as the Sons of God, and to shine as lights in the
world, and by the influence of their good conversation to turn others to
righteousness.

Such is the Character of those persons upon whose souls the holy doctrine of
the Gospel is impressed, and in whom the Christian religion has its real
being, force and virtue. These are partakers of the heavenly calling, and set
apart for God to do him service in the present world, and afterward to live in
glory with him for ever. These are the true Church of God (the Church being
here taken as mystical, not as visible) and these are all joined together by
one Spirit, in one Body under Christ their Head, in the same new nature, having
one rule of their profession, and one hope of their calling.

These are a great multitude, which no man can number of all nations and
kindreds, and people and tongues, yet hitherto not proportionable to the rest
of mankind. And they continue throughout all ages, but in greater or lesser
numbers, and more or less refined from Superstition or other corruptions, and
more or less severed from the external communion of the Antichristian State,
according to the brightness or darkness of the times and places wherein they
live.

CHAP. II.
Things pertaining to the Sound State of Religion. And first holy Doctrine.

THe advancement of the Christian life, which has its beginning in the new
birth, being the great end propounded in this discourse, in reference to this
end, the things here principally looked after are, the receiving and
propagating of holy Doctrine, drawn out of the pure fountain of Sacred
Scripture; the right administration of true Gospel worship, by which God is
glorified as God, and the worshippers are made more godly; The due preaching of
Gods word, and dispensation of other divine ordinances by personslawfully
called thereunto, for the conversion of sinners and edification of converts;
Holy discipline truly and faithfully administered by the Pastors, as the
necessity of the Church requires, and the State thereof will bear; Religious
family government; Private mutual exhortations, pious conferences and
profitable conversation; The predominant influence of religion in the civil
government of a nation, yet without usurpation or incroachment upon the civil
rights of any, especially of the higher Powers; The unity of Christians and
their mutual charity conspicuous and illustrious; and lastly, in order to all
these intents a good frame of Ecclesiastical polity.

Holy Doctrine is the incorruptible seed of Regeneration, by which the new
creature is begotten. It is not here intended to represent a perfect scheme
thereof, for it suffices to signify that extracts thereof from holy
Scripture, are drawn out in the ancient Catholic Creeds, and in the harmonious
confessions of the present Reformed Churches. Nevertheless our design requires
the observation of some most important things about the Doctrine of Salvation,

As that there be first an earnest and hearty belief of the existence and
providence of God, and his government of mankind by laws congruous to their
nature, and of the immortallity of human souls, and of a life of retribution in
the world to come; which is the foundation of all religion.

2ly. Right apprehensions of Gods nature and attributes, more especially of his
Holiness comprehending as well his purity and justice, as his mercy and
goodness; that as he is ready to procure his creatures happiness, and refuses
none that come unto him, so that he cannot deny himself, and that he receives
note but upon terms agreeable to his Holiness.

3ly. An Idea of Godliness in themind not as shaped by any private conceptions,
but as expressed by the Holy Ghost whose workmanship it is, that Christianity
in the hearts and lives of men may be the same with Christianity in the
Scriptures.

4. The receiving of the great mystery of Godliness, not as allegorized in the
fancies of some Enthusiasts, wherein it vanishes to nothing but as verisied in
the truth of the History, wherein it becomes the power of God to Salvation; and
so not to sever the internal spirit of the Christian Religion, from its
external frame, the basis whereof is the Doctrine of the Trinity in the Unity
of the Godhead, and of the incarnation of the eternal word.

Lastly, Soundness of judgment in those great Gospel verities, that are written
for the exalting of Gods grace, and the promoting of true godliness, and the
encouraging of the godly, in opposition to ungracious, ungodly, and
uncomfortable errors, of which sort are these following truths.

That the study and knowledge of the Scriptures, is the duty and privilege of
all Christians, that according to their several capacities, being skillful in
the word of righteousness, they may discern between truth and falsehood, between
good and evil, and offer to God a reasonable service according to his revealed
will.

That internal illumination is necessary to the saving knowledge of God, the
Holy spirit in that regard not inspiring new revelations, but inabling to
discern savingly what is already revealed in nature and Scripture.

That man was created after the image of God in righteousness and true
holiness; and that in this state he was endued with a self-determining
principle called Freewill, and thereby made capable of abiding holy and happy,
or of falling into sin and misery according to his own choice, and that God
left him to the freedom of his own choice having given him whatsoever power or
assistance was necessary to his standing.

That the first man being set in this capacity fell from God, and it pleased
God not to annihilate him, nor to prevent his propagating of an issue in the
same fallen state, which would follow upon his fall; but left the condition of
mankind to pass according to the course of nature, being now fallen.

That by the sin of Adam all men are made sinners, and corrupt in their whole
nature, and are under the curse of the Law, and liable to eternal condemnation,
and being left to the wicked bent of their own wills, are continually adding to
their original sin a heap of actual transgressions, and so are of themselves in
a miserable and helpless condition.

That the Lord Jesus Christ according to his full intention and his Fathers
commandment, has made propitiation for the sins of the whole world, so far, as
thereby to procure pardon of sin and Salvation of soul, to all that do
unfeignedly believe and repent.

That man being dead in sin cannot be quickened to the divine life, but by the
power of Gods grace, raising him above the impotency of lapsed nature.

That the culpable impotency of lapsed nature to saving good, lies in the fixed
full aversation of the will, by a deplorable obstinacy nilling that good to
which the natural faculties can reach, and ought to incline as to their due
object.

That the root of godliness lies in regeneration and inward Sanctification.

That God calls some by the help of that special grace which infallibly
effects their conversion and adhesion to him, without any impeachment of the
natural liberty of the will.

That whatsoever God does in time, and in whatsoever order he does it, he
decreed from eternity to do the same, and in the same order; and so he decreed
from eternity to give that special grace to some, and by it to bring them to
glory, which decree is eternal election, to which is opposite the pure negative
of Nonelection. As for preordination to everlasting punishment it passes not
upon any, but on the foresight and consideration of their final abode in the
state of sin.

That the more common convictions, inclinations and endeavors toward God in
persons unregenerate are good in their degree, and the ordinary preparative to
a saving change, and they are the effects of that divine grace which is called
common.

That deligent seeking after God by the help of common grace is not in vain, it
being the means to some further attainment toward the souls recovery, and it
is regarded of God in its degree, and God does not deny men further degrees of
help, till they refuse to follow after him, by not using the help already given
them, and by resisting his further aid.

That God has made all men savable, and though he does not simply and
absolutely will the conversion and Salvation of all, yet he wills it so far,
and in such manner as is sufficient to encourage the diligent in their
endeavors, and to convict the careless of being inexcusable despisers of his
grace toward them.

That there is an inherent righteousness, by which the faithful are truly named
righteous, not only before men, but in the judgment of God himself; and which
can be no more without good works then the sun without light.

That this is so perfect, as not to lack any thing necessary to the true nature
of righteousness, nor to be maimed in any principal part thereof, though in
respect of degrees and some accidental parts, it be imperfect.

That the faithful cannot by this inherent righteousness abide the strict trial
of divine justice, but they are acquitted from the guilt of sin, and their
deserved punishment by the mere grace of God in Christ.

That Christ's righteousness is so far bestowed on believers and made theirs,
that in the merit and consideration thereof they are freed from the curse of
the Law, and the condemnation of hell, are justified unto eternal, life and
adopted to the inheritance of the heavenly kingdom. And imputed righteousness
in this sense cannot be gainsaid.

That no faith is justifying, but that which works by love, and brings forth
the fruit of good works.

That the condition of the new covenant for the remission of sins and
everlasting life is faith alone, not as excluding repentance and new obedience,
but as excluding the works of the Law, or legal covenant; and this is no
derogation from the freest grace.

That the faithful keep the commandments of God and in some sense may be said
to fulfill the Law, that is not in the strictness of the covenant of works, but
in the observance of duty without reserves, in the sincerity of love toward
God and man, as the Scripture says, love is the fulfilling of the Law.

That obedience every way perfect is required of the faithful as their duty,
but not under the penalty of eternal death, yet under that penalty they are
obliged to sincere obedience.

That good works have relation to eternal life as the means to the end, in that
manner, as the seed to Havest, as the race and combat to the Prize, as the work
to the Reward; not according to equality or condignity, or merit strictly so
called, but according to free compact or congruity.

That the faithful may be assured of their own justification by a true fixed
persuasion, that excludes hesitation and suspense, and causes holy security,
peace and joy; and that they ought to labor for such assurance, which arises
partly from the divine promises, and partly from the sense of their own
infeigned faith.

That though godliness stands not in absolute perfection, yet it stands in that
integrity of heart and life, an indubitable evidence whereof cannot be had
without a very careful and close walking with God, and continued earnest
endeavors of perfecting holiness in his fear.

That all human actions must have an actual or habitual reference to Gods
glory, and that all things are to be done in the best manner for that end.

That notwithstanding the power of divine grace, which works mightily in Gods
chosen, whosoever will be saved must watch and pray and strive, and bestow his
chiefest care and pains therein, and so continue to the end, and particularly
in the constant exercise not of a Popish, outside, formal, but a Spiritual and
real mortification, and self denial in continual dependence on Gods grace, who
works in us to will and to do of his own good pleasure.

In the positions aforegoing, all nice, obscure, perplexed and unnecessary
notions are avoided, and the plain sense of Gospel doctrine is attended. This
simplicity and plainess makes the truth much more intelligible, and less
controvertible, where a multitude of nice terms and notions are vain and
hurtful superfluities, that muffle the truth, and cloud men's judgments and
multiply controversies, and cause much confusion.

CHAP. III.
The due ordering of Gospel Worship.

FOrasmuch as divine Worship, is the first and nearest act of Piety, and aims
immediately at the glorifying of Gods name, and the keeping of the soul devoted
to him, the due ordering thereof must needs be one of the highest concernments
of true religion. Whereupon such an order thereof must needs be most desirable,
as has most tendency to exalt the honor of Gods name, and to advance the
souls pure devotion. And doubtless that has most tendency thereunto, which is
most according to the nature and will of God. Notwithstanding the fetches of
men's wit in commending their will worship, God best knows, what service will
please him best, and do us most good. It becomes us, neither to contemn Gods
authority in the neglect of his institutions, nor to control his wisdom in the
addition of vain inventions. And this will bring us into the way of a
reasonable service, most acceptable to God and profitable to our selves.

In the fullness of time our Lord Christ, being to establish a more perfect way,
than what had been before, lays this foundation, God is a Spirit and they that
worship him, must Worship him in Spirit and truth. Accordingly he antiquated
the old legal form, great in outward furniture and visible spendor, but
comparatively small in substance and inward power; and instituted an other of a
far different strain, wherein the rituals and externals are few and plain, but
their substance and inward power is great and mighty. And when he abrogated
former things, which for their time had the stamp of divine authority, because
they suited not with the Gospel state, and were in a comparative sense called,
carnal ordinances that were not good; doubtless it was not his mind and will,
that men should erect new frames of their own devising after the similitude of
those old things, that are passed away. To worship God in the Spirit after the
simplicity that is in Christ, according to the Gospel dispensation, as it is
most agreeable to the nature of the divine Majesty, which is Worshipped, and
best fitted to glorify him as God indeed; so it is also most efficacious to
make the Worshippers more knowing in religion, more holy and heavenly in Spirit
and conversation, and every way more perfect in things pertaining to life and
godliness.

Irreverence, rudeness, sordidness, or any kind of negligence in the outward
service of God, is not here commended under the simplicity and Spirituality of
Gospel worship. Due regard must be had to all those matters of decency, the
neglect whereof would render the Service undecent; such as are convenient
places of assembling commonly called Churches, comely furniture and convenient
utensils therein, a grave habit not of special sanctity, but of civil decency
for a Minister, all which should not be vile and beggarly but graceful and
seemly; likewise a well composed countenance and reverent gesture, is requisite
in all that present themselves before the Lord. Sitting or lolling or covering
the head, or having the hat halfway on in prayer, is among us unseemly, except
natural infirmity call for indulgence herein: but laughing, talking, gazing
about in our attendance on religious exercises, is no better than profaneness;
and to come into the congregation walking with our hats on our heads, is by
custom taken for irreverence and incivility, and therefore to be avoided as
offensive. All matters of necessary decency, are in their generals of the Law
of nature, and in the particulars to be ordered by human prudence.

All natural expressions of devotion, as kneeling, and lifting up of the hands
and eyes in prayer, are allowed by all sorts. We call them natural because
nature it self teaches to use them, without any positive institution divine or
human; and a rational man by the mere light of nature is directed to use them,
yet not without some government and discretion. For herein nature it self is
subject to some variety, and is in part determined and limited by the custom of
several ages and countries, as for instance, in the prostration of the body in
the act of adoration, in the wearing of Sackcloth, and renting of clothes in
time of great humiliation, which in former ages were suitable, and that
according to nature, but not now adays in regard of the variation of custom.
And I suppose that in this sense St. Paul speaks against wearing of long hair
as contrary to nature.

But there has been much controversy about such Ceremonies as contribute
nothing to the aforesaid necessary decency, and are no natural nor civil and
customary expressions of reverence and devotion, but are of human institution
and of a mystical and merely instituted signification, and made visible stated
signs of Gods honor, and the immediate expressions of our observance of him,
and obligation to him, and by some supposed to be not mere circumstances, but
parts of divine Worship; and yet more especially if they be designed in their
use, for that significancy and moral efficacy that belongs to Sacraments, and
made no less then the Symbals of our Christianity. It lies not on me to
determine on either side in this controversy; nevertheless it is easy to
apprehend this, that it can be no danger nor damage to be sparing in those
things, which being at least doubtful and unnecessary, have turned to endless
strife and scandal between those that own the same doctrine of Faith, and the
same Church Communion. Likewise it can do no hurt to reformed Christianity, not
to insist on that latitude in devised rites of worship, that will acquit the
greatest part of the Ceremonies used in the Church of Rome, from the charge of
Superstition, and which makes way for the oppressing of the Churches, and the
sinking of religion under a luggage of unprofitable institutions.

To make any thing necessary and commanded of God, which he has not commanded,
and to damn any thing as forbidden by him, which he has left indifferent, and
to dread left God should not be pleased, unless we do somethings which we need
not do, and lest he should be displeased, when we do somethings not forbidden,
is no doubt the crime of Superstition; but it is not the whole extent of that
sin. For it is no less Superstition to feign God to be pleased with men's vain
inventions, yea though they be not enjoined or observed as divine precepts; and
this also is, to teach for Doctrines the commandments of men. And who are the
greater controlers of Gods wisdom, and usurpers upon his authority? They that
fear to do what God has allowed, supposing it to be forbidden, or they that
presume to add their own inventions for the bettering of his service, and make
the omission thereof as criminal, as the neglect of divine ordinances?
Doubtless it is a more tolerable Superstition to be over solicitous and
scrupulous, about the commandments of God, than to be over-confident and
vehement in the unwarrantable or questionable traditions of men.

Human devices multiplied in Gods worship, engender to much vanity and
superstition in the zealous observers of them, and are apt to extinguish the
inward life of Godliness, as rank weeds choke the corn; and they are commonly
made a Cloak to real ungodliness. And if some of them were first introduced
with pious intention, yet they are commonly maintained and multiplied to serve
a carnal Interest. And they are the more easily entertained and observed,
because it is easy to the flesh to buy out the inward Service of God and the
subjection of the inward man, by superficial bodily exercise. But the
depretiating of these devices, serves to pluck off the mask of hypocrisy, made
up of mere formalities, and to invigorate the life and spirit of true Religion.

To be the Ministration of the Spirit, is the excelling glory of the Gospel
Ministration, wherewith a grave and sober decency and comely ornament does well
accord; but excessive gaudiness, pompous and theatrical shows, various
gesticulations, and affected postures, are vanities too much detracting from
its dignity and spiritual Majesty.

CHAP. IV.
The due dispensation of Gods word.

WHen our Lord Jesus ascended up on high, he gave gifts unto men, appointing
and furnishing Spiritual Officers for the Service of his Kingdom, some
extraordinary and temporary, as Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists; others
ordinary and successively perpetual, as Pastors and Teachers. Wherefore the
interest of Christianity lies much in a right Gospel Ministry, which is
suitable and serviceable to our Lords design, and the ends of his Gospel. And it
is a Ministry, which is pure and incorrupt, dispensing the truth as it is in
Jesus, whereby men are brought to sound faith and true holiness; which is
vigorous and powerful, apt to take hold of the conscience and reach the heart;
which is sollicitous and laborious, traveling in birth till Christ be formed
in the hearers and the Man-child the new creature be born into the world; which
is assiduous and instant in preaching the word, by instruction, reproof and
comfort, that as much as in it lies, it may present every man perfect in
Christ; which comes with full Scripture evidence and cogent reason, with solid
matter in style and language not negligent, much less undecent, yet not too
curious and elaborate, but free, vehement, grave, serious and fit for the work
in hand, which is not to tickle ear, but to break open the heart; which is
exemplary in faith, purity, charity, self-denial and contempt of the world; and
finally which is not mercenary, but naturally cares for the state of the flock,
and accommodates it self thereunto, as its great charge and chief concern. And
who is sufficient for these things, says the great Apostle! Doubtless much
wisdom and grace is needful, in an able Minister of the new Testament, and a
Workman that needs not to be ashamed.

It being pre-supposed that he holds fast the form of Sound words, and that he
is thoroughly instructed in the mystery of Godliness, which he is to impart to
others, in the first place, his prudence will be concerned for the judicious
management of the dispensation committed to him. A prudent dispenser of the
word, will take care to deliver nothing to others, but what is very
intelligible to himself; and whereof he can make good sense, and render a
reason to those that ask it. He does not trifle with holy things, he shuns
vanity and curiosity, and does not ramble into impertinences, and cares not to
utter any thing for ostentation. He has in his eye the end of his Ministry,
and the usefulness and importance of what he has to communicate, that (as it
said of the Scripture from whence he takes it) it may be profitable for
Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for instruction in Righteousness, that
it may come home to the hearts and lives of men, and be fit to raise their
attention by their own concernment in it. He considers withal what the hearers
can best receive, that is, not what the flesh can well digest (for then the
most necessary truths must be forborne) but that which carries its own evidence,
to that it must be owned, or the gainsayers must be self-condemned. And this
is to prepare men's minds, and to make way for such harder sayings and stricter
precepts, as must be manifested in due season.

Moreover the Dispensation of the word of God should be, as the word it self
is, quick and powerful, and in all reason that is to be most esteemed such,
which is most apt to be effectual to the end, for which God has ordained it,
which is to open men's eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from
the power of Satan to God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and an
inheritance among them, that be sanctified through faith in Christ. That kind
of preaching that has most tendency to convince, direct and move toward this
end, is without controversy the most powerful.

The pressing of Doctrines with solid and cogent reason, provided they be made
plain and obvious to the capacity of the hearers, appertains to this manner of
preaching, and in a chief point therein. Strong reason may be so delivered as
to be too hard, and strong for plain people to receive and digest it. Here
Condescension is a great Duty, and perspicuity a great Gift. But the bare
evidence of reason does not all. For to gain the Will (which is the man)
besides the judgment, the fancy and affections had need be gained. We find it
the condescension of God himself in his word, to deal very much with these
lower faculties, which belonging not to brutes only, but to men also, it is not
brutish but human, to be moved by them in subordination to the judgment. Even
the most learned and prudent men, are found to take no small impression from
them; and therefore the most proper ways of soliciting and exciting them, are
not to be neglected, much less contemned. Now dry reason though strong enough,
is not so fit to take the affections or raise the fancy. Wherefore some other
helps, among which there are comparatively little things, are herein used, as
familiar expressions, apt similitudes, expostulations, lively representations,
and such like; to which may be added a voluble tongue, a moving tone, and
taking gesture. And though much noise and action make not a powerful Preacher;
yet earnestness of speech and elevation of the voice, is not of little force,
and especially with vulgar hearers, who being the greatest number in most
Auditories, are very regarnable.

And truly the weight of the business requires due fervor. Should the matters
of life and death eternal be delivered without feeling, as by men half asleep?
And people's drowsiness does no less require it. Yea, possibly the
apprehensions and affections of the common people may better be roused up, by a
somewhat boisterous way of excitation; which for this reason should not
displease the learned or most judicious sort, who are in this case to consider
not what would most affect themselves, but the greater multitude, who stand in
greatest need of help, and whose souls are not less precious, nor redeemed with
a lesser price, than the souls of the greatest Scholars, and Sages of this
world.

Indeed much judgment and and circumspection is here called for, that all
rudeness and homeliness of expression, all curiosity, levity and loathsome
affectation, and all manner of undecency be avoided; and that what is comely
and congruous and apt to convince and move be used, and that nothing be
overstrained. And in this matter self-distrust, if not too excessive, will do
better than Self-confidence and conceitedness.

Here it should be considered, that very worthy men may have some indecencies
in voice and gesture, which they cannot well remedy; and others, who are very
useful, and whose Service in Gods Church could not be well spared, may be
liable to some lesser mistakes and incongruities in expression, which critical
hearers may discern, yet they hinder not the efficacy of the word. And withal
let it be considered, whose work they do, that aggravate such weaknesses to
make sport for themselves, and others to the contempt of Gods ordinance. And
for them that pour out scorn upon the most Pious, Serious, Solid and profitable
kind of Preaching, and make ridiculous representations of it to the world,
because it suits not their seeming wisdom; I am rather inclined to lament their
folly, then to emulate their Wit, or envy their Applause with some men. We read
that the wise Preacher sought out acceptable words, that is words pleasing to
edification, that would reach home and were piercing as goads and nails.

The Preachers inward feeling of what he speaks, has a secret force to cause
his words to be felt by others, and what comes from the heart is aptest to go
to the heart, by a Sympathy in the Spirits of men. And that any should speak of
Seeing and Feeling in some sort, the things that are written in Gods word, will
not seem strange to them who have tasted that the Lord is gracious.

The powerful dispensing of the word depends chiefly on the assistance of the
Holy Spirit, though both natural and acquired parts, and the industrious
exercise thereof be likewise necessary. For which cause the spiritual man has
unspeakable advantage of the merely natural man in this Service. The special
presence of the Spirit with him and the grace of God in him, causes him to
speak in a strain more apposite, and suitable to the forming of the new
creature. Yea, such illumination and conviction and taste of heavenly things, as
proceeds from a more common, or less than regenerating grace, will do more in
this business with less abilities of art and nature, than far greater abilities
in those kinds can do by themselves alone. The common Sense of the faithful,
is a witness to the truth hereof. And it must needs be so, that he who has
some savor of the things of God, should speak more Savorily of them, then he
can, to whom they are tastless or unsavory.

Wherefore there is a Spiritual kind of preaching not indeed opposite to
rational, nor taken so to be by any that talk of it with understanding, though
the Assertors of it have been abusively personated, as holding such a dotage.
They do not say, that the Spirit shows any thing about the sense of Scripture
or divine matters, which is not consonant to right reason, or that whatsoever
is darted into their mind, is to be taken for an irradiation from the Holy
Ghost, or that any may presume upon the Spirits immediate help, in the neglect
of rational search and Study. But their meaning is, that as heretofore in
extraordinary persons there were extraordinary inspirations; so there have
been, are, and always shall be, the ordinary teachings and inspirations of the
Spirit; in regard whereof it is styled in Scripture the Spirit of wisdom and
revelation, which teaching as all the Faithful stand in need of, so more
especially the Ministers of the Gospel; and that this divine assistance does
elevate, or heighten the gifts of nature and learning, and guides us to sound
reasoning, yea, and sometimes brings things into the mind without previous
reasoning, yet rational and found to be so upon due Scanning. There is no great
evidence in reason, that St. Paul's demonstration of the Spirit and power, is to
be restrained to the miraculous confirmation of his Doctrine, or any
extraordinary gift (though that sense be not excluded.) For the contexture of
his discourse in that Chapter, sets forth a certain faculty, perceptive and
expressive of the things of the Spirit of God, belonging unto spiritual men as
such. And they are no Fanatics, that to this day own the more common
interpretation of the words, namely to Preach from the special help of the
illuminating and quickening Spirit, with a lively perception and feeling of the
things that are delivered. But whatsoever the meaning of those words be, verily
they are besotted with reason, that in the pride thereof regard not this
illumination from above, and scoff at those that look after it.

To Preach Christ is the matter of this dispensation, and to Preach moral
duties is not extraneous to the Preaching of Christ, but comprised under it.
Yet it must be acknowledged, that morality in its best estate (as it is
vulgarly taken for temperance and righteousness toward men, and other virtues
of that rank, as proceeding from a merely natural principle, which an Aristotle
might describe in his Ethics) is far below Christianity. For it is found in
many that are alienated from the life of God, and lead merely by the Spirit of
this world. But this name may be given to some higher thing, as first, to the
whole observation of Gods moral law founded in our Creation, and that not only
in the outward work after a common manner performable by the unregenerate, but
in a duemannerfrom a right principle to a right end, that is from the love of
God unto his glory. And in this sense we acknowledge that it is a great part,
but not the whole of the Christian Religion; nor indeed the whole of morality
taken not vulgarly, but Theologically, and that in its full extent. For so
taken, it is no other then the conformity of our minds and actions to God and
his laws, and faith in Christ, is a main part thereof.

Indeed to preach Christ, is to preach the whole Duty of man, and more
especially those duties that are consequent to, and founded in our redemption;
as also to set forth the whole mystery of the Gospel, which is the ground and
reason of our duty. For God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, and
accordingly has ordained the Ministry of reconciliation, by which there is
made known the lapsed and lost estate of mankind, the abundant grace of God in
Christ for their recovery, remission of sins, and free justification through
his righteousness, regeneration and inward sanctification, the inhabitation of
the spirit in believers, and their mystical union with Christ, their living by
the faith of him, and deriving of spiritual life and strength from him, and
growing up into him, till they be filled with all the fullness of God in him,
their spiritual warfare and conflicts between the flesh and spirit within them,
their temptations, desertions and renewed consolations, and the earnest and
sealing of the Holy Spirit given unto them. Surely these are fit Subjects to
behand led by a Gospel Preacher, though the Preaching of these matters or of
many of them, is by some called Canting and phrase Divinity; yet they are the
Sacred expressions of the Holy Ghost in Scripture. And dare any say they are
but a sound of words without matter agreeable to the Style? No, they are real
and deep mysteries, and intelligible to them that obey the truth. It is
heartily here asserted and earnestly contended for, that the Gospel calls us as
much to virtue as to glory, and that its true intent is to reduce us to a holy
life: yet withal, the Counsel of God therein is to set forth the glory of his
free grace, the all-fulness of Jesus Christ, and the mighty working of his
Spirit, and the wonderfulness of Salvation through him, to the intent that we
might glory, not in our selves but in him, who of God is made unto us Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption.

And indeed, who do more powerfully and successfully preach Christian duty,
than they that most insist on this unspeakable grace, and lay open the
treasures thereof? The love of Christ is so to be spoken of, as to beget in us
a love toward him, not imaginary and conceited, but real and substantial, made
good by an entire subjection to him. And therefore the Doctrines of free grace
and of good works are to be sounding together in our Pulpits. What Christ has
done for us is not to save us the pains of a continual mortification, and of
the agony to be endured therein, and of aspiring to the most perfect state of
holiness that is attainable. We are to live as strictly as if we were to be
saved by the perfection of our own obedience. And indeed none lead more holy
lives than they, that desire to be found in Christ, and when they have done all
that they can, rely wholly upon the mercy of God in him.

It is most true that Gospel mysteries do not lie in mere Phrases, nor is new
matter always brought with new forms of speech, nor are people much the wiser
by having their heads filled with them. There are empty sounds and terms
unintelligible, swelling words with windy notions, expressions that seem to
draw deep, whose meaning is but shallow. There is a sollicitous stating of
points with a seeming exactness, that is indeed weak and injudicious, and a
niceness in distinguishing, which is but frivolous. Many controversies much
agitated are but a strife of words, and too great stress is often laid upon
little fancies. And a greater mischief there is, that in cloudy language
pernicious doctrines take shelter, and dangerous Sects are known to hide
themselves in this covert. And therefore he that does his work rightly, will
know the true significancy and import of what he utters. He vents not mere
words, but sound matter and good substance; for the souls of men are fed with
solid sense and not with phrases.

Howbeit as touching expressions, there is a certain Spiritual strain, which is
most agreeable to the things of the Spirit of God, and which as coming from
life and Spirit, is better discerned than described. There is a speaking, not
in words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches. And
though this more eminently took place in the Apostles, and such other
extraordinary persons, yet there is no sufficient reason to restrain it to them
alone. St. Paul may well be understood to speak of this as a gift received by
them, that had received not the Spirit of the world, but that which is of God,
and as something suited to the perception and taste of all Spiritual men. It
does not exclude the use of human wisdom, though the wisdom of the Spirit sway
in chief. For no doubt, even Paul's human learning and prudence was herein
serviceable, though in subserviency to the influence and conduct of the Spirit.
This Spirituality of expression, is conformable to that of the Spirit of God in
Scripture, though not confined to the words thereof. Surely the mysteries of
Salvation cannot be better handled; than in those terms in which they were
first delivered, to wit, in Scripture expressions, or others consonant thereto,
solidly and pertinently used, and to call this canting, savours to much of that
Spirit, to which holy language is unsavory.

Without controversy, the strongest reason is of greatest force to gain the
wills of men, to embrace true Religion. For that which crosses sensuality,
selfishness and all the depraved appetite of our lapsed nature (as Religion
does) must needs have its greatest strength, next under the power of divine
grace, in the force of right reason. But care and skill is requisite, that it
be so prepared, offered, and set home, that it may be suitable to them that
should receive it, and that the cogency thereof may so reach unto, and fasten
upon their judgments, as to gain their wills. Philosophical ratiocinations are
too remote not only from low and dull capacities, but also from the greater
part of them, that are competently apprehensive and intelligent, and so being
too much estranged from them, they do not touch them to the quick. A familiar,
natural, plain and obvious way of reasoning comes home to all men, and is most
felt at the heart, and that by Scholars themselves, though their intellect may
be more delighted in more accurate or reserved Speculations.

Scriptural preaching is indeed the most rational, as coming with such reason
as is of greatest force with men in matters of Salvation. For Gods written word
is a treasure of divine wisdom, that thoroughly furnishes the man of God.
Besides, the infallible testimony thereof has more authority, than
Philosophical reason, though sound and true, can have, upon Christian hearers;
and it peirceth deeper and sticks closer. And arguments taken, and words spoken
from Scripture, wherewith the people converse daily, are more easily
apprehended and retained; and so are more instructive, and every way more
useful than other reasonings. Though numerous citations of sentences out of
human Authors be an unprofitable kind of ostentation; yet the Sentences of Holy
Writ, which is the evidence of our Christian hope, and the testimony of him,
who is truth it self, are most effectual to edification. And whosoever is able
to speak reason in divine matters, is to make a rational use of Scripture: and
if any quote it impertinently and absurdly, it is through defect of reason, and
they would be as injudicious in their Sermons without those quotations.

But nice and haughty wits mostly cavil without cause, and charge profitable
Preachers with injudiciousness, merely through their own vain curiosity and
inconsiderateness. Scripture quotations are sometimes used by way of allusion,
or for illustration, not for strict proof; and that which is brought for proof,
if it be not full and cogent, yet it may add some weight, and then it is not
abused. Besides, if a passage be used in a sound and pious, though not in its
proper sense, it is pardonable. It is fit indeed that in citing Texts, we know
their true import, and go more by weight than number, shunning impertinency and
superfluity; yet it is not unfit to note, that all sound and good Preachers are
not alike judicious, and those that are very solid may be guilty of some
oversights: and it is a bad matter that their Ministry, which God has owned
and honored with good success in his Service, should be set at naught for a
few mistakes (perhaps more pretended than real) about the sense of some
Scripture, when it is not applied otherwise than the Analogy of faith will
bear, and nothing is defended but known truth. I have known a pious but
strangely mistaken sense of a Scripture sentence cast into the mind, and there
fixed to have been the first occasion of seriousness in Religion, to one that
afterward lived and dyed a godly Christian. Now that which was causal in this
conversion was the godly truth it self, which was written in Gods word; and the
mistaking it to lie in such a sentence where it did not, being but accidental,
was no hinderance. I do in no wise countenance the irrational use of Scripture,
but am sensible of the importance of good judgment and due care about the sense
thereof: yet I cannot approve the scornful haughtiness of some men, who deride
godly persons well instructed in the Scripture, as having nothing but words and
Phrases and senseless notions; either because they come short of Scholar-like
exactness, or because they speak of the things of God in a more Evangelicall
and Spiritual strain, than these can well bear.

In speaking, the best use of art is to speak to best purpose, and for that
end, in divine matters to speak with greatest Majesty and authority. And this
is done not by ostentation of wit, by puerile and effeminate rhetorications, by
a rapsody of flanting words, by starched speech, by cadency of sounds, or any
too elaborate politeness, that please the shallow fancy, but by the evidence of
reason set forth in a masculine and unaffected Eloquence, that has power over
the wills of men, which are tough and knotty pieces.

Perspicuity is a great virtue and felicity in discourse, for hereby what is
offered gains attention, and enters the mind, and abides therein: but intricacy
and obscurity is a bar to its entrance and entertainment. Hereunto an easy and
obvious method, evident coherence, and plainness of expression conduces mainly.

Wherefore he that minds what he has to do, is not careful by a more curious
artifice to please the fancies of some itching hearers, but has most regard to
that composure, that makes most for a general benefit and edification. And for
this cause as he would not multiply words without need, and become tedious; so
he would not be too succinct and close; and by that means either too dark, or
too quick to inform or effect the people. In vulgar auditories a dilating of
the matter is most necessary, so that idle tautologies and prolixity be
avoided: and it may be spread forth in such fullness and plainess of speech, as
will not be unacceptable even to Scholars, that are not wise in their own
conceit. But the careless and confused speaking of incoherent and undigested
matter, rudeness or baldness of expression is no part of this commended
plainness, which is orderly, comely and weighty, agreeable to the Majesty of
Gods word.

A true Preacher of the Gospel rightly divides the word of truth, and gives to
all their portion. He does not make distinction, where the rule of faith makes
no difference, nor does he confound things, that ought to be distinguished. He
is not partial toward parties for interest or affection. And so he does not
promiscuously justify or condemn the evil and the good together on any side;
but as he accounts it an odious thing to rail upon one party in the ambiguous
terms of false Church, false Worship, false Ministry, Idolatry, Superstition,
Formality: so he accounts it no less odious, confusedly to inveigh against
those of an other persuasion, under the no less ambiguous terms (as they are
now commonly used) of Hypocrites, Pharisees, Fanatics, Enthusiasts,
Separatists, Humorists and such like.

He is constant in Preaching the word, instant in season and out of season. For
in Preaching frequently, he does not do the work of the Lord negligently, but
duly feeds the flock, and that with better prepared food, than they use to
bring that Preach but seldom upon pretense of greater preparation.

He watches over the flock with diligence, and naturally cares for their
estate; for he knows the worth of precious souls. He condescends to persons of
low degree, and is concerned for the souls of the poor and simple and
illiterate, as well as of the noble, rich and learned; for he knows their
Redeemer paid alike dear for both. And however the proud and covetous judge, he
does not think it below him to intermeddle, for the reducing of the simple that
go astray, and he seeks to recover them with gentleness and patience; for he
prefers the gaining of one Soul, before all the preferments of this world.

He earnestly looks after that, which some do little regard, to wit the Seal of
his Ministry in the saving efficacy thereof on the hearers, and when he finds
it, he makes it the crown of his rejoicing. And this Seal he takes not to be
their mere owning of Sound doctrine, or following an Orthodox party, much less
their abounding in notions, their talking and outward Guarb of profession; but
their new birth or their Spiritual growth, the promoting whereof is the scope
of his labors, and the daily travel of his Soul.

CHAP. V.
The due performance of Public Prayer.

PRayer being a main part of Gods worship and chief act of devotion, and such
as does accompany and Sanctify every other Religious duty, and the public
management thereof pertaining to the work of the Ministry; its due performance
must needs be of no small import to the increase of true Piety, and no small
part of the Ministerial excellency and sufficiency.

Among Spiritual gifts, I doubt not to number the gift of Prayer also, and I
judge they speak too low of it, that make it only a natural gift, or acquired
by practice and imitation. Much indeed may lie in natural parts, and
observation and exercise, but not all; for over and above these things, the
Spirit of Christ presiding perpetually over his Church sets in, and by a secret
influence on men designed of God for this service, indues them with a peculiar
aptness of knowledge and utterance, as well in Prayer as Preaching, for the
edifying of the Church. And some unsanctified persons being thus gifted, may
preach and pray with a notable tendency to the saving of others, when
themselves prove cast-aways. Private Christians also according to their
measure, are partakers of this gift in much diversity of degrees, God giving to
every man severally as he will.

Besides this, there is a special and saving gift, the Spirit of Prayer, and
Praying in the Holy Ghost, or by his gracious assistance in a holy manner,
according to the will of God, which is indeed lively and powerful, and apt to
kindle a holy fervor in them, that join in the service so performed. And why
that, which is performed in such a manner, and by such assistance, may not be
called a praying by the Spirit, I see no reason. They who thankfully
acknowledge and bless God for so great a gift of his grace, do not intend
thereby a miraculous inspiration, or an absolute infallible guidance of the
Holy Ghost. Much less do they think that their prayers are such dictates of the
Spirit, as would infer that the very matter and word^ thereof, being written
would become Canonical Scripture, to which is requisite not only an infallible
Spirit, but also an attestation thereof by the same Spirit, sufficient to
convince others. But this they maintain, that the Spirit helps them against
their indisposedness of mind, and deadness of heart, and manifold infirmities,
and strengthens their faculties, and quickens their graces, and enlarges their
desires, and elevates their souls, and brings things to their remembrace,
specially the divine promises, yea, and in some particulars may guide the heart
and tongue by a present immediate suggestion. For why must the Spirit of God be
thought to do less in exciting to good, then the Devil ordinarily does in
prompting to evil? And yet they are not to depend on the Spirits immediate
suggestion, for matter, words and method, without taking care or thought before
hand. It is an ordinary and not miraculous assistance which they expect, and
which is usually given according to men's preparations, and suited to their
several capacities.

The Spirit of Prayer is not confined to this, or that exterior frame or order
of Prayer; but is ever found there, where the heart has a due sense of the
matter. A particular form, whether stinted or not stinted is not of the essence
of Prayer, but only its outward shape, and it pertains to it not as it is a
Sacred thing, but as an action in general; and for that no action can possibly
be performed but in some particular mode, this holy action cannot otherwise be
performed. And whereas there are diverse modes thereof, they may be used as they
are congruous to the substance of the duty according to men's choice and
judgment, unless they were (as indeed they are not) bound up to one by a divine
determination.

The lawfulness of Set-Forms is further evinced from the Lords Prayer, and
other forms in Scripture, and as much is owned by the general custom of singing
David's Psalms. Wherefore to turn the back upon the public Prayers of the
Church, merely because performed in this manner, is unwarrantable.

And there is a^ little warrant to restrain all public Prayer to a stinted
Liturgy, and leave no liberty at all to the Ministers godly zeal and prudence.

In this particular, the interest of true godliness will be much better
advanced by moderation, than by contests and rigor on either hand. For it is
very discernable, that the Antipathy against either way, is mainly caused by
the animosity and mutual opposition, between the parties of different
persuasions and inclinations in this matter. They are too weak and ill-advised
at least, if not humorous and self-conceited, that reject all Sett-Forms: and
on the other hand to suppress the gift of Prayer in our selves or others, is to
sin against the grace of God and to hinder much good. The use of a Set-Form
without an imperious restraint of Prayer thereto, will obviate the objection of
Stinting the Spirit, which means (if there be any thing to the purpose in that
Phrase) a suppressing or undue restraining of this Spiritual gift, against
which a caution is here given.

In our addresses to the great God it concerns us to look well both to thoughts
and words, that in both he may be Sanctified by us, and glorified as God
indeed. And in our public addresses to him a more special care must be had,
that nothing be uttered before him, that is unmeet to be offered to his
dreadful Majesty. Rude, clownish, and homely expressions, as also quibling,
jingling, and all levity and trifling is very loathsome in Preaching, but in
Prayer much more. Affectation of words, curiosity and politeness becomes not
the weightiness and awfulness of this duty. Yea abruptness, obscurity, and all
incongruity of speaking is to be shunned herein, as much as possible: and that
only is to be used which is plain, clear, seemly, weighty, savory and
affectionate.

In like manner all indecency of voice, and gesture is to be watched against,
as an offensive thing, and apt to expose the Service to the derision of proud
scorners. Yet a seasonable elevation of the voice, or other apt expression of
earnestness is not to be counted rudeness.

Sometimes a worthy man may not be aware of some uncomeliness in his tone, or
in the posture of his countenance, or some other bodily gesture, by reason of
the fervor of his Spirit, in the duty joined with inadvertency toward those
exterior and lesser things. And sometimes an ill habit or custom is not easily
broken off. These inconveniences are prevented or redressed by a wariness of
disposition, and a moderate self-distrust, and the actual observation of what
is graceful or uncomely in others.

Prayer is a holy Converse with God, wherein an humble confidence, and Son-like
freedom of Spirit with him is acceptable; yet withal it calls for the greatest
prostration of soul, and the deepest reverence and Subjection. Wherefore humbly
to expostulate with God, is no sauciness. The whole current of the Prayers of
Saints in Scripture does warrant it, and that not only now and then in
extraordinary cases. Indeed our ordinary concerns with God, are no less than
the safety of our immortal Souls, the pardoning of our great and numberless
offenses, the subduing of inveterate corruptions, our escaping of many deadly
dangers, our victory over the adverse world, the powerful presence of his
Grace, the light of his Countenance; as also the interests of his glory, and of
his Church and people, and of the world in general, that poor Souls may be
delivered from the power of darkness, and translated into the kingdom of his
dear Son; all which are of the highest moment, and of themselves exceeding
difficult (though to God all things are possible) and they all require
vehemence and importunity, not as if God needed to be moved or stirred up, but
that we may declare our selves duly affected.

Howbeit even the best things may be overdone, and this over-doing is the
marring thereof. If in the expostulations of Prayer, men shall utter perverse
or frivolous things, or speak absurdly, daringly, or irreverently, they are
highly culpable and guilty of abusing the most holy things, and of contemning
the most glorious and fearful name of the Lord their God. Our freedom of
access to God and converse with him, must not be turned into an irreverent and
presumptuous familiarity. Those that are guilty of this rashness are worthy of
great rebuke. But I-know well, that the Spirit of Luke-warmness and profaness,
does usually cast reproaches and scorns upon that zeal and fervency of Spirit,
that well becomes the Servants of the Lord, and labors to make the most
accceptable, and profitable kind of Prayer to seem ridiculous.

It is against reason to think that the Ministers of the present age, brought
up under such eminent advantage for Ministerial abilities, should not be able
to speak to God in good and solid sense, in an orderly method, and in
affective, grave and seemly language, as becomes the Solemnity of Gods Worship.
Experience will justify the sufficiency of serious, pious and painful
Preachers in general, though the captious and curious, and such as love to
cavil, have found fault, and despised the profitable endeavors of those, whom
God has owned. Besides, the offenses that are committed in this matter,
proceed more from inadvertency and imprudence than from insufficiency, and may
be corrected by care and causion, and good advice. And it is no vanity to
suppose such a competency of prudence easily attainable by all those, that are
competently qualified for this Office. Indeed it cannot be expected, but that
some will be less able and less perfect than others in this performance, and
that the same persons may not be alike perfect therein at all times:
nevertheless, there is no such want of Security, that the Churches service will
be well performed, if any Prayer be used in the Church besides a prescribed
Form. For who can doubt, but that persons of competent ability and prudence,
may upon due encouragement be spread throughout a Nation, in such an Age of
learning and knowledge? And to say otherwise, were to disparage the Reformed
Religion.

And there is no just cause of doubt, but that an able Minister may make use,
either of a precomposed or of an immediately conceived Form of words. Yet in
this matter there is great diversity of judgment and affection, even unto much
prejudice and opposition. But the same minds might well be conciliated to both
ways, if rightly ordered. The Question is here supposed to be of the outward
mode, in which two things are mainly to be regarded, to wit, that it be
reverend and affective. Such, as are best persuaded of a pre-composed Form, and
find it expedient for them, doubtless may rightly manage it to the edifying of
themselves and others. For which end they must needs in some parts thereof make
use of occasional variation and enlargement (though premeditated) as minding
the more particular requiries of several times and occasions. But others by a
habit of ready utterance and much exercise, are well prepared to pray by the
immediate conceptions of their mind in proper and decent words, and can do it
without any straining of invention, and with much freedom of Spirit. No more is
here spoken, that what impartial men will grant. And why should any forbid them
that are thus qualified to use their gift? But if any should be rash with their
mouths, and hasty to utter any thing before God that is unmeet, they are
subject to the discipline of the Church to be censured for their error.
Moreover heightened affections enlarge the heart, and open the mouth, and do
not make a man at a stand for want of words. Indeed astonishing affection or an
ecstasy of Spirit may put one to such a stand, but that rarely takes hold of
any in a pubick performance. But a calm admiration and reverence of God, and
seriousness and earnestness of address to him, does not hinder but further
ap^expressions.

For the use of one constant Form, it has been pleaded that a stranger may
thereby the better know how we Worship God, and that the people better
understand and remember that, to which they are continually used. But on the
other hand variety and newness of matter, and words are more apt to quicken the
affection, and perfect the understanding also, especially of the attentive,
whenas under the constant rehearsal of one thing, the faculties grow flat and
dull. Besides, in the use of this liberty and variety, the Prayer being
ordinarily the same for substance in the main, the vulgar apprehension and
memory is helped, by the sameness of the main substance and scope, and the
affections are raised, and the understanding further edified by that which is
new in the frame, and method and particular matter, and the peoples more
particular variable concernments, are provided for by a more peculiar
accommodation and respect thereto, as occasions vary. And by the received
doctrine of Faith, a stranger may be sufficiently ascertained of the substance
of the Worship to be celebrated. For a Doctrine of a Church governs its
Worship; and it is well known, that one and the same tenor thereof will pass
through the several congregations of a nation, that are not confined to a
stinted Form, yet combined in the same faith and order. And when all is said,
that management and performance of this Service is the best, that is most
effectual to make the Comers thereunto more perfect in knowledge, more devout
and zealous toward God, more pious and blameless in their conversation, and
every way more perfect in the divine life; and it will be so acknowledged by
them that are discerning and serious in the things of God. But to conciliate
the minds of men diversely affected in this matter, and to prevent the
inconveniences, and to obtain the good of either way, a prescribed Form and a
free Prayer will do best together, in reference to the Churches peace and
edification.

CHAP. VI.
The right Administration of Ecclesiastical discipline.

THe Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the mysteries of God are Pastors of
the Church, and Pastoral authority includes both teaching and ruling, and
implies the peoples subjection in the Lord to their Doctrine and discipline. To
bereave the Church of discipline, is to leave it unfurnished of that means,
which is necessary to the preservation of all orderly Socities of mankind. It
is to turn the Garden of the Lord, by plucking up the fence thereof into a
Common or Wilderness.

The power intrinsecal to this Office, is not secular and coercive by temporal
penalties, but purely Spiritual; which is in the name of Christ, and by
authority from him the chief Pastor to watch over the Flock, to encourage them
that live conformably to the Gospel by the consolations thereof, and to warn
them that walk disorderly, and if any continue obstinate therein, to declare
them unworthy of Church Communion and Christian converse, and to require the
faithful to have no fellowship with them, to the intent that they may be
humbled and reformed.

As the Discipline of all Societies is to be regulated by their true interest
and and chief scope, so is this of the Church of God. Now the Christian Church
looks mainly to the honor of Christ, and the glory of Gods grace in him, and
to the Salvation of men, for which ends it was ordained. And consequently its
true interest lies in the conservation and augmentation of true Christianity or
the power of godliness: but that Church interest which is elsewhere fixed, and
levelled to an other mark, appertains to a carnal and worldly State set up in
the room, and pretense of this Spiritual Society.

The Churches true and proper excellency lies not in worldly splendour, opulency
and power; nor in outward rites and formal unity; nor in the stability and
amplitude of a mere external State: but in the inward light and life, in the
unfeigned faith and love, in the purity and Spiritual unity of believers, and in
the security and advancement of this internal State, and of the external State
in order to the internal. Wherefore the right end of discipline is not to
promote temporal glory, and opinions and formalities thereunto subservient, but
the Apostolic faith and worship, and the regeneration of the professors
thereof, and their sincere devotion, Godly unity, Sobriety, Righteousness,
Brotherly-kindness, and common Charity, and all the vital parts of
Christianity: and to keep and cast out Heresy, Superstition, Profaness,
Unrighteousness and all wicked error and practice, that tends to frustrate the
designs of Christ's Gospel: as also to prevent and remedy the causless tearing
and renting of Churches, and those alienations and animosities among
Christians, that proceed only from the wills and lusts of men. And the
management hereof to this right end, is of far greater consequence, than any
scrupulosity or preciseness about its external form and order. Nay, if an
external order could be proved to be primitive and Apostolical, and were
perverted and abused to enforce corrupt doctrines, scandalous and insnaring
inventions and impositions; and in a Ceremonial strictness to indulge real
profaness, and discourage true Godliness, it were no other then the mystery of
a carnal state under a Spiritual name, having a form of godliness, but denying
and suppressing the power thereof.

The right end of Discipline being such as has been declared, it follows that
its proper work is to encourage Godliness, and to disgrace open sin.
Accordingly being rightly managed it admonishes the unruly, casts out the
obstinate, and restores the penitent. About these things it is active,
watchful and vigorous. What severity it has, it exercises in correcting real
scandals and gross breaches of Gods Law, and in maintaining the Churches peace
against those that cause divisions, and offenses contrary to the Doctrine which
we have received, that is the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles.

But it cares little for those matters, wherein the life and power of
Religion, and the Churches peace and edification is unconcerned. Much less does
it seek to quench godly zeal, and to hinder the necessary means of the increase
of true godliness, or to afflict peaceable and pious Christians by any needless
rigors.

CHAP. VII.
Religious Family-government.

IN the time of the Law the solemn Dedication of houses was in use, the
Solemnity expressing that holy exercises should be performed in it, and that
the household should be holy. In the first times of Christianity, the Scripture
makes mention of Churches that were in particular houses, teaching that
Christian families should resemble Churches for piety and godly order.

By Family-godliness Religion thrives exceedingly, and decays as much by the
neglect thereof. By Domestic instruction knowledge is much increased. For this
private particular Teaching is apt to be more heeded than that which is public
and general; and persons are hereby prepared to attend with profit upon the
public Preaching. Good principles are infused, and impressions of good are
made upon those that live under such government. And where much may not be
wrought at present toward conversion, something may stick upon them, which may
afterward appear, when the grace of God shall visit them more powerfully.
Moreover National, and Church Reformation should here begin. Nations will be
wicked, and Churches corrupt, while families remain disordered: but by the
reformation of these lesser Societies the larger are easily reformed, as the
whole street is made clean, where every one will sweep his own door, which is
but an easy task.

It were most desirable that houses of eminent persons were exemplary in this
kind, as it appears King David's was by that profession, I will walk within my
house with a perfect heart, I will not know a wicked person, he that walks in
a perfect way shall serve me. But it is lamentable, that in so many families of
professed Christians of high and low degree, wickedness carries it with a high
hand in drunkenness, swearing, cursing, open profanation of the Lords day, in
hatred of Godliness, and contempt of Gods ordinances: and that in many others
free from debauchedness and open lewdness, there is no face, Religion, no
divine Worship performed, no Godly discipline, no instruction in the way of
Godliness observed. Should any professing subjection to God, maintain under his
charge and government an open Rebellion against God, or at least a total
neglect of him? Should not God rule, where his Servant rules?

Wherefore it is the proper work of Christian householders in their several
houses, to offer Prayers and praises to God daily, both Morning and Evening as
the daily Sacrifice; to Sanctify the Lords day in Prayer, singing of Psalms,
reading the Scriptures and other holy Books, in repeating Sermons, instructing
Children and Servants, and in taking account of their diligence and proficiency
under the means of Grace; and this to be done not formally and customarily, but
conscienciously in good carnest and to good effect.

It is their charge also to hold a prudent hand over children in their
Minority, and not to indulge them in a course of idleness, sensual pleasure, or
any inordinate liberty; also to make intercession to God for those under their
tuition, to allow Servants time for secret duty; lastly to purge their Families
of sinful disorders, and to remove scandals, as carefully as the Israelites
cleansed their houses from Leaven, at the time of the Passover.

As the Religious care of Superiors, so the submission and teachableness of
inferiors is enjoined. Children, Servants and Sojourners in Godly families,
being come into the Lords heritage and portion, and under his special
protection, and the dispensation of his grace, should not think it a yoke of
bondage to live under such a Discipline, and to be held unto such exercies; but
should improve the advantage and be followers of whatsoever is good and
praiseworthy. And whatsoever imperfections they find therein, they should not
malignantly aggravate the same, but bless God for the good, and consider the
defects as the remainders of human weakness.

CHAP. VIII.
Private mutual Exhortations, Pious discourse and edifying Conversation.

IT is also of great advantage when Christian people are inured in the way of
Religious converse, and discourse for edification. For by this means they
propagate the knowledge and love of the truth, and keep themselves in Spiritual
life and vigor, and daily building up one another on their most holy faith,
advance heavenward. And it is as comely as advantageous. The royal Prophet
understood what was seemly and worthy of him in his conversation, and he says,
I will talk of thy commandments before Princes and not be ashamed. Is it not
seemly for those that are risen with Christ to speak of the things above, and
for Fellowtravell rs toward the heavenly Kingdom, to mention the affairs of
their own country? It is also sweet and lovely, a partaking of that grace that
was poured into Christ's lips, and it is pleasant to all such as savor the
things of God. Yea, are not Converts bound by all means to seek the conversion
of others? We have received this holy commandment, Let no corrupt communication
proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good for the use of edifying, that
it may administer grace to the hearers.

Indeed holy language proceeding from the mouths of Scandalous persons or
detected hypocrites is disgraced, and loses its savor. If affectation and
vanity appear therein, it has not so sweet a relish. But this can be no
disparagement to gracious words, which holy and humble men of inoffensive lives
speak feelingly from the abundance of the heart; and those that judge them
hypocrites, God will judge. Moreover, honest minds may be sometimes guilty of
imprudence, and thereby occasion some disgust, and make that which is good and
wholesome to be unacceptable and ineffectual. Nevertheless it is a bad matter for
any one from the baseness of some Hypocrites, and the weakness of good
Christians to take occasion of pouring out contempt upon this godly Practice.
Yea, whosoever gives a check to it, upon pretense of its unseasonableness and
impertinency at some times, are not well advised for the interest of true
Religion, because for one that is overforward herein a hundred are too
backward, and that among the Wise and Able, who might reap a harvest of much
good, if they were not too shie or sluggish. The most have need rather of the
spur than the bridle in this case.

Wherefore discretion will mind the season in which every thing is beautiful,
and not inconsiderately force Discourse, and run on therein when it will not be
entertained, as in the set times of other Men's sports or business: Nor will it
press any beyond due measure, and what they can well receive, lest that which
in it self is precious become nauseous or untastfull. Opportunity and leisure
will sufficiently offer it self for set and solemn conference; and besides
this, there will be room almost continually to put in by the by, a word that
may take effect. How forcible are right words! It has sometimes come to pass,
that a short Saying occasionally let fall upon a prepared mind, has entered
deep, and stuck close. Yea, that which takes not much at present, may be
remembered, and have its effect after a long time, and then be matter of much
Blessing and Praise. The counsel of the wise Preacher looks this way. In the
morning sow thy seed, in the evening withold not thy hand, for thou know
not whether shall prosper this or that, or whether they shall be alike good.
Whatsoever scornful or careless Men conceit hereof, the Divine Wisdom has
made it praiseworthy and precious. The tongue of the just is as choice silver,
and the lips of the righteous feed many. And to good Hearts this Practice will
not be burdensome, for they will recreate their Minds herewith, as an holy
divertisement and serious Pastime, while others spend their leisure in that
mirth and laughter which the Wise Man calls madness.

CHAP. IX.
The Prevalence of Religion or real Godliness in the Civil Government of a
Nation.

IN Christian States and Kingdoms Religion being Gods interest, ought to have
the preeminence in all things. And its Preeminence is no incroachment upon the
Rights of the Higher Powers, but their Establishment. God alone has an
underived and unlimited Empire over Man his creature. The People are primarily
Gods Subjects, and then are subject to Princes, as to his Vicegerents, and
obedience to him is the grand interest both of Prince and People. None can
doubt that God has made his own Glory, and man's Salvation the supreme ends of
government and subjection. And consequently, that is the best Policy which
gives these ends the highest place, and makes temporal advantages and the
welfare of the outward Man subordinate thereunto. And this requires that the
Constitution give the highest regards to Gods Laws, and maintain their
Authority, and that the whole public Administration tend to the promoting of
Righteousness and true Holiness, and to the suppressing of all unrighteous and
impious Practice.

As it is the Church's duty and honor to teach and command her Children to do
whatsoever Christ has commanded: so it is the proper work and chiefest glory
of the Magistrate, who is Gods Minister to defend the Faith, and uphold the
Ordinances of the Gospel, and to further the most lively and powerful
Dispensation of them, and to encourage and command obedience to the Divine Law
written in Nature or Scripture. In subserviency hereunto his Power is to
determine such things as are requisite in general, but in particular are left
undetermined of God, and therefore called indifferent, and are to be ordered by
human Prudence according to the general Rules of Gods word. And for these ends
the chief Magistrate has a Supremacy in all causes, and over all persons,
Civil and Ecclesiastical. But it is no diminution of his Authority to remove
from it things unnecessary, unprofitable^, and offensive in their use, and for
their doubtful nature apt to perplex the Subjects conscience.

And he is the general Bishop of his Dominions in a political sense, without
any incroachment upon that Authority, wherewith Christ the King of the Church
has invested spiritual Pastors. As he is such an Officer, it is worthy of his
chiefest care to provide, and send forth able and faithful Dispensers of the
Word, that may teach the People the good knowledge of God, after the example of
the good King Jehoshaphat; and to see that every one, who has the Cure of
Souls, be resident with his Flock, and constantly instruct them by preaching
the Word, and Catechizing them in the Principles of Religion; and not to suffer
Pluralists to seize upon several Congregations as a prey, to fleece but not to
feed them; to encourage laborious Ministers, that watch for the Peoples Souls,
as those that must give an account; and strictly to enjoin the Sanctification
of the Lords Day, which was sanctified to the public Worship of God by the
Apostles of our Lord, who were guided by an infallible Spirit in settling this,
as all other Ordinances pertaining to Christ's Kingdom, and was observed by the
Apostolic Churches, and so has continued in all Ages, and in all places of
Christianity, and is conveyed down to us by as unquestionable Tradition as the
Scripture it self.

It is not of little moment to suppress, or at least to bring into disgrace
whatsoever customs serve for naught, but to feed inordinate Sensuality, and to
make those that use them profane, vicious and licentious. There are frequented
shows and pastimes well known, that increase unto all ungodliness, and may be
called the Devils ordinances. Those that wish well to Piety have an ill part to
act, when they take upon them to defend some exercises, from which an extreem
abuse is inseparable, and which are made a trade of gain arising from the
impurity and profaness of them, and therefore are incorrigible, and can admit
no reformation.

The Piety of any Nation is not to be measured by formalities and opinions and
uniformity in little things, but by substantial Devotion, by solid zeal in the
weighty matters of the Law, and main concerns of Religion, by righteousness of
life, by sobriety, purity, modesty, by peace and concord with mutual
forbearance in those differences that should not, and need not make breaches
among Brethren, by dutifulness in all relations, by industry, frugality, and by
abounding Charity that is full of good Works.

Happy is that State where religious influence is predominant, where the pious
and prudent bear sway, not by intrusion, but by lawful Admission; also where
it arises to that strength, as to carry along with it the affection and
interest of a Nation, not by setting up the Faction of a few, but by making the
generality, or at least the greater number of considerable men, some of them
truly regenerate Christians, and the rest orderly and well affected. One would
think it were out of question, that it were more desirable, that Religiousness
should be in fashion, than open dissoluteness and profaness. For uncontrolled
profaness will run down all Religion. But when those that reach not the Power
of Godliness indeed, come so far, as to take up an outward garb thereof, it is
a great external advantage to true Religion, and shows its prevalent Influence
on the public State. If any should demur upon this Assertion, by making it a
question whether Phariseim or Profaness be the worser evil, let him know first,
that profane and dissolute Christians are notorious Hypocrites, for professing
to know God, when in works they deny him. Besides Phariseism is not simple
insincerity, but a compound hypocrisy, wherein malignity and enmity against
the Power of Godliness is the chief ingredient, it is a kind of strict
externalness that seeks to destroy the inward life and spirit of that Religion,
which it pretends to own. I have no list to say that such malignity is less
mischievous than filthy lewdness or debauchery. But the garb of strict
Profession here mentioned, is of another nature, and serviceable to the
Churches good, though we must continually and strictly charge all Men to beware
of resting in it to the ruin of their own Souls.

CHAP. X.
Christian Unity and Concord.

ALl faithful Christians are Members of one mystical Body, having all one
Spirit, one Lord and Head, one Faith, one Baptism, and one God and Father of
them all, one Hope of their Calling, and one Heaven to receive them all. Their
Union and Fellowship being chiefly mystical and invisible, their Unity is far
greater, than what outwardly appears to the World, and sometimes than what
themselves can discern among themselves in particular, by reason of many
inferior, yet very disquieting differences and discords.

Nevertheless it behooves them to provide, that it might appear as much as may
be, what it is indeed, and that it be conspicuous and illustrious in the sight
of Men, by their walking in love and peace. Unity is the Churches strength and
beauty, the honor of the Faithful, and an argument for the certainty of their
most holy Faith. It makes Religion lovely, and draws forth blessing and praise
from the Beholders of it, and wins the World to a love and reverence of that
Piety, which makes the Professors of it to live in brotherly kindness and
mutual charity. But Division is the Church's weakness and deformity, the
reproach of Christians, and a scandal against Christianity, and an objection
put into the mouths of Infidels against the Faith, and an occasion of stumbling
unto many.

In the present divided state of Religion, each Party is apt to appropriate
Godliness to themselves, or at least to carry it toward others, as if they did
so. And they, that are loudest in accusing Dissenters of uncharitableness in
this kind, are themselves as uncharitable as any others. It is true, that God
has a peculiar People, distinguished from all others by a peculiar Character,
but it is not confined to any Party of this or that Persuasion or Denomination,
that is narrower than mere Christianity. And all true Christians are to receive
one an other, as God has received them. Indeed the best Christians are to be
best esteemed, and their fellowship is most desired. But if they should be
severed from the universality and in a strict combination set up as divided
Party, it tends to the Churches Ruin: For a Kingdom divided against it self
cannot stand, and if the nobler parts of the Body forsake the rest, the whole
must needs die.

Christian Concord does not signify an aggregation of things inconsistent, as
the fellowship of righteousness with unrighteousness, the communion of light
with darkness, the concord of Christ with Belial. To set up Unity against
Piety, is a conspiracy against Christ, who is King of righteousness, and to
pretend Piety against Unity, is to oppose Christ the Prince of Peace, whose
Kingdom is the Reign of Love in the Soul: Holiness and Peace must kiss each
other, and as inseparable Companions walk together.

It is the unity of the Spirit we are charged to keep in the bond of Peace: But
concord in any external Order without fellowship in the Divine Life, is not the
unity of the Spirit, which is to partake of the same new nature, and to walk
together in the same holy way. This is far more excellent than the greatest
compliance in matters of mere external order, and consequently much more
regardable in our estimation and reception of Persons.

Though to meet in one place, be not of so great importance as to be joined in
one Spirit, yet it must not be counted a small matter. The unity of Faith and
Love is much concerned in the unity of Church Communion: it will be a matter of
some difficulty for them to live together in Love, whom one Church cannot hold.
Church divisions commonly divide affections, and draw men into Parties and
divided Interests, and make them seek to strengthen their own Party, by
weakening all others, to the great damage of true Religion in general. For
which cause the unchurching of Churches and renouncing of Communion with them
that are sound in the Doctrine of Faith and Sacrament, and in the substance of
Divine Worship, should be dreaded by all sober Christians, yea, all unnecessary
distances should be avoided, least they lead to greater alienations, and direct
enmities and oppositions.

Those Churches that cannot hold local communion one with another, by reason of
differences that destroy not the essentials of Christianity, should yet
maintain a dear and tender Christian love one to another, and profess their
owning of each other as Churches of Jesus Christ, and should agree together
upon certain just and equal Rules, for the management of their unavoidable
differences, so as may least prejudice charity and common good, and least
harden the ungodly and grieve the weak or dishonor God, or hinder the success
of common, great and necessary truths upon the Souls of men, amicably promoting
the common cause of Christianity, and every part thereof, in which they are
agreed, and opening their disagreements to the People as little as they can.

Schism is an unwarrantable separation from or division in a Church, and
without controversy it is a heinous sin, and to be detested both for its
exceeding sinfulness, and woeful consequents. But it has been so disguised,
and the odious name has been so confusedly cast abroad, and so unreasonably
and maliciously misapplied, that it is too slightly thought of, where it should
be sadly laid to heart: For it is common with the strongest Party, be it right
or wrong, to call themselves the Church, and to have no better name for others
than Schismatics; And so the reproach is but contemned by them that suffer it,
and the sin it self is too little feared on all sides.

But it is not a Temporal Law nor Secular Power, nor any prevalence of Strength
or Interest, that makes a Church; and none of these things will excuse them
from Schism, that act uncharitably against their Brethren, and obstruct the
progress of the Gospel, and the increase of Godliness; Nor are they forthwith
to be counted Schismatics, who cannot in all points observe the Commandments
of men, and cannot neglect to yield their help to the saving of Souls, that
would otherwise want due means of Salvation, when God has called them to that
Service, with a woe unto them if they Preach not the Gospel.

For as much as all must dread the guilt of Schism truly so called, let it be
well considered, that Ecclesiastical Superiors are as much concerned to take
heed of Schismatical impositions, as the People are to shun Schismatical
Recusancy and Disobedience: As well the Pastors Wisdom as the Peoples due
submission, is here importunately called for. When Superiors know how to
Command, and Inferiors how to Obey, things will go as well as may be hoped for
in this our imperfect state here upon Earth.

As the Peace of a corrupt state of Religion is best assured by suppressing all
conscientious inquiries into its Decrees; so the Peace of the true Church and
of the sound state of Religion, is most secured by the most perfect exercise of
sound Judgment and upright Conscience in all its adherents. That Church that
claims to her self an infallibility, or challenges and obtains from her
partakers an implicit Faith in her determinations, without further enquiry,
needs not fear the breaking of the bond of her Peace, if she multiply
constitutions and impose any devised Doctrines and Ordinances suitable to her
own estate. On the other hand it is most evident that a Rational Conscientious
and truly Pious Concord among such Christians, as know and care what they
believe, can never be procured without avoiding the imposition of things
unwritten and unnecessary, in which it is morally impossible for men of sound
faith and good conscience generally to agree. But when necessary things only
are enjoined, their weight and truth will soon be known, and owned of all
honest minds, or at least are most likely so to be; and much sooner and easier
than the weight, and truth of little and doubtful things; and by this means
they would more easily move with joint consent in one Godly order, the matters
of their difference being before hand taken out of the way.

This moderate course being held, the union of unseigned faith and love will
become a sure foundation of true Christian concord with sound judgment and good
conscience, and do that for the suppressing of Schism in the right state of
Christianity, which implicit faith and blind obedience does in false, corrupt
and Antichristian State.

Here it is mainly requisite, that those things that most promote or hinder the
New birth and Spiritual life, be by Pastors and people universally most
regarded; and those that make little for or against the same, be looked upon as
of little moment. And the truth is, when the greatest and weightiest matters
are duly prized and most contended for, contentions about little things will
soon expire. And if this course be taken, hypocrites will lose their advantages
of seeming Religious by zeal for those things, wherein Religion does not
consist, and carnal designs and interests that now rend the Churches, and
trouble all things, would be defeated and abandoned.

Moreover to maintain peace, they that Rule had need consider what mistakes and
weaknesses are competible to true Believers, and sometimes to the best and
choicest of them, that they might not bear too hard upon them. And they that
are ruled must consider that the best polity or Constitution, so far as it is
of man's regulating, has defects and inconveniences, and affairs will be
complicated; and therefore they must not be too unyielding, but bear with what
is tolerable and not easily remediable (though they may not in any wise do a
sinful act, or omit a duty in the season of it.) For by want of such
forbearance, they may sooner destroy the good part than mend what is amiss. It
is not seldom in such cases that men seek remedies, that prove worse than the
disease.

If the healing of breaches require an yielding or receding from what has been
stood upon, it should be on that part where equity and necessity declares it
should be. It is not so easy for every Christian to resolve what is right in
many opinions and usages, as for those in power to omit the enforcing of them.
Unnecessary injunctions may easier be parted with, than men's judgments can be
altered, or their doubting consciences well settled. This tenderness and
forbearance is no lessoning of the Church' s honor and power. And a little
diversity i^ little things, cannot rationally move derisi^ in the irreligious,
nor justly give scandal to any. But there be things of that slightness that an
over-precise and importunate unifo^ mity in them, may occasion contempt and
suspicion of hypocrisy or superstitious folly Unity of faith and life is the
glory of the tr^ Church, and uniformity in external order is (...) be
indeavored with Sobriety, and is best effecte^ by cutting off superfluous
institutions and lay ing no greater burden on the faithful tha^ things
necessary. And this pacifick state may b^ as well hoped as wished for, if the
Guides o^ the Church would seek the things of Christ more than their own things.

But alas, the usurpations and impositions o^ proud and selfish men, even in
pretense o^ suppressing Schism, have hindered Christian people from uniting in
the true center of unity which is Jesus Christ, as set forth in the doctrine of
the Apostles and Prophets, and which (...) the same yesterday and to day and
for ever. In deed, they that prevail by power to advanc^ their own devised
ways, and crush Disenters may make a desolation and then call it peace an^
union; but it is not the peace of Christ's Kingdom

Divisions are caused by men of corrup^ minds, and partly by the weakness of
Good men ascribing too much to their own apprehen sions and inclinations, and
not considering the condition of others as their own, nor minding the necessity
and usefulness of lawful compliance, or of mutual forbearance and discention.

CHAP. XI.
A good frame of Ecclesiastical Polity.

THe promoting of true Christianity, and all the things before named pertaining
to the sound state of Religion, depends much upon a good frame of
Ecclesiastical polity. Undoubtedly our Lord Jesus Christ has appointed
Spiritual Officers to guide and rule his Church; and in the government thereof
there be some things of divine right, and unalterable by the will of man; and
there be many things necessary to the support and due managment thereof, that
are of humane determination as to the particulars. Both kinds are liable to
depravation and great abuse. Things of divine right may be corruptly managed
and perverted to wrong ends; And things of man's appointment are sometimes not
only ill managed, but ill ordained, as being wholly incongruous and perhaps
pernicious to the right ends of government. Now a good polity is the whole
compages of things laid together in the fabric of the Church fitted and
directed to promote the Christian life, or the power of Godliness, and to
prevent or remedy the decay thereof. And the more notably and powerfully
conducible it is to this end, it is by so much the more excellent.

According to this rule, it has most regard for sincere Christians, and
insists most upon their encouragement and the increase of their number, and it
makes all its external orders and interests subservient to the prosperity of
the Church regenerate.

The order wherein it excells, is an orderly management of those things, which
are of divine Command, in matter of Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Conversation, in such manner as is most effectual for the obtaining of their
ends, by such necessary rules of Prudence, as are requisite in all Human
actions.

It prefers purity and spirituality before external pomp, though it neglects
not those necessary decencies and Ornaments that should attend the Service of
God, according to the awful regard that is to be had thereto, and the reverend
demeanor to be used therein.

It provides able Ministers of the Gospel, and that every Pastor be resident
with his own Flock, and that he duly feed them, and labor in the Word and
Doctrine, and that the People be not left in the hands of a Mercenary procured
at the cheapest rate.

It provides by a liberal maintenance worthy endowments and privileges, for
that meet support and honor of the ministry, which is requisite to preserve
the authority and reverend esteem of their Persons and Office; yet it regulates
the same as much as may be, to prevent ambition, avarice, sensuality, idleness,
haughtiness; that the worst of Men may not be encouraged to aspire to its
Promotions, and that good Men may not degenerate, and that the sacred name of
the Church may be held by a society of Men, not carnal but truly spiritual.

It is constituted as much as may be, to secure a succession of wise and godly
Pastors and Teachers from age to age, which is the surest means of the Church's
perpetual good Estate.

It is not framed to uphold things only serviceable to a carnal interest, but
to enforce things acceptable to God and profitable to Men; and to suppress
whatsoever tends to defeat the power of the Gospel, or disgrace the Profession
of it; and to reform abuses impartially and effectually.

According to the true end of Ecclesiastical Authority (which is for
edification, and not for destruction) it inlargeth the power of doing good, and
restrains the power of hurting, as much as the ends of Government will permit
such restraint; accordingly its greatest severity takes hold of the worst Men,
and the best are left most at liberty, and secure from unnecessary molestation.

It is directed to the satisfying of the just and reasonable demands of
conscience, which is a choice and tender thing, and therefore it is very tender
of intangling and perplexing the same unnecessarily.

It makes the Pastors government truly pastoral, that is, not imperious and
violent, but Paternal, proceeding by Exhortation and Doctrine, and gentle
instruction and love, and when correction is necessary, by the rod of
Discipline.

It aims at the forming of Men's minds, and the governing of their conversations
by good and sound Principles, and to make them, a^ much as may be, a Law to
themselves: yet a^ supposing the exceeding pravity of Man's nature, and the
infirmities of the best of men, i^ leaves not the safety of Religion merely to
Men's good dispositions and inclinations, bu^ by due restraints curbeth the
remainder o^ Man's perverseness.

It seeks not to debase the People and de press their faculties, that they may
be the more easily led captive by politic Men at their pleasure; but to
ennoble them, as much as they are capable, and to advance their understandings
to the best improvement; and accordingly it takes care, that they may be
thoroughly instructed in things pertaining to Faith and Godliness. In a word, it
would make even the lowest and meanest of them not Brutes bu^ Men; and not mere
natural men, but Christians or spiritual Men.

The subject here described has different degrees of excellency, as it is more
or less answerable to its rule, and available to its end. But notwithstanding
diverse defects and errors, if that which is wholesome and good be predominant,
it is to be esteemed a good Constitution: yet the best is most desirable. Of
such consequence is the structure of Ecclesiastical Polity, that if it be
naught, it has a continual evil influence on all Church affairs, and perverts
the whole course thereof; and the making of many particular good Laws, or Rules
will not help it; for in that case they are rendered almost useless. It is
notably observed by a Person of eminent worth. Church Government is a fort or
castle, if Traitors to the Kingdom of Christ get the possession of it, it were
desirable, that the Castle were ruined, and the Christian Religion left to
support it self by the innate evidence of its own Truth, than be forcibly
maintained for contrary ends, and prove a mystery of Ungodliness and Tyranny.

CHAP. XII.
The corrupt state of Religion; and first Externalness and Formality.

EVery kind of excellency in the present World has its counterfit or false
resemblance, which in things of a moral nature is the depravation or
degeneration thereof. And so the true Religion has its degeneration which is
destructive to it; yet in this corruption of Mankind is easily mistaken, and
exalted in the room of it. It is a dead image of Christianity without the
inward life of Christ, and the works thereof are dead works being not wrought
in God. It is the dominion of the spirit of the World, and of unmortified lust
under pretense of the rule of the Spirit of God. It is a zeal of some
unnecessary Opinions and unprofitable Observances, received sometimes from a
more peculiar and private fancy, sometimes from the general custom and
tradition; or at the best, a zeal of Orthodoxality, when that form of sound
Doctrine is not obeyed from the heart. It is a self-chosen godliness, and not
of Gods making, taken up to delude the Conscience, and lift up the Soul with
high but illgrounded hopes, and in the mean while to excuse it from that which
is the root of the matter, the renouncing of the carnal life and all worldly
lusts, and the obtaining of the spirit of Power, Love, and of a sound mind. and
a life of Purity, Goodness, and impartial Righteousness. The best of it is but
a gloss or varnish of superficial Religiousness, accompanied with a dead kind
of Morality, which has its rise from education, or from complexion (otherwise
called good Nature) but springs not from the root of love toward God, and of a
living faith in Jesus Christ.

The several impostures, disguises and false pretenses, by which Men delude
themselves, and abuse the World in this matter, are almost numberless: yet they
generally fall into one of these two main currents of religious Aberrations,
either the Political, popular and broad way of Externalness and Customariness,
or the devious path of Sectarian dissetledness and extravagancy.

The more ample degeneration of Christianity is the merely formal, external and
political State thereof, that has prevailed far and near over the Christian
World. This externalness is very plausible and specious, but very consistent,
and for the most part accompanied with a large indulgence to the Flesh, and
with much licentiousness of Principles and Practice, and it casts the mind into
a deep forgetfulness of that which is spiritual, and substantial in Religion.
It is the common rode and broad way, because most obvious and easy to the
carnal spirit of all sorts of Men, who having some conscience of Religion,
gladly take up with a form, that with more security and peace they may deny the
power thereof; as also because it seems most servicable to Superiors for
shaping and swaying the consciences of Inferiors to their wills, and to the
ends by them designed. Accordingly as it gets ground, it erects a frame of
things which has a show of Piety, Unity and Order, but is really an engine
devised to destroy whatsoever may be truly called by those lovely names.

When Men's false and vain inventions rule instead of Gods Oracles; when the
truth of the Gospel is mingled with such Doctrines, Institutions, and
Observances, as corrupt the Purity, enervate the Power, and frustrate the ends
of the Gospel; when the misapprehension or misapplication of true Doctrine
depraves the mind, and begets a false notion of Godliness or Christianity; when
Regeneration or true Conversion is prevented, by being made in effect no more
than Civility, joined with a dead conformity to the exterior part of the
Christian Institution; when Religion is placed in an outside Pharisaical
Holiness, in some bodily severity, and it may be in mere forms and empty shows,
without internal and real Mortification and Devotion; when the exterior
Ordinances of the Gospel are retained, but used after another manner, than what
becomes the Gospel Church, or suits the ends of Gospel Worship; when a sapless
and fruitless Generation of Men are nourished in holy Orders, who cherish the
People in ignorance, profaness or lukewarmness, who show them a way to Heaven,
that is smooth, broad and easy to the Flesh, who serve, or at least spare the
lusts of Men, who humor the vulgar Sort in rude follies, who give absolution
upon formal and loose terms, and therewith a false repose to poor deluded
Souls; when the great interest of Churchmen is to promote Superstition, blind
Devotion, and implicit Faith, and to hold People in the chains of spiritual
darkness, and in the pleasing bondage of carnal liberty, their Consciences
being in the mean time secured by the belief of certain Tenants and Articles of
Religion, and the devout Observance of certain external Ordinances; When the
Policy of the Church is contrived to maintain fleshly ease and pleasure,
worldly pomp and power, and the chiefest glory of the Ecclesiastical State lies
in outward order, without inward life and spirit in sacred Administration; When
the weapons of its warfare are not spiritual but carnal, suitable to an earthly
and sensual State; When submission to the wills of Masters upon Earth is called
obedience, and their peaceable possession of Wealth and Honor is taken for the
Churches Peace; When concord in the unprofitable or hurtful dictates of Men is
made to pass for the unity of the Spirit; When the Constitution it self (the
general corruption of Mankind being considered) is found defective for the true
end of Government, and lets loose the rains of depraved Appetite, and by carnal
Allurements alienates the mind from the things of the Spirit of God, and turns
it after the pomps and vanities of the World, and serves the voluptuosness,
covetousness and pride of its adherents, for which cause its yoke is easy to
the sensual part of men, but it is scandalous to them that know the truth, and
becomes a Stepmother to the most serious and conscientious; when these and the
like things prevail, the Christian Religion is turned into another thing than
what it is indeed, by men of corrupt minds, who serve their own lusts, and by
the wisdom that descends not from above, but is Earthly, Sensual, Devilish,
square out to themselves, and those that live under their influence, a loose
Form of Christianity not after Christ, but after the course of this world.

But this corruption is more or less enormous in different Ages and Countries,
according to its greater or nearer distance from the times and means of purer
knowledge.

And a less corrupt state may be severed from that which is more grossly vicious
and impure, and yet remain a degeneration in the same kind though in a lower
degree.

And let this be noted that in a degenerate state, the doctrines and
institutions of Christ may be so far retained, as to contain things absolutely
necessary to Christian faith and life, which may beget and preserve the vitals
of Christianity in them, that do not mingle with the other poisonous
ingredients, or at least not in their full extent.

Yea, the Degeneration may happen to be in a lower degree, and less pernicious,
and perhaps only as a Scab upon some part, and not overspreading the whole Body
of the Church, and great multitudes therein may profess and practice the truth
as it is in Jesus. Thus the Judaical Church in its corrupt state retained the
vitals of true Religion, which were a sufficient means of grace to them that
escaped the pollutions of those times, and were not seasoned with the leaven of
false Teachers.

CHAP. XIII.
The Sectarian and Fanatical Degeneration.

THe other deviation lies more out of the common rode of the generality of
carnal Gospellers, and this is usually styled Sectarian, whereof the particular
by paths are numberless. But let this be noted, that whatsoever way swerves
from the main ends of Religion, and the great design of the Gospel, is no other
than a Sect or Faction, yea, though it spread so far and wide, as that they who
walk therein, do for their huge multitudes presume to appropriate to themselves
alone, the Title of the Catholic Church. Wherever the interest of a Party
bears sway to the detriment of the universal Church, and the common cause of
Godliness, where inventions false or useless are made the necessary Symbols of
Religion, there a Sectarian interest bears Sway, and the gaining of the Secular
power will not wipe off the blot of such a Party. The name of Sectaries may fit
proud usurpers as well as blind zealots. This necessary proviso being made, it
remains to speak in this place of the more incoherent, unstable, and
ungovernable sort of Sects. The root of the evil in this kind is commonly a
heightened fancy, and complexional Zeal bearing Rule instead of Sober judgment,
and a more intellectual, Spiritual and pure love. It shall suffice to set down
some notable instances, for it were endless to recount them all.

Some have been so far transported with the hatred of Church Tyranny, and
persecuting Pride and cruelty, that they mind not the good of Church unity,
order and government; and they run so far from implicit faith in the dictates
of proud men, that themselves have proudly slighted the Churches directive
judgment, and all Pastoral Authority as a thing of no value, and have fiercely
impugned it, as opposite to Christian liberty.

Of the like strain are they, that upon pretense of higher seize and
greater Spirituality have rejected external ordinances; as the dispensation of
the Word and Sacraments, and the public Ministry, and Ecclesiastical
discipline as low and beggarly rudiments, while they declare themselves hereby
to be carnal, and vainly puffed up in their fleshly minds.

Some through abuse and mistake of Divine promises concerning the Spirits
Teaching, have forsaken the sure guidance of Gods Law, and betaken themselves
to the uncertain intimations of Providence, and the dangerous impulses of their
own Spirits, and pretended immediate inspirations, which are for the most part
the delusions of an exalted Fancy; and sometimes they have really fallen under
Satanical impressions.

Because there is the fleshly wisdom of the carnal mind, that is enmity against
God; some have disclaimed reason it self as corrupt and carnal, and in the mean
while follow their own wilful imagination under the pretense of the Light
within them, and delight in things irrational and unintelligible, and render
themselves incapable of sound instruction.

A Fanatic fury has hurried some under pretense of erecting the fifth
Monarchy, to rend and tear Kingdoms and Nations, to attempt the dissolving of
all Government in Church and State; which is indeed the most ready way to
subvert Gods Kingdom by the subversion of Christian Magistracy and Ministry,
and to dispossess the Gospel of the Territories it has gained.

Some have proceeded so far in the pretended Reign of the Spirit, as to
abrogate the external Frame of the Christian Religion, and to turn the Gospel
History into mystical Allegories, yet such as might be conceived and shaped in
a vulgar fancy, and are low and despicable things in comparison of the great
mystery of Godliness, according to the Historical sense of Scripture.

And which is yet worse, some have been so gross as to turn into an Allegory
the great hope of our Christian calling, even the Resurrection of the dead, and
the life of the World to come, and so pervert the mysteries of the Gospel into
a mysterious Infidelity and Apostasy from Jesus Christ.

Yea, some perverting the high expressions of fellowship with God, and dwelling
in God, and being made partakers of the Divine nature and the like, have
impiously talked of their begodded condition, and blasphemously entitled the
most High and Holy One, to their abominable extravagancies and impurities. And
besides all these, some are perpetual Seekers, having no fixed belief in the
most important points.

Persons so far enlightened as not to see the necessity of a higher way than
the common dead formality, and having some taste of Spiritual things, and
thereby raised above the general indifferency, and Luke-warmness unto a kind of
strictness, seriousness, and fervor of Spirit in Religion, yet falling short
of true Conversion, and especially if they be well conceited of their own gifts
and parts and seeming graces, are apt to be carried away with a full gale of
fancy into the gulf of these delusions.

And a tincture of this contagion, though in a lower degree, may sease on some,
who stand in the true grace of God, being deceived by a show of purity and
Spirituality, and peradventure lying under the disadvantage of some insnaring
occasions, which work upon the remainder of pride, levity, curiosity, and other
corruptions, which the present imperfect State leaves in the hearts of real
Christians. And some of these may sooner fall into absurd opinions, than many
that receive not the truth in love, who may easily abide among the Orthodox,
either because they do not concern themselves in Religious inquiries, or
because they are held by worldly advantages which stand on truths side.

The fancy is sooner filled with notions and the affections thereby raised,
than the judgment is well informed and the heart established in grace. Hence
proceed a sickliness in the Souls appetite, a satiety of plain Saving truths,
and of sound wholesome Preaching, a desire of novelty, Self-conceitedness,
pragmatical confidence, rash censures, partiality in hearing the Word, a
lessening of the Pastoral Authority, encroachments upon the Pastors Office,
dividing principles and practices, and innumerable, inconveniences. Moreover,
well meaning People associated in a stricter profession, are apt to be
sequacious of some leading persons among them, and some will follow the rest
for company. And the high pretensions and heightened confidence of Enthusiasts,
is a kind of Enchantment to bewitch those that unwarrantably approach to near
them, especially such as are predisposed by temper or complexion toward
Enthusiasm.

In these things men forsake the Law and the Testimony to walk by false Lights,
and to follow blind Guides. The Holy Ghost bids us try the Spirits, and has
given us an infallible rule of Trial, and leaves us not to any unaccountable
impulse or impression. The whole Tenor of Evangelical Doctrine shows that the
Christian Spirit is both pure and peaceable, that it does not divide, break and
scatter a Christian people, but unites, heals and settles them, that it does
not overturn Churches and civil States, nor inflame Rulers against subjects,
nor subjects against Rulers, nor dissolve Magistracy and Ministry; but that it
turns the hearts of the Fathers to the Children, and the disobedient to the
wisdom of the Just; and conciliates the minds of Magistrates, and Ministers and
People of all degrees in righteousness and peace, which is the right and sure
way of erecting Gods Kingdom. It does not cancel reason, but maintain its
interest in Religion, as being under the power of God, and the great prop and
proof of the Christian Faith. It is a Spirit of judgment, and soberness, and
suppresseth the wild Dominion of the unruly imagination. It does not turn men
from humanity and civil behavior, unto a surly and cynical pride, and Fanatic
melancholy and austerity; but it disposes them to all the duties of human
life, and civil Converse.

But there must be Heresies, and it is impossible but that offenses should
come. Where the light of the Gospel is broken forth, Sectarianism and
Fanaticism is the Devils After-Game. So it sprung up in Germany upon the birth
of Protestantism, so it sprung up in the Primitive Church upon the birth of
Christianity, in the Gnostics, and such like Sectaries, and so it continues in
our times. These irregularities and extravagancies are a great damage, and
reproach to a serious, zealous and strict profession, and it is a stone of
stumbling before many.

Nevertheless the greatest and most dangerous Degeneration from the Sound state
of Religion lies not this way. The conceptions and motions of Fanaticism,
having a kind of Spiritual strain though in a delusion, take not with the
greater number whether of high or low degree, the learned or unlearned sort.
And in case it seases on a greater multitude, it may trouble and unsettle a
State, but it can never settle it self; and if it domineer a while, its Tyranny
cannot hold, because it has no foundation, and it can never obtain to be a
national Religion, because it is inconsistent with the stability of civil
Government. Its greatest mischief to a State is, that it may serve the designs
of others to work out a more lasting misery. For which cause, the Romish
Emissaries under a vizor have overacted this wild Spirit, that by its confusion
and Anarchy, they might make way to introduce their own Tyranny. But the more
extensive, dangerous, and lasting depravation of Christianity lies on the same
side with Popery, which is formidable indeed being founded in power and policy
and suited to worldly interests, and to which men's innate propensions do
generally more incline them. For that their fancies and affections are
inveagled with its outward wealth and glory, and their consciences laid a sleep
by its loose principles and lifeless form of devotion.

CHAP. XIV.
The way of preserving Religion incorrupt.

THe truth and purity of Religion lies in its conformity to its rule, which is
Gods revealed will or law, and its deviation from it, is its depravation. From
this rule men are easily drawn aside, being enticed by their own vain
imaginations, perverse inclinations, and carnal interests, to false ways and
vain inventions. For which cause it behooves the zealous Religionist to be
careful even to jealousy, that he be not imposed upon by himself or others,
and in this care heartily and entirely to resign, and conform himself to the
Law of God. By such resignation and conformity he secures his own Soul, and
what in him lies the Sound state of Religion.

It is here acknowledged, that what is written in nature is Gods Law, as well
as what is written in Scripture, and that natural Revelation as well as
supernatural is Divine, and whatsoever is known of God by the Light of nature
in the matter of Religious Worship, is to be received as well as that, which is
known by the Light of Scripture; and the divine Goodness is to be owned in
both, though in the latter it has appeared more abundantly, because therein is
given us a full instruction in all things pertaining to Gods Kingdom, which in
the other is not given. For the great mysteries of the Gospel could not be
known by nature; and in things that could be known thereby, the light is but
weak and glimmering, and not easily able to fix the heart therein, not so much
for want of evidence in the object, as from the pravity of our mind, reason
being laid asleep and all our faculties being sunk into the brutish life. What
is the utmost capacity of that light among the Heathens, is hard for us to
define; and though it be harsh to determine that they were all utterly and
universally forsaken of God; yet it is evident both by Scripture and the lives
of the Gentiles, that Gentilism was a very forlorn state. This is enough to
show the high favor of God toward the Church in supernatural Revelation, by
which he has not only instructed us in things supernatural, not otherwise to
be known in this life; but also more perfectly in the Laws of nature, now
transcribed into the Books of the Old and New Testament, so that there is
nothing of Religion or Morality that may not be found therein.

Besides the Law of God written in Nature and Scripture, what certain and
stable rule of Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Conversation, has the Church
to walk by: that there can be no certainty or consent in mere or all Tradition,
or in the judgment of the ancient Fathers, or the ancient practice of the
Catholic Church, is so evident as needs no confirmation: and there can be no
acquiescence or accord in the determinations of any visible, universal, Supreme
Power. For whereas all Christians acknowledge the Divine Authority of the
Scripture, they neither do, nor ever did, nor will, unanimously acknowledge
that there is such a Power in being. And the main Body of them that maintained
such a Catholic Supremacy, cannot agree in what subject the same resides,
whether in the Pope, or a General Council. And as several Popes, so have
several Councils of equal amplitude and authority, often crossed one another;
and consequently some of both kinds must needs have erred: And it still remains
a controversy undeterminable, which Councils are to be received, and which to
be rejected, unless the whole Christian World hitherto disagreeing herein, will
be bound up by the resolves of one Party, that can bring no better proof than
their own pretended infallibility: To all which may be added that an
Ecumenical Council truly so called, or a Representative of the universal
Church, was never yet congregated. Wherefore let the Faithful rest upon the
old right foundation, the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, whose
infallibility is unquestionable.

Such being the fullness and perfection of holy Scripture, which was given by
Divine inspiration; and that for this end, that the man of God might be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, it must needs be safest in
Divine matters not to be venturous, without its warrant. They best secure
themselves from error, who keep to that rule which is both perfect and
infallible, some pretending to lay open the folly of the way which they call
puritanism, affirm that the mystery thereof lies in this principle, that
nothing ought to be Established in the Worship of God, but what is authorized
from the Word of God: Indeed there are those of that denomination, who disallow
whatsoever instituted Worship is not so authorized; but they are not so
ignorant, as to suppose that all particular circumstances belonging to Divine
Worship, which admit of endless variation, are defined in the Word of God; such
as are those natural and civil circumstances without which, actions are not
performable But they suppose a wide difference between these matters, (such as
time, place, method, furniture, etc.) and those ordinances of Religion which
they take for parts of Worship, as being made direct and immediate signs of
honor given to God by their use: And all of this kind some do judge or at
least suspect to be unlawful, that are not of Gods appointment.

My design obliges me to shun the intangling of this Discourse with
controversy, and therefore I write not either for or against the lawfulness of
such uncommanded Worship; But it is sufficient for me to show that the purity
of Religion is more safe by acquiescence in that only which God has
prescribed, than by addition of new ordinances of Worship devised by men, who
even the best of them may too easily deviate from the truth: And who knows not
that too much yielding to men's devised Forms and Rights, which had a show of
Wisdom, made way for the departure of so great a part of Christendom, from the
primitive Christianity.

All duties of the Law of nature, may be clearly proved from Scripture, though
the particular instances thereof that are innumerable, and their infinitely
variable circumstances cannot be there expressed. As for instituted Worship, it
is unquestionable that there is no such defect in those parts thereof that are
of Divine authority, as needs to be made up by the human addition of other new
parts. And it is granted on all hands that there are things merely
circumstantial belonging to it, which are necessary in general, but in
particular not determined of God, and must be ordered by the light of nature
and human prudence, according to the general rules of Gods word.

None that know what they say in magnifying the written Word, will teach the
People not to rely upon impartial reason, which no true Revelation did ever
contradict. But we are so conscious of the weakness of human understanding,
that in case of any seeming contrariety between Scripture and Reason, not to
give the Scripture the preeminence, we know is most unreasonable. Is Scripture
liable to be perverted? so is Reason. Is there obscurity and difficulty in the
interpretation of Scripture? so in human ratiocinations much more. Whosoever
can apprehend right reason, can rationally apprehend Gods written word, which
is its own interpreter, and whose authentic interpretation of it self, we are
enabled to discern by rational inferences and deductions, as well as the sense
of any rational discourse whatsoever. And the evidence of Gods Testimony is
much more effectual, than the arguments of human reason to command assent, and
quiet men's minds and appease their contests. And if we yield not our
controversies to be finally decided by this sacred Rule, whither shall we go,
or wherein shall we all be bound up?

The truth is, when men seek out vain inventions to please their own fancies,
or to serve their own ends; and find their devised ways condemned by Gods word;
then they fall to derogate from its authority and sufficiciency, and talk much
of the impertinency, and folly of those, that insist upon it, and cry up
tradition, and reason, and that wisdom of Man, that is but foolishness with God.

When things will not be as well as they should, they must be as they may.
There be some useful truths and practices that may be too dearly bought, if
purchased with the breach of the Churches Peace and Unity, and the hazard of
its whole Estate. Howbeit then is the best state of things, when the Apostolic
Doctrine and Discipline is the standardmeasure of all, and nothing is retained,
but what is plainly agreeable thereunto. And the safety of pure Religion lies
in as through a reformation according to this rule, as the times will bear.

Let the severest reason that is impartial, weigh the following words written
by one of a Catholic Spirit, and true to the Interest of Reformed
Christianity, touching our departure from Rome. We should leave upon us no
string or tassel of our ancient Captivity, such as whereby they may take hold
of us to pull us back again into our former bondage, but look upon our selves
as absolutely free from any tie to them, more than in endeavoring their
Conversion and Salvation, which we knowing so experimentally, not to be
compassed by needless Symbolizings with them in any thing; I conceive it our
best Policy, studiously to imitate them in nothing; but for all indifferent
things, to think rather the worse of them for their using them, as no Person of
Honor would willingly go in the known Garb of any Lewd and Infamous Persons:
Whatsoever we Court them in, they do but turn to our scorn and contempt, and
are more hardened in their own wickedness. Wherefore seeing that needless
Symbolizings with them does them no good, but hurt, we should account our
selves in all things indifferent, perfectly free to please and satisfy in the
most universal manner we can, those of our own Party, not caring what Opinions
or Customs, or outward Formalities the Romanists and others have, and may have
had from the first Degeneracy of the Church.

As for the word Popery, it is not more odious than ambiguous among
Protestants. On the one hand some, that will speak hard words against it, have
drawn it into so extremely narrow a compass, as to place it in little more than
a secular interest of Power controverted between the Pope, and the Princes and
Prelates of Christendom: and others that make it broader, are yet very tender,
if not fond of many gross Corruptions of the Roman Church. On the other hand
some have extended it so far, as to disparage things good and laudable, and
requisite, and ignorantly call by that name whatsoever they fancy not.
Nevertheless those useless and offensive things taken up by the Papal Church
since the time of their known Apostasy, both Doctrines and Customs, and that
are theirs more peculiarly, may justly be called Popish, though they were not
imposed as Apostolic commands, or means of obtaining Pardon of Sin, or of
working Grace. Why should we be tenacious of their Forms, to the scandal of
those of our own Belief? How are we obliged or concerned to conform to their
usages more than they are to ours? Have they any Authority over us, or are they
any way a Rule unto us? Are not the holy Scriptures of right both their Rule
and ours? Or can they upbraid us for departing from them in these at least
unnecessary Opinions and Customs, unless they upbraid us upon those grounds
which we have rejected, together with their Usurpation, and and which if we
receive again, we must quit Protestancy it self? This striving to come so near
them whether tends it, but to reduce us again into that Church? For by all
approaches to them, they are not drawn one step toward us, but are the more
hardened, and still they rest unmovable on the rock of their pretended
Supremacy and Infallibility.

The impurity of the Romish Church lies chiefly in its Superstition and
Sensuality. In the grosser part of its Superstition is manifold gross Idolatry;
and any way of symbolizing with Idolatry which is spiritual Whoredom, should be
dreaded by the chaste Spouse of Chirst, as the retaining of such Images as have
been, and are apt to be made objects of Religious Adoration, and the making
choice of the peculiar garbs and fashions of Idolaters in their worship.
Moreover where the gross Pollutions are avoided, if their pomp and train of
Ceremonies be retained, they will be apt to take up the heart of such as are
busied in them, and to corrupt the Worship of God, and make it a dead work and
carnal Service, and so the spirit and power of Godliness will decay and die
among the People by this means.

Sensuality the concomitant of Idolatry and all gross Superstition is likewise
manifested in their Devotions. Of the Israelites Idolatry it is written, The
people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. Sensual sports and
pastimes are mingled with the Devotions of carnal Worshippers, as is notably
seen in the Popish Festivals. And this makes the sensual part of Men addicted
to such a way. To pray a while, and then to play is the business of their
Sacred Solemnities. But this course alienates the mind from true Holiness, and
tends to much Profaness, and not only the Piety, but the civility of a Nation
will hereby much abate. A Church that would maintain the purity of Religion,
the power of Godliness, had need have its solemn days of divine Service
distinct from the appointed times of carnal sport, mirth and jollity.

CHAP. XV.
The enmity of the World against Godliness, and the Calumnies and Reproaches
cast upon it considered.

THe security and increase of true Religion is a matter of no small difficulty.
The enmity against it is general and perpetual, in the first race of Mankind it
brake forth even to Blood, and throughout all Ages it has been propagated, and
that with great rage, as well within as without the Pale of the visible Church.
The adverse World knows not the new Nature what it is, for it knows not God,
whose Image it is. The World is not only alienated from the Life of God, but
opposite to it by the antipathy of the carnal Life, and so not only wants the
true relish, but has a strong disrelish of the divine and heavenly Nature.
Moreover true Christianity is a light, by which all things that are reproved,
are made manifest; and the World that lives in sin and loves darkness, hates
the light, by which it is condemned, not only with an hatred of Aversation, but
of hostile Persecution.

Nevertheless, the Unregenerate sort of Men in general, cannot and would not
abandon all sense of Religion, which is so deeply imprinted in human Nature,
and the form whereof may be acceptable even to corrupt nature. Wherefore they
own the name, while they hate the thing; and keep up a show and form thereof,
while they deny the Truth and Power. And having a false apprehension of Christ
they adore him, while they trample upon his present Members, that really bear
his Image; and having a false Idea of Godliness, they honor the memory of the
Saints of former Ages, while they vilify those of their own times, in whom
Godliness really exists, which shows, that if Christ and the former Saints were
now on the Earth to appear what they were indeed, they would be no less hated
and scorned than the Faithful that are now living.

The manifold ways of destruction and misery wherein the wicked walk, though
contradictory to each other, do all conspire in this Enmity; and Godliness is
put to conflict not with one sort of Enemies, but with the various corrupt
Parties of the divided carnal World. Yet worldly Interests often make their
advantages of Christianity, and have their designs upon it, and complicate
themselves with it in some external and accidential Engagements for a season,
and then the Enmity is restrained. And not a few, that fall short of
Regeneration, may be so illuminated and wrought upon, as not only to cease from
malignancy and hostility against it, but to promote and strengthen its external
Interests. But for all this, the Serpentine nature has hitherto been more
predominant in this lower World, and Gods Kingdom has had far greater
Opposition, than assistance from the Powers thereof.

Now we are noting the injury and despite that is done to Godliness, the
calumnies and reproaches, heaped on the serious Professors of it to render them
hateful and contemptible, requires some animadversion. Their adversaries set
them forth as Proud, Froward, Stubborn, False, Rash, Fierce, Petulant, Sullen,
Fanatical, Hypocritical, Censorious, Pragmatical, Unruly, Schismatical,
Seditious, Unpeaceable, Presumptuous, Selfish and such like.

If we would judge rightly of these imputations, we are to mind many things,
viz. The intrusion of Hypocrites, the multitude of half Converts, the great
weakness of Grace, and defect of wisdom in the greater part of Sincere
Christians, and the imperfections of the best and chiefest of them. It is
further to be considered that faults real or seeming, are more remarkable in
strict Professors than in any others, as spots in a white Garment; also that
the common malignity will aggravate the same above measure; likewise that the
things, they are charged with (were they truly charged) are not peculiarly
theirs, but the corruptions of the world in general; and that some degrees
thereof are found in all, in whom human weakness is found, and that they are
less and in a lower degree in this party of men than in any other. Add hereunto
that the faults of some are commonly objected against all, and the sins of men
not yet made perfect, are cast upon that holy and perfect way, which condemns
those sins, and has broken the dominion of them.

Moreover, when it is undeniable that this sort of men in general have
renounced palpable dishonesty, injustice, filthy lewdness, wantoness,
intemperance, luxury and other gross pollutions of the world, they are burdened
(according to the true method of calumniation) with matter of suspicion or evil
surmise, as Hypocrisy, Self-conceitedness, Fancicalness and secret Pride,
things mostly belonging to the hidden man of the heart; or with Spiritual
wickedness, as Envy, Malice, Bitterness, Vainglory, Ambition, Self-admiration
and Contempt of others, things of more close and covert nature, and as not
easily proved, so not easily disproved where they are objected; or with the
ambiguous charge of Schism, Faction, Turbulency, Singularity, Peevishness,
Perverseness, Obstinacy; which opposite parties are continually casting upon
each other, faults and duties, virtues and vices happening to be called by
these names. And in this method of of accusation, the innocent are sooner
injured than cleared, and slanderers do their work, for the reproaches are
boldly cast abroad, and something sticks.

But notwithstanding all the obloquie and calumny, the whole world may be
challenged to produce an instance of any Sort or Sect of men, that have
exceeded or equaled the serious Professors of the true Christianity in things
honest, and just, and comely, and useful, and praiseworthy. It must not be
exspected, but that during their imperfect State obliquities and aberrations
will be found more or less in them, as they are more or less remote from
perfection. But if true honesty and virtue be a reality and not an empty name,
and if it be not perished out of the world, it exists and resides in them.

Howbeit in this way there are inevitable occasions of stumbling, not given but
taken, and such fall thereat, as do err in their hearts, and have not known
Gods ways. The practice of true Piety lying out of the common road, is
misjudged as a kind of humorous Singularity.

To speak Feelingly of Divine things, seems folly or mere fancy to them, who
have no knowledge or taste thereof in themselves.

To express with zeal or vigor such things as seem to others incredible, though
they be most true and excellent, is taken for Madness.

Tenderness of Conscience, strictness of life, servour of devotion,
mortification and heavenlymindedness, is by Sensualists, Formalists, and carnal
Politicians, judging by their own measure taken for Hypocrisy, designing the
applause of men, or some eminency and advancement in a party, or some other
Self-interest.

A Pious regard to the lesser as well as the greater commands of the Law, and a
dread of despising the least Commandment, is commonly esteemed peevishness and
needless preciseness.

To distinguish between the Holy and profane, the zealous and lukewarm, the
carnal and Spiritual in the visible Church, and to judge of both sorts as they
are, is a great offense to the world, for which the Religious are thought to be
Proud, Boasters, Dispisers of others, Uncharitable, Censorious; and Formalists
are magnified against them for their large charity toward all, which is indeed
no Charity, but indifferency in Religion, not seldom accompanied with
bitterness toward the Godly.

To speak as the Scripture does of a peculiar people, and as Christ himself, of
the fewness of Gods chosen among the many outwardly called, is accounted the
confining of godliness to a Party, and the fancying of themselves to be the
only People of God. Now such arrogance is justly charged on those that place
Religion in narrow opinions, and platforms, and methods of their own chosing,
and judge of all men as they are nearer or farther from them: yet nothing is
surer than that God has a peculiar People, who are comparatively a small
number distinguished from the world by his own mark, which is no other than his
own image in righteousness and true Holiness.

To discern a laborious, lively, faithful Ministry from that which is lazy,
lifeless and deceitful, and to regard the one and the other accordingly, to
note the ignorant, foolish, profane and scandalous of that Function, to contemn
a vile person, and to honor them that fear the Lord, to take notice of the
Serpentine Seed, and to turn away from such, to abhor impiety, and to have no
fellowship with the wicked in their evil deeds, provokes an evil Generation
that are hereby reproved and judged, and they raise an outcry against the Godly
as Factious, unsociable despisers of Government, makers of Parties, and enemies
to Peace.

To examine the doctrines, precepts, traditions, and customs of Men by Gods
Word, to use all just means to discern his Will, and to choose to obey God
rather than Men, when their commands are contrary to his, is reviled for proud
perverseness, contempt of ancient Customs, and the authority of Superiors,
disobedience to Kings and Laws.

To be zealous for Gods honor, and the purity of Religion, to be earnest and
active in stopping the course of Sin, and promoting Piety and the means of
Salvation, and to be concerned for Gods Interest in the World more than the
common Sort are, make the Religious to seem pragmatical, turbulent, and
unpeaceable.

Not to run into the common excess of Riot, nor to comply with mad Mirth and
Jollity, offensive Gallantry, or any Extravagancy that is in Fashion, is
accounted Stoical Superciliousness and Morosity.

Strictness of Profession, seriousness and necessary preciseness of
Conversation seems to many to be the same thing with Phariseism, wherewith the
most conscientious are commonly most reproached, and so the hateful name of
Christ's worst enemies is cast upon his true and faithful Followers.

Wherefore it is worth the while to note who and what they were. It is evident
from the Gospel-History, that the Pharisees were a strict Sect, and in great
reputation for seeming-Holiness, no Separatists from the Jewish Church, but of
chiefest sway therein, and of great esteem among the Rulers. They little cared
for the ordering and government of the Heart, and placed Perfection in outward
works, and in Rituals more than Morals, and chiefly in the Ceremonies of their
own devising, and the Traditions of the Elders, and in zeal for the Corban or
the Churches Treasure, and to these things they made the weightiest duties of
the Law give place. They wore broad Phylacteries, and affected a proud
reservedness and formal gravity. Those Fastings, Prayers and Alms-deeds, that
should have been done in secret, they made a show of openly to be seen of Men.
They would be counted Rabbis, and owned for absolute teaching Masters and
Leaders of the People, and would have all subject to their dictates. And they
were Maligners and Opposers of the power of Godliness, and Persecutors of the
true Israelites to maintain their own institutes and interest. Now for our part
we have no need, nor mind to vindicate the true offspring of such Forefathers.
It concerns all Christians, as Christ warned the Disciples to beware of this
leaven. But the truth is, something of Phariseism may be found among some of
all Parties, as self-confidence, vainglory, self-praise, censoriousness,
arrogance, partiality, perverseness of conscience, or straining at gnats and
swallowing of camels. And peradventure, those that most object it to others,
may be most deeply infected with it themselves; but however, it concerns all
Sorts to beware of it, and do as much as is possible to purge it out from among
them, and every Christian should strive to keep himself from any smatch of it,
seeing it was so unsavory to Christ.

It is thus very discernable from the manifold misapprehensions of the way it
self, how Godliness falls under the hard thoughts and speeches of the mistaken
World. But wisdom is justified of her Children. And if Godliness it self by
misapprehension become a rock of offense, no wonder the World is scandalized at
the hypocrisy of false Pretenders, and at the real faults and weaknesses of
sincere Professors. But Christ has said, Blessed is he that is not offended in
me.

Undoubtedly the making of an higher Profession does not exempt any from a just
conviction and reproof. That Hypocrites should be detected, and the scandalous
faults even of sincere Christians noted, is the interest of true piety. And
charity both toward them that give offense, and toward them that take it to
their hurt; requires such discovery. The Godly lay to heart no evils more,
than the scandals of Professors; and they know they are most concerned to take
heed, lest any root of bitterness bearing gall or wormwood should spring up
among them. And those, that sin before all, their discipline is to rebuke
before all, that others may fear. But the great mischief is, that some so speak
and write of Hypocrites and offenses, as to reproach Godliness it self, and
bring the Profession of it into disgrace.

When they take notice of any thing amiss in Men professing Godliness, whether
the matter of fact be true or false, or the scandal be in reality or appearance
only, they presently say these are your Professors, they are all such, and the
whole pack affords no better.

The real or seeming hypocrisy, pride, covetousness, unrighteousness,
uncharitableness, selfishness of some is cast upon all.

From some instances of aberration they argue against a godly tenor of
Conversation, and deny sincerity where they see a falling short of Perfection.

They disparage a serious and circumspect course of Life, by pretending it may
be but a mere guise or show, there may be lurking vices, and they who have
escaped gross Sensuality may be guilty of spiritual sins, as pride and envy; and
so they ground their detraction upon suppositions and surmises of what may be,
though not appearing.

They inveigh against hypocrisy in that manner, which hardens the vicious in
their de^auchery; and they encourage Libertines in ^dleness and excess of
vanity, by telling them, that the Precisians may do worse.

Those godly exercises that lie out of the common road (as to instance in Holy
conference) they bring into contempt, by objecting an unseasonable and
preposterous use thereof, or the impertinency and weakness of some therein.

They censure inordinate transports of zeal, and whimsies in Religion more
bitterly than lewdnesses, outrages, gross impieties, and daring wickedness of
dissolute Persons.

They will burden the sober-minded, that are zealous for their God, with the
inexcusable madness of some intemperate Zealots.

The failings of the Religious they aggravate above measure, and particularly
some passionate disorders, that are commonly complexional, and have less of the
will, and consequently of sinful malignity in them, than many sins that make
lesser noise, and raise less clamor: and they magnify the eveness,
moderation, mildness and other humanities of loose or lukewarm Persons for the
true Christian Spirit.

They upbraid the Godly with their solemn confessions and aggravations of Sin
before the Lord, and with their acknowledgment and bewailing of such scandals
before the World, as have been given by some among them; as also with their
public Testimonies against Errors and Corruptions, that have risen in their
times; and so they reproach them for their humility, sincerity, and
impartiality in abusing themselves and giving glory to God, and condemning Sin
where ever they find it.

They scoff at those that speak of communion with God, spiritual experiences,
desertions, and the like matters; and use in scorn Scriptural words and
phrases, and other holy expressions used by the Religious; and profane the
terms of Holy, Godly, Saint, Sanctified, by the use thereof in scandalous
Ironies, and so they make sport for profane men, and harden them in their
irreligion.

They would render holy things contemptible by nothing, some little oversight
and indecencies (mostly involuntary) in those that perform the same, as perhaps
in the Preachers tone or gesture.

And to say the truth, it is one of the easiest things in the World for
licentious wits to play upon the most serious and sacred things, and to make
the most acceptable Service of God and his choicest Servants, seem ridiculous.
These are some of the many vile and wretched ways of disgracing true Religion:
And I will add one more, to wit, that madness of opposition, on what side
soever it be, which to make a different Party odious, will not fear to expose
Godliness it self to the contempt and scorn of them that scorn all Religious
Parties.

Surely it is a fearful thing to be a hater, reviler, and scorner of Persons,
and things dear to God, and precious in his sight: What is it to provoke the
Lord to jealousy, if this be not? Wherefore he does no ill service that
detects this perilous folly: And men would easily shun such mistake and
prejudice, as makes them misjudge and condemn the Pious, if they would but deal
fairly, and exercise the same equity and candor toward them, which is due to
all sorts, and which toward themselves all do justly challenge.

But Godliness will be still Godliness, let presumptuous wits employ their
Tongues and Pens to transform into never so ugly shapes, Invectives, Sarcasms,
odious, and ridiculous Tales and Stories, Scenial representations and disguises
will not confound it, nor sink its authority and reputation. On the other hand
the fairest coverings, and best contrived Apologies, the most notable and
advantageous Policies, will not make corrupt things savoury, nor insipid things
relishable, nor little empty things great and weighty, nor uphold the
estimation of a degenerate, carnal, outside, lifeless state of Religion, where
better things are known. The wit of man may adorn or palliate any folly, and
deform true Wisdom: but in a lucid Region, where knowledge is diffused, Wisdom
will show it self, and the folly of fools cannot be hid.

But let the Religious know, that it behooves them to take care that they suffer
not so many things in vain; for these indignities may do them more good, than
the vain applause of men: If their Enemies give them advantage (as indeed they
do) for the learning of more Wisdom, Sobriety, and Circumspection, let them
receive it; it is pity they should not make the most of such harsh
Instructions. What manner of Persons should they be in all Holy Conversation
and Godliness, that as much as in them lies, there might not be that woe to the
World because of offenses; and that with well doing, they might put to silence
the ignorance of foolish men; More especially they should do their uttermost to
shun even the appearance of the sins more peculiarly charged upon them, as
Hypocrisy, Pride, Wildness of Fancy, Affected Singularity, and Self-Flattery;
and to be adorned with a conspicuous sincerity, humility, and charity.

And whatsoever contumely they endure, let them by no means retaliate in the
same kind, remembering their blessed Lord, who being reviled, reviled not again,
but committed himself to him that judges righteously. Wickedness comes from
the wicked: scurrility, petulancy, bitterness and all intemperate language, is
more agreeable to their adversaries, than to them: And it is observed, that the
flinging of witty sarcasms, biting jears and scoffs, and railing words against
a Party, do vex and gall more than hurt or break them; and provoke, but not
convince them; and serve indeed to feed a humor, and make sport, and do some
present feat, but do not carry the main cause, or prevail in the end, but turn
rather to the damage and blemish of those, for whose service they were
designed.

CHAP. XVI.
Religions main strength next under the Power of God, lies in its own
intrinisick excellency.

THe propagating of true Christianity, and the sound state of Religion,
agreeable thereunto against the enmity of the adverse World, is worthy of the
utmost endeavors of all pious men; and to search into the right ways and means
thereof, is a necessary and noble speculation. But it must first be known, that
its Stability and Victory in the World depends primarily upon the Wisdom,
Truth, and Power of God engaged for it, and therefore it cannot fall by the
Power and Policy of Adversaries, nor sink and lose it self by the weakness or
defectibility of its Professors; but it remains firm and sure, and the same for
ever.

Next after the Power of God, its main strength is its own intrinsic
excellency. It is upheld chiefly by its own principles, which are man's
perfection, and place our nature in its due state, and put both Persons and
Societies into the only right frame, and reduce all things into their own place
and order. They have nothing in them of iniquity, impurity, vanity or
unfitness; but are perfectly holy, just, and good, and give unto God his due,
and unto men theirs, and that upon the most excellent grounds that can be laid;
as the Glory of God, our conformity to him, our fellowship with him, our reward
from him and in him, and all in and through a Mediator, who is God and Man in
one Person, and the Head of all the faithful, who are his Body. The Godly
practice conformable to these principles, is from a cause that fails not, to
wit, the inhabitation and influence of the Holy Spirit of God.

Though true Christianity be far above the strain and reach of mere nature, yet
it is practicable by Divine grace; and notwithstanding the imperfect state of
its Professors, it fails not of its end, which is to bring into the
Possession of the heavenly Kingdom, the fruition of God and everlasting glory:
yea, it does effect great and excellent things in the present world.

Its rules are pure and perfect, its motives are great and high, and of
indubitable verity. They that live after it, are a Law to themselves and an aw
to others. No other institution Philosophical or Religious, is so powerful to
restrain inordinate affection, and to settle the minds and affairs of men in
the greatest peace and order, as far as human imperfection can arrive. It
denies all vicious excesses, and sensual pollutions, yea all offensive
levites, and unchristian irregularities, and all fellowship therewith: Yet
morosity and sowreness of Spirit, it by no means approves; but serenity of
disposition, and freeness and sweetness of conversation is both commanded and
caused by it.

It reaches the hidden man of the heart, and awes the Conscience; it forbids
the inward motions of intemperance and injustice, it condemns and loathes
Hypocrisy, and makes all external works to be nothing without sincerity. It
makes sincere love the principle, and places it at the bottom of our whole
behavior toward others, and therefore prompts and powerfully ingages to
mutual succor in the time of need. It maintains a charity unknown to the
Infidel World, and which is a virtue peculiar to it in the greatest vigor and
extent. It injoyns the love of enemies.

It exalts Humility, meekness and mutual forbearance as chief virtues, which
were contemned by the pride of moral Heathens; And therefore it makes men just
and peaceable: And yet withal it has the best grounds of true fortitude and
magnanimity; And therefore Damns that pusillanimity and foolish softness of
disposition, which betrays truth and virtue. Self-denial is one of its grand
precepts, without which none can live under its discipline and so it overrules
and controles that selfishness which is the Arch-rebell against God, and the
root of all mischief, and turns the World upside down. It teaches men to live
above the Honors and riches of the World, and takes off the heart from them.

Its principles most entirely accord with the true interest of the Higher
powers, it declare their authority to be from God as they are his Vicegerents,
and teaches them to rule in Subordination to him according to his laws; And it
awes the Consciences of Subjects to obdience. If Rulers command any thing
repugnant to the Laws of God, it forbids subjects to perform such-commands,
yet withal obliges to submit with patience to the unjust penalties of
nonperformance, and to avoid Mutinies and Rebellions. It also teaches the
people in Spiritual matters to receive the Churches directive with their own
discretive judgment, and so not to derogate from the just Authority of
Ecclesiastical Superiors.

It is indeed the chiefest strength of all just Governments and Societies. The
truth is, it does hedge in with thorns the lusts of men, as Pride, Malice,
Revenge, Covetousness and Sensuality; but it secures and inlarges their
wholesome comforts and enjoyments, their proprieties, immunities and all just
privileges. It advances Righteousness, Temperance, Beneficience and all other
duties appertaining to mankind. Wherever it roots and spreads, it makes no
small part of the Prudence, Courage, Industry and Frugality, and by consequence
of the wealth and strength of a Nation. There is no aggregation of men in the
world, wherein appears more of that which is good and profitable to men, than
is found where the influence of this profession becomes predominant, whether in
a Nation or Kingdom, or City or Family.

The Spirit of Christianity is the Spirit of power, of love and of a sound
mind, which gives great advantage for Prudence, Soberness, steddiness of
Conversation. The seriousness and gravity of this way disposes not to futil
talking, childish credulity, easiness and rashness, but to a considerate
freeness, and direct dealing with a generous caution and reservedness in due
Season.

Though its followers cannot link themselves to Factions, and serve all times
and occasions, and go along with the men of this world in their designs
throughout: yet they shall not fail of interest in a Nation not wholly
vitiated; nor is it hard for them to maintain an influence upon the public
State, if they accommodate themselves to serve it so far as conscience and
prudence leads them. Considerate men will not contemn them, and they that own
them shall know where to find them, and in pursuing good designs shall find
them fast friends. Religion does not cast men down into stupidity,
pusillanimity, or sluggish neglect of opportunity; but erects them to a
Prudent, and temperate vigor of Spirit, and regular activity, whereby they
become fit for the affairs of human life in a higher or lower Sphere, according
to their different capacities.

CHAP. XVII.
Religion may be advanced by human Prudence; what ways and methods it cannot
admit in order to its advancement.

THough true Religion stands by an unchangeable Law, and depends not upon the
mutable things of this World, and varies not according to their variations, nor
is to be governed by the common policy of secular Kingdoms: nevertheless its
affairs may be much advanced by prudence, and disadvantaged by indiscretion.
There is a lawful use of human Policy, being refined from Hypocrisy and all
iniquity. The Author of this Profession, the holy and just One, in whose mouth
was no guile, advises his Disciples to be wise as serpents, and harmless as
doves. St. Paul one of his chief Ministers was attentive to all the methods of
gaining People, and became all things to all men that he might win some; and he
was bold to tell some, that being crafty he caught them with guile: but it was
the guile of abounding Charity and self-denial, managed with prudence for the
service of Christ, and the saving of Souls.

In secular Kingdoms the reasons of State are locked up from the common view.
But the maxims and methods of this Interest may with great advantage be
disclosed as well to Aliens and Enemies, as to Friends and fellow-Citizens. For
by this discovery the powers of the World, who through their own
misapprehensions, or others malicious suggestions are sometimes turned against
it, may become more propense and indulgent toward it; and the more sober part
of Men may be inclined to favor it, and greater numbers both of high and low
Degree may be brought entirely to close with it, when they shall behold the
goodness and usefulness, the innocence and integrity of its Principles. As for
the Enemies counterworking we need not dread it. For the stratagems of this
warfare are not carnal, and cannot be counterwrought with carnal stratagems.

It remains therefore as the business of this inquiry, to consider how we may
improve the intrinsical and innate Advantages before mentioned; and to gain all
extrinsical and adventitious ones, that may be made, and to make the most of
them all for the designed end. But due care must be had, that the wisdom of
this World or human Policy have not too great (...) stroke. For many are the
arts and method^ that serve secular Interests, which the sincerity and purity
of true Religion can by no mean admit.

It cannot stablish it self in blood and cruelty nor murder the innocent for
its own security nor hold People in subjection by the horro^ of a Spanish
Inquisition, which is not the policy of the city of God, the Spiritual
Jerusalem, but of Babylon.

It cannot make use of such impostures, as are used to uphold the mystery of
iniqui^y, and which is the way of those Church Politicians that make Men stupid
and foolish, that they may the better Lord it over them as besotted Vassals.

It cannot invite or engage any to its Side by ^arnal allurements, and
provisions made for ^he lusts of Men. The making of such Provisions would
extinguish its life and power, and bring forth a spurious carnal Brood, that
always with deadly hatred pursues its true Pro^essors.

It cannot lift up it self by serving the de^^gns and lusts of earthly
Potentates; though it ^ives them their due honor to the full, yet it ^empts
them not by flattery to think of themselves above what they are, nor does it
pro^itute its Sacred Rules to patronize any enor^ities in their Conversations,
or political Ad^inistrations.

It cannot subdue a People, and hold them un^er by armed violence and
usurpation, for his were to subvert it self, and undermine its ^wn foundation,
which is truth, meekness and ^^ghteousness.

It seeks not by any irregular motions to per^rb a settled State, though
adverse and injurious to it. It cannot enter into the recesses (...) wicked
Policy; its principles will not bear (...) out in the cunning and close ways of
dishon^ sty. It abhors such engagements, as draw o^ necessity of proceeding in
unrighteous or da^ gerous Counsels, and especially such iniqui^ as would not
pass away in a transient action but would hold up a lasting usurpation or i^
jury to its perpetual reproach and repugnan^ to it self.

It neither has, nor in human judgment (...) like to have the sufficiency of
an arm of Fles^ or worldly Puissance, for its intrinsic and a^ biding
strength, until it comes in a more ex^ tensive power, and more ample victory
that has been yet manifested in the World. The mutable Advantages of certain
times and occa^ sions are but loose and hollow ground, and n^ settled
foundation for it to build upon.

It is not furthered by a course of subtilties and of intricate and cloudy
projects, which be get suspicion of evil; but by an openess an frankness of
dealing in all certainty and clearness. For in it self it is clear as the Sun,
an^ regular and certain as the ordinances of He^ ven, or the Motions of the
Celestial Bodies Whatsoever degree of obliquity or uncertainty happens to it,
is only extrinsical proceeding from Men's corruptions and frailties, who ne^
there are, can be here absolutely exact and perfect in it.

It rejects the fury of passion, bitterness, clamours, wrath, tumult, and all
outrage. In a word, it can admit nothing that is inconsistent with entire
honesty.

And it is not weakened by this strictness. For Truth is great and powerful;
and by a weak and gentle, yet sound and solid manifestation of it self, it
maintains a conquest answerable to its own condition in this present World.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Interest of true Religion lies much in its venerable Estimation among Men.

A Corrupt state of Religion nourishing Pride and Sensuality, and yielding it
self managable to the designs of Men after the course of the World, is commonly
upheld by an arm of Secular power, which by ways of its own it can make sure to
it self. But pure Religion abhorring base compliances; and residing in the
hitherto lesser number that walk in the narrow way, is not so well suited for a
settled and continued potency in that kind. Wherefore by how much the more it
fails of an assurance of worldly Power and Greatness, by so much the more it
needs the advantage of venerable estimation for its own intrinsic excellence.

A desire of vain glory, and an ambitious catching at the praise of Men is
opposite to this interest, and destroys the ends thereof. But because things
that appear not, are of the same reason with things that are not, in regard of
influence upon the minds of Men, Christianity should be made appear to be what
it is indeed, that it is not a mere Idea in the imagination or intellect, but a
wisdom and power that may be practiced: and its glory is displaid in a Life of
integrity, purity and charity by the brightness of which graces in the
primitive Times it became illustrious, and was exalted over all the learning,
and virtue, and potency of the Heathen World, in such an Age as had all civil
disciplines in their perfection; and it is never so much endangered, as when
the sanctity of its Professors is fallen, or exposed to scandal.

Eminent Holiness is after miracles the next great testimony to the truth, and
is now in the room of Miracles, and its influence is very powerful.
Wheresoever it is, it invigorates others of this Fellowship that are near it,
and it commands aw and reverence from all Men. It Is a great happiness, when
Persons endued herewith are in proportionable number fixed like stars of the
first magnitude throughout the firmament of the Church, when there are Men of
strong Parts, much prudence, active spirits, firm resolution, who are filled
with the Holy Spirit, inflamed with love to God, and devoted to seek the things
that are Christ's, and fitted thereunto by real mortification and selfdenial,
also when Persons of a lower sphere for the perfections of Nature or Learning,
have attained to a large measure of the primitive Spirit of Faith, love,
meekness, brotherly kindness and charity, whereby they are made ready to every
good work, and provoke others thereunto.

As the eminent piety of some, so the appro^ed piety of the generality of
serious Professors imports exceedingly to the reputation and reverence of true
Religion. The spiritual Man discerns the excellency of the Divine life, and
the beauty of Holiness; and the natural Man also can discern humility,
chastity, tem^erance, patience, charity, integrity, as things morally good and
profitable to Men, and by ^ese things the truth is vindicated and main^ined. To
defile the purity of this Professi^ is to stain its glory, and to stain i^s
glory, is (...) render it weak and despicable. None there^re may pass for the
allowed Disciples of this ^ay, but such as keep themselves pure from (...) foul
sins of Sensuality, and from all palpa^ dishonesty. Howbeit the lawful favor
^d assistance of any others may with due cau^ be admitted in its concernments.

A harmless life if barren and unprofitable is of little value in it self, and
also of little force to advance any Profession. Nay a fruitless life is
scandalous and unchristian. They are the words of Christ, herein is my Father
glorified that ye bear much fruit, so shall ye be my Disciples. The root of
such fruitfulness in good works is love out of a pure heart, and good
conscience, and faith unfeigned, to which belong those praises, that it is the
end of the Commandment, and the fulfilling of the Law. Now because they that
walk circumspectly are often censured by the looser Sort to be uncharitable, it
does the more concern them really to show forth the laudible fruits of Charity,
and to maintain all good works before Men, though not to be seen of Men, and to
hate narrowness of Soul and base selfishness.

What do ye more than Others? says the Author of our Profession. When the
Religious apparently excel the choicest part of unregenerate Men, then is
Wisdom apparently justified of her Children. Natural men may have some amiable
virtues by which they aim to commend themselves both to God and the World, yet
in other matters of no less manifest and necessary concernment they are
licentious and remiss. But the true Christian make it his business to fulfill
all Righteousness. And as the principle of true Piety causes an intirene^ in
all the parts of good Life; so being duly improved and stirred up, it will
cause them that have it, not only to acquit themselves in whatsoever things are
acceptable, and praiseworthy among the merely virtuous part of Men, but also to
perform those things that are far above them, and both a wonder and a reproof
unto them.

Religion has a good savor among all Men, by the due observance of all
relative duties; and nothing renders it more unsavory, than the violating of
those bonds, and the nonperformance of those dues, which arise from natural or
civil relations; For these things are our proper sphere, our daily walk and
constant business, wherein we are most accountable to God, and useful to men.

Industry and providence in the affairs of this Life, conduces to reputation;
but idleness and improvidence is very scandalous. Upon this account, Godliness
is sometimes reproached by occasion of some idle Pretenders, and others that
are Pious, but inconsiderate and imprudent. Religious exercises must be
attended seasonably, and in due order: Idle and careless Persons, that wander
from their callings, how full soever of good words, must be numbered among those
that walk disorderly. When the Rules of Christianity are so agreeable to the
temporal well being, and so indulgent to the present necessities of mankind, it
is a great shame to expose it to contempt and prejudice, by such perverseness or
improvidence, as if it were inconsistent with industry and prudence, in the
necessary concernment of this World.

In like manner a discreet and moderate use of riches, a generous frugality,
and frugal liberality, avoiding fordid covetousness on the one hand, and vain
ostentation and deliciousness on the other, is of good report and gains esteem;
but to live either too narrowly, or too profusely, taints a man's reputation,
and derogates from the honor of his Profession.

To be constant or always the same, is a noble property, and is had in much
honor. And hereunto true Christianity gives the greatest adnantage. Its main
principles are evident and unchangable; with the allowance of prudential
accommodations according to time and place in things indifferent. It is a chief
point of Wisdom to bring our might and main to the great and weighty things of
the Law, and to watch with jealousy against every devise of man that would
undermine them; but to be more cautious and sparing in points of less
importance, yet the occasions of much contest among them that own the same
Doctrine of faith. We are ill advised if we lay our main stock where our main
interest is not touched. Several matters touching Religion have been carried in
a vicissitude according to the change of times, and yet the substance of
Religion not altered. It is not safe to fix a necessity upon such things, from
which the urgency of aftertimes may enforce us to drawback, unless we will
desert our Stations, before we have a discharge from our Master in Heaven. The
espousing of some controverted Forms and Doctrines may end in a divorce,
dishonorable enough, although it be conscientious: And the reproach hereof may
be aggravated by the pretended constancy of others in erroneous ways, when it
is indeed no other than the pertinacy of a selfish mind, or an adhering to a
worldly interest. When there is a liberty some Forms may be safely chosen, as
most advantageous, and yet not asserted to be the only necessary; and again;
some others may be laid aside, as inconvenient: and yet not damned as impious,
or simply evil. The parent of true constancy is Godly Wisdom, having the sure
foundation of evident and unchangable Truths, with a just latitude in things
not determined by the positive Laws of God. And so there may ordinarily happen
to the same man some diversity of practice at different times, that deserves
not the brand of time serving, which is often too rashly objected. For the same
fixed principle of knowledge and integrity will direct to this way or method of
a sacred Action at one time, and at another time to that which is far
different; yea, and (when it cannot be avoided) to a submitting to what has
sometime been rejected, I mean rejected not as in it self unlawful, but as
inconvenient or less profitable. When we are at liberty, we are obliged to take
the best way; but when confined, we must do as well as we may in that state.
And the submission signifies an acknowledgment of the simple lawfulness, but
not of the comparative goodness or desirableness of the thing imposed.

Since our blessed Savior has given his Church a legacy of Peace in Him, with
tribulation in the World, to suffer with reputation, is not of little moment.
It sometimes comes to pass, and that inevitably, that the Godly suffer much in
such cases which the looser sort account niceties, and needless scruples; in
which cases, their sufferings are precious in the sight of God, who highly
values the jots and tittles of his Law: but they are not so honorable in the
sight of men. But when their cause is so unquestionable, that all sober Spirits
of Orthodox belief must needs regard it, their suffering has much more glory,
and all the faithful will be more constant and uniform in adhering to such a
cause. Howbeit if they suffer for conscience sake in such things as the World
accounts niceties; yet an upright and prudent walking with a peaceable Spirit,
submissive in things clearly indifferent, and bearing with others intolerable
differences, will be an ample defense unto them, and gain respect, and
peradventure mollify those that do the injury. Furthermore let it be here
noted, that to the Sufferer it is no less honorable, to suffer for the Life
and Power of Christianity, in opposition to the immorality, malignity, and
hypocrisy of carnal Christians, than in the defense of the Christian Faith, or
any Article thereof, in opposition to Infidels, Heretics, or Blasphemers. For
the Christian life and practice is the end of the Christian Faith and Doctrine,
and therefore cannot be of less regard. Yet this kind of Suffering is more
dishonorable to Christ, in respect of the Persecutors, who are his professed
Servants, and therefore in this respect, it is more grievous to the persecuted,
than if they Suffered from those that disown his name, or are his more avowed
Enemies.

CHAP. XIX.
The most ample diffusion of the Light of knowledge, is a sure means of
promoting true Religion.

FAlse and corrupt ways bear sway by a Peoples ignorance; but Religion in its
right and sound state as a Jewel that has its greatest luster by the brightest
light, is maintained by the clearest knowledge. In bright times, the impostures
and carnal designs of devised Doctrines, and superstitious vanities will be
made manifest; and the hypocrisy being detected, the Merchandise thereof will
be quite marred. In such times even the vulgar sort will expect from those in
sacred Functions, at least the appearance of a sober, righteous and godly
conversation, with diligence in holy administrations. Then the enemies of real
Sanctity are put to hard shifts, and forced to appear either in some colors of
Truth, or in the shame of their own nakedness. For this cause the Followers of
Truth make it their special interest, as thoroughly to promote the most ample
diffusion, and universal increase of Knowledge among all ranks and sorts of
Men, as the Adverse partly seek to oppose and debase it.

We do not hereby mean an intermedling in difficult matters, a smattering in
controversies, and certain curiosities of Opinions, a store of unnecessary
notions, and of mere words and phrases, which things are commonly erroneous,
and at the best but injudicious, and puff up the half-witted and
self-conceited, and make them troublesome to themselves and others. But that
which is here commended for an universal increase and propagation, is to
understand the Principles of the Essential Truths of Christianity, to see their
evidence, to judge rightly of their weight and worth, and to view their
coherence; and besides these, to know so much of other Truths as the different
Capacities of Men will enable them, for the bettering of their Knowledge in the
Essentials.

The means of diffusing this Light are well known, as the constant Preaching of
the Word, and the opening of the Principles of Religion in a due form of
Cathechism, the strict observation of the Lords Day, repetition of Sermons,
^ious Conferences, reading the Word, and Prayer in Families, profitable
Communication among Neighbor-christians in their daily converse, the spreading
of practical Books written by Men of sound judgment, and Ministers private
applications to those of their own Charges with prudence and meekness.

For the same end that main Principle of Protestanism, the judgment of
Discretion, as ^elonging to all Christians, is to be asserted and ^indicated
against that Popish and brutish Do^trine of implicit Faith, in the Church's
de^rminations. This is not to subject matters of ^aith to a private Spirit; but
to refer them to ^e divine Authority of the holy Scriptures, to ^e apprehended
in the due and right use of ^eason, which is a public and evident thing, ^d
lies open to the trial and judgment of all Men. And to Men of sober minds,
serious for the saving of their own Souls, the Analogy of Faith in the current
of Scripture is easily discernable.

Moreover, the general increase of Knowledge lies much in the ingenuous
Education and condition of the common People, in opposition to sordidness,
slavery and brutish rudeness. Though some look upon the vulgar sort with
contempt, and seem to value them no more than brute Animals, and think it
enough that their Governors understand and consider for them, and not they for
themselves: yet Christ has shed his Blood as much for the redemption of that
Sort, as of the Noble and Mighty, and Prudent; and he has made no difference
between the one and the other in the conditions of Salvation, and in the
privileges and ordinances of his Kingdom. As for the receiving of the Grace of
God, the Scripture casts the advantage on the poorer and meaner side. Not many
wise Men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called, was the
observation of St. Paul, and St. James witnesses, that God has chosen the
Poor of this world, rich in Faith, and Heirs of his Kingdom. And those whom God
has chosen, must needs be instructed in his Will. That reasonable service that
he requires, none can perform without Knowledge. Ignorance is opposite to the
nature and being of true Christian Piety, which is not at all where it is not
received with understanding.

This general increase of Knowledge has fallen under a great suspicion of
evil, and it may be under the jealousy of Rulers, as disposing Men to
Sedition, Rebellion, Herisie and Schism. But how great a reproach is hereby
cast upon human Nature, or political Government, or both, that the more
rationally apprehensive the Body of a People are, they are so much the more
ungovernable, as if Government could not stand with the proper dignity and
felicity of human Nature? What manner of civil State is that, which degrades
the Subjects from Men to Beasts, for a more absolute Dominion over them? What
manner of Christian Church is that, which to prevent Heresy and Schism, takes
order that its Members be no Christians? It is an unchristian, inhuman policy
in Church or State, the foundation whereof is laid in the Peoples ignorance. As
for the true interest of Rulers, it is not weakened, but strengthened by their
Peoples knowledge, which in its right and proper tendency makes them more
conscientious, and however, more circumspect and considerate, and consequently
more easily manageable by a just and prudent Government. But gross ignorance
tends to make them barbarous and belluine, and in their mutinies and
discontents uncounsellable and untameable, and therefore very incongruous to a
State governed by the Principles of Christianity or Humanity.

CHAP. XX.
The advantage of Human Learning to the same end.

THough Religion rests not on human Learning, as its main support; yet it seeks
and claims the necessary help thereof. Those whom God designs for eminent
service, he indues with eminent gifts either by means or miracle; and he gives
every entrusted Servant a measure answerable to his degree. The Apostles who
laid the foundation were wise Master Builders: and surely it was not the mind
of Christ that Wisdom should die with them, when he settled his Church to
endure throughout all Ages, and promised to be with it to the end of the World.
It is said indeed, that the foolishness of God is wiser than Men, and the
weakness of God is stronger than Men. But that which is so called, is not
foolishness and weakness indeed, but only so accounted by the pride of carnal
Wisdom.

In this Learned age the Antichristian State in Christendom is forced to
advance Learning in its own defense. And now without Learning either divinely
inspired or acquired by means, we cannot defend our selves against it.
Wherefore to destroy the supports of Learning, is the way to subvert Religion.
Yea, though we were not engaged by such strength of the Adversary to provide
for our own defense; yet solid human Learning does of it self notably advance
Divine Truth. The Learning that was spread over the World in the primitive
times of Christianity, apparently made way for that sudden and ample spreading
of the Gospel. And the Reviving thereof after an universal decay, no less
apparently made way for the breaking forth of this clearer Light of the Gospel
after the long night of Popery. Unlearned and barbarous times are noted among
the causes of depraving Religion with multiplied Superstitious absurdities and
deformities. Indeed that great Mystery of Iniquity, the Romish Synagogue is
favored by many wise and learned Ones; but the interest of great Power and
Wealth, and other carnal al^urements engage them to uphold that Babel, and so
to detain the Truth of God in their own ^nrighteousness.

The Papal Kingdom of darkness has amply provided for an eminent measure of
Learning in their Superior Clergy, and certain religious Orders designed for
Theological controversies, and the propagation of the Roman ^aith, being
necessitated thereunto by the learnedness of the present Age. But for the
vulgar Priests, who daily converse with the common People, that are ignorant
and unlearned, it matters not how little Knowledge they have; and the Grandees
care not that they should be conversant in learned Books, no not in their own
Bellarmine. As for the Laity, it is a Principle in that Church, that Ignorance is
the mother of Devotion. A corrupt Ecclesiastical State, upheld for worldly
ends, has no reason to desire the advancement of Learning any further, than is
requisite to defend it sel^ against learned Adversaries, and to hold the Vulgar
in admiration of it. It would have the People wholly to trust their Teachers,
and it is not well relished, when learned Gentle men of the Laity are exact,
and studious i^ Theological inquiries.

The supports and rewards of Learning may be so inordinately apportioned and
confe^ red, as to exalt boundless ambition and avari^ in some, and to nourish a
dronish idleness and Epicurism in others, and to cast the residue^ and those
the greatest number into ignoranc^ beggary, baseness and superfluity of naught^
ness. Such a disposition of things, besides the ruin of Religion would in the
ruins there^ bury Learning it self (as it has done in for mer Ages) if the
industry of some were n^ kept waking by the increase of Knowledge a^ mong
another sort of Men. But whatsoeve^ abuse corrupts that which in it self is
excellent, the supports of Learning are always necessary in the true Church;
and to settle a way for a perpetual succession of wise and learned Guides of
the Flock in this entire and sound state of Religion, is to build the same on a
Rock.

The spirit of this Profession being sober, solid and serious, is happy in
disposing toward the attainment of much Perfection in all profitable science,
and especially toward that which is most excellent and useful in human
affairs, to wit solid and deep judgment. In this respect the Children of true
Wisdom stand upon the vantage ground; and the scope of their business directs
them to excel in the more substantial part of Learning, which perfects reason
and falls in with practice, and makes them able effectually to converse with
Men both in Religious and Civil matters. These do not spend their days in a
cloister living to themselves alone, but are seasonably called forth to sacred
or civil Functions, and so by Study in conjunction with practice and
experience, they become more perfect in Science. The same ^ntents and purposes
direct them to understand the end and use of their acquisitions, and to have
their Learning at command, and ma^ageable for present business.

CHAP. XXI.
The general civility or common honesty of a Nation makes it more generally
receptive of real Christianity or Godliness.

REligion having considerateness and soberness in its nature, has great
advantage by the sober and serious temper of a Nation, City or Country, where
its advancement and propagation is designed. Civility is a good preparative to
Piety, and experience witnesses, that among the serious and temperate sort of
People, and in the most civilized places Religion takes best; and that it takes
least in those places where debauchery and Sensuality reign in those of the
higher rank, and a Heathen-like rudeness and stupidity seiseth the common
multitude. Wherefore that sort of Men, whose spirit or interest leads them to
uphold a corrupt and carnal Church State, seek to gratify the most sensual and
vicious part of a Nation, because they cannot so easily gain the considerate
and soberminded, who are more inquisitive into the principles and practices of
different Parties, and look more than others into the inside of men's Devotions.

A Nation may be generally brought to civil conversation and the external part
of Religion. For the restraining of filthy lewdness, gross excesses and
rudeness best comports with the health of the Body, the security of the estate,
and the quietness of the mind. Therefore when it is in use, it is no burden but
an ease even to unregenerate Nature, and so may pass generally among a People.
Likewise natural Men being convinced and awakened, will easily observe
Religious duties so far as the peace of the natural Conscience does require.

The Conversation of the Pious is exemplary and of great authority, especially
when their strictness and seriousness is tempered with the amiable virtues of
Meekness and Moderation. By this they may do much toward the civilizing of
those that live about them, and to conciliate the minds of Men toward them,
and bring them to good thoughts of Religion. But the harshness of some rigid
honest Men may exasperate and beget hatred in some, whom condescension and
sweetness of conversation might have gained, or at least mol^ified.

Likewise by a discreet and seasonable use of christian liberty in the
temperate enjoyments of outward comforts in harmless Recreations, and sober
cheerfulness in honest Company, the Religious may bring over others to a
friendly converse with them, and may be a means to keep them from the more
gross and scandalous Pollutions of the world. Yet as they ought to shun an
excessive reservedness and austerity, so they must take heed of too great
compliance with others in carnal liberty, upon pretense of a friendly converse
with them. They may not spend their time in recreations, fruitless visits,
merry meetings and the like exercises, wherein there is enough of idleness and
vanity, even when there is nothing of dissoluteness or gross immorallity. For
by such a trade of life they would lose themselves in a sober kind of
Epicurism, or Sensuality under a form of Godliness; and they would harden
others in their loose walking, or make them think that Professors are but as
other men, except in a name and outward Form. Wherefore they may be sociable no
otherwise, than that it may appear they make Religion their business, and walk
circumspectly and redeem their time from vanity, for the serious Duties of
their general and particular callings.

It may be further noted, that whatsoever promoteth knowledge among the meaner
sort, promotes Civility. Likewise where a people are generally settled in a way
of industry and frugality, and those of higher extract or education are bent
unto exercises truly noble and worthy, that Nation will be disposed to a more
considerate and apprehensive habit of mind, and to a more sober and regular
course of life; but the State of things is corrupt and tends to general
debauchedness, when those of higher Rank and Quality live in idleness and
sensual excesses, and have a proportionable number of the meaner sort waiting
upon them in much idleness, for the service of those lusts and vanities. This
course would vitiate the whole Mass of a people, did not some powerful
opposite means preserve some parts more entire and sound in Morals. Now an
order and frame of things settled for frugality is not unworthy of a generous
Nation. It is a noble thing for persons of higher birth and breeding to improve
their parts, and wealth, and leisure in useful and liberal studies and
exercises, whereby something may be added either to their own Fortunes, or to
the common stock and treasure of Mankind.

Where this considerate and sober disposition of a people is affected, it
should be esteemed a great happiness, and worthy of the best improvement for
the advancement of Religion. Discreet and well minded persons are in no wise to
be discouraged or disobliged. If they cannot be raised to a higher pitch, it is
better to keep them where they are, than by any matter of disgust to occasion
them to fall back first to disrelish, then to loath and oppose a strict
profession.

CHAP. XXII.
The increase of Religion is promoted by being made, as much as may be,
passable among men.

SUch is the course of this world, that a necessity of being singular lies upon
those that embrace the power of Godliness. And because all singularity is
obnoxious to disgust and censure, it concerns them to make it evident, that
theirs is not humorous and affected, but necessary and conscientious; and so to
shun all affectation of odd conceits and practices, or any unnecessary
reservedness. The mere departing from evil and the impartial discharge of duty
will set them too much alone and aloof off from too too many. And truly it is
the grief of sincere and humble minds, that they can have no more company in
the way that is called holy. But the humor of needless Singularity, has a
snatch of Pharisaical leaven in it. To be affable and of easy access, and free
in harmless compliances avails much to remove or lessen prejudice.

It is not of little moment to discern and keep the right Path in the matter of
Conformity to the decent Civilities of this world. To be sollicitous and exact
about idle and tedious curiosities of Habit, Gesture and complemental Converse,
to run with the foremost after new Garbs and Fashions, is inconsistent with the
Purity, Gravity and moderate severity of true Religion. On the other hand, to
neglect the decencies of the Age is taken to proceed from a sordid or a peevish
humor. A mediocrity in such things is most acceptable and advantageous. The
truth is, the extravagancy of our times has tempted some to strain Christian
liberty beyond the bounds of Soberness, and there is need that some check be
given to this excess of vanity. Nevertheless the other extreem will gain no
honor. Morosity truly so called is very offensive, and is indeed but a severe
and serious folly.

It is not to be expected that all should be of the same strain, Guarb or
humor in these indifferent matters pertaining to human life, wherein is found
so great diversity among virtuous and worthy Persons. The more Free, Gentile
and cheerful may not despise them that be more shie, reserved and solemn in
their behavior, nor may these judge the other. For Godliness stands on neither
side, but is indifferent toward both.

And importunate zeal, and strictness about things of indifferent or doubtful
interpretation does oft-times great disservice to Religion, and hinders that
reception that was ready to be given to it. When too great a stir is made about
little matters, men of loose principles will suggest against all Godly care and
strictness, as needless scrupulosity and preciseness. And the urging of some
hard things, as indispensable duties upon weak and uncertain grounds, has
alienated the minds of some from that course of life, which was necessary to
their Salvation.

It is most true, that the Faithful in Christ have their conversation in
Heaven, as being redeemed from this present evil world, and having Jerusalem
which is above the Mother of them all. Nevertheless as yet they dwell upon
earth, and converse with natural men, and therefore may not speak and act in
such a strain, as if they were taken out of the world. Provided they deny no
principle of Faith, it behooves them to show themselves in nothing estranged
from the principles of human reason, and moral prudence according to men upon
earth, and in that regard to act as Citizens of this world; though in regard of
their heavenly Spirit and conversation, which is their life indeed, they must
walk as fellow Citizens with the Saints now in Glory. I urge this the rather
because they are by Scornful men numbered among Fanatics.

Upon the same ground in all public Affairs, they must consider what the
Kingdoms of this world with bear; they must be discreet and temperate in their
incounters with Peoples vanities, especially inveterate Customs; and in all
things they should approve themselves fit and able for the service of human
Society. This will make them appear considerable, and befool and shame those
that slight them.

There is no difference in Christ, between bond and free, high and low, rich
and poor; but they are all one in him: Wherefore the Scripture says, let the
Brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted, but the rich man that he
is made low. And accordingly it testifies against the having of the Faith of
our Lord Jesus Christ, with respect of Persons. Howbeit this indistinction of
Persons respects Privileges that are merely Spiritual, to which there is no
inequality of right upon any civil pre-eminence: but in all civil Privileges,
Christianity maintains the different rights of the several ranks of men, and
injoyns us to render honor to whom honor is due. And there is more in it than
a mere gracefulness of behavior, or pleasingness of humane conversation; for
it is necessary to maintain Government, and to keep the World in order.
Religion therefore does not countenance a levelling humor, nor any insolence
and irreverence toward Superiors, but condemns their pride and folly, that
presume to ^arry it in that sort, upon the account of an equality in Christ, or
a conceit of their own pre-eminence in him above others. The profession of
Godliness cannot be more prejudiced, than by such a Spirit and behavior
discerned in those that pretend to it. The mighty, the noble, and the wealthy,
will not endure to be confronted by mean Persons; but are tempted to hate and
crush that Profession, which they think makes men forget those distances and
due observances, which civility calls for. But Religion is made more passable
and acceptable, especially with those at the upper end of the World, by the
discretion and modesty of its Professors, in upholding civil distinctions and
degrees of honor among men, and in rendering to all their dues according to
those degrees.

CHAP. XXIII.
The observing of a due latitude in Religion, makes for the security and
increase thereof.

CHristianity is not to be extended to such a latitude, as to take in
Heretics, (...) Idolaters, or real Infidels, because they ar^ named
Christians; nor is it shut up in severe^ Parties distinguished by certain
Doctrine Rites and Platforms, which the tyranny (...) ancient Tradition,
National custom, Politic^ Interest, or passionate zeal has exalted: but it
incompasseth all those that hold Christ the Head in the unity of Faith and
Life. Wherefore the constitution of the Church must be set as much as may be
for the incompassing of all true Christians, which indeed makes for its most
fixed and ample state. And the taking of a narrower compass, is a fundamental
error ^n its Policy, and will always hinder its stability and increase.

The true state of the Church (as of any other Society) lies in the
universality, or the ^hole Body, and not in any divided or sub^ivided parts
thereof. Accordingly, its true ^nterest leads not to the things that make for
the exalting of this or that Party, but to those common and great concernments
that uphold and increase the whole Body. And it is but just and equal to
accomodate the public Order, to the satisfaction of all Parties, not in what
their several designs and humors crave, (which is impossible) but in what they
all may justly challenge by their Christian liberty, and which is possible;
namely, that their consciencies may not be perplexed and ^rdened with things
unnecessary, how high^ soever magnified by some one Party.

They that seek Worldly wealth and glory (...) a Church state, think it as good
to yield (...) all, as to relinguish any thing of their ^nstitutions. For
although they know that moderation might make for a general Peace, and for the
lasting good of a Christian People, yet they foresee that by removing offenses,
and reforming abuses, they should open a door to men of such principles, as may
subvert the foundations of their building. Therefore they think it safer to
immure themselves by institutions suitable to their own estate, and to adhere to
them unalterably. According to this reason in the Council of Trent, the Pope
gave his Legates instruction so to proceed, that the Lutherans might despair o^
Peace, without a total submission. For h^ regarded not their return upon such
term^ as would diminish the Authority and Revenue of his Court, or weaken any
of the foundations of Papal Power. Such a Party value all men, whether they
draw nearer t^ them, or keep further from them, as they stand affected to the
interest which they maintain. But true Religion stands upon another bottom, and
pursues other ends, to wit, Holiness and Peace, and that without partiality and
without hypocrisy. It has no privat^ carnal Interest to uphold, and therefore
need not such carnal devices for its own securit^ and advantage. By
comprehensiveness loses nothing, because it seeks not gre^ things upon Earth,
nor serves the designs of an^ Faction; and as it loses nothing hereby, s^ it
gains much, both in amplitude and st^ bility.

In Church affairs, those things are to be held fast which Christ our Lawgiver
has by his unalterable Rule determined, and made necessary to the building up
of his Church, such as are the Spiritual Ordinances and Officers of his
institution. But things of mere human determination are not unalterable, and
the alteration thereof in a season that requires it, does no whit weaken
Religion, or darken the glory of it. And doubtless they ought not to be more
regarded, than integrity of life, and Ministerial ability and industry, for the
Churches Edification in Faith and Holiness. The exercises of Christian meekness
and charity in such things, is far more glorious to the Church, than a forced
uniformity; and that constraining rigor which does but debase men's judgments
into servility, and teaching them to strain their consciences, ^ends to make
them less Conscientious and Religious. Besides, the said moderation in those
matters, wherein uniformity of apprehensions is unnecessary and imposible, will
keep the Church in a better consistency, and deliver it from those contests and
breaches which may end ^n its dissipation. But what glory or safety ^s there in
a public Order that is, and ever will be made the subject of controversy,
more than the Rule of Unity?

The hinderance of the most important things of Christ's Kingdom, is a mischief
that always follows the promoting of narrow principles, and partial interests
in Religion, Whereof these instances among many others may be noted, The
obstructing of the liberty of public Ministerial Service, to be given to
Ministers that lie under restraint, lest some that accept it not should be
weakened in their severed Interest; Also the opposing of a public order of
Catechizing the People in the uncontroverted principles of Religion, lest the
petty Liberties of a Party in their severed way should be impaired. But the
concerns of any particular Party are set behind the common Interest of
Christianity, by a true Catholic Spirit which is ready to join hand in hand
with any that seek the increase of Faith and Godliness, in the unquestionable
means thereof. And no detriment can accrue by concurring even with men of
adverse principles, in setting on foot those things received in common, that
have a sure tendency to advance true Religion: of which sort, are all good
means of introducing knowledge and civil conversation among a People rude and
ignorant.

The fixing of Divine right upon matters of mere prudence, and the damning of
things indifferent for unlawful, is an error of evil consequence. It causlesly
breaks a People into Parties, and excites them to subvert their opposites, and
the opposition seems unchangeable. Hereby public affairs are discomposed, the
cause of Religion is imbroiled, and the propagation thereof obstructed; and
perhaps at length, after tedious contests, either both Parties being weary of
endless strife, sit down in silence; or the weaker being vanquished, is
crushed, or yields with shame and loss. Into the snare of this Error, men are
brought by narrowness of judgment, or strength of fancy, or hurry of prejudice,
driving from one extreme to another, to which may be added the private
Interests of leading men. Wherefore we should take care that we lay no bonds
upon our selves, in those things wherein neither the Law of nature, nor any
positive Law of God has bound us up.

Furthermore, it does not stand with the settlement or enlargement of any
Church Interest, to enter into such Religious bonds, as must needs conflict,
not only with the opposition of perpetual adversaries, but also with the
dissentings and dissatisfactions of friends considerable for number and
quality; in as much as they are too narrow for the common Interest, and biass
too strongly to a Party of one persuasion. For which cause their pre^alence is
not lasting, but by usual and easy changes, their weakness is discovered.

To tie a People to certain little rules and methods in Church Discipline, that
are ge^erally displeasing; as the necessary terms of church Privileges, when
the ends of Discipline may be as well obtained without them, is at the best but
the vanity of a needless trouble, in doing that with much ado, which might be
done with less; and it may occasion an incurable breach, and the rejection of
the whole Form of Government.

Narrow and uncertain boundaries of Church Communion, and arbitrary and rigid
rules of admission, are contrary to that ample and fixed Church state, which is
necessary to uphold and propagate true Religion. The Faith of Christ has been
propagated and perpetuated in large Kingdoms and Nations, by incompassing under
its external Rule and Order, the multitude that made profession, though they
might fa^ short of the New Birth, and those things tha^ accompany Salvation:
And it does not roo^ or spread in any sort considerable in a Region, where the
order of admission is set by the rigid and narrow principles of a small Party,
and the general multitude lies open as wa^ ground for any to invade or occupy.
The strength and security of the Protestant Reformation, came by the taking in
of Kingdom^ and whole Dominions within its compas^. The external Kingdom of God
must needs be much wider than the internal. It is like the draw Net that
gathered Fishes good and bad, and like a Corn Field, wherein Whea^ and Tares
grow together till the Harvest. Moreover, the increase of professed Christian
makes way for the increase of regenerate Christians and Converts to the power
of Godliness, are generally made out of the mass of People, of an Orthodox
profession: and few of them are turned immediately from Infidelity, Popery, or
any Heresy.

CHAP. XXIV.
The Care and Wisdom of the Church in preventing, and curing the evil of
Fanatical and Sectarian Error.

AMong the Wiles of Satan, whereby he depraveth the Spiritual excellency of
pure Religion, and mightily hinders its advance in the Kingdoms of this World,
Fanatical and Sectarian aberrations, are not the least. If these follies were
but heeded by those that are most in danger, before they are engaged and
drunken with error, it were in great part an antidote against this mischief.
For the well minded that are but weak, and of easy impression, are lead aside
chiefly for lack of attention and observation. Many are Children in
understanding, and many are passionate and inconsiderate, and an innate levity,
and inconstancy of mind is very common.

It behooves the Guides of the Flock to possess the minds of the People with
sober principles; and to have a watchful eye upon the first rising of any
Pragmatick Fancies that feed on notions and novelties, under a show of a more
discerning Spirit in Gospel Mysteries, than others have. Such being vanity
puffed up, will be starting questions and multiplying slight exceptions against
the received Truth, and will please the itching ears, and slight Spirits of
some pretenders to Godliness, who will become their hasty proselytes, and join
with them to unravel one thing after another, in the texture of holy Doctrine.
And by the repute of their good parts and seeming Piety, may stagger others of
good intentions, but weaker judgments. And of this sort, none are more
dangerous than vainglorious Teachers: ambitious of leading Parties, and by
plausible indowments furnished for such designs. These to raise their own fame,
and make to themselves a devoted People, will become absolute Sect-Masters; and
those that close with them, they hold with pleasing devices, and serve their
humors, that they may serve themselves of them. There is also in some Persons
a right Sectarian leaven, which is evermore to follow peculiar Opinions, and
some separated Party in Religion, and they speak security to their own Souls,
by being of such an Opinion or of such a Party.

Against the Sectarian and Fanatic Spirit, it concerns the Church to keep a
continual watch and ward; but not so as to imprison the truth, to lock up the
key of knowledge, to stifle Godly zeal, to detain a People in dead and dull
principles, that will not reach to the New Birth and Divine Life. For this were
all one as to prevent or cure a frenzy by causing a Lethargy, or some other
such like stupidity.

Moreover, a Superstitious formal love, and sensual way of Religion, will in no
wise be able to prevent or suppress this evil, but will give occasion to its
rise and growth, except in times of profound ignorance and silence, as in the
depth of Popish darkness. But whenever the light breaks forth, and the People
see with their own eyes, and the Ecclesiastical Governors will not admit a
true reformation, but persecute those that seek it, then are many in danger of
falling into this opposite extreme. For they are cast upon it, both by the
hatred of the present corruptions, and by the weakness of their own judgment,
being not thoroughly instructed in the solid truth. And so they ^un hastily from
superstition and externalness into delusion and wild fancies; from the common
dissoluteness and remisness of those that call themselves Orthodox, into a vain
boasting of perfection; from the usurpations of proud men incroaching upon
Christ's Prerogative and their false constrained Unity, into Anarchy and
confusion; and from a wrathful zeal and persecuting cruelty, into a disorderly
promiscuous and familistical love, or indulgence toward all. On the contrary,
a Church state that is agreeable to the Spiritual Ministration of the Gospel,
and truly Apostolical, is the surest remedy against Sectarianism and
Phanaticism, truly so called. When the Church abandons Romish Tyranny and
Superstition, and yet is settled in a regular and stable Polity; when the
public Order thoroughly promotes the means of sound knowledge, and incourageth
real Godliness, it satisfy the minds of them who justly expect in a Gospel
Church and Ministry, more than an outward Form, even the manifestation of Truth
and Spiritual Light, and Life and Power; an^ it prevents their wandering to seek
after it i^ the devious paths of Sectaries.

It is of great moment, that of the mo^ learned, able, and judicious Persons of
Orthodox profession, there be many eminently Pious, whose authority and
reputation may b^ able to hold in those, whose affection an^ fancy is apt to
outrun their judgment; likewise that the Pastors of the Church, who a^ called
the Light of the World, do so walk i^ the Light, as that there be no occasion
o^ stumbling in them through notorious Prid^ Covetousness, Self-Seeking,
inordinate sensuality, or the vehement appearance of any gross evil. For the
weaker sort is commonly undone by offenses.

And because seducers are very active and spare no cost nor travel, but as they
have done of old, do compass Sea and Land to gain Proselites, it behooves the
Pastors carefully to keep their People, and the People carefully to keep
themselves out of the hands of these Hucksters. The common remisness in this
matter is deplorable.

Sometimes the manner of opposition against Seducers, is unadvised and
prejudicial. To contend for truth by wrath, and clamor, and contumelious
language and usage, inhanceth the price of Error, and adds to its reputation.
But the surest way is to converse much with our plain hearted People, and to
season them with right principles, and to detect the subtle methods of
deceitful workers, and the dangerous issues of their allurements, and by
honest and inoffensive applications to prepossess those holds, of which
deceivers seek to possess themselves.

And here it is of chief importance, that the influence of the Pastors and
other prudent and able Persons, upon the common multitude of professors, be
more prevailing, than the influence of the common multitude upon the Pastors
and other prudent Leaders. Servile temporizing with vulgar fancies, degrades
the Authority and Wisdom of prudent Guides, and lifts up a vulgar Spirit, and
will bring it to that pass, that the weakest and most inconsiderate shall sway
the Churches Interest. Let Persons of approved worth be more faithful and
noble, than by such servility and treachery, to raise to themselves a power in
the hearts of the weaker sort. Let them rather commend themselves by their
known Integrity, Wisdom and Goodness, and by being ready also in all
condescension, to serve and please them to their Edification. And such
faithfulness is the surest means to gain them love and honor.

Let the Religious beware of seeking to be admired and magnified among one
another, or of overprizing each others esteem. This latter seems to be the
cause that drew Peter to a fit of dissimulation and separation from the
believing Gentiles, while he sought too much to please them that were of the
Circumcision.

Sometimes we know not our own Spirits. It is good to beware of provocations
like to be given or taken. Upon a supposed affront or injury, men of parts have
been hurried into dangerous contests, and to make head against petty passionate
opposition, they have run beyond their own thoughts, and wrought strange
confusion. Discretion and charity seeks to convince and satisfy, and not to
exasperate an offended Brother.

It is well observed, that no turbulent Opinion or Party does usually arise in
the Church, but by the Church's neglect of some truth or duty. Wherefore if an
evil spirit seek an occasion of mischief, reform the abuse, and so prevent his
working upon the simple.

And forasmuch as some of upright hearts being deceived with a fancy of a more
sublime and perfect way, may pass into the tents of Sectaries so far as
conce^ns Church Order and external Worship, a compassionate regard must be had
of such as walk honestly, and retain those fundamental Truths, that may be a
groundwork for saving Faith and godly Life. Now toward such, the greatest
charity is exercised in laboring to remove the stumblingblock of their error,
and to make it plain before them, that the Faithful whose Communion they
forsake, contend for the Perfection of holy Scripture, and the explicit
Knowledge of the doctrine of Salvation, and the reasonable service of God
according to his Word, and spiritual Worship suitable to the Gospel
Dispensation, and the lively use of holy Ordinances, in opposition to unwritten
Traditions, Men's inventions, implicit Faith, ignorant devotion and mere
formality; That they declare by word and deed against the iniquity and impiety
of this evil World, and therefore the world hates them; that they insist upon
no forms or usages in Religion, but what are commanded by the positive Laws of
Christ, or are necessary in their general reason by the law of Nature; that
they seek no worldly advantages or advancements in the Church, but what are
necessary for the support of the Truth, according to Gods ordinary Providence;
and lastly, that human infirmities must not be thought strange in them, that
have not obtained Angelical perfection. These and the like things should be
laid open before honest People that have been seduced into Sectarian error.

CHAP. XXV.
The advancement of the sound State of Religion by making it National, and the
settled interest of Nation.

Christ's little Flock cannot go out of the World, nor retire within themselves
alone from the Nations of the Earth; but they must needs remain a part of
Kingdoms and Commonwealths with the World in general. They must take themselves
to be concerned in the civil Powers, for the Powers that are will take
themselves to be concerned in them, and their ways. For which cause their aims
and actions (as far as their Sacred Rule allows) must be fitted to the capacity
of the civil Government, and directed unto the general peace and quietness of
the nation, whereof they are, and in which they enjoy their civil rights. By
this means religions interest may incorporate with the general interest of a
nation, and run in the same channel.

That pure Religion may take root, and spread and prosper, it is necessary to
bring its external frame to the consistency of a National settlement. The just
^a^aude hereof is laid in the doctrine of Faith, and substantials of Divine
Worship, and things necessary to Church unity and order, but it goes not beyond
these. And being fixed in this extent, it is in a way to gain besides the
support and power of the Law, the Nations unstrained compliance and approbation.

As on the one hand Ecclesiastical tyranny is a root of bitterness always
bearing gall and wormwood: so on the other hand unfixedness, and unlimited
liberty consists not with that stability, wherein all prudent Governors would
settle their own affairs, as also with that general tranquillity and repose
which is the health of any People. If one were raised to empire by a mere
Fanatic Party, he cannot settle himself, nor stand upon firm ground, till he
wind his interest out of their hands, and turn himself to the way of general
satisfaction.

To the same intent and purpose it is of great importance so to fix the terms
of Church Communion, as not to set a perpetual bar against the main body of the
People. A Church state so barred, though it were asserted with, a veterane
Army, and could enclose all preferments both of honor and profit within it self
to be at its disposal, yet it is hard to see how it could ever obtain a firm
establishment. For a Christian Nation in general being shut out of the Church,
or barred of such Privileges, as are supposed to belong to them as Christians,
are enraged, and likely to be engaged as one Man to oppose that which they take
for intolerable oppression. Or if they care not to be admitted, they will turn
to a contrary interest and Party in Religion, or to infidelity, Barbarism,
Atheism, or some destructive way or other.

Now the intention here propounded may take effect, if the Constitution shut
out none from Sacred and Spiritual Privileges, but such as make not Profession
of true Christianity, or be destitute of that knowledge which is absolutely
necessary to true Faith in Christ, or to the profitable use of those Ordinances
whereof they would partake; or by public trial can be evicted in their deeds
to deny Christ, to whom they profess subjection; or be guilty of such
scandalous enormity or disobedience, as is reproachful to the Christian Name.

It is likewise to be considered, that Discipline is a work of time, and that
People are to be brought on by degrees, when they have lain long undisciplined.
For a Nation is not born in a day.

Right Ecclesiastical Discipline grates hard upon Men's corruptions, and stirs
up many nemies. Likewise the civil Powers are often jealous of it, lest it
should move excentrick to their motions. Therefore being a tender point, it
requires so much caution as nothing more. Cogent reason persuades those that
are herein concerned, most willingly to put themselves under the regulation of
the civil Magistrate, and to contain themselves within all tolerable
limitations prescribed by him, (I mean such as defeat not the ends of
Discipline) and by clear and moderate actings within their own sphere to render
their Office less invidious.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of Submission to things imposed by lawful Authority.

WHosoever duly prizeth the public peace of his own liberty for public
service, will consider the utmost lawful boundary of Submission to things
imposed by lawful Authority, that nothing possible to be done, be left undone.
But what is sinful, ^s in a moral sense impossible. We may not ^ie for God.
Nothing erroneous may be asser^ed, nothing simply evil may be admitted in our
own practice. But in an established Church not infected with Heresy or
Idolatry, nor defective in any vital part of Religion, it is duty to bear with
much, that we conceive to be amiss in others practice, to which we make not our
selves accessory by neglecting any means of redress within our Power and
Calling. Yea, being constrained by others rigor we may stoop to the use of some
things, which profit little, if they be not simply evil, nor by an evil
consequent destructive to the main Service, to which they are superadded. The
yoke of such subjection may cause grief of heart, but does not wound the
conscience.

Indifferent things are not made unlawful merely by being enjoined; and it is
necessary that some things indifferent in specie should be determined for
orders sake. But forasmuch as things not in themselves unlawful, may some
times be so pernicious in their consequents, a^ by a vehement appearance of
evil to draw others into sin, and by a strong tendency to evil, to lead and
settle them in a way that is not good, I dare not say that the latitude of
conformity to things in their own nature indifferent, is unlimited. Rulers have
received their power of Injoyning, and subjects their liberty of conforming for
edification and not for destruction.

In a case of this nature we are led on to consider, whether the scandal of
compliance with things indifferent in themselves but of harmfull consequence,
be not of lesser moment than the scandal and misery that may follow upon
noncompliance. Though of things simply evil neither may be chosen: yet of
things evil only in their consequents, either the one or the other inevitably
coming upon us, that must be chosen, upon which the lesser evil follows.
Peradventure the scandal of Submission may be overballanced by the apparent
consequence of a more important good, by which also it may in time be quite
removed. The wisdom of the Prudent must herein direct their way. Though the
Ruler be judge of what rules he is to prescribe; yet the conscience of every
Subject is to judge with a judgment of discretion, whether those rules be
agreeable to the Word of God or not, and so whether his Conformity thereto be
lawful or unlawful. Otherwise he must act upon blind obedience, and might be
excused in doing things either simply evil, or pernicious in their consequents.

A general certainty, that Rulers must be obeyed in lawful things, is no
security to the conscience for Obedience to this or that Injunction, when we
doubt of the Lawfulness of the thing enjoined. For we cannot be sure that
obedience in this case is a duty and not a sin, because we are sure it is a sin
to obey in things unlawful, and such the thing now in question is or may be,
for ought that we discern, and our ignorance cannot change Gods Law. Therefore
the doubtfulness of the thing it self, makes the obligation to Obedience
likewise doubtful. And perhaps the danger may be greater on the part of
obeying than refusing. For possibly, the injunction of an heinous sin may be
the matter of the uncertainty; and in this strait we apprehend it more unsafe
and less excusable to choose the greater before the lesser sin, on which side
soever it be, though indeed it be lawful to choose neither.

Indeed it is much easier for Rulers to relax the strictness of many
injunctions about matters of supposed convenience, than for Subjects to be
enlarged from the strictness of their judgment. And blessed are they that
consider Conscience, and load it not with needless burdens, but seek to relieve
it i^ its distresses.

And as this forbearance and tenderness i^ Superiors is the praise of their
Government, and advances peace and concord; so does moderation and a
submissive disposition commend Inferiors, and much advantage their godly zeal.
For it stops the mouths of clamourous Men, it obviates the ensnaring designs of
adversaries, and it gives greater boldness in contending for weightier matters.

Howbeit sometimes that submission, which all circumstances considered, both
Prudenc^ and upright Conscience declares necessary, may be liable to a
reproach as a matter of temporizing. The truth is, a Ministers reputation is of
great moment to the ends of his Ministry; and he is not to be blamed, that is
loath it should suffer shipwreck; and an appearance or suspicion of time-serving
does greatly endanger it. If a man should forbear some compliances, which he
clearly foresees will bring him into a vehement suspicion thereof, in Charity
it should be taken not for an undue valuation of his own credit, but for a
tender regard to the honor of the Gospel. When an exalted Party shall set
themselves to profligate the credit of those that are brought under, by
constraining them to such Compliances, they have more regard to their own
particular triumph than to the honor of the common Faith, and all true
Religion, which is by this means exposed to the contempt of the irriligious, as
if it were mere hypocrisy and matter of interest on all sides. As for
Inferiors, in this case they are in a strait between ^wo, and which way can
they turn themselves ^o avoid-all inconveniences. For the same ^ersons that
reproach them as temporizing, would in case of non-submission clamor against
them as humorous and factious. Herein I shall offer the aptest remedy I know,
^amely, neither in word nor deed to abandon or disown the Truth, and in these
burdensome yet not unlawful compliances not to run with the foremost, but to
proceed in such manner and so far, as the standing in necessary libertie^ may
require, and as the more considerate pa^ of men will justify to be discreet
and honest, but above all to endeavor by a godly and blameless life to make it
manifest, that Conscience has been duly satisfied and not trifle^ with.

In doubtful matters and difficult times, the all good men should keep the
same latitud^ of judgment and practice in all wisdom, for the true interest of
Religion, may be wished b^ not expected. For some will be more, other less
enlarged by the diversity of their apprehensions. Also some by their natural
disposition are more timorous or more complying: other again are more hardy and
less flexible, or more reserved and resolute in their opinions. Many are
injudicious, and the best have their passion^ and some lie under disadvantages
that may Biass the judgment this or that way, where the matter is somewhat
disputable: others man have weightier reasons, either for assent or di^ sent
though not obvious, and perhaps not (...) expedient to be declared. Men's cases
being so exceeding various, they must needs vary^ practice. Some inconvenience,
but no d^ structive mischief will follow this diversity, it do not (as one
would think it should not disunite affections. For then these several Pa^ties,
or persuasions rather, are one in their main cause, and may with one Spirit,
though walking in several Paths, carry on the great concernments of it. If
Religion were but the bond of a Faction, or the strength of a worldly interest,
the asserters thereof might lose or lessen it by taking such several ways; But
it depends not upon parties, and their designs, nor is obnoxious to such
engagements, but in it self perfectly free from them. Therefore it is advanced
in any way that gives it liberty and opportunity, to display it self to the
world in the evidence of its own truth and goodness.

CHAP. XXVII.
The surest and safest ways of seeking Reformations.

WHen a corrupt State of Religion is inveterate or deeply rooted in a Nation,
^he work of Pious men, is convincingly to re^rove that corruption by the light
of holy Doctrine, and of holy Walking; and to pro^agate and press home with
zeal, the great and ^nquestionable truths of Christianity: but to ^e more
silent and sparing in matters more con^overted and of less importance, the
vehement ^rging whereof will not convince the world, nor silence the adversary.
Likewise by humble addresses to the Higher powers in a fit season, they may
seek the redress of such enormities, as are evidently Scandalous, Absurd and
Odious, and yet perhaps the chief props of that corrupt State. For this may be
done without scandal or hazard, and much is done if it take effect. Clamorous
contests about doubtful Forms and Customs, and in comparison but by matters,
do serve to animate the opposite party, and afford them matter to work upon:
but the vigorous maintenance of the vital parts of Religion, and the detecting
of gross abuses, bears them down.

It is time that ripens all things, and every thing in its season is beautiful
and successful. Then the redress of evils will run in its prepared Channel,
and a plain Path will be found through passages formerly inaccessable. And then
Rulers themselves may see what one of deep judgment observes, that when time of
course alters things to the worse, Wisdom and Counsel had need alter them to
the better; they may find the necessity and utility of Reformation, and by
their Authority make it warrantable. If the friends of truth walk in sober
counsels, and sure ways, and follow the truth in peace and love, and be
serviceable to the common good, they retain their innocence and maintain their
honor, which is their surest interest, and shall be found though the fewer
number to have a considerable influence upon the public State.

Both Religious and Civil Affairs are apt to be carried in extremes, for which
cause Reformations commonly are suspected, and their credit is much impaired.
In avoiding Superstition, some have run into rudeness and undecency. In Divine
worship the natural expressions ofreverence and devout affection, and things
necessary to decency and order, should be observed carefully by those that turn
away from Superstitious vanities, that it may appear that a well informed
Conscience, and the Spirit of a sound mind does guide and rule them, and that
their principles are no way defective; but sufficient and ample unto all
regular devotion. These necessary decencies and natural expressions of
Devotion, are plain and obvious to all intelligent persons; and the modes of
Civil reverence and seriousness in use among us, do much guide herein.

A compliance with sober and grave solemnities affected by a Nation in general,
helps to procure a good esteem, and to get ground among them; whereas
opposition and singularity may beget a general dislike. Men do but mispend
their zeal in opposing prevalent customs, that have nothing in them contrary to
sound Doctrine and good life. Among other things I may instance in Religious
performances at Funerals, which may well be ordered without Superstition or any
other abuse, and improved to the peoples benefit, who are then met together in
the house of mourning. Some Churches being in the midst of false worshippers to
prevent all Superstition, have forbidden the making of Prayers or Sermons at
the interment of the Dead. But in things of this nature, Several Churches may
have their peculiar reasons, and accordingly their different orders.

As concerning Heathenish pastimes, and vanities sometimes affected by the rude
vulgar, and perhaps countenanced by some of higher degree for ends well known,
they tend indeed unto much profaness, and may trouble the minds and stir the
zeal of good men. Nevertheless, when the power of reforming is beyond their
line, it suffices that the weighty and unquestionable matters of true
Religion, be constantly inculcated upon the People, and the spreading of sound
knowledge endeavored, both by public Doctrine and by private Instruction. And
those humorous fooleries, which opposition often heighteneth, would soonest
fall to the ground by contempt and silence.

In a happy season, when the power of Religion has a potent influence upon a
Nation, the laying of a good foundation for time to come, is mainly to be
regarded. An opportunity in this kind may be lost, not only by a sluggish
neglect, but also by an impetuous overstraining of it. It is overstrained, when
things are carried forth beyond what a Nation will ever bear. It may be more
advisable to stop at moderate Reformations, than to proceed to such extreme
alterations, as must needs stand in opposion (if so be they can so stand) to a
contrary fixed inclination generally prevailing. The consequents of such
proceeding, need not to be here discoursed.

Besides, the more healthful state of Religion may stand not in a total change
of things long in use, but in reforming the abuse thereof. And it should be
minded that sometimes in curing a lesser evil, there is a real hazard of a
greater mischief; and in hasty attempts of changes, things may be carried on
beyond the commendable end designed, even to its utter ruin. For commonly men
are not Masters of what they get in such precipitate ways.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Considerations tending to a due enlargement and unity in Church Communion.

AN unhappy kind of controversies about Forms of Divine Worship, Ecclesiastical
Government, and qualification of Church Members, has been the calamity of our
times. The differences in these points have made a sad breach upon Church
unity, and divided Brethren of the same Reformed Profession, both in affection
and interest, and have been the occasion of much misery. In regard whereof,
some things that make for an amicable condescension among Brethren, and for
humble submission to Superiors, are here propounded for consideration, but not
as peremptory resolves. Though many or most of them seem to me to carry their
own evidence; Yet it becomes one who is sensible of human weakness, and of his
own meaness, to write modestly in these points about which there is so great a
variety of apprehensions.

The Communion of Saints, is the Communion of the Catholic Church, and of
particular Christians, and Churches one with another as Members thereof; and
therefore we may not restrain our fellowship to any particular Church or
Churches, so as to withold it from the rest of the Catholic Church.

Our Communion with the Catholic Church, is as well in Religious Worship, as
in Christian Faith and Life. As there is one Faith, so one Baptism, and one
Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, and we being many, are one Bread and
one Body. Though we cannot at once locally communicate with the whole Church in
external Worship, because it cannot possibly meet in one place; yet according
to our capacity and opportunity, we are so to communicate with the several
parts thereof, and not unwarrantably withdraw from any, and this is a vertual
communicating with the whole.

Church Discipline and Government, as to the particular Form thereof, has much
more obscurity than the Doctrine of Christian Faith and Life, and is much more
controverted among the Godly Learned. And in more dark and doubtful points,
humility, charity, and good discretion, teaches mutual forbearance.

In Ecclesiastical Regiment, all Church Members are not so concerned, as Church
Guides and Pastors are.

Christ has not left the affairs of his Kingdom in so loose a posture, as to
give a liberty of leaving or choosing the Communion of a Church according to our
own affections, without regard to order.

A particular visible Church being a Body politic, cannot subsist without
rules of stable Policy. Her censures and judgments ought to be clear, certain
and uniform, or of the same tenor; and therefore may not proceed upon such a
kind of Evidence, as at the most is but conjectural, and of variable
apprehension.

Our arbitrary conjecture of an others Regeneration, is but an uncertain way of
admission to sacred Privileges, wherein no uniform judgment can be held
between several Churches, nor the several Members of the same Church, nor by
the same Person with himself at several times. For men's apprehensions about the
Spiritual Estate of others, are exceeding different and inconstant.

But whether a Person make a credible profession, or be competently knowing, or
grossly ignorant; whether he be scandalous or walk orderly, is capable of
certain evidence, and of constant regular proceeding thereupon.

Let it be considered whether of these two, either to proceed with men
according to our private hopes and fears about their internal state, or
according to stated Rules and certain Evidence, be the surer way to preserve
the Church in Peace, and to propagate true Piety.

Also, whether Persons passable by such public Rules, can in Ecclesiastical
Trial be judged to be ungodly, or to make a false profession, whatsoever our
private fears are concerning them. And if their Profession be not proved false,
whether it be not to pass for credible in that Trial. Human Laws and public
Judgments presume them to be good, that are not evicted to be bad.

Private familiarity is at every ones choice: but our Church Communion being a
public matter, must be Governed by public and common Rules, and not by
private will.

If a Church impose such Laws of her Communion, as infer a necessity of doing
that which is unlawful, there is a necessity of abstaining from her Communion,
so far as those unlawful terms extend.

Churches mentioned in Scripture, had their corruptions in Doctrine, Worship,
and Manners; yet the Godly did not separate from them for those corruptions,
nor were commanded so to do. Indeed they are commanded to come out of Babylon,
which is no other than to separate from Idolatrous, Heretical, Antichristian
Societies. Yet in suggesting this, I do not encourage to a stated Communion in
such Churches as have no other Ministers placed in them, than such as are
altogether unfit to have the charge of Souls committed to them, that is, who are
unable to teach, or teach corruptly; either teaching pernicious Doctrine, or
abusing, mishandling, and misapplying sound Doctrine, to encourage the Ungodly,
and discourage the Godly. For the Scripture bids us beware of blind Guides and
false Prophets.

By continuing in Church Communion, we partake not of the Sins of others, which
we have no power to redress, nor are we made guilty by their leaven, if it does
not infect us; and profane Persons are no more countenanced by our presence,
than those lewd Priests the Sons of Eli were by the Peoples coming to sacrifice.

In communicating in holy things, we have internal Communion only with the
faithful, and as for the mere external Communion, it is with those that have
as yet an outward standing in Christ, till they are cut off by the hand of God,
or due order of Discipline.

When a Minister has done his part to keep off the unworthy, in the dspensing
of the Sacrament to such, he is in a moral sense merely passive; so that their
unworthy participation cannot be imputed to him.

Nor in such an Administration is a practical lie or any falsehood uttered. For
the Sacrament seals the mercy of the Covenant not irrespectively, but
conditionally, and the words of the application must be so understood.

If we have not power to separate an obstinate scandalous offender from the
Church, yet the withdrawing of our selves from him, is an Excommunication in
some degree, and the effect thereof is hereby in part obtained.

When Ministers and People do their duties in their Places, without usurpation
of further Power than they have warrant for, then all will be, though not so
well as it might, yet as it can be at present.

Of several modes and methods of public Action, Prudence makes choice not
always of what is simply best, but of that which is most passable, if it be not
so disorderly as to mar the substance, or frustrate the end of an
Administration.

In sacred Adminstrations we may yield without sin to others sinful
weaknesses. And though we may not please them in doing that which is evil; yet
we may in that which is lawful, but less edifying; and so we may let go some
good in the manner of performance, rather than omit the whole Service. Here is
indeed a sinful defect, yet not on our part, but on theirs who urge the way
that is less edifying, and refuse the better.

The exercise of Church Discipline being a means and not the end, must be
governed by rules of Prudence, among which this is a chief one, that the means
must not be asserted so stiffly as to endanger or destroy the end.

The exercise of Spiritual Authority is necessarily more regulated by the
determination of the Civil Magistrate, in a State that maintains the true
Religion, than in a State that either persecutes or disregards it.

If it were supposed, that Spiritual Power is radically the same in all
Ministers of the Gospel, let it be considered, whether the exercise of that
Power may not be more restrained in some, and let forth to a larger extent in
others, upon prudential grounds; provided it be not enlarged in some to an
exorbitancy, and streightened in others to an extreme deficiency.

Likewise if there be a dissent or doubting about a Superiority or Pre-eminence
of Spiritual Power in some distinct Ecclesiastical Office, let it be considered
how far submission may be yielded to a Power objectively Ecclesiastical, but
formally Political, derived from the Civil Magistrate, and seated in
Ecclesiastical Persons by Temporal Laws.

Lastly in reference to things imposed, there is a wide difference between a
quiet submission, and an approving free choice. It may be the duty of Subjects
to do that, which may be the sin of Governors to command. For in the same
things wherein Governors refuse the better way, Subjects may do their parts and
choose the best way they can.

If these considerations or others of the like Catholic tendency be found
allowable, and will pass among Brethren of different judgments, they may
prevent and heal many breaches, and unite dissenters in the bond of Peace and
Love, and afford unto such as have been entangled, a more free scope and large
capacity for public aims and actions.

CHAP. XXIX.
Whether the purity and power of Religion be lessened by amplitude and
comprehensiveness.

A Doubt may arise in this place, whether it ben ot safer to make the
Church-doors narrow, and to keep a strict guard upon the entrance into it, and
to insist upon the exactest purity, that Religion may continue incorrupt, and
that the Church be not defiled, nor its Interest ravished by Strangers.

In resolving this doubt, I forget not that the way is narrow and the Gate is
straight that leads unto Life. But self-denial and real mortification and a
conversation in Heaven, and not strictness of opinion in Church Order, is this
narrow way and straight Gate; and our Salvation lies upon purity of heart and
life, and not upon Church purity.

Besides, God has made the Gate of the visible Church, much wider than the
Gate of Heaven; and Church Discipline cannot be set in that strictness, in
which the Doctrine of Salvation is to be preached. For Doctrine directly
judges the heart; and requires truth in the inward parts; but Discipline
judges only the exterior conversation, and must be satisfied in the
credibility of Profession.

In walking by rigid rules of Discipline, though with an aim to advance purity,
we may easily shut out those whom Christ has taken in. True Piety may be found
in many, who retain such things as some Godly Christians judge Erroneous or
Superstitious; and Godly sincerity may be found in many, whom some of greater
zeal, but too censorious, may judge to be but formalists. It is not good to
neglect sober and serious People, though in a lower degree of profession, who
conform to Gods Ordinances, and regard a sound Ministry, and show themselves
teachable, lest we reject those that would help to uphold and honor Religion,
more than many who will put themselves forward among the strictest sort, but
indeed are either carnal projecters or busy bodies, or froward and fickle
Persons, and a stain to the Profession in which they seem to glory.

This narrowness of Church Communion, and other reservedness of some strict
Professors, tends neither to the increase nor stability of pure Religion.
Zealous Christians are a kind of good leaven, like that in the Gospel Parable,
which if kept alone, is of no efficacy, but being diffused will season the
whole lump. If they sever themselves into distinct visible Societies from the
body of a Nation, professing the true Religion, their virtue cannot spread far;
but they leaven the whole mass of People by being diffused throughout the
whole. And then they gain reverence and reputation, and by their example
profane and dissolute Persons may be convinced and much reformed, and among
those that walk orderly, many may be carried on from common to saving Grace.

Hereunto may be added this inestimable benefit; to wit, the apparent hope of
the propagation of true Religion to the Generations to come, which otherwise
being unfixed, might in time wear away and fail in such a Nation.

Furthermore, sincere Christians are comparatively but a little Flock, and of
that little Flock, the greater number are of low capacities and very defective
in political prudence; and if they were wholly left to govern themselves in
separated Societies, they might easily be ensnared into Parties and Breaches,
and manifold inconveniences. Indeed those of them that are best able to govern
themselves, are most convinced of the need of public Government. Wherefore it
is the security of the faithful to live under a public and fixed rule and
order, and consequently to be imbodied with a Nation, if it may be, in one way
of Communion.

CHAP. XXX.
Factious usurpations are destructive to Religions interest.

REligion is by the maligners of it too often called Faction. But the name is
not more reproachful, than the thing it self is hurtful to it. And the
prudent promoters of it, will avoid Factious usurpations and all such ways, as
would turn to a general greivance. But if any number of men in a higher degree
of profession, should seek the engrossing of profits and preferments within
themselves, upon the account of their being Religious, and the assuming of such
power as cannot be maintained, but by injury or disregard really, or in
appearance offered to all others, and should so act in Civil Affairs, as if
they only were the people, and think to do this for the advancement of
Religion, they would much mistake their way. For besides the iniquity of this
practice, the vanity and weakness of it is manifest.

The intrinsic and permanent strength of strict Religion must be well
considered. For that which is adventitious, is very mutable and may be soon
turned against it. Occasional advantages may suddenly raise it up to reputation
and power among men, and as suddenly leave it to sink and fall again. Wherefore
its friends and followers may well reckon that they have made the most of their
advantages, when they can secure its interests in the common interest of a
Nation.

A firm liberty and security founded in a national interest, is more agreeable
to the condition of regenerate Christians, than an entire potency to themselves
alone. For they would scarce well comport with so great a weight of power.
Hypocrites for carnal ends would addict themselves to their party and overact
them. The sincere would prove but men, corruptions would appear, and
miscarriages would mar their reputation, which is not their least Support.
Hereunto may be added many incongruities that would happen to them. The
Gallantry and Splendour of the world will be no help to that humble and contrite
frame of Spirit, and real mortification, and holy walking, and heavenly
mindedness which is the power of Christianity. The various and versatile ways
of worldly policy turning to innumerable occasions, are not very passable to
truly tender Consciences. Besides, if the power were enclosed within these
narrow limits, many of low Birth and Breeding must needs be lifted up, both to
the envy of the excluded party, and the disesteem of Magistracy. And persons of
low condition being raised above their own Sphere upon the account of Religion,
may be easily tempted to think more highly of themselves than they ought to
think, and to grow busy, peevish and rigid in needless matters, which will
provoke a People and fire their Spirits, and though the rage be pent up for a
season within their breasts, it will at length break out into a flame.

The power of Christianity, as to human strength, is best established and
extended, by leaning upon some common interest with which it falls in, as the
Vine is born up, and spreads abroad by the support of a wall or frame. It is
therefore most suitable to the terms upon which it stands in this world, to be
in a complex state with some other just, large and stable interest, such as is
the common peace and safety both of Prince and People.

And being a holy and wise Profession, it leads its Followers in safe and right
Paths, and teaches them to wait therein with patience. The nature of its
interest will bear such patient waiting. For it is not carnal consisting of the
great things of this world, which may call for an eager and quick pursuit, and
daring interprizes. but it is the upholding of such a cause as needs not fear a
sinking, if it catch not hold of every sudden offer, that is not clear in
regard of Conscience or prudence, but by an unchangable reason it indures
throughout all ages, and if it fall it shall rise again. It needs not the
making of Parties, and drawing people to its side by a pragmatical importunity,
nor to enter into any suspected ways; but wheresoever it is managed like it
self in righteous and prudent Counsels, it makes the fairest progress and of
longest continuance.

The reasons aforegoing, do hold in due proportion against the engrossing of
privileges, in particular in corporate Societies, and the making of Parties to
interrupt the settled order of promotions and to keep back persons legally
entitled, that the Religious alone might be promoted. Such Practices make sad
breaches, and upon change of Affairs will turn to the great detriment if not
the depression of the Party so advanced.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of Leading and following, and of Combinations.

GOds Providence uses to dispose into all quarters, some men not only of known
integrity, but eminent for wisdom and reputation, who see more than the
ordinary sort of good men, and are able and meet to give advice like those
children of Issachar, men that had understanding of the times to know what
Israel ought to do. These are much the stay of this Profession, and by their
influence keep things right, and preserve the weaker sort from manifold
aberrations. It is supposed that they seek not their own glory in being made
Heads of Parties; but that in sincerity and self-denial they follow truth and
peace, and use their Authority and ability, to promote a Catholic interest,
and true concord among all Christians.

Nevertheless sometimes the understanding of the prudent fails, and Counsel is
hidden from them. It pleases the only wise God, sometimes to permit strange
resolves to proceed from good and wise men, that our main stress of hope might
rest upon him alone, and on his infallible Word; and that we might not become
the absolute Disciples of any Masters upon Earth.

One or two eminent men in a Country, though wise and faithful, may not be
followed as it were by implicit Faith, which may lead into great mistakes. It
is to be supposed, that there be many discreet persons, though not of eminent
ability, whom it may become to hear and reverence their eminent men, yet to see
with their own eyes, that is, to judge by their own reason. In this matter
there be two extremes, either to be too morose or too sequacious, the one being
the effect of a sullen pride and Self-conceit; the other of pusillanimity,
temerity, and such like weakness, and both tending to make breaches and lead
into parties. We may have the persons of Worthy men in due veneration, but not
in excessive admiration.

Avoid precipitate Leaders, for though the service of hot Spirits may be
sometimes prosperous; yet in this temperate cause their conduct is pernicious.
And there is as much reason to avoid such Leaders as care not, or at least
consider not, what they do against the common interest of Christianity, to
advance a particular Form or Party. But above all beware of such persons, whose
apparent worldly interests lead them to adhere to some divided Party, and to
cherish Faction. If much be committed into such hands, we shall be lead into a
wrong course, or disabled to follow the right, though we see it plain before
us. Yea, the cause of Religion will be inthralled to the service of a Faction,
and be left with disgrace enough when men have served their turns of it.

A people of honest zeal may easily be overcredulous of great and powerful men
that pretend to favor Religion, and take it into their Patronage. Yet the more
discerning sort will look to it, that, while Grandees retain them with such
favor and Friendship, they overact them not to the dishonor and damage of
this Profession, which is more worthy than to be held in vassalage, and made to
lackey after corrupt designs; and more noble than to bear such indignity.

It is good for the younger sort of Professors to reverence the ancient and
more experienced; and for all sorts in their choice of Guides and Patterns, to
prefer solid judgment with integrity of Life and Conversation before taking
parts, heat of zeal and high affections. Amidst diversities of Parties and
Persuasions, it is safe to hold communion with the generality of Serious and
Pious Christians, and yet to receive with love the several disagreeing Parties,
who for the main walk in the truth, and to have communion with them all, as far
as Catholic Principles will give leave.

In pursuing the ends of this Interest, there is no need of private or
unauthorized Persons entering into such stated combinations and correspondences,
as the Jesuits and other Orders under the Papacy, have settled in their
Societies throughout the World. For all Pious Christians are taught of God, and
have one Spirit touching the main of this design, and are inclined to pursue
the same with one accord. And indeed so it is, that only the sincere friends of
truth, men of upright hearts, and humble spirits, and honest lives, will
observe and follow the rules of this Interest. And it suffices, if they keep
close to their common rule of Faith and Life, and follow after the things that
make for Peace, and know the present state of Gods Israel, and acquaint
themselves with each other, as opportunity of converse offers it self, and so
govern themselves, and carry on the advancement of Religion by such honest and
harmless means, as need not shun the light, but may stand before the face of
all opposers.

CHAP. XXXII.
The Wisdom of the Higher Powers in promoting the Religiousness of their People.

THe advancement of true Religion is the interest of the Higher Powers, if to
maintain Gods honor and man's chief good be their interest, and if the defying
of God and the utter undoing of men be against it. Yea, if the Tranquillity and
Peace of Governors and the stability of Government be regarded, human Wisdom
will direct to promote that way which is no other than the exercise of a
Conscience void of offense toward God and toward Man. Godliness includes
Prudence, Justice, Temperance, Fortitude, and all Goodness. It is an internal
Law effectually subduing them that have it to all external Laws that are just
and good, and the example of it goes far to the bettering of many others in
things pertaining to humanity. It is regular and harmonious in every part, it
leads to Order, Peace and Unity, and there is nothing in it inconsistent with
right Policy. It is the way of true Wisdom, and apt to take most among the
serious and well advised part of the People, and when it has taken hold of
them, it makes them Wise and Serious more abundantly. It corrects rash, rugged,
wrathful, and fierce natures, and to say the least, whatsoever turbulency may
afterward remain in such, it makes them of far more sedate and castigate
Spirits than otherwise they would be. And though it does not forthwith
exterminate, yet it so debilitates all Complexional Distempers, that they
cannot break forth into a course of mischief; and ordinarily it works an
evident notable change. Of so great force is an attentive and active Conscience
over all human passions. And doubtless it is the strongest bond to hold
Subjects in obedience to their Governors. For the Conscientious are held in by
the terror of the Lord and the dread of the wrath to come, besides the sense
of man's wrath, which they have in common with all considerate Persons.

Wherefore it is clearly the Princes Interest that his Subjects universally (if
it can be) should be Religious, and consequently it is the Wisdom of his
Government to endeavor it as far as it is attainable. And if he would bring
them to such a state, he is to take care to exalt Gods immediate Sovereignty
over their Consciencies, and under that Sovereignty to hold them in subjection
to himself. For where Conscience is not preserved in its awful regard to Gods
Law as its Supreme rule, true Religion is extinguished. And they are the
Patrons of Irreligion, who propagate such principles as tend to alienate the
Conscience from its true Sovereign and Proprietor, and either to make it
servile to those who have no just dominion over it, or to debauch it into
searedness or dead security.

One way most needful and advantageous for preserving Gods Authority over
Conscience, is most effectually to bind Gods Laws upon the People; and to order
what things else are necessary for the due observation thereof, and to lay no
other yoke upon them in things pertaining to God. And as this way imports much
to the sincerity and reality of Religion, so it does no less to the keeping of
Religious minds in unity. For in what center will the judiciously Conscientious
unite, if not in the revealed mind and will of God, as it is apprehended by
them? Will the injunctions of the Civil Magistrate, or the Authority of
Ecclesiastical Superiors better resolve the doubts of such men, or silence
their Disputes? This is not urged to prove that Superiors can enjoin nothing in
Religion, but what is particularly before enjoined of God; or that the
Consciences of Inferiors are not bound by their Commands in subordination to
Gods Commands: but only that they take the best course for the unfeigned Piety
and truly Christian concord of their People, that by their injunctions, seek
mainly to promote obedience to the Divine Laws, and add no more of their own
than what is clearly necessary thereunto. And what more just and prudent course
than to forbear things that are unnecessary, and unserviceable to the promoting
of Truth and Peace; yet with a perplexity and a stumbling block, an easy inlet
to all dissolute or ductile Spirits, and a bar against many of known sincerity:
and to use that moderation in the public Rule and Standard, which takes away
or exceedingly lessens, dissents, and consequently the occasions of dissension.

The Spirit of Christianity forbids Christian Magistrates to destroy sincere
Christians, for their little differences and narrow principles in Forms of
Church Order. And no reason of State will oblige them to that severity, how
importunately soever some Interessed men may urge it. Judicious charity or a
prudent indulgence toward such, cannot undermine Religion or the Civil State.
And a sound Ecclesiastical Polity set for the increase of true Godliness, will
receive no damage by it, but it will rather gain upon those Dissenters, and if
their scruples be not removed, it shall abide firm and stable, and grow in
strength by the reputation of its own goodness and sufficiency, in that it is
not hazarded or impaired by this charity and forbearance. The Higher Powers by
granting some limited liberty do more universally protect the faithful, and
having no interest in competition with the advancement of Christ's Kingdom, are
able and wise enough to provide against any dangerous inconveniences. The
bounds and rules of this indulgence are not so undiscoverable as to make it a
vain proposal: yet, it is but an idle demand of those that require an
enumeration of all particulars, than which, nothing more or less may be
tolerated in any case. All particularities in any human affairs are not easy
nor necessary to be known at one view, nor are they so fixed, but they may
admit considerable variations according to the different state of things. There
be general rules of Prudence that are a sufficient indication of what ought to
be done at any time, as the present case requires. As the Wisdom of a
Householder will direct him how far to bear with faults and weaknesses in his
Family; so the Magistrate by Wisdom will discern what may be born with in his
Commonwealth, so far as is sufficient to the true and just ends of Government.

CHAP. XXXIII.
The Church's true interest to be pursued by Ecclesiastical Persons.

NOthing is more precious, and among Christians nothing should be more valued,
than the good of Gods Church, for it is Christ's and Gods great interest in the
world: but the misery is, that the Churches name is abused, and its interest
mistaken most perversely. For none have more pretended for the Church than they,
whose business is to get and keep worldly pomp, and power with carnal ease and
pleasure; and to make laws and rules serviceable to these ends; and to corrupt
the minds and debauch the lives of men, that they may bring them into blind
obedience to such laws, and maintain their worldly dominion over Christ's
heritage, and who value all men howsoever qualified, as they stand affected to
their estate, and accordingly stick not to reject the eminently good, and to
receive the notoriously bad. In the Romish Church all this is palpable. Now let
these be called the Church, by them that list to give that name, to a state of
Pride and Luxury, of Tyranny and oppression, of carnal and Devilish Policy,
under which the souls of people are betrayed to everlasting perdition.

Wherefore those in the Ministry that are sollicitous of the Churches welfare,
should state the interest thereof aright, which indeed is not for the service
of the flesh or the carnal mind; but for the promoting of the Divine life in
men, and the increase of the mystical Society of Regenerate Persons, united in
Christ their Head by his Spirit dwelling in them; and in order thereunto, for
the increase of the visible Society of persons externally owning such an
internal State. And therefore it is to promote and propagate the sound
knowledge of God in Christ, and to make the people of their charge really good,
and to advance them what they can in grace and wisdom according to their
several capacities, and to deal with them in meekness and love, and to walk
before them as examples of all purity and goodness, and to be more sensible and
sollicitous about the corruptions and sinful disorders, than the sufferings of
the Church, and to be more zealous for Gods honor and the good of Souls, than
for their own honor, wealth or power, and in a word to seek the things of
Christ more than their own things.

The Ministers that discharge their Office well, are in Scripture declared
Worthy of double honor. And that they be endowed with honorable settled
maintenance, is necessary for the support of a Religion, that for its
excellency requires to be supported by the help of excellent Gifts, as
Learning, Eloquence and Prudence, not now to be obtained by Miracles, but in
the ordinary use of means with much cost and labor. And questionless the
withdrawing of these supports tends to the Churches ruin, nevertheless an
inordinate and licentious collation, and accumulation of Preferments making for
the Service of Covetousness, Ambition and depraved appetite, and for the decay
of Sobriety, Vigilance and Industry in the Pastors, is no less dangerous. This
exorbitancy after the Roman Empire became Christian, allured and brought in the
men of this World, who have their Portion in this life, and gave them advantage
by carnal arts, to possess themselves of the chief Seats of Power in the
Church, by which means Religion degenerated into externalness and carnality,
and that which was then named the Church was at length turned into a worldly
State, which grew more and more corrupt till the mystery of iniquity was
fulfilled in it.

Where Christianity has recovered it self out of the degeneracy of the later
times, and knowledge is generally diffused among the people, the sufficiency,
industry and faithfulness of Ecclesiastical persons will be inquired after,
negligence in their Administrations and irregularities in their lives will not
pass without noting, the ignorant, idle and scandalous will fall into contempt,
outward Formalities will be no covering, as in darker times they were,
distinctive Habits and Reverend Titles alone will not procure veneration, the
Ecclesiastical Authority will sink and fall without remedy, if real worth does
not uphold it. In such times men will not be to learn that an arm of flesh does
not constitute a Christian Church, and that the aid of the secular Power is not
enough to prove one Party to be Orthodox, and the rest Heretical or
Schismatical. External violence, which is the common support of false
Religions, will in this case do little good, but it will render them that call
for it the more odious, and more discover the weakness of their Cause.
Wherefore the Clergy must resolve to do Worthily and fulfill their Ministry,
or they must extinguish the Light of the Gospel, or the Light of the Gospel
will extinguish them. But if as faithful Shepherds they watch over the Flock,
and tender the state thereof, if they labor in the Word and Doctrine, and
Teach with meekness and patience if they pity and succor the weak, and heal
that which is lame, that it may not be turned out of the way, if they use the
rod of Discipline with judgment and Paternal affection, if they discard and lay
by men's unprofitable institutes, and maintain all Divine ordinances in their
due honor, and chiefly urge the observance of the indispensable Commands of
God, and turn men from externalness, and make it their chief aim that Christ by
his Word and Spirit may Reign in the hearts of Professed Christians; then shall
they magnify their Office and establish their Authority, and hold their Flocks
in an unfeigned Reverence and submission, as feeling the force of the
Ministerial warfare in their Consciences. And the inferior differences shall
not be able to cause disgust or aversation, or break those strong bonds of the
Peoples sincere regard toward their Pastors: but they would rather be swallowed
up in love, which is the bond of Perfectness.

The Conclusion.
NO greater thing can fall under the consideration of Mankind, than the
Security and increase of true Religion. The Glory of God among men and their
eternal Salvation depends upon it. It Is as far above the concernments of the
Kingdoms of this World, and their Politic Administrations, all Secular
Affairs, and Philosophical speculations, as the Heavens are high above the
Earth. An inquiry into the Sound state and true interest thereof, is a
contemplation worthy of the greatest minds, and the advancement of it is the
chiefest honor of the highest Powers. It Is the Royal interest of that
Potentate, who is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, and of that Blessed Society
which are incorporated under him their Lord and Head. And who that in any
degree has truly known the felicity of this Kingdom, and hopes for a Lot of
inheritance in the glory of it, does not value the concerns thereof above all
his chief joys that are but of this World? A zeal for the common Faith, and a
constraning love to all the Faithful, has excited a very mean and weak one to
do what he was able on this important Subject, impartially searching after
their common good. Let the Prince of this Society, one of whose names is
Counselor deliver his Flock from all dangerous and disadvantageous error, and
from wandering in broken Parties by unstable and divided Counsels, and show them
graciously the right way of maintaining a consistency among themselves, and of
gaining upon the reconcilable part of men. And forasmuch as this Prince and
Leader is the Lamb of God whose Banner is Love, let his people every where be
acted by the Spirit of Love, and show forth the meekness of Wisdom in all good
Conversation, with Humility, Patience and Long-suffering, having this Principle
deeply imprinted in them, The Wrath of Man works not the Righteousness of God.

The point of CHURCH-UNITY AND SCHISM Discussed.
CHAP. I.
Of the Church and its Polity.

THe Church is a Spiritual Commonwealth, which according to its primary and
invisible State is a Society of regenerate Persons, who are joined to the Lord
Christ their Head, and one to another as fellow Members by a mystical Union
through the Holy Spirit, and are justified, Sanctified, and adopted to the
inheritance of Eternal Life; but according to its secondary and visible state,
it is a Society of Persons professing Christianity or Regeration, and
externally joined to Christ, and to one another by the Symbals of that
Profession, and made partakers of the external privileges thereunto belonging.

There is one Catholic Church, which according to the invisible Form, is the
whole company of true Believers throughout the World; and according to its
visible Form, is the whole company of visible Believers throughout the World,
or Believers according to human judgment.

This Church has one Head and Supreme Lord, even Christ, and one Charter and
System of Laws; the Word of God and Members, that are free Denizons of the
whole Society, and one Form of Admission or solemn Initiation for its Members,
and one kind of Ministry and Ecclesiastical Power.

This Church has not the power of its own Fundamental Constitution, or of the
Laws, and Officers, and Administrations intrinsecally belonging to it, but has
received all these from Christ its Head, King and Lawgiver, and is limited by
him in them all. Nevertheless, it has according to the capacity of its acting,
that is, according to its several parts a power of making Secondary Laws or
Canons, either to impress the Laws of Christ upon its Members, or to regulate
circumstantials and accidentals in Religion, by determining things necessary in
genere, not determined of Christ in specie.

As the Scripture sets forth one Catholic Church, so also many particular
Churches, as so many Political Societies distinct from each other, yet all
compacted together as parts of that one ample Society, the Catholic Church.

Each of these particular Churches have their proper Elder or Elders, Pastor or
Pastors, having authority of teaching and ruling them in Christ's name. An
Ecclesiastical Order of Presbyters or Elders, that are not Bishops, is not
found in holy Scripture. For all Presbyters or Elders, being of a sacred Order
in the Gospel Church that are any where mentioned in Scripture, are therein set
forth as Bishops truly and properly so called, and are no where set forth as
less than Bishops. These Elders or Bishops are Personally to Superintend all
their Flock, and there is no grant from Christ to discharge the same by
Delegates or Substitutes.

A distinction between Bishops and Presbyters, and a Superiority of the former
over the latter, was after the Scripture times anciently and generally received
in the Christian Church. Yet it was not a diversity of Orders or Offices
essentially different, but of degrees in the same Office, the essential nature
whereof is in both. The Bishop of the first Ages was a Bishop not of a
multitude of Churches, but of one stated Ecclesiastical Society or single
Church, whereof he was an immediate Pastor; and he performed the work of a
Bishop, or immediate Pastor toward them all in his own Person, and not by
Delegates and Substitutes; and he governed not alone, but in conjunction with
the Presbyters of his Church, he being the President.

Though several Cities in the same Kingdom have their different municipal Laws
and Privileges according to the diversity of their Charters, yet particular
Churches have no Divine Laws and Privileges diverse from each other, but the
same in common to them all, because they have all the same Charter in specie
from Christ. Therefore each of them have the same power of Government within
themselves. And the qualifications requisite to make men Members or Ministers
of the Universal Church, do according to Christ's Law sufficiently qualify them
to be Members or Ministers of any particular Church, to which they have a due
and orderly call.

Local, presential Communion in Gods Ordinances, being a main end of erecting
particular Churches, they should in all reason consist of Persons, who by their
cohabitation in a vicinity are capable of such Communion, and there may not be
a greater local distance of the Persons than can stand with it.

A Bishops Church was anciently made up of the Christians of a City or Town,
and the adjacent Villages, who might and did Personally meet together, both for
Worship and Discipline.

All Christians of the same local Precinct are most conveniently brought into
one and the same stated Church, that there might be the greatest Union among
them, and that the occasion of straggling and running into several Parties
might be avoided. Yet this local partition of Churches is not of absolute
necessity and invariable, but if there be some insuperable impediment thereof,
the partition must be made as the state of things will admit.

No Bishop or Pastor can by Divine right or warrant, claim any assigned circuit
of Ground as his propriety for Ecclesiastical Government, as a Prince claims
certain Territories as his propriety for Civil Government; so that no other
Bishop or Pastor may without his License, do the work of the Ministry, in any
case whatsoever within that Circuit.

It is not the conjunction of a Bishop or Pastor with the generallity or the
greater number of the People, that of it self declares the only rightful
Pastor or true Church within this or that Circuit. For many causes may require
and justify the being of other Churches therein.

Seeing particular Churches are so many integral parts of the Catholic Church,
and stand in need of each others help in things that concern them jointly and
severally, and they have all an influence on each other, the Law of Nature
leads them to Associations or Combinations greater and lesser, according to
their capacities. And the orderly state that is requisite in all Associations,
does naturally require some regular Subordination in the several parts thereof,
either in way of proper authority or of mutual agreement. And the Associated
Churches and particular Members therein, are naturally bound to maintain the
orderly state of the whole Association, and to comply with the Rules thereof,
when they are not repugnant to the Word of God.

A Bishop or Pastor and the People adhering to him, are not declared to be the
only true Church and Pastor within such a Precinct, by their conjunction with
the largest Combination of Bishops or Pastors and their Churches. For the
greater number of Bishops may in such manner err in their Constitutions, as to
make rightly informed Persons incapable of their Combination.

A National Church is not a particular Church properly so called, but a
Combination or Coagmentation of particular Churches, united under one Civil
Supreme, either Personal as in a Monarchy, or Collective as in a Republic. And
the true notion thereof lies not in any Combination purely Ecclesiastical and
Intrinsecal, but Civil and Extrinsecal, as of so many Churches that are
collected under one that has the Civil Supremacy over them. The National
Church of England truly denotes all the Churches in England united under one
Supreme Civil Church-Governour, the Kings Majesty.

Civil Magistrates as such, are no Constitutive parts of the Church. The
Christian Church stood for several Centuries without the support of their
authority. But Supreme Magistrates have a Civil Supremacy in all Ecclesiastical
matters, and a political, extrinsecal Episcopacy over all the Pastors of the
Churches in their Dominions, and may compel them to the performance of their
Duties, and punish them for negligence and mal-Administration; and they may
reform the Churches, when they stand in need of Reformation.

The possession of the Tithes and Temples does not of it self declare the true
Pastor and Church, nor does the Privation thereof declare no Pastor and no
Church. For these are disposed of by the secular power, which of it self can
neither make, nor make void a Pastor or Church.

A Diocese is a collective body of many Parishes under the Government of one
Diocesan. If the several Parishes be so many particular Churces, and if their
proper and immediate Presbyters be of the same order with those which in
Scripture are mentioned by that name, and were no other than Bishops or
Pastors; then a Diocese is not a particular Church, but a Combination of
Churches, and the Diocesan is a Bishop of Bishops, or a Governor over many
Churches and their immediate Bishops. If the Parishes be not acknowledged to be
Churches, nor their Presbyters to be realy Bishops or Pastors, but the Diocese
be held to be the lowest Political Church, and the Diocesan to be a Bishop of
the lowest rank, and the sole Bishop or Pastor of all the included Parishes; I
confess, I have no knowledge of the Divine right of such a Church or Bishop, or
of any precept or precedent thereof in Scripture. For every particular Church
mentioned in Scripture was but one distinct stated Society, having its own
proper and immediate Bishop or Bishops, Elder or Elders, Pastor or Pastors, who
did Personally and immediately Superintend over the whole Flock, which
ordinarily held either at once together, or by turns Personal, present
Communion with each other in Gods Worship. But a Diocese consists of several
stated Societies, to wit, the Parishes which are Constituted severally of a
proper and immediate Presbyter or Elder having cure of Souls, and commonly
called a Rector, and the People which are his proper and ^rge or cure. And the
People of the not live under the Personal and in^rsight of their Diocesan, but
under ^legates and Substitutes. Nor do they only hold Personal present
Communion with each other in Gods Worship, either at once together or by turns.
Nevertheless, which way soever a Diocese be considered, I have nothing to
object against submission to the Government of the Diocesan, as an
Ecclesiastical Officer established by the Law of the Land under the Kings
Supremacy.

There is nothing in the nature of the Office of Presbyterate (which according
to the Scripture is a Pastoral Office) that show it ought to be exercised no
otherwise than in Subordination to a Diocesan Bishop. Christ, who is the Author
and only proper giver of all Spiritual Authority in the Church, has not so
limited the said Office, and men cannot by any act of theirs enlarge or lessen
it as to its nature or essential state, or define it otherwise than it is
stated of Christ in his word.

No power Ecclesiastical or Civil can discharge any Minister of Christ from the
exercise of his Ministry in those circumstances, wherein Christ commands him
to exercise it, nor any Christians from those duties of Religion, to which the
Command of Christ obliges them.

As the Magistrate is to judge what Laws touching Religion are fit for him to
enact and execute, so the Ministers of Christ are to use a judgment of
discretion about their own Pastoral acts; and all Christians are to do the same
about their own acts of Church Communion. The too common abuse of the judgment
of discretion cannot abrogate the right use thereof, it being so necessary that
without it men cannot act as men, nor offer to God a reasonable Service.

CHAP. II.
Of true Church-Unity.

WHen the names of Unity and Schism are by partiality and selfishness commonly
and grossly abused and misapplied, the nature of the things to which those names
do of right belong, ought to be diligently inquired into, and clearly and
distinctly laid open. For a groundwork in this inquiry I fix upon two very
noted texts of Scripture. The one is Ephesians. 4. 3. Endeavoring to keep the unity
of the Spirit in the bond of Peace. The other is Romans 16. 17. Mark them that
cause Divisions and Offenses contrary to the Doctrine that ye have learned, and
avoid them. The former guides us to the knowledge of true Church-unity, and the
latter shows us the true nature of Schism.

By the former of these Texts, all Christians are obliged to maintain that
Spiritual Unity, which they have one with another under Christ their Head, by
the Holy Ghost in all due acts of holy Communion in Peace and Concord. Several
important things are here to be taken notice of.

1. There is a Spiritual unity between all Christians in the form of one
mystical Body, as there is a natural unity between all the members of the
natural Body. The members being many are one body and members one of another.
2. This Unity is under Christ as the Head of it. What the head is to the
natural Body, that is Christ and much more to his mystical Body the Church. 3.
This Unity of Christians one with another under Christ, is by the Holy Ghost,
and therefore called the Unity of the Spirit. The Spirit of Christ the Head,
does seize upon and reside in all the Faithful, by which they become Christ's
mystical Body, and are joined one to another as fellow members. 4. This Unity
of the Spirit among Christians is witnessed, maintained, and strengthened by
their holy communion of Love and Peace one with another, but is darkened,
weakened, and lessened by their uncharitable Dissentions.

Hence it is evident that the Unity here commended, is primarily that of the
Church in its internal and invisible State, or the Union and Communion of
Saints, having in themselves the Spirit, and Life, and Power of Christianity.
It Is the unity of the Spirit we are charged to keep in the bond of Peace. But
concord in any external order with a vital Union with Christ and holy Souls,
his living members, is not the unity of the Spirit, which is to partake of the
same new Nature and Divine Life. Secondarily, it is the Unity of the Church in
its external and visible State, which is consequent and subservient to the
internal, and stands in the profession and appearance of it, in the professed
observation of the duties arising from it. Where there is not a credible
Profession of Faith unfeigned and true Holiness, there is not so much as the
external and visible Unity of the Spirit. Therefore a sensual Earthly
generation of men, who are apparently lead by the Spirit of the World, and not
by the Spirit that is of God, have little cause to glory in their adhering to
an external Church order, whatsoever it be.

Holy love, which is unselfed and impartial, is the Life and Soul of this
unity, without which it is but a dead thing, as the Body without the Soul is
dead. And this love is the bond of perfectness, that Cement, that holds
altogether in this mystical Society. For this being seated in the several
members, disposes them to look, not to their own things, but also to the
things of others, and not to the undue advancement of a Party, but to the
common good of the whole Body. Whosoever wants this love, has no vital Union
with Christ and the Church, and no part in the Communion of Saints. The Church
is much more ennobled, strengthened, and every way blessed by the Communion of
holy love among all its living members, or real Christians, than by an outside
uniformity in the minute circumstances, or accidental modes of Religion. By
this love it is more beautiful and lovely in the eyes of all intelligent
beholders, than by outward pomp and ornament, or any worldly splendour.

The Unity of the Church as visible, whether Catholic or particular, may be
considered in a threefold respect, or in three very different points. The
first and chief point thereof, is in the essentials and all weighty matters of
Christian Faith and Life. The second and next in account is in the essentials
and integrals of Church state, that is, in the Christian Church-Worship,
Ministry and Discipline, considered as of Christ's institution, and abstracted
from all things superadded by men. The third and lowest point is in those
extrinsecal and accidental Forms and Orders of Religion, which are necessary in
genere, but left in specie to human determination.

Of these several points of Unity, there is to be a different valuation
according to their different value. Our first and chief regard is due to the
first and chief point, which respects Christian Faith and Life; The next regard
is due to that which is next in value, that which respects the very
constitution or frame of a Church; And regard is to be had of that also which
respects the accidentals of Religion, yet in its due place and not before
things of greater weight and worth. Things are of a very different nature and
importance to the Churches good Estate; and a greater or lesser stress must be
laid upon Unity in them, as the things themselves are of greater or lesser
moment.

The Rule or Law of Church Unity is not the will of man, but the will of God.
Whosoever keeps that Unity which has Gods word for its Rule, keeps the Unity
of the Spirit; And whosoever boasts of a Unity that is not squared by this
Rule, his boasting is but vain.

An Hypothesis that nothing in the Service of God is lawful, but what is
expressly prescribed in Scripture, is by some falsely ascribed to a sort of men
who earnestly contend for the Scriptures sufficiency, and perfection for the
regulating of Divine Worship, and the whole state of Religion. God in his Word
has prescribed all those parts of his Worship, that are necessary to be
performed to him. He has likewise therein instituted those Officers that are
to be the Administrators of his public Worship in Church Assemblies, and has
defined the authority and duty of those Officers, and all the essentials and
integrals of Church state. As for the circumstantials and accidentals belonging
to all the things aforesaid, he has laid down general Rules for the regulation
thereof, the particulars being both needless and impossible to be enumerated
and defined.

In this point God has declared his mind, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Ye shall not add unto
the word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it. Deuteronomy.
12. 32. What soever thing I command you, observe to do it, Thou shall not add
thereto nor diminish from it. The prohibition is not merely of altering the
Rule, Gods written Word by addition or diminution, but of doing more or less
than the Rule required, as the precept is not of preserving the Rule, but of
observing what is commanded in it.

Such human institutions in Divine Worship, as be in mere subserviency to
Divine institutions, for the necessary and convenient modifying and ordering
thereof, are not properly additions to Gods commandments. For they are of
things which are not of the same nature, end and use with the things which God
has commanded, but of mere circumstantials and accidentals belonging to those
things. And these circumstantials are in genere necessary to the performance of
Divine Institutions, and are generally commanded in the Word, though not in
particular, but are to be determined in specie by those to whom the power of
such determination belongs.

They that assert and stand to this only Rule, provide best for the Unity of
Religion, and the Peace of the Church. For they are ready to reject whatsoever
they find contrary to this Rule, they are more easily kept within the bounds of
acceptable Worship, and all warrantable obedience, they lay the greatest weight
on things of the greatest worth and moment, they carefully regard all Divine
institutions and whatsoever God has commanded, and they maintain Love, and
Peace, and mutual forbearance toward one another in the more inconsiderable
diversities of Opinion and Practice.

Those things that are left to human determination, the Pastors, Bishops or
Elders, did anciently determine for their own particular Churches. And indeed
it is very reasonable and naturally convenient, that they who are the
Administrators of Divine institutions, and have the conduct of the People in
Divine Worship, and know best what is most expedient for their own Society,
should be entrusted with the determination of necessary circumstances within
their own Sphere. But forasmuch as the Supreme Magistrate is entrusted of God
with the care of Religion within his Dominions, and has a Civil Supremacy in
Eclesiastical affairs, and a great concern in the orderly management of public
Assemblies, he is authorized of God to oversee the determinations and actings
of Ecclesiastical Persons, and may assume to himself the determination of the
aforesaid circumstantials for the honor of God, the Churches edification and
the public Peace, keeping within the general rules prescribed in Gods Word.

For the maintaining of Church-Unity, that is according to Gods word, it is the
part of Subjects to submit to what their Governors have determined, so far as
their submission is allowable by the said rule; and it is the part of
Governors to consider well the warrantableness of their determinations. More
especially their wisdom and care is much required in settling the right bounds
of Unity. In this regard the terms of admission to the Communion and Ministry
of the Church must be no other, than what the declared will of God has made
the terms of those privileges, and which will shut out none, whom God has
qualified for and called to the same. The setting of other boundaries, besides
the iniquity thereof, will inevitably cause divisions.

The Apostles, Elders and Brethren assembled at Jerusalem, Acts 15. 28. writing
to the blieving Gentiles declare, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us to
lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary things. From which it is
evidently inferred that the burden of things unnecessary ought not to be laid
on the Churches.

The things enjoined by that Assembly were antecedently to their Decree, either
necessary in themselves or in their consequents according to the state of
things in those times and places. And whatsoever is made the matter of a strict
injunction, especially a condition of Church Communion and Privileges, ought
to have some kind of necessity in it antecedent to its imposition. Symbolical
Rites or Ceremonies instituted by man to signify Grace or Duty, are none of
those things, which being necessary in general, are left to human determination
for this or that kind thereof. They have no necessary Subserviency to Divine
institutions, they are no parts of that necessary decency and order in Divine
Worship, without which the Service would be undecent. And indeed they are not
necessary to be instituted or rigidly urged in any time or place whatsoever.
The being and well being of any rightly constituted Church of Christ, may stand
without them.

St. Paul resolves upon the cases of using or refusing of meats, and the
observance or non-observance of days, which God had neither commanded nor
forbidden, and of eating of those meats which had been offered in Sacrifice to
Idols, Romans 14. and 1 Cor. 8. That no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion
to fall in his Brothers way. The Command here given, extends to Pastors and
Governors as well as to other Christians, and is to be observed in acts of
Governments as well as in other acts. St. Paul was a Church Governor and of
high authority, yet he would not use his own liberty in eating Flesh, much less
would he impose in things unnecessary to make his Brother to offend.

In the cases aforementioned, there was a greater appearance of reason for
despising, censuring or offending others, than there can be for some
impositions now in question among us, viz. on the one side a fear of partaking
in Idolatry, or of eating meats that God had forbidden, or of neglecting days
that God had commanded, as they thought; on the other side a fear of being
driven from the Christian Liberty, and of restoring the Ceremonial Law.
Nevertheless, the Apostle gives a severe charge against censuring, despising or
offending others of different Persuasions in those cases. And if it were a Sin
to censure or despise one another, much more is it a Sin to shut out of the
Communion or Ministry of the Church for such matters.

The word of God, which is the Rule of Church-Unity, evidently shows that the
unity of external order must always be Subservient to Faith and Holiness, and
may be required no further than is consistent with the Churches Peace and
Edification.

The Churches true Interest lies in the increase of regenerate Christians, who
are her true and living Members, and in their mutual love, peace and concord,
in receiving one another upon those terms which Christ has made the bond of
this Union. The true Church Unity is comprised by the Apostle in these
following Unities; One Body, one Spirit, one Hope, One Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, one God. But there is nothing said of one ritual or set Form of Sacred
Offices, one policy or model of Rules and Orders, that are but circumstantial
and accidental in a Church state and very various and alterable, while the
Church abides the same.

CHAP. III.
Of Schism truly so called.

HEre I lay down general positions about Schism without making application
thereof; Whether these positions be right or wrong Gods Word will show; and who
are, or are not concerned in them, the state of things will show. Schism is a
violation of the Unity of the Spirit, or of that Church-Unity which is of Gods
making or approving. This Definition I ground on the aforecited Text, Mark them
that cause Divisions and Offenses contrary to the Doctrine that ye have learned.

Separation and Schism are not of equal extent. There may be a Separation or
Secession where there is no Schism. For Schism is always a Sin, but Separation
may be a Duty, as the Separation of the Protestants from the Church of Rome.
Moreover, there may be Schism where there is no Separation. The violation of
Unity or the causing of Divisions may be not only by withdrawing, but by any
causing of others to withdraw from the Communion of the Church, or by the undue
casting or keeping of others out of the Church, or by making of any breaches in
Religion contrary to the Unity of the Spirit.

By looking back to the nature, and rule, and requisites of true Church-Unity,
we shall understand the true nature and the several kinds and degrees of Schism.

As holy love is the life and Soul of Church-Unity, so that aversation and
opposition which is contrary to love, is that which animates the sin of Schism,
and is as it were the heart root of it. Whosoever maintains love, and makes no
breach therein, and whose dissenting or withdrawing from a Church is no other
than what may stand with love in its extent, is no Schismatic.

The Unity of the Spirit being primarily that of the Church as mystically, the
breach thereof lies primarily in being destitute of the Spirit and Life
Spiritual, much more in being opposite thereunto, under the show of
Christianity; also in the languishing or lessening of Spiritual Life,
especially of the acts of holy love.

The Unity of the Spirit being secondarily, that of the Church as visible in
its external state, and the first and chiefest point thereof being in the
essentials and weighty matters of Christian Faith and Life; the highest
violation thereof and the chiefest point of Schism, lies in denying or
enormously violating the said essentials or weighty matters. And it is directly
a violation of the Unity of the Catholic Church, and not of particular
Churches only.

Not only particular Persons, but Churches, yea a large combination of Churches
bearing the Christian name, may in their Doctrine, Worship and other avowed
Practice, greatly violate the essentials, or very weighty matters of Christian
Faith and Life, and be found guilty of the most enormous breach of Unity.

It is no Schism to withdraw or depart from any the largest combination or
collective body of Churches, (though for their amplitude they presume to style
their combination the Catholic Church) that maintain and avow any Doctrine or
Practice, which directly, or by near and palpable consequence overthrows the
said essentials.

The next point of external Unity being about the essentials and integrals of
Church state, the Sacraments and other public Worship, the Ministry and
Discipline of the Church considered as of Christ's institution, the next chief
point of Schism is the breach hereof. And this may be either against the
Catholic, or a particular Church.

Of such Schism against the state of the Catholic Church, there are these
instances.

1. When any one part of professed Christians how numerous soever, combined by
any other terms of Catholic Unity, than what Christ has made, account
themselves the only Catholic Church, excluding all Persons and Churches that
are not of their combination.

2. When a false Catholic Unity is devised or contended for, viz. a devised
Unity of Government for the Catholic Church under one terrene Head, personal
or collective, assuming a proper governing power over all Christians upon the
face of the whole Earth.

3. When there is an utter disowning of most of the true visible Churches in
the World, as having no true Church state, no not the essentials thereof, and
an utter breaking off from communion with them accordingly.

Of Schism against a particular Church in point of its Church state, there be
these instances.

1. The renouncing of a true Church as no Church, although it be much
corrupted, much more if it be a purer Church, though somewhat faulty.

2. An utter refusing of all acts of communion with a true Church when we may
have communion with it, either in whole or in part, without our personal sin of
commission or omission.

3. The causing of any Divisions or Distempers in the state or frame of a true
Church contrary to the Unity of the Spirit.

But it is no Schism to disown a corrupt frame of Polity, supervenient to the
essentials and integrals of Church state in any particular Church or
combination of Churches, like a leprosy in the Body, that does grossly deprave
them, and in great part frustrate the ends of their constitution.

The last and lowest point of external Unity lying in the accidental modes of
Religion, and matters of mere order, extrinsick to the essentials and integrals
of Church State, the violation thereof is the least and lowest point of Schism,
I mean in it self considered, and not in such aggravating circumstances as it
may be in.

Those accidental Forms and Orders of Religion, which are necessary in genere
but left in specie to human determination, are allowed of God, when they are
determined according to prudence, and charity for Peace and Edification, and
accordingly they are to be submitted to. Consequently it is one point of Schism
to make a Division from or in a Church upon the accountal of accident Forms and
Orders so determined according to Gods allowance.

But if any of the accidentals be unlawful, and the maintaining or practicing
thereof be imposed upon us as the terms of our communion, it is no Schism but
Duty to abstain from communion in that case. For explicitly and personally to
own errors and corruptions even in smaller points is evil in it self, which
must not be committed that good may come. In this case not he that withdraws,
but he that imposes causes the Division. And this holds of things sinful
either in themselves, or by just consequence.

And herein he that is to act, is to discern and judge for his own practice,
whether the things imposed be such. For Gods Law supposes us rational
creatures able to discern its meaning, and to apply it for the regulating of
our own actions; else the Law were given us in vain. Submission and reverence
toward Superiors obliges no man to resign his understanding to their
determinations, or in compliance with them to violate his own conscience.
Persons meek, humble, peaceable and thoroughly conscientious and of competent
judgment, may not be able by their diligent and impartial search to see the
lawfulness of things enjoined, and it is a hard case if they should thereupon be
declared contumacious.

Seeing there be several points of Unity, the valuation whereof is to be made
according to their different value, men's judgment and estimation of Unity and
Schism, is very preposterous, who lay the greatest stress on those points that
are of least moment, and raise things of the lowest rank to the highest in
their valuation, and set light by things of the greatest moment and highest
value; as indeed they do, who set light by soundness of Faith and holiness of
Life, and conscientious observance of Divine institutions, where there is not
also unanimity and uniformity in unscriptural Doctrines and human ceremonies.
And they that make such an estimate of things, and deal with Ministers
accordingly, do therein little advance the Unity of the Spirit, or endeavor to
keep it in the bond of Peace.

Seeing the word of God is the rule of Church Unity, a breach is made upon it,
when other bounds thereof are set than this rule allows. An instance hereof is
the devising of other terms of Church Communion, and Ministerial liberty, than
God has commanded, or allowed in his Word to be made the terms thereof; Also
any casting or keeping out of the Church or Ministry such as Gods Word does
not exclude from either, but signifies to be qualified and called thereunto.

God does not allow on the part of the Imposer such terms of Church communion
or Ministerial station, as are neither Scriptural nor necessary to Peace and
Edification, nor are any part of that necessary order and decency, without
which the Service of God would be undecent, nor are in any regard so necessary,
but that they may be dispensed with for a greater benefit, and the avoiding of
a greater mischief. And they are found guilty of Schism that urge such
unscriptural and unnecessary things unto a breach in the Church. Such Imposers
are not only an occasion of the breach that follows, but a culpable cause
thereof, because they impose without and against Christ's warrant, who will not
have his Church to be burdened, nor the consciences of his Servants entangled
with things unnecessary.

Nevertheless, such unscriptural or unnecessary things, if they be not in
themselves unlawful nor of mischievous consequence, may be of Gods allowing as
to the submitters. Thereupon they are guilty of Schism, who merely for the sake
of those unnecessary things yet lawful as to their use, though wrongfully
urged upon them, forsake the communion of the Church or their Ministerial
station, where things are well settled as to the substantials of Religion, and
the ends of Church order, and when they themselves are not required to justify
the imposing of such unnecessaries. Here I speak of contumacious refusers, who
will rather make a breach than yield. But refusers out of conscience believing,
or with appearance of reason suspecting the said lawful things to be
unlawful, are either accquitted from Schism, or guilty but in a low degree,
and much less culpable than the Imposers, who might well forbear to impose.

Be it here noted that when Superiors sin in commanding a thing exempt from
their authority, it may be the Subjects duty to observe the thing commanded. In
this case the said observance is not an act of obedience, for that can arise
only from the Rulers authority to command. But it is an act of prudence, equity
and charity, and it is good and necessary for the ends sake, and in that regard
it is an act of obedience, though not to the Earthly Ruler, yet to God who
commands us to follow Peace and maintain Unity in all lawful ways and means.

In the judgment of the Apostle it is no slight matter to act against
conscience rationally doubting, or suspecting a breach of Gods Law, Romans 14. 5.
Let every man be fully persuaded in his mind, v. 14. To him that esteems any
thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean, ver. 23. He that doubts, is damned
if he eat, because he eats not of Faith, for whatsoever is not of Faith is
sin. The command of Rulers is no good security for acting against a rational
doubting conscience. When I am in doubt touching the lawfulness of the thing
enjoined, I have no certainty of being on the safer side, by complying with
Rulers. For though in general obedience to Rulers be a certain Duty, yet in the
particular doubted case, I cannot be certain that my compliance is right and
warrantable obedience, and not a breach of Gods Law. Is it plain that I ought
to obey the commands of Rulers in things that have Gods allowance? so it is as
plain that I ought not to obey their commands in things which God has
forbidden. Moreover, it is as plain that I ought not to act against my own
conscience, which as being the discerner of the will of God concerning me, is
of right the immediate director of my actions. Indeed my conscience cannot
alter Gods Law, or make that which God has made my duty to be not my duty, yet
it will not suffer me to act in disconformity to its directions.

Seeing the Unity of the Spirit is always in conjunction with Faith and
Holiness, to which the Unity of external order is always to be subservient, it
follows that when Unity of external order does not tend to advance but hinder
sound Faith and true Holiness, then a false Unity is set up, and the true Unity
is abandoned, and divisions and offenses are caused. And it is no Schism but a
duty not to adhere to a Unity of external order so set and urged, as that it
tends to the destruction or notable detriment of Faith and Holiness, which are
the end of all Church Order. The means are good in reference to their end, and
must never be used in a way destructive to it. Of the hinderance of the said
ends, there be these following instances.

Here laid down in general, without intendment of particular application to any
Churches now in being, which are left to be tried and judged by that rule by
which all must stand or fall.

1. When a Church or Churches, a Congregation or Congregations have an
establishment of external Polity, and an ordained Ministry, and a Form of
Divine Worship, but are destitute of such Ministers as are qualified to feed
the Flock, and are burdened with such as are altogether unfit to have the
charge of Souls committed to them, who are either unable to teach, or teach
corruptly, either teaching corrupt Doctrine, or abusing, mishandling and
misapplying sound Doctrine, to encourage the Ungodly and discourage the Godly.

2. Where there are some Ministers able and apt to teach and duly qualified;
but their number is in no wise proportionable to the number of the People, and
there be multitudes that cannot have the benefit of their Ministry, so that if
they have no more placed among them than those few, they have in effect none.

3. Where sincere Christians, or credible Professors of Christianity are cast
out of an established Church by wrong sentence, or are debarred from its
communion by unlawful terms enjoined them, or unnecessary terms which are to
them unlawful by real doubts of conscience, and which Christ has not
authorized Rulers to enjoin as terms of Church communion.

4. When Ministers, whom Christ has furnished and called, are driven out of
their public station by unlawful terms enjoined, or by terms unnecessary and
to them unlawful by real doubts of conscience, and which Christ has not
authorized Rulers to enjoin as terms of the public Ministry.

Upon the cases here mentioned, I inquire whether the said Ministers and People
may not draw together into new congregations. Let it be considered whether the
determinations of men may be a perpetual bar to true visible Christians, (it
may be to multitudes of them) against the enjoyment of those most important
privileges, to which God has given them right. Yea, suppose their consciences
were culpably weak in scrupling things imposed, yet they may suffer wrong by
such an excess of punishment, as so great a deprivation. And Christ does not
reject them for such weaknesses.

Let it be also considered, whether such injured as Christians are wrongfully
excluded from Gods Ordinances, and such neglected Souls as are left destitute
of the necessary means of Salvation, may lawfully be deserted by Christ's
Ministers. Should not the Stewards of the mysteries of God endeavor to supply
what is lacking to such by reason of the rigourousness or negligence of others?
If it be said, we may not do evil that good may come, nor break the laws of
Unity for such respects, the answer is, that this is not to do evil, but a good
work and a necessary duty, and here is no breach of Unity that is of Gods
making or allowing. The necessary means of saving Souls are incomparably more
precious than uniformity in external, accidental order, especially when it is
unwarrantably enjoined, and attended with such evil consequents. If within any
local bounds assigned for the Pastoral charge of any Ecclesiastic, the People
be left destitude of competent provision for their Souls, it is no intrusion or
breach of Unity if an other Pastor perform the work of the Ministry within
those bounds.

Subjects may not by coercive power reform the public State and change the
Laws, which is the work of the Supreme Magistrate. But let it be considered
whether they may not have their voluntary Assemblies for Gods Worship, when
they are driven from the communion of the legal Churches by the imposition of
unlawful terms, or unnecessary terms apprehended by them to be unlawful. For
in this case they are forced either to hold such Assemblies, or to abide
perpetually without those Spiritual privileges which are their due, and the
ordinary means of their Salvation.

There is a great difference between inimical Separation, like Sedition in a
Commonwealth, and Secregation upon necessary causes without breach of charity.
And among the necessary causes this may be one, that all sober Christians, who
for conscience sake cannot submit to the way of the Established Churches, may
be relieved; and that none may be exposed for lack of that relief to be lead
aside into the error of the wicked, as Heresy, Infidelity, or any other course
of Impiety. Indeed here is some variation from the ordinarily regular bounding
of Churches. But the partition of one Church from another by local bounds, is
not of absolute necessity and invariable, but naturally eligible from the
convenience thereof, when it may be had. But the state of some Christians may
be such, as to compel them to vary from it. The scope hereof is not to set up
Churches against Churches, but either occasional and temporary Assemblies, or
at the most but diverse Churches distinguished by their several places of
assembling, or by diversity of external order, as the allowed Congregations of
Foreigners in London, are distinguished from the Parish Churches.

If any object the inconveniences that may follow the permitting of Church
Assemblies besides those of the Established Order, the answer is, That the
wisdom and clemency of Rulers in any Nation where this case may be supposed can
provide, that as few as may be should stand in need of that permission, by
fixing the terms of Church communion and Ministerial liberty to such a
latitude, as may comprehend all the more moderate Dissenters. And after such
comprehension, Christian charity will plead, that all tolerable Dissenters
(that is, all who believe and live as Christians) may be tolerated within such
limits, as may stand with public Peace and safety. That which is here
proposed, may make for the relief of many thousand serious Christians without
breach of the external order, which is necessary to be maintained, and is not
set up to the hinderance of things more necessary.

It is to be noted that the offenders expressly marked out by the Apostle in the
Text, Romans 16. 17. were ungodly men that opposed or perverted the Christian
Doctrine, and being Sensualists and deceivers disturbed and polluted the
Christian Societies, and seduced the simple into destructive error and
practice. Wherefore the Text is ill applied to the rigorous condemnation of
honest and peaceable men, that dissent only in some accidental or inferior
points of Religion, for which the Apostle forbids Christians to despise or
judge one another. Yet not only false Teachers, but all Schismatics are here
condemned under this description, viz. those that cause Divisions and Offenses.
And though they be not direct opposers of sound Doctrine, yet being Dividers or
Disturbers, they practice contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, which teaches
Unity, Love and Peace. But still it must be observed that the reality of Schism
lies not in being divided or disordered, but in causing the division or
disturbance, or in a voluntary violation of or departing from true Church-Unity.

They that cause Divisions are not excused from Schism by the support of
Secular Power, nor are others convicted of it merely by the want of that
Support. The Magistrates power in Sacred things is accumulative, not
destructive or diminitive to the rights of Christ's Ministers and People. It
takes not from them any thing that Christ has granted them, but gives them a
better capacity to make use thereof.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Schisms that were in the more ancient times of the Church; and the
different case of the Nonconformists in these times.

OF those parties which were anciently reputed Schismatics, as violating the
Unity of the Church, yet not Heretics, as denying any Fundamental point of the
Christian Faith, the Novatians and Donatists are of the chiefest note.
Forasmuch as both these are looked upon as the greatest instances of Schism, it
may be requisite for me to consider the true state of their separation from the
main body of the Christian Church, passing by accidental matters, and insisting
on the merits of their cause according to their main Principles and Practices.

As concerning the Donatists, the breach made by them had this rise. Donatus
with his Accomplices vehemently opposed Cecilianus, who had been chosen Bishop of
Carthage, in design to thrust him out of his Bishopric. They accuse him of
being ordained by one that had been a Proditor, and of having admitted into
Ecclesiastical Office one that was guilty of the like fault. This Cause was by
the Emperor Constantine's appointment heard before several Councils and many
Judges. The Accusers still fail in their Proofs of the things objected,
Cecilianus is acquitted and confirmed in his Office. The Party of Donatus
failing in their design, were carried in a boundless rage of opposition to a
total, and irreclaimable Separation from all the Churches that were not of
their Faction, and became very numerous upon a pretense of shunning the
contagion of the wicked in the Communion of the Sacraments. Their principles
were, that the Church of Christ was no where to be found but among themselves
in a corner of Africa; also that true Baptism was not Administered but in their
Sect. Likewise they proceeded to great tumult, and violence, and rapine. And a
sort of them called Circumcelliones gloried in a furious kind of Martyrdom,
partly by forcing others to kill them, and partly by killing themselves.

The Novatians took their name and beginning from Novatus a Presbyter, first at
Carthage, afterward at Rome, who held that they who lapsed in times of
Persecution unto the denying of Christ, were not to be readmitted unto the
Communion of the Church, though they repented and submitted to the
Ecclesiastical Discipline of Penance. He separated from the Roman Church, and
was made a Bishop by Bishops of his own judgment, in opposition to Cornelius
Bishop of Rome. Cyprian gives a very bad character of him, as a turbulent,
arrogant and avaritious Person. But of what Spirit soever he was, his Judgment
and Canon was received among many that were of stricter lives; and he himself
is reported to have suffered death in the persecution under Valerian.

At the Council of Nice, Acesius Bishop of the Novatians being asked by
Constantine, whether he assented to the same Faith with the Council, and to the
observation of Easter as was there derceed, answered that he fully assented to
both. Then being again asked by the Emperor, why he separated from the
Communion, he recited for himself things done in the Reign of Decius, and the
exquisite observation of a certain severe Canon, that they who after Baptism
had fallen into that kind of sin, which the Scripture calls a sin unto death,
ought not to be partakers of the Divine mysteries; but to be exhorted to
repentance, and to expect the hope of remission not from the Priest but from
God, who has power to forgive. By this it appears that the Novatians did not
deny the Salvability of the lapsed, or others that had fallen into a sin unto
death, but only refused to admit them to Sacerdotal Absolution and
Church Communion. And thus they made a very unwarrantable separation, grounded
upon an unjust rigor of very bad consequence.

Nevertheless their error was no other, than what holy and good men might be
ensnared in by the appearance of a greater detestation of sin, and its tendency
to prevent the lapse of Christians into Idolatry, and to make them more
resolved for Martyrdom. And by as credible History as any we have of the
ancient times, they are reported to have had among them men eminently Pious,
and some famous for Miracles. They unmovably adhered to the Homousian Faith,
and for the maintenance of it together with the Orthodox, suffered dreadful
Persecutions. They had some Bishops remarkable for Wisdom and Godliness, and
such as were consulted with by some of the chief of the Catholic Bishops, and
that with good success for support of the Common Faith against the Arrians and
such like Heretics. Under a certain Persecution, wherein they were Companions
of the self same suffering, it is said that the Catholics and Novatians had
Prayers together in the Novations Churches, and that in those times they were
almost united, if the Novations had not utterly refused that they might keep up
their old institutes; yet they bare such good will one to another, that they
would die one for another. These and many other things of like nature are
reported of them by Socrates, whom some indeed suspect to have been addicted to
them, yet upon no other ground, but because he gives them their due upon
evident proof. And besides what he has reported, Sosomen thus testifies of
them, L. 2. C. 30. That when other Sects expired, the Novatians because they
had good men for the Leaders of their way, and because they defended the same
Doctrine with the Catholic Church, were very numerous from the beginning, and
so continued, and suffered not much damage by Constantines Law for suppressing
of Sects; And Acesius their Bishop being much favored by the Emperor, for the
integrity of his life greatly advantaged his Church. Also L. 4. C. 19. He
reports the great amity that was between them and the Catholics in a time of
common Persecution.

Whether the case of the Dissenters from the Uniformity now required, be in
point of Schism of the same or like reason with the above mentioned, or any
other anciently reputed Schismatics, is now to be considered. And it is the
case of those that dissent not in the substance of Religion, but only in things
pertaining to the Ecclesiastical Polity or external Order in the Church, that
is here taken into consideration. Of these, some being persuaded of the
necessity of their own Church Order, desire to remain as they are in their
severed Societies; yet they do not nullify the legal Churches or Ministry, or
the dispensation of the Word, Sacraments and Prayer therein performed. Others
being satisfied in the constitution of Parochial Churches, and in the substance
of the Established Form of Worship, would gladly embrace a freedom of
Communicating and Administering therein, upon the removal of some bars that lie
against them, and which they think may well be removed. Thereupon they seek an
Accommodation and Union by a sufficient comprehensiveness in the public
constitution; and withal a reasonable indulgence toward those Brethren, who
for the straightness of their judgments cannot be comprehended.

Neither Party of the Dissenters here described can be charged with any thing
like the Donatistical fury before expressed. If Austin sought the suppression
of that Sect by the secular power, in regard of the horrible outrages committed
by them, it cannot reasonably be urged for a precedent (as it has been by
some) for the suppression of men Sober and Peaceable, and sound in the main
points of Christian Faith and Life. Nor can either Party of us be charged with
that intolerable presumption and arrogance of the Donatists, in confining the
Flock of Christ to their own Party, or the disannulling and utter denouncing of
all Churches besides their own. Nor is the ground of our dissatisfaction like
theirs, which began in a quarrel against a particular Bishop, and was
maintained by animosity against those that would not condemn him. It is well
known that another manner of account is to be given of our Dissents.

If it be objected, that those Dissenters whose principles bind them up to
persevere in their severed Societies, seem in this respect to be as the
Novatians, who would not admit a Reunion with the other Churches; it may be
answered for them, that reasons have been offered in the foregoing parts of
this Discourse for indulgence to conscientious People, who are entangled by the
narrowness of their principles touching Church Order. Besides, they do not
stand off upon so harsh and rigorous a point as the Novatians did, viz. The
utter repelling of the lapsed, though penitent from the Communion of the
Church. And they have ordinarily communion in the Word and Prayer with
Congregations that are not of their Church way, and occasionally in the
Sacrament with those Congregations, where they apprehend a care of the exercise
of Discipline. Nor may they be judged so irreconcilable to the Established
Order, but that the holy lives of those in the public Ministry, and their
lively Preaching, and a greater care of true and real Church Discipline, might
do much to their recovery.

In the mean time, why may not these be upon as good terms under the present
Government, as the Novatians were under the Government of their times? Church
History reports that they were cruelly Persecuted by the Arrian Emperors and
Bishops, and that they had great indulgence under Orthodox Emperors, and with
many Catholic Bishops and Patriarchs, whose prudent and moderate Government
did best provide for the Peace of their Churches. But those Orthodox Bishops,
who took from them their Churches and Estates, were chiefly either such as took
to themselves a Secular Power, and ruled imperiously and with violence, or such
as with their zeal had more of wrath and rashness than of meekness and
prudence. This can be easily proved in the particular instances, if need were.

But this is not the case of all Nonconformists. For part of them (and upon
good experiment made, they may be found the greater part) do not seek to abide
in a severed State, but desire a Union. It is well known they are as sensible
of the evil of Schism, and as Studious of the Churches Peace and Concord, as
any others. And though they have not the same latitude of judgment with others
in some points, yet they have a right Catholic Spirit to promote the common
Interest of Religion, and more especially the Protestant Reformation, and dread
the weakening and shattering of it by needless Divisions, and are ready to go as
far as conscience will allow in compliance with the injunctions of Rulers. But
they are cast and kept out of the Established Order by the injunction of some
terms, which in regard of their present judgment, they can not comply with, but
under the guilt of so great a sin as dissembling in the matter of Religion.

Touching Church Government, they admit the Episcopacy that was of ancient
Ecclesiastical custom in the time of Ignatius, yea, or of Cyprian. Bishop
Usher's model of Government by Bishops and Archbishops with their Presbyters,
was by some of them presented to the Kings Majesty for a groundwork of
Accommodation. They acknowledge the Kings Ecclesiastical Supremacy according to
the Oath in that case required. His Majesty in his gracious Declaration
concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs, gives a Testimony concerning the Ministers
that attended him in Holland, in these words, viz. To our great satisfaction
and comfort, We found them Persons full of affection to Us, and of zeal to the
Peace of Church and State, and neither Enemies (as they had been given out to
be) to Episcopacy or Liturgy, but modestly to desire such alterations in
either, as without shaking foundations might best allay the present Distempers.

They are ready to engage that they will not disturb the Peace of the Church,
nor endeavor any point of alteration in its Government by Rebellious
Seditions, or any unlawful ways. Those points of Conformity wherein they are
dissatisfied, are but some accidentals of Religion and external modes, and the
Declarations and Subscriptions importing an allowance of all and every thing
contained in the Liturgy. And they think that these points are not so necessary
in themselves or in their consequents, but they are very dispensable as the
Wisdom of Governors shall see cause.

If it be objected, that if any thing should be yielded to them, there would be
no end of their cravings, that which I have to say is, That reasonable men will
be satisfied with reasonable concessions; and if Subjects know not what is fit
for them to ask, Governors know what is fit for them to give. By granting the
desired relaxation, the Church would not (as some allege) be self-condemned,
as confessing the unlawfulness of her injunctions, or as justifying the
Opinions of the Dissenters. For it can signify from her no more than either
her indulgence to the weak, or her moderation in things less necessary and more
controverted, which would not turn to her reproach, but to her greater
justification.

I have here nothing to say to them that object against any relaxation after
that manner, as if they desired not our Conformity but our perpetual exclusion.
Such may be answered in due season. And I have here nothing to do with those
that argue against us from Politic considerations, respecting a particular
Interest too narrow for an adequate foundation of Church-Peace and
Christian-Concord. But my scope is to consider what may be done by the Higher
Powers and Church Guides for the healing of breaches, according to the Wisdom
which is from above, which is first pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to
be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality and without
hypocrisy.

I have made particular observation of those too most remarkable Parties, which
have been looked upon as the chief instances of Schism in the more ancient
times. The other Schisms that I find of any remark in those times were raised,
sometimes by Persons cast out of the Church for their Crimes, and thereupon
drawing Disciples after them, as was that of Meletius a Bishop in Egypt, who
was desposed for having sacrificed to Idols. Sometimes by offense unjustly
taken at some supposed faultiness in a Bishop, as was that of an Orthodox Party
in Antioch, against another Meletius, an Orthodox and right worthy Bishop of
that City, only because he was at first brought in by the Arrians; sometimes by
the exasperations of the People for injuries done to them or their Pastors, and
outrages committed by their opposites, as was that of the Johannites at
Constantinople upon the banishment of Chrysostom; and sometimes by mere
animosity and humor of coffeehouse, as was that of Lucifer a Bishop in
Sardinia, who separated from Eusebius Bishop of Vertellis and others, because
they disliked his rash act of Ordaining Paulinus to be Bishop of Antioch, as
tending to perpetuate the Schism there begun.

Touching all the said Parties, it may be observed that they did not plead that
any Opinions or Forms were imposed on them, to which their consciences did
reluctate, nor did they desire others forbearance toward them in such things
as might bear too hard upon them; but they themselves would not bear with
others in that which they supposed faulty, but did nither choose wholly to
abandon the Communion of the Churches, and did not seek nor care for
accommodation with them. But this is not the case of at least a great part of
the Dissenters of these times. For they importune an accommodation with the
Churches of the Established Order, and for Peace sake, are willing to bear with
the practice of others in that which themselves dislike or doubt of; but they
cannot obtain a Dispensation from others, in some things which are very
dispensable points according to their judgment, but are forced to abide in a
severed state, unless they will profess what they believe not, or practice what
they allow not.

Now because the judgment and practice of antiquity is much insisted on, I pray
that it may be considered, whether in the Primitive, or ancient times of
Christianity, men, yea, many hundreds of men duly qualified for the Ministry
by sound Faith and good Life, as also by their Learning and Industry, and
offering all reasonable security for their submissive and peaceable demeanure,
were or would have been cast and kept out of the Church for their Nonconformity
to some Opinions, Forms and Ceremonies, which at the best are but the
accidentals of Religion, and of the truth or lawfulness whereof, the Dissenters
were wholly dissatisfied, and which the Imposers judged to be but things in
themselves indifferent.

And I further pray that it may be considered, whether it be easier for the
Nonconformists to be self-condemned in Conforming to some injunctions against
their consciences, and in deserting the Ministry to which they are dedicated,
than for Superiors either by some relaxation to make them capable of
Conforming, or to bear with their peaceable exercise of the Ministry in a
state of Nonconformity, while some of their injunctions confine them to that
state.

CHAP. V.
Of making a right estimate of the guilt of Schism, and something more of
taking the right way to Unity.

THe confused noise about Schism, and the unjust imputation thereof, that is
commonly made, has greatly disordered the minds of many. Some have been
thereby swaid to an absolute compliance with the most numerous or the most
prevailing Parties. Others discerning the abuse of this name, but forgetting
that there is something truly so called, have made light of the thing it self,
which is indeed of a heinous nature. I have been engaged in this Disquisition
by a deep sense of the evil of Schism, and an earnest care of keeping my self
from the real guilt thereof, and what is here written, I willingly submit to a
grave and just examination. Errare possum, Haereticus, Schismaticus esse nolo.
I am liable to Error as others are, but I am sure I am no wilful Schismatic.

It is commonly given to men to pass a severe judgment upon every dissent from
their own Opinions and Orders. Whereupon, as that has had the character of
Schism stamped upon it, which is not such indeed; so that which is Schism in a
low and tolerable degree, has been aggravated to the highest, and prosecuted
against all rules of prudence and charity.

To make an equal judgment of the guilt of Schism in Persons or Parties, the
degree of the Schism is duly to be considered. Our Savior teaches that
reviling language, contemptuous words and rash anger, are breaches of the Sixth
Commandment, yet in degree of guilt, they are vastly different from the act of
wilful Murder. And indeed in the kind of delinquency here treated of, there
are as great differences of degrees as of any other kind. The case of those
that are necessitated to a noncompliance in some lawful things by them held
unlawful, yet seeking union would gladly embrace a reasonable accommodation, is
much different from theirs, who upon choice and wilfully sever themselves,
because they love to be severed. In like manner the case of those who desire
and seek the conformity of others, and would gladly have fellowship with them,
yet through misguided zeal, are approvers of such unnecessary impositions as
hinder the conforming of many, is much different from theirs, who designing the
extrusion of others, contrive the intangling of them by needless rigors. Many
other instances might be given to express the great disparity of cases in point
of Schism, all which may teach us in the estimate that we are to make thereof,
to put a difference between honest minds, that by mistake are drawn into
Division, and those that out of their corrupt minds and evil designs do
wilfully cause Division.

In many things we offend all, and therefore it behooves us to consider one
another, as subject to the like errors and passions. We should not judge too
severely, as we would not be so judged. There be many examples of Schismatical
animosities and perversnesses, into which in the ancient times such Persons
have fallen, as were otherwise worthily esteemed in the Church. Cyril with the
greater number of Bishops in the Ephesine Council, too rashly deposed John of
Antioch, and his Party of Bishops upon a quarrel that arose between them. And
John with his Adherents returning to Antioch, did more rashly depose Cyril and
his Party, and yet both Parties were Orthodox, and in the issue joined in the
Condemnation of Nestorius. But the most remarkable instance in this kind, is
the disorderly and injurious proceeding of so venerable a Person as Epiphanius,
against so worthy a Person as Chrysostom, to which he was stirred up by the
instigation of that incendiary Theophilus of Alexandria. The said Epiphanius
goes to Constantinople, and in the Church without the City held a sacred
Communion, and Ordained a Deacon; and when he had entered the City, in a public
Church he read the Decree made by himself and some others in the condemnation
of Origens Books, and excommunicated Dioscurus and his Brethren called the long
Monks, worthy and Orthodox men persecuted by the Anthromorphites. And all this
he did without and against the consent of Chrysostom the Bishop of the Place,
and in contempt of him. I may further instance in the long continued division
between Paulinus and Meletius, with their Parties at Antioch, though both of
them were of the Nicene Faith; likewise in the long continued Separation made
from the Church of Constantinople, by the followers of Chrysostom after his
banishment, because they were exasperated by the injuries done to their worthy
Patriarch.

These weaknesses in good men of old times, I observe not to dishonor them,
but that we may be thereby warned to be more charitable and less censorious
toward one another, in case of the like weaknesses and disorders, and to be
sollicitous to maintain Peace, and to prevent discord among all those that are
united in the substantials of Christian Faith and Practice, and for this end to
be more careful in avoiding unreasonable oppositions, unwarrantable
impositions, and all causless exasperations.

True Holiness is the basis of true Unity. For by it the Faithful cleave to
God, and one to another in him and for him, and are inclined to receive one
another on those terms, on which God has received them all. And by it they are
turned from that dividing selfishness, which draws men into several or opposite
ways according to their several or opposite ends.

Let not a carnal wordly Interest in a Church state, be set up against Holiness
and Unity. Let the increase and peace of the Church visible, be sought in order
to the increase and peace of the mystical. Let no one Party be lifted up
against the common Peace of sound Believers; and let not any part of the
legitimate Children of Christ's Family be ejected or harassed upon the
instigation of others, but let the Stewards in the Family carry it equally, and
so gratify one part in their desired Orders, that the other part be not
oppressed. Let not them be still vexed, who would be glad of tolerable terms
with their Brethren. In Church Governors let the power of doing good be
enlarged, and the power of doing hurt restrained, as much as will stand with
the necessary ends of Government.

Let the Discipline of the Church commend it self to the consciences of men.
Let the edge of it be turned the right way and its vigor be put forth, not
about little formalities but the great and weighty matters of Religion. Zeal in
substantials and charitable forbearance in circumstantials, is the way to gain
upon the hearts of those that understand the true ends of Church Government,
and what it is to be Religious indeed.

Let the occasions of stumbling and snares of division be taken out of the way,
and let controverted unnecessaries be left at liberty. Discord will be
inevitable, where the terms of concord remain a difficulty insuperable. The
Conscientious that are willing to bid high for Peace; cannot resign their
consciences to the wills of men, and humility and soberness does not oblige
them to act contrary to their own judgments out of reverence to their
Superiors; they cannot help themselves, but their Superiors may. It Is the Spirit
of Antichrist that is fierce and violent; but the Spirit of Christ is dovelike,
meek and harmless, and that Spirit inclines to deal tenderly with the
consciences of Inferiors. Tenderness of conscience is not to be despised or
exposed to scorn, because some may falsely pretend to it. The Head of the Church
and Savior of the Body is compassionate toward his Members, and he has said,
Whosoever shall offend one of these little ones, that believe in me, it were better
for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in
the depth of the Sea.

As the way of unity lies much in the wisdom, equity and charity of Superiors,
so in the humility and due submission of Inferiors, in their ready closing
with what is commendable in the public constitutions, in their bearing with
what is tolerable, in making the best improvement of what is therein improvable
for their own and others Edification, in a word, in denying no compliance,
which piety toward God and charity toward men does not forbid.

Matters of public injunction, which Inferiors stick at, may be considered by
them either as in themselves unlawful, or as inexpedient. Now it is not only
or chiefly the inexpediency of things commanded, but the supposed unlawfulness
of diverse of those things that the Nonconformists generally stick at, whereof
they are ready to render a particular account, when it will be admitted.
Howbeit a question may arise about the warrantableness of submission to things
not in themselves unlawful but inexpedient, especially in respect of scandal,
the solution whereof may be requisite for the clearing of our way in such
things.

Upon this question it may be noted, That in those cases, wherein there is no
right of commanding, there is no due of obedience. Nevertheless, things
unwarrantably commanded are sometimes warrantably observed, though not in
obedience, yet in prudence, as to procure Peace, and to show a readiness to all
possible compliance with Superiors. Moreover, Rulers have no authority to
command that, which in it self is not unlawful, when Christian charity forbids
to do it in the present circumstances by reason of evil consequents. For all
authority is given for Edification and not for Destruction. Likewise our
Christian liberty includes no License to do that act at the command of Rulers,
the doing of which in regard of circumstances, is uncharitable. But here it
must be considered, how far the law of charity does extend in this case, and
when it does, or does not forbid my observance of what the Ruler has
unwarrantably, because uncharitably commanded.

True charity does not wholly destroy Christian Liberty, though it regulates
the use thereof; and it does not extend it so far one way as to destroy it self
another way. If I am bound up from doing every indifferent thing, at which weak
consciences will take offense, my liberty is turned into bondage, and I am left
in thraldom to other men's endless Scrupulosities. This is I think a yoke which
Christians are not fit nor able to bear. This bondage is greater and the burden
lies heavier upon me, if by reason of others weakness, I must be bound up from
observing an indifferent thing at the command of Rulers, and by them made the
condition of my liberty for public Service in the Church, when my conscience
is fully satisfied that it is lawful, and otherwise expedient for me to do it.
As for the warrantableness of enjoining, the Ruler must look to that. Are some
displeased and grieved that I do it? As many or more may be displeased and
grieved if I do it not. Do some take occasion by my necessary use of a just
liberty, to embolden themselves to sin? My forbearing of it may be an occasion
of sin to others, as their persisting in some troublesome Error to their own
and others Spiritual damage, and in unwarrantable noncompliance with their
Governors. And the loss of my liberty for public Service consequent to such
forbearance, must also be laid in the balance.

When both the using and forbearing of my liberty is clogged with evil
consequents, I know no safer way than duly to consider of what moment the
consequents are on either side, and to incline to that which has the lesser
evil. Herein the Wisdom of the prudent is to direct his way upon the impartial
view of all circumstances which come under his prospect. And if good conscience
and right reason, guided by the general Rules of Gods Word, lead me to make use
of my Christian liberty in compliance with my Superiors, I must humbly and
charitably apply my self to remove the offense, that some take, by clearing the
lawfulness and expediency of my act to their judgments. But if that cannot be
discerned by them, I am by my Christian good behavior to make it evident to
their consciences, what in me lies, that what I do, I do sincerely and
faithfully, and that I am no temporizer, man-pleaser and self-seeker. I humbly
conceive that that high saying of the Apostle, If meat make my Brother to
offend, I will eat no Flesh while the World stands, does admit such equitable
interpretation, as the circumstances of time, place, person, and the whole
state of things declares to be most reasonable.

A humble representation of my own case touching the exercise of the Ministry.
I Have been in the Ministry near forty years, having been ordained Presbyter
according to the Form of Ordination used in the Church of England. And being
called to this Sacred Order, I hold my self indispensibly obliged to the work
thereof, as God enables me and gives me opportunity. The nature of the Office
is signified in the Form of Words, by which I was solemnly set apart thereunto.
viz. [Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins thou do forgive, they are forgiven,
and whose sins thou do retain, they are retained: And be thou a faithful
Dispenser of the Word of God and of his holy Sacraments, in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen.] The former part of these
Words being used by our Savior to his Apostles, in conferring upon them the
Pastoral Authority, fully proves that the Office of a Presbyter is Pastoral,
and of the same nature with that which was ordinary in the Apostles, and in
which they had Successors.

Likewise, this Church did then appoint that at the ordering of Priests or
Presbyters, certain portions of Scripture should be read, as belonging to their
Office to instruct them in the nature of it, viz. That portion of Act. 20.
which relates St. Paul's sending to Ephesus, and calling for the Elders of the
Congregation with his exhortation to them, To take heed to themselves and to
all the Flock, over which the Holy Ghost had made them Overseers, to rule the
Congregation of God. Or else 1 Timothy 3. which sets forth the Office and due
qualification of a Bishop. And afterward the Bishop spoke to them that were to
receive the Office of Priesthood, in this form of words, (Ye have heard,
brethren, as well in your private examination, and in the exhortation and holy
Lessons taken out of the Gospels and Writings of the Apostles, of what dignity,
and how great importance this Office is whereto ye are called, that is to say
the Messengers, the Watchmen, the PASTORS and Stewards of the Lord, to teach,
to premonish, to feed, to provide for the Lords Family.

I mention my Ordination according to the Episcopal Form, because it is of
greatest esteem with them, to whom this Representation is more especially
tendered. Nevertheless, I own the validity of Presbyterial Ordination, and judge
that Ministers so Ordained, may make the same defense for exercising the
Ministry, in the same case that is here represented.

Christ is the Author and the only proper Giver of this Office; and though he
give it by the mediation of men, yet not by them as giving the Office, but as
instruments of the designation, or of the solemn investiture of the Person to
whom he gives it. As the King is the immediate Giver of the power of a Mayor in
a Town Corporate, when he gives it by the Mediation of Electors and certain
Officers, only as instruments of the designation, or of the solemn investiture
of the Person.

I am not conscious of disabling my self to the Sacred Ministrations, that
belong to the Office of a Presbyter, by any Opinion or Practice, that may
render me unfit for the same. Touching which matter, I humbly offer my self to
the trial of my Superiors to be made according to Gods Word.

Nothing necessary to authorize me to those Ministrations is wanting that I
know of. I am Christ's Commissioned Officer; and I do not find that he has
revoked the authority which I have received from him; And without the warrant
of his Law no man can take it from me. Nor do I find, that the nature of this
Office, or the declared will of Christ requires, that it be exercised no
otherwise than in subordination to a Disocesan Bishop.

That I do not exercise the Ministry under the regulation of the Bishop of the
Diocese, and in other circumstances according to the present established Order,
the cause is not in me, who am ready to submit thereunto; but a bar is laid
against me by the injunction of some terms in the lawfulness whereof I am not
satisfied, whereof I am ready to give an account when it is required.

I do not understand that I am under any Oath or Promise to exercise the
Ministry, no otherwise than in subordination to the Bishop, or the Ordinary of
the Place. The promise made at my Ordination to obey my Ordinary and other
chief Ministers, to whom the government and charge over me is committed,
concerns me only as a Presbyter, standing in relation to the Bishop or
Ordinary, as one of the Clergy of the Diocese, or other peculiar Jurisdiction,
in which relation I do not now stand, being cast out and made incapable
thereof. Moreover, in whatsoever capacity I now stand, the said Promise must be
understood either limitedly or without limitation. If limitedly, as in things
lawful and honest, (as I conceive it ought to be understood) then I am not
bound by it in the present case. For it is not lawful nor honest for me to
comply with the now enjoined Conformity against my conscience, or in case of
such necessitated noncompliance, to desist from the Ministry that I have
received in the Lord. If it be understood without limitation, it is a sinful
promise in the matter thereof, and thereupon void. Absolute and unlimited
obedience to man may not be promised. Let it be considered also that the
objected promise could not bind me to more than the Conformity then required.
But since my Ordination and Promise then made, the state of Conformity has
been much altered by the injunction of more, and to me harder terms than
formerly were enjoined. When I was Ordained, I thought that the terms then
required were such as might be lawfully submitted to. But young men (such as I
then was) may be easily drawn to subscribe to things publicly enjoined, and so
become engaged, before they have well considered.

The Ordainer or Ordainers, who designed me to this Office of Christ's donation,
and not theirs, could not by any act of theirs lessen it as to its nature or
essential state. Nor can they derogate from Christ's authority over me, and the
obligation which he has laid upon me, to discharge the Office with which he
has entrusted me.

That a necessity is laid upon me in my present state to preach the Gospel, I
am fully persuaded, in regard of the necessities of Souls, which cry aloud for
all the help that can posibly be given by Christ's Ministers, whether
Conformists or Nonconformists. The necessary means of their Salvation is more
valuable, than mere external Order or Uniformity in things accidental.

I receive the whole Doctrine of Faith and Sacraments, according to the
Articles of the Church of England, and am ready to subscribe the same. I have
joined, and still am ready to join with the legally established Churches in
their public Worship. The matter of my sacred Ministrations has been always
consonant to the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches, and particularly of the
Church of England. I meddle not with our present differences, but insist on the
great and necessary points of Christian Religion. I design not the promoting of
a severed Party, but of mere Christianity or Godliness.

I am willing to comply with the will of my Superiors as far as is possible
with a safe conscience, and to return to my Ministerial station in the
Established Churches, may I be but dispensed with in the injunctions, with
which my conscience, till I be otherwise informed, forbids me to comply. In the
whole of my dissent from the said injunctions, I can not be charged with
denying any thing essential to Christian Faith and Life, or to the constitution
of a Church, or any of the weightier matters of Religion, or with being in any
thing inconsistent with good Order and Government.

My Case, as I have sincerely set it forth, I humbly represent to the Clemency
of my Governors, and to the charity, equity and ^^^^^r of all Christ's
Ministers and People. ^e I design to follow after the things which make for
Peace; and I hope I am not mistaken in the way to it.

I. C.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside.
ONe Hundred of Select Sermons upon several occasions, by Tho. Horton, D. D.

Sermons on the 4th. Psalm. 42. Psalm. 51. and 63. Psalm. by Tho. Horton, D. D.

A Complete Martyrology, both of Foraign and English Martyrs, with the Lives of
26 Modern Divines, by Sam. Clark.

A Discourse of Actual Providence, by John Collings, D. D.

An Exposition on the 5 first Chapters of the Revelation of Jesus Christ, by
Charles Phelpes.

A Discourse of Grace and Temptation, by Tho. Froysall.

The Revival of Grace. Sacramental Reflections on the Death of Christ as
Testator.

A Sacrifice and Curse, by John Hurst.

A Glimps of Eternity to Awaken Sinners and Comfort Saints, by Ab. Coley.

Which is the Church, or an Answer to the Question, Where was your Church
before Luther? by Rich. Baxter.

The Husbandmans Companion, or Meditations suitable for Farmers, in order to
Spiritualize their Employment, by Edward Bury.

Mr. Adams Exposition of the Assemb. Catechism, showing its Harmony with the
Articles and Homilies of the Church of England.

The present State of New England, with the History of their Wars with the
Indies.

Popery an Enemy to Truth and Civil Government, by Jo. Sheldeck.

Spelling Book for Children, by Tho. Lie.

Principals of Christian Religion, with Practical Applications to each Head, by
Tho. Gouge.

Almost Christian, by Matthew. Mead.

Godly Man's Ark, by Edmund Calamy.

Heaven and Hell on Earth in a good or bad Conscience, by Nath. Vincent.

Little Catechism for Children, with short Histories, which may both please and
profit them, by Nath. Vincent.

Ark of the Covenant, with an Epistle prefixed by John Owen, D. D.

This Author has lately Published this Book Entitled,

The Kingdom of God among men. A Tract of the sound state of Religion, or that
Christianity which is described in the holy Scriptures, and of things that make
for the security and increase thereof in the World, designing its more ample
diffusion among professed Christians of all sorts, and its surer propagation to
future Ages. Printed for Tho. Parkhurst.


