A Second Discourse OF THE RELIGION OF ENGLAND: Further Asserting, That
REFORMED CHRISTIANITY, Settled in its Due Latitude, is the Stability and
Advancement of this KINGDOM. Wherein is included, An ANSWER to a late Book,
ENTITVLED, A Discourse of TOLERATION.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1668.

A Second DISCOURSE OF THE RELIGION of ENGLAND.
SECT. I.
Of the Foundation of our Peace already laid in the Religion of the Nation, and
the Structure thereof, to be perfected by the Unity of that Profession.

COncerning Religion in this Kingdom, there have been, and still are great
thoughts of heart, and the troubled state thereof has much disturbed the Minds
of Men, and the whole course of Human Affairs. Doubtless, Religion it self is
not in fault, which in its right and sound state, being an Institution holy,
just and good, must needs be of great efficacy to compose and quiet our minds,
and to heal and settle the Nations. But that which in it self is Excellent, is
by the Errors and Corruptions of men, made subject to much vanity. And the
Adversary of Mankind being not able to raze out the deep impressions thereof
that are in our Nature, has made it his Masterpiece so to corrupt or
discompose it, as to disorder the Passions of Men, and the Affairs of the World
about it.

Concerning the Cure of these Distempers, and the Redress of the Evils thence
arising, there is no cause of Despair or Despondency, if Men cease from their
high Provocations, and God from his righteous Indignation. The most effectual
means of Reconciliation between the Disagreeing Parties, is, For all of them to
be reconciled to God. Then would that Spirit of Perverseness, which by the
Divine Displeasure has been mingled in the midst of us, be controled and
vanquished; and Offenses and Prejudices being removed, we might discern the Way
of Peace. God forbid that Sentence should pass upon this Generation,
Destruction and misery is in their paths, and the way of peace they have not
known.

Next, under the Divine Favor and Blessing, our Help stands in the Wisdom
and Piety of our SOVEREIGN and His PARLIAMENT. But this Grand Affair is
acknowledged to be full of difficulties, caused by the Passions, Prejudices and
Interests of the several Parties. Nevertheless, the Prudence and Patience of
those that sit at the Helm of Government, is able to Master it: For, the
Groundwork of Peace is laid to their hands, in the Religion of the Nation; and
the Impartial may descry the opportunity of such a Settlement as may
accommodate all those Parties in which the Nation's Peace is bound up.

The true Interest of Sovereignty, is the self-same with that of the
Universality, or whole Body of the Kingdom; and this is founded in such a
Common-Good, as belongs to all sorts of men, by whom the Public Weal consists.
And where there are, and inevitably will be different Persuasions among them,
the Wisdom of the Government is to contract and lessen their differences, as
much as it is possible; but, howsoever, to prevent or heal divisions, and to
hold them united among themselves, in the common Benefit, and all of them
necessarily dependant upon the State. This is a firm Basis of the perpetual
stability of Empire, as also of the Subjects Tranquillity and Prosperity; and
the present Discourse rests upon this Principle as its sure Foundation.

Now in this Realm, the joint Stock of those several Parties, for matter of
Religion, is REFORMED CHRISTIANITY, for which they are all jealous, even unto
discomposure, upon any Encroachments of the Popish Party. Wherefore, it is the
Wisdom of this Government, to remove or lessen the Differences, and to cure the
Divisions which now disturb and divide the Protestants, and to hold them united
among themselves, and all of them in firm dependence upon this State, and
consequently, to give them all their due encouragement, not indeed in loose and
irregular ways, but in a ruled Order, consistent with stable Polity, and
agreeable to the Government of this Kingdom.

The Groundwork being already laid in the Protestant Religion, which is the
general and grand Interest of this Nation, the Structure and Fabric of the
Unity and Peace of this Realm, is more or less perfected, as the Unity of this
Profession, and the Peace and Concord of its Professors, is more or less
acquired. And now this great Question lies before us, Whether the Unity of
Religion be obtained by requiring a Conformity of Judgment and Practice in
matters of perpetual difference from the beginning of the Reformation unto this
very day; or, by permitting a latitude of Opinion and Practice in those points;
and that not infinite and inordinate, but limited by the Public Rule.

SECT. II.
The Good of the several Parties is best secured by common Equity, and the good
of the Universality.

HOw happy might the disposition of Human Affairs be, if that were acknowledged
in men's Practice, which is most clear and obvious to Human Understanding, That
things of common Equity and regard to all sorts, who are necessarily included
in the Public State, be preferred by each particular Party, before great
Advantages to themselves apart, with disregard of all others. For, all
particular Interests which are incorrupt, and will hold firm, are embarked in
the Interest of the Universality, and must sink or swim therewith: Whereupon,
not only the Commonwealth, but the more appropriate Concernments of men, are
better secured for continuance, by this Moderation and common Equity.

There lie before us the Protestant Religion, (which is the true Primitive
Christianity) and the Ancient, Equal and Happy Constitution of the Government
of this Kingdom. The Conservation and Advancement of both These, are infinitely
more valuable than the prevalence of Parties, by all true Protestants, and true
English men. A public Spirit is that which is truly pious and generous. But,
over and above this Noble and Christian Consideration, this also should be very
prevalent, That those Two great things before named, in which all do share, and
by which all subsist, are the Basis even of the more private and contracted
Benefits of the several Parties; and by disturbing these, they weaken their own
hold, and disturb their own safety. Those that hate Moderation, and follow
Extremes on either hand, consider not the true state of England. It is an
unhappy Error when divided Parties, who when all is done, in their divided
state, can be but Parties, and not the Whole, shall so act in their turns, as
if they took themselves to be the whole Body of the Nation, or equivalent
thereunto. And it is a calamitous aversness, when such as must live together
either as Friends or Enemies, shall refuse lawful and safe terms of mutual
agreement.

As for Conscience, and its high Concernments, if it be guided by that Wisdom
which is from above, which is first pure, then peaceable, it puts in no caution
against the healing of this breach: For, Order and Peace may be obtained upon
terms not repugnant to the Principles of either Party. His Majesty's Wisdom
has rightly comprehended this matter, in His Declaration concerning
Ecclesiastical Affairs, where He says, We are the rather induced to take this
upon Us, (that is, to give some determination to the matters in difference) by
finding upon a full Conference that we have had with the Learned men of several
Persuasions, That the Mischiefs under which both Church and State do at present
suffer, do not result from any formed Doctrine or Conclusion which either Party
maintains or avows; but from the Passion, Appetite, and Interest of particular
persons, which contract greater prejudice to each other by those Affections,
than would naturally arise from their Opinions. It is apparent, that the avowed
Doctrines on either side, could not set the Parties at this distance, if their
Spirits and Interests were reconciled.

SECT. III.
What may be esteemed a good Constitution of the State Ecclesiastical.

AS concerning the public Order, it imports exceedingly to discern and make a
difference between things desirable, but morally impossible, or extremely
improbable, and things necessary and attainable. Perfect unanimity about
matters of Religion, and a harmony of Opinion in all Theological Truths, is
very desirable; but it was never yet found in any Age of the World, among those
that owned the same Religion, and consequently it cannot be necessary in all
those that ought to be comprehended in the same Church, or Religious Communion.
For which cause, a precise Uniformity in matters of mere Opinion, will hardly
ever pass with general satisfaction: Neither is it of that importance, that
some make it to be, for Peace and Edification. There is another thing not only
desirable, but the indispensable duty of all particular persons, which is
Brotherly Love among all that receive the common Faith once given to the
Saints. This is of far greater consequence than the former, and more largely
attainable, because it is a Catholic Disposition, and the right Spirit of true
Christianity; and indeed, the failing hereof is lamentable and reproachful.
Howbeit, this excellent Christian Virtue is commonly much interrupted and
impaired in many, by prejudicate Opinions, and depraved Affections; and it must
not be expected, but that Animosities and Jealousies may remain between men of
different Persuasions, by reason of the corruption of man's nature, and the
infirmities of the best of men. And therefore the foundation of a solid
National Settlement, must not, and need not be laid in men's good dispositions
and inclinations: For, although the distemper of many minds continue, yet
public Order, and steady Government, is in no wise impossible.

Things are necessary, either as the End, or the Means. The things here
considered, that are necessary as the End, are, The Advancement of the
Protestant Religion, and the Kingdom of England, the Tranquillity of Church and
State, and the Security of all sound Protestants, and good Subjects. That which
is necessary as the Means, is the Public Rule and Standard by which these
blessed Ends may be obtained; that, notwithstanding the remainder of men's
Perverseness, the common high Concerns of Reformed Religion, and of this
Kingdom, be not disturbed, impaired, or cast back by the Altercations that may
chance to arise between men of different private Opinions, and different
partial Interests. The high Importance and Necessity of a stated Rule of such
Force and Efficacy, evinceth the possibility thereof: For, so Noble and
Necessary Ends, cannot be destitute of all possible Means leading thereunto.
Evil Dispositions and Manners are the rise of Good Laws: And Lawmakers, that
are subject to like passions with other men, have the Wisdom to limit
themselves and others, for the Universal Good, wherein the good of every
Individual is secured.

The Public Rule being to be framed to the proportion of the People that are
to be settled under it, the chief regard must be had to their fixed and
unmovable Persuasions and Inclinations, lest They should break the Rule, or the
Rule break them. In a Nation whose Active Part is zealous of Religion, and able
to discern, and addicted to discourse the Grounds thereof, the Order of Things
ought, in the first place, to be directed to the satisfying of the Just and
Reasonable Demands of Conscience, which being troubled, is a restless thing;
and then to the outward Encouragements of Piety and Learning, and withal, to
the bridling of Ambition, Avarice, Faction, and all depraved Appetite. It must
be expected, That diverse Obliquities and Deficiencies may remain, and Troubles
will arise: but if that which is Wholesome and Good, be so predominant as to
Master the Evils, though not to extinguish them, it is to be esteemed a Good
Constitution.

SECT. IV.
The Comprehensiveness of the Establishment, and the Allowance of a just
Latitude of Dissents, is the best Remedy against Dissentions.

THere was lately published a Discourse for a due Latitude in Religion, by
Comprehension, Toleration and Connivence, directed to this End, That the
occasions of those Discords which divide the Members, and distract the whole
Body of the Protestant Profession, might cease; and that the common
Concernments, wherein the disagreeing Parties have a large joint Stock in
things of greatest moment, might be pursued. This is encountered with an adverse
Discourse, which is here to be examined, and the state and reason of the
aforesaid Latitude, is to be further cleared.

Toleration being commonly understood of the permission of different ways of
Religion, without the Line of the Approved Way, A Discourse of Toleration does
not hit the Discourse of the Religion of England, in the main thereof, whose
chief Design is the Extension of the Established Order, and the Moderation
therein required; and then Toleration is treated of analogically, with respect
not only to common Charity, but to the Safety of the settled Polity. It is no
less besides the mark, to argue from the Mischiefs of a boundless and
licentious Toleration, against that which is Limited and well Managed, and has
for the Subject thereof, nothing that is intolerable.

But, if under this Name be comprehended also the Permission of diversity of
Opinion in the same Established Order, let it be considered, Whether any ample
Polity can consist without such Permission. For, it is a thing utterly unknown,
and seems morally impossible, for any numerous Society of Inquiring men, to be
of the same judgment in all points of Religion. And though the Sons of the
Church, as they are called, agree in those points wherein they all differ from
the Nonconformists, yet they differ among themselves in far weightier Matters,
and such as have caused great Schisms, and have been the subjects of the
Debates and Determinations of some Synods in the Reformed Churches. Now if
Charity among themselves, and their appropriate Interest, dispose them to this
mutual forbearance, a more extensive Charity, and the common Interest of
Reformed Christianity, should incline them to a forbearance in those other
matters.

There is yet a greater Error committed about the Subject of Toleration, which
the Answerer, by mistake, will have to be Dissentions in Religion, but is
nothing so in the design of that Discourse to which he pretends an Answer. And
this has brought forth a large Impertinency, which takes up more than a third
part of his Book: For, those whose Liberty He seeks to withstand, are not
touched with that which he writes at large of the nature of Dissentions, with
their Causes and Consequences, and the Magistrates duty concerning them,
whether it be right or wrong, setting aside the injurious application thereof.
And all that labor had been spared, if he had put a difference between
Dissension and Dissent, words that are near in sound, and perhaps, sometimes,
promiscuously used; but in their strict and proper sense, far distant: For,
Dissension is no sooner presented to the mind, but it is apprehended as
something either culpable and offensive, or calamitous and unhappy: But Dissent
is of a better notion, and is not necessarily on both sides, either a Fault or
a Grievance. But if this Author means by Dissentions, no more then dissents or
differences of Opinion, with what truth and justice can he charge them all (as
he does) with such execrable Causes and Effects. Dissentions have been, and may
be remedied, and their fuel being taken away, those flames will be
extinguished: But diversity of Opinion seems in this state of Human Nature, to
be irremediable. It is therefore hoped, that the state of this Church and
Kingdom is not so deplorable, as to want a Settlement while these Dissents
remain. Moreover, there are private dissents between particular men, within the
latitude of the Public Rule; and there are dissents that may be called
Public, as being from the Public Rule, or some parts thereof. Now the broader
and more comprehensive the Rule is, the fewer will be the Dissenters from it.
And the permission of private diversities of Opinion, in a just Latitude within
the Rule, is the means to lessen Public Dissents, and consequently,
Dissentions much more. And this was the main scope of the first Discourse.

The great importance of Unity in the Church of Christ, is acknowledged and
contended for as much on this side, as on the other: Howbeit, we do not believe
that Christ our Head has laid the Conservation and Unity of His Church, upon
unwritten and unnecessary Doctrines, and little Opinions, and Sacred Rites and
Ceremonies of mere Human Tradition and Institution. But He has set out the
Rule and Measure of Unity in such sort, as that upon Dissents in those things,
the Members of this Society might not break into Schisms, to a mutual
condemnation and abhorrency. The imposing of such things (except in those Ages
whose Blindness and Barbarism disposed them to stupidity and gross security in
their Religion) has been ever found to break Unity, and to destroy, or much
impair Charity, Goodness, Meekness and Patience, which are Vital Parts, and
chief Excellencies of Christianity.

SECT. V.
Whether the present Dissentions are but so many Factions in the State.

ONE grand Objection is, That the Dissentions among us, are but so many several
Factions in the State. But, mere dissents in Religion, are no State-Factions at
all, but proceed from a more lasting Cause, than particular Designs, or any
temporary Occasions, even from the incurable Infirmity of our Nature. And if it
were granted, That the Dissentions were State-Factions; yet, they are not so
originally and radically, but by accident. Some may take advantage to raise and
keep up Factions by them. For this cause, take out of the way the
stumbling block of needless rigors, and then Dissentions will cease or
languish, and consequently, the State Factions (if there be any such that are
kept up by them) will come to nothing.

It is so evident, that Toleration, which came not in till after the breach
between the Late King and Parliament, did not open the avenues to our Miseries,
that one may wonder any should say it did. But, meet Indulgence to all sound
Protestants, is the likeliest means of stopping such avenues. And, if it be for
the Interest of England to have no Factions, the best way is to remove those
burdens, which, like a partition wall, has kept asunder the Professors of the
same Religion: Then the Masters of our Troubles (whosoever they be) cannot have
that advantage by their Eminency in their Parties, to drive on their Designs in
the State. Factious Spirits are disappointed, when Honest Minds are satisfied
and secured.

This Author relates the Aims of several Parties on this manner: The Papists
are for the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome; some of the other Sects are for a
Commonwealth; others are for the Fifth Monarchy. But, if the true state of the
Nonconformists be well considered, it will be found, that in Them, as well as
any others, the King and Kingdom is concerned, and the good of Both promoted.
It is not with them, as with the Popish Party, who have such a severed Interest
to themselves, that the State is little concerned in it, save only to beware
of its Encroachments. But the Protestant Dissenters, are such as do much of the
Business of the Nation, and have not their Interest apart, but in strict
conjunction with the whole Body-Politick. Yea, they have no possible means of
ensuring their Interest, but by Legal-Security obtained from the Higher Power,
and by comporting with the general tranquillity both of the Church and State of
England. They cannot fly to the Refuge of any Foreign Prince or State, (as the
Papists have done frequently) they acknowledge no Foreign Jurisdiction, (which
is a Principle of the Popish Faith) but all their Stake lies at home, and they
can have no sure Hold that is aliene from the Happiness of the King and
Kingdom. An Impartial Observer cannot but discern this. If it be lawful to name
a thing so much to be abhorred, as a Change of the Ancient Laws and Government,
they could not be happy, nor do their Work by such an unhappy Change.
Experience witnesses, That their Interest is not for hasty and unstable
Victory, or unfixed Liberty; but, for a state of firm Consistence and Security;
and that they cannot hold their own, but by the common Safety both of Prince
and People.

The sum of this Matter is, That a Party not only comporting with the good
Estate of this Realm, but even subsisting by it, and therefore firmly linked
unto it, should not be cast off.

SECT. VI.
Whether the NONCONFORMISTS Principles tend to Sects and Schisms.

SOme Reasons were offered to show, That Indulgence toward Dissenting
Protestants, did much concern the Peace and Happiness of this Realm. And the
Prudent will judge Arguments of that sort to be of the greatest weight in the
Affairs of Government. There is no need to reinforce the cogency of those
Reasons: The Adversary has wrested them to an odious meaning, contrary to
their manifest true intent; but whether he has indeed evinced them to be of
little or no moment; or, whether they stand in full force, let judicious men
consider. The whole reasoning in that particular, rests upon this Maxim, That
it is the SOVEREIGN's true Interest, to make his divided People to be one among
themselves, and to keep them all in dependence upon Himself, as the Procurer of
their common safety.

The Prejudices that have been conceived, and the Calumnies that have been
raised against the Nonconformists, gave occasion of resolving this Question,
Whether they be of a judgment and temper that makes them capable of being
brought under the Magistrates Paternal Care and Conduct, to such a stated Order
as will comport with this Church and Kingdom? This, by the Answerer, is termed
a Dialect of Canting, and is wilfully wrested into a Question of another
nature. Whether he had occasion given him to speak so scornfully, let any judge
that understand sober language. But, that they might appear incapable of a
Comprehension, he sticks not to affirm, That the Principles of Presbyterian
Persuasion, do not admit of any stability, but may be drawn out to patronize
the wildest Sects that are or have been. And his main proof is taken from the
bare word of Two of their Eminent Adversaries. He might have remembered, That
the same Reproach is cast upon the Principles of Protestantism, by Romish
Writers. One may well ask, Where is the Truth and Candor of those men that
write after this manner? Consider the French, Dutch, Helvetian Churches, how
entire they keep themselves in Orthodox Unity, from the Gangrene of Sects and
Schisms. The Church of Scotland, whilst it was Presbyterian, was inferior to
none in the Unity of Doctrine and Church Communion. Did Prelacy ever effect the
like Unity in the Church of England? And shall the Sects that now are, or
lately were in this Nation, be charged upon Presbytery, that was never settled
among us; and against which the Sectaries had the greatest indignation? Though
that Way never obtained in England, nor was favored with the Magistrates
vigorous aid, yet it is very untrue, that the first admirers and friends
thereof, grew sick of it, and hissed for the other Sects to affront, reproach
and baffle it. It is well known, that it received those disgraces from another
sort of men.

The asserting of this Government, is far from the design of this or the former
Treatise; yet it may be lawful to vindicate it from unjust aspersions. The
Answerer is pleased to style it, No other but a Sect. I hope he does not intend
to make the Foreign Reformed Churches, but so many Combinations of Sectaries.
If his meaning be, that is no better than a Sect in England, because another
Government is established by Law, let him tell us, Whether Episcopacy would be
a Sect, if it should appear in those Countries where Presbytery is the Legal
Government? No less will follow, if the Notion of Sect be extended so far, as
to fetch in whatsoever dissents from the Order by Law established.

SECT. VII.
Of their Principles touching OBEDIENCE and GOVERNMENT.

ANother great Prejudice taken up against the Nonconformists, is, That they are
inconsistent with any Regular Government: And this Author reports, that it is a
common Maxim among the Dissenters, That an Indifferent Thing becomes Unlawful
by being Commanded. But let the World hear them speak for themselves out of
their Account to His Majesty concerning the Review and Alteration of the
Liturgy.

We humbly beseech Your Majesty to believe, That we own no Principles of
Faction or Disobedience, nor patronize the Errors or Obstinacy of any. It is
granted us by all, That nothing should be commanded us by man, which is
contrary to the Word of God: That, if it be, and we know it, we are bound not
to perform it, God being the Absolute Universal Sovereign: That we must use all
just means to discern the Will of God, and whether the Commands of Men be
contrary to it: That, if the Command be sinful, and any through neglect of
sufficient search, should judge it Lawful, his culpable Error excuses not his
doing it, from being sin: And therefore as a reasonable creature must needs
have a judgment of discerning, that he may rationally obey it; so is he with
the greatest care and diligence, to exercise it in the greatest things, even
the obeying of God, and the saving of his Soul: And that where a strong
probability of a great Sin and Danger lies before us, we must not rashly run
on without search: And that to go on against Conscience where it is mistaken,
is sin and danger to him that erreth. And on the other side, we are remembered,
that in things no way against the Law of God, the Commands of our Governors
must be obeyed; but if they command what God forbids, we must patiently submit
to suffering, and every soul must be subject to the Higher Powers for
Conscience sake, and not resist: The Public Judgment, Civil or Ecclesiastical,
belongs only to public persons, and not to any private man: That no man must
be be causlesly or pragmatically inquisitive into the reasons of his Superiors
Commands; nor by Pride and Self-conceitedness, exalt his own understanding
above its Worth and Office; but all to be modestly and humbly self-suspicious:
That none must erroneously pretend to God's Law, against the just Command of
his Superiors, nor pretend the doing of his duty to be a sin: That he who
suspecteth his Superiors Commands to be against Gods Laws, must use all means
for full information, before he settle in a course of disobeying them: And that
he who indeed discovers any thing commanded, to be a sin; though he must not
do it, must manage his Opinion with very great care and tenderness of the
Public Peace, and the honor of his Governors. These are our Principles: If we
are otherwise represented to Your Majesty, we are misrepresented: If we are
accused of contradicting them, we humbly crave that we may not be condemned
before we be heard.

This is sound speech that cannot be reproved. Wherefore if the Clemency of
their Superiors shall remit those Injunctions that may wellbe dispensed with,
and unto which they cannot yield conformity for fear lest they sin against God;
their Principles will dispose them with an humble and thankful acquiescence, to
receive so great a Benefit.

SECT. VIII.
Of placing them in the same rank for Crime and Guilt, with the PAPISTS.

THE Answerer has not feared to set the Papists, and the Protestant
Dissenters, upon the same level, in the guilt of Rebellion, Cruelty and
Turbulency. For a high Charge having been made good against Popery, That it
disposes Subjects to Rebellion: That it persecutes all other Religions within
its reach: That wheresoever it finds encouragement, it is restless, till it
bear down all, or has put all in disorder: He comes and tells the World, That
the Nonconformists are no more innocent of the same Crimes. Can men of sound
minds and temperate spirits, believe this? And what greater advantage can be
given the Popish Party, then that a Protestant Writer should declare and
publish, that so great a part of Protestants are equally involved with them in
those heinous Crimes with which the Protestants have always charged them? And
that such a one should tell them, That it will seem unequal to deny a
Toleration to them, and grant it unto others that are here pleaded for; which
is in effect to say, They have as good reason to expect an Indulgence from this
State, as others that maintain the Doctrine of the Church of England, yea, such
as communicate in her public Worship. Is there no better way of exalting
Prelacy, and disgracing its supposed Adversaries, then by this Reproach and
Damage done to the whole Protestant Profession? Yea, he so far extenuates the
guilt of Papists, and brings it down so low, as to make it common to all other
Sects. In which one would think he should have been more wary, who in one place
stretches the notion of Sect so far, as to make its reason to lie in being
different from the Established Form of Church Government. Now for matter of
practice, he imputes the same guilt to all other Sects; And if the Papists
(says he) have any Doctrines which countenance those Practices, that is to be
accounted as the issue of their insolency in their own greatness. And he
implies, That it is only the want of strength, that other Sects are not so bad
as they for such kind of Doctrine, as well as Practice. Such passages falling
from a Protestants Pen, may do the Papists better service than their late
Apology. But why does he say, If the Papists have any such Doctrines? Does he
not know they have? The Church of England was assured of it, when concerning
the Adherents of Rome, she used this expression in a public form of Prayer,
Whose Religion is Rebellion, and whose Faith is Faction. We wish their eyes
were open, who cannot see more permanent and effectual causes of the aforesaid
Crimes peculiar to that Religion, and rooted in the Principles thereof. The
evidence hereof given in the former Discourse, is not needful to be rehearsed in
this place.

This Author (as others that oppose the ways of Amity and Peace) loves to
grate upon a string that sounds harsh, To renew the remembrance of the late
War. Those distracted Times, are the great Storehouse and Armory, out of which
such men do fetch their Weapons of offense; and the great Strong-hold, unto
which they always retreat when they are vanquished by the force of Reason, and
then they think they are safe, though therein they contradict the true intent
of the Act of Oblivion. Some of those that now so importunately urge the Injury
and Tyranny of those Times, did then suf^iciently comply with Usurpers; and
left Episcopacy to sink or swim; and did partake of the chiefest Favors and
Preferments that were then conferred. And on the other hand, such as they
upbraid, and are now Sufferers, did as little comply with those that subverted
the Government, and did as zealously appear for the rescue of our late
Sovereign, and for the restitution of His present Majesty, as any sort of men
in the Realm. But to intermeddle in the Differences of those Times, and to
repeat Odious Matters, and to use Recriminations that will disturb the minds of
men, and tend to a perpetual Mischief, is aliene from, and opposite unto my
Pacifick Endeavors. As for his charging the Nonconformists with certain
Doctrines and Positions by him there mentioned (which I know none that
maintains) and other Accusations and Reports relating to the time of the War;
the Truth or Falsehood, the Equity or Iniquity, the Candor or Disingenuity of
his Testimony in those things, is left to the judgment of the Righteous God,
and of Impartial Men.

SECT. IX.
Whether their Inconformity be Conscientious or Wilful.

ANother part of the Proceeding is very Unrighteous and Presumptuous. The
Dissenting Ministers appeal to God, That they dare not Conform for Conscience
sake. This Author hence inferrs, The force of the Argument is, There is a
Necessity of Toleration, because they Will not conform. Is a Cannot for
Conscience sake, of no more force than a bare Will not? But who best knows
their hearts, themselves or their Adversaries? He would make the world believe,
that not Conscience, but Obstinacy and Faction, is the cause of their holding
out, and that the greatest part were trapann'd into Nonconformity. That
trifling story of their being trapann'd, is not worthy of serious discourse. It
is so evident, as not to be denied, That about the time the Act of Uniformity
was to be put in practice, there were motions and overtures of Indulgence from
the King and some of the great Officers of State, who were known to have high
affection and esteem for the Church of England, yet did approve and promote
those Overtures as the best Expedient for the settling of this Church and
Kingdom. But to let that pass, Can men of Understanding and Candor think, that
so many serious persons, who as well as others, may be thought to love
themselves, their Families and Relations, should continue such egregiously
obstinate Fools, as to refuse the Comforts of their Temporal Being, for a
Humor, and remain in a state of Deprivation, into which they had been merely
trapann'd? As for the objected unprofitableness of their returning, how does it
appear? What hinders their Capacity of gaining Benefices, yea and Dignities, if
they could Conform? Why should they not find as good acceptance as others, in
their Preaching and Conversation? It may be they would enter too fast, for the
good liking of some, into those Preferments, who therefore would set such Bars
against them, as they should not be able to break thorough.

SECT. X.
Of their peaceable Inclinations, and readiness to be satisfied.

IN the late Times of Usurpation, there were apparent predispositions in this
sort of men to Peace and Concord. The longing desire and expectation that was
in them, as much as in any others, of a National Settlement, and general
Composure, did accelerate His Majesty's Peaceable Restoration. Surely they
were not so stupid as to imagine that great Turn of Affairs, without the
thoughts of their own yiedling, and such as they hoped would be effectual with
those of the other Persuasion. Their early and ready Overtures of
Reconciliation, which are publicly made known, will testify their Moderation,
to the present and future Ages. Their Offers of Acquiescing in Episcopacy
Regulated, and the Liturgy Reformed, was on their part, a good advance toward
Union. His Majesty has given this Testimony of them in His Declaration: When
We were in Holland, We were attended by many Grave and Learned Ministers from
hence, who were looked upon as the most able and principal Assertors of the
Presbyterian Opinions, with whom We had as much Conference as the multitude of
Affairs which were then upon Us, would permit Us to have; and to Our great
Satisfaction and Comfort, found them persons full of Affection to Us, of Zeal
for the Peace of the Church and State, and neither Enemies (as they had been
given out to he) to Episcopacy or Liturgy, but modestly to desire such
alterations as without shaking Foundations, might best allay the present
Distempers which the indisposition of the Time, and the tenderness of some men's
Consciences had contracted.

I wonder at the confidence of that Assertion in the Answer, That it is
sufficiently known, That none of the present Nonconformists did in the least
measure agree in the use of those little things; and though desired by the King
to read so much of the Liturgy as themselves had not exception against, and so
could have no pretense from Conscience. For it is well known, that some of them
did in compliance with the Kings desire, read part of the Liturgy in their
Churches. As for others that did not, perhaps for the prevention of scandal
they might use their liberty of forbearance till some Reformation were
obtained. The truth is, the Concessions on this side have been abused, to the
reproach and disadvantage of the depressed Party; and from their readiness to
yield so far as they can, for the common peace sake, a perverse inference is
made, That they might yield throughout, if Humor and Faction did not rule them.
Is there any Justice or Charity in such dealing? May not men of upright
Consciences, and peaceable Inclinations, forbear the insisting upon some things
to them very desirable, and give place to some things not approved by them as
the best in that kind, if so be they might obtain their Peace and Liberty, by
Indulgence granted them in other things, wherein Conscience binds them up that
they cannot yield? Moreover, some Concessions made by particular men of very
Catholic spirits, in the earnest pursuit of Peace, have been wracked and
wrested to a sense beyond their true import; and then they that so handle them,
triumph in their own conceit, over them, as if they had given up the whole
Cause. Certasnly they are ill employed, who from their Brethrens yielding
offers, raise Opposition against them, and endeavor to set them further off.

SECT. XI.
The propounded Latitude leaves out nothing necessary to secure the Church's
Peace.

TO set forth the propounded Latitude in the particular Limits thereof, is not
agreeable to a Discourse of this nature: For it were presumptuous both in
reference to Superiors, and to the Party concerned in it. And it is
unnecessary; for Prejudices being removed, and the Convenience of a greater
Latitude being acknowledged, the particular Boundaries thereof will easily be
descried: And indeed, the generals that are expressed, are a sufficient
indication thereunto. His Majesty's Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical
Affairs, has mentioned particular Concessions on both sides, and that Harmony
of Affections therein, He calls excellent Foundations to build upon. The
Moderation and Indulgence there specified, would do the work; I mean not so as
if all Dissenters would instantly be thereby brought in; but that our wide
breach would presently be healed in great part, and be in the surest way for a
total and absolute healing; and so much would be gained at present, as might be
able to conquer the remaining Difficulties.

The former Discourse had this position, That the Ends of Church Discipline do
not require a Constitution of narrower bounds, then things necessary to Faith
and Life, and Godly Order in the Church. The Answerer says, That this
Establishment is not enough for a Settlement, because it does not secure the
Peace. And to show the insufficiency thereof, he gives two instances of
Discord between the Parties; First, about the Persons to whose care the great
things of Christianity should be entrusted to see them conveyed unto Posterity,
whether they shall be a Single Person, or a Consistory, or each single
Congregation. Secondly, About the means of conveying those things, the Worship
of God, and the Circumstances thereof. From hence he draws this Conclusion,
Therefore to preserve Peace among her Members, the Church had need to determine
more then the great things of Christianity; and to enjoin more then what is
barely necessary to Faith and Order. Verily, it may much amuse one to think
what that thing should be in the Ecclesiastical Polity, which is not necessary
to Christian Faith and Life, and godly Order in the Church, and yet necessary
to secure the Church's Peace. And if the aforesaid Instances of discord between
the Church of England and the Dissenters are not necessary to Faith or Order,
what reason can be rendered of the inexorable Imposition thereof, upon
dissenting or doubting Consciences? Can it be necessary to the Church's Peace,
to exclude or deprive men for such Differences in which neither Faith nor Order
are concerned? Or is this the Answerer's meaning, That the Church's Peace
consists in the exclusion of the Nonconformists; and that the necessary use of
some Injunctions, stands in keeping them out; so that not their Conformity, but
their Exclusion is the thing thereby intended?

The Comprehension does not suppose (as it is mis-reported) That Presbytery
should be permitted or encouraged. All intermedling with the Form of
Church Government, was declined; only the prescribed Uniformity was considered.
Besides, for the exact Presbyterial Form to be comprehended in Episcopacy, is
contradictory; yet that something of Presbytery should be included in it, is
not repugnant. And such a Comprehension is approved in His Majesty's aforesaid
Declaration. Likewise King CHARLES the First, in His Discourse touching the
Differences between Himself and the Two Houses, in this point, declares that He
is not against the managing of the Episcopal Presidency in one man, by the
joint Counsel and Consent of many Presbyters; but that He had offered to
restore it as a fit means to avoid those errors, and corruptions and
partialities which are incident to any one man; also to avoid Tyranny, which
becomes no Christians, least of all Churchmen. But neither this nor the former
Treatise, interposeth in this Matter, but leaves it to the Wisdom of our
Superiors.

The desired Latitude leaves not the Concernments of Church or State to the
Ingenuity of Men, nor casts out any Injunctions that are means of Peace and
Unity; yea, or of that necessary Decency which the Apostle requires; only of
Rites and Opinions long disputed, it would take in no more then needs must; and
not merely because they have been long disputed, but because they are also of
little value, (and here confessed not to be necessary to Faith and Order) yet
are matters of endless Controversy in this Church, and occasions of great
separation from it.

It being asserted, That the indisputable Truths of Faith, and the
indispensable Duties of Life, are the main Object of Church Discipline, the
Answerer demands, What are those indisputable Truths, since there is scarce any
Truth of Faith that has not been disputed against? What manner of arguing is
this? Because All Truths have been disputed, does it follow, that there are no
indisputable Truths? That is called Indisputable, that cannot reasonably or
justly be disputed, though men of corrupt minds, and reprobate concerning the
Faith, will call the greatest Truths in question, and resist the clearest
Evidence. When the Apostle mentions matters of doubtful disputations, he
implies there be matters that are indubitable.

SECT. XII.
Of acquiescence in the Commands of Superiors, and the proper matter of their
Injunctions.

IN the former Treatise this Argument was used. The Church does not claim an
Infallibility, therefore the cannot settle the Conscience by her sole Warrant,
but still leaves room for doubting. The Answerer makes this to be either a
piece of ignorance, or of portentous malice, and an Assertion that would
disturb all Government both in Families and in the State, that would confound
all Society, and extirpate Faith and Justice from among the sons of men. But
this his strange Inference rather is portentous. That the Church cannot settle
the Conscience by her sole Warrant, is it not a Principle maintained by all
Protestants in opposition to the Popish implicit Faith, and blind Obedience?
But is this person consistent with himself? For after he has a while
expatiated in his imaginary hideous Consequences, he comes himself to deny that
the Church binds the Conscience by her own Authority. And yet it is a lesser
thing to bind the Conscience, than to settle it, and leave no room for
doubting. For Conscience may be obliged, when it is not settled. And if the
Church cannot oblige, doubtless she cannot settle the Conscience by her sole
Authority. How then could a man of reason draw such hideous Inferences from
that Position? If I may give way to conjectures, I suspect that he might take
check at the word Infallibility, by which I intend no more then Infallible
Direction; and I fear not to own this Assertion, That whosoever have not
Infallible Direction, or the certain assistance of an Infallible Guide, so as
to be exempted from all error in what they propound for Belief or Practice,
cannot settle the Conscience by their sole warrant.

I still aver, That in prescribed Forms and Rites of Religion, the Conscience
that does its office, will interpose and concern it self. And it is matter of
astonishment that a Learned Protestant should say, this Position must needs be
false. For Conscience guided by the fear of God, will use all just means to
discern his Will, and cannot resign it self to the dictates of men in the
points of Divine Worship. If the Judgment of Discerning, which makes men differ
from Brutes, be to be exercised in any case, it is chiefly requisite in these
matters wherein the Glory of God, and the Saving of the Soul is so much
concerned.

It is granted, That to maintain Peace and Unity in the Church, and to be
obedient to the Higher Powers in those things which are proper matter for their
Commands, are most strictly injoined Duties. But the Injunctions here
considered (though to the Imposers they are but things Indifferent, that is,
neither Commanded nor Forbidden of God) in the Consciences of Dissenters, are
Unlawful. To instance in some controverted Ceremonies, They think that God has
determined against them, though not in particular, yet in the general
Prohibition of all uncommanded Worship. And they reply, Whether it be right in
the sight of God to hearken unto men more then unto God, judge ye. To restrain
that of the Apostle, He that doubts is damned if he eat, only to things wherein
the Church has not interposed her Authority, is a false gloss, and a begging
of the Question. What human Authority can warrant any one to put in practice an
unlawful or suspected Action, or to make profession of a known or suspected
Falsehood? As concerning the Rights of Superiors, it is the Church's Duty and
Honor to teach and command her Children to do whatsoever Christ has
commanded. And it is the chiefest Glory, and most proper Work of the
Magistrate, who is Gods Minister and Vicegerent, to be custos and vindex
utriusque Tabulae, To encourage and enforce Obedience to the Divine Laws,
whether written in the Bible, or imprinted in our Nature; and in subserviency
thereunto, to have power to determine such things as are requisite in the
general, but in the particulars are left undetermined of God, and are to be
ordered by Human Prudence, according to the Light of Nature, and the general
Rules of Gods Word. But things indifferent in their nature, and either
offensive in their use, or needless and superfluous, are not worthy to be made
the proper matter of his Commands. It is a grave and weighty saying of a
Learned man (of whatsoever Persuasion he were) If the special Guides and
Pastors of the Church, would be a little sparing of incumbring Churches with
superfluities, or not over-rigid, either in reviving obsolete Customs, or
imposing new, there would be far less cause of Schism and Superstition; and all
the inconvenience that were likely to ensue, would be but this, That in so
doing they should yield a little to the imbecility of their Inferiors; a thing
which St. Paul would never have refused to do.

SECT. XIII.
Of the alleged Reasons of the Ecclesiastical Injunctions in the beginning of
the Reformation.

THE Answerer relates at large the proceeding of this Church in the beginning
of the Reformation. The sum of the Relation is, That there being Two sorts of
men, one that thought it a great matter of Conscience to depart from the least
Ceremony, they were so addicted to their old Customs; the other so newfangled,
that they would innovate all things, and nothing would satisfy them but that
which was new; It was necessary for the Church to interpose for Peace sake, and
casting off neither Party, to please each to their edification; and also to
enjoin some things to the common observance of all, and therefore she took away
the excessive multitude of Ceremonies, as those that were dark, and abused to
Superstition and Covetousness, but retained those few that were for Decency,
Discipline, and apt to stir up the dull mind of man to the remembrance of his
duty to God. We have good warrant to call in question the truth of his
Narration in things of the greatest weight. First, It is not true that the
Party that were for Ceremonies, comprehended all those who staid at home, and
did not fly in the time of Queen Mary's Persecution. For such as dissented
from the Ceremonies in the time of that Persecution, had their Assemblies for
the Worship of God in this Land, and endured among others, in the Fiery Trial.
And we can find but little zeal in the Martyrs of those days for this kind of
Conformity. Likewise it is not true that the Party that were against
Ceremonies, were but small, as being but some few of those that fled beyond
Sea: There is clear evidence to the contrary. An Historian zealous for
Conformity, even unto bitterness, reports in his Ecclesia Restaurata, That in
the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, many that were disaffected to
Episcopacy and Ceremonies, were raised to great Preferments. Besides, those
that were in Ecclesiastical Dignities, he observes, That the Queens Professor
at Oxford, and the Margaret Professor in Cambridg, were among the
Nonconformists. For the multitude of Dissenters in those days, there is a
notable testimony of a Friend of Prelacy, in his Letter to Mr. Richard Hooker,
about the writing of his Ecclesiastical Polity, in these words: It may be
remembered, that at the first the greatest part of the Learned in the Land, were
either eagerly affected, or favorably inclined to that way; the Books then
written, savoured for the most part, of the Disciplinary style; it sounded
every where in the Pulpits, and in the common phrase of men's speech; and the
contrary Part began to fear they had taken a wrong course.

There is as little Truth and Justice in that report, That the Party that were
against Ceremonies, caused the Troubles at Frankford, and brought a Dishonor to
the Reformation, and Infamy upon our Nation. The English Congregation at
Frankford, was settled after the Discipline of the Foreign Reformed Churches,
and enjoyed much Peace, till certain eminent men, zealous of the English Forms
and Rites, came among them, and by a high hand brought in the Liturgy, and
brake them to pieces, and forced away the Ministers, and those Members that
were in the first forming and settling of that Church. Afterward, they that
remained and received the Liturgy, continued not long in unity, but in a short
time an incurable and scandalous Schism brake out between the Pastor, and
almost the whole Congregation.

Lastly, There is a great mistake in the main business of the Narrative, in
representing things as settled by the Church of England in the beginning of the
Queen's Reign, to please each Party in the abolishing of some, and the
retaining of other Ceremonies: Whereas at the reviving the Reformation at that
time, the Ceremonies then abolished were offensive to all Protestants, and
nothing appears to be done in favor of the Anticeremonial Party, about the
points in difference. But things were carried to a greater height against their
Way, than in King Edward's time, whose Reformation was thought to incline more
to that which was afterward called Puritanism. For which cause the Historian
before mentioned, has written, That that King being ill principled, his Death
was no infelicity to the Church of England. The truth of the matter is, That in
the first Times of the Queen, whose Reign was to be sounded in the Protestant
Religion, the Wisdom of the State intended chiefly the bringing over of the
whole Body of the People, and to settle them in that Profession; and therefore
thought fit to make no more alteration from their old Forms, then was necessary
to be made. Care was taken, that no part of the Liturgy might be offensive to
the Papists, and they accordingly resorted to our Divine Service for the first
Ten years. Also the retaining of the Ceremonies, was a matter of condescension
to the Popish Party, the State thereby testifying how far they would stoop to
gain them, by yielding as far as they might in their own Way. Now long
Experience has showed, That what was done with respect to the Peace of former
Times, and reconciling of Papists to Protestants, is become an occasion of
dividing Protestants from one another, without hope of converting Papists.

SECT. XIV.
The alleged Reasons, why the Ceremonies are not to be taken away, Examined.

Diverse Reasons are alleged to prove a continued necessity for these
Ceremonies, as, Because they that are for the Church, are unwilling to have
them taken away: To revoke them, is to comply with those that will never be
satisfied: Imputations have been laid upon the Things enjoined, as
Antichristian, Idolatrous, Superstitious: A War was undertook to remove them:
And it is a reproach to the Church, whose Foundation is upon the Truth, to be
various. Hereunto we make answer: Whosoever delight in the use of the
Ceremonies, may enjoy their liberty; but let it suffice them to use it, without
laying a stumbling block before others, or intangling their Consciences, or
hindering all of a contrary Persuasion from the Ministry, from teaching School,
yea, and from taking any Academical Degree. With what soberness can it be said,
the Dissenters will never be satisfied, when hitherto they were never tried
with any Relaxation or Indulgence, although they have given evident proofs of
their unfeigned desires of Accommodation? They do indeed esteem the Ceremonies
an excess in the Worship of God; but suppose that some have been immoderate in
disparaging those Rituals; on the other hand, shall their value be so inhansed,
as to be thought more worth then the Church's Unity, and the exercise of mutual
Charity among its Members? May not the Church salve her Honor, by declaring,
That in remitting these Injunctions, she merely yields to the infirmity of weak
Consciences? As St. Paul declared concerning abstaining from meats, who had as
much power to make a Canon, as any sort or number of Ecclesiastical persons can
now pretend unto. As concerning the late War, it is easier said then proved,
That it was undertaken to remove the Ceremonies; and it was not so declared by
those that managed it. But if it were so indeed, as it is here suggested, let
this Argument be well weighed, A dreadful War that had a dismal issue, was
undertaken to remove certain Ceremonies that at the best are but indifferent,
therefore let them never be removed, but still enforced to the uttermost upon
Consciences that disallow them. As for the reproach of the Church by the
appearance of being various, we conceive the controverted Ceremonies are no
Foundation of the Church of England, nor any substantial part of her Religion,
and do therefore hope, that some Indulgence therein will not fix upon her any
brand of Inconstancy. It is objected, That the Popish Priests would hereby take
advantage. It seems then, that greater care must be taken that the Papists, who
are implacable Adversaries, be not offended, then that many thousand honestly
minded Protestants should be relieved. But the strangest Reason comes up last.
Dissentions about things indifferent, have necessitated the Church to make
these Injunctions: That is, say the things are but indifferent, yet great
dissentions have risen about them, and are like to continue without end;
therefore the Church has been necessitated to impose them with great severity
upon multitudes who esteem them unlawful, and all for this end, That
dissentions may be removed. We are astonished at this Argument from the Pen of
a Learned man. The truth is, these alleged Reasons have more of Animosity in
them, then of Equity; Charity, or good Advice. Indeed the Apostle says, Mark
those that cause divisions and offenses contrary to the Doctrine that ye have
received; but he does not so brand those that scruple unwritten Traditions, and
needless Ceremonies, but adhere to the entire Doctrine of Christ, and all
Divine Institutions.

SECT. XV.
Of the diversity of Opinion and Practice already permitted in the Church of
England.

THE Moderation of the Church of England in the Articles of Predestination,
Divine Grace, and Freewill, being urged against the rigorous imposition of the
controverted Orders and Ceremonies, this Answer is made, That the case is not
the same, for that those points are so full of difficulty, that they, and
questions of that nature, have been matter of dispute in all Ages, and in all
Religions; but about the Orders and Ceremonies, this is the only thing to be
resolved, Whether the Church has power to injoin an indifferent Ceremony? But
there is no such difference in the case. The Question of things Indifferent,
has been mistaken for the Grand Case of the Nonconformists; for those points
which are the main reason and matter of their inconformity, are by them
accounted not indifferent, but unlawful, and therefore not to be admitted in
their practice, till their Consciences be better satisfied. And it is not
irrational to think, that serious doubtings may arise in sober minds about some
parts of the enjoined Uniformity, and particularly, about those Ceremonies
which seem to draw near to the significancy and moral efficacy of Sacraments,
and thereupon may appear to some not as mere circumstances, but as parts of
Divine Worship, and their Consciences may be struck with Terror by the sense of
God's Jealousy about any instituted Worship which Himself has not prescribed.
Moreover, these Orders and Ceremonies have been matters of dispute in all times
since the beginning of Protestant Reformation. But under the degenerate state
of the Christian Churches, by the great Apostasy of the later times, there
could be no occasion of disputing these things, when Will Worship was generally
exalted, and the grossest Idolatries had prevailed.

I question the truth of that Assertion, That the Dissenters cannot name one
Church besides ours, in which there was a Schism made for a Ceremony. For a
great Rent was made in the Christian Church throughout the World, about a
Ceremony, or as small a matter, to wit, the time of celebrating the Feast of
Easter. But whenever a Schism is made, let them that cause it, look to it,
and lay it to heart. Woe to the world because of offenses, and woe to that man by
whom the offense comes* But we still insist upon this Argument, That these
Rites being at the best but indifferent in the opinion of the Imposers, the
observation of them cannot in reason be esteemed of such importance to the
substance of Religion, as the different Opinions about the Articles aforesaid
are. And who knows not with what animosity and vehemence the Parties that are
called Arminian and Antiarminian, have fought against one another; and what
dreadful and destructive Consequences they pretend to draw from each others
Opinions? Now put case the more prevalent Party in the Church of England should
go about to determine those Controversies on the one side, or the other, (and
truly they were sometimes determined by a Synod in His Majesty's Dominions,
namely by that of Dublin in the year 1615, also by the greatest Prelates, and
most eminent Doctors in England, in the Lambeth-Articles; and what has been,
may again come to pass) would not that side against whom the Decision passes,
be ready to cry out of Oppression? Yea, how great a Rent would be made by it
through the whole Fabric of this Church? Furthermore, in Ceremonies publicly
used, and matters of open practice, the Church of England has thought good to
indulge Dissents, as in that of bowing toward the Altar, or the East, unless it
be required by the local Statutes of particular Societies. And in this the Sons
of the Church do bear with one another, according to the direction of the
Canons made in the year 1640. Unto which may be added, That the Mode of Worship
in Cathedrals, is much different from that in Parochial Churches. Likewise some
Ministers before their Sermon use a Prayer of their own conceiving; others
only (as the phrase is) bid Prayer. If these and other Varieties, be no
reproach to our Church, will it reproach her to suffer one to Officiate with a
Surpliss, and another without it?

SECT. XVI.
Men differently persuaded in the present Controversies, may live together in
Peace.

IT is no vain speculation, to think we may have peace, if men persuaded in
their Consciences that the controverted Ceremonies are superstitious, or at the
best but Trifles, and that the Liturgy and Ecclesiastical Polity, need some
Reformation, should be joined with men far otherwise persuaded. And the
preserving of Peace in that case, does not suppose or require that all these
differently persuaded men, will be wise on both sides to content themselves
with their own opinions: But it supposes the State, and the chief Guides of
the Church, to be wise, (as it is always requisite they should be) and that
many of Reputation and Eminency on both sides, will be prudent and temperate,
and examples of Moderation to others, (and not to suppose this is to disparage
and debase our present Age) but above all, it supposes the Public
Constitution so well stated and settled, as to be able to curb the Imprudent and
Unsober, and to encourage the Modest and Well-advised.

Surely all Dissenters upon Conscience, will not be prevailed with by the same
Conscience, to endeavor the propagation of their own way in these differences,
to the depression of others. If some offer to disturb the Peace, can no Rule of
Government restrain them? It is a deplorable case indeed, if there be no remedy
but for those that are favored by the Higher Powers, utterly to exclude and
reject those that want the like favor and countenance.

At this day the Church of England by Her present Latitude, or at least
Connivence, keeps peace among Her Sons of such different Persuasions, as
formerly stirred up great Dissentions in this Church. Who is ignorant of the
Contentions raised about the Arminian Controversies in the several Reigns of
Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles the First? But in the present
Times, the mutual forbearance on both sides, but chiefly the Church's Prudence,
has laid asleep those Controversies; whereas if one side presuming upon its
Power and Prevalency, should go about (as formerly) to decry and depress the
other, and to advance and magnify themselves, and ingross the Preferments,
doubtless the like flames would break out again. For there is a great dislike
and abhorrency settled at the Heart-root of both these Parties against each
others Opinions; and a suitable occasion would soon draw it out to an open
Contestation. Now if the Church's Peace and Unity be already maintained in such
seemingly dangerous diversity of Opinion among her Members and Officers, and
those not of the meanest rank, why should her Prudence and Polity he suspected
as insufficient to maintain Unity and Peace in the indulging of the differently
persuaded in the now disputed Rites and Opinions?

SECT. XVII.
Of DISSENTERS of Narrower Principles, and of TOLERATION.

THE Latitude discoursed in the former Treatise, is unjustly impeached, as
providing only for the Presbyterians, and relinquishing all other Dissenters;
for it comprehends within the Establishment, those of all sorts that are of
Principles congruous to stated Order in the Church; so that no sort is
excluded, whose Principles make them capable. And was this Capacity any where
restrained to the Presbyterians? Some Nonconformists are for Moderated
Episcopacy, after the form of the Ancient Churches; and diverse others, as to
particular forms of Government, are Latitudinarians; and others there are
besides these, who would live peaceably under the present Hierarchy, might they
be spared from the personal profession or practice of some things which they
think unlawful or doubtful.

Moreover, beyond the Established Order, the Latitude includes a Toleration for
those that are of sound Faith, and good Life, but have taken up some Principles
of Church Government less congruous to National Settlement. I cannot yield to
that position, That only Necessity can give color to Toleration, for that it
is by the confession of all, one of those things that are not good in their
nature. I suppose that Christians bearing with one another in tolerable
differences, is a branch of Brotherly Love; and therefore Charity, as well as
Necessity, may plead for this Way of Indulgence.

But it is objected, That we want an instance of the safety of Toleration, in
any Nation where the Supreme Governor had not a standing Army to circumscribe
and confine the Heats of Dissenters in Religion, to their own breasts, and keep
off the destructive Effects of Schism.

Let me reply, That this Maxim, That no Toleration of Dissenters, howsoever
regulated, can be safely granted by the Supreme Governor that has not a
standing Army, makes little for the Safety and Liberty of true Religion. The
Protestants that live under the Princes of the Roman Faith, are little
beholding to one that publishes to the World, That those Princes can with
safety tolerate them no longer then they keep up a standing Army to keep off
the destructive effects of that which they call Schism. One may see by this and
other instances, what bias the Judgment has, by the Zeal of a Party, and how
it is brought to assert such things as may expose the true Religion to the
danger of Suppression or Extirpation in many Countries. But has the French
King less assurance of the Loyalty of His Protestant Subjects, then of the
Roman Catholics? Would a Necessity be laid upon Him to maintain constant
Forces to keep the Protestants in obedience, when he could rule the rest of his
People without such Terror? Or is Toleration the reason of a standing Army in
the United Provinces of the Netherlands? In this Latitude no other Toleration
is pleaded for, then what can be made safe and secure by the ordinary ways of
Legal Government.

Both Duty and Interest obliges all sorts to proceed as far as it is possible
in complying with their Superiors; and if the uncontrolable Power of Conscience
enforce them to lie without the Pale of the Established Order, they should deem
that Exclusion their great Unhappiness. But so it is, that Prudent and Pious
men may be of exceeding Narrow Principles about Church Order and Fellowship.
Christian Charity pleads for Indulgence toward them; and we hope Political
Prudence does not gainsay it. For although their Way may fall far short of
settling a Nation, yet they may have Spirits and Principles very consistent with
Public Tranquillity. And their Indulgence may be obtained by a good
Understanding and Confidence between Them and the Higher Powers, the Clemency
of the One showing Favor in that extent which the Public Order may safely
tolerate; and the Humility and Discretion of the Other, causing them to prise
the Favor, and to use it rightly. That such Condescension and Clemency should
be used on the One side, and such Humility and Modesty on the Other, why should
it seem impossible? For the One may see, that by granting some Limited Liberty,
the Protection of Christ's Flock, and the Satisfaction of well-minded Subjects
may become more Universal: And the Other may likewise see, that a smaller
Party, and those of Narrow Principles, are of themselves in no wise
proportionable to the State of this Nation; and therefore that they cannot well
subsist, but in conjunction with, and subordination unto an Establishment more
commensurate to the whole Body of the People. This necessary Subordination, may
beget a mutual Confidence and Security. If it be said, The Tolerated Party may
become Dangerous or Suspected, it is always supposed that they stand by their
Good Behavior, and the Rulers Favor. But they are not like to prove
Dangerous, if the Establishment be large enough. For the Narrowness thereof
makes the Dissenters numerous, and still increases their Number.

SECT. XVIII.
It is the Interest of the NONCONFORMISTS to prefer Comprehension before
Toleration, where Conscience does not gainsay.

IF it can be made evident, That the Nonconformists should embrace a
Comprehension as the surest means of their particular Good, it will conduce
exceedingly to evince, That the Favor of Rulers will not be in vain toward
them; and that their Petitions, Discourses, and other Instances for Moderation,
were not feigned, because grounded on their true Interest that cannot lie.

Were they united among themselves, and did the Times highly favor them, even
then it were their Wisdom not to insist too far upon their own Persuasions, but
to comply with such moderate Order as is most passable in the Nation, (their
Consciences not gainsaying) much more does it now behove them, by Moderation
and Submission to dispose themselves for the Favor of their Superiors.

They should choose rather (if it be possible for them) to be Comprehended in
the Approved, then to be Tolerated in a Severed Way. For there is not so much
lost thereby in point of Liberty, but as much or more is gained in point of
Safety.

It is a happiness to be secured from dangerous wanderings, perplexities,
breaches, and manifold inconveniences, into which they may be led that are
wholly left without the Line of the Established Order. Those persons that by
their Wisdom and Learning can the better defend themselves from the aforesaid
Evils in a severed State, cannot be ignorant how precipitate and unadvisable
many of their Number may be, and not so easily to be governed by their more
prudent Guides. Men of discerning and stable judgments, would do their
uttermost to preserve the more inconsiderate people from falling into a full
and absolute Separation from all Christian Societies that are not of their
Persuasion. For they may easily apprehend into how great and dangerous Errors
that Vortex may carry about those that fall into it.

They that are best able to govern themselves, do see most need of a Public
Government, and how necessary it is, that both People and Teachers be under the
Regulation and Influence of Authority, for the avoiding of many and great
Inconveniences. And there are many and great Benefits, by being comprehended
in the Approved Order, not otherwise to be obtained. Their Peace is better
insured, their Influence is more diffusive, their Instances and Motions for the
Common Good, will be more regarded. They have a larger scope for employing
their Masters Talent in the Public Service of the Gospel, and they may speak
with more Authority, and better success among all ranks and sorts of men, who
will look upon them as theirs, when they hold their Public Stations.

Unto all this may be added, That the Ancient Nonconformists earnestly opposed
the Separation of the Brownists, and held communion with the Church of England
in its Public Worship.

And doubtless it is the Ministers Interest, not to have their Subsistence by
the Arbitrary Benevolence of the people, and so to live in continual dependence
upon their mutable dispositions for a Maintenance that is poor and low in
comparison of the Public Encouragements. Hereby one may partly judge, whether
Learned and Prudent men be Nonconformists by the pleasure of their own will, or
the constraining-force of Conscience.

Now their Consciences may be relieved, if they be not made personally to
profess or practice any thing against the dictates thereof. And retaining their
own private judgments, they may well hold to this Catholic Principle, That in
a Church acknowledged to be sound in Doctrine, and in the Substance or main
Parts of Divine Worship, and not defective in any vital part of Christian
Religion, they are bound to bear with much which they take to be amiss in
others Practice, in which they do not personally bear a part themselves*

As concerning a Form of Church Government, and Rule of Discipline, Men that
understand their own Interest, cannot for self ends (as they have been
upbraided) covet the Power of such a Discipline as inevitably procures envy and
ill will, without any temporal profit or dignity. And if the Higher Powers will
not admit such a Form, (I deliver my own private judgment, without prejudice to
other men's) this may tend to satisfy the Subjects Conscience. That
Ecclesiastical Government is necessarily more directed and ordered in the
exercise thereof, by the Determinations of the Civil Magistrate, in places
where the true Religion is maintained, then where it is persecuted or
disregarded. And they that have received the Power, must answer to God for it:
They that are discharged from it, shall never account for that whereof they
have been bereaved.

SECT. XIX.
It behooves both the Comprehended and the Tolerated, to prefer the common
Interest of Religion, and the settling of the Nation, before their own
particular Persuasions.

AS those Dissenters, whose Consciences will permit, will best comply with
their own good, by entering into the Establishment, if a door be open for their
access: So they of Narrower Principles, that cannot enter into it, will be
safest within the Limits of such Indulgence as Authority would vouchsafe to
grant them, with respect to the Common Good. Men of all Persuasions should
rather choose to be limited by Public Rules, with mutual Confidence between
their Governors and Themselves, then to be left to the liberty of their own
Affections, upon terms uncertain and unsecure.

Besides the Concernment of their own Peace, there is this great Persuasive,
That this Advice is a compliance with that state of things which will best
satisfy and settle the Nation, and maintain Reformed Religion against Popery,
and Christianity against Atheism and Infidelity.

True Englishmen, and Lovers of their dear Country, which is impaired and
reproached by these breaches, should yield as much to its Wealth and Honor, as
their Consciences can allow. Loyal Subjects and good Patriots should consider
what the Kingdom will bear, and prefer such bounded Liberty of Comprehension
and Indulgence, as tends to Union, before a loose, though larger Liberty, that
will keep the Breaches open, and the Minds of People unquiet and unsettled. And
it is not of little moment to mind this, That the high Concerns of Conscience
cannot be better secured then in the Peace and Safety of the excellent
Constitution of this Kingdom.

For the Amplitude of Reformed Religion, all true Protestants should promote an
ample Establishme^t thereof, both for the incompassing of all that be sound in
that Profession, as also for the more capacious reception of those that may
become Converts thereunto. And not only the increase and glory thereof, but
its stability in these Dominions, is promoted by such an ample Establishment.
Witness our great Defense against Popery, by the common zeal of all Protestants
of the several Persuasions, for Protestancy in general. By this concurrent
Zeal, the insolences of the Papists have been repressed, and their Confidences
defeated. Could the Protestant Conformists or Nonconformists, either of them
upon their own single account, if one should exterminate, or utterly disable
the other, be so well secured against Popery, as now they are by their common
Interest? And to imagine by rigor to compel the depressed Party to incorporate
with the Party advanced, so that one should acquire the Strength of both, would
in the issue be found a great Error. By such proceeding* indeed, a Party may be
wounded and broken, and rendered unserviceable to the common good, but shall
never be gained as an addition of Strength to those who have so handled them.
But an Accommodation would make both to be as one. And seeing in their present
divided state, the concurrent Zeal of Both has been so formidable, as to dash
the hopes of the Popish Party, how much more in a state of Union, might their
Strength increase against their common Adversaries! Wherefore, the One should
open the Way, and the Other should readily come in upon just Terms. This should
be the rather minded on both sides, because the Considerate Nonconformists will
never promote their own Liberty by such ways and means as would bring in a
Toleration of Popery; yea, they would rather help to bear up the present
Ecclesiastical state, then that Popery should break in by Anarchy, or the
Dissolution of all Church Government.

Moreover, an ample, fixed state Ecclesiastical, is necessary to uphold and
increase true Religion, as well against Infidelity, as against Popery. The
loose part of the World would turn to a weariness and contempt of Divine
Institutions, and Christianity it self would be much endangered in a state of
Ataxy and unfixedness. By what ordinary means has the Doctrine and Institution
of Christ been propagated and perpetuated in large Kingdoms and Nations, and in
the Universe, but by incompassing under its external Rule and Order, great
Multitudes that may fall short of the Life and Power thereof. And it does not
root and spread in any sort considerable, in a Region, where the external Order
is set by the Rigid and Narrow Principles of a small Party, and the general
Multitude lies open as wast ground, for any to invade or occupy. Let
considerate men judge how much the ample state of a mere Orthodox Profession, is
to be preferred before Infidelity, or Popery, or any other Sect of the
Christian Name, that is Idolatrous or Heretical. There be few Converts to the
Power of Godliness, from Infidelity or Popery, or any Heresy, but they are
generally made out of the Mass of People of an Orthodox Profession.

If it be the will of God that one must suffer for the Cause of Religion, it is
more for the Honor of Christianity to suffer from Infidels, then from Papists;
likewise it is more for the Honor of Reformed Religion, to suffer from
Papists, then from Protestants. And if it were at ones own choice, One should
much rather (caeteris paribus) suffer in defense of the main Truths of
Christianity, then for refusing a Ceremony, or for any other part of
Inconformity. For this cause a Union is so desirable, that these Bitternesses,
Reproaches and Scandals, might cease from among us.

Lastly, Whatsoever Enlargement we have granted by the Favor of our Lawful
Superiors, we have it in the best way, and a Blessing is in it.

SECT. XX.
EPISCOPACY will gain more by Moderation, then by Severity in these Differences.

THE Answerer enumerates many Reasons why a Form of Church Government should
meet with many Difficulties in its return after a proscription of Twenty years;
and concludes it must be a Generation or two, not seven years, that can wear
out all those Difficulties. On the other side he says, Presbytery languished
almost as soon as it had a being, etc. I perceive Presbytery is a great
Eyesore. Peradventure I may be reckoned a Presbyterian; and to say the truth,
I am not ashamed of their company that are commonly called by that Name; yet I
have no pleasure in such Names of distinction. I am of a Persuasion, but not of
a Party; and whatsoever my Persuasion be, it is Moderate, Catholic and
Pacifick. Neither my Design nor my Principles engage me to maintain the
Presbyterial Government. Nevertheless I cannot but take notice with how little
reason the intrinsic Strength of Prelacy, or Weakness of Presbytery, is argued
from the duration of the one and the other in this Kingdom. Had Presbytery the
Strength of the Civil Power? Or was it ever formed in England? Was it not
crushed while it was an Embryo, by the prevailing Potency of its Adversaries?
Look into those States where it has been Established, if you would judge aright
concerning it. On the other hand, has not Prelacy had all the Strength of Law
and Power engaged in its defense, by the Encouragements of Worldly Grandeur for
its Favorers, and by Severities inflicted on its Impugners for above Fourscore
years? In which space of time, none could appear against it without the hazard
of utter undoing, or great Suffering. And though it were thus born up, not for
Seven years, but almost a Century, yet we do not find that it had worn out the
Difficulties of those Times, which were not so Many and Great as this Author
reports its present Difficulties to be, in its return after a proscription of
Twenty years. But there is a more excellent and surer Way, which, it is hoped,
may attain to a happier End in less time then a Generation or two. If the
Distemper of Minds were healed, and Unchristian Enmities laid aside, then
Moderation being sincerely begun, would hold on, and make the Disagreeing
Parties to be still more yielding, and mutually obliging; those Provocations
and Prejudices would then cease, by which they have been mutually alienated,
and hurried into such Hostilities, and they would not be tempted in their own
Defense (as they think) to strengthen themselves by Evil Advantages.

If Episcopacy yield to a Moderate Course, why should any prudent Dissenters go
about to molest it? For in so doing they would but perpetuate their own trouble
and unquiet state, seeing that diversities of Opinions, and occasions of
Discord are like to continue about Forms of Church Government, until Forms
shall be no more. On the other side, Why should the Episcopal Clergy dread that
Moderation that would render Episcopacy more generally inoffensive and
acceptable, and put some end to the hitherto uncessant struglings against it?
Are they jealous that the Structure of their Government may be weakened, and at
length dissolved? They might rather apprehend it might gain Assistance and
Reputation from many that now either by constraint and necessity, or by
provocation and prejudice are made its Adversaries. Who so searches to the
root of the matter, shall find, That not so much the Species of Government, nor
the Forms that are used as weightier matters, have been the chief
stumbling block, and the occasions of the greatest disgust and aversation.
Neither the Episcopal Office nor Habit, does affright this sort of People from
hearing a Bishop preach to their Edification.

The right and sure way to establish Episcopacy in a Land where Reformed
Christianity is established, is not to urge precise Conformity in Opinions and
Orders, and doubtful things of mere human determination; but to encourage
soundness in the Faith, Ability and Industry in the proper Work of the
Ministry, and a Conversation becoming the Gospel; and to discourage
Pluralities, Nonresidencies, Licentiousness and Idleness in all sorts, who
serve not Christ, but themselves, in their Sacred Functions, and whose End is
only to live in Pomp, Wealth and Pleasure. Will the Church-Governors say (as
it has been answered) they are bound up by the Laws; and if Patrons present
unworthy persons which have the Qualifications the Law requires, the Bishops
must not reject them; nor can they turn them out at their pleasure, but must
give an account to the Laws. To this I reply, If the Admission and Permission
of unworthy Ministers, comes to pass not by the Bishops Administration, but by
the defectiveness of the Laws, why has not their Zeal excited them in the
space of so many years, and several Princes Reigns, to endeavor the obtaining
of Laws effectual on that behalf, as it has to procure and make, from time to
time, stricter and stricter Injunctions about Conformity and Ceremonies? For we
know no reason why as full and vigorous Laws may not be made against Ignorant,
Negligent and Scandalous Ministers, as against Nonconformists. Conscience,
Honor and Safety, obliges the Episcopal Clergy to turn the edg of their
Discipline the right way, and to show its energy and vigor, not about
Ceremonies, but the great and weighty matters of Christian Religion. And I
believe that many worthy Ministers of the Church of England, are so persuaded.
Wherefore, in the former Discourse I cast no evil reflection upon the
Latitudinarians, or any moderate persons; nor represented them as conforming
not sincerely, and as becomes the Ministers of Christ. They may sincerely,
according to their Principles, submit to these Impositions, and yet not like
the Imposing. The expression of their lukewarmness in Conformity, signified no
more but this, That they set a rate upon these Matters according to the value,
and that they bear but an indifferent respect to things that at the best are
but indifferent.

It is objected against me, That having provided a place of rest for my self
and my Party, in the stated Order, I am little sollicitous for others. I do
here solemnly profess, That I am chiefly sollicitous for the Tranquillity and
Rest of a troubled Nation. As for my own Concernment, my Deprivation is an
Affliction to me; and I would do any thing that were not sin to me, to recover
the liberty of my public Service in the Church: But if it cannot be, I submit
to His good pleasure, by whose determinate Counsel all things are brought to
pass, and am contented to remain a Silenced Sufferer for Conscience toward
God. Yea, I should much rejoice in such Enlargement of the Public Rule, as
might give a safe entrance to others, though I my self by some invincible
strictness of Apprehension, should remain excluded; for I have no Faction to
uphold, and by others Gain I am nothing lessened. And in my opinion, it will be
no dividing of the Nonconsormists, or weakening of their Interest, if a part of
them might close with the Approved Order of the Nation, enlarged to the
latitude of their judgments, when others of streighter judgments are left
without. Indeed, if they were a Faction, they might lose or lessen themselves
hereby: But Reformed Christianity is their Grand Interest, and their main Cause
lies not in any avowed difference of Doctrines between them and the Episcopal
Protestants, nor in any Secular Advantages to hold to themselves in a divided
state, but in the Advancement of Gods Kingdom by the increase of true Christian
Faith and Piety.

The Answerer has used many hard speeches against me, and charged me with
Malice in diverse passages, which I answer not in particular, because the
innocence and inoffensiveness of my words will clear it self; and because I
would not make this Discourse tedious, by replying to things impertinent to the
main scope. It shall suffice me to add, That I have written these things, as
knowing that the Judge stands before the Door.

FINIS.
THE Contents.
Sect 1. OF the Foundation of our Peace already laid in the Religion of the
Nation, and the Structure thereof, to be perfected by the Unity of that
Profession. 2. The Good of the several Parties is best secured by Common
Equity, and the Good of the Universality. 3. What may be esteemed a good
Constitution of the State Ecclesiastical. 4. The Comprehensiveness of the
Establishment, and the allowance of a just Latitude of Dissents, is the best
Remedy against Dissentions. 5. Whether the present Dissentions are but so many
Factions in the State. 6. Whether the Nonconformists Principles tend to Sects
and Schisms. 7. Of their Principles touching Obedience and Government. 8. Of
placing them in the same rank for Crime and Guilt, with the Papists. 9. Whether
their Inconformity be Conscientious or Wilful. 10. Of their peaceable
Inclinations, and readiness to be satisfied. 11. The propounded Latitude leaves
out nothing necessary to secure the Churches Peace. 12. Of acquiescence in the
Commands of Superiors, and the proper matter of their Injunctions. 13. Of the
alleged Reasons of the Ecclesiastical Injunctions in the beginning of the
Reformation. 14. The alleged Reasons why the Ceremonies are not to be taken
away, Examined. 15* Of the diversity of Opinion and Practice already permitted
in the Church of England. 16. Men differently persuaded in the present
Controversies, may live together in peace. 17. Of Dissenters of narrower
Principles and of Toleration. 18. It is the Interest of the Nonconformists to
prefer Comprehension before Toleration, where Conscience does not gainsay. 19.
It behooves both the Comprehended and the Tolerated to prefer the common
Interest of Religion, and the settling of the Nation, before their own
particular Persuasions. 20. Episcopacy will gain more by Moderation, then by
Severity in these Differences.

