A PARTICULAR ACCOUNT Of the Present Siege of MASTRICHT With the sundry
remarkable Circumstances thereto relating.
Being the substance of a Letter written out of Holland by a Friend to a Person
of Quality in London.
Honored Sr,
I have received yours dated at London the 24. of August old style; in which
you desire an account of the present Action at Mastricht, and also of what has
past since the time of his Highness the Prince of Orange his laying siege to
that Place.

Your Commands therein I am very ready to comply with, though not so well able
to undertake such a Task as are Others here of your acquaintance, who have
better information than I have: besides I know I shall run the hazard of being
censured by Some, who are not only ungrateful, but maliciously unjust in
their reports of the Actions of our Nation, endeavoring to rob them of that
honor they fo dearly bought; yet such as those are I value not, being assured
that his Highness the Prince of Orange, and Others who have been Eyewitnesses
of their brave Actions, will rather confirm and countenance the truths I shall
speak of them, then depress them: I will therefore give your Honr. such a brief
account as has been writ me by several Persons of Worth, Some of them
sealing the truth thereof with their bloods, many of them being since dead of
their wounds.

I will not give your Honr. the trouble of describing the City of Mastricht,
and the fortifications thereof, because that alone might fill up this sheet,
and many more: I shall only name the 7. detached Bastions which are the
Outworks of the Town; the first is Le Roy, then La Reine, le Dolphin,
Monmouth, Conde, Turin, and Crequi: they of this Garrison of Mastricht were
reported to be at the beginning of the Siege 4500 Foot, 2000 Horse, 500
Dragooners, beside Granadiers, and Others belonging to the Train of Artillery:
the Governor of Mastricht is Marshal Le Estrade, at this time employed at the
Congress in Nimwegen as one of the Plenipotentiaries from the French King; In
his place is now Governor Don Calvo a Catalonian born, a Man of great Valor
and as grand Experiences, as does appear by his brave defense of the Place.

On the latter end of June, his Highness the Prince of Orange, with several
detached Regiments out of the Army in Flanders, with other Regiments out of
the Boss, Bergen op zoom, and other Garrisons marched for Mastricht, where they
met with a Camp volant under the Conduct of the Prince of Ossenbrugh, amongst
which were some Troops from the Duke of Brandenburgh and other Allies, all
which forces, being modestly counted, were 24000 or 26000 Men.

Upon the First of July his Highness the Prince of Orange having held a grand
Council of War, set down before Mastricht: where He gave out orders for making
the Lines of Circumvallation and Communication about the Town, at the same time
posting every Regiment, and Battaillon where they should encamp; the next thing
done, was his Highnesses proclaiming the States Order or Placate for a free
Leaguer, that is, that neither Buyer nor Seller was to pay any tax or excise;
this caused Provisions to be very cheap, and great plenty of all things
needful for the Leaguer. The next day following came to the Leaguer many
thousand Bores from all parts to work in the Trenches.

This Day the three English Colonels, Colonel Fenwick, Col. Widdrington, and
Colonel Astley made a Request unto his Highness, the Prince of Orange, therein
desiring that the English might be encamped together, and that they might be
commanded on service alone; that, in case they did well, they might have the
honor due to them, and on the contrary, if ill, that then they might bear
their shame; but they were not willing to bear the faults of others; this
Request of theirs was granted by his Highness, with all imaginable Kindness,
and as an honor and Esteem his Highness had for the Nation, they were posted
next his Highnesses own Guards on the Boss-port-side, giving the chief Command
of the English unto the Valiant Col. Fenwick as being eldest Colonel: The 3.
English Regiments were reckoned to be 2500 Men on their March to Mastricht,
beside 150 or thereabouts which came to the Regiments from the Boss and other
Places, so that the 3. Regiments were effective Men 2600, beside some
Volunteers and Reformed Officers. Now were all hands at work in making the
Lines of Circumvallation and Communication: The Garrison at the same time was
not idle, who fell out in Parties, defending their people who were grazing
their Cattle under the works of the Town: Here began the sport between the
Garrison and the Leaguer; for both sides sent out their Skirmishers a
pickeering; the next day his Highness planted some Fieldpieces, which played
upon those that were grazing their Cattle under the works; at the same time the
Enemies in the Town played their Cannon on the Skirmishers from the Princes
Leaguer, so that it resembled a small Battle, for that there were Foot and
Horse from both Parties sighting, and the Cannon playing on each other at the
same time: In this days Action Major Archer Major to Col. Fenwick a Man of
great knowledge in fortification and of a clear Courage pickeering against the
Enemy, boldly adventuring to view the Works of the Town, and to discover the
Enemies posture, was shot through and through the body with a brace of bullets,
yet brought off with him a Frenchman prisoner, some say, 2. Frenchmen: The
next day the French begun to be quiet, having lost in this days Action several
Men, and being much galled by the Fieldpieces; so that they came out no more
with their Cattle to graze, but kept close in their Works, and for 2. days were
very still, shooting their Cannon very seldom on the Princes Leaguer.

And here I am to let you know of a great misfortune which hindered the Prince
of Orange in his designs against the Town, occasioned by the want of Water in
the River Mase, for all the great Cannon that were to be battering Cannon
against the Town, and the greatest part of the Train of Artillery were all
stopped upon the River for many days for want of Water to carry up the ships or
boats; this gave the French occasion to make a Ball in the Town for the Ladies,
and to say that the States Cannon were in the Lumber. On the 17th. day of this
Month the Guns and Train of Artillery arrived at the Leaguer, and the same
day his Highness ordered 4. Batteries to be made, one of 14 Guns, and one of 8,
one of 6, and one of 4. the next day being the 18th. his Highness commanded the
opening of the Trenches, that is, to break ground for the making of an approach
to the Enemies Works; and the Honor of this was given to the Rhine-Grave, who
took with him Capt. Lee, Capt. Macullicot and other English Volunteers, and
with the Princes Guards, began to break ground: the English Regiments
succouring the Guards, who made so bold, and so prosperous advance, that they
lodged themselves that night so near the Dolphin-Bastion, that the small shot
from the Enemies works killed many of the English, and the great shot fell in
the English Quarter so fast, that that night Cap: Sabin, sleeping in Major
Downings Tent, had his head beaten off with a Cannonbullet; and a Sutlers Wife,
drawing beer, had both her legs shot off; and because one of the Cannon bullets
came into Col. Fenwicks Kitchen where his French Cook was dressing supper, the
Monsieur presently left his Coockery, and hastened to the Hague, declaring that
his bargain was with Col. Fenwick, not to come near the Cannon-shot.

At this time his Highness the Prince of Orange behaved himself to a Miracle,
adventuring himself in places of the greatest dangers, and, as a mark of
Honor, that night received a shot, which pierced his clothes on the Arm, but
entered not his skin; and at this time the Valiant Rhine-Grave received also a
wound.

On the 29th. it was resolved, that the English should have the honor to
attacque the Dolphin-Bastion, and thereupon his Highness came to the English,
and encouraged them, giving to each Company an Ox and 2 Sheep.

And here I should say something as to the Gallantry and Courage of our Nation:
but, because I am an Englishman, I shall forbear; and only relate the matter
of fact, as it was performed upon their going on to do service: All things
being prepared, and the English drawn out, The first that adventured on the
Bastion were 2. Sergeants named Powel and Pinder, 2. bold Britains; These two
with their Halbards at the head of the snap-hanses fought hand to hand with the
French upon the mounting of the Bastion; at last the English pusht so hard,
that the French ran, and the English were possessed of the Bastion.

And here I am to describe unto you the Nature and form of the Bastion: This
Dolphin Bastion is pointed from the Town, and the broad side of the Bastion
next the Town had only a thin wall, on purpose so made, that the Town might on
all occasions beat down that wall, and lay the Bastion open to the Town, that
thereby their Cannon might shoot into the Bastion; and thus it fell out, for as
soon as Our Nation was in the Bastion, they showred shot on that Wall, and
presently made a breach, that the English stood open to their guns: whereas the
Ingeneers that were with the English should have taken care to have raised
Works on that side, that the English might have been hid from the shot: All
these misfortunes or miscarriages in those that had the Command of the
Ingeneers, did not daunt the English, for they stood their Ground, and kept
possession for an hour and a quarter; all this while no relief came, so that
the English were grown very weary and fatigated: In the mean time an English
Colonel prayed that the English might be relieved by English out of the
Trenches; to which was replied, that the English had done bravely, and that the
Guards should reliev them; and accordingly the Princes Granadeers of the Guards
began to enter the Bastion, and were all in the Bastion, and the English
commanded out: The French, seeing the Red-Coats marching out, sallied out with
foot and horse, and attacqued the Bastion, and made a great slaughter amongst
the Dutch, and also amongst the English who were in great disorder marching
out, not well understanding the reason of the Duchess coming to reliev them,
and not English, as was expected: and to contribute to this misfortune, at this
very time there happened fire to be in the powder of one of the Prince of Oranges
batteries not far from this Bastion, which gave a terrible blow, in which were
burnt and blown up 70 or 80 people, which accident struk a Panick sear in Some,
that that was a Mine that sprung by the French, and that the next would be a
Mine where they were: this made them retreat in disorder, leaving the Bastion
in possession of the French.

The next day the Princes Guards with other Regiments were commanded to attack
this Bastion, who received such a repulse that they lost their labor, and 3.
Captains of the Guards and several other Officers.

At this time the nights were dark, and therefore the Governor of Mastricht
caused Lamps of pitch and tar to be hung round the Walls and Pallisadoes of the
Town, that thereby they might discover the Enemy if they drew near the works,
shooting all the whole night their great Guns, and showring small shot out of
the Counterscharp, so that many of the Princes Leaguer were every night shot by
chain-Shott; and these were answered by the Princes Batteries which were many,
who continued shooting day and night, only giving time for the cooling their
guns. The next day, being the 4.th of August, the English were ordered to
attack the Bastion retaken by the French, as you have heard: A Copy of which
Disposition for the Attacque thereof, I here recite, word for word, as near as
I can translate it, from the Princes Orders.

The disposition for the Attack to be made the 4. th of August being Tuesday in
the Afternoon at 5. a clock precisely, upon the Bastion called the Dolphin.
The 3. English Colonells.
Col. Fenwick Col. Astley Col. Dolman.

(The Noble Col. Widdrington having been killed the night before in advancing
the Approaches to the Dolphin-Bastion; in whose Command the Prince had put Col.
Dolman Son of the late Well-known Col. Dolman.)

These must furnish for the foresaid Attack, as follows

First, 2. Sergeants with 10. Snaphanses, to be followed at the same time by
12. Granadeers commanded by one Sergeant.

Then 12. Granadeers with one Sergeant,

Then 12. Granadeers with one Sergeant:

These 24. Granadeers to be commanded by a Fit Officer chosen out of the 3.
Regiments.

These are to be followed by one Lieutenant and 2. Sergeants with 30.
Snaphanses.

These are to be followed by One Captain, with one Lieutenant, one Ensign, 2.
Sergeants and 50. Snaphanses.

These to be followed by one Sergeant and 12. men with half pikes.

These shall be followed with one Capt., a Lieut. an Ensign and Sergeant with
28. men with spades and shovels: and these 28. Men are to be drawn out of those
Men chosen out of the three Regiments for the work in the Aproaches.

Then 56. Men to be chosen out of the 3. Regiments commanded by a careful
Officer, and 2. Sergeants, whose employment shall be to bring to those detached
all such things, as they shall stand in need of: In case these take success,
they are to make Lodgements in the middle of the face within the Bastion, or
otherwise, between the sap and the Bastion, having communication with one
another: There must also be care taken to discover the Mines, and the doors of
communication; those once found they must immediately be barrikado'd, and there
place some horse out of the Friese Regiment, that shall attend this service.
All this is to be don precisely at 3 a clock in the afternoon, and they to
stand ready in their Quarters before the front of the 3 English Regiments, and
then to receive further Order.

This Attacque of the English is to be done at the right hand of the Approaches
where Col. l' Avergne is now with 3. Regiments.

2. In case the English be beaten out, then another disposition is to be don by
the Guards of the Prince in the same manner.

3. And if that fail, then a third by Col. l' Avergne with his 3. Regiments.

4. And if that fail, then a fourth by Col. Cassiopyns with the Regiment of the
Rinegrave, Cassiopyns and Tamminge.

The English are to have a Major or some fit Officer to command in chief this
Attacque, and so for the other Attack, if the English be beaten off: The
English are to stand ready with this Detachment until the Chief Officer that is
to command them show them where they must march out of the Trenches.

These Detachments being made, Capt. Barnwell, Eldest Capt. to Col. Fenwicks
Regiment, who commanded then as Major in the place of Major Archer (who before
was shot through and through with a brace of bullets) had the Honor to command
in chief this Disposition.

And here I cannot omit saying something of this brave Capt. Barnwell, who
without doubt behaved himself to a miracle, who marched out on the head of his
men with a white Feather in his hat, encouraging his men, and telling them,
that they were to remember they were English men, and that their Enemies were
French, who never yet could make Englishmen run; and then with a shout, Fall on
brave Boys, he mounted the Bastion, where they fought hand to hand, at the head
of the Trenches, with in a little half quarter of an hour, the French gave way,
Capt. Barnwell ran up to the Officer that commanded the Switsers, crying out to
his men, they run, they run, and then bravely killed the Swits-Officer; at the
same time Capt. Barnwell received several shotts, besides other wounds of
which he died, sealing this Victory and possession of the Bastion with his
Life: thus Being possessed of the Bastion, the next English Officer that was
commanded on the Bastion was Capt. Phil. Savage, a man of known courage, who
marched in with his men without much trouble, and being there some time, he got
the Ingeniers Servant to help him to find the Mine or Mines of this Bastion;
the which Capt. Savage found, and there with a Lanthorn and an Ingenier, he
went round the whole Bastion, but could not find any door of Communication from
the Town, therefore they thought themselves safe: in the mean time the English,
having set their Centries, began to remove the dead bodies, which lay so thick
in the Bastion, that they could not walk, or stir up and down therein: whilst
the English were busy about this work, The French took their opportunity of
seeing one of the Centries either asleep or off from his post; and thereupon
They first sprang a Mine, and then entered the Bastion, armed with back, breast,
and head-pieces, and Sithes in their hands, crying tue tue: then Capt. Stone,
Capt. Widdrington, Capt. Cra^ne, Capt. Middelton and Capt. Hales, Captains in
the Scotch Regiment under Col. Collier, with 2. other Captains of Col.
Kilpatricks' Regiment of Scots, coming in to the assistance of the English in
the Bastion, were all blown up, and wounded, the French then springing a great
Mine in the middle of the Bastion, which was terrible to see and hear; for the
whole Bastion, seemeed to be one flame; A very dreadful sight and noise! when
the bodies and pieces of men fell down in to the Bastion, some without heads
some without legs and arms, others their flesh burnt on their legs and other
parts: At this time was killed Capt. Crane, and Capt. Stone shot in the breast,
and out at the shoulder, and his leg broke with a plank of wood; Capt. Savage,
Capt. Widderington, Capt. Hales and others sticking in the ground in several
postures, Some buried in Earth up to the middle, Others to the shoulders, all
wounded and burnt, yet alive.

At this time the French got the possession of the Bastion, for a small time,
cutting and killing the English they found alive; whereupon Capt. Savage
speaking French, called out to an Officer, and passed a Complement on the
Monsieur, that they were the brave French, and therefore would not kill them
after they had demanded Quarter, telling the French Officer that He and the
Others there were Capt. and therefore prayed a Safeguard from being killed by
the French Souldjers; to which the Officier replied that the would take care of
them presently; so sent a Sergeant with a Centrie or two to preserve them from
being killed outright, but first they pulled of their Corslets, and took off their
rings, and what they could come at that was not in the earth buried: but this
safety lasted but a small time; for so soon as the French saw fresh forces
coming out of the Approaches to relieve the Bastion, they (the French) fell a
cutting the Prisoners again, and crying out tue, tue tout; but the relief came
on so fast out of the Approaches, that the French quitted the Bastion: Now, the
Bastion being again possessed, the Ingeniers and Pioniers having placed their
baskets, and thrown up some earth to hide them from the Guns of the Town, which
before laid so open, that on the walls of the Counterscherp they might look
into the Bastion, and fire into it as they pleased; Now, I say, was it time to
dig out the Captains and Others which were alive; though some of them died
immediately, when they were stirred: But Capt. Savage who had eleven wounds,
Capt. Stone, Capt. Widdrington, Capt. Hales, and Capt. Middleton, though very
much burnt and wounded, are alive, and in a fair way of being fit for service
within a little time: But Capt. Crane, and 3 Scotch Officers, with 5 Dutch
Officers are dead of their wounds.

And here give me leave to say something of the gallantry and bravery of a
Frenchman; who, though an Enemy, yet ought to have the honor he merits as his
due; which was this, namely, according to the very words written me by a Sober
and Valiant English Officer, who was in this Action, That He shall never forget
how he saw a Captain of the French jump through the flames to get into the
Bastion; which Officer He found afterward dead just without the breach, as he
conceived, stifled with the flame; for it was there where the fire was so
violently flaming out of the Mine.

Thus the Bastion was recovered, though with great difficulty, loss of many
men, much occasioned by the neglect of Some who promised that the Sally port of
the Bastion should be broken down, that the English might retreat into the
Approches upon all occasions, and also relieve the Bastion without exposing
themselves under the Enemies Guns, by going round about, or else climbing over
the works: which caused great complaint.

The next day, the English being at their quarters, the 3 English Colonels
ordered great care to be taken for the sick and wounded; and then took a vieuw
of what number of men they had able to be commanded on duty, the which appeared
to be but 300. in each Regiment: yet the English relieved the Approaches
constantly every time it came to their turns, not being absent from Action when
occasion required: besides that Several of the English Volunteers went
constantly on service with the Rhijn-Grave, as did Capt. Lee and Capt.
Mackullicott, the one of them being killed and the other desperately wounded in
company and service with the Rhijne-Grave: the former whereof viz. Capt. Lee
behaved himself to that degree, that had he lived he would have had great
preferment in the service of the States. Now because I have named the brave
Actions of Some of the Officers of Our Nation, you may expect I should speak
something of Every one of them killd and wounded; but truly that is a thing
impossible to do in this Letter; That being subject enough for a far larger
Discourse and to fill a Volumn: Besides that my Letters from them in the
Leaguer give me ordinarily but an account of such a Captain or such an Officer
killed or wounded; a List whereof I shall set down at the end of this Letter,
which will appear to be a prodigious number out of such a handful of English
and 2. Scottish Regiments.

And now, since All Gazets and Courants are full of the brave Actions of his
Highness the Prince of Orange, the Rhyn-Grave, Lord of Owerkerk, Grave Solms,
and Others, Give me leave to say somewhat of them; which yet will fall very
short of what they merit from the best of pens: As to his Highness, He has so
behaved himself, like a Prince of his quality and command, that he has out-don
a wonder, ventured and labored so in the Batteries and Approaches, and has
been so many nights on horsback till the next day following at 9. a clock, that
many wondered how his Highness could enendure such a fatigue. And The
Rhyn-Grave does not deserv less praise, who has received to this day 5 wounds,
and each at several times, and Grave Solms and the Here Owerkerk have don very
well, the latter of which did a brave and unparaleld action at the head of a
party of the Life Guard, that he commanded out against the French Horse, that
over powered a party of the Princes Leaguer, which the French sallyed out upon:
And I ought not to forget Valiant Col. Colliers who as Adjutant-General and
also Colonel of a Scotch Regiment has don very bravely in every place where he
commanded.

And now I have been speaking of the Dutch, I must also say something of the
Forces Quartered on the other side of the Mase on the Wyck side, under the
Command of the wise and valiant Prince of Ossenbrugh, who finding that the
French made little sallies out on that side of the Town, devised how he might
engage the French to sallie out; his Highness therefore ordered the making of a
false work before the Wyck, as if it were designed to lodge some foot there,
and at the same time orderd a party of Horse and foot to lie in Ambuscado; the
French perceiving that the Dutch were making this work, resolved to sally out
with a party, and to fall on the Dutch, that were making this work, the which
they did that night following, beating the Dutch out of the Work; the Dutch
seemed to run away from the French, but so soon as the French were in the Work,
the party that lay in the Ambush appeared and got between the work and the
Town, fell upon the French, and of 300 Foot and 50 Horse there did not get 30
into Mastricht.

This night the Grave of Horn made a brave and bold attempt on the Enemies
Counterscarp; so did the Rhine-Grave the same, and that night possessed
themselves in 3 places upon the Counterscarp: here the Rhine-Grave received his
deadly wound which disabled him to mount the Approaches anymore.

The next thing undertaken was the attacking of the Horn-work, that laid at the
end of the Rhine-Graves Approach, but by a misfortune that happened in
springing of one of our Mines, that Attach failed; beside, that night the
French bent all their force of the Town on that side where that Horn-work lay;
yet the Dutch bravely adventured, and went to the Pallisadoes that night,
killing above 400 Switsers, beside French: upon which as Some the next day
reported in the Princes Leaguer, the Governor Don Calvo removed most of his
baggage, and much of his stores into the Wyck, which lies on the other side the
Mase, resolving to fly thither if he could not keep Mastricht; and hat the had
caused false works to be made in several places of the Town, where he thought
the Dutch might attempt to storm, and also had made a false wall where the
Dutch had batterd the wall, in which said works he had made several devices of
Fireworks with Grenades, Stinkpots, and other devices to set on fire, if the
Dutch attempted a storm; and that he had 2 days before published a Placate that
if any one of the Burgers or any else whosoever should speak of rendering the
town, they should immediately be broke on the Wheel, and that the Women should
be put into a Church together in the middle of the Town; and that he had made
several half Moons, and other Works in the Town; and that he gave a pistol head
to every one that played the Grenades when they sallyed out, and to every one
that went out upon parties 30 styvers in silver.

At this time was taken a Spy who came out of the Town, pretending to desert
it, which Spy had in his pocket 2. Musket-bullets in which were 2 Letters in
Characters, one to the Governor of Limburgh, and theother to the Governor of
Charle-Roy, the substance of which Letters was, that, if relief did not come in
few days, he could not hold the Place, for he had lost many men and those left
were so satigated that he could scarce get the Men, on Duty.

The next day there came some French Officers with Orange scarfs about their
middle, who by that means passed the Leaguer, and being near the Town threw
away their scarfs, and flourished their white hankerchiefs; which were the men
that brought them the good news of relief.

The Rhine-Grave being thus disabled by his last Wound to do any longer duty,
the charge and command of the Rhine-Graves post and Approaches was given to
Lovignie: this misfortune of the Rijn-Grave gave the Prince of Orange great
trouble, for his Highness imposed much trust on the Rijn-Grave: therefore his
Highness now was on strict watch, night and day adventuring his person in the
Trenches, in all capacities, and did sometimes that which a private Soldjer did:
and it is a great Providence he escaped, for many have been killd and wounded
by his side; and as I have said before, He has been on hors-back, from 5 in
the afternoon until 9 the next day, several times contenting himself with a
piece of bread and cheese in his hand on horsback: I shall say no more of him,
least you think I flatter him. I shall now tell you, that at this time came
news that Monsr. Schombergh, Monsr. deHumieres and Crequi were on a march for
the relieving of Mastricht; this caused His Highness the Prince of Orange, to
make a small journey to Grave Waldeck, who lay then about 10. hours from
Mastricht, thereby to advise what was fit to be don at this juncture of time,
it was then resolved to detach out of the Princes Leaguer all the horse that
could be spared, to reenforce the Army under the command of Grave Waldeck: At
this time the Spanjard, who is allways grave in all he take s in hand, marched
his pace up toward Mastricht, not at all doubting but that he should so
advantagiously post himself, that the French should not at all be able to force
a passage into Mastricht.

And here I am to tell you that his Highness the Prince of Orange met with a
grand disappointment from the Bishop of Munster and Some other Allies, who
promised (and upon good grounds they had so to do) that they would furnish in
the Leaguer at Mastricht a very considerable body of foot, beside horse; which
had they been there, according to promise, for ought I know, Mastricht had been
now in the hands often he States. Now was the Prince busy in putting himself in a
posture to receive the French; the Town at the same time, making several
sallies, though did little hurt. On the 26th. of this month being St. Lewis
day, the French in the Town fired the whole day, much more then ever before,
both for joy of the relief they were assured off, as also for the honor of
their Patron St. Lewis.

Now it is time to tell you what is become of our English Regiments, who at this
day had not left, as duty-men, above 300; all the rest killed and wounded; yet
this handful never mist duty, when it came to their turn. Now grow's the Alarm
hot of the French approach; and his Highness therefore resolvs to put himself
in posture, of defense; and thereupon dispatched Orders to march out the horse
to Join with Count Waldeck, and on the 27th day he gave out orders for drawing
often the Cannons from off the Batteries and works, with all such of the
Artillery belonging to the Siege; the which was most expeditiously don, and the
same put into boats and secured: The next day being the 28th. his Highness by
advice of Council thought good to raise the Siege, and to make all the force he
could in order to give battle to the French, if they did not decline it; as the
French have don all this year in Flanders: by this time the Alarm grew hot in
the Princes Leaguer, that the French were come, that the French were come: this
caused some little confusion amongst some Troops then on the advance guard of
the Town, who in despite of their Officers, would not stay for the necessary
Orders, but ran out of the Works. At this time the Ossenbrughs and Lunenburghs
forces, which laid on the other side of the Mase, not judging themselves strong
enough to oppose or stand the shock of the French, marched all over the Mase,
and joined themselves to the Princes Leaguer: At this very time the English had
the honor of being on the Rear-Guard in the Approaches, who staid the very
last of all the Leaguer, notwithstanding they were discouraged by Some not 3.
pikes length from them, that showed a base Example; and they at the last
marched out fighting their way through, and loosing men; for the French
perceiving that Some made more then ordinary haste out of their Trenches, drew
their great guns upon their Works, and fired like mad on our Men, and sallyed
out both horse and foot, possessing themselves of the Princes works, burning and
killing all they could meet with: and had not Col. Fenwick, and Lt. Col.
Salsbury hastened out of the house they lay in to be cured, as they did, the
French had, within one quarter of an hour, taken them all prisoners. By this
you see that as the English had at the beginning of the Siege the honor to be
on the advance-post of danger, so now at the last they had as much honor in
marching the last of all out of the Approaches.

The Siege being now raised, and the Prince and his Forces being drawn up in
Battalia, I have no more to say of the Siege: Only once again to mind you,
that much of this is fallen out through the neglect of those who deceived his
Highness the Prince of Orange in not sending their Troops to his Highnesses
Leaguer, as was agreed.

It remains, That I give you an account of what Officers were killed and
wounded in this Siege: which you will find in this following List.

A List of the Officers killed and Wounded in the 3. English Regiments, and the
Scotsh Regiment under Adjutant-General Col. Collier.
Killed
Col. Widdrington killed with a musket shot. Col. Dolman killed with a 4
pounder. Capt. Barnwel killed in the Dolphin-Bastion. Capt. Crane killed in the
Dolphin-Bastion. Capt. Cranalls killed with a 2 pounder. Capt. Friar killed
with a musket shot. Capt. Lee his ribs broken, and he shot in the thigh. Capt.
Sabin shot with a cannon-ball asleep in Major Downings Tent. Capt. Douglas
Killed with a shot.
Wounded
Col. Fenwick shot with a musket-bullet on the cheek-bone in the Approaches.
Major Archer shot through and through with a brace of balls. Capt. Macullicot
dangerously shot. Lt. Col. Magdugle wounded. Cap. Savage wounded with eleven
wounds in the Dolphin Bastion. Each wounded and blown up in the Dolphin-Bastion.
Capt. Stone Capt. Widdrington Capt. Middleton Capt. Hales
Capt. Tailor deadly wounded. Cap. Sulivan Cap. of the English Granadeers
dangerously wounded. likewise wounded.
Capt. Wisdom, Capt. Lilliston, Capt. Babington, Capt. Mackiney, Capt. Smith,
Capt. Collier, Capt. Walcop

Lieutenants killed
Lt. Loyd. Lt. Clynton. Lt. Cunningham. Lt. Netherwide. Lt. Roberts. Lt.
Butler. 3 Lieutenants more, whose Names I have not.
Lieutenants wounded
Lt. Macullicuddy. Lt. Bellasis. Lt. Giles. Lt. Coney. 5. more wounded, of
whose Names I have yet no account.
Ensigns killed
Ensign Neal. Ens. Clark Ens. Fisher. Ens. Struel. 3. more of whose names I am
uncertain.
Ensigns wounded
Ensign Ferrar. Ens. Anslam. Ens. Smith. And 4 Ensigns more, whose Names are
not yet come to hand.
Besides all these, There were 21. Gentm. Volunteers killed; among whom was Mr.
Wiseman: Also two Kinsmen of Lt. Col. Salsbury, who behaved themselves to a
wonder. And whilst I mention them, I cannot forget the Lt. Colonel himself,
whose untainted valor and bravery of Spirit did here most eminently show it
self, he shunning no dangers, but miraculously encountering and overcoming many
perils in the Trenches, and in all the Approaches most faithfully seconding the
truly Honble Col. Fenwick, whose undaunted courage and prudent Conduct in this
Affair exceed my praise.

Also 15. more Gentm. Volunteers wounded: among whom is Capt. Gerart Bary whose
leg is shot off: and diverse others are sadly dismembered.

These are the Number and Names of the Officers I find set down in my Letters:
peradventure I have in this Collection mist Some, which I hope will be excused:
The List is large enough already out of such a Number as Our Nation were at
first upon this service.

There is One thing more that I must beg leave to observe to you, as a piece of
honor and Generosity in Our Countrymen, and that is concerning the 4 Irish
Officers, who, notwithstanding their great sufferings, and unjust persecution
upon that false accusation made against them, yet generously upon their own
expense attended this service at Mastricht, where you find Capt. Patrick Lee
killed in the service, and Capt. Macullicott dangerously wounded: for which I
quaestion not but that his Highness the Prince of Orange will reward those of
them that shall be left alive, not only for their now service, but for their
great sufferings: for certainly there is nothing more brings blessing on a Land
and government, then the relieving the oppressed, and giving right judgment on
the behalf of the Innocent against false accusations.

Thus have I faithfully given you an account of such passages and matters of
fact as I have found written me in my several Letters touching this Siege of
Mastricht. In this Brief Narrative I have perhaps omitted the Relation of the
brave Actions of Some Others of Our English and Scotsh Officers; for Others
indeed there were that ventured as far for marks of honor as those that are
killd and wounded; and it may be I have not enumerated all those who were
killed and wounded; I am also sensible that I have not spoken enough in
reference to the character which is due to Col. Fenwick, for his Conduct in
this affair, it requiring a style above what my pen can reach: In all these I
hope I shall be excused, when it shall be considered that I intended not this
as a large History of all the passages there; but only to give some small part
of satisfaction to your Honrs. desire, viz. such as a single Letter is capable
off: The defect and brevity whereof I had yet thought to have made out by
giving your Honr. a more exact Account of the present State of Affairs in this
Country; which falls under several Considerations: as

First, the dangerous growth of the French in the Mediterranean Sea, touching
which your Honr. may take notice what a great number of Ships and Galleys have
been built by the French since the year 1660.

Secondly, The great probability of the Spanish Netherlands salling into the
hands of the French in the ensuing year; They having now gotten into their
possession those Considerable Passes, Conde, Bouchain and Air, have now only
Yperen and Cambray to win, and then all the Other Towns fall into their hands
of course: Now it is worth the Consideration, what Neighbors the French are
likely to prove, when possessed of the ports of the Spanish Netherlands!

3. A word also might here be inserted touching that which indeed requires the
most serious thoughts, viz. the Interest of the Protestant Religion. but --

Lastly, Please to consider with what grand difficulties This State in
particular is now engaged: never did people more strive to manage a Case that
required so many eyes and hands at work, than do they; and all to preserve that
Golden Liberty which cost so dear. Your Honr. cannot choose but sympathize and
be affected with their Condition, or, at least, commend their Industry, that
out of a Country not so big as Yorkshire and Lincolnshire do show such
miracles: not only maintaining an Army of 100000. Men, and 4. Fleets at Sea,
one in the West Indies, one in the Mediterranean, one in the Baltic Sea, and
one on their own Coast: but also daily paying to their Allies manyvast sums of
money; (and how well they are served by Some of them, wise men may judge by the
consequence) Besides all which, did you but see what charge they have been at
this year in driving out an unwelcome Guest, (the Water) which had overflowed
half their Country, and should behold what Bridges, Walls, and other
Structures they are now building for the Common good, you could not choose but
have a great sense of their Condition, and exceedingly commend their
indefatigable endeavors: And therewithal heartily wish with me, that They may
not in any wise be necessitated to make a disadvantagious Peace with the King
of France; but that Our King, upon whose Mediation so much depends, may be by
Our good God so directed, that He may herein be helpful, and so procure that
great honor and blessing to be the Peacemaker, and Physician for stopping of
that great Effusion of Christian blood; so as withal, the Consequence of a
forced peace to this people may not likewise be of ill consequence to England.

Sr. As to that part of your Letter wherein you desire to know the Reasons why
Lt. Col. Salsbury, Major Downing, Cornet Grahme and Some Others have wholly or
in part quitted the Service; I must beg your pardon; rather reserring you, for
satisfaction, to the Persons themselves, who design to be in England within a
little time: Yet I cannot omit saying thus much for all those Gentlemen, that
it is not upon the lest account of any thing that might tend to blemish them;
they being all of good Esteem in the Army both for valor and Experience: The
Former of which has served as an Officer in France, Flanders, and England ever
since the Taking of Dunkirck, where among the English He got great honor when
but a young Officer.

And as to the Last Question in your Letter, wherein you desire satisfaction
concerning some Reports in England made against the States for ill usage, and
injustices done to several Gentlemen that came over to serve the States: Give
me leave to say some few words in their justification: The very same things you
write me out of England I have met with here: I have had several Gentlemen
that have cur'sd and sworn against the State for injustice don them, yet upon
my attendance with those Gentlemen on the Here Beaumont and Others they have
complained off, I have found my Countrymen in the wrong; nay, I have found
that the State have done much more to encourage Our Nation than to Others: I
have known that the State have given the English sull Ordinances for the whole
Winter, when Some of the Captains have had but 15 20 or 25 men in their
Companies, which should have been above 70. At the same time the Prince of
Orange procured them coats and Arms for their Men without paying one styver: (a
favor not don to any else) and when all this has been done to encourage them
to get their Companies complete against the Muster, they have faild, to a great
scandal. These may be some of those that complain of being turned out,
occasioned by their own neglect, when they have had 6 or 8 months time to
complete: And Some of These yet so unjust as not to pay those handfulls of Men
they had, which made the poor Creatures run away, being half-starved: When, I
remember, Some of Those good Officers asked the Prince of Orange leave, that
they might hang Some of the English that ran away, to make Examples to the
rest: But the Prince answered short, that he would not have it lie onhis
Conscience to hang poor men that run away to get bread to preserve Life. Yet,
know there are Some that have cause to complain of being put out at the Bril
upon the then Reducements: To which I shall nevertheless answer, That it was
impossible but Some must be left out, because there was Tag, Rag, and Long-tail
that got Commissions at London from the Dutch Ambassadors, hastening over, Some
with 10 Men, others with more or less; the Number of the Pretenders being 105.
Some expecting to be Captains, and Some to have higher Commands: as I knew One
that had 6. Commissions to dispose of as he pleased: This was the grand fault,
in giving out so many Commissions, and to many that were not able to perform
their Capitulations: At last this 105 were reduced to 36. in 3. English
Regiments, and 12 Companies in a Scotsh Regiment: So that, Take 48 Companies
out of 105. then there remain 57 Complainants. But Every one of those Cashiered
Captains had their Capitulation-moneys paid them, and Every Captain 100
Duckatoons as Danch-gelt, or Gratuity-money for their good will to the State:
And this was done to All, except Some few at this time under consideration
given them upon the justice of their Cause.

But I know, There is yet a Complaint behind, and that is, that the best Men
were turned out, and the Worst through favor, or some worse thing, kept in: To
which I referr you to the Names of Those who stand Officers in the List; by
which you will find PerSons of great merit and long Experienced Soldiers in
Commission: Besides that Several of those Officers left out at the Bril, are
since taken into the Regiments, as I could name several. To conclude, I never
yet could meet with Any one who served well, and kept to the Capitulation, but
that the States paid very punctually.

Some real Complaints I have indeed met with touching the misfortune of those
Worthy Gentilmen the Irish Officers falsely accused: but that, I question not,
will be satisfied in time. However it is impossible but there will be some
complaints amongst Soldiers; as may fall out even in England, where the Pay is
the most and the best in Christendom.

At the conclusion of my Letter, I received this further Intelligence, That,
seeing Our English Regiments are now become so very thin, His Highness has
ordered them into Garrison. The Dutch Regiments have also lost abundance of
Men, yet the Prince, who is now with his Army at a place called Bergaworm, was,
for his part and those with him, in readiness enough to have fought the French.

I give Your Honr. no further trouble; only entreat your Candid interpretation
of these Lines from him, who subscribes himself

Honor Sr, Your most Humble and Obedient Servant WILLIAM CARR.
Hague the 5. of September. 1676. St. N. P. S. The Princes Armyis, with those
of the Allies retired into Brabant. The French are between Liege and Mastricht.




