EYAPSTIA: OR, A Grateful Acknowledgment OF GOD'S GOODNESS In Preserving our
most Gracious King WILLIAM, And for the Success of His Arms this Last Summer.

Delivered in a SERMON To a Country-Auditory On the 22d of September 1695.
Being the Day appointed by Authority for a Public Thanksgiving.

By WILLIAM CORBIN, Preacher at the Chapel of Bromley St. Leonard's in the
County of Middlesex.

LONDON: Printed for R. Baldwin near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. MDCXCV.

To the Right Honorable Sir JOHN SUMMERS, Knight. Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of
England, and one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
MY LORD,
REflecting upon the hearty Affection that you bear both to His Majesty's
Person and Government, and the Greatness of the Post in which you now stand,
which renders you serviceable to both; I have presumed to shelter this plain
Discourse under your Honor's Patronage, and sent it abroad into the World
under the Protection of your Name.

The Design of it is to convince some, to confirm others, and to show how
sincerely zealous I am for the Public Good both of the Church and State. I
humbly beg your Honor's Pardon for my Presumption in this Dedication, since
hereby only I have the Advantage of demonstrating my zealous Affections
toward, and grateful Acknowledgment of your excellent Merits, and to show how
much I am,

MY LORD, Your Lordship's most Humble, most Grateful, and Obedient Servant,
Will. Corbin.

To the Worshipful GEORGE FORD, Esquire; One of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace
for the County of Middlesex, AND To the rest of the Parishioners of the Parish
of Bromley St. Leonards in the said COUNTY.
AS this Discourse reached the Ears of most, or all, of you from the Pulpit, it
now returns to refresh your Memories from the Press; not that I question your
steady Loyalty to his Majesty's Person, and true Affection to his Government,
nor from any ambitious Temper in me to appear to Print, especially in this
Carping Age; but, to gratify the repeated Desires and earnest Solicitations
of some of you to whom I am highly obliged. I therefore make a Present hereof
to you; accept of it therefore in the plain Dress in which it was delivered.
Your Earnest Desires were the Midwife that ushered it into the World; and
therefore how misshapen soever it is, call it your own. The Design of it is
laudable, and it may serve, by the Blessing of God, (if it fall into the hands
of any such) to confirm the Minds of those that are wavering in their
Affections to the Present Government, to convince and silence the Enemies
thereof, and persuade all to a Holy and Christian Emulation, of exceeding each
other in their Loyalty to the KING, in their true Affections to his Government,
and diligent Endeavors, in their several Capacities, for the Preservation of
both, and to engage all in a Charitable and Christian Deportment one toward
another. And that it may have this happy Effect upon all, is the earnest Desire
and hearty Prayer of,

Worshipful and Beloved, Your Faithful and Obliged, (though Unworthy) Minister,
W. C.

EZRA III. 11. the former part. And they sung together by course, in praising
and giving thanks unto the Lord: because he is good, for his mercy endures for
ever toward Israel.


AS Troubles and Afflictions call for Repentance and Humiliation, so Days of
Victory and Deliverances call aloud for Rejoicing and Thanksgiving.

For the grateful Acknowledgment of Favors received, is a mighty Obligation
upon Almighty God to bestow more and greater Favors upon a People.

God has, blessed be his Name, to all other his Favors and Advantages (which
he has given our KING against His and Our Enemies) added this one, of
Delivering so strong a Fortress (which our Enemies possessed) into his Hands.

In the Strength of which, being so mightily increased both by Art and Treasure
since they had the Possession of it, they mightily encouraged themselves, and
thought perhaps, with the proud Sons of Anak, that no Force could stand before
them: But, blessed be God, some of them have lived to see themselves deceived,
tho Multitudes have perished; which has not a little advanced the Subject of
our Praises this Day: and to add to the Glory and Triumph of so signal a
Victory, God, in his infinite Mercy, has made use hereof, to deliver several
Thousands of our own Soldiers, who were treacherously delivered over to, and
detained in the Captivity of our Enemies; and that by the Conduct of our
Renowned and Illustrious KING WILLIAM, for whose Safety we praise God this Day,
as for so signal a Victory he has obtained against His and Our Enemies in this
his Expedition.

And oh! that every one of our Hearts and Lives, as well as our Lips and
Tongues, would unanimously and sincerely praise and magnify the Rock of our
Salvation, the Lord of Hosts, and sing together by course, in praising and
giving thanks unto the Lord, because he is good, for his mercy endures for
ever toward Israel.

The Text and the Occasion are happily met together, and both are joined in one
Duty.

The Thanksgiving, in the Text, was made upon the Laying of the Foundation of
the New Temple which was to be in the room of that which was built by Solomon
and destroyed by the King of Babylon.

And the Victory which God has given our King, and the Safety and Protection
of his Person, is the Subject of this Day's Thanksgiving.

And we are met together at this time, to acknowledge and adore the Infinite
Wisdom and Power of Almighty God, in contriving and bringing such mighty things
to pass.

How light soever our Enemies may make of this Action, yet I hope it will prove
to be of Consequence to correct their Pride, and a just Retribution for their
Cruelty.

For doubtless, God, who has not been an idle Spectator of their Pride and
Blasphemy, of their cruel and unchristian Carriage, will have a time to correct
them for all this.

And who can tell, but this is the Season which God has appointed for the
Performance of so great a Work, as that of Relieving almost all the Christian
World from the Tyranny and Rage, from the unjust Invasions, and proud Insults
of, not long since, a growing Tyrant; I mean, Lewis XIV. who I hope will, in a
little more time, be a dejected and sneaking Nothing, in respect of our Heroic
and Illustrious KING: and, through the good Providence of God, the Affairs of
the World at this time seem to be disposed for such a Performance, by the wise
Conduct, diligent Care, and undaunted Courage, of our Renowned King WILLIAM,
whom God long, long preserve, to be a Terror to France, and for the Honor,
Safety, and Welfare, of all the Reformed Churches in the World.

God has had a peculiar Care of his Church in all Ages, and he has never
wanted Instruments to rescue and deliver her, when in his infinite Wisdom he
has thought it most convenient: We have many Instances to this purpose in the
Holy Scriptures, besides those in Humane Story.

God, we read in Holy Writ, preserved the Church of the Jews, by the Conduct of
Joseph and Moses, of Joshua, of David, of Esther, and many others; and since
that time, his Church has been ever dear to him in all Ages; he has still
appeared for her in her Distresses and Afflictions, and by some means or other
(as his infinite Wisdom has thought most convenient) has wrought out her
Deliverance, sometimes by ordinary, and sometimes by extraordinary means, and
preserved her in the midst of imminent Dangers: and this has been proved true
more than once within the Experience of two or three Generations past.

God did heretofore make use of Constantine, justly styled Great, for the
Patronage, Defense, and Support of his Church, in whose Relation this Nation
may justly glory: And in this Generation, God has not been wanting to give us
extraordinary and signal Instances of that Care which he has still for his
Church amongst us, in raising up our Valiant and Renowned King WILLIAM, to be a
Patron too, and the Deliverer and Defender thereof; that when we were even
brought to the very brink of Ruin, and in the eyes of Humane Probability, we
had scarce any way left to escape, then God sent us a Deliverer, in an
extraordinary manner, and gave him extraordinary Success, beyond the
Expectations either of his Friends or Enemies; and has from time to time
preserved and secured his Person from many secret Machinations, and open
Violences of his Enemies, and given Success to his Arms; yea, in this present
Expedition, has given evident Demonstrations of his Care of him, and has
given him such Success which I hope is but a Foretaste or Specimen of what
Success he designs him, if our Sins do not prevent it.

Let us therefore sing together in course, according to the Example of the
Text, and with all the Intentions and Powers of our Souls praise and give
thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, and his mercy endures for ever toward
Israel.

In discoursing of these Words, I shall observe,

I. The Duty of Praise and Thanksgiving; and then take notice of the Object
thereof.

II. I shall speak something briefly to the Subject of this Praise; which may
serve as an Argument to prove the Reasonableness of the Duty.

III. Show you the manner how it ought to be performed, with the Qualifications
with which it must be accompanied to render it acceptable to God, and
profitable to our Selves; and so conclude with some brief Reflections upon our
Duty.

I begin with the First; (viz.) The Duty of Praise and Thanksgiving. And this
is always incumbent upon the receiving of Blessings; and therefore the Holy
Prophet calls upon Men oftentimes in one Psalm, to praise the Lord for his
Goodness, Psalm. 107.1, 8, 15, 21, 31.
and declare the Wonders that he does for the Children of Men; yea, he calls
upon the Heavens and the Earth, and the Stars, yea the Angels in Heaven, to
praise the Lord, Psalm. 71.6.
and he himself will praise him continually.

And this is sometimes expressed by showing forth, Psalm. 9.1. sometimes by
declaring his Doings, Psalm. 96.30. and to exalt his Praise, Isa. 38.18. and
many more.

And therefore I observe in the

Second place, That this Praise must have a determinate Object; and that we
must acknowledge to be twofold, principally God, and secondarily our
Benefactors, as the Instruments of God.

First, The principal Object of our Praise and Thanks is God; Jam. 1.17.
for it is from him that every good and perfect Gift comes, says the Apostle,
and in him that we live, move, and have our being. He is eminently the Object
of our Praise, as well for those excellent and divine Perfections that are in
him, as for those abundant Blessings and Favors which he bestows upon us,
which deservedly require our Praise and Adoration; and therefore our Praise is
sometimes taken for the whole Worship of God, as St. Paul intimates, Romans 1.21.
Psalm. 92.5.
but more especially for that Joy and Gladness which we conceive of his
Goodness.

For besides those Excellencies that dwell in him, we have innumerable Benefits
to praise and thank God for, which I need not now stand to enumerate, forasmuch
as the repeated Affluence of them may be sufficient to lead an ingenious Temper
to the Acknowledgment of that Bounty which bestows such good things upon us.
We have our Beings, and all those necessary Supports which are required to
sustain and refresh us, from God; he opens his hand, Psalm. 145.16.
and fills all things living with plenteousness; our Wool, and our Flax, our
Corn, our Wine, and Oil, comes all from the Bounty of God, and are of excellent
use to support and sustain our humane Nature.

And the Ordinances of God, the Word preached, and the Sacraments duly
administered, are of excellent use, to beget in us, and preserve us to, a
spiritual and eternal Life; for which, the pious Examples and the renowned
Actions of those that have gone before us in the Faith of Jesus Christ, are no
small Advantage, and may serve to excite our Diligence to write after their
Copy, that at last we may be Partakers of the same Glory with them in the
Kingdom of Heaven: All which comes from God, and we ought to praise and thank
God for them all.

But that which we come hither this Day to praise and thank God for more
peculiarly, is such a Blessing, as we know not well how to express it: it is
the Preservation of his Majesty's Person in the midst of so eminent and great
Dangers; by whom, as God's Instrument, we enjoy all the forementioned Blessings.

And we praise and thank God this Day for the Success of his Arms against such
an important, and almost impregnable Fortification, which he has valiantly
wrested out of the possession of our Enemies, almost in the sight of their
whole Army.

And that by his Conduct, God has delivered so many Thousands of our own
Soldiers out of the Captivity of our Enemies, who were treacherously delivered
unto them.

We acknowledge the Providence of God principally in the performance of all
this; and therefore we principally praise and thank God for them, as also for
those former Blessings which we have received, which we know not well how to
express the Greatness of.

It is for the Conservation of our pure Religion, which (beyond any thing that
the Enemies thereof could ever yet make appear) is the most pure Religion (both
in its Constitution and Discipline, in its Precepts and Doctrine) that is this
day in the World.

We praise and thank God also for the free and public Exercise of his Worship,
without any Idolatrous Injunctions, or the giddy Inventions of Mercenary
Priests.

And farther, for the Conservation of our Civil Rights and Properties we bless
and thank God this Day; all which, through his Goodness, are now secured to us,
contrary to, and beyond the Expectations of our Enemies, yea, beyond our own
Hopes, not many Years ago; which cannot yet be forgotten by any thinking
Person; and that God has, in his infinite Wisdom and Goodness, raised up such
an Instrument for our Preservation and Defense, and the Conservation of all
these singular and great Privileges: So that all our Fears and Jealousies in
our Selves, and all the cruel Designs and Machinations of our Enemies, have
hitherto come to nothing; and I hope will come to nothing in respect of our
Disadvantage for ever. All which, we obtain and enjoy by the wise Conduct and
valiant Deportment of our Illustrious and Gracious King WILLIAM, for whom we
praise and thank the God of Heaven, who has raised up such a noble Instrument
upon Earth thus to defend and secure us, and preserve all these Advantages to
us, and who has already, in a great measure, been instrumental to correct the
Pride, and bring down the high Conceits of all our Enemies, that dare own
themselves publicly to be so, who would long ere this time have debauched our
Religion with an Idolatrous Superstition, sequestered our Civil Properties, and
made our Lives a Prey to their Ambition and Cruelty, if God had not prevented
them: And that this was their Design, was conspicuous to all the World, if
their Power could have prevailed; for we of these Kingdoms could not expect to
fare better under the Power of France than their own Native Subjects, which is
notoriously known to all the World.

We therefore praise and thank God, who is the Rock of our Salvation, who has
raised up for us so noble and glorious an Instrument, and by him has hitherto
prevented their Designs, and preserved him to this Day, against all their
Contrivance (treacherously and secretly) to assassinate his Royal Person more
than once, since they could not prevail against him by their open Attempts: But
God has hitherto prevented their Designs against him, and, we hope, will bring
him back in Safety now also, to sit upon his Throne, and long, long, govern
these Kingdoms, notwithstanding whatsoever Malice, whatsoever Treason,
whatsoever the Cruelty of France and Hell can contrive, and that in spite of
all his Enemies, he may long be a public Blessing to these Kingdoms, and all
the Reformed Churches in the World may rejoice in him, and thank and praise
God, together with us, for raising up so noble an Instrument for their and our
Safety and Deliverance; who is in the second Place, being so noble a
Benefactor, a fit Object of our Thanks and Praise, who has so often hazarded
his Life, and as it were, lightly esteemed the Glory, Ease, and Pleasure, with
which an Imperial Crown is generally attended; and all for the Safety of our
Lives, to preserve our Properties, and to secure us against all the unjust
Invasions and proud Insultations of our avowed Enemies, for which he well
deserves our Thanks and Praise: And yet there are some malevolent and wicked
Spirits still among us (the more's the pity) who are so ungrateful, that they
will not only not own, but despise and undervalue him for all this: But I hope
the Number of such ungrateful People is but small, and that they will now see
their Interest, and be ashamed of their Folly, and join together with us in
thanking and praising our most Gracious and DREAD SOVEREIGN for what he has
done for us, and for what we enjoy by his means, and return him our hearty
Affections, and deport our selves toward him and his Government with all
Loyalty and Obedience every day, and together put up our most devout Prayers to
the God of Heaven this Day, that his farther Success (in all his Enterprises)
may be proportionable to the Goodness of his Cause; and then we may confidently
expect, that our Enemies may be rooted out from among us, and not able to
appear abroad against us, and our selves, and all that is dear to us, be
secured against all the Attempts of France and Hell.

A Foretaste of which, we celebrate in our Praises and Thanksgiving this Day
(for the singular Preservation of our KING, and the noble Victory obtained by
him in this his Expedition,) which is but an Earnest of what God farther
designs us by his Conduct, if we are not wanting to our selves.

And this we may conclude, not from any Goodness or Excellency that is in us,
for God knows we are a disobedient and wicked People, but for the Wickedness
of our Enemies, and those manifold Blasphemies with which they have blasphemed
God, and for those many Affronts which they have put upon his Majesty, who is a
jealous God, and will not let such impudent and daring Offenders go unpunished;
and therefore we may expect that God will appear, and vindicate his Honor
against so bold and daring Enemies: this he has begun to do already, for which
we come hither to thank and praise him this Day.

And I would to God, that the Hearts of all the Inhabitants of this Kingdom
really meant what they express with their Tongues, or ought to express upon
this Occasion, that we may not offer to God the Sacrifice of Fools.

And that we may all of us show forth the Praises of God throughout the whole
course of our Conversations, by our religious and pious Lives, as we do this
Day by the Sound of our Lips; for this God expects from us, and gives us
great Encouragement so to do; 1 Samuel 12.14.
For if ye will fear the Lord, says the Prophet, and serve him, and not rebel
against the Commandment of the Lord, then ye shall continue, and also the King
that reigns over you.

Thus then I have briefly hinted to you the Duty, viz. Thanks and Praise, with
the Object thereof, which is principally God, and secondarily our Benefactors:
I have also given you some brief Hints concerning the Subject of our Thanks and
Praises, viz. all the Good we enjoy, and particularly this Day, for the
Preservation of our Gracious and Dread Sovereign in so many and great Dangers,
to which he has been so often exposed in this his Expedition, and for the
Success of his Arms both by Land and Sea.

For which (if we knew how to frame it) let us sing unto the Lord a new Song
(according to the Prophet's Injunction) because he has done mavelous things:
Psalm. 98.1.
and let us, according to the President in the Text, sing together in course,
that is, now we are called together by Public Authority for this Exercise, and
praise and thank God, because he is good, and his mercy endures for ever
toward our Israel.

For repeated Favors, and new Victories, call for repeated Praises and
Thanksgiving, and will put ingenious and grateful Spirits upon inventing new
Songs to praise God withal: let us therefore praise him for his excellent
Greatness, and praise him for his excellent Works; and let the high Praises of
God be in our mouths all this Day especially.

But alas! what will our Praises signify to him! we only hereby demonstrate,
that we are not stupidly insensible of the great and wonderful Blessings and
Favors of God; and this is our Duty not only at this time, and upon this Day,
but throughout the whole Course of our Conversations; and as every day affords
us new Benefits, so every day should engage us in new Praises, which if we
faithfully perform, will engage God to bestow more and greater Blessings upon
us, as I intimated before.

The Wisdom of God is able to find out all the Contrivances of Men; and such is
his Power, that he will dissipate and expel all those that are levelled against
his Church, and turn the Wisdom of all Achitophels into Foolishness: And this
he has done often to our own Experience.

Yea, he will give a Symbol of his Presence with all such as faithfully and
devoutly thank and praise him; for when the Israelites lifted up their Voice,
with Trumpets and Cymbals, to make one Sound to be heard, in praising and
thanking the Lord, because he is good, and his Mercy endures for ever, 2 Chronicles
5.13.
then the house was filled with the cloud, even the house of the Lord.

And our Praises and Thanksgiving for Mercy received, is the ready way to
obtain more and greater, if performed with a hearty Sincerity, and without
Hypocrisy; for the same Wisdom, the same Power, the same Goodness, and the
same Providence, is engaged and concerned for our Good which has hitherto
been, if our Ingratitude prevent it not.

General Mercies require general Praises and Thanks, and such are the Mercies
which we commemorate this Day; and the Effect of such our Praises, if hearty
and sincere, will appear to our particular Advantage; for if we are thankful
for a little, we thereby entitle our selves to much; though the Mercies which
we commemorate this Day, cannot be said to be little; which if we make that
Improvement of as God requires, we shall interest our selves in more and
greater than those.

For God's Treasury is never exhausted; he has Victories still in store, and
Deliverances still ready, for a thankful and grateful People: whereas
Ingratitude will cause him to hold his hand, and render an Ungrateful People,
as unworthy of Mercies in themselves, so despised and rejected by others, an
Instance of which we have in the Jews, who for their Ingratitude are a People
rej^cted by all the World to this day.

The City of Athens was upbraided with monstrous Ingratitude, and that justly
too, for that she suffered those Worthies to die in Ignominy and Oblivion,
Miltiades, Aristides, Solon, and others.
who by their virtuous Endeavors had raised her up upon the Pillars of Fame,
and brought a great deal of Glory and Honor to that City; but the City covered
them with the inglorious Dust of Obscurity: and this is remembered to the great
Dishonor of once a flourishing and famous City, and will never be forgotten to
the End of the World.

Ingratitude, says the Prophet, is as the Sin of Witchcraft; it is a Sore, and
a Plague.

If we therefore should pass by such signal Blessings (as this Summer's
Expedition has afforded us) without Praises to God, and blessing the King, we
may well be censured for our intolerable Ingratitude, and may justly provoke
God to blast our, farther Designs, and render us, as the City of Athens, (which
was once famous) now despised, and that not only by Almighty God, but all the
Nations round about us, and esteemed unworthy of any more Blessings.

I believe there are scarce any but what pretend to give Thanks this Day, or
are so daringly bold to oppose Authority herein, and run Counter, publicly, to
the general Opinion and Practice of the Body of the Nation.

Yet it is to be seared, and it may be asserted too, without a breach of
Christian Charity, that there are but too many such among us, who, as the
Prophet says, Draw near to God with their Lips, while their Hearts are far
from him; who seemingly praise God for the Safety of our KING, and the Victory
which he has obtained over his Enemies, with the rest of his Loyal Subjects,
yet in their Hearts, it may be, curse the KING, or at least secretly laugh at
those who are more zealous and devout in Praising and Thanking God for his
Safety (than themselves.) It Is plain enough, beyond Contradiction, that there
have been many such in this Generation; and I should mightily rejoice if there
were none such in this day.

The Grecians had a Proverb among them which certainly concluded against
themselves, and I fear may be applicable to some in this Generation, though I
hope to none that are here present, Agamemnon, for the Honor of Greece, had
done great Service to the Conquest, and Subversion of Troy, and when he came
home, was suffered to be slain by his own Wife: the Application is plain and
easy.

Our Gracious and Dread SOVEREIGN has exposed himself much beyond the common
Methods of Crowned Heads, in the Service and for the Advantage of these
Kingdoms: He has banished our Fears, and rescued us out of Danger; he has
secured our Religion and Property to us, if the Fault be not our own; if, like
the Israelites which were delivered out of the Bondage of Egypt, we are not
uneasy till we be bound again.

I may be bold to say, some such there are (I grieve to speak it, and yet it is
but too true) who endeavor to blast the Fame, and lessen the Merit of our
Glorious and Renowned PRINCE and SOVEREIGN, and hereby vertually endeavor to
overthrow his Government, at least in the Hearts and Affections of his People;
and this may be naturally concluded from their unbecoming Deportments toward
him and his Government.

For this we may conclude as a general Maxim, That whosoever shall refuse to
swear Fealty and Allegiance to the KING, from any Pretense whatsoever, will not
be deficient in his Endeavors to extirpate his Government, especially in the
Affections of his People, and dethrone his Person too, whenever it shall be
in the power of their hand to do it; which God of his infinite Mercy prevent.

Such Persons may justly be stigmatized with a Mark of horrible Ingratitude,
both to God and the KING; and we may conclude, that they shall be severely
accountable (to God) one day for all this, whatsoever their present
Apprehensions and Pretenses be. But I hope the Numbers of such ungrateful
Persons are now so small, that they will not be sufficient to obstruct our
Happiness, or engage God to put a Stop to that Success which he designeth our
KING, of which that of this Summers Expedition is a Specimen or Foretaste; for
which let us praise and thank God, as our Duty requires us, and sing the
Praises of God aloud, that all the World may hear it: I mean, live a holy and
religious Conversation, that others seeing our good Works, may glorify our
Father which is in Heaven. This will engage God to prolong the Life of Our
Gracious and Valiant KING; to prosper his Designs, and to fight his Battles; to
conquer his Enemies, and to arm his Officers and Soldiers, as with Courage, so
with Faithfulness, and with Wisdom, which are no small Advantages: and such we
may expect, upon our grateful Acknowledgment, and sincere and hearty Thanks to
God for the Blessings and Favors already received.

Thus then is the Duty, with the Object, and the Subject thereof; which may be
a forcible Argument to prove the Reasonableness thereof. The manner of
performing it, I have already briefly hinted at, it must be in course, as it is
in the Text, that is, in the time appointed for the Exercise thereof, viz. this
Day, set apart by public Authority for this Purpose; not that hereby other
Times and Seasons are excluded for the Praising and Thanking God for his
Benefits and Favors, which are continued and renewed to us every day, (for
which we ought to repeat our Thanks and Praise every day) but not neglect to
give general and public Thanks and Praise to God this day for so general and
public Blessing; and let this be done in a due Proportion according to the
Greatness of the Mercy we enjoy, with Uprightness and Sincerity of Heart, with
a humble Mind, and engaged Affection, which are the Qualifications, as I
briefly hinted before, with which our Duty must be accompanied; and being thus
qualified, will be accepted, and undoubtedly advance our Prosperity, to the
Ruin and Overthrow of our Enemies.

This will obtain us greater Victories against them, secure our present
Advantages, and prevent our future Danger; and this, we may expect, will be the
happy and blessed Effects of our hearty Thanks and Praise.

For the Application of all then.

What remains, but that we be all engaged in the faithful and zealous
Performance of this Duty, as the Nature of the thing requires.

And consider, it is from God we enjoy all our present Mercies, and in him are,
or ought to be, all our future Hopes and Expectations: he made us when we were
not, and restored us when we were lost: it is he that supplieth our Wants,
forgives out Sins, and crowns our Designs; and the richer those Benefits are,
the more hearty Thanks they require; great Deliverances, and signal Victories,
such as we commemorate this Day, call for a due Proportion in our Thanks and
Praise; for where much is given, much is also required.

All that we have is given us of God, and all that we enjoy is from him, and is
not the Production of blind Chance or Fatality.

The Philosopher might see the Stars in the Water, though he could not see the
Water in the Stars; it is not the Stars, but God that governs the World, for all
things are disposed of according to his Directions.

What the Astronomer imagined to find in the Heavens, I am sure may be found
here below: Cancer is not there but here, viz. many Apostates, retrograde to
Goodness, Piety, and Religion; here is Scorpio the Slanderer and Blasphemer;
here, and not there, are those Depressors, and covetous Defrauders, and
Serpents which hurt and destroy one another; here below, and not in Heaven, are
those Bulls and Goats, Persecutors, and unclean Persons, Lions rampant, and
Rams assailant, that push and devour one another, the more's the pity.

It Is strange to behold, and yet too true to be denied, that Men endued with
rational Souls, and capable of immortal Glory, should act so irrationally.

Is this the Gratitude we owe to God? If so, sure this excellent Quality has
lost its proper Virtue. Is this to praise, and give Thanks to God, for such
signal Tokens of his Love and Favor? viz. to run Counter to his holy Laws? if
so, we may expect no other Effect thereof than the Apostle indicates, that if
we bite and devour one another, we may be destroyed one of another, and the
Common Enemy may swallow us all.

It was the Divisions and Discords of Jerusalem, together with their
Ingratitude, that wrought their Ruin; and it may do ours unless we speedily
amend.

The Murmuring of the Israelites in the Wilderness was the Cause why many of
them were destroyed, and never entered into the Land of Promise: Let us then,
by the Foresight of their Ruin, prevent our own.

Our Fears are now evaporated, and our Danger at present seems to be over, and
yet we will not (I mean, some troublesome Spirits which breath among us) be
content; but let us take heed, and sin no more, Joh. 5.14.
according to our Lord's Instructions, lest worse things come upon us than
whatever yet we have felt, or fear.

We seem, generally, to be well enough satisfied with what God has done for us;
but many among us are still dissatisfied with the Methods and Instruments, in,
and by which, God has brought about so mighty a Deliverance; as if it were
convenient for, and peculiar to them, to prescribe Rules to Infinite Wisdom.

They would have the Blessings of God, but they would have them descend upon
them in their own Clouds, or else they shall not be esteemed worth their
Notice, but rather deserve their Opposition.

And this seems to be the plain Language of some disaffected People in this
present Generation.

Oh, horrid Ingratitude! altogether unbecoming the Practice of Reasonable Men,
or Christians.

I would ask a Question, if I knew where to have it resolved, viz. What such
Men as these would have? To which, I doubt, themselves cannot answer.

It must certainly be concluded, that they are in love with Chains, that seeing
they are loosed from them, they endeavor, what in them lies, to bind them on
afresh: This, certainly, is neither consonant with Reason nor Religion, though
such Men, perhaps, will pretend to both, for both detect such Absurdities.

It Is unbecoming the Reason of a Man, to destroy his own body; and I am sure
it is unbecoming the Practice of a Christian, to contribute toward and rejoice
in the Ruin of his Country, and of that Church of which he is a Member, (at
least by Profession;) as undoubtedly all such disaffected Persons virtually do,
though it be not in their Power actually to perform it.

But such Persons, whoever they are, must expect one day to be severely
accountable for all this; and therefore I would faithfully warn them all of it
this day, if my Voice would extend so far.

For it is no small matter, to endeavor to thwart the Designs and Methods of
the Almighty God.

For if Men will walk contrary to him, he will also walk contrary to them, and
by some means or other, and at some time or other, will make them feel the
weight of their Folly, in the Punishment of their Iniquities.

And if his Mercies cannot prevail with them to be grateful, his Judgments will
make them know what it is to affront his Majesty.

Let such therefore be wise in time, and express the Gratitude of their Souls
for such great Blessing, in a due Proportion of Thanks and Praise, as is
suitable for such an Occasion, and that with a hearty Sincerity.

And let us all, after the Example of the Holy Prophet, call upon, and stir up
one the other, to praise the Lord, and declare the wonders that he does for the
Children of Men, and especially for such wonderful Blessings as we commemorate
this Day, viz. The Preservation of our Gracious and Illustrious KING, and for
the Advantages which God has given him against His and Our Enemies in this
Summer's Expedition.

And well may the Safety of such a PRINCE deserve and require a Day of
Congratulation and Thanksgiving.

I need not now give you a Narrative of his Miraculous Preservation, forasmuch
as it has been so often repeated in your ears.

Such were the Guards of his Person, that hitherto (blessed be His and our God)
his Enemies Attempts against him have been unsuccessful.

And besides the subsidiary Guards of Men, he had an inward Guard (I doubt
not,) viz. the Integrity of his Mind and Conscience; which, though it do not
always secure a Man against the Rage and Violence of Men, yet it arms a Man
with Courage and Resolution, to stand against and sustain all.

Besides which, he had a spiritual Guard too, viz. the devout Prayers of his
Faithful and Loyal Subjects, which always attended his Preservation.

Yea, he had also a higher and more noble Guard, which still attended his
Safety, viz. the Protection of the Watchful and Powerful Angels, those
ministering Spirits, and the watchful Providence of his great Maker and Creator;
those divine Guards, which have fenced him in on every side as with a Wall of
Fire, which at once preserved his Person, and destroyed many of his Enemies.

But my purpose is not at this time to bring you back to the View of his
Perils, but to stir up your Hearts to a thankful Acknowledgment of, and hearty
Thanks and Praise to God for, his wonderful Preservation and Success, who is
justly styled The Defender of the Faith.

He has, as the Instrument of God, been hitherto the Preserver of his Temple
among us (ever since the great Disposer of all things has committed the Charge
thereof to his Care) from Idols and Superstition: and God has hitherto
(blessed be his Majesty for ever) preserved him from all his Enemies; and we
may conclude, that that Providence that has hitherto preserved him in such an
extraordinary manner, has designed him for some farther Service to the
Christian World, (which is more than ordinary.)

For because he loved Israel for ever, says the Spirit of God by the Prophet,
1. Kings 10.9.
therefore made he him KING, to do Judgment and Justice.

It was God that sat a Crown upon his Head, and has hitherto, by a Miracle,
preserved it and him together, contrary to the Designs, and in spite of all
the raging Malice of France and Hell: For by me, says the Spirit of God by the
Wiseman, Prove. 8.15.
Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice.

God has hitherto delivered him from all the secret Attempts and open
Violences of his Enemies: and in him we are all delivered, that we might
rejoice in his Safety, as sometimes the Romans did in the Recovery of
Germanicus, when they ran with Lamps and Sacrifices to the Capitol, and there
sung, with Shouts and Acclamations, Salva Roma, salva Patria, salus Germanicus;
the City is safe, and the Country is safe, and All is safe in the Safety of
Germanicus.

And the same Acclamations of Praise well become Our Mouths this Day, when we
seriously consider the manifold Blessings we enjoy in the Safety of, and under
the Auspicious Reign of our Noble and Illustrious KING WILLIAM.

For such a KING of Men, under whose Government we enjoy all that our Hearts
can wish or desire, (as the present Circumstances of Affairs stand,) save only
that of his Royal Presence among us,) let us adore and magnify the great God
of Kings.

And as we ought in private to sing every day, so may we with the whole Nation
sing (with upright Hearts and engaged Affections) in public this Day, Salva
Britannia, salva Ecclesia Anglicana, salvus Gulielmus, the Kingdom is safe, the
Church is safe, all our Estates are safe, and we are all safe and happy in the
Preservation of, and under the thrice Auspicious Reign of our Illustrious KING
WILLIAM.

And I would to God, that as we have great Cause of Emulation, so we would be
diligent and faithful in the Imitation of the Praises and Thanks of Israel.

Bless we then the great King of Kings, for his Preservation, who as God's
Instrument preserves our Temple; as the Israelites did for their King, who
built the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 5.12.
whilst the Levites and the Singers sound with Harps and Cymbals the Praises of
the Lord our God; and say, as it is in the Text, Praise the Lord, for he is
good, for his mercy endures for ever toward our Israel.

Let us then, my Brethren, with prepared Hearts, and religious Affection,
magnify the glorious Name of God, as we pretend to do this Day; and, if it be
possible, let us, by some unusual Strains of united Thanks, pierce the very
Skies, and give an Echo to those Celestial Quires which are above, who
perpetually sing forth the Praises, and Glory, and Honor, of the Great and
Immortal God, who sits upon the Throne for evermore.

In one Word, May the God of Heaven still preserve the Person of our Dear and
Dread SOVEREIGN, and convert or confound all his Enemies.

May the Crown long, long flourish upon his Head, and may he reign gloriously
over all that hate him, and in the Affections of all his Subjects.

And may the Keepers of God's Temple, and the Defenders of the true Ancient and
Apostolic Faith among us, live and flourish; and let every true-hearted
Englishman say, with one Voice, Amen, Amen.

Yea, let Amen, the faithful and true Witness in Heaven, say Amen to it.

And as for our Selves, Let us all (dearly beloved) heartily and sincerely
repent of our former Sins, and resolve every one of us in particular, to be
better men, and better Christians, and to serve God with pure Hearts and
Consciences, and demean our selves always in a Virtuous and Religious
Conversation.

And then we need not fear, but God will still preserve our KING and Us from
all His and Our Enemies, and give us a complete and entire Victory over them,
to a glorious Perfection, and establish us upon the lasting Foundations of
Peace and Happiness, that we may still have more and more Occasion to praise,
magnify, and adore the God of Heaven, our great and mighty Deliverer; and
after the Example of the Holy Prophet, call in all the Creatures of God to
celebrate his Praises, and say with one Voice, Praise the Lord, for he is good,
and his mercy endures for ever toward our Israel.

FINIS.

