DOLUS an VIRTUS? OR, An ANSWER TO A SEDITIOUS DISCOURSE CONCERNING The
RELIGION of ENGLAND: AND The Settlement of Reformed Christianity in its due
Latitude.

Vae Vobis Hypocritae!

To which are added, The VOTES of PARLIAMENT.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Star in Little Britain. M. DC. LXVIII.

AN ANSWER TO A SEDITIOUS DISCOURSE CONCERNING The RELIGION of ENGLAND.
MEeting with your Discourse of the Religion of England, asserting, That
Reformed Christianity settled in its due Latitude, is the Stability and
Advancement of this Kingdom: I was inclined to peruse it, because, casting my
Eye upon your Preface, I found your first words acknowledge, That Religion is
deeply imprinted in humane Nature, and has a great power over it; therefore I
could not but hope to meet with the great Effects of it, in your own;
especially, since you seemed so sollicitous only for the Peace of Religion, and
the Nation; and that you did so ingenuously profess, That nothing was suggested
in your Discourse for Politic ends: That Episcopacy was not undermined, nor
any other Form of Government insinuated: That all Pragmatical Arrogance,
presuming to give Rules to Governors, or teach them what to do, was carefully
avoided: That only the Possibility, Expediency, and Necessity of Moderation was
represented: And that you humbly desired this honest intention of yours in
pursuance of Peace, might find a favorable reception.

This is the pretended Incense you offer to the Public good, hoping that the
smoke of it will skreen your Falsehood from view; but being smoke, it
vanishes, and leaves your designs so perspicuous, that I esteemed my self
obliged to detect you, and to show the World how contrary your Discourse is to
all these Pretensions in your Preface: A man may see an itching humor in you to
be doing, but what, one can hardly conjecture, but by the shadows of your
motions, which are subtle and violent, and therefore properly to be called
Presbiterian.

Three differing ways of Religion are mentioned in your Discourse to be in
this Realm, viz. Protestants of the Church of England, Protestants
Non-conformists, and Papists.

With the Papists you begin, and therein spend seven Sections, which are
premised on purpose to make your Reader more attentive and kind to the Author,
who would be accounted so fiery an enemy to them: But this part of your
Discourse I am not concerned in, who neither am, nor ever was a Papist; nor do
I pretend to understand their Religion, as you do; therefore I shall leave them
to the consideration of the Parliament, who, you confess, has appointed a
Committee to receive Informations concerning them: only I shall offer somewhat
out of your Discourse, whereby it may truly be discerned how true an enemy you
are in your heart to them.

I have heard very wise and great Politicians say, that Jesuits are but Popish
Presbiterians, and Presbiterians but Protestant Jesuits: and it is no wonder,
that Cocks of the Game, bred up in the same Principles, should sometimes fight
with one another, not coldly, as with some others, but with most sharp and
deadly strokes, provoked and enabled by the Spurs of Emulation and
Pragmaticallness: Under this consideration I confess you may be looked upon as
an enemy, but wherein else, we will now consider.

In your Preface you acknowledge that in this your discourse, you only
submissively offer to the consideration of your Superiors, a Relaxation only
of the Prescribed Uniformity, and some Indulgence to Dissenters of sound Faith,
and good life: amongst which number you account the Papists, because after the
Character you have given of their Faith and Actions, you say in your Seventh
Section, That Notwithstanding they have not changed their Principles, etc. but
have taken methods of greater artifice and subtilty, yet you profess that your
whole preceding Discourse against them, is not directed against the security
of their Persons and Fortunes, or any meet Indulgence or Clemency toward
them; but advise, That they may have their Faith to themselves, without being
vexed with snares, or any ways afflicted.

Here your Proposing a Tolleration for Popery, under the pretense of a meet
Indulgence or Clemency, must not by any means be thought a suggestion for
Politic Ends, although it is one of the chiefest in your whole discourse,
since it increases the number of the Dissenters from the Church of England,
which presently makes the body of them (in your opinion) so momentous, etc.
Next, The security (without any limitation) which you plead for their Persons
and Fortunes (which at once proposes the Repealing of all the Poenall Statutes
against them (which you account snares) is in your opinion, only a Relaxation
of the prescribed Uniformity, and no pragmatical arrogance, nor does not (in
the least) presume to teach your Governors what to do, contrary to the
established Sanctions both of Church and State. But Dat veniam Corvis, You may
write what you please, provided you pretend, That you only propound these
things in Case of insuperable necessity, and that for Truth's sake: but should
any thing of the like nature be in the least motioned by any else of whatsoever
persuasion, we know the Tune, you would sing presently.

Now Sir, I will accompany you to your main design where you would be, though
with much cunning and sliness you creep to it by degrees, and with more
Policy, even then, conceal it, when you speak it; so that none may see your
skin, but only such as can see thorough the thin lawn of your Rhetoric.

Sect. you tell us, That you would have Reformed Christianity to be settled in
the Kingdom in its full extent. In your Eleventh, That Protestants
Non-Conformists are most momentous in the Balance of the Nation. In your
Twelfth, That the Extirpation of them is most difficult and unprofitable. And
in your Thirteenth, That all this your discourse for them, is neither
threatening nor intimation of Rebellion. I could wish, you had not mentioned
these last words, for the very telling us, you do not threaten, after you have
discoursed so largely of the number, momentousnesse, and weight of
NonConformists, and withal of the impossibility of their extirpation, which
was never yet thought of, Does deeply threaten. Reformed Christanity must be
settled in its full extent: this argues, that it is not yet done; Those who
require it, are an innumerous people, powerful and momentous, (which indeed
they did demonstrate sufficiently but the other day, when they bare down all
before them) and now being again debarred from the Benefices and Fatness of the
Land, they esteem themselves ruined and extirpated: and yet they cannot be
extirpated; because it is neither good nor feasible; not feasible, and
therefore, cannot; not good and profitable, and therefore will not: all this
you say, and yet if any think you threaten in all this, he is much mistaken;
you do not use to threaten, before you strike, nor strike, before you find
evidently you can prevail, and strike home.

But what is the Cause of all this Dissatisfaction, disgust, and disorder here
amongst us? Because Reformed Christianity is not settled and cherished in its
due extent. O Sir, ought you not here to have expressed plainly and clearly
what you mean by Pure reformed Christianity, and what is the due and right
extent thereof? This is the great and only work you had to do, which you
dissemble and neglect, and only tell us in general, That the line of this
extent must be the measure of all men's Zeal; That this will advance Gods
Kingdom and the Churches Glory: That this will promote the designs of Gospel,
being true Protestantisme in its Latitude: this is all can be gathered from
you: what is then the Latitude, what the right extent of Reformed Christianity?
it is, say you, A measure extended in its right Latitude, for God and the
Churches Glory: what is it? It is a Latitude cherished unto its extent
according to the designs of Gospel: thus you enlighten us; what do we hear by
all this, but what Protestant Conformists, and Non-Conformists, Papists and all
say as well as you, and yet the Land is never a whit the wiser. But you think,
more then you speak, as wise ones use to do: and speak indeed like an awful
Legislator, that is modelling a Platform of government within himself, and we
must not know what you do, till you have done it. I may indeed conjecture your
meaning, and think you would only have the Presbiterians included within this
line of Communication, and true extent of Reformed Christianity: so that made
equal with the Reverend Bishops, they may Preach in Pulpits, what now they
utter in darkness; and by their Vocal Zeal, render Episcopacy first
unnecessary, then inexpedient, and at length Antichristian. But I will not use
any conjecture of my own, nor understand any more then you would have me; only
give me leave to tell you, unto your no less satisfaction, then what you have
given us, That Reformed Christianity is already settled, rooted, and cherished
in the Land unto its due extent, unto its true Latitude, unto the right measure
of Zeal, that will advance Gods Kingdom and the Churches Glory, promote
virtue, and all the designs of Gospel, in the very best reformed way, which
is, Protestantisme in its just and proper Latitude. What you propose to be done
(as not done) is done already, so that all your Discourse, Ratiocination and
Legislation, for ought I see yet, is needless.

Sect. you tell us (as is before mentioned) How momentous in the Nation,
Non-Conformists are: and now we may well expect to hear, whether all this
momentous People be within the pretended extent of Reformed Chrstianity, or no,
and who these momentous people be; but no such matter; your discourse is large
and wide as they are, telling us they are every where spread amongst the
Nobility, Gentry, and Trading party, in no small ranks and relations, called
Fools by some, and pitied by others, and this is all; enough indeed to augment
our fears, but our knowledge is but where it was.

Violence (say you) toward Non-conformists will do no good with them that are
a rational, willing People (to dispute and disobey the Government of Church and
State) numerous, momentous, sober, and peaceable men (sufficiently experienced
in the late times) in whom no small part of the Nations sobriety, frugality,
and industry does reside; who are not the Wasters, but mostly in the number of
Getters (by plundring the whole Nation) with whom Trade will cease, the Vitals
of the Land expire, Money grow scarce, Rents fall, and all for the loss of
those men, who rule themselves wholly by that great Principle of Protestantism,
Judgment of Discretion: Nor will there be found Magistrates to put such
forceable ways in execution upon them, to the terror of the whole Nation: Why
do you then insinuate the suspicion of these fears? But we understand the
figure of your style in your whole Discourse, and do not question (by the
assistance of God) but that the wisdom of His Majesty will obviate all the
designs and threats of your Party: in the mean time, Pray declare what
Violence is either acted, or so much as thought of against those so rational,
so willing, so sober, so peaceable, so momentous People? He that pretends a
fear in himself, where no fear is, may well be suspected to contrive evil
against his Neighbor, whom he pretends to be afraid of: Remember this, it is
no secret property of Malice and Sedition, but well enough known; we have not
yet forgot Jealousies and Fears.

That this Representation in your Discourse, is a challenge to the Higher
Powers, and a demand of Liberty, and a Threatening if not granted, he is much
mistaken. And why so? O say you, Rulers themselves must be ruled by Reason, or
do worse. And so must their Subjects too, or else all will go ill; but which is
the Reason Paramount in this case, that of Subjects? or their Rulers? But how
does this rid us of the fears you lately put us in? Rulers must know their
People; who is ignorant of that? and yet it were to be wished they did not know
too near and sensibly some of their ill qualities, which were better stifled:
Alas these Dissenters know they should have patience, and stand in their
stations; it is true; but knowing and doing are two things, and so is it
likewise to stand in their stations in their own Houses, and in a Camp. Their
Discomposure may speak Woe and Misery, not Wars and Tumults. Marry Sir, Woe and
Misery is too much: but all our Woe and Misery has hitherto proceeded from
Wars and Tumults, as their original issue; and if you assure us of the like
Effect, we may well dread the like Cause. Their sullen Mutinies make no noise,
though they may loosen all the joints and ligaments of Policy. They have not
any Convulsive motions, though they may bring a Paralitick or Hectic
distemper, or Atrophy, or stop the current of vital blood in the veins of the
State. O hold Sir, your heart runs over too abundantly: And is this your
Rhetoric of persuading us to fear nothing from this sober, peaceable,
rational, and willing People? because the Discomposure they are in, will bring
nothing but Woe and Misery; their sullen Mutinies only loosing the joints and
ligaments of Policy: their momentous issue will bring only a Paraletick or
Hectic distemper, etc. nothing else, no not any thing else: You cannot surely
but smile in your own bosom, whilst you use such frightful horrors and
dreadful expectations as these, to acquit us of fear. Do you esteem all these
dismal Events upon a Nation as Trifles? And are your sober, peaceable, rational
and willing People ready to act all this without regret, as things of no moment
amongst their momentous progeny? Surely, had you not already molded every
thing amongst your selves unto your own satisfaction, so that you are now
ready, as you phrase it your self, to stand in your stations, you would not yet
have dropped from your Pen, these your most villainous and impious derisions: let
me prophecy for once, however plausible and facile the means you have
projected may appear now unto you, you will miss of your end (as you have once
already through the infinite mercy of Almighty God to this poor Nation) and
fall your selves into these heavy miseries, which you mention as slight
things, by way of derision to the State and Kingdom.

That all that are thought fit to abide with security (so that it seems there
are some you think fit to force again into Exile, though you will not now name
them) may be reduced to three sorts; you would first have an established order
made up of such as are proportionable to the ends of Church and State;
secondly, a limited Tolleration of some others; and thirdly, a discreet
Connivance to the rest, according to charity and safety. But who shall be
placed in the first, and who in the other ranks, must be concealed, till the
time of acting in particular, what here you word in general, be in season: And
although a vulgar man can hardly distinguish betwixt Tolleration and
Connivance; yet distinguished they must be, for you will have three sorts I
suppose, although you never speak it your self, in respect to three states of
Dissenters, Presbiterians, Independents, and Quakers, etc. Presbiterians you
would have put into the comprehensive state with Episcopal Protestants settled
and established and cherished by Law. The Independents are only to be
tolerated, but with careful restrictions, that they come not too near the
Line. The Quakers to be wisely and charitably connived at, as rules of safety
may suggest. And you take this your rule, it may be, from the consideration of
the Rainbow, which has three chief colors in it; the Pumicious or
Yellow-colour gilds the outward and greater semicircle, refracted from the
least Opacitie: the Green tincture is in the middle, refracted from a meaner
thickness of matter; the Purple is the interior of the least semicircle, and
therefore so much the darker: for stronger is the action of the Luminous body
in the outward Periphere, and greater the Opacitie in the inward, and a mean of
both in the middle. The Presbiterian must be put in the outward and greater
Circle with the Episcopal Protestants, here called the comprehensive state, or
established and cherished order, as next to the firmament: The less lightsom
and greenish Independent, must be in the middle state of Tolleration, as
further from God: And the Quaker, who professes himself to be the only pure
light, must be content with the lower Rim of discreet connivance, which being
nearest the earth, has more of Opacitie in it, and less of light. If you do
not mean this, pray tell us what you mean; I am sure you would have the fine
Yellow Presbiterian to be in the Circle of comprehensive approbation, or else
your whole Book signifies just nothing.

Established Order stated in its due Latitude, you tell us here, and in your
Sixteen and Seventeen Sections, three words more: The first is, That this
established Order must be sure to be made wide enough, that it may take in so
many as may be able to control all the rest; those forms of men which use to
be imposed on the Consciences of those who enter in, being so far made void,
that they may neglect them without offense, and hold only to indisputable
Truths, and indispenceable Duties. This is in plain English, to let the
Presbiterians come within the line of Communication and favor with the
Episcopal Divines now cherished, and all the rest kept out, that they may have
some body under them to control: But why should any be kept out, that use the
very same Plea for themselves which you now do; and if you once proceed so far
as to give any reason for their Exclusion, you shall find that they have
already used the same for yours: But you will not be in Heaven, except you may
have some body there to control, and trample on: You first were begotten and
born with this controuling spirit, and if it should once fail, you would be no
more your selves; let me tell you a secret, To control and trample upon
Inferiors, is but a Presbiterians Property; but to control Superiors, is
his very Essence and Nature.

That the Dissenters who desire to be included in this Comprehensive state,
under the paternal favor and care of Magistrates (Presbiterians you mean) are
very capable of such an inclusion, as being those whose Principles are fitted
for Government and Doctrine according to Godliness, and so ready to cement with
the Church of England, which is true in substance, though defective in
Discipline and Rules compiled by men, which the true Sons of the Church cannot
swallow. They allow of true Episcopacy as balanced with Presbiters: They admit
of a Liturgy, and are satisfied in their Judgments concerning the lawfulness of
it, and Ceremonies too, if consonant to the Word and Rules of Scripture; the
time was when you threw us into blood about it; but it is well, if the
miraculous hand of God in restoring the Church, has convinced your judgments;
but I doubt it is but conditionally, if you may be admitted. And you say, It is
our misery, that the favored Party will never condescend, but still trample
upon the rest. But Sir, we perceived but lately, that you would not your selves
be otherwise favored, than that you might have some left out to trample on.
But as to that favored part, unto whose Society you would be taken, you let
them know in this word of yours, That you mean still to think as you have
thought, and speak and act as you have done hitherto; but yet notwithstanding
you are very capable of that their Association, because they giving an example
of Moderation, must condescend to let you ( the wisest of Dissenters) sit upon
their Benches, whilst you are wilfully resolved to condescend and complie with
them in nothing: The Church of England never excepted against your Principles
and Doctrines which be conform to Government and Godliness: What you disavow,
what you have railed at so unjustly, and your implacableness in your own ways,
which it is unknown to this day, whither they will tend, or in what they can
rest. This is the only impediment of your favor: and your general cautation of
your own holiness, sobriety, justice and industry (all which we have fully
experimented) is no recantation of this, nor any real way of Sociation.

That such a Condescension to a widened Establishment, is the safety of
Religion. This is a great word and comfortable, if it be true: that we may
therefore the more readily believe it, you tell us, That a sound Church as
Englands is, cannot so easily be hurt by the abatement of a few rigours in
themselves but indifferent, and so esteemed by the wiser Dissenters
(Presbiterians you mean) who can easily let them pass in such as will use such
little. 15. P. 31.
things, or of some of them, they can bear with others in the practice of some
things, which themselves cannot practice: and they can submit to some things,
which they cannot approve; not for unworthy ends, but for Conscience sake;
without engaging therefore in troubles, whereof none knows the issue: that is,
if you may be admitted, else you will roar out upon them, and they that use
them. The wiser Dissenters are men without all doubt better taken in by
Authority into the Established order of favor and protection, than left out
with the other people of more unmanageable and instable principles, to increase
the reputation of their Party. This indeed does found like something of safety:
the fewer Rebels, the securer our Peace; and where is most of Peace, our safety
is there the greater. But all this is understood, if these Dissenters now to be
admitted into society and friendship, have laid down those seeds of
Disagreement and Dissension (which hitherto have kept them asunder before this
their admission.) Upon these very Motives, which you now say are Formalities,
Petty matters, Indifferent and Tristing things, you did voluntarily first
separate your selves, and inferred a War which ruined the whole Land; let your
Books and Writings be brought forth, they will testify, that you accounted and
called those Motives, Weighty and Fundamental for the justifying of your Wars
and Broyls; which now for the making up of your Association, You say are but
small and indifferent, and no ways fit to hinder so much happiness and safety,
as the said Association would bring to Religion and the Nation. For the
obtaining now of favor and protection amongst the Bishops (set up again by the
Magistrate) after you by force of Arms had cast them down, all those
differences you would bring with you, are very minutulous and indifferent,
which to overthrow them formerly, were great Christian and Momentous truths.
How comes this to pass? are you changed men? no, the very same, of the same
animositie, and in the same mind: and all those points which differences you
from the Episcopal Protestant, are now momentous and weighty with you, just as
they were then: And they were then indifferent and mere Trifles, just as they
are now. For they were then indifferent and small in order to the Bishops
yielding and condescension unto you, and your whole Party therein, and so they
are still; but in order unto your condescension unto them, your Bishops and
Shepherds, the very same points wherein they require your compliance, O they P.
32. l. 1.
are deadly and needless Choke-pears, which you cannot swallow; they are Popish
Rites, besides Holy Scripture; they are Forms of men, and not of God; they are
racks, and ruinous scandals to weak Consciences; and so they were then: nor is
there any more change in you, than in Aesop's Fox, who by force worried the
Pullen, when he had them in his reach; and when he found them safely roosted,
he persuaded them by kindest words, that they might be all together, for that
he loved them all in Visceribus suis. And if the Bishops will but pull you up
to them, because they think it not convenient to come down to you, we shall
soon see how dearly you love them, and how quickly the frozen Serpent being
warmed in their bosom, will hiss and sting both them and us; but of this we
shall perceive more in your following Discourse.

But why do you choose this Legislative way intermixed with supplications, for
the obtaining of an End which you lately compassed so successfully by the
Swords of your industrious, ready, and willing People? O, you sigh us out the
reason hereof in most compassionate tones: The wiser sort of Dissenters
(Presbiterians) say you, whose Conformity were they gained, would most avail
(for what?) are weary of these strifes, they dread the consequence of
changings, the hurrying into other extremes, and the wild excursions of some
spirits; they would not be left again to the late uncertainty and continual
vacillations in Government: and they have long since seen the manifold errors
committed in the Policy of the late times: they know that such unfixed liberty
would not secure them; and therefore it may be well thought, they would accept
reasonable terms, and rest satisfied therein.

For all this, the Nation well enough perceives, that you the wiser sort of
Dissenters, are as ready now for War in your minds, as you were 28 Years ago,
when it was first begun, and prospered in your hands: for you walk not any
longer now in the dark, as then you did; you have the same resolution; greater
purses, by plundring and cheating the whole Nation; more men educated already
in your principles, and trained up to your hands: and, which is the sum of all,
a greater probability now of Victory, than before you durst promise to your
selves. Why then do you not proceed prosperously, and endeavor to get by
strength, that authority and power, for which you do now so whiningly pray and
supplicate? O! there is a weighty and momentous reason for it, which you have
not yet told us plain enough: Is it your inclination and love to Peaceableness?
Love to your poor Country which you are loath to see any more imbroyl'd? Fear
of success? No: shall I tell it you? wonder you needs must, how I got into your
heart to find out your meaning; for your meaning once found out, will enable us
sufficiently to understand your words; but your words will never guide us
sufficiently to find out your meaning: It is this; You wise Dissenters do now
seriously consider, that after you had betrayed the People into the waste of so
much Time, Treasure, and Blood, in your last victorious War, enterprised for
the rooting out of those damnable unchristian Points and Practices in the
Church of England; which now to currie favor with the same Party (after
strange Revolutions set up again by the miraculous hand of God) you call
Trifling, and Indifferent things: in that very nick of time, when you looked to
receive the reward of your triumphant malice (the Victory now wholly obtained,
and the English Church and State then under your feet) it pleased God in his
just judgment, for your Hypocrisy to Him, Treason and Sedition against the
Church your Mother, and the King your Father, to let that Body of Puritans
(whereof you were the leading part) to shiver imperceivably into several
pieces, and the simpler part thereof (called afterward Independents) to cast
you the wiser part (then and ever since called Presbiterians) out of the
Saddle: So that you reaped nothing considerable (besides the plundering the
Nation) to what you expected, for your ten Years policy, sweat, and labor:
And that very same Authority which then did back you, did, by the just
judgment of God, so refine it self, by casting out their Members, which were
judged by the rest not pure enough for their Design, that at last it dwindled
into nothing: And you have now lived to see the same Church and State settled
again, and cherished by the Magistrates (to the infinite satisfaction of all
honest and sober men) which you had overthrown as you thought for evermore. And
this is the only thing you dread again, here expressed by your self in such
general words, as before we did not, but now do wholly understand: You fear
strifes; the consequence of changings; the hurrying into extremes; the
excursion of some spirits; the uncertainty and vacillations in Government,
unfix'd Liberty, etc. All this fear, in one word, is, lest you be frustrated of
your end as you was before: And you have very good reason to fear it; for why
may not the Body of Presbiterians drop into several parts, to undermine and
ruin themselves (after the Victory obtained) by piecemeals, till the last drop
left alone, dry up, or be consumed by other second causes, as well as the Body
of Puritans then did? And therefore you think it better (all things rightly
considered) rather than fight again with so much expense to an uncertain event
(and it may be, become liable to pay for the mischief you have formerly done)
to entreat the Clergy that they would be pleased out of their own great love
and bounty, to make you partakers of what they enjoy: For, it is but a little
thing, a triste, a thing mere inaifferent, a very nothing that differences you
and them: All Sacred Truths; All Indispensable Duties; All Established
Principles; All Divine Rules of Sacraments, Prayers, and Worship; All
indisputable Verities, they all agree in most harmoniously: and the other
little, small, indifferent, petty things, let them not be imposed to the
Churches distemper and religious damage. Here is the sum and secret of the wise
Dissenters; They would not be thought yet fully resolved to raise any more
Wars, because it prospered with them so ill before; nor threaten, as they did;
nor exaggerate the weightiness of the Cause as they did; but try now for a
while some contrary Topic means, that for ought they know, may speed better.
Their End indeed, (which is their own Profit,) is the same it was; but the
means to obtain it, is new, viz. Humble Supplications: and that which hinders
this Union, (which in Process of our late Wars) were Fundamental Points, and
the very Vitals of Christianity, yet they must be called in this calmer way,
Indifferent little things: for things that are begged must be called little,
though they are never so great; but when they are demanded by force, they must
be named Great, though never so little. The doubt that our Reverend Bishops may
justly have, is, Whether a Condescension to incorporate you into their own
Sphere, may not prove ruinous to their own Clergy, and the whole State: for
whilst you are below as Suppliants, your differences are little; but when you
are in power, they will be then momentous again: And so the established
Government of the Church, must perish by their own good liking.

Section unto such as you left in a Region below you, gaping there for
Tolleration and Connivence; and in it you deliver us your Rule, and in your
Nineteenth your Counsel. Your Rule is, That other Dissenters (besides you wise
ones) although they may have taken in some Principles of Church government
less congruous to National Settlement) be not oppressed, but have their
liberty, yet not an inordinate one, but limited by the safety of true Religion
in general, and of the established order: Here you are Lording it already over
your Brethren Dissenters, whilst you are assuring them, that you would not be a
means of exposing them to oppression, contempt, and hatred; but would admit
their Plea, as far as it would go: (which you intend to be judge of:) For if
God has received them (say you) why should their fellow servants (ah humble
Soul!) reject or afflict them causelessly? but if your heart after Legislative
Prudence shall think and declare, that God has not received them, then woe be
to them and their Plea. This is all the assurance you give of your moderation,
when you shall come into Power; and all the Rule you lay down to us for
Tolleration, and Connivence, leaving us to guess what you mean in particular by
this your Tolleration, how it is distinguished from Connivence, who should be
connived at, and who tolerated, and wherein may consist this safety of
Religion, and the established Order, by which the Tolleration must be measured.
But before we proceed further, pray let me ask you, how comes it to pass, that
you being but a Part of the Dissenters, should pretend any preeminence over the
rest of the Dissenters, and by what right do you pretend to measure out their
Tolleration and Connivence more then they do yours? Do you think that these
Dissenters, who ever they be, have not the same Plea, that you have, for their
more favorable Tolleration and Connivence which you allot them? They have, and
use the same, in your own words, and say, that consequently their Profession
and way is not to be streighned according to your pragmatical and simple
Tolleration and Connivence: so likewise do they humbly show, that this their
Plea, is no threatening to Rulers, nor intimation of Rebellion; and a little
more humbly too then you do, for standing wholly upon that main Principle of
Protestantisme the judgment of Discretion, there is none of the other
Dissenters (besides your selves) that say That the discomposure they are in,
shall bring woe and misery, that their sullen mutinies shall loosen the joints
and ligaments of Policy: but using your meeker Phrases, acknowledge, That to
abide in their Stations, to have patience under grievances, to sweeten their
Governors by humility and modesty, is their best security. And they plead with
your selves, That if any thing has been amiss in their Practices or
Principles; that a looking back to former discords, mars the most hopeful
redintegration. All the Excuses which you use for the many enormous Principles
and Practices of Presbiterians; the very same is the justification and excuse
of all the other Dissenters, if they have been faulty in the like manner: And
by all that, which is your own Plea, may those more innocent Dissenters
(whether Independents or Quakers, etc.) hope as well as you, to be placed in
the firmament of the Established order, and not to be left below by the mere
judgment of their elder brother in iniquity, in the dark Regions of Tolleration
and Connivence, where they are sure to be most tyrannically trampled upon, if
Presbiterianism get the sway, for then instead of every Bishop that is put down
in a Diocese, there will be set up a Pope (for absoluteness) in every parish.

But the same Principles and Practices must not wear the same color in you,
and in other men; others look hellish black, whilst you must be pure as
cristal: in other men they are Oppressions, Crimes, Sedition, bloodshed,
murder and devilish inhumity; but in you the willing People, it is Piety, Zeal
for the Lords Cause, Tenderness of Conscience, Care of Gospel Designs,
Prudence, Love of public Good; what others act or write amiss, is their
damnable Religion; yours, but petty swervings from the way, if happily you did
ever fail in such slippery places. Thus, Plures cum faciunt idem, non est idem.
You cannot therefore do amiss, because only you do it, nor others act well,
because they are others and not you who act it.

Tolleration and Connivence you shall allow them. Does this your counsel come
from your heart? ought they in reason and conscience to acquiesce in it? They
ought surely: then hear me; You are all now equally in the state of Tolleration
and Connivence, nor have you the wise Dissenters any one word to say for your
selves, but what the other have: I hope then, you will take your own counsel;
though it issue from another mouth, it is your counsel still. Hear then the
Church of England thus speaking in your own words unto you wise Ones, who can
better understand the power of your own advice, than other Dissenters can.

As Authority may be too prone to err (most wise Dissenters) in the severity
of imposing, so Subjects may be too wilful in refusing to obey. As an explicit
assent, and approbation, may by Superiors be too rigidly exacted in doubtful
things; so the unreasonable stiffness and harshness of Inferiors, may keep them
from that compliance in practice, which their Conscience (becalmed from passion
and prejudice) would not gainsay. Every Christian should be deeply sensible of
the common Interest of Reformed Christianity, which is incomparably more
valuable than those private, and little narrow Models, which may have much of
fancy and affection. Well-minded persons may easily be deceived touching their
private sentiments in Religion: they may think they are under the
uncontrollable sway of Conscience, when indeed they are but bound up by custom,
education, complexion, interest, or some other kind of prejudice. The prudent
and sober should not easily settle upon such Opinions as will never settle the
Nation, but tend rather to infinite perplexity and discomposure: Howsoever we
will not bear too hard upon any thing that may fairly pretend to Conscience,
which though erroneous, should not be harshly dealt with. Nevertheless (when
all is said) some dissatisfaction does invincibly possess the judgment, in that
case, Christian humility and charity, as well as discretion, advises such
persons to acquiesce in their private security and freedom, and not to reach
after that liberty that may unsettle the Public order, and undermine the
common safety.

This is your Nineteenth Section, advising your under Dissenters (as you esteem
them) to Moderation: and. 14. P. 28. l. 10.
it is the Churches advice to you, pray take it, since you confess, That such
is the complicated condition of humane Affairs, that it is exceeding difficult
to devise a Rule or Model that shall provide for all whom equity will not plead
for: therefore the prudent and sober will acquiesce in any constitution, that
is in some good sort proportionable to the ends of Government.

Nay, nay, the Case is altered (quoth Ploydon) you will say presently, That was
our counsel to other men, and then it signified something; but it signifies
nothing now, when it is given by others to us: indeed you speak but what you
think, if you speak thus: All your own actions are just and virtuous, your own
words powerful and efficacious; but the same things spoken by other men, are
fruitless; and the same deeds when other men act them, are abominable, ungodly,
and devilish. But you see in the interim how alike unsuccessful wise
Presbiterians are both in their writing and fighting: They war most stoutly,
but O Fortuna Presbiteriana! the Victory is no sooner got, but another (then
unthought of) comes between them and home, and takes away the Garland: They
write most politickly, but O Fortuna! all their whole Discourse so subtly
contrived, pleads for them, they intended to oppose: One would think the two
Elders in Daniel who accused innocent Susanna, were their first Fathers, they
have the same fortune with them in whatsoever they do: to seek for Renown, and
thereby to be ashamed and confounded; to accuse others, and with the same
breath to condemn themselves. There might be much more of this nature picked
out of your Discourse for your self-condemnation, but I must hasten to your
conclusion.

That the Presbiterians exaltation in the widened Establishment, is the
interest of the King. But no body that reads it, can find the least argument
toward the evincing the point: for it is wholly taken up in excusing and
coloring over the wicked principles and practices of Presbiterians: for, you
say, That the arraignment of the Non-conformists supposed principles may
happily proceed upon mistakes; and, that they and others inclinable to their
way, are by some charged with such principles as detract much from Kingly Power
and Dignity, and tend to advance Popular Faction: For their vindication, you
say, It Is confessed, they have been eager Assertors of Legal Liberties: Does
this acquit them from the charge, or does it not rather deeply charge you, and
all that are of such an opinion, before the great God, for stiling the late
bloody and rebellious Wars, an assertion only of Legal Liberties? If you had
proved the mistake, you had done something: but seeing you could not, I commend
you for saying, That a looking back to former Discords, mars the most hopeful
Redintegration; Acts of Indemnity are Acts of Oblivion, and must be so
observed: which is the reason I do not give you such an answer to many parts of
your Discourse as you justly deserve: but whether you may not be justly charged
with the said accusation, I leave it to be seriously considered by the Reader;
for you allege in this Section, That the Non-conformists profess much
affection to Monarchy, and the Royal Family: And that they are so well
satisfied, as none more, in the Ancient Fundamental constitution of this
Kingdom: If so, how came it to pass, you declared in your former part of your
Discourse P. 35. l. 1.
so cunningly and cautiously in these words, That the Ministers of the
Presbiterian persuasion, do heartily acknowledge His Majesty to be Supreme
Governor over all Persons, and over all Things and Causes in these His
Dominions: If you had dealt ingenuously without any Presbiterian mental
reservation, you would have said, Over all Persons, and over all Causes, as
well Ecclesiastical as Civil: then we had understood you; but we are well
satisfied how Anti-Monarchical Presbiterianism is: And if you are so well
satisfied in the ancient fundamental Constitution of this Kingdom, what means
your whole pragmatical Legislative Discourse, wherein the factious and
seditious Models that you have cast in your supercilious Noddle, are proposed
as sufficient to persuade the changing the fundamental Constitution of the
Kingdom, especially of the Church, which has been established by the wisdom of
so many Parliaments: but the reason of this boldness, you ingenuously confess
in this Section, when you say, That as some set their wits a work P. 41. l. 21.
in framing, so do others in evading the designs of such Engagements; which are
no less than the Laws of the Land in this particular: which I could advise you
(for Conscience sake, if there is any Obedience to be paid to the Higher
Powers, and what they enact) to bear more Reverence and Obedience to, and not
so seditiously endeavor their overthrow, otherwise you may chance meet with the
Goats Fate described in the Poet,

Rode Caper vitem, tamen hinc cum stabis ad aras In tua quod fundi cornua
possit, erit. Then according to your own words, The condition of the Page 41.
l. 33.
Dissatisfied (because they wilfully and seditiously will be so) may without
damage or just scandal to any, be made such, that they shall not long for
changes, but gladly embrace present things, and then the implacably evil minded
will want matter to work upon, and rest without hope of disturbing the Public
Peace: which your seditious insinuation so cunningly endeavors, when you give
us in this Section the Character of the People of England in these words, The
English (in Page 42. l. 23.
general) are an ingenuous and open-hearted People; and if unluckie accidents
discompose them not, they are of themselves disposed to have their Kings in
great veneration. Is not this a huge piece of Rhetoric to persuade His
Majesty, that the approbation and exaltation of Presbiterians is his own great
Interest? if it bears any sense or construction, it must speak thus,
Presbiterians profess much affection to Monarchy, and the Royal Family, and
have the King in great veneration; but if He grant not what they demand, they
will not do it: they have stiffly both by Pen and Sword, resisted and opposed
all Authority; and if He will not do what they will have Him, it will prove an
unluckie accident that shall discompose them, and put them quite besides it;
and then we must expect (if not Wars and Tumults as we have had) yet Woe and
Misery. Thus, forsooth, is established the Kings Interest.

the Church and Clergies interest and benefit by the Legal Establishment of
Presbiterians. But here, as you did before, you bring no argument to the Point;
but having to deal with the Clergy more in this Section, than in any other, you
lay about you like a mad man, vilifying them as reproach unto the Church,
telling us, That the more considerate Sons of the Church do observe and bewail
such dangerous miscarriages by Simony, Pluralitics, Non-residency, and
Profaneness, as threaten a second downfall: That if the Church would flourish,
the Bishops must not be the head of such Ministers, as for Ignorance and
Lewdness are a scandal and scorn to their Neighbors, etc. I suppose you mean
your selves for the more considerate Sons of the Church, and therefore you
should have done well to have named who are so guilty, and where they are, that
they might receive their reward: but I hope it only proceeds from your malice,
which is very hot against the Bishops and Clergy, witness these your words, It
is taken for granted, that neither Conscience nor Page 20. l. 30.
Interest will permit the Bishops and Clergy of England, to unite to the Sea of
Rome. Their Doctrine is too pure, and their judgment too clear for a full
compliance with Popery: Here you imitate Archers, who draw back the Arrow, that
they may wound with a greater force; you vindicate their Conscience and
Interest, their Doctrine, and their Judgment; and yet most maliciously wound
them with your full compliance: There are more of this nature which I shall let
pass, and observe how with the same breath you magnify your selves, saying,
Presbiterian Ministers are Godly and Learned, able and apt to teach the People:
(by experience we know what) stiling your selves Laborers in the service of
the Lord of the Harvest: The chief Shepherds faithful servants: Orthodox and
pious Ministers: Godly and peaceable men, preaching only the indubitable truths
of Christianity: Men of known moderation, etc. One would wonder at your
impudent partiality, and your shameless, malicious scandals, if you did not
presently discover your design in them, when you say, The Religion of any State
will sink, if it is not held up in its venerable estimation amongst the People.
By these actions of you, and your Party, the World does take notice, what men
are cast out, and why, and thinks it is the honor, strength, and safety of the
Church, that such men be numbered amongst their opposites; who can with
Conscience pretend, That it is sincerely wished, that the Clergy may hold
their state in safety and honor; that they may never be laid low for want of
meet Revenue or Dignity; and in the very next Page propose the cutting off some
Luxuriances from some of the Highest Order: and the sharing among many what is
engrossed by a few. Now we fully understand you: hitherto I confess I was
amazed (although I well knew what were the Motives that moved you to procure
our late Troubles) what could be the chief drift in your design, seeing you
here sincerely wished, That the Clergy might hold their state in safety and
honor: and that you so often in your Discourse declared, that the things of
difference between you and the Church were so inconsiderable, that you
professed Page 31, 18.
you could bear with others in the practice of them, although you could not
practice them your selves; and that you could submit to some things which you
cannot approve, and that not for unworthy ends, but for Conscience sake: That
you acknowledged also, That the Presbiterians generally (by Page 33, 31.
which it is evident you are not all of a mind, nor ever will be) held the
Church of England to be a true Church, etc. and therefore that they did
frequent the Worship of God in the Public Assemblies: And that many that press
earnestly after further Reformation (which it seems is never to have an end) do
yet communicate as well in the Sacraments, as the Word preached, and Prayer,
etc. and therefore for diverse reasons you lay down, you say, It may be well
thought Page* 37, 15.
they would accept reasonable terms, and rest satisfied therein. O! would you
again be fing'ring the Revenues of the Church? are these the reasonable terms,
which your avarice calls a moderation? because I believe you will say, you
would but share with them, and yet cannot but suspect the great danger and
damage which may be dreaded to ensue this moderation; Why? did ever danger and
damage ensue moderation? Yes, such an one as this is, to the overthrow of
Church and State, and therefore it may be dreaded again; but you think, you
sufficiently secure us from that fear, by telling us, That nevertheless it may
possibly not ensue it; a pretty argument, and here you give us a better, when
you say, that by letting you have their Revenues, and by eclipsing their
dignities, Thus may the Clergy enjoy an Estate of Power, Plenty, and Honor,
with less Envy, and hazard of undermining: This argument is thus far true,
Can^abit vacuus, etc.

In all probability the Ape in Aesop by such arguments as these persuaded the
Beasts in the Forest to cut off their Tails. In the Twelve last lines of this
Section, You sum up the main drift of your whole design, viz. The settling
(or rather the unsettlimg) the Church, in a due Extent, that it may encompass
so much as may enable it to Vanquish whatsoever is inconsistent with it, and to
keep within compass whatsoever may be Tolerated under it. And next, by cutting
off the Luxuriances of some that are in the Highest Order, you mean to reduce
Episcopacy into a Presidency balanced or managed by a due commixtion of Page
34. l. 9.
Presbyters; which does not undermine Episcopacy, nor insinuate any other form
of Government instead of it, as you promised in your Preface, and yet in the
very last line of this Section, you imply (and which is too apparent) that your
Envy is Undermining it. I shall further observe, because it has relation to
the Clergy, that in your Fifteenth Section you say, As for the Established
Order, we presume not here to intermeddle with the form or species of Church
Government: and in your Sixteenth Section, The asserting of your Discipline is
not here intended; in this we may believe you, for both these are reserved to
be presumed to be done, when you shall be settled in your Power, and none shall
dare to contradict you, and then have at all.

Section presumes to persuade the Gentry and Nobility, that it is their
Interest also: but if you had here set down the first Chapter of Genesis at
large, instead of this your discourse, they might happily have discerned thence
some consequence or reason why it should be their Interest, but in your
discourse none at all, except you mean that your advancement should bring with
it a Levelling of the whole Kingdom, as well as the Church; for so we know that
every Hill must be brought low, when every Valley is exalted. But as Metals are
not better known by their sound, then the Spirits of some men by their words, I
shall in short observe how seditiously you endeavor in this Section to sow
Division; First you say, The Latitude and Liberty here discoursed, is thought
to give too great advantage to the Citizens and the Commonality, as also to
make all sorts of men more knowing and less servile; and consequently less
obsequious to the wills of great men. Here you insinuate to the People, that by
this Settlement you propose, they shall receive great advantage, and be
absolutely free. Next you say, The doubt is, whether the Nobles and Gentlemen
of England can maintain their Authority and Splendour, with the freedom of
Citizens and the Common People: And it may be, the Higher degrees in England,
would never be so advanced, as some have conceited* if the meaner sort were
reduced to the condition of the French Pesantry: These are your seditious
pretenced (not real) doubts, which false surmises you would have the People
also to doubt and conceit, and then to believe that this your whimsical
Proposition (if effected) would secure them from the danger; but your own
immediate words are a sufficient answer to such doubts, for you say, Surely in
the times of their Ancestors, they were in as much splendour and power, as they
have been in the memory of this Age; and yet in those times both Citizens and
Yeomanry were rich and free, brave and worthy in their own rank. This
sufficiently proves that the one has not been so much as doubted, nor the
other in the least thought of* or endeavored to be effected, because the Nobles
and Gentry have maintained their Authority and Splendour, and yet the Citizens
and Common People are now richer and freer than they were formerly.

The rest of your Section is an impertinent Discourse, endeavoring to level the
Gentry with the Citizens and Traders, and most pragmatically to teach them what
Habit they shall wear, and how they must carry themselves in their Countries;
all which are suggestions pretending to take away all Emulation between them,
but with malicious aggravations endeavors to raise divisions between them. We
need not wonder why you do it, for from the Mythologie of the Fable of Medeas
sowing Serpents teeth, which grew up armed men (mutually wounding one another)
you learned first by the invenomed bitings of your malice, to set us formerly
together by the ears; and from that success, you are encouraged to hope and
attempt it again. Doubts cause wise men to suspend their assents, but makes the
Vulgar presently yield theirs to them, which is the reason you threw in these,
that you might continue and increase the melancholy mistakes of the People, by
fomenting new jealousies amongst them: so that by raising again the winds of a
general discontent, and then being unguarded by the confusion of another storm,
you might more easily set up your selves: By such Cunnings, the Multitude may
be carried above the perception of their understanding, contrary to what
Religion would persuade them; but then we have seen by experience, that being
once shaken in some Opinion, of which they had a reverence, they presently fall
into the same uncertainty of the other parts of their belief, which had no more
authority with them, than those which were already shaken in them. We have
sufficiently experimented how by destroying Charity, and disuniting the
continuity of Faith, how it begot diversity of Opinions, which produced
different Sects, whose Dissentions have been so mazed in the Errors of their
own confusions, that at last they reduced Religion to be almost nothing but
believing some few Propositions tending only to the overthrow of Church and
State; which was quickly effected, and the Presbiterians (who were the Authors
of it) presently thrown by, as it was expected, because it is the nature of the
Vulgar (who err always in the extremes) to despise all humane Laws, when they
are once misled in those which are Divine.

Lastly, You tell us here, That your own comprehensive Latitude (or Altitude
rather) would heal our Breaches, and put an end to our Disturbances, and
therefore your Exaltation will be the security of us all. But here you ought to
remember, that half the Dissenters (that is all, besides you the wise Ones) are
left out, and excluded by you, from this Line of the comprehensive State.

Will they cause no disquiet? none at all, you may warrant us that well enough;
for all the other Parties are but still called up by the Alarm of Presbiterians
to rebel; and when they are quieted, all will be then in peace; if otherwise,
let all men hear and tremble at your threatening, The severities of Law against
Dissenters, may at length come home to them and theirs who take themselves to
be far out of the reach thereof: This is like you, you are for Revenge to the
third and fourth generation.

And now the Reverend Bishops are to make their choice, whether they will stand
in fear of the rising of these portentous Exhalations, that cause so much
disturbance; or draw them up by the Sun of their favor into this Region of
Exaltation, to lighten there and thunder; for Presbiterians whether high or
low, can never rest: Inferiors they must oppress, Equals they will control;
and all Superiority they cast down: What is under them, must look continually
to be disturbed; and all that is over them, they undermine; which is the reason
that their way was never yet obtained in England, nor were they ever Page 32.
l. 24.
favored with the Magistrates vigorous aid, so much as for an accommodation
with the Established Polity: Keep them below, and they threaten; set them on
high, and they thunder, and that in a frightful manner: In a word, they are
violent in every place, because they have in this World no natural place of
their own: and they seem to be born to do mischief to others, but no good to
themselves; for as the wisest of Kings says, He that troubles his own house,
shall inherit the wind.

Finally (as you say) Our Breaches are too well known, and make little for our
reputation or advantage in Foreign Parts. About things impertinent, Contention
should cease. Page 22. l. 16. Page 21. l. 15.
It strengthens the common Adversary, who is irreconcilable. Why do you
continue them? Why do you raise them about such indifferent things? You
confess, The Reformation in England for its Legality and Orderliness, is
unquestionable. Page 17. l. ^^. Page ^^. l* 19. Page 37. l. ^.
Why do you dispute it? You confess, That by needless Schisms and Factions to
weaken the common interest of Reformed Christianity, is to dissipate the Church
of God, and to defeat the great ends of Christian Religion. You say, You are
weary of these strifes: Why do you begin them again? You sufficiently know the
woeful Catastrophies they have produced, because you have been an Actor in them:
and therefore now to begin the same designs again; as such actions used to be
judged the worse for having no Parallel, they are now more justly to be
aggravated by the example of your former practices of the same nature;
especially considering the great Clemency that has not only pardoned them, but
commanded their oblivion, where they had lain in silence, if your Discourse had
not brought them into memory.

To conclude, although you are pleased to beg the question, when you say, The
chief Prejudices have been considered; and these three important Interests
being known aright, are found not to oppose, but to require this Latitude of
Religion. How honestly and satisfactorily you have performed it, I leave to the
judgment of the impartial Reader; and shall only further observe, that by your
words ( if all these Interests are rightly known) it seems you have in reserve
another great Point (no less than the true interest of Church and State, and
consequently the whole Government) to be better stated, and otherwise to be
disputed, although already established by so many Laws, when you shall be
seated in that power you gape for: but as I have (I hope) very justly called my
Answer to you, Dolus an Virtus? so you will find, that you shall never have wit
enough to catch us with Tricks, nor courage enough to convince us by the Sword,
That your pragmatical Proposition is the Interest of England.

FINIS.
VOTES, etc. of the Honorable House of Commons, Febr 25. etc. 1662. Upon
Reading His Majesty's Gracious DECLARATION and SPEECH, etc.
Die Mercurii 25. Feb. 15. Car. R.
Resolved, etc. Nemine contradicente,

THat the humble thanks of this House be returned to His Majesty, for His
Resolution to maintain the Act of Uniformity.

Resolved, etc.

That it be presented to the Kings Majesty as the humble Advice of this House,
That no Indulgence be granted to the Dissenters from the Act of Uniformity.

Most Gracious Sovereign,
THe Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House of Parliament, did
with great joy receive Your Majesty's most gracious Speech, at the opening this
Session of Parliament: And being thereby invited to consider of your
Declaration of the Twenty sixth of December last; they have with all Sobriety,
Duty, and Affection, examined the grounds thereof; and do by me present unto
Your Majesty Their most hearty Thanks for the same, and humble Advice
thereupon; both which, I do beseech Your Majesty, that you will vouchsafe me to
deliver in their own words.

May it please Your most Excellent Majesty,
WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses of the House of Commons in Parliament Assembled, having with all
Fidelity and Obedience, considered of the several Matters comprised in Your
Majesty's late Gracious Declaration of the 26th of December last, and Your most
Gracious Speech at the beginning of this present Session,

Do, in the first place for our selves, and in the names of all the Commons of
England, render to Your Sacred Majesty, the Tribute of our most hearty Thanks,
for that infinite Grace and Goodness wherewith Your Majesty has been pleased
to publish Your Royal Intentions of adhering to Your Act of Indemnity and
Oblivion, by a Constant and Religious Observance of it. And our hearts are
further enlarged in these returns of Thanksgivings, when we consider Your
Majesty's most Princely and Heroic Professions of relying upon the Affections
of Your People, and abhorring all sort of Military and Arbitrary Rule. But
above all, We can never enough remember, to the Honor of Your Majesty's Piety,
and our unspeakable Comfort, those solemn and most endearing Invitations of us
Your Majesty's Subjects, to prepare Laws to be presented to Your Majesty,
against the growth and increase of Popery; and withal, to provide more Laws
against Licentiousness and Impiety; at the same time Declaring Your own
Resolutions for maintaining the Act of Uniformity. And it becomes us always to
acknowledge and admire Your Majesty's Wisdom in this Your Declaration, whereby
Your Majesty is pleased to resolve, not only by Sumptuary Laws, but by Your own
Royal Example of Frugality, to restrain that excess in men's Expenses, which is
grown so general and so exorbitant; and to direct our Endeavors to find out fit
and proper Laws for Advancement of Trade and Commerce.

After all this, we most humbly beseech Your Majesty to believe, That it is
with extreme unwillingness and reluctance of heart, that we are brought to
differ from any thing which Your Majesty has thought fit to propose; And
though we do no way doubt, but that the unreasonable Distempers of men's
Spirits, and the many Mutinies and Conspiracies which were carried on, during
the late Intervalls of Parliament, did reasonably incline Your Majesty to
endeavor by Your Declaration to give some allay to those ill humors, till the
Parliament Assembled; and the hopes of Indulgence, if the Parliament should
consent to it, especially seeing the pretenders to this Indulgence, did seem to
make some Titles to it, by virtue of Your Majesty's Declaration from Breda.
Nevertheless, we Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, who are now
returned to serve in Parliament, from those several parts and places of Your
Kingdom, for which we are chosen, Do humbly offer to Your Majesty's great
Wisdom, That it is in no sort advisable that there be any Indulgence to such
persons who presume to dissent from the Act of Uniformity, and the Religion
established.

For these Reasons,

WE have considered the nature of Your Majesty's Declaration from Breda, and
are humbly of opinion, That Your Majesty ought not to be pressed with it any
further,

Because it is not a Promise in it self, but only a Gracious Delaration of Your
Majesty's Intentions, to do what in You lay, and what a Parliament should
advise Your Majesty to do; and no such Advice was ever given, or thought fit to
be offered; nor could it be otherwise understood, because there were Laws of
Uniformity then in being, which could not be dispensed with, but by Act of
Parliament.

They who do pretend a right to that supposed promise, put the Right into the
hands of their Representatives, whom they chose to serve for them in this
Parliament, who have passed, and Your Majesty consented to the Act of
Uniformity. If any shall presume to say, that a Right to the benefit of this
Declaration does still remain after this Act passed,

It tends to dissolve the very Bonds of Government, and to suppose a disability
in Your Majesty and the Houses of Parliament, to make a Law contrary to any
part of Your Majesty's Declaration, though both Houses should advise Your
Majesty to it.

We have also considered the nature of the Indulgence proposed, with reference
to those Consequences, which must necessarily attend it.

It will establish Schism by a Law, and make the whole Government of the Church
precarious, and the Censures of it of no Moment or Consideration at all.

It will no way become the Gravity or wisdom of a Parliament, to pass a Law at
one Session for Uniformity, and at the next Session (the reasons of Uniformity
continuing still the same) to pass another Law to frustrate or weaken the
execution of it.

It will expose Your Majesty to the restless Importunity of every Sect or
Opinion, and of every single person also, who shall presume to dissent from the
Church of England.

It will be a cause of increasing Sects and Sectaries, whose numbers will
weaken the true Protestant Profession so far, that it will at least be
difficult for it, to defend it self against them: And, which is yet further
considerable, those Numbers, which by being troublesome to the Government, find
they can arrive to an Indulgence, well, as their numbers increase, be yet more
troublesome, that so at length they may arrive to a general Tolleration, which
Your Majesty has declared against; and in time, some prevalent Sect, will at
last contend for an establishment; which, for ought can be foreseen, may end in
Popery.

It is a thing altogether without President, and will take away all means of
convicting Recusants, and be inconsistent with the method and proceedings of
the Laws of England.

Lastly, It is humbly conceived, that the Indulgence proposed, will be so far
from tending to the Peace of the Kingdom, that it is rather likely to occasion
great disturbance. And on the contrary, That the asserting of the Laws, and the
Religion established, according to the Act of Uniformity, is the most probable
means to produce a settled Peace and Obedience throughout Your Kingdom: Because
the variety of Professions in Religion, when openly indulged, does directly
distinguish men into parties, and withal, gives them opportunity to count
their numbers; which, considering the Animosities, that out of a Religious
pride will be kept on foot by the several Factions, does tend directly and
inevitably to open disturbance. Nor can Your Majesty have any Security, that
the Doctrine or Worship of the several Factions, which are all Governed by a
several Rule, shall be consistent with the Peace of Your Kingdom.

And if any persons shall presume to disturb the Peace of the Kingdom, We do in
all humility declare, That we will for ever, and in all Occasions, be ready
with our utmost endeavor and assistance, to adhere to, and serve Your Majesty
according to our bounden Duty and Allegiance.

FINIS.

