A Copy of the Presentment and Indictment Found and Exhibited by the Grand Jury
of Middlesex, in the UPPER BENCH at WESTMINSTER, On the last day of Hillary
Term, 1659.
Against Colonel Matthew Alured, Colonel John Okey, (the Captains of the
Gards) and Edmond Cooper (one of the Door keepers) for assaulting and keeping
Sir Gilbert Gerrard Baronet, one of the Knights of the Shire for their County,
by force and arms out of the Commons House of Parliament, on the 27. day of
December last; when 21. Members more were in like sort secluded and kept out of
the House by them: which will serve as a President for other Counties, and
future Secluders of the Members.
THE Jurors, etc. do present, That whereas by the Laws of England, and the
Custom and Privileges of the Parliaments thereof, every Knight, Citizen and
Burgess^ duly chosen and returned to sit in the Parliaments of England, ought
to have free access and entrance into the Commons House of Parliament, and
therein freely to sit and Vote during the continuance of the said Parliaments,
without any forcible interruption or hinderance; And whereas there was a
Parliament duly summoned to meet at Westminster, within the County of Middlesex
on the Third day of November in the year of our Lord, (after the computation of
England) 1640. And whereas Sir Gilbert Gerrard of Harrow on the Hill in the
County of Middlesex aforesaid Baronet, was by the Freeholders of the said
County, duly elected, and returned one of the Knights of the said County, with
full and sufficient power for himself, and the Commonalty of the said County,
to sit and vote in the said Commons House of Parliament, and to do and consent
to all such things as should be ordained by Common Council of Parliament,
during the continuance of the said Parliament, without any forcible
interruption or hinderance; Nevertheless, Colonel Matthew Alured, late of
Westminster in the County of Middlesex aforesaid Gent. Colonel John Okey, late
of Westminster aforesaid in the said County Gent. and Edmond Cooper late of
Westminster aforesaid in the said County Laborer, together with diverse other
persons to the said Jurors yet unknown, on the 27. day of December, in the year
of our Lord 1659. at Westminster aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, with
force and arms, etc. in and upon the said Sir Gilbert Gerrard Baronet, in the
peace of God and in the public peace then and there being, and going to and
endeavoring to enter into the House of Commons of Parliament aforesaid, at
Westminster aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, then and there being and
sitting, to sit and discharge his Duty therein, as one of the Knights of the
said County of Middlesex and a Member of the said Commons House of Parliament,
an assault did make, and then and there with force and arms aforesaid, him the
said Sir Gilbert Gerrard did forcibly and unjustly keep out of the said Commons
House of Parliament, and hinder him from entering into the said House to
discharge his duty aforesaid therein; to the high violation of the Privileges
of Parliament, the great and pernicious example of other Malefactors, and
against the peace of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed for EDWARD THOMAS at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain^, 1660.


