A Philosophical DISCOURSE Concerning SPEECH, Conformable to the CARTESIAN
PRINCIPLES.

Dedicated to The Most Christian King.

Englished out of French.

In the SAVOY, ^^^nted for John Martin, Printer to the Royal Society, and are
to be sold at the Bell, a little without Temple Bar, 166^.

TO THE KING.
SIR,
THis Discourse is the sequel of some others, that have already appeared in
public, under the August Name of Your MAJESTY. I thought I was obliged to
offer unto You the First part of this Work, forasmuch as having proposed to my
self at the beginning, to give each man to consider, what He is, me thought,
that Your MAJESTY should find in this consideration more pleasure than all
other Men. I have the same reasons to present this also to You, where I treat
no more of the Knowledge of our selves, but of the Means to know oth^^s, and to
be known by them. I show, that this Means is SPEECH; I explain all the Effects
thereof, and the better to discover the Causes, I carefully inquire into all,
it borrows from the Body or the Soul. These Causes, SIR, are so excellent in
Your MAJESTY, that You will doubtless have an incredible satisfaction to
examine them: Above all things I am persuaded, You will find more of it than
any Man, when you shall consider its Effects. You will see, it is Speech, which
produces what Your MAJESTY loves most, I mean, Glory, and you will acknowledge,
that to it you owe that Luster, which makes Your MAJESTY outshine all the
Powers of the Earth. It Is by it, SIR, that You express those Generous Thoughts,
which all tend to our Felicity; and it is by the same, that you have achieved
those great things, which make all Nations say, that You are the Greatest
Prince that ever was.

I know, SIR, that men admire no less in Your MAJESTY the Faculty you have to
be silent, than the Facility to speak: I know, I say, that the Prudence you
have to be silent, is one of the reasons, which make others speak so much of
You. But I remember very well, that Secrecy, how favorable soever it is to
great Desseins, cannot alone make them succeed, and that, how-ever Your MAJESTY
has advantagiously used it in all the Contrivances you have made for our
Happiness, you would never have obtained the Execution thereof, if you had not
employed Speech; it was necessary, Orders should be given for that. Indeed,
SIR, you know how to give them as becoms a Prince, who needs none but himself
to contrive and to resolve. You alone know, why you give them, and those that
receive them, often not know the excellent End, Your MAJESTY proposes to your
Self, but at the moment, which makes them succesfull.

How amiable is Glory, when a Man thus owes it entirely to himself! And how
pure and sincere does that of Your MAJESTY appear to me? Others, who have only
Power for their Portion, here themselves praised for a thousand Events, wherein
their Conduct had no part: Words are always found for them. But all the
Actions of Your MAJESTY, are so much above what can be said of them, that those
to whom Praise costs least, complain they can find none to express them. Such
an one has demanded Ten years to write, what we have seen You do in Ten days:
And another that knows, it requires less pains to compare Hero's with one
another, than to write their Praise, has endeavored to find like ones to Your
MAJESTY, but could meet with none among all those, whom Antiquity has left
recorded. Indeed, SIR, none of them are known, whose Passions have not guided
all their Enterprises: the world has seen him, whom past Ages have most
boasted of, to follow nothing but the motions of his Ambition, and, without at
all considering the tranquillity of his Subjects, to carry the trouble into
whole Asia; whereas, SIR, all Europe has seen You, young and victorious,
showing favor to your Enemies, that you might give Peace to your people: And
it sees at this very time, that Your Majesty covets not a great Country
exposed to your Conquests, but desires only what of right you can pretend to.
This moderation, SIR, is the greatest Virtue of Kings, and especially is it
admirable in a Prince vigilant enough to surprise the Enemy in a season, when
the most ardent Spirits for war, do quit that painful exercise; and brave
enough to execute himself, what the boldest durst not advise. What Mortals,
SIR, could have stopped Your Majesty, accomplished with these Excellencies, if the
Right of Bienseance could have tempted you? But your Neighbors were to assure
themselves afresh, it is not Ambition that has armed you; it is from the hands
of Justice, you hold that sword, which subjects the Provinces in less time,
than needs to march through them, Brabant and Henaut may give testimony hereof
to the rest of the World. Your Majesty has made them know your Right, because
you let them feel the force of your Arms; and it is known, that their Revolt is
the only cause of those great Exploits, which History will never be able
sufficiently to celebrate, and for which Poesy it self, which boasts to speak
like the Gods, confesses to want expressions. But Sir, though Poesy cannot
express the surprising effects of your Courage, take it in good part, that
Philosophy does rebuke the Excess of it, and that with her usual liberty she
reproaches you for having exposed your Sacred Person like that of a Common
Soldier. This reproach would make up the Glory of every other Prince; but Sir,
how could any man have excused You to posterity, if that Great Heart, which is
not given you but to sustain the Destiny of France, had made you be cast away
in this occasion? One cannot praise enough this ardor, which makes you quit
pleasures in the midst of Winter; but how noble soever it be, it is to be
blamed, when it makes you seek dangers, and when it exposes, against
rebellious Subjects, a life so precious to so many other faithful ones. Be
pleased, Sir, to hearken to that zeal, which speaks to you; It has always
loved Kings, it has never flattered them, and as it knows none greater than
Your Self, it cannot at that time, when it intends to discourse of SPEECH, make
better use of it for the good of the Universe, than to tell what you owe to
your own Preservation.

I shall add, Sir, that the same being to declare it self upon this Subject by
the mouth of a Man, it could not choose any one, whose Zeal were equal to mine.
I am

SIR, Of Your Majesty The most humble, most obedient, and most faithful Servant
and Subject, CORDEMOY.

The Preface.
I Proposed in the Six Discourses, which preceded this, Published A. 1666. under
the Title, Le discernement du Corpse and de l' Ame; of which see Phil. Trans.
No. 17. p. 306.
the means to know Our selves, and made it manifest, that it only consisted in
discerning in us the Operations of the Soul, and those of the Body. Now I
propose the means of knowing Others, and that is SPEECH. I explain as far as I
am able, What it is; and poursuant to my first dessein, I endeavor in this
Discourse exactly to distinguish what it borrows of the Soul, from what it
holds of the Body.

I. To begin this Inquiry with the more certainty, I do not reason but upon
what I have found within my self in the Sixth Discourse of the lately mentioned
Book; and as if I had never yet been assured, there were other Men besides my
self, I stay in the very beginning upon this Consideration, viz. Whether it be
necessary, that all the Bodies, which I see to be like mine, be united to Souls
like mine? Resolving with my self not to believe it, unless I have such evident
signs thereof, that I may doubt no more of it. I examine, What those Bodies do
that is most surprising; and as long as I can rationally impute the Cause
thereof to the Disposition of their Organs, I think, I may safely affirm, they
have no Soul. But after having found in the sole Disposition of the parts of
those Bodies, that thence I can render a reason of Noise, the Sounds, the
difference of the Voices, and the very Words uttered by Echo's and Parrets, I
am at length obliged to admit Souls in all the Bodies that resemble mine, and
to acknowledge it not possible for them to speak to such purpose, as they do,
without being endowed with Reason.

2. Next, having found, That to speak is in general nothing else, but to Give
signs of our Thoughts, I observe some of those signs. The first, I consider,
are the Motions of the Eyes or Face, and such Cries, as ordinarily accompany
the differing states of the Body: And I take notice, that they are naturally
conjoined with the Passions, of which the Soul is sensible on the occasion of
changes in the Body; and that the best way we have to manifest what she
suffers, is, not to strain the Face, Eyes or Voice. I note likewise, that this
way of explicating our selves, is the first of Tongues, and the most Universal,
there being no Nation but understands it: But I observe at the same time, that
the wickedness of Men has made that the most deceitful of all. Besides those
Natural signs of the Passions of the Soul, I discover others, which are but
Instituted ones, by which she can express what ever she conceives. I show
briefly the agreement and the difference of some of those signs, to make all
to be understood, what I intend to deduce from thence in this place; and
reserving to my self to discourse of it more strictly, and more to my purpose
thereafter, I stay to consider, How one may invent a Language; How a man may
learn the Tongue of a Country, where no body understands his; and lastly, How
Children learn to speak. I admire, how their Reason is put to it in that
Infant-age, to make them discern and distinguish the signification of every
word; above all, the Order, which they follow for that purpose, appears to Me
surprising, forasmuch as it is altogether like that of the Grammar; so that
seeing, how much this Art imitates Nature, I find no difficulty to make it out,
How those, that have given us the Rules thereof, have learnt them from little
Children. And in this whole research I meet with so many Arguments to evince
the Distinction of the B^dy and Soul, that to me it seems not, there can any
thing be more evidently known, than ^he.

3 After some reflex^^ns ^n^^ important a Truth, I betake my self, for the yet
better knowing of the nature of Spe^ch, to unfold in this place all what is to
be found in it on the score of the Body. I consider therefore in him that
speaks, the manner how the Air enters into the Lungs; why it makes a sound
in issuing out at the Windpipe? How the Muscles, that serve to open or shut
this conduit, diversifie the sound? What parts of the mouth are employed to
determine it in a Voice? What is the configuration of every one in these
different terminations? and what is the Change of the Throat, the Tongue, the
Teeth, and the Lips, in all the Articulations? Which gives me to understand,
as much as needs, what Speech is, as far as it depends upon the Body. I observe
with the same accurateness the effect, which by sound is produced in the Ear
and Brain of him, that hears. I find, it is from the correspondency between
the Brain and the other parts of every Animal, that it can be so differently
moved by different sounds; and examining chiefly the use of the Nerves, which
diffuse themselves from the Ear to all the parts serving to form the voice, I
discover the reasons of many odd effects, and amongst them, of certain Birds
imitating the singing of others, and the sound of our Musical Instruments, and
often our very Words.

4. I also draw from thence a convincing argument, that Brutes need no soul to
cry, or to be moved by Voices, or even to imitate the sound of our words; and
that if the cry of those, that are of the same species, disposes them to
approach one another, and makes those that are of a different kind, to retire;
the cause of that is to be sought no where else but in their Bodies and the
different construction of their Organs. But at the same time I find, that in
Men, the motion of the parts, which serve for the Voice, or of those that are
moved by it, is ever accompanied with some thoughts; and that in Speech there
are always two things, viz. the Formation of the Voice, which cannot proceed
but from the Body; and the Signification or the Idea, that is joined therewith,
which cannot come but from the Soul.

5. And because hitherto I have said almost nothing of the Voice, of Writing,
and of Signs, but what may serve to declare what those three ways of
expressing our thoughts have common (there having been no occasion, sooner to
observe the differences of each) I take notice in this place of three sorts of
Signs, of two sorts of Writing, and of two of Voices. I stay principally upon
the last, on which occasion I finish the explication of what the order of the
precedent matters had not permitted me to explicate sooner, touching the
easiness or difficulty, there is in joining certain Idea's to certain Words,
when we learn a Language: And making out as accurately as I can, how all that
is done, I find, that the trouble which some have to conceive, or to explain
themselves, is not an imperfection in the Soul; and that that mavelous
facility, which others enjoy to express th^mselves, proceeds only from an happy
Disposition of the Brain, and of all the parts that serve for the Voice or for
the Motions of the Body.

6. On which occasion I inquire into the natural causes of Eloquence, and find,
that to the perfection thereof are required two talents at once, which by birth
are never given to one and the same person, but yet that one of them being
furnished by Nature, the defects of the other may be supplied by Art. And having
remarked, that that is not reciprocal, I declare (as far as I may in a
Discourse where I am to explain but the Principles) whence those defects
proceed, and by what they may be corrected; and I do even examine, without
stepping into the Ethics, why an Orator ought to be a good man, and how much
Lying may impair the force or the grace of his action.

7. Lastly, having considered sufficiently, how much Eloquence depends from the
Temperament, and how it may be corrected or perfected by exercise, I examine,
Whether it is to be met with among Spirits not united to Bodies: Which obliges
me to enquire into the manner, after which they may manifest their thoughts to
one another; and it makes me discover, that even our Spirits would enjoy a more
easy communication among themselves, if the strict Union they have with the
Body, did not indispensably oblige them to make use of Signs. The same
raciocination teaches me also, that the difficulty we meet with in
entertainments, is not to conceive the thoughts of those, that speak to us, but
to unwrap it from the Signs they use to express it in, which often do not suit
with it: Whence I conclude, that the Thought of one Spirit is always clear to
another from the very instant he can perceive it. And this truth (which I
discuss as far as I am capable) serves me to resolve those difficulties, which
others have thought unsurmountable but by submission to Faith. I well know,
it is Faith, that must teach us, whether sundry things have a being indeed; but
there is not always need of its aid to conceive them. It belongs to it, for
example, to tell us, whether there be other Spirits more enlightened, that serve
to direct ours; but when once it has declared to us that truth, me thinks, our
reason can attain to it. And I esteem, that reflecting a little on what the
thread of my subject has obliged me to write of it in this Tract, we shall find
it more easy to conceive, how pure Spirits can inspire us with their
sentiments, than to conceive, how one Man can inspire his thoughts to another.

I might have proceeded further in this Inquiry, but having proposed to my self
only to examine what serves to Speech, I thought I was to make an end, after I
had considered the sundry ways by which Thoughts may be communicated, seeing
that that is properly, what we call To speak. I could wish, that the discourse
I have made of it, might prove as pleasant to others as the reflections, it has
obliged me to make, have been to me. I avow, they have been all the
divertisement I have enjoyed during the last Vacations; and as it is, at least
in that time, permitted to comply with our inclinations, the pleasure I have
found in it, sollicits me strongly to spend in the same manner all the other
hours, wherein I may be permitted to divert my self. To conclude, this Argument
is so pleasant and so fertile, that one needs but to propose it, and it will
beget a thousand pleasing thoughts: And I doubt not, but all those that excel
me in genius, will find by occasion of this Discourse a thousand pretty things,
which I have omitted; so that without boasting of my Book, I may affirm, that
the more wit a man has, the more pleasure he will find to read it.

A DISCOURSE OF SPEECH.
AMongst the Bodies, I see in the World, I perceive some, that are in all
things like mine, and I confess, I have a great inclination to believe, that
they are united to Souls, as mine is. But when I come to consider, that my Body
has so many operations distinct from those of my Soul, and that nothing of
what makes it subsist depends at all from Her, I think I have at least ground
to doubt, that those Bodies are united to Souls, until I have examined all
their actions: And I do even see, that by the maxims of good sense I shall be
obliged to believe, that they have no Soul, if they do only such things,
whereof I have found in my self that the Body alone may be the cause.

Thus if I see; that the Objects make different impressions on them by the
Eyes, Ears, Nose or Touch, and if I see them eat, sleep, wake, feed, breath,
walk, and dye, nothing of all that ough^ to make me believe, that there is any
other thing in them but a certain disposition of organs and parts, which indeed
is admirable, but yet so dependent from the course and order of the other
matter, that I have acknowledged that to be the only cause in me of Nutrition
Sleep, Respiration, and of the power which objects have to move the Brain so
many surprising ways.

It Is true, I have observed, that cer^^in Thoughts always accompanied in me
most of the motions of my Organs; but yet it is true also, that by the exactest
preciseness, with which I have distinguished what was in all my operations on
the account of the Body, and what on the score of the Soul, I have found
manifestly, that if I had nothing but the Body, I might have all what appears
to me in the other Bodies, which resemble mine.

It behooves me therefore to observe those Bodies nearer, and to examine,
whether I may not perceive by any of their Actions, that they are ruled by
Souls. I see, that ordinarily they are carried to places, where the Air seems
most proper to entertain by respiration a due temper in the Blood. I see, that
they withdraw likewise from places, where the Cold might too much retard the
motion, and from those, where the Heat might render it too quick. I see, that
they often fly with vehemence from the encounter of many other Bodies, that
appear to me of a Shape and Motion capable to destroy them; and I see also,
that they approach those, which may be beneficial to them: And all these
actions appear to me to be done with a discerning such as I find in me, when I
do the same actions.

Mean time, when I reflect, that I have found by other Contemplations, that the
sole Disposition of the Organs is the cause of all those operations in me, I
fear I affirm too much, if I attribute the different motions of the Bodies,
that surround me, to another cause, than to the agreement, there is between
their Brain and the Objects; and then, as long as I do not see them do but what
is for their good, as to eat, to drink, to seek after coolness or warmth, and
whatever may maintain them in a state suitable to their nature, I am not to
believe, there is any other thing in them but the Organs, which may suffice for
that.

But methinks, I see them often do things that relate not at all to
themselves, nor their preservation: I see some of them that meet with other
Bodies, the encounter whereof must in all appearance destroy them: I see even
some of them quit the food they need, and the places that shelter them from
what may be noxious to them, to run thither, where their destruction is in a
manner certain: And that makes me reasonably presume, that in such occasions
they may be guided by somewhat, that is very differing from themselves. For
when I see, that they approach resolutely to what is destructive to them, and
abandon what may preserve them, I cannot ascribe those effects to this
Mechanical proportion or agreement, that is between them and the Objects: And
since I have often noted, that notwithstanding the bent my body has toward
certain things, and that in spite of the force, wherewith its structure makes
it avoid others, I have yet a will contrary to its natural disposition, which
makes it often to be transported after a manner quite differing from that, it
would be, if it followed nothing else but the disposition of its organs, and
the force which the objects exercise upon it; I can hardly keep my self from
believing, but that the motion of all the Bodies, that resemble mine, depends
from a will like mine.

In a word, I can scarce doubt of it, when I reflect on the chain of many of
their actions, that have no relation at all to what can preserve them; and
above all, the connection, I find between the Words, I hear them utter at all
times, seems to demonstrate to me, that they have Thoughts. For although I do
very well conceive, that a mere Engine might utter some words, yet I understand
at the same time, that if the organs, which should distribute the wind, or open
the pipes, whence those voices should issue, had a certain settled order among
them, they could never change it, so that when the first Voice were heard,
those that were wont to follow it, would needs be heard also, provided the wind
were not wanting to the Engine; whereas the words, which I hear uttered by
Bodies, made like mine, have almost never the same sequel. On the other hand I
observe, that those Words are the same, which I would use to express my
thoughts by to other subjects, that should be capable to conceive them. Lastly,
the more I observe the effect, which my words produce, when I utter them before
those Bodies, the more methinks that they are understood: and those, which they
utter, answer so perfectly to the sense of mine, that there appears not any
more ground to doubt, but that a soul performs that in them, which mine does in
me

Notwithstanding, in pursuance to that firm resolution, I have taken to admit
nothing in my belief, but what shall appear evident to me; after I have
considered it enough, not to need to fear, I deceive my self; I will more
seriously than ever reflect upon all what serves for Speech, since that is the
surest way, I have, to know, whether all the Bodies, which so perfectly
resemble mine, are indeed Men as I am.

The first, which seems to me worthy consideration, is, that there are many
Bodies, that can cause a noise by impelling the Air, and that that noise may be
different, according to the different concourse of Bodies, or the diversity of
their parts: In which regard it is so far, there should be need of supposing
Souls in Bodies to produce that effect, that on the contrary I know, that the
Noise not happening but because the Air is impelled, the cause of it cannot
rationally be imputed but to what is capable to impel it, that is, to a Body.

I know also, that by the aid of Mechanics one may so fitly adjust certain
Bodies to one another, that they shall be able to compose instruments capable
to make agreeable sounds, and even to imitate the Songs, which I have sometimes
used to express grief or joy.

I know further, that Rocks and other like Bodies can make us understand not
only Sounds, as Musical Instruments do, but also Words perfectly articulated.
It Is true, I know, that they form them not, and that, as they would repel a
ball to him that should cast it on them, they do no more but send back the
words to him that has uttered them, that is, they drive back to him the same
air that was driven to them, without changing any thing in that impression;
which makes it carry the words so far from the places, where they are
pronounced, when there is nothing to stop them.

I conceive likewise, as I have already said, that Art may go so far as to
frame an Engine, that shall articulate words like those, which I pronounce; but
then I conceive at the same time, that it would only pronounce those, that were
designed it should pronounce, and that it would always pronounce them in the
same order.

So that I ought not hastily to believe, that whatsoever can make a Noise,
render a sound, form voices, or pronounce words, has Thoughts; and I ought
above all, to take notice, that the wonderful Workman, to whom I owe the
structure of my Body, has so mechanically disposed and ordered all the parts,
and principally those that serve for the voice, that to form it I need no Soul:
The sole motions of the Muscles, the Breast and the Diaphragme can make the Air
enter into my Lungs, or let it out; and the only situation of the Cartilages
of the Larynx, diversely changed by the small Muscles which serve to move them,
may be the cause of a thousand sharp or grave founds, sweet or shrill, piercing
or weak, according to the different flexures, the air receives in that passage.

I ought also to consider, that when I articulate diverse words, it is only
because that the Air, which is already let out of the throat, is diversely
agitated, according as the Muscles of my Tongue move the same either upwards or
downwards in my mouth; or else because being near to get out, it is agitated
according to the different ways, in which my Teeth or my Lips can apply
themselves to one another by the motion of their Muscles.

Besides I must consider, that the Muscles, which, serve to move all those
parts, are not moved themselves, but according as my Brain is agitated, and
that that can be so, a thousand different ways by the Organs of Hearing; my
soul having no other part in all those motions, but to perceive the effects
thereof.

Lastly, I am to take notice, that there is so great a communication and
correspondency between the Nerves of the Ear, and those of the Larynx, that
whenever any sound agitates the Brain, there flow immediately spirits toward
the Muscles of the Larynx, which duly dispose them to form a sound altogether
like that, which was just now striking the Brain. And although I well conceive,
that there needs some time to facilitate those motions of the Muscles of the
Throat, so that the Sounds, which excite the Brain the first time, cannot be
easily expressed by the Throat, yet notwithstanding I do as well conceive,
that by virtue of repeating them it will come to pass, that the Brain, which
thereby is often shaken in the same places, sends such a plenty of spirits
through the nerves, that are inserted in the Muscles of the Throat, that at
length they easily move ^ll the cartilages, which serve for that action, as it is
requisite they should be moved to form Sounds like those, that have shaken the
Brain.

Thus it is not enough, that Bodies make Sounds, form Voices, and even
articulate Words like those, by which I express what I think, to persuade me,
that they think whatever they seem to say. For example, I ought not be so rash
as to believe, that a Parret has any thought, when he pronounces some Words:
For besides that I have observed, that after having repeated to him exceedingly
often the same words in a certain order, he never returns but the self same
words, and in the same coherence; It seems to me, that since he does not make
these returns to purpose, he imitates men less, than Echo's do, which never
answer but what has been said to them; and if there be any difference between
Parrets and Echo's, it is, that Rocks, tossing back the Air without changing at
all the impressions, it has received, render the same voices, that have struck
them; whereas Parrets form another voice like that, which has struck the ear,
and often repeat words, which are said to them no more. But in short, as I
cannot say, that Rocks speak, when they return words, so I dare not affirm,
that Parrets speak, when they repeat them. For it seems to me, that to speak,
is not to repeat the same words, which have struck the ear, but to utter others
to their purpose and suitable to them. And as I have reason to believe that none
of the Bodies, that make Echo's, do think though I hear them repeat my words,
seeing they never render them but in the order, I uttered them in; I should by
the same reason judge, that Parrets do not think neither.

But not to examine any further, how it is with Parrets, and so many other
Bodies, whose figure is very different from mine, I shall continue the Inquiry,
which I need, to know the inward constitution of those, who resemble me so
perfectly without; and for that purpose I think, I may, after the disquisition
I have been making of all what causes noise, sounds, voices, and words,
establish for a Principle,

That if the Bodies, which are like mine, had nothing but the facilness of
pronouncing Words, I should not therefore believe, that they had the advantage
of being united to Souls: But then, if I find by all the Experiments, I am
capable to make, that they use speech as I do, I shall think, I have infallible
reason to believe that they have a soul as I.

To make this examen in such an order, as leaves me no suspicion at all to have
deceived my self, I must consider before all, what I mean by SPEECH. To speak
(in my opinion) is nothing else, but to make known what we think to that
creature which is capable to understand it. And supposing that the Bodies,
which resemble mine, have Souls, I see, that the only means to express to one
another what we think, is, to give to our selves external signs thereof.

But, me thinks, I have found, that there are many signs common to them and
me, by which we understand one another: for seeing that they answer to my signs
by other signs, which give me images agreeable to what I think, I do not
believe I am deceived, when I persuade my self, that they have understood my
thought, and that the new thought, which their signs have excited in me, is
really that, which they have.

Moreover, I see, I can agree with some of them, that what commonly signifies
one thing, shall signify another, and that this succeeds so, as that there are
none but those, with whom I have agreed about it, that appear to me to
understand what I think.

Whence I conceive; that those signs are of Institution, and as that
Institution necessarily supposes reason and thoughts in those, that are
capable to agree about it, I should, it may be, advance nothing rashly, if I
now affirmed, that those Bodies are united to Souls.

But that, which might trouble me here, is, that if there be signs of
Institution, I think, I know others, that are altogether natural. For example,
all those, by which I express my passions without any design to do so: Thus a
smiling Mien, and certain motions of my eyes, or of the other parts of my Face,
make me often consider, when I consult with the Looking-glass, that if others
saw me, they would know my sadness, my joy, or the other passions stirring in
me: And that, it may be (If those bodies resembling mine, have Souls) is the
surest means to discover to them the different constitutions of my Soul.

Yet, if I take good heed, I can render those signs very deceitful. For I find,
that though naturally I appear outwardly cheerful or sad, when I am so indeed,
yet I have the power to constrain the motions of my face and eyes, so as to
make them have an Air quite differing from that, which they would have, if I
left their motions free: Which gives me to understand, that though naturally
certain motions of my face, and even of my whole Body have been joined to some
of my thoughts, yet this conjunction is not so necessary, but that I can
sometimes alter it, by joining those thoughts to other motions. And though
indeed, that give me much pain, yet I conceive, that as we may form an easy
habit of what at first appears very difficult, I could also render these
changes easy enough to me.

But, what I am most of all to observe here is, that, although it be very
convenient, that, as long as my Soul is united to my Body, (for the
conservation whereof she has diverse passions) her joy, her sadness, her
desires, or her fear be always joined with the motions, which the good or ill
disposition of that Body can beget in the Brain; as also that that
correspondence which is between the parts of the Brain and those of the Face or
Eyes, and all such as are external, be the cause, that what is within, may
never change, unless there be marks of it without; yet notwithstanding, since
those exterior marks have no necessary relation but to the changes of the
Brain, and that the sole condition of the Body may be the cause thereof, it
might happen, that though the Bodies, which resemble mine, should not be united
to Souls, that yet they would have the same motions of eyes and face, which I
often perceive in me, according as they should be well or ill disposed within;
so that those external signs, so like in those Bodies and mine, are not alone
an infallible argument, that those bodies are endowed with Souls.

Further, since those motions of the face and eyes, and even those cries, that
are never wanting, when nothing constrains them, to follow the different
conditions of the Body by reason of the relation, there is between all the
parts thereof, may very properly be called the natural signs of the State, the
Body is in; I shall be careful to forbear, when the eyes and face, or even the
Cries of those Bodies shall not appear to me excited but by the objects, that
may benefit or hurt them, to believe, that those external motions are the signs
of any Thought.

But yet, when I shall see, that those Bodies shall make signs, that shall
have no respect at all to the state they are in, nor to their conservation:
when I shall see, that those signs shall agree with those which I shall have
made to express my thoughts: When I shall see, that they shall give me Idea's,
I had not before, and which shall relate to the thing, I had already in my
mind: Lastly, when I shall see a great sequel between their signs and mine, I
shall not be reasonable, If I believe not, that they are such, as I am.

Thus I have no more cause to doubt concerning this point; for I have many a
thousand like trials, and I have not only seen a great connection between their
signs and my thoughts, but I have also found so great an one between their
signs and mine, that I can doubt no longer of their thoughts. And if the
power, I have to hinder, that the exterior motions of my face, and the other
signs of my passions may not express them, has been one of the reasons, I
have had to acknowledge, that my thoughts were very different from the motions,
that are wont to accompany them; I can now assure, not only that those other
Bodies, which resemble mine, have thoughts, but also, though they can, as I my
self, not let them always be so joined to the motions, which use to signify
them, that one ought always to trust them; Yet I have found, that they knew
the art of constraining themselves, and frequently after many signs on their
side, and mine, which showed me that they understood my thoughts, and made me
believe that I understood theirs, I perceived, they had a design to deceive me.

Now then, since I may doubt no longer, that the Bodies, which resemble mine,
are united to Souls, and in a word, since I am assured, that there are other
men besides my self, I think I ought carefully to inquire into what remains to
know of Speech.

Hitherto I have discoursed of it but in general, and said only, that To speak
was to give signs of one's Thought: But in regard that the little reflection, I
have made on these signs, has already discovered to me so important a truth,
and that I also see, that those same signs are the only means to entertain
Society amongst Men, which is the greatest good, they have in this World, I
intend as much as I can to observe the different sorts of them together with
their properties, and to endeavor to discover all the wonders of them, to
learn all their uses.

One of the chief things, I find worthy of consideration touching these signs,
is, That they have not any resemblance to the Thoughts, which men join to them
by institution. And indeed, whether we express our thoughts by gestures, by
discourse, or by characters, (which are the three sorts of the most used signs,
by which we manifest our thoughts) we cannot but see (if we consider it with
some attention) that there is nothing less resembling our Thoughts, than is all
that, which serves us to express them. For, when a man, to declare that he
agrees not with me in such or such a thing, is shaking his head, and when the
better to express it, he moves his throat, tongue, teeth and lips, to form
words, or takes paper and with a pen trace^ characters to write it to me, I see
so little resemblance betwixt all those motions of the Head, of the Mouth, or
o^ the Hand, and what they teach me that I cannot enough wonder how they so
easily give me the understanding of a thing, they so ill represent.

But what is most admirable herein is, That this vast difference between those
Signs and our Thoughts, does by marking to us that, which is between our Body
and Soul, teach us at the same time the whole Secret of their Union. At least
methinks, that that strict union, which the sole Institution or men is able to
settle betwixt certain external Motions, and our Thoughts, is to him that will
consider it, the best means to conceive, wherein in truth consists the Union of
the Body and the Soul. For cartainly, if we do conceive, that men can by
institution join certain Motions to certain Thoughts, it cannot be hard to
conceive, that the Author of Nature, in forming a Man, so well unites some
Thoughts of his Soul to some motions of his Body, that those motions cannot be
raised in the Body, but the thoughts must also be forthwith excited in the
Soul, and that reciprocally as soon as the Soul will have the Body move after a
certain manner, it be so at the same time.

For the rest, it is evident, that from this so necessary relation, which the
Author of Nature maintain betwixt the body and the soul, it is that that
necessity of making Signs to express our thoughts has its rise. For, seeing
the Soul can have no though, but at the occasion whereof there will be made a
motion in the Body, and that also she cannot receive any Idea of what is
without but by the motions excited in the Body, which she animateth; it must
needs be, that two Souls united to two different Bodies do express their
thoughts by Motions, or, if you will, by outward Signs. But to know persectly,
how that is done, there needs, in my opinion, to be made but a little reflection
on what I have already observed about the principal differences of Signs, on
the particular cause of each, and on the reasons, men have to use them.

And first, if it be true, that certain motions of the Face, and certain Cries
do naturally follow certain conditions of the Body by virtue of the relation,
which is between all the parts thereof, we must believe, that the thoughts,
which are naturally joined to those motions of the Face, and to these Cries,
are the passions, which the Soul suffers at the occasion of the State, the Body
is in; so that if a man has well observed his Eyes, his Face, and all the
outward parts of his Body during the time he has been in certain passions, he
has been able, seeing the same motions in another man, to Judge, that that man
felt the same passions: It Is true, if at times he has been so dextrous as to
constrain himself in the like state, he may have learned to mistruct those
signs; but still it is manifest, that they are naturally proper to declare
passions, and that the best means to make one understand what the Soul suffers,
is, not to constrain the Face, the Eyes or the Voice; it is the most natural way
to express our thoughts; it is also the first of all the Languages, and the most
Universal that is in the World, since there is no Nation, but understands it.

There are two other ways to express not only the Passions of the Soul, but
also what ever she conceives, viz. Speech, and Writing; which, to speak truth,
are but one and the same thing. For, men having observed, that they could form
different Voices or different Letters, did agree, that the words or the Letters
should signify Things, and they expressed themselves by the one or by the other
of those ways, according as it was more convenient to the State, they were in;
if they were absent, the letters which remain after they are drawn were more
convenient for them, because they could be carried where a voice could not; but
if they were present, words uttered seemed to them a more facil way to express
themselves; and lastly, if there were some, that had not the freedom of the
voice, he might by Characters expose to the Eye the Signs of his Thought: So
that if there be any real difference 'twixt Writing and Speaking, it is, that in
Speaking we make use of the Voice, and in Writing of Characters, which it is
true, are very differing signs, but in both we express our selves by things
external and corporeal, which by institution are made to signify what we think;
and that in general is what we call Speaking.

This being so, there is no man, that may not conceive, that one can lear^ a
Language, or a way of Writing, an^ that one may even invent them. For is
evident, that whether we learn them or invent them, we do nothing else bu^
agree, that certain Characters shall signify certain thoughts. It appears also
that if there be a difference between learning and inventing them; it is, that
in learning them, we only furnish our selves with the signs, already agreed
o^ by other men, but in inventing them we are Masters of the Institution, which
makes that the Words or Characters signify rather one thing than another: And
by this means it is, that almost all the Nations have made to themselves
different Languages.

But as it is easy to conceive, how men that speak one and the same Language,
may agree amongst themselves about the means of inventing new ones; I shall
stay a while to consider, how a person that has no knowledge at all of the
Language of a Country, may learn it, though those of that Country should know
nothing of his.

For that end I conceive, that applying himself at first to know the names of
the things, most necessary for him, he should attentively hearken to all that
should be said by those, who should hold in their hands, or show any of those
things; and the word they should repeat oftnest in speaking of that thing,
being most likely the name of it, he should, when he pronounces that word, at
the same time, to obtain the thing, use some sign to manifest he had need of
it; and if, making that show, and and giving to understand his need, he should
not name it aright, men would not be wanting to tell him the right name of it;
so that he might by the like informations in a short time know the name of many
things, and how little wit soever he had, observe, above all things, the words
that should be repeated to him oftnest, by answering to diverse questions, he
should make of the name of the things, by pointing to them. For, in all
appearance, the words, that should be found in all the answers nearest the name
of every thing, would signify, That is called, or named; so that he would have
no more to do but to repeat them, for the making of new questions.

When he shall have learnt by this means the names of many things, he might
then, according as those things should be beneficial or hurtful, observe the
words, which those, who should manifest they were affected with them, should
use to express what they meant by them, and by this way learn the words, which
signifying the qualities are always added to those, which signify the things,
to which those qualities belong.

Next, when he shall see done certain actions, e.g. of mounting, descending,
going away, and coming, he might ask, How that was called, and when he shall
know words enough to form discourses, wherein he might mingle Verbs with Nouns,
that is to say, what he thought concerning the things and their actions, he
could then make himself to be understood, though he should as yet speak
improperly as to the words and the construction.

But to see, that that is not impossible, we need only to consider, that such a
thing must often happen to Travelers: And should not Men of age find means to
make themselves to be understood in a Country where they come, since little
Children find them to learn the language of the Country where they are born?
They bring nothing with them into the world, but what Nature gives to all men,
to express pain, joy, or other passions: Mean while, that suffices them; and
how little time soever they have lived, they so well study the looks of their
Nurse, that she can make them weep or laugh, by only looking on them. Thus they
easily know the passions of those that come near them, by the external motions,
which are the natural signs of them.

They are somewhat longer to understand the signs, that men have instituted to
signify things; but the need they have of some of them, renders them so
attentive to ^ll what is said of those things, when they perceive that they are
touched or shown by the hand, that at length they learn the name of it. It Is
true, that ordinarily we endeavor to excite in them some p^ssion (as joy) by
some cry, which accomp nying the show that is made to them of the things at the
same time, when we tell them their names, makes th t they are more attentive
to them, and by being more affected with them by this means, they retain them
the better.

But in the taking p^ins to teach them certain things, we often perceive, that
they know the names of a thousand other things, which we desseigned not to show
them: And what is most surprising therein, is, to see, when they are 2. or 3.
years of age, that by the sole force of their attention they are capable to
find out in all the constructions which are made in speaking of one and the
same thing, the name, we give to that thing.

They learn after this, with the same applic^tion and discerning, the words
which signify the qualities of the things of which they know the names.

At last, extending their knowledge farther, they mark some actions or motions
of those same things; and observing at the same time those that speak of it,
they, by virtue of their attention, and hearing repeated the words, which are
mixed with the names that signify the things or their qualities, distinguish
those that signify action.

Thus a child of a strong and vigorous temper, seeing a Horse that runs, seems
to have a mind to fly after it, those that intend to divert him, often asking
him, Whether he sees the Horse: And because perhaps that word would be too
hard for him to pronounce, in regard that Children do better pronounce all the
words, that need only the Lips or the Gums to be well articulated, they give
him a name convenient for it; and when by the effect he makes to get to the
Horse, he is come near the pronunciation of that word, he is led near the
Creature, which he is made to flatter, by saying it is a fine, a good Horse:
which is often repeated as long as it suffers it self to be thus caressed. But
if the Horse begin to stir or snort, which may make one fear it might hurt the
Child, those that have a mind to take the Child away from it, presently say,
it is a naughty Horse: And if that Child, when it is carried away, expresses by
crying it would stay, those that hold it, fain a kind of fear, of which the
Child knowing the outward signs in their looks, feels presently the like
motions, which makes it be contented to be removed from the Horse: And whereas
during all that while the word naughty is often repeated with demonstrations
that make the Child more attentive, it conceives what this new word means,
remembers it, and often repeats it his own way, so that, if after such lessons
the same Child sees an Horse, it will repeat the word, which signifies to him
that Animal, and if in his approach to it he finds it gentle and content to be
stroaked, he names at the same time the word that signifies an Horse, and that
which signifies its gentleness; but if it prance, the fear which the Child
will have of it, will make it strive to get away, and to name the word naughty
as well as it can, after that which signifies an Horse, without tying these
two words together by any Verb, that denotes any action.

I shall here mention on the by that it is likely, that those who made the
Elements of the Grammar, made the like Observations. As the whole are of their
method could not be deduced but from the Nature it self, they must needs have
considered, how Children learn to speak; and I see that indeed their precepts
are nothing but an Imitation of those which Nature gives to Children.

First, Grammarians teach the Words, that signify things, which they call
substantives; then those that signify qualities, which they call adjectives;
and till they have well distinguished those two names, they teach not the words
that signify the actions of things, which they call verbs: wherein they follow
also the sons Nature gives to Children, who, as far as we can observe, do not
apply themselves to hearken to the words which signify the actions of a thing,
but when they already know the name of the thing it self, and that of the
qualities, which makes that thing please or displease them: for it is always
according to this agreeableness, that they learn one thing rather than another.

And to explain that by the same Example, which I have already begun to m^ke
use of; when the Child, whereof have spoken, knows well the name of the Horse,
and the names of the qualities, that make it please or displease him, the
desire which it naturally has to extend its knowledge causes it to observe
the actions of the Horse when it sees it; and if at times we perceive, that
following the impetus of its temper, it gives signs of joy, when it sees the
Horse run, we shall then say with such outcries as commonly do accompany Joy,
and by moving the Child in a manner like that the Animal moves in, that the
Horse runs; and this often repeated will make the Child conceive the word which
expresses that action, insomuch that it will not fail to join the word, which
signifies the Horse, to that which signifies its action.

We might, pursuing of the same example, show, how a Child learns at length to
speak a whole language; but it is sufficient to have exactly observed the
beginnings of it, it being easy to understand the sequel thereof. That which
is only to be noted here, is, that it requires much more time to teach them
the power of Adverbs, th^n the words that signify substances, qualities, and
actions; because it concerns not so much their conservation to know that more,
or this less; that excess, or this defect, which are expressed by the Adverbs,
that are joined to things, qualities or actions, as the things, qualities or
actions themselves do.

It may also be considered, that when they begin to take notice of the more,
the less, of the excess or defect, they commonly express it by some motion, or
some pointing at bigness, smalness, according as things touch one another
strongly or slightly by their qualities or action.

It Is the same with Conjunctions and other particles invented to connect
things, or to separate them. For, Children use them but seldom, and late;
because they, following nature altogether, believe to have expressed the thing
and its quality, when they have put the two words, that signify them, to one
another.

And the same a Child does as to the action, which he expresses by putting the
word, which signifies it, next the name of the thing, without being yet able
to discern that preciseness of the times, or to observe that diversity of
terminations, which applying the word, that signifies one and the same action,
to diverse persons and diverse times, forms Conjugation.

We might also show, how a Child comes to know the term of actions; and lastly
we might draw from the natural order, wherein Children learn to speak, notions
to judge, which of all the Languages are the most perfect: For doubtless those
which we should find in their ordinary constructions to follow most that
natural order, should pass for the most perfect.

But since I only look here after the Principles, I am not to proceed so far to
particulars. I desire only, that by the way an important truth may be taken
notice of, which this example of Children evidently discovers to us, viz. That
from their birth they have their reason entire; because indeed this way of
learning to speak is the effect of so great a discerning, and of so perfect
reason, that a more wonderful one cannot possibly be conceived.

If in the sequel of age they appear without conduct, and almost without
reason, it is to be considered, that it is the knowledge of aff^ires, and the
matters they are to reason upon, which they want, rather than reason. To which
may be added, that the Customs of the World, which make up all the wisdom of
it, are often so contrary to what Nature, well ordered, would exact from men,
that those who are born, need to live many years, to learn things so remote
from what Nature te^cheth. But always it is manifest, that the Reason of
Children is entire from the beginning, seeing they learn perfectly the Langu^ge
of the Country where they are born, and that in less time than Men of age need
to learn that of a Country, where they should chance to travel, and not find
any body that understood theirs.

By this time it is not difficult to conceive, why it is so easy for us to
learn a strange Language of a person that understands it, and understands also
ours: For then we can easily enquire after the name of every thing. By this
means also we may learn many Tongues, it being obvious, that after we have
learnt the word, which signifies a thing in French, we may also learn, by what
words the Italians, the Spaniards and other Nations express that thing: And
what is remarkable, is, that when we have once agreed, that many words shall
signify one and the same thing, we so well join the Idea or the thought of
that thing to each of those words, that often we remember very well that the
Idea of it has been given us, without remembering which of all those words was
employed for it: whence it comes to pass, that when we are in company with
persons of different Countries, whose Tongues we understand, we easily retain
every news, and all what was said upon the matters, that were spoken of,
without remembering just the words nor the Language that was made use of to give
us those images, which remain of them in us.

This also shows very clearly, methinks, the distinction there is between our
Thoughts, and the Words whereby we express them: And as the principal end, for
which I designed this Tract, is to show this distinction, so I think I am not
to omit in this place another Consideration, which, in my opinion, makes that
so evident, that it is not possibe to doubt of it.

And that is, that when a man speaks in public, and has for his Auditors many
persons of different Nations, the sense of his words is not apprehended but by
those, who know the Language he uses, although the sound of his words do
equally affect all the rest. But if the Soul were not distinct from the Body,
and if Thoughts were not distinct from Motions, it would happen, that when the
Brain of many persons should be affected in the same manner, they would all
think the same thing at the same time, because they equally have what in that
matter depends from the Ear and Brain. But because all have not agreed in this,
that certain motions of those parts should signify certain things, nor have
joined them to the images they have of them, it happens, that one speaks
fruitlesly of those things before them, and that they understand them not,
though the words, employed to express them, strike their Ear and Brain, as they
do the Ear and Brain of those that understand them.

The same thing may also be seen in those that study any Language. They often
know in one instant the signification of a word, but know it no more in
another; and yet they well remember the word; and they have also the image of
the thing, which it is to represent to them; but they have not yet so well
joined the one to the other, that that image returns to their mind, when the
word is pronounced which signifies it.

Although I am persuaded, I have hitherto said nothing but what is grounded on
principles clear enough to leave no doubt, and that possibly they might be
sufficient to deduce other consequences from them, which might also discover to
us some truths important enough; yet notwithstanding I believe, that to cle^r
up fully what remains to be said, and even what has been said alre die, it will
be fit, before we proceed, well to discriminate all what is sound in Speech ^s
depending from the Body, from wh^t there is in it, as depending from the Soul;
and then to consider what it borrows from their Union.

Upon the account of the Body in him, that forms the Voice, it is to be
considered, that he has Lungs, into which the Air enters by the Windpipe when
the Muscles of the Breast distend all the sides thereof by their motion; just
as Air enters in a pair of Bellows at the end, when it is expanded by separating
the two sides thereof.

We are also to conceive, that as the wind, which issues out of Bellows, when
they are closed, would be capable to thrust the Air as many different ways, as
we should put different pipes at the place where the wind comes out; even so
the Air, which issues out of the Lungs, when the Breast subsides, is diversely
thrust, according as the Entry of the Windpipe is differently disposed; which
I enlarge not upon, because I suppose, that it is generally known, that besides
many small gristly rings, serving to keep the sides of the membrane, which
forms that channel, by which the Air enters into and issues out of the Lungs,
from approaching one another too near; there are three considerable ones,
whereof one can shut it self so close, that when it is in that position, the
Air cannot get out of the Lungs but with a great force; And sometimes also it
can so enlarge it self, as that the Air may issue out very easily. But as
between the greatest and the smallest Aperture, of which it is capable, here is
an infinite diversity of other Apertures, of which every one makes a different
impression on the Air, we are not to think it strange, that the Air which comes
out of the mouth, is able to make so many different effects.

I suppose also, that every one easily conceives, that the Cartilage, which
serves to modify the Air, is not destitute of the muscles, that are requisite
to open it, to shut it, and even to keep it in certain positions, as there
shall be need to make one and the same sound last. These Muscles are disposed
in so wonderful an order, that it is not possible to see it without admiration.
The other two Cartilages have also their Muscles, and all things are so well
ordered in that place, that one may raise or depress that Entrance, and open or
close it, and that either slowly or swiftly, yet so that the motion of the
small muscles, which serve for some of those actions, be not hindered by the
motion of those, that serve for others: Which informs us, that it is from the
sole disposition of that place of the Windpipe, that the difference of the
sounds depends.

And it is to be observed, that if there were but that part, there would not be
any difference betwixt the sounds, it would make, and those of a Flute, that
is, it would make only uncertain sounds, and no voices: but to give them a
certain determination, the Mouth is so fashioned, that these sounds coming to
be tuned, receive different terminations according to the different ways it
opens.

If for example you open the Mouth as much as you can in crying, you cannot
form but a voice in A. And for that reason the Character, which in writing
denotes that voice, or termination of the sound, is called A.

If you open your mouth a little less, advancing the lower jaw toward the
upper, you will form another voice terminated in E.

And if you approach yet more the jaws to one another, yet without making the
Teeth touch, you will form a third voice in I.

But if on the contrary you go to open the Jaws, and at the same time draw the
Lips together at the two corners, the upper and the lower, yet without quite
shutting them, there will be formed a voice in O.

Lastly, if you approach the Teeth, yet without quite joining them, and at the
same instant put out both the Lips by approaching them again, without quite
joining them, you form a voice in U.

It is so easy to conceive, how the motions that are given to all the parts of
the Mouth in each of those formations of voices, being mixed, there may be
formed voices, the termination whereof shall be intermediate between two of
those five voices; that I shall not stay to examine how these middle or
compounded Voices are formed, which are called Dipthongues.

But I believe it is necessary a little to examine, how those motions of the
Voice are made, that make those different Articulations of it, which in writing
are expressed by the Characters called Consonants.

Some are articulated by the Lips only; thus when we join our Lips without
joining the Teeth, we cannot form the voice A, but in disjoyning the Lips in
such a manner, as makes us articulate the Syll^ble Ba, whereof the last letter
expressing the termination of the Sound, that is, the Voice, is called Vowel;
and the first, which marketh the manner how this voice is articulated, sounding
together with it, is called H. Consonant. Whence, by the by we may see, that
often the Voice may be good, without being well articulated: For, the Lungs,
which thrust the Air, and the entrance of the Windpipe, may be so well
disposed as to make the Voice very agreeable and pleasing; but in the same
person, who shall have that advantage, the other parts of the Mouth may be so
ill disposed, that not being moved with ease, nor corresponding the one to the
other with an entire justness, the Voice shall not be well articulated.

What is said of B. with the Voice A. may be said of the same Consonant with
other Voices, without any difference in the articul^tion, which beginning
always with disjoyning the Lips is always the same, and receives not its
different termination but from the different site, which the parts of the Mouth
put themselves in, to form those different Voices.

The Consonants P, and M. are formed as B. by disjoyning the Lips; but with
this difference, that the Lips are to be only joined to pronounce B. by opening
them; but they must be more strongly closed and drawn inward to utter a P; and
yet more closed and more drawn in, well to pronounce an M.

The Letter F. is uttered by joining the under-lip to the upper-teeth, whereas
the former Consonants are formed by joining both Lips together.

The Consonant V. is pronounced as the Letter F. with this difference, that you
do more press your Teeth against the Lip for the Letter F, than for the
Consonant V.

The Letter S. is pronounced by approaching the Under-teeth near enough to the
Upper-teeth, and the Tongue near enough to the Palate, not to let the Air pass,
which is getting out of the Mouth, but by a kind of whistling: And the Letter
Z. is pronounced after the same manner, only with this difference, that for Z.
we leave a little more space to the air, by not approaching so much the Tongue
to the Palate, and by so extending it that it may nearer approach the Teeth,
than in the pronouncing of S.

D. is uttered by an appulse of the top of the Tongue to the Gums of the
upper-teeth; and T. by striking with the top of the tongue against the place
where the upper and lower teeth join.

As for the letter N. it is formed by striking with the top of the tongue
between the palate and the upper part of the teeth: And R. by carrying the top
of the tongue to the upper part of the palate, so that the tongue being shaken
by the air issuing forcibly, yields to it; and often returns to the same place,
as long as one will have this pronunciation to last. And the letter L. is
uttered by carrying the top of the tongue between the place, where the letter
N. and that, where R. is formed.

G. is pronounced by a gentle appulse of the middle of the tongue to the inward
extremity of the palate; and K. by its appulse to the same place with a little
more force.

As to X, it is a pronunciation compounded of S. and K. For C, it may be said,
that it is often pronounced like S. and frequently like K. The letter Q. is also
pronounced like K.

Lastly, the J. consonant is pronounced by carrying the middle of the tongue
toward the interior extremity of the palate, with less force than in G, when
it is pronounced with an A, or O, or V, For CH, it is a pronunciation of C,
joined to a gentle aspiration; so that the syllable Ga. comes from the bottom
of the Throat; the syllable Ka, from somewhat more forward; the syllable Ja,
from a place a little nearer the middle of the palate, and the syllable Cha,
from the very middle of the Palate

I do not examine, why some pronounce certain consonants better than others.
For it is obvious, that the facility or difficulty of pronouncing comes only
from the disposition there is in the parts of the mouth, insomuch that if the
muscles of some of them be well disposed, and those of others not, we shall
pronounce the Letters well, where we have need of the motion of the parts, that
are in a good disposition; and we shall pronounce ill those, where we have
occasion of the motion of parts, that are disposed ill. Thus little Children
will pronounce better the B. than P. D. and some others, where we need only the
lips or some teeth, or the top of the tongue, than those letters, to pronounce
which there is required the use of the middle of the tongue, or where it is
necessary to redouble the tongue to the height of the palate, as the letter R;
because the humidity of their Brain makes their tongue too thick: whence we
are wont, in speaking to them, to alter the name of the things which they knew
first, when there are letters which they cannot pronounce; and that amongst Us,
we mark to them their Father and Mother (Pere and Mere) by words, of which the
Consonants are easy, being pronounced by the lips and teeth, or by the tip of
the tongue.

After we have taken notice as much as was necessary, How Sound is formed; How
it is terminated into Voices; and How articulated into syllables by him that
pronounces (to consider nothing but the Body;) We are now to examine the
effect it produces in the Ear, it strikes, and in the Brain, it shakes.

In regard that the Anatomy of the Ear is a thing commonly known, and that it is
sufficient for every one to be persuaded in the general, that it is an Organ
disposed to receive the air, when it is propelled by Bodies, which by touching
one another drive it from betwixt them, or repelled by hard Bodies, or issuing
out of the Lungs of an Animal; I shall make no description of it: I desire only
it may be observed, that as many different shakings there are in the Air, so
many different sorts there are of its passing into the Ear, and that according
to those diversities it causes a different agitation in the Membrane
(stretched out in the bottom of the Ear) and in the Nerves answering thereto.

It may also be judged by what we know of the construction of Animals, even of
Beasts, that according as the Agitation of the Nerves of the Ear is different,
the Brain must be agitated in different parts; and likewise that it is always
according as those different parts are agitated, that the spirits are
differently distributed into the members.

But all that is performed by a necessary sequel of the mechanical disposition
of the whole Body of every Animal, and even of every Beast, which being of a
certain kind, that is, made for one thing or another, has all what is
necessary to effect what the Author of Nature proposed to himself in forming
it: It has the Brain so adjusted (according to its temperament) for all what
may conserve it, that if the Objects which can hurt it, move its Brain, it is
always after such a manner, which makes it to open in the places, whence the
spirits may flow into the muscles, which serve to make it retire from those
Objects; and if the Objects, which can benefit it, move its Brain, it is always
in such a manner, as makes it to open in the places, whence the spirits may be
diffused into the muscles, which serve to make it approach to those Objects, so
that if we suppose, that one and the same noise striking the ears of two Beasts
of differing kind, do agitate at the same time their Brains, we are to believe,
that that agitation being diversely made in each, and in different parts of
their Brain, according as that which causes the noise, shall be agreeable or
contrary to it, it will also happen, that the course of the spirits being
necessarily different in those two Beasts, one of them shall be carried far
from the object, whilst the other approaches to it. Thus the howling of a Wolf
may make a Sheep fly, but at the same time bring to him another Wolf.

But it is necessary to observe here, that although the Art, whereby the Brain
of Animals is composed, be infinitely varied, and that it is admirable herein,
that according to their different conformations it is always found so
artificially disposed, that those Creatures must necessarily and according to
all the rules of the Mechanics approach to what is naturally good for them,
and retire from what is naturally noxious to them; yet it was not possible,
that within the small compass of their Brain there should be so many differing
springs, that they could have a proportion necessary, and always well suited to
all sorts of Objects.

But instead thereof, their Brain is made of a substance soft enough, easily to
receive new impressions, and yet consistent enough to retain those, which in
some places thereof are made by certain objects, which being neither naturally
good nor ill for them, do yet sometimes occasion considerable benefit or
mischief to them; and frequently those traces, which at first were not in the
Brain, remain there so well marked, that when the Objects, which caused them,
present themselves, the places, keeping the impression, being more agitated by
them than the other, diffuse thence such spirits into the muscles, as serve to
carry the Animal nearer to or further from those Objects, according as they
have been found beneficial or noxious to it.

Mean time, whereas there is much more danger for the Animal, to suffer the
approach of the Objects, that can hurt it, than there would be in the not
approaching those that might do it good: at the time when there is yet no
impression in its Brain at the occasion of an Object, if then it happen, that
from a noise that Object begin to shake the Brain of the Creature, it will
never fail to fly; especially if the Air has been agitated strongly, or in
such a way that has troubled the Brain,

I believe there is no body, that has not often felt in himself the effects of
this surprise, and experimented how much the Will, which the Soul then has to
keep the Body in certain places, is controled by this natural Disposition,
which makes all the Spirits and Muscles conspire together to transport it far
from those places, where a noise is made; especially when it is so great, that
the whole Body is threatened to be there destroyed.

Every one may also have found, what force the agitation made in the Brain by a
noise not ordinary, has to make the Spirits, without one's thinking on it, flow
into the muscles, that serve to transport the Body out of the places where that
noise happens.

But since this is not yet the place proper to examine, what the Soul's part is
in Speech, we must, to finish the Observations of what she borrows from the
Body for the formation of a Voice, call to mind a Note, I have already made,
which is, that the same Nerves which answer to the Ears, have branches going to
the Teeth, the Tongue, the Entrance of the Windpipe, and generally to all the
places which serve to form or modifie the Voice; so that, following Nature's
Institution, the same shaking of the Auditory Nerves, which affects the Brain
with the motion, caused by a voice in the Air, is also the cause, that the
Spirits, which flow from the Brain into the Nerves of all the parts serving for
the Voice, dispose their Muscles in a manner, which answering to the Impression
made by the Voice in the Brain, puts them into a state to form a Voice
altogether like it: And if it have been necessary, that the correspondence,
which is between the Auditory Nerves and the Brain, should be such, that when
it should be moved by the concussions of the air, that should be done in
different places of it according to the diversity of Noises, to the end that,
following that diversity, the Spirits might diffuse themselves into the
Muscles, that can carry away or stay the Animal, according as the causes of
that noise are good or ill for the whole Body; It was no less requisite, there
should be a sufficient commerce between the same Auditory Nerves, and those of
the parts, that serve for the Voice, to bring it to pass, that when a voice
should strike the ear, the Muscles of those parts might immediately be disposed
as they ought to be, to form another perfectly like it.

And to manifest this necessity better, it is requisite to make two reflections.
The first is, that if it concern Animals, to have their Brain shaken by the
noise of certain Bodies, before they approach too near them, that so they may
avoid them; it concerns them likewise to have their Brain moved by some other
Bodies, to the end that they may be carried toward them, when they are remoter
from them, than is requisite for their conservation, or convenience.

The other is, that as, (considering only each Animal according to its species)
there is nothing more noxious to it, than those of a contrary species; so there
is nothing that can be more beneficial to it than those of its own kind.

That being so, it is evident that nothing could be so useful as this
communication, which is between the Ears and the parts serving to form the
voice: For by this means the cry of one Beast shaking the Brain of another of
its kind, it presently comes to pass, that not only it is carried toward that,
which makes the cry (according to what has been said) but besides, the
Muscles of its Throat do so dispose themselves, that it makes at the same time
a like cry, and this new cry striking the Brain of that, which cried first,
causes the spirit to flow into the Muscles, which serve to carry it toward the
second; so that they sooner meet, and may, according to the causes of the cry,
that made them approach, draw from one another what may contribute to their
conservation.

I very well know, that this necessity of forming cries or voices like those,
that have struck the Ears, is not so universal, that it must so fall out
always; and that there are two cases, wherein it happens otherwise even in
Brutes.

The first is, when that Creature, whose Ear is struck, and whose Brain is
agitated by a Cry, is not of the same kind with that which makes the Cry. For
we know, by what has been above delivered, not only that the dispositions of
the parts, which form the voice in Animals of different species, being
altogether different, that cannot come to pass, but also, that what is the
cause why a Brute makes a cry like that which is made by another of its own
kind, is only that they may the sooner come together in cases of need, which
they may stand in of one another.

The other is, that it may often happen, even among Animals of the same kind,
that the Brain of the one is moved by the Voice or Cry of the other after such
a manner, that it shall be more beneficial for that creature, whose Brain has
been moved by that cry, to have the spirits flow into other Muscles, than those
which serve to make a like voice. For example, if a Cock makes that noise he
uses to make, when he meets with a grain of corn, it may be, that that noise
striking the ears of the Hens, will shake their Brain in such a manner, as
shall make them run to the place where that grain is, without forming a voice
like that which made them come thither: As also it may happen, that one Animal
cries so, on the occasion of a dangerous object, as that it makes all the
other of the same species run away, without forming any cry like it. But as
often as a Brute is not pressed by such necessities, which do always
strongliest determine the course of the spirit in its Body, when its ear is
struck by a Cry; that communication betwixt the Ears and the Larinx makes,
that from the same place, where the Nerves of the Ear have made a motion in its
Brain, the spirits do necessarily flow into the Muscles of the Larinx, which
disposing it in such a way, as is suitable to the impression of the Brain do
make the Animal form a cry altogether like it.

Thence it comes, that Birds excite one another to sing: And in short, this
commerce between the Nerves of the Ear, and those of the parts serving for the
voice, is in general so much the cause of the noise, which most Brutes make,
that (provided they are not in any urgent need) when their ears are excited by
some noise, the impression it makes in their Brain, causes the spirits, that
are not diverted another way, take their course to the Larinx to dispose it to
make a like noise. And as the noise which has shaken their Brain, cannot
always be imitated by the voices, which they are capable to make according to
the natural conformation of their Throat, they often return such as are very
differing. Hence it is, that Musical Instruments excite Birds to sing, yet
their songs are so different from all that is played on such Instruments. But
to show, that that proceeds only from the little conformity there is between
those Instruments and the disposition of the Throat of the Bird, which hinders
the imitation, we find that as often as there is a proportion between their
throat, and the voices that strike their Ears, they fail not to form at length
such as are like them.

Thus Linets learn in time the note of Nightingales, the songs of other Birds,
and what ever is played on Instruments; and they learn even, as Parrets, to
pronounce some of our words, because they have the Tongue and Beak disposed to
articulate them. If they be long in learning the songs of other Birds, or our
words, it is because the Nerves, which communicate from their ears to the
muscles of their Throat, Tongue, and Beak, cannot be so soon adjusted to those
new ways of voices, as to cause their formation presently; but it appears at
last, that from the time that those parts are capable to form those voices,
they do actually utter them.

And we ought above all things to observe, that the change which happens in
them when they learn, is, that their Brain being diverse times struck in the
same place by the same Songs, or the same Words, the impression thereof remains
so strong in that place, that the spirits which thence issue to flow into the
muscles of their Throat, Tongue and Beak, do at last dispose them to repeat
those songs or words.

It is likewise to be well observed, that they never return the songs and words
they have learnt, but when they are in no such need, which diverts their
spirits another way; and if in those necessities they form a cry or voice, it is
ever the cry or voice of their kind; so that they form not strange songs, nor
utter human words, but when they want nothing, and when the spirits, abounding
or much heated, run, without any diversion to their course, from the place of
the brain, which those songs or words have most agitated, to the parts that
serve for the voice; except great care have been taken to give them none of the
food they needed, but at the time when some body did sing or speak near them:
for then the presence of the food does not fail to excite them to repeat the
same songs or words.

And to understand this well, we must conceive, that Brutes learn their cry
from others of their kind, and that ordinarily the food is the cause of it. For
their young ones, having at the same time their Ears struck by the cries,
always made by their Dams at the presence of some food, which they have not yet
the possession of, and their Eyes also struck by that food it self; it must
come to pass, that the place of their brain which always receives those two
agitations at once, gets thence in time such an impression made in it, that the
spirits taking their course from that place to the throat and the muscles
serving for the voice, must needs dispose them after such a manner, as
answering to the impression of the brain, causes those young ones to make a
cry like that of their Dam.

But when they are brought up by men, and when Linets, for example, are bred in
a Cage, and that in-stead of the cry of their Dam, it happens, that in the
presence of the food, certain strange songs or humane words strike their ears;
it is no wonder if those words or songs (making impression in the same place of
the brain, whence that food should have made the spirits to flow into the
muscles of the throat and beak, to cause them to make the noise, which birds
make at the presence of a food they hold not yet,) are cause that the spirits
being otherwise directed, do also otherwise dispose the muscles of the throat,
tongue and beak, of those young Birds, and make them sing songs and utter words
instead of the cry, which they would have formed, if their Dam had bred them:
This must needs so happen; and even those songs or words may then be called
their natural cry or song, because having always accompanied an action, that
has made so deep an Impression on their brain, it cannot be, that that action
should move their brain, and the spirits should not also flow presently to the
muscles, which serve for that song or those words. And likewise, if they have
been put in a certain condition, or in a certain place to make them learn the
better, they will sooner repeat what they have been taught, if they be put
again in the same condition and place, than in any other.

It Is easy also to understand, why it has sometimes happn'd, that a great
noise, as that of a Trumpet, having at one blow shaken altogether the ear of a
Bird, has made so strong an Impression in his brain, that having struck out
all the others, the spirits have no more diffused themselves toward his
throat, than in such a manner, as might dispose the muscles of the Larinx to
return sounds altogether like that of a Trumpet: And we must not wonder, if the
passages, through which those spirits flow to the throat, being more difficult
to be moved, than the brain to be shaken, the Bird remains sometimes in a kind
of silence for many days, before he renders that sound; nor also, if that
silence be perpetual, when the parts, which serve for the voice, are not
capable to form a like one to the sound, which has so strongly moved the Brain.

In short, there is no intelligent man, who after this discourse sees not, why
an Animal being born deaf, must needs be dumb.

From all which it results with sufficient evidence to a considering Man,
first, That it is the Lungs and the structure of the Windpipe, the mouth, the
palate, the teeth, and the muscles of all those parts, which by receiving and
repelling, or in diversely modifying the Air, is the cause, enabling us to form
Voices, and to articulate them.

Secondly, That it is by reason of the communication, which is between the
brains and the other parts of the body of every Animal, that it is diversely
agitated by those Voices.

Thirdly, That in every Animal, capable to form Voices, there is such a
commerce from the ear to the brain, and from the brain to all the parts serving
for the voice, that the same voice which shakes the brain by the intervention
of the ear, disposes it also to diffuse the spirits into the muscles of those
parts; which spirits putting them into a posture answerable to the manner in
which that voice did strike the brain, make them form a voice altogether like
it, if some pressing necessity of the Animal diverts not the course of the
spirits to another place.

Which being once well understood, it will be easy to know a thousand things,
which commonly enough are not known touching the different effects of the cry
and noise of Animals; which I mean not to explain more particularly, because
that all those, who have attention enough to conceive the few principles, which
I have laid down, will from thence draw all what is necessary to explain it,
and because those that are not capable of such an attention, would not conceive
what I could say of it even in a more particular discourse.

I shall only stay to consider here, that according to these Principles, Brutes
need no Soul to cry, or to be moved by cries. For if they be touched in any
place, or their nerves struck with force enough to cause a great shake in their
Brain, it is sufficiently easy to conceive, that that action agitating the
spirits, these must flow much more swiftly into the muscles, and by this means
the swiftness of those that run incessantly to the heart, augmenting, must
render the pulses thereof more precipitate; which makes it propel so great a
plenty of blood into the Artery of the Lungs, that this Artery being more
distended than ordinarily, presses the Windpipe, and makes the air to be
driven out of the Lungs with an impetuosity answerable to that, whereby the
blood entered there.

The second effect of this quick agitation of the spirits is, that at the same
time they flow to the heart, some of them diffuse themselves also to all the
other muscles that are in a continual action, as those of the breast; because,
whereas the passages, through which the spirits are conveyed in those sorts of
muscles, are always open by reason of the necessity of their continual action,
the spirits cannot receive a new motion without presently communicating it to
those Muscles: which causes those of the Diaphragme and Breast press the
Breast in such a manner, as makes the air issue out with unusual force; and
seeing the muscles of the Larinx are also strongly agitated, the air thence
getting out is beaten in a manner, which holds somewhat of that agitation.

Thus it may be conceived from the sole disposition of the Body, why a Brute
cries: And to know how it may be moved by cries without having a Soul, you need
but remember the communion there is between the brain, the parts serving for
the voice, and all the parts of the body. For, if according to the difference
of cries, the brains are diversely moved, and if following that diversity of the
shakings of the brain, the body is diversely carried, we need go no further than
their bodies, for a cause, why Brutes of one and the same kind are moved to
come to one another by the cries they make, and why their cries often drive
away those of another kind. If we consider only that they have a body so
mechanically disposed, that the sole structure of it may be the cause that it is
carried to such Objects, as may be good for them, and from such as may hurt
them; me thinks, that how wonderful soever their motions may seem to us, we
cannot rationally impute them, and particularly their cries, but to the
construction of their bodies; since, if we heed it well, we shall find in our
selves, that the cries are not made but by the body alone. For indeed, if we
cry, it is not because we have a Soul, but because we have Lungs and other
parts, which can receive and force out the air with certain modifications.

Likewise, if the Nerves of our Ears be moved by a voice, that is, by an air,
which other bodies have agitated so, as that our brain shaken thereby,
diffuseth spirits into the muscles of all the parts, whose motion can form a
voice like that which moved it, that is, repel the air in a manner answerable
to that which has shaken it, it is upon no other account but that of our
having a Body.

Lastly, if our brain, when it is shaken by a noise or voice, sends the spirits
rather into the muscles, that serve to carry our body near to or far from those
which caused that Noise, than into the muscles of the Larinx or of the other
parts, serving to form a like voice, it is because we have a Body. So that, if
^here be nothing found in Brutes but ^he like effects, we cannot rationally
^ay, that they have ought else but Body.

But as for Us, we must avow (whatever we adscribe to our bodies in what
regards the causes and effects of ^he voice) there is always somewhat
^ccompanying them, which cannot be from the Soul. For as it is true (to speak ^n
general) that it would be sufficient ^o have motions, for which our body ^s
fit, and to receive the effects which ^re wrought upon it by the various
ob^ects, that agitate the brain thereof, to ^onserve our body, for as much as
the ^roportion and relation God has put ^wixt it and the other bodies of the
^orld, gives it, without our thinking on it, all what can maintain it in a
condition suitable to its nature: So it is true also to say, that all that would
be acted in us, and yet we perceive nothing of it, if we had nothing but the
Body. But now, reflecting on what happens to us, when some noise strikes the
nerves of our ear, we shall plainly find, that besides that shaking of the
nerves of the Ear, which continuing to the very internal parts of the brain,
does there agitate the spirits, and makes them flow into the muscles, serving
to move ou^ whole body near to or far from tha^ noise, there is always
conjoined a Perception to every shake of our ear, or of the other parts of our
body: And a^ times we even find in us a Will altogether contrary to the motions
which that noise excites in our body. And although sometimes the impetuousness
of those motions be such, that we can hardly stop them in their carriere; yet
it is manifest, that that contrariety would not be found in us, if what renders
us capable to Will, were not differing and altogether distinct from what makes
u^ capable to move.

But of those two things which we find in our selves, besides Motion, I mean,
the Perception, which we have, whenever the nerves of our ear are shaken; and
the Will, which we have by consequent, to consent to the motion, to which our
whole body is excited, or to restrain it; me thinks the latter is so evidently
distinct from our body, that none but very inconsiderate persons can be without
observing and knowing the distinction.

As to the Perception, we have on the occasion of the shaking, which the voice
causes in the nerves of the ear, though it be somewhat difficult to be
distinguished from that shaking, because it always accompanies it; yet it is
easy to him, that is a little accustomed to judge of the effects by their
causes, to find, that the shaking, being a motion, cannot appertain but to our
Body, and that the Perception being a Thought, cannot belong but to our Soul:
And as we have found by other reflections, that the Union of our Soul and Body
only consists in this, that certain Thoughts are so united to certain motions,
that the one are never excited without the others be so too at the same time;
we ought not to wonder any more to find, that the nerves of our ear shall never
be shaken, but we shall presently feel in our Soul a Sensation, or, if you
will, a Perception answerable to the manner the nerves are shaken in; nor ought
we to believe, that that agitation and that perception are one and the same
thing, although they always accompany one another.

We are therefore to consider two things in that we call Sound; one is the
manner, in which the Air, striking the nerve of our ear, shakes our brain; and
the other is the Sensation of our Soul on the occasion of that agitation of the
brain. The former belongs necessarily to the Body, because it is nothing but a
Motion; and the latter belongs necessarily to the Soul, because it is a
Perception.

So likewise in Speech there are two things, viz. the Formation of the voice,
which cannot come but from the Body, according to what we have already
discoursed; and the signification joined with it, which cannot be but from the
Soul. So that Speech is nothing else but a voice, by which we signify what we
think. It Is true, you may also (as has been already observed above) join your
thoughts to other signs besides the Voice, as to the characters of Writing, or
to certain Gestures, and that indeed all those ways of expressing our selves
are nothing but ways of speaking (to take the word in a general and large
sense:) But then, because the Voice is the most easy sign, the word Speech
has been appropriated to it, leaving to Characters the word of Writing, and to
other ways of expressing our selves the word Sign, which is that of the Genus,
common to all those three Species's.

It may be I have already said enough of each of them, to make them to be
sufficiently distinguished; but possibly also, since I have not examined them
but on the score of what they have common among themselves, it may not be
useless or tedious, to speak of them apart, that it may appear wherein they
differ one from another.

And to begin with that kind, to which has been left the name of the Genus, I
mean, the Signs, we must, to comprehend in a few words what may be known of
it, take notice, that some of them are natural, others, that may be called
ordinary or common, and others, that may be termed particular.

The natural ones are those, by which, because of the necessary communion,
which is between the passions of the soul, and the motions of the body, we know
from without the inward different states of the Soul. I have said above, that
these motions are the same in all men. But yet we are to remember, that since
we may purposely constrain them, or excite them at pleasure, we are not to
trust them too much, nor believe that they signify always what they should
signify.

The signs, which I call ordinary, are those by which most men are wont to
declare certain things, and those are merely of institution: Some are more
universal, others less. E. g. When we will, without a voice, say that we
consent, we give a sign with the head, quite differing from that which we make
to show, we consent not: so we make certain signs with the hand to drive one
away. And these kinds of signs are general enough; but those, by which we
declare our respect to one another, though commonly they be the same in a whole
Country, yet they are very different in another.

The signs I call particular, are those in which a whole Nation or a whole
Commonalty agrees not, but which are instituted 'twixt two persons or a few
more, to signify certain things, which they would not have others to take
notice of.

As for Writing, there is none that is Natural, and it is by Art only, that men
have found out the secret of it. As they saw, that they could make Gestures and
Voices to signify whatever they had a mind to, so they thought, that giving
significations to Characters, which the hand might form, those would be signs,
which remaining for a long time after us, would make our thoughts known not
only to those that should be far off, but also to them that should be born a
great while after them.

And this has been done diverse ways. At first were used such characters,
whereof each signified a Thing; but this way was troublesome, forasmuch as men
were to learn too many Characters, and to remember too many significations;
besides that by that means there could only be signified Things, but Actions
not conveniently.

Afterward, as it was observed, that all the diversities of Speech proceeded
only from the different ways of forming Voices, or articulating them, and that
Five voices only, differently articulated, or diversely assembled, did form all
the words; it was thought fit, to give a Character to each of those Voices:
next there were instituted Characters to mark their Articulations; and the
assembling of those different characters made syllables, which being joined
together did compose entire words: so that disposing those Characters in an
order like that we form the voices in, or the articulations which they
represent, we remember the words, and those words make us remember the things
they signify. Thus we see, that writing is a way of speaking to the Eyes,
which it is true demands more time to express, but then it lasts also much
longer.

It has likewise this other defect, that few persons can see at the same time
the Thoughts of him that uses it; but since that is made up by this admirable
advantage, of being able to signify the thoughts of the Writer,
notwithstanding the distance of places and times; it has always seemed so
great a convenience, that in seeking to supply what is wanted, men have at last
found the Art of Printing, that is, of making Characters of metal or wood,
which being once ranged, and charged with ink or color, can mark all the
leaves, needful to gratify many to read at the same time and in diverse places
the same thing.

I do not discourse here, that there are ways of writing, that are ordinary,
and others, called Cifers, which are peculiar to certain people: Neither do I
recite the way of expressing Numbers upon paper by characters that bear most
commonly the name of Cifers; nor that of expressing Sounds by other characters
called Notes: For all that is sufficiently understood of it self.

As to the way of expressing ones-self by the Voice, to which principally has
been given the name of Speech, we may say, that there are Voices natural; as
those that are put forth in Grief, in Joy, and in the other passions. But (as I
have already said of Signs natural) we must not always trust those voices, and
they be often strained, or used to make others believe, that we resent what
indeed we resent not.

There are other Voices, which men make use of to express to one another their
thoughts: Some are more univerversally received, as those are which compose the
Language of a whole People, others are more particular, used by persons, that
agree amongst themselves of words altogether new to signify their thoughts.

I have already taken notice, how we begin to speak when we are little
Children; how one may learn a new Language; and if there be any thing left to
be said on this subject, it will be to consider in this place, how he that
learns a new Language may turn it into a habit.

For that, we are to observe, that we join from the time of the first Language
we learn, the Idea (or image) of a thing to the sound of a word; which is
entirely upon the score of the Soul. For the sensation, called Sound, and the
Image of the thing, made to be signified thereby, are all from the Soul, as we
have already made out. From the Body's part there is a motion of the spirits
and brain, which every voice excites, and an Impression, which every thing
leaves there: But that motion is always joined to that Impression, as the
Perception of every sound is always joined in the Soul with the particular
image of this or that thing; so that when we will express the Idea of that
thing, we conceive at the same time the sound of the voice, which signifies it:
then, on the occasion of that Idea, and of the Will which the Soul has, that
the brain should duly dispose it self to diffuse the spirits into the parts,
which are to form it; it comes to pass, that it is shaken at the place where
the impression of that thing did remain, from whence the spirits flow into the
muscles of the parts, which serve for the voice, to dispose them to form that
which signifies what we have a mind to say: And as we have learned to join all
those things from our Birth that conjunction follows so close the will we have
to speak, that we imagine that what is so readily done, must needs be much more
simple; and since we see not any Engine much composed, but it performs its
effects with much difficulty, we can scarce believe, seeing the facility there
is in speaking, that there should need so many parts to be acted for that
purpose: But we must accustom our selves by admiring the structure of our Body,
to consider that it is made by an incomparable Workman, who is inimitable.
Besides, if we are convinced, that the Union of the Body and Soul proceeds only
from the perfect correspondence, which God has established between the
different changes of the brain, and the different thoughts of the Soul; we
ought not to wonder, that the one acts so easily upon the other, and that their
actions do always accompany one another so well, as long as God Almighty
preserves their Union.

But in regard that this is one of the most important verities, that can fall
under consideration, it will not be amiss, for the opening of all the
difficulties thereof, to observe, that there are three kinds of
Correspondencies between the Soul and the Body.

The first is natural, and that is that necessary correspondence, by which
certain sensations rise always in the Soul, when certain motions are excited
in the brain; as motions are excited in the Body, when the Soul has a will to
it. And this correspondence cannot absolutely cease but with our life, and that
which wholly changes it, causes death.

Besides this, there is a second Correspondence 'twixt the Idea's the Soul has
of things, and the Impressions which those things leave in the brain. This
correspondence, no more than the first, cannot change altogether; and whilst
the Soul is united to the Body, she never has the idea of things corporeal, but
their impression is in the brain.

But there is a third correspondence between the Name of every thing and its
Idea, which being only by Institution, may be changed: but yet, in regard the
sound of the first name, men give to a thing, is a sensation, which the Soul
strictly joins to the Idea of that thing; and since also the impression of that
name is found joined to that of the thing in the brain, we find it a trouble to
sever them: Whence it is, that when we begin to learn a Language, we commonly
explain by the first word, by which we named a thing, the new word, by which we
intend to understand it in the tongue, we are learning.

And there are even such, whose brain is so disposed, that when they learn a
new Language, they always join to the words of that, which they already know,
the words of the second, to represent to themselves what they signify.

Others, that have another disposition of the brain, do so easily join the
sound of a new word in it self to the Idea of the thing, that that Idea is
equally represented to them by the two words, and they not obliged to think on
the one to understand the other.

Thus one may so well join one and the same thought to many signs, and to
words of different Languages, that one may with an equal facility use both to
express it: But with a very little consideration we may easily judge, by the
pains we find in the beginning, to join the words of a new Tongue to the Image
of every thing; by the necessity we are in, to join the image of a new word to
that of an old, which made it to be understood; and even by the pains we
experience in pronouncing those we learn, that Speech indeed depends upon the
relation and correspondency of many things, and that, if afterward it becomes
easy, it is only from the excellent composition of the brain, and the
admirable, commerce between its motions and our thoughts.

For the rest, me thinks, if the Soul is obliged, whilst she is united to the
Body, to join her thoughts to words, which cannot be heard nor formed without
the organs of the tongue and the ear; She might, if that union ceased, much
more easily discover to every other Spirit what she did think. And truly if it
be a pain to him that examins it, to conceive, How the thought of a man that
speaks is joined to the motion of his brain, and the motions of his brain to
those of the parts serving for the Voice; if it be difficult to comprehend, How
that Voice, which is nothing but Air agitated, strikes the ear, and is able by
moving the brain to excite in his soul, that hears the sound of the words, the
Idea of the things signified by them; if that, I say, is so hard to conceive,
because we know, there is so strange a difference between the nature of the
Spirit and that of the Body, we cannot but easily comprehend, that if two
Spirits were not united to Bodies, they would find less difficulty to discover
to one another their thoughts, in regard there is naturally much more
proportion between the thoughts of two like Spirits, than between the thoughts
and the motions of two Bodies; and upon the least reflection made on the
facility and clearness, with which one man conceives the thoughts of another by
Speech, we shall avow, that a Soul might incomparably more clearly and more
easily conceive the thoughts of another Spirit, if both of them depended not
from the organs of the Body. For a spirit sure should more easily apprehend a
thought which is a thing spiritual, than the sign of that thought, signs
being things Corporeal.

Thus I esteem, that it is much more natural for spirits to manifest or to
communicate to one another their thoughts in themselves, and without any
signs, than to speak to one another, that is, to communicate their thoughts by
signs, that are of a nature so different from that of Thoughts: The pains also
which every one finds in conversation, and on all occasions where men impart
their thoughts by signs or speech, is not to comprehend what another thinks,
but to extricate his Thought from the signs or words, which often agree not
with it.

It Is also the ignorance of the signs and words, that is the cause, why men,
bred in different Countries, are a long while together without being able to
understand one another: But as soon as acquaintance has afforded them all
what is requisite, readily to unfold what every sign or word means, they find no
more trouble to conceive their thoughts, of how different Nations soever they
be. Which evidently shows, that men understand one another naturally; that the
thought of one is always clear to another, as soon as he can perceive it; and
that, if there be men, who conceive better than others what is said, that
facility of understanding comes from the structure of their brain, which being
so disposed, as that the impressions, I have spoken of, are there more easily
received, better ranged, and more distinctly marked, makes the thoughts,
answering thereto, to be also more easy, more consequent and more clear;
whereas those who want that good conformation and disposition of the brain,
must needs be slower in conceiving, by reason of that necessary correspondence
and relation between the motions of the Brain and the thoughts of the Soul,
whilst she remains united to the Body: But who sees not, that that
entanglement would cease, if the Soul were separated from the Body?

It Is also from the Fabrique of the brain and the other parts serving for the
Voice, that the facility or difficulty of the expression comes, and the pain,
that some have to speak, proceeds only from hence, that the parts of their
brain, which answer to the thoughts of the soul, or those that serve for the
Voice, are ill disposed; but not from their Thoughts, which always explain
themselves clearly by themselves, and would never be obscure, if they were
severed from the signs, or the Voices, employed to make them to be understood,
and often not agreeing with them.

In short, that indispensable necessity, men are in, during life, to express
themselves by words, is the cause that those, who naturally have their Brain
better disposed in what may serve for the operations of the Soul; who have more
vivid impressions of every thing; who know to range them better, and who are
accustomed to express them in the most proper words; are always those, that
speak with most ease, the greatest agreeableness, and the best success:
insomuch that if one will search well after the physical causes of Eloquence,
they will be all found in that happy disposition of the Brain.

We know, that the first part of an excellent Orator is, to be able, easily to
discern among all the things, that offer themselves to his Mind upon the
subject he is to treat of, what his Auditors are to know thereof; to the end
that he may precisely tell them nothing but that; and it is evident, that unless
he have a Brain disposed to keep the impressions of every of those particulars
very distinct, he cannot make that due discernment of them.

The second consists in the well ranging of all what is able to make the
things, he designs to express, to be understood; so as what is the most simple,
the most clear, and the first in the order of nature, may serve for a Light to
clear up what follows, which of itself might be more obscure: And that cannot
be, when the parts of the Brain are ill disposed, or the course of the Spirits
ill regulated; for then the impressions of the things confounding themselves,
often present to the mind at first, what ought not to be proposed but at last;
or else they are stirred with so much precipitation, that the mind can neither
reflect upon the order of every one, nor put it in its due place.

The third is, to know well, and to find easily the word, by which each thing
is properly signified in the Language, he uses; and that depends from the
Memory, which cannot be so faithful as it ought to be, unless the parts of the
Brain be so well-ordered and in such a temper, as keeps the impressions from
confounding themselves, and the idea's of one word from presenting themselves,
when he seeks for another.

These are the three things, that are absolutely necessary in the design of
Instructing, which is only the first part of Eloquence and these three things
require a Brain of parts well ordered and stayed and a Course of Spirits very
well regulated; which, if there were no more required, is very difficult to
find.

But then, when we come to consider, that for the other part of Eloquence,
which tends to move, we must know the Passions of the Auditors, and their
springs, in order to strengthen or to change them, according as shall be
requisite for the end aimed at; and that the greatest secret, well to express a
Passion to excite the same in others, is to feel it in our selves: we are
obliged to confess, that for the good success therein, it seems that the parts
of the Brain cannot be agitated enough, nor the Course of the Spirits be too
impetuous.

It Is true, if we did speak to people, that were only subject to Error, and
not to Passions, it would suffice to speak the things in order, to explain them
clearly, and to prove them in order to persuade the Auditors of them; and for
that purpose it would be sufficient, to have the parts of the Brain well
ordered, and a temper not to be easily moved.

But commonly we speak to persons, who besides Errors are so subject to
Passions, that they are not persuaded, except you be equally furnished with what
is requisite to instruct, and to move; and these two things depend from two
dispositions so opposite, that it is hard to find men furnished with Brains so
tempered and adjusted, as to afford both those perfections together.

We find also, that generally all those that are fit to instruct have a
coolness, which makes them languid when they will move; and on the other hand,
that those who are very apt to move, have a fire in them, which makes that the
Auditors cannot conceive, but with difficulty, what they say to instruct;
Whereunto the Example which Cicero in one of his Discourses relates of two
Orators, agrees admirably well. He says, that one of them was furnished with a
great clearness of mind, but was of a cold temper; and seeing that he had twice
tried to get some accused persons quitted, without being able to make the
judges resolve for it, though he had perfectly instructed them; he besought the
other, whose genius was altogether different, to speak on their behalf; which
succeeded wonderfully well: And Cicero observes, that that vehement Orator,
seeing there remained no more for him but to move the Judges already instructed,
composed himself some hours before he went to the Audience, to speak of that
matter in a private room with so much heat, that he was already in a sweat,
when he came before the Judges, whom he constrained, by the vehemence of his
action, to grant him what the first could not obtain of them by the strength of
his reasons.

As often as I think on this case, I cannot but admire the advantages, which
the Relator of it had in both the parts of Eloquence; and though I look upon
him as the Pattern, which all those that mean to prosper in this Art, ought to
propose to themselves, I avow, that he appears to me in-imitable. But he may
serve as an Example to show, that one and the same person may render himself
cap^ble to move and to instruct. I say, render himself capable; for I think
not, that one may be born fit for both these things, if we consider only, what
we naturally find in every one; and I think that of the two Talents, which
serve to make a man perfectly eloquent, there is one that may be supplied by
study, when ^he other is in our nature; but this is not reciprocal.

And the better to examine this difficulty, we are to observe, that those who
have a lively conception, have commonly the Passions violent, because they have
all the parts of the brain very subtle and exceeding moveable; but ordinarily
they have but little memory, and if they find things easily, they remember them
difficultly. On the contrary, those that have the parts of the brain grosser
and more fixed, conceive things less and less easily; on the other hand, their
passions are not so prompt; but for a recompense, they retain longer both
things and passions.

But it is easy to see, that this latter sort is capable to speak, when the
business is only to instruct; but if the spirits of men are to be managed, and
not to be informed of certain things till they have been inspired with certain
passions those latter will never get their end. And if sometimes by virtue of
observing other Orators, or by reading their Works, or by hearing them, they
find out their Dexterities; they cannot imitate them but in copying them in
subjects altogether resembling those which such Orators have handled, without
ever producing any thing matching the Original And even sometimes, for as much
as the Memory is all their excellency and strength, they borrow the very words
of those, whom they copy, and often they name their Authors to add some weight
to the things, which they commonly deliver so little to purpose, and always so
frigidly, that they would be intolerable, if they were not supported by some
names in veneration among Great men.

Orators of this sort may exercise themselves long enough; they will never
arrive higher than to be Copists of some one entire piece; but they will never
gain the dexterity to reunite many strokes of different Desseins, much less
that of making new ones.

Whereas those that are of a contrary temper, having a lively and quick
imagin^tion, know easily the strength and weakness in a subject; they soon
discern what is to be declared, what to be hid: if they be obliged to say all,
they know how to prepossess the spirits before they propose what might be
prejudicial to their Party, or displease the Auditor; and when they form the
dessein of their discourse, if they imitate other Orators, it is only as far as
it agrees to their argument: And to speak truth, a Man of wit falls rather upon
the thoughts of the Great Men that have been before him, because Reason
suggests to him what has been suggested to them, than because he reads their
Works.

It Is true, that that fecondity of the mind that makes him easily to conceive
and bring forth, may be the cause, that in certain things he will be too much
carried away, or dispose them ill, or also not be able to retain them; but
these defects are not without remedies.

The first may be supplied by a frequent exercise of speaking upon the
subjects, in which a man finds he is wont to be most easily carried away, and
by accustoming himself not to pass certain bounds which he prescribes to
himself, or makes his friends prescribe to him; and it is not hard to give to
one self these reins, after a man once knows his propenseness to be transported.

To remedy the second inconvenience, a man must accustom himself to marshall
his thoughts, and to order them well upon all the subjects he proposes to
himself, of what nature soever; and as the way of declaring them is very
different from that of conceiving them, he must, to accustom himself to speak
well what he knows, often ask himself, how he would declare this or that
matter, if he should be obliged thereto; in what manner he would handle the
same subject before a great multitude of people, or before a less Assembly;
what would be said of it, if spoken before persons of power and honor, or
before his Equals; and to render this practice more useful, he is to examine
when others have spoken in public, wherein it is they have succeeded well, and
wherein been deficient; and even to endeavor, after having found the cause of
their failure, to make up the same discourse better than they did; and to
continue these Exercises until one's mind be accustomed well to digest all
sorts of subjects.

As to the third Inconvenience, which is that of the Memory, seeing that that
cannot be defective, but in not representing to us the things, or in not
furnishing us with the words; there is a remedy for the first defect, by
putting the things in so natural an order, that the one must needs make you
remember the other by the connection they have together; and then, after a man
has formed the dessein, and ordered all the parts of a discourse, he must
often revolve and repeat it with himself, to be accustomed to it.

For the Words, we are not to fear their easy occurring to us for speech, when
the matters are present to our Mind, if so be we are accustomed to speak. And
for that purpose, a man must impose upon himself the necessity of speaking upon
all sorts of subjects, accustom himself, by writing, to vary and turn them
every way, and always to choose the most difficult or the most abstract
matters. For when by the force of searchng a man can find ways to make those
things to be understood, he has almost no difficulty to find words and
expressions in all other subjects, that are more ordinary, and which the
various necessity of Life render more common.

After we have thus examined, How much Eloquence depends from men's Temper, and
how that may be corrected or perfected by Exercise; it will not be amiss to
consider, That there is no greater Enemy to true Eloquence, than Lying: And as
Eloquence is a means not only to express what we think, but also to oblige
others to think as we do, it ought never to be employed but to manifest Truth,
or to make it to be embraced and followed; and he that employes it to excite in
others unjust sentiments, or to make them believe things that are false,
commits the most heinous of all treacheries. For tell me, I pray, if human
society be not entertained but by Speech, is it not a violation of the most
sacred right that is amongst men, to employ, for the leading of them into
error, or for persuading them to evil, such endowments as ought to serve only
to make them know what is true or just? If this were seriously thought on, there
would be much more sincerity; especially when men speak in public, where the
least disguises may draw after them very dangerous consequences For the rest,
me thinks, that to make us accustom our selves to speak nothing but truth, it is
a powerful motive, often to represent to our selves that we have not the
facility to express our selves, but because God Almighty, to whom we owe our
thoughts and the motions of our tongue, is very willing to excite the one, when
we will make known the other. Me thinks, it is in a manner impossible for one,
that makes often this reflection, to lie. For, I pray, if we be convinced, that
God is not subject to error, nor to a lie, nor to any iniquity, which always
follows it so close; how can we employ Signs and Voices, which are not formed
but by his power to do that, which displeases him most? I admire, that a
Heathen came to know this truth so far, as to say, That no man could be
eloquent, except he were honest; and that we should have such contrary
sentiments.

But not to mix here Morality farther than it is suitable to a Discouse of
Natural Philosophy, it will be to our purpose to examine in this place, whence
it is, that not only an Orator ought to be a man of integrity, but also that he
cannot be perfectly eloquent, unless he be so? And this is not hard to
conceive: for, if it be agreed on, that to be perfectly eloquent, a man must
know the Art to instruct his Auditors, and that of raising or allaying
Passions, according as it shall conduce to the end, that is proposed; we must
also agree in this, that an Orator, that speaks the contrary to what he knows,
will not so easily find words to express it, as if he spoke the truth; and if
to avoid mistaking, he studies what he is to say, it must be acknowleged, that
his Discourse, which will be but a piece of Memory, can never have that grace
nor force, which is found in that of a person, who having learnt to speak well,
and speaking what he thinks, fears not, he should mistake.

Again, it must be granted, that if he, that is not an honest man, will excite
in others the motions and passions, which really are not in himself, 'twill
always go off coldly, to express passions studied; and if, to surmount the
effect of that constraint, which appears when a man will refrain his own
motions to fain others, he will blot out all the strokes and the little
motions, by which his Countenance, Eyes, and Gesture would show the contrary to
what his Words do express, he must so exceedingly strain, that not only he
loses the grace, without which a man cannot please nor persuade, but also
renders himself odious, and is so far from exciting in others the motions which
he has not in himself, that he begets horror in all those, who persuade
themselves, that he indeed feels the violence of the passions, wherewith he
appears to be moved.

In a word, it is evident, that there is naturally such a relation between the
Sentiments of men, and the Signs and Words used to express them, that one and
the same person can never tell a Lie so gracefully as a Truth: And as a man
cannot be very eloquent, when he constrains to say what he does not think, or
to express what he feels not; it is impossible to be very eloquent, unless one
be very sincere and honest, seeing it belongs only to a man of integrity to
speak n^kedly what he thinks; his motions are so just, that he needs not to put
on any constraint; besides, the Truth, which accompanies all his words, and
that love of Justice, which animates all his motions, give so much weight and
grace to his action, that it is in a manner impossible to resist it; and which
is the chief, we are easily carried away by the motions of a man, whom we
believe to be Virtuous: and when he, that speaks, has the advantage of
exciting in others the same passions which himself resents, as he is soon
master of their thoughts, so he soon renders their judgment favorable to what
he aims at. And since we see, that those, whom a like disposition of body
makes liable to the like motions, have ordinarily the same sentiments about
the same things, we may justly believe, that the fairest means to gain others
to the same opinion with ours, is to raise motions in them altogether like
ours. For indeed (which particular cannot be too often repeated) as long as our
Souls remain united to our Bodies, all our motions will be so consonant with
our sentiments, that we shall never be able to inspire the one but by the other.

This reflection makes me think, that as we can conceive Spirits not united to
Bodies, if there be eloquence amongst them, that cannot be by the means of
Motions, because they are not capable of them: But supposing, that those
Spirits are in that state of liberty, wherein they can determine themselves to
this or that thing, it is easy to conceive, that if one of them, being more
enlightened than others, has a passion for a thing, which a mere spirit is
capable to have a passion for, (as for example, for his own glory) he may put
his thoughts, which he shall manifest to others upon that subject, into an
order which shall appear so excellent, that it shall excite in some the same
passion which he resents; and on the other hand (to keep to the same example) a
Spirit yet more illuminated and better inclined than the former, may make
those, who might have fallen into that error, to conceive, that, whereas that
Glory can appertain to none but the Soverain Power, it is a folly for any one to
pretend to it, when he is not God.

It might after the same manner be conceived, how mere spirits might inspire
one another with diverse sentiments touching all such things for which they were
capable to have passions, supposing (as has been said) that they were in a
state of choosing one of two.

But to draw from this notion no more than may serve for my intent, it is to be
considered, that if for speaking a man needs the motion of the parts that serve
for the voice, and if for hearing there is need of the agitation of the parts,
that serve for Hearing; there needs nothing between two Spirits, to communicate
their thoughts to one another, but to will it: And since we find, that the
thought of one man is easily understood by another, from the time that the
first has spoken, that is, from the time that by the motions, which serve to
beat the Air, he has moved the Ear of him, to whom he will have his thought
known; it is also easy to apprehend, that if two Spirits, who depend not from
the Body in their operations, will discover to one another their thoughts, they
have nothing to do but to will it: There is, me thinks, much less difficulty to
conceiv the one than the other (as I have already observed:) For in Speech
there are two things, viz. the Will to communicate one's thoughts, and the
Motions by which they are communicated; but those Motions have so little
affinity, in themselves, to the thoughts, that it seems very strange, how a
thought can be so well united to a motion, as that the one should be an
occasion to know the other; whereas in the manifestation, which two Spirits
make to one another of their thoughts, there needs nothing but the Will to
communicate them; and Spirits being of one and the same nature, it is evident
that one Thought may much easier be the occasion of another thought, than
Motion.

But next, what has been said of the Communication of two mere Spirits, ought
to be said of the commerce that may be betwixt a Spirit united to a Body, and
one that is not. For certainly what incapacitates two men to communicate their
thoughts to one another without motions, is, that they have Bodies, and that
the one cannot be advertised by the other but by the motions occasioned by the
Body, to which the Soul is united: But supposing that one of the Spirits have
no Body, it is capable to render it self present by its very thoughts to that
which has a Body, as it does to that which is destitute of a Body; and
reciprocally that Spirit, which is united to a Body, will be able, without the
intervention of the Voice, to express its thoughts to every Spirit that is
Body-less.

Mean time we are so accustomed to judge of all things, by those we see, that
since men make use of a voice, and very easily understand one another, we
rashly judge, that it would be very difficult to two Spirits mutually to
communicate their thoughts: And some judge it even impossible, that a Spirit,
destitute of Body (for example, an Angel) should communicate with Us. But it is
evident, that that proceeds only from the precipitation of our Spirit, who
makes no reflection on what befalls him in the communication, he has with the
spirit of another Man. For if he did consider, that the beating of the Air, and
the other things, which serve to make him understand the thoughts of the person
that discourses with him, have nothing in them resembling those thoughts; he
would more wonder, that he understands him, than he wonders, when one will
persuade him, that two Angels speak to one another, or that even one Angel can
converse with Us, without the assistance of a voice.

I cannot in this place forbear to take notice, how much the reflection, we make
on what passes within us, is capable to make us judge aright of what is done,
or at least may be done elsewhere. And the Example I draw from the manner,
after which we converse with men, is so proper to make it to be conceived, what
might pass betwixt Spirits destitute of such Bodies as we have, and even
between those Spirits and Us, that, the thing being well examined, there will
be found no other difference between those two sorts of Communications, but
that that, which is between Man and Man, will prove the more difficult to
conceive, in regard it is made by the means of Motions, which are quite
different from Thoughts, whereas that, which we may have with mere Spirits, is
less sensible, because it is performed without any of those motions, which
render as 'twere sensible to us the thoughts of the men, whose voice strikes
our Ears.

And this may be also the cause, why we are informed, that when Spirits would
give any important advertisements to Men, they borrowed Bodies, and formed
Voices like those of Men. But those Extraordinary things are not to hinder us
from conceiving, that naturally we can communicate with mere Spirits more
easily than with Men. So that if Faith teaches us, there are Spirits not united
to Bodies, and that he, who has created them as he has us, having committed
to them the care of conducting us, they are always present to our Spirit to
direct it without constraining it; there is nothing in that, which is above
those things, we think we know best. For in short, as we conceive, that the
communication between two Men is made by Speech, that is, by a Will to express
what they think, and by the motions answering to that will, we may also, me
thinks, conceive, that the converse of two Spirits may be made by the sole Will
of manifesting themselves to one another; and that if a mere Spirit communeth
with a Man, though that be in a way less sensible than is that of ordinary
Words, yet it is after a manner intelligible, which may insensibly give him the
thoughts, he needs for his conduct; which in a word, is, to inspire him. Even
so may we easily conceive, that God, who causes our Spirits to move Bodies,
can (if need be) give to an Angel the same power to make himself to be
understood by speech.

Now, me things, I see, what is properly meant by the word Inspiration; and I
believe, I am not deceived, when I say, that it is by that means only, that
those thoughts may come into our mind, which have no affinity to any of those,
that naturally are in our Soul, only because we have a Body.

Next, I see, that we know no more the Spirits of any of all those men, that
speak to us, when they inspire us with their thoughts, than those mere Spirits,
which I think capable to inspire us better thoughts. And as the new thoughts,
which come into our mind by the conversation we have with men, are a sure
testimony to any of us, that they have a Spirit like ours, we are to take the
new thoughts coming in to us (without being able to find the cause of them in
our selves, or impute it to the discourse of men) for an assured testimony,
that there are yet other Spirits, that may inspire us with them.

I find also, that the custom of understanding the thoughts of other men by
gestures and the voice, makes that way to affect us more, than the things,
which are inspired us without it. But if I heed it well, I see, that we do not
more know the ^^^rits of me^ th t speak to us, than t^^ ^p^rits the (...) us. A
like Air, t^ (...) out b^ (...) ^^s of him, that discourses w^^h ^s, striking
our ears, exciteth, upon the agitation of the Brain, sounds in our Soul, and at
the same time the images or conceptions which we have joined to those sounds:
But in truth, neither that propelled Air, nor any thing of what passes into
the Body from him that speaks to us, is his thought; and if we have any reason
to believe him to have thoughts, it is only because we feel, that he excites new
ones in us. But if all the reason, we have to believe, there are Spirits united
to the Bodies of the men that speak to us, is, that they give us often new
thoughts, such as we had not, or that they oblige us to alter those we had; can
we doubt, when new thoughts come into us, that are above our natural light, and
contrary to the sentiments which the Body may excite in us, can we, I say, when
no men inspire us with them, doubt of their being inspired us by other Spirits?
I judge, we cannot reasonably; and the custom, we have to receive them by the
means of Speech, which is a sensible way, ought not to make us disadvow those,
that are inspired us by a way different from that of the senses.

I know also, that if we be free to hide our thoughts, whilst our Soul is
united to a Body, we might have the same liberty, if it were separated from it;
and that in some manner that freedom would yet be greater, in regard that
often when we speak to a person, the signs and the voices, by which we express
our selves, may be perceived or understood by a Third, to whom we would not
discover our thoughts; whereas a pure Spirit, who is not obliged to make use of
those external signs, can manifest his thoughts to the Spirit he will inform,
so as no other shall know of it.

In effect, in that state we now are in of discovering our thoughts, we do
nothing else but to Will; and although that Will be joined to motions, which
fail not to be in certain parts of our body as soon as we need it for the
signifying our thoughts; yet notwithstanding our souls are not the cause of
those motions (according to what we showed in our 4th Discourse In his book
entitled, Le Discernement du Corpse and de l' Ame.
) and they do nothing else to express themselves but to Will, so that as long
as they are united to our Bodies, we cannot express the thoughts coming into
our mind but by moving the Tongue, the Throat and the Mouth; this necessity is
imposed on us by that union: But as soon as there should be no such necessity
to borrow motions for expressing what we think, there would need no more to
make other Spirits understand it, but to will that they should understand; and
if we would have it hid from them, there would need no more than not to will
that they should know it.

I have elsewhere delivered the reasons, by which it appears, that all the
action of the Soul consists in willing, and I think I have sufficiently made it
out, that all what depends from Her, is, to determine herself to one thing or
another, so as I shall not need here to repeat any thing of what I have said on
that subject: But it will not be amiss to take notice in this place, that
although God do not make us conceive, what is the substance of our Spirits, nor
how they will, that is, how they determine themselves; yet we know clearly,
that we have a Spirit, and that our Spirit has the power of determining it
self. But now, as we are assured, that we speak not our thoughts but when we
please, we ought to believe, that if we were in a state to need signs and
voices no more, we might then by our Will alone discover or hide our thoughts.

We are also to remember, that it is not more difficult to conceive, that then
we should make our thoughts to be apprehended by other Spirits, than to
conceive, that the spirit of another man should apprehend, in the present
state, what we think, when we express it by voice or by signs.

For the rest, when I say, that Souls emancipated from the Body might hide or
manifest their thoughts to one another; that is to be understood, if they had
the same reason to hide their thoughts, they have now in the present state. But
it is apparent, that, if they shall be happy, as they will have no thoughts but
for the Glory of their Maker, so they will be glad that all the Spirits should
know them; and if they for ever lose his grace, they will have only such
thoughts, which being to serve to publish the effects of his justice, will be
known to all the Spirits.

Lastly, we ought to remember, that according to what I have delivered of the
Action of Souls and Bodies, in the fifth Discourse of the first part, we say,
that one Soul acts upon another Soul, as often as one has new thoughts upon an
occasion given by the other; even as we say, that one Body acts upon another
Body, as often as one Body receives some change upon occasion afforded by the
other: And as I have shown, that a Body never gives any motion to a Body, but
only for as much as their meeting together is an occasion to the Divine Power,
which moved one, to apply it self to the other; We are also to conceive, that
when one Soul will make known to another Soul what she thinks, that happens
forasmuch as Almighty God brings it to pass, that according to the will of the
one, the other comes to know it: And even as the Will we have, that our Body be
moved, does not make it move, but is only an occasion to the First Power to
move it after such a manner as we desire it should be moved; so the Will also,
which we have, that a Spirit should know what we think, is an occasion to that
Power so to order things, that all may be disposed in such a way, as that that
Spirit may understand it.

Thence it necessarily results, that it is as impossible for our Souls to have
new perceptions without God, as it is impossible for the Body to have new
motions without Him. And it is evident besides, that our Souls, which depend
from Him for their Being and for their Conservation, depend not at all from Him
for the Use of their Will, whereof he leaves the determination altogether free.
And I dare deliver it as a thing that will appear manifest to all men of good
sense, who shall attentively consider it, that as the Body is a substance, to
which Extension belongs naturally, so that it would, as to effects natural,
cease to be a Body, if it ceased to be extended; even so the Spirit is a
substance, to which the power of determining it self does so naturally
appertain, that it would cease to be a Spirit, if it ceased to will; and God
Almighty has made it thus, that he might be loved by it. Which appears so
evidently, that if he had not declared it by so many miraculous testimonies of
his tenderness, which goes so far as to ask of us our Heart, that is to say,
our Love; we should be altogether persuaded, that He will be the object of our
Will in this World, by this only consideration, that there is no object so
great, but it can embrace it.

As to the power of knowing, perhaps he has not given us that so great, at
least not in this World. But it is certain, that we have knowledge enough, as
not to fail, if we use well the light we have, and the power we are endowed
with, of judging of nothing, but after we do well know it. For, God gives us
all the ^ight we need; we have idea's very distinct, to know the things of
Nature as much as it is useful to know them, since we can, when we use
prudence, discern wherein every one is beneficial or hurtful to us: And
although, according to what I have already observed, he affords us not the
advantage to know the very substance of things, yet he so well discovers to us,
wherein they can hurt ^r profit us, that to use it aright, we are ^nly to will
it.

As for those things, which are above Nature, although they infinitely surpass
our knowledge, yet we have very distinct notions of the Reasons, why we are not
able to conceive them, and of the Reasons also, why we are to believe them. For
if on the one hand in the doctrine of Faith there are things to be found, that
are beyond our natural light; we have on the other, such evident signs of the
Obligation for us to submit our Spirit to his Authority, who proposes them to
us, and so great convictions of our unableness to comprehend all what is; that
we have cause to take all, what comes to us from thence for infallible Truth;
in a word, for Notions which we hold from Grace; and from which, as well as
from those which we hold from Nature, we may deduce all the Conclusions that
may serve to regulate our Belief, and the Conduct of our Life, so that we are
guilty, when by inconsideration or obstinacy we deviate from those Rules.

But without insisting on the consideration of all the great Truths; that might
be collected from this whole Discourse, I think it will become me to conclude,
after I have considered all the several ways, whereby Thoughts may be
communicated, which is properly what we call Speaking, and which I had proposed
to my self to examine.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by John Martyn at the Bell a little without
Temple Bar.
THe History of the Royal Society of London, for the Improving of Natural
Knowledge, by Tho. Sprat. in quarto.

Philosophical Transactions, giving some Account of the present Undertakings,
Studies, and Labors of the Ingenious in many considerable parts of the World,
for Anno 1665. 1666. 1667. 1668.

Observations on Monsieur de Sorbier's Voyage into England, by Tho. Sprat. In
duodecimo.

An Essay toward a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language; by John
Wilkins D. D. Dean of Ripon, and Fellow of the Royal Society. In folio.

Abrahami Couleij Angli Poemata Latina in quibus continenter sex libri
Plantarum, viz. duo Herbarum, duo Florum, duo Sylvarum, and unus
Miscellaneorum. In octavo.

Physical Reflections upon a Letter written by Monsieur Denis, concerning a new
way of curing sundry diseases by transfusion of blood. In quarto.

Englands Wants, or several Proposals probably Beneficial for England. In
quarto.

Euclidis Elementa Geometrica Novo ordine ac Methodo fere demonstrata. In
duodecimo.

Experimental Philosophy in 3 Books, with Observations about Cole-mines, by Dr.
Henry Power. In quarto.

Cerebri Anatome cui accessit Nervorum descriptio and usus, Studio Dr. Tho.
Willis. In octavo.

Diatribae duae Medico-philosophicae, quorum prior agit de fermentatione sive
de Motu intestino particularum in quovis corpore. Altera de Febribus, hic
accessit dissertatio Epistolica de urinis. Studio Dr. Tho. Willis. In duodecimo.

Micrographia, or some Physiological Descriptions of Minute bodies, made by
Magnifying-glasses, with Observations and Inquiries thereupon; by R. Hook
Fellow of the Royal Society. In folio.

The Sermons of Bishop Brownrig. In 2 Voll. folio.

Vetus Testamentum Graecum ex versione Septuaginta Interpretum juxta Exemplar
Vaticanum Romae Editum. In octavo.

Graecae Linguae Historia, sive oration de ejusdem linguae origin, progressis,
atque incremento, a Gulielmo Burton Londonensi. In octavo.

Lexicon Manuale Graeco-Latinum, and Latino-Graecum. Auth. Cornel. Schrevelio.
In octavo.

Enter into thy Closet, or a Method and Order for private devotion, together
with particular perswasives thereunto and helps therein, with an Appendix
concerning the frequent and holy use of the Lords Supper. In duodecimo.

Natural and Political Observations made upon the Bills of Mortality, with
reference to the Government, Religion, Trade, Growth, Air, Diseases, and the
several Changes of the said City; by Capt. John Grant Fellow of the Royal
Society. In octavo.

Kalendarium Hortense, or the Gardiners Almanac, directing what he is to do
Monthly throughout the year, and what Fruits and Flowers are in prime: By John
Evelyn Esquire, Fellow of the Royal Society. In octavo.

A Summary of Devotions, compiled and used by Dr. Will. Laud, sometime Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury.

The Considerator considered, or a brief view of certain Considerations upon
the Biblia Polyglotta, the Prolegomena and Appendix thereof by Br. Walton, late
Bishop of Chester. In octavo.

Claudius Mauger's French Grammar, enriched with an exact Pronunciation, and
many new Dialogues containing an account of Englands Triumph, with the State of
France, Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Military, with Instructions for Travelers
into France,

Where also you may have choice of new Latin and French Books.

FINIS.

