THE Nonconformist's PLEA FOR LAY-COMMUNION WITH THE Church of ENGLAND.

Together with a Modest Defense of Ministerial Nonconformity, and the Exercise
of their Ministry.

By Mr. JOHN CORBET, late of CHICHESTER.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns in
Cheapside near Mercers Chapel. 1683.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
HERE thou have some Remains of the Reverend and Learned Mr. Corbet late of
Chichester; Those that knew him say, that he was a man endued with the wisdom
that is from above, that is first pure, and then peaceable, gentle, (meek,
moderate,) and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without
partiality, without hypocrisy; therefore it is conceived that any thing which
he had designed for public use, may be well accepted of, by all those that
desire to follow after peace with all men, so far as is consistent with purity:
Whether the design of these Remains of his be not to vindicate the truth, and
to promote purity first, and then peace, is left to thee to judge after thou
have impartially perused and considered them in the fear of God; and if in any
measure they conduce to so good an end, it is hoped thou will be thankful to
God for the benefit which the Church of Christ, and therein thy felf, may
receive by the use of them. Thou have them just as they were left under his own
hand; if himself had lived to publish them, thou might possibly have had
them in some better method: but it is not thought sit that any other person
should take upon him to alter any thing in them.

The Nonconformists Plea for Lay-Communion with the Church of England, etc.
NOtwithstanding my Nonconformity, and the exercise of my Ministry in that
state, I am inclined upon the following considerarions to have communion with
Parish-Churches in the worship of God, at those times in which our own
Congregations do not require my presence therein.

1. I own Parish-Churches, having a competent Minister, and number of credible
Professors of Christianity, for true Churches, and the Worship there performed,
as well in the Liturgy or Common prayer, as in the preaching of the word, and
prayer before and after Sermon, to be in the main sound and good for the
substance or matter thereof. And I may not disown the same in my practice by a
total neglect thereof, for my judgment and practice ought to be concordant.

2. Tho I judge their form of Worship to be in many respects less perfect than
is to be desired; yet I have found my heart spiritually affected and raised
toward God therein, and more especially in the receiving of the Lords Supper.
I judge that this form may be used formally by the Formal, and spiritually by
those that are Spiritual. It is my part to make the the best of it, being the
Established Form.

3. I am desirous of joining, as far as I may, with all Congregations
worshipping God in Christ, out of my high regard to all Christian Worship, and
out of my love to the communion of Saints universally, and a desire to testify
that I am a truly Catholic Christian.

4. Tho I am constrained by force of conscience to be among those that dissent
from the enjoined Conformity; yet my design and business is not to advance a
severed party as such, but true Christianity or godliness among all that
profess the Christian Faith, and what in me lies to keep up a Reverend esteem
of Gods Ordinances celebrated among them all.

5. Tho I have reason to have a very tender regard to those that own and accept
my Ministry, for their edification and satisfaction, yet by ways of love and
concord I am to seek the edification of others also, while I lay no
stumbling block before the one or the other sort.

Against the putting of this intention in practice, I meet with these
Objections.
Obj. 1. I may seem a contradiction to my self, and to justify what I
disallow, having refused to give my assent and consent to all and every thing
contained in the Book of Common Prayer.

Ans. 1. The denying of assent and consent to all and every thing contained in
that Book, does not gainsay the lawfulness of partaking in that Worship, it
being sound for the substance in the main, and the mode thereof being laudable
in diverse forms and orders, and passable in the most, though in some offensive,
inconvenient, or less perfect.

2. The chief matters for which I refuse to declare an assent as is enjoined,
lie not in the ordinary Morning and Evening Prayer, but in other parts, as the
Order of Baptism, Confirmation, Burial of the dead, etc. and in certain
Rubricks or Rules to which I cannot subscribe.

Obj. 2. It is to countenance a more defective and inconvenient way of worship,
and it tends to the rooting of others in their formality, and to the increasing
of their number.

Ans. 1. My partaking in any Divine worship which is holy and good for the
matter, and allowable or passable for the mode in the main, does not involve me
in the blame of some sinful defects therein, to which I consent not, and which
I cannot redress.

2. I do not acquiesce in this Form of worship only, nor do I by my example
induce others so to do, seeing in other Congregations I both dispense and
attend upon the word and prayer in another ^^rm, and judge it necessary for me
so to do.

3. It is to me indubitable that this form is so far profitable and edifying,
as that merely for the defects found therein, there is no cause of renouncing
it, or the Communion of the Churches for its sake, especially while other
prayer and the preaching of the word is not there by excluded.

Object. 3. It is against our engagements for reformation.

An. 1. I am engaged to endeavor reformation only according to my power and
calling, and this practice does not gainsay my endeavors of the same within
those limits.

2. My engagement to endeavors of reformation, does not necessitate me to
unwarrantable separation.

3. My engagement to endeavors of reformation, does also engage me against
Schism.

Object. 4. It will offend (that is to say, displease) many of my own side.

An. 1. They have no reason to be more offended with me for practicing
according to my principle, than I am offended with them for practicing
according to theirs.

2. It is a trouble to me to do any thing in Religion, displeasing to those
that are seriously religious, and more especially to those that own my
Ministry, and suffer under the same impositions under which I do; but I may not
sin for their sakes by a renouncing of true Churches, or by a perpetual neglect
of communion with them.

Object. 5. It may prove an occasion of raising a greater enmity against those
that cannot be satisfied to partake in this worship, yea, it may stir up a
greater severity against them.

An. This objection (if that which is suggested in it be true) is of great
mdment, for I must have a tender regard to conscientious brethren and must not
use my liberty to be an occasion of their suffering. But to this I say,

1. The moderate judgment and practice of some (who in the mean time have
maintained their plea for reformation, and exercised their Ministry according
to their capacities and opportunities) has been advantageous to the general
interest of Nonconformists.

2. If so bad a consequence should indeed follow, as is objected, I would for
that season forbear the said use of my liberty, and p^^take with my brethren in
their sufferings.

Object. 6. It may weaken my own party, and make many of them more indifferent
toward reformation.

An. 1. I disclaim being of a party as such: I confine not godliness to any
peculiar way narrower than mere Christianity. If any among us place their
Religion in being of a party, they deceive their own souls, and it behooves me
being a Teacher among them to let them understand so much.

2. While I use my liberty, and show my moderation and charity toward all true
Churches, I do not show an indifferency toward all opinions, and forms, and
constitutions, but by word and deed I manifest a desire and endeavor of the
best constitution, that has the greatest tendency to make the best Christians,
and to advance holiness and peace in the Churches

Object. 7. It may raise suspiti ons that I may proceed further in Conformity,
and that I am but a lukewarm Nonconformist.

An. 1. The Kingdom of God stands not either in Conformity or Nonconformity as
such.

2. I desire that my zeal in the matter of Nonconformity may be proportionable,
that is neither more nor less than the thing it self requires.

3. I am not willing to stand at a greater distance from others than I needs
must.

4. How ready soever I am to pursue peace and concord, I am not like to
conform, till the grounds of my Nonconformity, which are with me of great
weight, be removed.

Object. 8. Hereby I may lose or lessen my reputation and interest among those
of my own side.

An. 1. My reputation and interest among men, must give place to the pleasing
of God, and the keeping of a good conscience.

2. To me the most valuable benefit of reputation is an advantage thereby
gained of being acceptable and successful toward men in the work of the
Ministry; and that which is most advantageous hereunto, is the reputation of
integrity, and to do all things advisedly, honestly, peaceably, without
partiality, hypocrisy and felfishness, is the best means of such reputation.

Object. 9. It will not please those of the other side, unless I absolutely
conform; and it may be some of them will despise and hate me the more.

An. 1. My design is not man pleasing, and I think it looks not like such; I
were very ill advised indeed, if while I venture the displeasing of my own, I
should aim at the pleasing of a different party.

2. In reference to the other side, my design is not to please them, but to
convince them, that what in me lies, I follow after Churchpeace and concord,
and that the cause of the divisions that are, lies not on my part.

3. Tho on the Conforming side there may be some, who hate those most that come
nearest to Conformity, if they are not through therein; yet there be others, who
are more valuable, that are of a better spirit, with whom my moderation may
have good effects.

Ob: 10. It may hazard a breach in our own congregation, and the dissolution
thereof, as things now stand with us, and consequently hinder the good of
souls, that is now gained by the word and prayer.

An. 1. Indeed such an evil is carefully to be avoided in this time of our
difficulty and danger; but I rationally hope that it will not so fall out: Our
friends are not ignorant of the latitude of my principle, and the practice here
propounded will' be no great surprisal to them, it being no more than what I
declared that I did before I came to my present station among them.

2. I shall keep a watchful eye upon this concern; if I see any distemper that
threatens a breach arising upon this occasion, I will for a while suspend my
liberty, and I will proceed herein no otherwise than they can bear, I will be
calm and gentle toward them, and not carry it peremptorily in any wise. And
this I shall do not for my own private ends (the Searcher of hearts knows) but
sincerely for their good.

3. I will by degrees insinuate into them the equity of their bearing with me
in my persuasions, as I bear with them in theirs, and of allowing me the
liberty of my own acts in things that concern my self alone, when in such acts
as concern the society, I do nothing without their consent.

4. If it should come to pass that they will impose upon me what is not fit for
me to comply with; in that case, I will not violently break from, nor stay to
make breaches among them, but quickly withdraw my self.

The Sum of the Matter.
I consult not my private interest in the case, but am sincerely solicitous to
know and do herein what is my duty to do.

I would do what I can, to justify my Catholic principle and spirit, and I
would abstain from the appearance of unwarrantable separation.

I would give no occasion to any of disowning or reproaching a form of Divine
Worship which is found in the substance thereof, and accepted of God from the
sincere, tho it be less perfect in diverse material points, and less convenient
for the mode.

I would in all things be a faithful guide to the people to whom I preach the
Gospel, I would lead them in the way of peace and concord, and be free from
giving them an occasion of withdrawing from the established worship more than
is necessary.

I would show my self a freeman governing my own acts according to my
conscience, and not subject to the opinions and affections of others, or the
imagined interests of a party.

If I cannot mollfie them that seek to suppress me, I would render them more
inexcusable.

I would testify, what in me lies, that Nonconformists are capable of an
accommodation, and silence them that gainsay it.

A Defense of my Endeavors for the Work of the MINISTRY.
THAT I might not be wanting to my just Vindication in this Cause, I hold my
self obliged to present the aforesaid Defense to the consideration of all
impartial Readers: it takes its rise from the several heads of the Bishops
charge against me, all which were owned by himself before many Witnesses, and
are here set down.

1. That forasmuch as I did not exercise the Ministry in subordination to the
Bishop, and as regulated by him, I transgressed against the nature of my
Office, as not being the Office of a Pastor mentioned Ephesians. 4. 11.

2. That I violate my oaths and promises which I made at my Ordination, to obey
the Bishop or Ordinary.

3. That I trespass against the Right of the Bishop, upon the account of
exercising the Ministry where he is the Pastor.

4. That I make a Schism in the Church.

5. That I violate the Authority of the Civil Magistrate.

To these particulars, the several Heads of my Defense following, are a direct
Answer.

1. That I have received from Christ the Office of a Pastor mentioned Ephesians. 4.
11. and that I am bound in my present state to fulfill it.

2. That I am not obliged either by the nature of my Office, or by any oath or
promise, or by being under the regulation of Authority, to exercise my Ministry
no otherwise than as in subordination to, and as authorized and regulated by
the Bishop of the Diocese.

3. That I invade not the Right of the Diocesan Bishop in exercising the
Ministry where he claims the right of being the Pastor.

4. That I do not violate any true bonds of Church-Unity, nor in any respect
cause divisions and offenses.

5. That I do not violate the Authority of the Civil Magistrate.

1. That I have received from Christ, the Office of a Pastor, mentioned, Ephesians.
4. 11. And that I am bound in my present state to fulfill it.
THE Ministry that I have received, is the sacred office of Presbyterate, to
which I am ordained according to the form of Ordination that was established in
the Church of England.

That this office is of divine right, I take for granted; and that according to
the Scripture it is the office of a Pastor, mentioned Ephesians. 4. 11. I thus prove.

1. Wheresoever this office is set forth in the Scripture, it is set forth as
the office of a spiritual Pastor or Bishop, which is to feed the Flock of God
by teaching and ruling it: And a Presbyter who is a sacred Officer of the
Christian Church, but not a Bishop or Pastor, is no where mentioned in
Scripture. If it be said, that this Office is otherwise set forth in Scripture,
or that a Presbyter, who is a sacred Officer of the Christian Church, yet no
Bishop, is there mentioned, let the Assertor show the place or places.

If it be said, that this Order of Presbyterate may be of divine inst^tution,
yet not defined or expressed in Scripture, I desire satisfactory proof from
some other Authority; both of its being of divine institution, and what its
nature is.

2. To have the Power of the keys of binding and loosing, of remitting and
retaining sins in Christ's name, as his commissioned officer, is to have
Episcopal or Pastoral Power, and this Power belongs to the said Office of
Presbyterate.

Forasmuch as some distinguish the Power of the keys into that which is in in
foro interiore, or the Court of Conscience within, and that which is in foro
exteriore, in the exterior Court, to wit, that of the Church; the former of
which is said to belong to the Bishop and the Presbyter, and the latter to the
Bishop only. I further enforce my argument; 1. The Scripture makes no such
distinction; and where the Law distinguishes not, we may not distinguish. 2.
The distinction in this case is vain, for all power that belongs to the Pastors
of the Church, purely respects the Conscience, and it respects the Conscience
as having the conduct of the outward man, and that in reference to Church
communion, as well as other matters. 3. If Presbyters may in the name of
Christ, bind the impenitent, and loose the penitent as to the conscience, which
is the greater and primary binding and loosing, then by parity of reason, and
that with advantage, they may bind and loose as to Church Communion, which is
the lesser secondary and subsequent binding and loosing.

3. That Officer is a Pastor or Bishop, that has a power of Authoritative
declaring or judging in Christ's name, that this or that wicked person in
particular is unworthy of fellowship with Christ and his Church, and of
charging the congregation in Christ's name, not to keep company with him, as
being no fit member of a Christian society; and also a Power of authoritative
declaring or judging in Christ's Name, that the same person repenting of his
wickedness, and giving evidence thereof, is meet for fellowship with Christ and
his Church, and of requiring the congregation in Christ's Name again to receive
him into their Christian fellowship; for these powers are no other than the
powers of Excommunication and Ecclesiastical absolution: Now the Presbyter has
apparently the said Powers, as he can undoubtedly declare, and judge, and charge
as aforesaid, touching this or that person or particular; all particulars being
included in the general, he has undoubtedly a Power of applying the Word in
Christ's Name as well personally as generally.

4. For the further clearing of what is already argued, let it be considered,
that an Authoritative Teacher in the Church commissioned by Christ, is also a
Pastor; for the government of a Pastor is only by the Spiritual Sword, which is
the Word of God; and the discipline which he exercises, is no more than the
personal application of the same word to judge the impenitent, and to absolve
the penitent in Christ's Name; and he that Authoritatively teaches in Christ's
Name (as the Presbyter does) can do so much in the personal Application of the
Word.

5. The Pastoral Authority of Presbyterate is further cleared by many passages
in the public forms of the Church of England touching that order.

In the very form of my ordination according to the ancient use of this Church,
I received the office of a Pastor and Successor of the Apostles; I mean not in
their Apostolic but Pastoral office: The form was this, Receive the holy
Ghost; whose sins thou remittest, they are remitted; and whose sins thou
retainest, they are retained; and be thou a faithful dispenser of the Word of
God, and his Holy Sacraments, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost, Amen. Now the former part hereof is entirely and completely the
form of Words used by our Savior, Joh. 20. 22, 23. toward the Apostles,
expressing their Pastoral Authority; and the latter part, Be tbou a faithful
dispenser, etc. is no derogation or diminution from the Power granted in the
former part. If the Presbyters are not the Apostles successors in the Pastoral
Authority, how could they have right to that form of ordination?

In the form of ordering Priests or Presbyters in one of the prayers after the
mentioning of Christ's sending abroad into the world, his Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists Doctors, and Pastors, there follows thanksgiving to God for calling
those that were then to be ordered Priests, to the same Office and Ministry of
salvation of mankind. Whence it appears, that this Office is the same with some
of the forementioned kinds. And what can it be but that of Doctors and Pastors?

This Church did before the last alteration made Anno 1662. in solemn form of
words require the Presbyters, when they were ordained, to exercise the
discipline of Christ as the Lord has commanded; and this Realm received the
same according to the commandments of God.

And that they might the better understand what the Lord has commanded
therein, this Church did appoint also, that at the ordering of Priests there be
read for the Epistle that portion of, Acts 20. which relates St. Paul's sending
to Ephesus, and calling for the Elders of the Congregation, with his
exhortation to them to take heed to themselves, and to all the flock, among
whom the Holy Ghost has made them Overseers, to rule the congregation of God.
Or else 1 Timothy 3, which sets forth the Office and due qualifications of a
Bishop. These portions of Scripture this Church appointed to be read to the
Presbyters, as belonging to their Office, and to instruct them in the nature of
it. And afterward the Bishop speaks to them that are to receive the office of
Priesthood in this form of words. You have heard, brethren, as well in your
private examination, as in the exhortation and the holy lessons taken out of
the Gospel, and the Writings of the Apostles, of what dignity, and of how great
importance this Office is whereunto ye are called -- That is to say, the
Messengers, the Watchmen, the Pastors and Stewards of the Lord, to teach, to
premonish, to seed, to provide for the Lords Family.

I acknowledge that the passages here alleged are taken out of the old Book of
Ordination, that was established in this Church till the late alterations made
Anno 1662. if those alterations signify another meaning about the several Holy
Orders than what was signified in the old Book, then the sense of the Church of
England in these times differs from the sense of the same Church in all times
preceding the said Alterations; but if they signify no other meaning than what
was signified in the old Book, my citations are of force to show what is the
sense of this Church, as well of the present as of the former times about this
matter.

Here I must take notice, that in opposition to part of what has been
alleged, it was asserted, That that part of 1 Timothy 3. which contains the
office and qualification of a Bishop, was read at the Ordination of Presbyters,
not because it belonged to their Office, but because it was joined with that
which follows touching the office of a Deacon, then likewise read as properly
concerning the office of a Presbyter, pretended to be no other than the Deacon
there mentioned.

To this I answer, If the Presbyter in the Church of England be indeed no other
than the Deacon spoken of, 1 Timothy 3. it see^^ strange that this Church, yea and
the Universal Church, should so miscall an Officer, as to give him a name, viz.
Presbyter, which the Scripture always appropriates to another Officer (as is
pretended) and to neglect the Scripture name of this Office, viz. Deacon. It is
strange that an Officer said to be no other than the Deacon there spoken of,
should have the power of the keys, the same form of Ordination which Christ
used toward his Apostles. If it were so, it is likewise strange that the
qualifications of the said Deacon should be appointed to be read at the
Ordination of a Presbyter, as properly belonging to him; and also at the
Ordination of a Deacon inferior to a Presbyter, as properly belonging to him,
the former part of the Chapter touching a Bishop, being omitted. Besides all
this, the new Book of Ordination puts the matter out of doubt, and evidently
refutes the aforesaid evasion. For in it the latter part of 1 Timothy 3. beginning
at verse 8. touching the Office of Deacon, is appointed to be read at the
ordering of Deacons; and the same is not appointed to be read at the ordering
of Priests, but another portion of Scripture, viz. Ephesians 4. 7, etc. Furthermore,
if the Deacon mentioned in Timothy be no other than the subject Presbyter, I
would know in what place of Scripture the Deacon of the Church of England,
inferior to a Presbyter, is set forth. And be it noted, that the Deacon of this
Church is not so much the Deacon of Tables, as of the Word; and therefore a
Presbyter must needs be degraded in being made no more than a Deacon of the
Word.

Hitherto I have insisted on the nature of my Office, and have proved it to be
the Office of a Pastor. Now I proceed to prove, That in my present state I am
bound to fulfill it.

Being dedicated to this Ministry, I stand under a perpetual obligation to
fulfill it, according to my ability and opportunity, and as the necessity of
souls requires of me. And whatsoever some think, the thing is most evident,
That the souls of men cry aloud for all the help that can possibly be given
them by those whom Christ has qualified and called to the work of the
Ministry, wheth^r Conformists or Nonconformists.

This apprehension reflects no dishonor upon conscientious Conforming
Ministers, for whose ability and industry I bless God. But the number of them
is not so proportionable to the people of this Land, as to make the labors of
those that are cast out, to be needless. The harvest is great, and the
laborers are too few.

As for this City, in which are six Parishes within the Gates, besides two in
the Suburbs, I leave it to the consideration of those that know the state
thereof, whether there be sufficient care taken for the preaching of the
Gospel; when as there is no settled preaching on the Lords days, or week days,
in any of the Parish Churches. The Parish in which I dwell, has for many years
had no Minister at all, and the two Parishes without the Gates for many years
have had neither Ministers nor Churches, in one of which is the house that was
licensed by his Majesty for our meeting. The only settled preaching is at the
Cathedral, performed sometimes by the Superior Clergy, but mostly by a greater
number of others in their courses, who generally living at a distance, cannot
be so well known to the people as their appointed Teachers ought to be; and let
them that know the place of preaching consider and judge, whether it can contain
the inhabitants, if all should repair thither.

I pass not to be despised or judged by them, who make slight work of the cure
of Souls, for whom Christ has given himself a ransom: Certainly they are more
precious than to be exposed to perish for lack of sufficient instruction and
exhortation, rather than preachers authorized by Christ, if silenced by men,
when not disobedient to any ordinance prescribed by his word, should speak to
them that they might be saved. The necessary means of saving souls, such as is
the due public preaching of the Gospel, together with personal instruction, is
incomparably more valuable than the maintaining of uniformity in little
opinions, and ceremonies, and other accidental forms and orders.

2. That I am not obliged either by the Nature of my Office, or by any Oath or
Promise, or by being under the regulation of Authority, to exercise my Ministry
no otherwise than as in subordination to, and as authorized and regulated by
the Bishop of the Diocese.
THIS Head has Three distinct Branches to be distinctly proved, whereof the
first is, That I am not obliged by the Nature of my Office to exercise my
Ministry no otherwise than in subordination to, and as authorized and regulated
by the Bishop of the Diocese.

1. The Nature of this Office does not require it either in reason, or from the
declared will of Christ: first not in reason, for there is evidently no reason
in the nature of the office, beng the office of a Bishop or Pastor, that it
cannot be exercised but in subordination to a Diocesan Bishop: if any say that
there is, let him show it.

2. Christ who is the Author and only proper giver of all spiritual authority
in the Church, has not either by himself, or by the Mediation of the Apostles,
so defined or limited the aforesaid office of Presbytetate, as that it can be
exercised no otherwise, than in the aforesaid subordination. If any one affirm
that Christ has so defined or limited it, it rests upon him to make proof of
it.

If it be urged, that I have no power but what I received by the Ordainers, and
that is a power of administering only in the aforesaid subordination. I answer,
1. I have already proved that by the very form of my ordination I received the
office of a Pastor and Successor of the Apostles in their Pastoral office. 2.
Tho Christ give the ordinary spiritual power, and particularly that of
Presbyters in some respect by the mediation of men, yet he gives it not by them
as giving the power, but as instruments either of designing the person to whom
he gives it, or of the solemn investiture of that person, as the King is the
immediate giver of the power of a Mayor in a Town Corporate, when he gives it
by the mediation of the Electors, not as giving the power, but designing the
person to be invested with it, or by the mediation of some officers as
instruments of the solemn investiture 3ly, For as much as the ordainer or
ordainers that designed me to this office of Christ's Donation, could not by any
act of theirs enlarge or lesson it as to its Nature or Essential State, or
define it otherwise, than it is stated by Christ in his word; in case such
words were pronounced out of the Book of ordination (I say not that they were,
but in case they were) as import a lessening of the office in its essential
state, they are void and null. If a Minister, that joins a man and woman in
Marriage according to the true intent of that ordinance, shall add other words
that forbid the husband the government of his wife, that addition is a nullity.

2. I am not obliged by any Oath or Promise, to exercise my Ministry no
otherwise than as in subordination to the Bishop of the Diocese.

I acknowledge that when I was ordained, I made those promissory Answers to the
Bishops Interrogatories, which are contained in the Book of Ordination that
then was. But, 1. let it be considered, that if the said interrogatories and
answers, or any of them, superinduced any limitation upon the Office, that
takes away any thing essential to it, (I say not that they did, but in case
they did) they were nullities. 2. The promise then made to obey my Ordinary,
and other chief Ministers to whom the government and charge over me is
committed, concerns me only as a Presbyter standing in relation to the Bishop,
as one of the Clergy of the Diocese, which I now am not, being cast out of that
relation, and made incapable of it; and consequently the said capacity ceasing,
the obligation c^aeth. 3. The said promise must be understood either
unlimitedly, or with limitation; if unlimitedly, it was a sinful promise in the
matter thereof, and therefore void; if with limitation, as in things lawful and
honest, then I have not broken it; for it is not lawful nor honest for me to
desist from fulfilling the Ministry that I have received, if the Ordinary so
require.

3. Nor am I obliged as aforesaid by being under the regulation of Authority. I
Treely acknowledge, that in the exercise of my Ministry I am not exempt from the
Regulation of any just Superior Authority in the Church (as for the Civil
Authority, it is after wards to be spoken of) whether it be by way of
government, or of agreement. And I had much rather live under a Regulation,
than not. But it cannot be supposed, that any Superior Authority can limit me
to the prejudice of Christ's Authority and interest, and the obligation that he
has laid upon me to discharge the Office with which he has entrusted me. My
Office is a Trust received from Christ, to be accounted for to him. I am his,
and not the Bishops Minister. Let it be supposed, tho not granted, that the
Bishop of the Diocese were my rightful Superior to Repulate me in my Office;
yet for him to ^o^bid me to discharge my Office, and for me thereupon to
desi(...) to the prejudice of Christ's Authority, who would have me now to
discharge it. Christ charge me, among the rest of his Ministers, in those
words of St. Paul, Col. 4. 17. Take heed to the Ministry that thou have
received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it. If any shall say, That Christ has
now forbidden me to exercise the Ministry, or discharged me from it, it behooves
them to prove it, and I am ready to receive and consider any proof of it.

3. That I invade not the Right of the Diocesan Bishop in exercising the
Ministry, where he claims the Right of being the Pastor.
HERE lest my sense of Episcopacy be mistaken, I judge it necessary to premise,
1. That I fully own the Scripture-bishop, or Evangelical Pastor. 2. That I do
not disown the Episcopacy that was of ancient Ecclesiastical custom in the time
of Ignatius, yea or of Cyprian. 3. That Bishop Ushers Model of
Church Government by Archbishops and bishops, with their Presbyters, was
offered to his Majesty by the Divines of the Presbyterian persuasion (as they
were called) for a groundwork of accommodation between the Bishops and them.
And I assent to the offer which they made. 4. After the same manner I assent to
the state of Episcopacy as described by K Charles the first in his discourse
touching the differences between Himself and the Two Houses in the point of
Church Government, in these words: That he is not against the managing of the
Episcopal Presidency in one man, by the counsel and consent of many Presbyters;
but that he had offered to restore it, as a fit means to avoid those errors,
and corruptions, and partialities, which are incident to any one man; also to
avoid Tyranny, which becomes no Christian, least of all Churchmen; besides, it
will be a means to take away that odium and burden of affairs which may lie too
heavy on one man's shoulders, as he thought it did formerly on the Bishops here.

But I do not as yet discern the divine Right of Episcopacy in the state and
privileges thereof here following, wherein I desire information, and would
gladly receive satisfaction, if there be such divine Rights indeed. None can be
justly offended with me for examining in my own defense that Right which I am
accused to have invaded.

do not discern that a Bishop infimi gradus, I mean one that has none under
him but Parish-Ministers, who are pretended to have no Episcopal
governing-power, I say I discern not that such a Bishop can by divine Right
challenge to himself alone the Episcopal Authority over hundreds of particular
Churches. For every particular Church should have its proper Pastor or Bishop.

And particular Churches with their proper Pastors, are so evidently of Divine
Right, that some eminently learned men in the Church of England have declared
their judgment, That no Form of Church Government besides the mere Pastoral
Office and Church Assemblies, is prescribed in the Word of God, but may be
various, according to the various condition and occasion of several Churches.

Neither do I discern, how it is possible for one man to do the work of a
bishop toward hundreds of Churches, I mean the work of a bishop infimi gradus,
under whom there are no subordinate Bishops or Pastors. For the work of such a
bishop is to oversee all the Flock, to preach to them all, to baptize and
confirm all that are to be baptized and confirmed, to administer the Lords
Supper to all, to bless the Congregation, publicly and privataly to admonish
all as their need requires; to excommunicate the impenitent, to absolve the
penitent, and that upon knowledge of their particular estate.

If such a Diocesan bishop says, it suffices that he perform all this to the
Flock by others, namely by the Parish-Ministers as his Curates, and by other
Officers his Substitutes; it is answered, 1. That the Pastoral Authority is a
personal trust. 2. It is desired that he show his Commission from Christ the
Prince of Pastors, to do his work by others; for I am now inquiring what is of
divine, and not of humane Right. 3. None but a bishop can do the proper work of
a bishop.

But if it be said, That the Parochial Congregations are not Churches, but only
parts of the Diocese, which is the lowest particular Church: I desire proof
from Scripture, That such Congregations as our Parishes, having their proper
Presbyter or Presbyters invested with the power of the keys, are not particular
Churches properly so called. The reason of my desire of this proof is, because
the Scripture is a perfect Rule for the Essential constitution of Churches, tho
accidents there unto belonging may be regulated by humane prudence. 2. It is
most evident in Scripture, that a particular Congregation of Christians, having
their proper Pastor or Pastors, Presbyter or Presbyters, are Churches properly
so called: And a Parochial Minister I conceive to be a Pastor or Elder
according to the Scripture.

Moreover if a Diocese containing a hundred, two hundred, five hundred, or a
thousand Parishes (as somewhere it does) do constitute but one particular
Church, and those particular Parishes be not properly to be accounted Churches,
but only so many parts of that one Diocesan Church, why may not ten thousand,
yea ten times ten thousand Parishes be likewise accounted but one particular
Church, and brought under one man as sole Bishop or Pastor thereof?

In all this I have not argued against the right of an Archbishop, or Overseer
of other Bishops, such as Titus must needs be, if he were Bishop of Cr^te,
where Bishops or Elders were to be ordained in every City. If either Scripture,
or Prudence guided by Scripture, be for such an office, I oppose it not, and
nothing here spoken makes against it.

If our Diocesan Bishops be in very deed Archbishops or OOverseers of inferior
Bishops, to wit, Parish-Ministers, I do not here argue against it, but only
say, that in their, Archiepiscopal Diocese or Province they cannot exercise
their authority any otherwise than according to the rules of Gods word for the
edification and peace of the Church, and that they cannot discharge the
inferior Bishops from their obligation to Christ, whose immediate Ministers and
Stewards they are, and to whom they are immediately accountable.

Moreover I do not discern that any Bishop can by divine right so challenge or
claim such a circuit of ground for his Diocese (as for example the County of
Sussex) as that thereupon he can by the said right prohibit all other Pastors
whatsoever to do the work of the Ministry in any case without his license
within such a circuit of ground, or that such a measure of ground is related to
his Episcopal office as a propriety for government Ecclesiastical, like as
certain territories, and dominions are as a propriety in reference to Civil
government, related to the temporal Soveraingty of a Prince.

The partition of one Church from another by local bounds, is not of divine
institution, but of humane prudence from the convenience of the thing; I say
convenience, not absolute necessity; And the state of things may be such as to
compel to vary from it in some particulars.

It is supposed by learned men, that in the Apostles times there were several
Churches at Rome under their several Bishops or Pastors in the same local
bounds, as one of the Circumcision, and another of the Uncircumcision. And if
it were not so de facto, I think few will deny but that it lawfully might have
been so.

If upon the aforesaid diversity of condition in the persons, namely, as being
of different nations and languages, there may be several Churches under several
Bishops or Pastors within the same local bounds, why not also upon other
diversity of condition, which may render them as incapable of being of the same
particular Church, as if they were of diverse nations? One instance may be an
unmovable diversity of persuasions about points of Religion.

As for example, Why may not Lutherans and Calvinists of the same nation, town
or village, have their several Churches under their several Pastors, and live
in peace? Nothing could hinder the said peace, but want of Christian Humility
and Charity. And consequently, why among us may not Christians that have
invincible diversity of persuasions in matters of Church Government live
peaceably within the same precincts in their several Churches?

Besides all this, if the local bounds assigned for one man's immediate Pastoral
charge be so vast, and the multitude of Souls therein be so great as to render
it impossible for any one man to fulfill that charge toward them, can it be
judged an usurpation against dwine right, if another Pastor without license
from him should perform ministerial service within those bounds? Likewise let
it be (...)ered what may or may not be done, in any circuit of gro(...) ^here
the inhabitants are destitute of competent provision for their Souls, and lie
neglected by such as claim the Pastoral ch^^ge over them. Is it an intrusion or
usurpation, if in that case one that is dedicated to the work of the Ministry
shall endeavor without license from the said neglecters, by preaching and
other ministerial service to save souls that are so exposed? Furthermore, let
it be considered how any Clergyman can be the proper pastor of a people, that
does not the work of a pastor toward them, which work I have before set forth.

Lastly, I cast in this consideration also, how any Clergyman can be the
proper pastor to a people against their wills. I doubt not but a people may
sin, yea, greatly sin in not receiving a pastor duly offered to them, and so
they may as greatly sin by receiving such a pastor as may be imposed on them.
But how any one can actually bear the pastor al relation to a people, that
never consented to that relation, I would be better informed.

Thus it has been examined, whether I am culpable by trespassing against the
divine right or rights of a Diocesan Bishop in exercising the Ministry where he
claims the right of being pastor. And it has been examined in that form, which
the matter being a tender point is capable of. As for his humane rights, they
are his preeminence and jurisdiction under the King as Supreme, and to which he
is entitled by the Law of the Land. Now I am no usurper against this; for I
claim no such preeminence, I exercise no such jurisdiction. As for my
obededience to his jurisdiction as an officer subordinate to the King, it shall
be spoken of in its own place.

4. That I do not violate any true bonds of Church-Unity, nor in any respect
cause divisions and offenses.
THE Case of Schism now in controversy is not to be hudled up, but well
stated, whereunto many considerations are prerequisite. Those that are set
down, I take to be of moment: but the express application of them, I forbear,
and doubt not but the considering and impartial Reader will excuse me therein;
and judge that he himself can easily do that part with more convenience than I
can in this writing. Church-Unity is not to be built upon the doctrines and
ordinances of men, but upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus
Christ being the chief corner stone; and none are to be shut out from the
Communlon of the Church, or the work of the Ministry, whom Christ has not
excluded, but qualified and called thereunto according to the Scriptures which
are the rule of admission and exclusion from the said privileges.

2. The unity of the spirit, which we are charged to keep in the bond of peace,
is not concord in external forms and orders without participation of the same
new nature, and walking in the same holy way. It is said Ephesians. 4. One body, and
one spirit, and one hope, one Lord, one faith, one Baptism, one God and Father
of all; but not one ceremony, one posture of body, one garb of Churchornaments,
one habit of vestments, one ritual and unity of assent to all opinions and
formalities: An holy fellowship in the spirit of grace, and in the life of
faith and love, is far more excellent than the greatest compliance in
ceremonies and unnecessary doctrines of doubtful disputations, and
consequently, is far more regardable in that estimation and reception of
persons either for Church Communion, or the holy Ministry.

Touching Schism, let this be noted: It is not Secular power and interest, that
of it self can constitute a true Church or Pastor, no^ can it excuse those that
are born up by it from Schism when they act Schismatically, and do all that
they can to continue the snares of division; neither are all they without more
a do to be accounted Schismatics who are destitute of Secular power, and who
cannot in all points observe the commandments of men, or neglect to give their
necessary help in Christ's service, when they are forbidden of men.

Schism is the causing of divisions in or from the Church, as the Apostle sets
it forth Romans 16. 17. Mark them that cause divisions and offenses contrary to
the doctrine that ye have learned: And let them be marked indeed whosoever they
are. The guilt of it lies as much upon those that make unwarrantable
separations; and they are most culpable that are the chief causes of the
division; and such are they, who impose unlawful terms of Church Communion and
M^nisterial liberty, and they also that rigorously impose such terms thereof,
as Christ and his Apostles never warranted them to impose, either expressly or
by consequence.

Let the case of such as are cast and kept out of a Church by wrong sentence,
or by imposition of unlawful terms of communion, or unnecessary terms, that are
unlawful to them by unremovable doubts of conscience, be considered, for such a
case may be: What shall they do? Must the unrighteousness of others be a
perpetual bar to them against the enjoyment of those privileges, to which they
have a right before God? Why may they not lawfully enjoy Gods ordinances in
distinct assemblies, if they hold them peaceably and charitably?

Let the case of such Ministers as are cast and kept out of the Ministry by the
imposition of unlawful terms, or unnecessary terms that are unlawful to them by
unremoveable doubts of conscience, be considered, for this case also may be:
What shall they do when they are under an obligation to Christ to fulfill their
Ministry; and when the necessities of fouls make theirs, as well as others
ministry to be necessary, and when all the help that can possibly be given both
by them and by those that dissent from them, is little enough? Every pastor tho
he be under the public judgment of Superiors, has a judgment of discretion
also (that is to say, a right of discerning) about his own call and obligation
to this service.

Let it be here also considered, whether the necessary means of saving souls,
such as is the due preaching of the Gospel, be not incomparably more precious
than uniformity in matters of opinion and ceremony, and accidental order.

There is a great difference between inimical segregation, like sedition in a
Commonwealth; and a going severally upon weighty reasons, and without breach of
charity: And among other weighty reasons this may be one, That all Christians
of sound faith and good life, that are dissatisfied about some humane
injunctions and orders in a Church, may not for lack of tender regard toward
them, be utterly abandoned and exposed to be led aside into the errors of the
wicked, as to heresy, apostasy or a course of irreligion.

It is in the power of Rulers to grant this Indulgence to such Dissenters, when
it is not in the power of Dissenters to change their Judgments. And this is not
to set up Church against Church, or according to an ancient manner of speaking,
Altar against Altar, but only either occasional and temporary Assemblies, or at
the most but diverse Churches distinguished by their several places of
Assembling, as one Parish Church from another; and by diversity of External
Order, as the allowed Congregations of Foreigners in London from the Parish
churches. The same true Religion for the substance thereof, is exercised; and
the same holy ends are pursued in the one and the other. And there will be no
opposition between them, but what an unchristian Enmity proceeding from Worldly
lusts and interests will produce.

If any object the inconveniences that may follow the permitting of
Church Assemblies besides those of the established Order, I have this to reply:
1. Our Rulers may so provide, if the Clergy would ^ot gainsay, that few may
stand in need of that permission, in comparison of those that now do; and the
way is to fix the terms of Church Communion and Ministerial Liberty, so as to
comprehend all sober Protestants; and this is done by requiring no more as
necessary to the one or the other, than what Christ has made necessary
thereunto. 2. After such Comprehension settled, the Toleration of all tolerable
Dissenters within such limits as will secure public peace and safety, is more
agreeable to the wisdom and clemency of Rulers, and the charity of Christians,
than the Rigorous constraining of the said Dissenters to what they cannot bear,
and the restraining of them from the liberty of serving God according to their
eonsciences. 3. But if the present state of things must continue, the
inconveniences that may follow the present practice of the Protestant
Nonconformists, are far less than what will follow the deserting of their
Ministry, and the neglect of fouls in so great a need of their help.

The considerations aforegoing I submit to the judgment of impartial Readers,
in reference to the case of Protestant Nonconformists, of whom I am. Moreover,
I judge it necessary to give some account of my own principles and practice. I
have not wilfully forsaken my Ministerial station in the established Order, but
am driven from it. I am ready to make Oath before any that have power to
administer it to me, That my conscience is not satisfied, that it is lawful to
observe all the terms that are imposed. Let it be noted, That I do not affirm
the unlawfulness of the terms; but that they are unlawful to me in regard of my
conscience, and I am ready to render Reasons of my dissatisfaction. It has
been alleged. That so much has been written for Conformity, as may satisfy
any that have a mind to be satisfied: But I profess in his sight, who knows my
heart, That I have a mind to be satisfied if I knew how.

I set up no Faction or severed Party against the common interest of Religion;
but according to my mean ability I seek the edification, peace and concord of
all Christians of all persuasions, and the increase of true godliness among
them all.

I renounce not Parochial Churches as no true Churches; I have not forsaken the
communion of such Churches, nor encouraged others to forsake them; but have
communicated with them in the Worship of God, and so shall do: and this my
principle and practice I am not sparing to declare to my friends that are of
another mind in this particular. Nevertheless where a Parish Minister is
utterly unmeet for the charge of souls, I cannot encourage any to commit the
charge of their souls to him. But as for all conscientious and faithful
Conformists, I highly prize them for their works sake, and seek to promote
their Reputation, and the success of their Labors.

I will thankfully accept the liberty of Ministeral employment in the said
Churches, when it shall be granted me. And for the obtaining of my liberty, I
am ready to submit not only to whatsoever is in specie or particularly injoined
in Gods word, but to whatsoever is necessary in genere, and left in specie to
humane determination, if it be determined according to the general Rules of
Gods Word.

I have given an account of my self according to the latitude of my own
principles; but I have not done it to the prejudice of others that are of sound
faith and good life, but of narrower principles touching Church Government; for
by the considerations here propounded, their due liberty is provided for.

5. That I do not violate the Authority of the Civil Magistrate.
I AM licensed by the King to be a Teacher, and to teach in any place licensed
and allowed by him. His Majesty has declared the same to be grounded on his
Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Affairs. In the last Law against Conventicles it is
provided, That neither that Act, nor any thing contained therein, shall extend
to invalidate or avoid his Majesty's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Affairs. Of my
License granted by his Majesty, there has been no Revocation that I know of.
If upon Reasons of State it has seemed good to hi^ Majesty to grant no more
Licenses since such a time, I do not see that it follows thereupon that he has
made void the Licenses that he has granted.

His Majesty has graciously declared, That he had seen better effects of one
years Indulgence, than of many years severity before that time.

Tho the Parliament were dissatisfied in the way of the Kings granting the
Indulgence; yet they approved the thing it self, and accordingly passed a Bill
for the grant of it; tho by occasion of their speedy Recess it passed not into
a Law.

It appears that the Parliament has the matter of Indulgence, or Liberty to
Dissenters, still under consideration, by the Bill of Comprehension, which at
their last meeting was voted in the House of Lords, with the concurrence of
diverse Bishops; but their Prorogation hindered the completing thereof.

Now when this is the sense both of King and Parliament about this matter, I
humbly hope that our Superiors will take it into their prudent consideration,
and be favorable to honest and peaceable people under their Jurisdiction.

But supposing, tho not granting, that my License is not in force; I proceed to
some other considerations.

I acknowledge the Kings Supremacy in all causes, and over all persons Civil and
Ecclesiastical.

As the power given to Spiritual Pastors, is declared in Scripture to be given
for edification, and not for destruction; so the power given to the Civil
Magistrate in matters Ecclesiastical, is given to the same intent.

As in Naturals, the inferior subordinate causes have no power of acting
against the efficacy of the Superior; so in Morals the inferior Ruler has no
authority against the Superior. Therefore if Magistrates, being all of them
subordinate to God, shall command any thing contrary to his Law, such their
command cannot beget an obligation on the subject to fulfill it, tho the subject
must not Resist their power.

The Civil Magistrate, notwithstanding his Authority in Ectlesi^sticks, cannot
discharge any Minister of the Gospel from the exercise of his Ministry in those
circumstances wherein Christ commands him to exercise it.

The Civil Magistrate is to judge what laws are fit for him to enact and execute
about Ecclesiastical matters, and the Ministers of the Gospel have a right of
discerning, which is called a judgment of discretion, about their own pastoral
acts, what they ought, and what they ought not to do, according to Gods word,
otherwise they must be held obliged to a Blind, Popish, Brutish Obedience.

But whatsoever the Ministers discern to be their duty to do, they ought to do
the same only in such ways as are consistent with their Loyalty to God and the
King.

The Bishop has no external jurisdiction in his public Courts, but what is
derived from the King as Supreme; and the Ecclesiastical Laws, by which the
Bishop is to proceed, are the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws. Consequently no
Minister, that lives under any Bishops Jurisdiction which is but derived, can
be obliged to obey the Bishop proceeding in his Court, any further than he is
obliged to obey the King, who has the supreme jurisdiction under God and
Christ, and that is no further than is consistent with obedience to God.

I Presented this clear and open defense with desire and expectation of his
Lordships answer in writing according to his promise, (as I apprehended) but he
refused to receive it. I trust through the grace of God, that I am ready to
renounce any error, whereof I shall be convicted, and to receive any truth that
shall be made manifest to me. And I give this account before men in the sense
of that great account which I must give to the Chief Shepherd and Bishop of
Souls, who searches the hearts and reins, and will give unto every one
according to his works.

FINIS
Several Tracts not yet Printed, prepared for the Press, and left under Mr.
John Corbet's own handwriting, intended shortly to be published, are as
follows.
1. THE true State of the Ancient Episcopacy. 2. The present Ecclesiastical
Government, compared with the Ancient Episcopacy. 3. A Consideration of the
present State of Conformity in the Church of England. 4. A Discourse of the
Church, and of the Ministry thereof. 5. A Tract of Certainty and Infallibility.
6. Of divine Worship, in three parts; 1. Of the Nature, Kinds, Parts, and
Adjuncts of Divine Worship. 2. Of Idolatry. 3. Of Superstition less than
Idolatry. 7. Matrimonial Purity.
Those already lately Printed of Mr. John Corbet's, are,
1. Kingdom of God among men, with a A Discourse of Church-Unity and Schism.
80. 2. Self-Imployment in secret. 3. An Account given of the Principles and
Practices of several Nonconformists. 4. An humble endeavor of some plain and
brief Explication of the Decrees and Operations of God about the free Actions
of Men. More especially of the Operations of Divine Grace.

