

THE INTEREST OF ENGLAND In the Matter of Religion, The First and Second Parts.
Unfolded in the SOLVTION Of Three QVESTIONS.

The Second Impression.

Written by John Corbet.

LONDON, Printed for George Thomason, and are to be sold at the Rose and Crown
in St Paul's Churchyard, 1661.

The Preface.
THe Endeavors of Pacification between the Subjects of the Prince of Peace,
and the Children of the God of Peace, may be well taken from one who has
obtained mercy to be an Ambassador of Peace, in the Ministry of
Reconciliation. Likewise it may well become any sincere Protestant, Loyal
Subject, and true Lover of dear England, to study and bring forth whatsoever
has a tendency to Reconcile those Parties in whom both the King, and the
Kingdom, and the Protestant Cause are so highly concerned. I am therefore
encouraged upon this confidence, That the offer of a willing mind in this
service is acceptable to God and good men. The Peace here propounded is the
Friend and Sister of Truth: It offers not to inthrall or burden Consciences of
either Persuasion: By allowing some diversity of Opinion, it takes away the
difference of Parties, and permits the Points of Difference to be matters of
Speculation but not of Practice: As to give an instance, Some of the Episcopal
way hold, that a Bishop differs from a Presbyter in regard of Order; that he is
ordained ad speciale Ministerium. Others of the same way do hold, That they
differ not in Order but Degree: The Presbyterians believe they are the same in
regard of Order, yet that a difference in Degree may be admitted; and so they
accept of a President-Bishop. Nevertheless, all the Episcopal Divines do judge
it ordinarily necessary, that a Presbyter be ordained by a Bishop in
conjunction with Presbyters; and none of them (as far as I understand) do judge
it unlawful that Acts of Church Discipline and Government be administered by a
Bishop in the like conjunction: And consequently the persons of these several
Persuasions need not divide, but may easily be made one in practice, by the
regular consociation of Episcopacy and Presbytery. The Peace here pursued was
earnestly expected and promised in the late great Revolution. Christian
Charity, common Honesty, yea, Necessity pleads for this Peace: They who now
contemn it, if there be any such, may come to know the want of it as well as
others. Let them who have gotten the advantage rejoice with trembling: for who
knows what he is doing, and where is the end of his working, whose judgments
are unsearchable, and whose ways are past finding out? The most subtle
Politician, whose Writings are not held to savor much of Religion, has this
Religious Observation, -- If we consider the course of humane Affairs, we shall
many times see things come to pass, and chances happen, for the preventing of
which the heavens altogether would not that any order should be taken. Match. --
And for example he alleges the great miscarriages of the Roman
Commonwealth, in the War with the French, insomuch that they did nothing like
to themselves, nor worthy of the Roman Discipline, either for equity, or
industry, or courage, or foresight, even until they were brought to the brink
of utter ruin. Certainly if the voice of Peace cannot be heard in this
remarkable time, when it calls and cries unto us by so manifold pressing
engagements, it is of the Lord, who has not given an ear to hear, nor an heart
to consider. I am far from presuming upon the force of my own reasoning in this
matter; it is the subject it self that is my confidence, and my heart is in it.
Let the God of Heaven inspire and prosper the King in His Gracious Inclinations
to the work of Peace, that all who fear Gods Name may see that in Him the Sun
of Righteousness is risen upon them, with healing in his wings. Let the
Interest of the Protestant Religion, and the Kingdom of England, prevail with a
Protestant English Parliament. Let all Ecclesiastical persons, being the
servants of Christ by special Office, cease from seeking their own things, and
let them seek the things which are Jesus Christ's: Be it far from any of them to
smite their fellow servants whilst they are doing their Masters work. If there
be any consolation in Christ, any comfort of Love, any fellowship of the
Spirit, any bowels and mercies, let all good Christians in their several places
promote the Peace of Christ's Kingdom and Family by all the ways of equal and
reasonable Condescension and Forbearance. Lastly, Let the Candid Reader accept
this Labor of Love, and not undervalue the weight and worth of the Cause, for
the defects of these Discourses.

J. C.

I. Q. Whether the Presbyterian Party should in Justice or Reason of State be
Rejected and Depressed, or Protected and Encouraged.

II. Q. Whether the Presbyterian Party may be Protected and Encouraged, and the
Episcopal not Deserted nor Disobliged.

III. Q. Whether the Upholding of both Parties by a just and equal
Accommodation, be not in it self more desirable and more agreeable to the State
of England, than the absolute Exalting of the one Party, and the total
Subversion of the other.

The Interest of England in the Matter of Religion unfolded in the Solution of
three Questions.
Section I.
THe Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, legally united in one King,
but by violence subjected to one Usurped Power of different Forms successively,
were for diverse late years reeling to and fro like a drunken man, and driven
hither and thither like a Ship in a troubled Sea. The ancient Fundamental
Constitution being overturned, those who took to themselves the Government, had
gotten a plenary possession of all the strength by Sea and Land, detected all
Conspiracies, quashed all Insurrections, and by Policy, Industry, and
wonderful Success, became formidable at home and abroad. The people sorely
bruised by a tedious civil War, were glad of some present ease, and generally
desired nothing more then to lie down in rest and peace; Likewise the more
considerate part of men, though little satisfied in the present state, yet
fearing other extremes, were nothing forward to endeavor a total change, but
thought it most advisable to take things as they were, and to bring them, if
it were possible, to some reasonable temper and consistence. Notwithstanding
these advantages, the Powers then in Being could never settle in a fixed stable
posture; and those who took the first Turn, namely, that Fragment of the
Commons House, could by no means advance or get ground in any degree toward
it: For besides the general hatred of their Usurpation and Selfish Practices,
their Republican Form, and their Designs touching Religion were wholly aliene
from the disposition of these Nations. He, who put them down from their Seats,
and exalted himself in their room, reducing the Government to a single Person
and a Parliament, set up an Image of the ancient Form, unto which the greater
number were not unwilling to bow down, not out of good will to the Person, but
for the Forms sake, and hope of Order; And by his able Conduct of Affairs, he
became less hated and more feared then at the first, yet not beloved: His
chiefest Grandees in Council and Army he made nothing to cashiere, when they
appeared to take check at his Proceedings, and so he seemed to have made a fair
progress in the establishing of his new Dominion. But the truth is, that Party
and those means by which he obtained the Power, would in no wise permit him to
make it sure: His Army was not like that of Caesar, who had no other aim than
to make their General Lord of the Roman World, and to share in his fortunes;
But it was acted by working Spirits zealous of peculiar Notions touching things
both Religious and Civil, utterly repugnant to the way of general Satisfaction
and National Settlement. And not only those of the standing Army, but the
whole body of that irregular Party throughout the Nation did generally oppose
the Kingship of this Person, who was their head and Chief, conceiving, that the
best insuring of their Interest was not by way of legal Stability; but
Sword-security. This old Leaven their chief Commander could not purge out, and
this Veterane Party could not with safety be abandoned or neglected, until a
larger tract of time might beget a better confidence between him and the sober
part of the people. But in this unsettled posture being taken off by death he
leaves all to a Successor depending rather upon the Courtesy of the present
Grandees, and the peoples peaceable inclination* than any potent abilities or
interest of his own. After a while, the wild spirit of the Army, before
manacled, brake loose, and instantly dissolved the whole frame of that new
Model. Forthwith they run into inextricable Errors and Mazes, through unstable
and headlong Counsels they do and undo, build up and pull down the samethings,
and are always reeling upon the brink of a Precipice: And at last to hasten an
inevitable ruin, the Army and Party combined with it is divided against it
self, the bonds of Union are broken, and things brought into extreme disorder
by a spirit of Ambition, Giddiness, Perverseness, Fury.

Section II.
The Nation grows impatient of these confusions, and conceives just indignation
at the disgrace and scorn cast upon it by such ridiculous changes and absurd
motions in Government. Considerate men saw plainly, that the state of England
was grown poor and feeble, and must needs langush more and more till it has no
strength left to resist any Invader, or to subsist under its own charge and
burden. The thoughts of men in general fix upon the exiled Royal Family, as
alone sacred to Sovereignty, and alone able by reason of its extensive and
grounded Interest to hold and manage it. In this juncture of time the unruly
motions and projects of the prevailing part of the Army received some check by
a Chieftain of High Trust, yet not of the Army-spirit. Presently the three
Kingdoms gaze upon him, musing what is the design, and what may be the issue of
his single opposition. Being a Person deliberate, reserved and resolute; by
ambiguous expressions and winding Traverses he amuzes all parties, and feels
his way step by step, till he finds when to declare and where to fix himself.
At length a full Tide of concurring accidents carries him to a closure with the
sober part of the Parliamentary party, who from first to last intended only a
Reformation, and due regulation of things in Church and State, but abhorred the
thought of destroying the King, or changing the Fundamental Laws of the
Kingdom. Whereupon the doors were set open to the Readmission of the Secluded
Members, which necessarily drew after it the restoring of King, Lords and
Commons, according to the ancient constitution. Nor was it possible in that
state of things, that any other party could peaceably bring about this much
desired and long expected end: For the Soldiery however changed and much
qualified were not so manageable as to have endured the stirring of those, who
were then called Royalists, but in any such appearance they were in all reason
likely to have deserted their General, and from that rooted principle of
self-preservation to have taken such ways and counsels, as might put things to
a stand, if not to the utmost hazard. But those prudent and sober-minded
Patriots being re-assembled after so long Exclusion, to put a Period to those
disorders, did not only prevent the aforesaid mischief, but also beget a good
measure of quietness and confidence in the minds of that party which
conscientiously adhered to them in the first Cause asserted by both Houses of
Parliament, in as much as these longed for nothing more, then the securing of
the true Reformed Protestant Religion, and their Civil Rights and Liberties
upon the ancient Foundations, and esteemed the legal settlement of the Kingdom,
to be that regular way wherein they might expect that God should meet them, and
bless them, and give them peace, and wherein (whatever happens) they should
find security and satisfaction to their own Consciences.

Thus the Divine Providence having first prepared the way, brings back King
Charles the Second, drawn in the swiftest Chariots, even the affections of his
willing people, and amidst their triumphant acclamations peaceably sets him
upon the Throne of his Royal Progenitors. And there let him long sit and reign,
and let his House and Kingdom be established throughout all Ages. And verily in
this great turning time it is of the highest importance to inquire and search
how the King and Kingdom, who in so wonderful manner have been restored to each
other, may be put into a stable possession of peace, happiness, and security
unto all mutual complacency and satisfaction.

Section III.
After a dreadful Earthquake shaking all the Powers of the Kingdom, and
overturning the very Foundations, and after a new frame of things erected
standing for diverse years, and seemingly stated for perpetuity, the Regal
Family and Government is raised up again, not by the power or policy of that
party who fought under the Banner of his late Majesty in the Wars, between Him
and both Houses of Parliament; But by the restless desire of the Nation, and
the vigorous actings of the City of London, with the concurrence of the
Secluded Members of the Long Parliament, in conjunction with that Renowned
Person who then held the power of the Sword: Which it pleased the King to take
notice of according to His Princely Condescension in His Gracious Speech to the
House of Peers for hastening the Act of Indemnity. [ My Lords, if you do not
join with Me in extinguishing those fears which keep men's hearts awake, and
apprehensive of safety and security, you keep Me from performing my promise,
which if I had not made, I am persuaded that neither I nor you had been now
here: I pray you let Us not deceive those who brought Us, or permitted Us to
come together.]

His Majesty thus brought back to a willing and free-spirited people by their
own Act, beholds his undoubted Interest set forth to his hand, and made plain
before him, which is no other, then a well tempered and composed state of
Affairs both Religious and Civil in all his Dominions, by the abolishing of
former differences, and the reconciling of all reconcilable Parties; and
especially of those grand Parties, which (if made one) do upon the matter carry
the whole Nation. And this His Majesty's Wisdom has already observed in that
excellent Proclamation against vicious, debauched, and profane persons in these
words [ That the Reconciliation and Union of hearts and affections can only
with Gods blessing make us rejoice in each other, and keep our Enemies from
rejoicing.] And this is the earnest expectation and hope of the Religious, and
well affected to public Tranquillity, That the King, our Supreme Head and
Governor, whose gracious Disposition does not suffer him to cleave to any
divided part of his Subjects, and to reject others that are alike Loyal, will
as a Common Father, protect and cherish all those that are found capable and
worthy, and become our great Moderator by his Authority and Wisdom, to lessen
differencies, and allay Animosities between dissenting brethren, which already
agree in the main Points of Religion. What was it that brought home His Majesty
with such impetuous affection, and impatience of delay, even in those as well
as others, who must needs know that an abatement of their particular interest
would follow? What was it (I say) but a clear knowledge and foresight, that all
would run to rack and ruin, unless the Public State did settle speedily upon a
national bottom, which could not be any other then the ancient Royal Family?
Wherefore let our hearts rejoice that our Dread Sovereign proceeds to build his
Designs, not upon the interest of any one Party, though numerous and powerful,
but upon the common Tranquillity and Security of the Nation: So by the blessing
of God he will continue a happy and mighty King over a happy and contented
people, who will esteem him their Wealth and Strength and Stability, because
they know, that none but He under God, can make them happy, and that they can
Center and Bottom on none but Him.

Section IV.
Among the various dis-agreeing Parties within this Kingdom, which seem to
render it an indigested Mass of people; two main ones appear above the rest,
of so large an interest, that if by any means they might become no more twain,
but one; they would take in, and carry along the whole stream and strength of
the Nation. And these two are the Episcopal and Presbyterian Parties, each of
them highly laying claim to the Protestant Religion. And undoubtedly whilst
these two remain divided, the Kingdom of England, and the Protestant Religion
is divided against it self. This disunion is removed either by the Abolition
of one Party, or by the Coalition of both into one. The former if supposed
possible, cannot be accomplished but by violent and perilous ways and means.
The latter is brought to pass by Accommodation or mutual yielding. Moreover
there is a third way imaginable, Toleration indulged to the weaker side. In
which of these ways lies the true Interest of the King and Kingdom is the
great Case of the time, and the Subject of this Discourse, which presumes not
to inform his Majesty; but in subordination unto his declared moderation and
condescension, endeavors, by showing things as they are, to convince and
persuade Interessed persons, that the Pacification begun for this Interim may
be entire and perfect and fully settled for perpetual unity. The whole matter
rests upon three main Enquiries.

I Qu. Whether in Justice or reason of State the Presbyterian Party should be
Rejected and Depressed, or Protected and Encouraged.

II Qu. Whether the Presbyterian Party may be Protected and Encouraged, and the
Episcopal not Deserted nor Dis-obliged.

III Q. Whether the Upholding of both Parties by a just and equal accommodation
be not in it self more desirable and more agreeable to the State of England,
than the absolute Exalting of the one Party, and the total Subversion of the
other.

And here let none prejudge the matter by reason of the name Presbyterian,
which with some is rendered odious; but let the Character hereafter given be
heedfully observed. Let none take offense at the name of Prelate or Prelatist,
which is not used for envy but for distinctions sake. Moreover the reasons why
the first Inquiry is propounded on the Presbyterians behalf, are, because
Episcopacy now stands on the rising ground, and seems to have no need of an
Advocate. Also the Presbyterians aim not at an ample, splendid and potent
State; but at Liberty and Security in their lower Orb; and chiefly because
they are by some misrepresented, and by many mis-apprehended, and
pre-condemned as inconsistent with public tranquillity in Church or State.

Section V.
As concerning their true Character, the Notation of the name whereby they are
called is both too shallow and too narrow for it. The word Presbyterian has
not sufficient depth to go to the root of the matter, nor breadth sufficient to
comprehend this sort of men. That Form of Ecclesiastical Government by
Parochial and Classical Presbyteries, Provincial and National Assemblies, is
remote enough from their main Cause, and those firm bonds that make them
eternally one, in respect whereof many that approve a regulated Episcopacy will
be found of their number. For there is a vast difference between the ancient
Episcopacy, and the height of Prelacy or Hierarchy of the latter times. This
later only is the true opposite of Presbytery. And so they may not abhor to be
named in several respects both Presbyterian and Episcopal, yet not Prelatical.
Some of them commend, and I think most of them here in England allow in order
to peace, Episcopum Praesilem non Principem. Wherefore as concerning their main
and rooted principles, they admire and magnify the holy Scriptures, and take
them for the absolute perfect Rule of Faith and Life, without the supplement of
Ecclesiastical Tradition; yet they deny not due respect and reverence to
venerable Antiquity. They assert the study and knowledge of the Scriptures to
be the duty and privilege of all Christians, that according to their several
capacities being skillful in the word of Righteousness they may discern between
good and evil, and being filled with all goodness may be able to exhort and
admonish one another: Yet they acknowledge the necessity of a standing Gospel
Ministry, and receive the directive authority of the Church not with implicit
Faith, but the Judgment of discretion: They hold the teaching of the Spirit
necessary to the saving knowledge of Christ: Yet they do not hold that the
Spirit brings new Revelations, but that he opens the eyes of the
Understanding to discern what is of old revealed in the written Word; They
exalt divine Ordinances, but debase humane Inventions in Gods Worship,
particularly Ceremonies properly Religious, and of Instituted Mystical
signification: Yet they allow the natural expressions of Reverence and
Devotion, as kneeling and lifting up of the hands and eyes in prayer; as also
those mere Circumstances of Decency and Order, the omission whereof would make
the service of God either undecent or less decent. As they worship God in the
spirit according to the simplicity of Gospel Institutions, so they rejoice in
Christ Jesus, having no confidence in a legal Righteousness, but desire to be
found in him who is made unto us Righteousness by gracious Imputation: Yet
withal they affirm constantly that good works of piety toward God, and of
Justice and Charity toward men are necessary to salvation. Their Doctrine
bears full conformity with that of the Reformed Churches held forth in their
publiek Confessions, and particularly with that of the Church of England in the
nine and thirty Articles, only one or two passages peradventure excepted, so
far as they may import the asserting of Prelacy and humane Mystical
Ceremonies. They insist much on the necessity of Regeneration, and therein lay
the groundwork for the practice of godliness. They press upon themselves and
others the severe exercise not of a Popish, outside, formal, but a spiritual
and real mortification, and self-denial, according to the power of
Christianity. They are strict observers of the Lords day, and constant in
Family prayer: They abstain from oaths, yea petty oaths, and the irreverent
usage of Gods name in common discourse; and in a word, they are sober* just and
circumspect in their whole behavior. Such is the temper and constitution of
this party, which in its full latitude lies in the middle between those that
affect a Ceremonial Worship, and the height of Hierarchical Government on the
one hand, and those that reject an ordained Ministry and settled Church order,
and regular Unity, on the other hand.

Section VI.
Within these extensive limits the Presbyterian party contains several
thousands of learned, godly, orthodox Ministers, being diligent and profitable
Preachers of the Word, and exemplary in their Conversation; among whom there
are not a few that excel in Polemical and Practical Divinity; also of the
judicious, sober, serious part of the people, (in whose affections his Majesty
is most concerned) they are not the lesser number. By means of a practical
Ministry this way like the Leaven in the Gospel parable has spread and
seasoned the more considerate and teachable sort in all parts of the Kingdom,
and especially in the more civilized places, as Cities and Towns. For indeed
such as are of this mind and this way, do make Religion their business, and
imitate the Bereans commended nobleness, resolving not to take up Religion upon
trust, but to search the Scriptures daily whether those things which they hear
are so, that they may judiciously embrace the truth. Add hereunto that one of
his Majesty's Kingdoms is Presbyterian. Certainly such a people may claim a
portion in their Gracious Sovereign, and surely he does not, he will not in any
wise refuse them.

Section VII.
The men of this persuasion are not lukewarm, but true Zealots. Nevertheless
they have no Fellowship with the spirit of Enthusiastical and Anabaptistical
Fancy and Frenzy: They are no Fanatics, although they begin to be by some
abused under that name; but they are persons of known learning, prudence, piety
and gravity, in great numbers, besides of inferior rank a vaste multitude of
knowing serious honest people. None of all which are led blindfold by Tradition
or Implicit Faith, or do run headlong into Fanatic Delusions, but they give
up themselves to the sole direction and authority of the holy Scriptures.
Wherefore impartial reason will conclude, that they chose this way, as with
sincerity of affection, so with gravity of Judgment; and that the things
themselves, even the more disputable part thereof (as that against the
Hierarchy and Ceremonies) as such as may frequently prevail with good and wise
men, in as much as they appear to those that have embraced them, to have the
Impress of Divine Authority, and the Character of Evangelical Purity.

Section VIII.
For the reasons afore-going the infringement of due Liberty in these matters
would perpetuate most unhappy Controversies in the Church from Age to Age. Let
the former times come in and give Evidence. As touching Ceremonies, the Contest
began early, even in King Edward's Reign, between Hooper and other Bishops. The
Consecration of Hooper Elect Bishop of Gloucester being stayed because he
refused to wear certain Garments used by Popish Bishops, he obtained Letters
from the King, and from the Earl of Warwick to the Archbishop of Canterbury
and others, that he might not be burdened with certain Rites and Ceremonies,
and an Oath commonly used in the Consecration of Bishops, which were offensive
to his Conscience. Nevertheless he found but harsh dealing from his Fellow
Bishops, whereof some were afterward his Fellow Martyrs, and Ridley among
others, who afterward thus wrote unto him, when they were both Prisoners for
the Gospel. [ However in time past in certain Circumstances and By-matters of
Religion your wisdom, and my simplicity (I grant) has a little jarred, each of
us following the abundance of his own sense and judgment; Now be assured, that
even with my whole heart in the Bowels of Christ I love you in the truth, and
for the truths sake which abides in us.] Some godly Martyrs in Queen Mary's
days disliked the Ceremonies, and none of them died in the defense of
Ceremonies, Liturgy, and Prelacy, in opposition to all other Ecclesiastical
Government and Order. It was the Protestant Verity which they witnessed and
sealed in blood in opposition to Popery, especially the prodigious opinion of
Transubstantiation, and the abomination of the Romish Mass, or Sacrifice. In
the same bloody days certain English Protestants being fled for refuge into
Germany, and settled in Frankford, were divided among themselves about the
Service Book, even with scandalous breach of Charity, and in the issue the
Congregation was sadly broken and dissipated. The Gospel returning under Queen
Elizabeth, these differnces were revived and held up by Disputes, Writings and
Addresses to several Parliaments, and there were great thoughts of heart for
these Divisions. Nevertheless the differences remain uncompounded; in process
of time severe Canons were framed, and with much rigor imposed, and so
continued: Ministers were distinguished into Conformists and Non-Conformists;
and a multitude of painful Preachers suffered deprivation for Nonconformity.
Be it here observed, that the persons known by the name of Non-Conformists were
not Separatists, but earnestly opposed the separation of the Brownists, and
held Communion with the Church in public worship upon this pacifick principle,
that we may not separate from a true Church blemished with some corruptions and
errors, while we are not compelled to subscribe to those errors, nor in our own
practice to submit to those Corruptions. Howbe it the greatest part of the
Ministers named Puritans, yieded Conformity to those controverted Rites and
Forms, that were by Law or Ganons established, as to things burdensome not
desirable, in their nature supposed indifferent, but in their use many ways
offensive; and groaning more and more under that yoke of bondage (as they
coneeived) they waited for deliverance, and were, in the main, of one soul and
spirit with the Non-Conformists: And even then the way called Puritanism did
not give but get ground. But now the Tenants of this way are rooted more then
ever; and those things formerly imposed, are now by many, if not by the most of
this way, accounted not only burthensom, but unlawful. And after a long time
of search and practice, the minds of men are fixed in this opinion, and are
not like to be reduced to the practice of former times; and therefore in all
reason the imposing of such matters of controversy as by so many are held
unlawful, and by those that have a zeal for them judged indifferent, not
necessary, cannot procure the peace of Church and Kingdom.

Section IX.
That this numerous party will not vary from its self, or vanish upon changes
in Government or new Accidents, does hence appear, in that it does not rest
upon any private, temporary, variable occasion, but upon a cause perpetual and
everlasting. Those forementioned Principles of science and practice, which give
it its proper Being, are of that firm and fixed nature, that new contingencies
will not alter them, nor length of time wear them out. They are the great
things of God, which have a great power over the spirit of man And they are
embraced by such as highly prize them, not for temporal advantages, whereof
they have no appearance, but for an internal excellency discerned in them, as
being necessary to the glory of God and the salvation of men. And consequently
to these men it is not satisfactory, at all adventures to be of the
State-Religion, or to believe as the Church believes. Neither will they be
dissolved or much weakened by the declining happily of some principal Ones, who
being bought off by preferment may turn prevaricators: For notwithstanding such
a falling off, the inward spirit that actuates the whole body of them, and
knits them to each other, will remain in full strength and vigor. And though
many others through weakness or mildness should stagger and give ground in the
points of lesser moment and more controverted, yet the root of the matter may
remain in them, and as to the main they may be still where they were. But what
are those great things for which this sort of men contend? Surely they are no
other then the lively opening of the pure Doctrine of the Gospel, the upholding
of all Divine Institutions, particularly the strict observation of the Lords
day, a laborious and efficacious Ministry taking hold of the Conscience and
reaching to the heart, a godly Discipline correcting true and real scandals and
disobedience; in a word, all the necessary and effectual means of unfeigned
faith and holy life, that the Kingdom of God may come in power. And for these
things sake they are alienated from the height of Prelacy and the pomp of
Ceremonious Worship. This was well known and provided against by the swaying
part of the later Prelatists; For in as much as they could not quell the
Puritans by the rigid injunction of Conformity, that they might give a blow at
the root, Lectures were suppressed, afternoon Sermons on the Lords day
prohibited under pretense of Catechizing (which was only a bare rehearsal of
the Form of Catechism for Children, without explication or application of those
principles) a Book for sports and pastimes on Sundays enjoined to be read by
Ministers in their Parish Churches under penalty of deprivation, sundry
superstitious Innovations introduced, a new Book of Canons composed, and a new
oath for upholding the Hierarchy enforced. Far be it from me to impute these
things to all that were in Judgment Episcopal; for I am persuaded, a great, if
not the greater part of them disallowed these Innovations. Nevertheless those
others that were most vehement, active, watchful, vigorous, did not by all the
aforesaid means advance, but rather weaken their Cause, and lessen themselves
in the esteem of observing men, and the oppressed party increased in number and
vigor. It is therefore evident that this Interest, for which we plead, is not
like a Meteor which after a while vanishes away, but is of a solid and firm
consistence like a fixed Constellation; And the injuries done unto it are not
of that nature, as to be acted once and for all, and then to pass into the
grave of oblivion, but they are lasting pressures to a perpetual regret and
grievance. And should not these be done away, especially when the occasions
thereof will be found not necessary, but superfluous?

Section X.
There remains yet some greater thing which strikes deep into this Enquiry,
which at the first glance perhaps may seem a fancy, but by impartial judgment
will be found a manifest and weighry truth; namely, that as this Interest will
never vary from its self, so it will never be extinguished, while the State of
England continues Protestant. I do not now argue from Maxims of Faith and
Religion (as that the life and power of Christianity shall never fail, that
after the greatest havoc of the true Church, there will be a remnant, a seed,
that shall spring up to a great increase after a little season) but I have here
entered upon a way of reason, and let men of Reason judge. Suppose that the
Persons now in being of this strict profession were generally ruined and rooted
out, yet let but the Protestant Doctrine, as it is by Law established in the
Church of England, be upheld and preached, and it will raise up a genuine
offspring of this people, whose way is no other then the life and power of
that Doctrine, as it is not only received by tradition, education, example, or
any humane authority, but also imprinted upon the spirit by a lively energy and
operation. And this I further say and testify, let but the free use of the
Holy Bible be permitted to the common people, and this generation of men will
spring up afresh by the immortal seed of the Word: For that pure, spiritual,
and heavenly Doctrine pressing internal renovation, or the new Birth, and the
way of holy singularity and circumspection, and being written with such
Authority and Majesty, must needs beget, though not in the most, yet in may, a
disposition and practice in some sort thereunto conformable. This is evident in
reason, if it be granted, that the sacred Scriptures are apt to make deep and
strong Impressions upon the minds of men; And whosoever denies this, as he is
in point of Religion Atheistical, so of Understanding brutish? For even those
impious Politicians who in heart make no account of Religion, yet will make
show of giving reverence to it, because it is always seen to have a mighty
influence upon men of all ranks and degrees. Wherefore upon the grounds
aforesaid I hold it a matter of unquestionable Verity, that the way in scorn
called Puritanism will never utterly sink unto Protestantism it self shall fail,
and Popery be set up with a bloody Inquisition.

Section XI.
And verily if there were a design to reconcile England to Rome, let all means
be used totally to quash the Puritanes or Presbyterians; but if England will
keep her self pure from Romish Abominations, let her be a kind Mother to these
her Children; For this Interest is one chief strength of the true Reformed
Protestant Religion. Let those well known Principles that strike to the heart
of Popery be brought forth for evidence, to wit, the perfection of holy
Scriptures, in opposition to unwritten Traditions; the Authority of Canonical
Books; in opposition to the encroachments of the Apocrypha; the distinct
knowledge of the Doctrine of Salvation according to every man's capacity, in
opposition to implicit Faith; the reasonable serving of God according to the
Word, in opposition to blind devotion; Spiritual Gospel Worship, in opposition
to a pompous train of Ceremonies; the efficacious edifying use of religious
exercises, in opposition to the Popish Opus operatum or work done; lastly, the
power of godliness, in opposition to splendid Formality. Whether the Prelatical
or Presbyterian party be the more rooted and grounded in these Principles, let
knowing persons consider and give judgment. It has been observed, not by
vulgar ones, but by Statesmen in former times, that the Puritans stood between
the Papists and the swaying part of the later Prelatists as a partition wall,
which was therefore to be broken down (as was reported) to make way for an
attempted reconciliation. In those times a Venetian Agent in England being
intimately acquainted with the Popes Nuncio here resident, had fathomed the
depth of his Religious Negotiation touching this grand affair, and in his
account given to the State that sent him, and since published to the world,
has these notable observations; [ That in the Realm of England are three
Faction; the Catholics, the Protestants, and the Puritans. Now says he [
these three Factions in Religion, though they all oppose one another, yet the
hatred of Protestants against Puritans is greater then against Catholics; and
that of Catholics is greater against Puritans then against Protestants; and
that of Puritans is greater against Catholics then Protestants; and thus both
Catholics and Protestants do easily combine together for the ruin and rooting
out of Puritans.] What these Protestants are he thus declares, [ they did not
so engage themselves to those particular opinions (meaning of the Reformation)
but they have since set themselves to reform the abuse of Religion by reducing
themselves again to the old practice of their Forefathers.] The Puritans he
describes in these words, [ that being seasoned and initiated with the Doctrine
of Calvin, they judge the English Reformation imperfect, and so refused
submission to that form of Policy.] Such is the account of this Statesman, both
a Forreigner and a Papist, and not to be supposed partial in favor of
Puritans. Now by Protestants he understands only those that adhered to the
English Prelacy. And so indeed that party have impropriated the name to
themselves, excluding the Presbyterians, who in the mean while complain of
palpable injury, and give evident proof, that they of right have as much
Interest in that venerable name. As touching the passages here quoted, let them
rest on the Relators credit, and their own evidence, whatever it be. What our
great Clergy intended, I determine nothing, but in equity leave it
questionable. How far they actually advanced this way, be it collected out of
their own Writings, and other manifest Expressions.

It is no novelty for Papists to impose the name of Puritans on such as retain
the old Protestant spirit of Antipathy to Rome, which is a good argument to
prove, that in the party more peculiarly so called, lies the heart and strength
of aversness and enmity to the Heresies and Idolatries of the Roman Church.
Wherefore, Those Bishops in the Church of England who were heartily averse from
Popish Innovations, were more benign and favorable to Puritans, and themselves
accounted Puritan by the adverse party, and upon the same account the Gentry of
this Kingdom were so esteemed. And let it be well observed that the more
primitive times of Protestantism were more leaning to that which Romanizing
spirits have called Puritanism. (Pardon the frequent use of this term, for I
glory not in it, but am constrained to use it for distinctions sake, in
bringing former things to remembrance.) Should not King, Nobles, and Commons
remember their Darling Protestiantism, and not abandon that sort of persons
which contribute so much to the upholding of it. It is confessed, there have
been some scandals given, yet more taken. But in this case let the saying of
our blessed Lord be minded. Not only woe to the man by whom the offense comes,
but woe to the world because of offenses. It will not be well with England
while we give way to passion and prejudices from offenses taken, and so run
from one extreme to another. Where is the wise Counselor? Can we come to no
temper? Is there no healing for us? Shall we sleep securely whilst the
Seedsmen of the Envious One, the Jesui's and other Romish Agents, sow the Tares
of Division in our Field, not only to weaken and hinder, but to choke and eat
out our common Faith? Yea blessed be God for our gracious Sovereign, who makes
it his care and study to allay distempers, and compose differences by his just
and gracious concessions already published concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs.

Section XII.
The Presbyterians are loaded with many calumnies; as that they are against the
Interest of Civil Magistracy, especially of Monarchy, that they are giddy,
factious, schismatical, domineering, and what not. Let not prejudice but reason
sway men's minds in matters of such importance.

As concerning the Interest of Civil Magistracy, that Presbyterians pluck from
it the power in Causes Ecclesiastical, that they erect Imperium in Imperio, is
a groundless and gross mistake. Take the declared Judgment of the highest in
that way according to their own words. [To the Political Magistrate is allowed
a diatactick, ordering, regulating power about Ecclesiastical Matters in a
Political way. So that he warrantably reforms the Church, when corrupted in
Divine Worship, Discipline, or Government. He convenes and convocates Synods
and Councils made up of Ecclesiastical persons, to advise and conclude
determinatively, according to the Word of God, how the Church is to be reformed
and refined from corruption, and how to be guided and governed, when reformed.
He ratifies and establishes within his Dominions the just and necessary Decrees
of the Church in Synods and Councils by his Civil Sanction. He judges and
determines definitively with a consequent political judgment or judgment of
discretion, concerning things judged and determined antecedently by the Church
in reference to his own act. He takes care politically, that even Matters and
Ordinances merely and formally Ecclesiastical be duly managed by
Ecclesiastical persons orderly called thereunto. He has a compulsive,
punitive, or corrective power formally political in matters of Religion in
reference to all sorts of persons and things under his Jurisdiction. He may
politically compel the outward man of all persons, Church Officers, or others
under his Dominions, unto external performance of their respective Duties and
Offices in matters of Religion, punishing them, if either they neglect to do
their Duty at all, or do it corruptly.] Thus they yield unto the Supreme
Magistrate a supreme political power in all spiritual matters, but they do not
yield that he is the Fountain of spiritual power, there being a spiritual power
belonging to the Church, if there were no Christian Magistrate in the world.
They assert only a spiritual power over the Conscience, as intrinsecally
belonging to the Church; and acknowledge, that no Decree or Canon of the Church
can be a binding Law to the Subjects of any Kingdom under temporal penalties,
till it be ratified by the Legislative power of that Kingdom, And, they do not
claim for the Convocation, or any other Ecclesiastical Convention, an
Independency on Parliaments; if they did, surely the Parliament of England
would resent such a Claim.

Section XIII.
There goes a voice, that the Presbyterians are Antimonarchical; But are their
Principles inconsistent with Monarchy, or any impeachment to the same? These
are contained in the character above-written; let any of them be called into
question, and let Sentence be past upon them, if they be found guilty; but if
no particular be herewith charged, the reproach must pass for calumniation, not
accusation. Peradventure the exact Presbytery, that is, the parity of degree
and authority in all Ministers, is that against which this charge is directed:
although this parity is not insisted upon, or urged to the breach of peace,
neither is it essential to Presbytery; yet what reason can be rendered why this
may not comport with Kingly Government? Or would this sort of men have no King
to reign over them? Does a Re-publique better please them? Did the English or
Scottish Presbyters ever go about to dissolve Monarchy, and to erect some other
kind of Government? In no wise: for in the Solemn League and Covenant they
bound themselves to endeavor the preservation of the Kings person and
Authority, and declared they had no intent to diminish his Majesty's just power
and greatness. After the violent change of Government, they came slowest and
entered latest into those new Engagements imposed by the usurped Powers, and
some utterly refused, even to the forfeiture of their preferments, and the
hazard of their livelihoods, when the Nation in general submitted to the yoke;
and many of those who thus object against them, did in temporizing run with the
foremost. The truth is, the generality of Conscientious Presbyterians never ran
with the current of those times. Some more eminent among them, Ministers and
others, hazarded their lives, and others lost their lives in combining to bring
our Sovereign, that now is, to the rightful possession of this His Kingdom. And
those in Scotland adventured no more then all to uphold him; and when He lost
the day, they lost their Liberty, and when He fell, it was said by the
Adversary, Presbytery was fallen. I have known when keeping company with the
chief Presbyterian Ministers has been objected by the Republican Council of
State for a crime causing Imprisonment. Lastly, the Presbyterians by their
influence first divided, and then dissipated the Sectarian party, and so made
way for his Majesty's Return in peace. And it is acknowledged by some eminent
on the Episcopal side, that the sense of the Covenant has lately quickened many
men's Consciences in their Allegiance to the King, so as to bring him with David
home in infinite joy and triumph. All which do show plainly, that they are not
averse from Regal Government, or the Royal Family, but they desire to dwell
under the shadow of our dread Sovereign, hoping to renive as the Corn, and to
grow as the Vine under his gracious influence. Peradventure it is said, they
would enervate Monarchy, and render it too impotent. Surely I cannot find the
rise of this Objection, unless from hence, that they were not willing to come
under any yoke but that of the Laws of the Realm, or to pay arbitrary Taxes
levied without consent of Parliament. I confess there are none that more
reverence their Liberties, and value the native happiness of the free born
Subjects of England. And verily their true knowledge and sense of the nature of
Christian Religion makes a due freedom exceeding precious: For this Religion is
not variable according to the will of man, but grounded upon an unchangeable
and eternal truth, and does indispensibly bind every Soul high and low to one
divine law and rule perpetual and unalterable. And therefore it does strongly
plead the expedience of a due civil liberty on the behalf of its Professors;
yet such a liberty as will not infeeble Monarchy, nor the legal power of the
Kings of England And without controversy, a King ruling a free people has a
power much more noble and more free, then he that rules over perfect Vassals,
that has no Propriety. The power is more noble, because it has a more noble
subject of Government; it is more honorable to rule men then beasts, and Free
men then Slaves. Likewise the power is more free: For whatsoever Prince has
not his power limited by his peoples legal freedom, he will be bound up some
other way, either by the potency of subordinate Princes and great Lords within
the Realm, or by a veterane Army, as the Turkish Emperor by his Janissaries,
and the Roman Caesar's by the Pretorian Bands and the Legions. Upon which
account, to be a powerful Monarch over a free people, is the freedom and glory
of our Sovereign Lord, above all the Potentates on earth.

Section XIV.
But Rebellion and Disobedience is the loud outcry of some against this party.
And this were a crying sin indeed. But let not sober minds be hurried into
prejudice by such exclamations and outcries. It were to be wished, for common
peace and amity, that the late public discords were eternally forgotten. But
seeing some in these times of expected Reconciliation will not cease to implead
and condemn the honest minded, and render them odious to the higher Powers, a
necessity is laid upon us to speak something Apologetical, at least to mitigate
the business and remove prejudice. The Presbyterian party in England never
engaged under a less Authority than that of both Houses of Parliament. I have
read that the Parliament of England has several capacities, and among the
rest, these two; First, that it represents the people as Subjects, and so it
can do nothing but manifest their grievances, and petition for relief.
Secondly, that by the constitution it has part in the Sovereignty, and so it
has part in the legislative power, and in the final judgment. Now when as a
part of the Legislative Power resides in the two Houses, as also a power to
redress grievances, and to call into question all Ministers of State and
Justice, and all Subjects of whatsoever degree in case of Delinquency, it might
be thought that a part of the supreme power does reside in them, though they
have not the honorary Title: And this part of the supreme power is indeed
capable of doing wrong; yet how it might be guilty of Rebellion is more
difficult to conceive. In this high and tender point it belongs not to me to
determine. And as touching the much debated point of resisting the higher
powers, without passing any judgment in the great Case of England, I shall
only make rehearsal of the words of Grotius a man of Renown, and known to be
neither Anti-monarchical, nor Anti-prelatical, which are found in his Book de
jure belli and pacis, by himself dedicated to the French King. [ Si Rex partem
habeat summi Imperii, partem alteram populus aut Senatus, Regiin partem non
suam involanti, vis just a opponi poterit, quia eatenus imperium non habet.
Quod locum habere censeo, etiamsi dictum sit, belli potestatem penes Regem
fore. Id enim de bell^ externo intelligendum est, cum alioqui quisquis imperii
summi partem habeat, non possit non jus habere eam partem tuendi.] lib. 1. c.
4. s. 13. With reverence to Sovereign Majesty I crave leave to speak this word
of truth and soberness. In a knowing age flattery does not really exalt or
secure the Royal Prerogative; the Authority of Parliaments being depressed and
undervalued is the more searched into and urged. Concerning the utmost bounds
and limits of Royal Prerogative and Parliamentary Power the Law in deep wisdom
chooses to keep silence, for it always supposes union, not division between
King and Parliament. Wherefore the overstraining on either hand, let all men
forbear: His Majesty's wisdom and goodness, and his peoples obedience and
loyalty in all ways of mutual satisfaction will best secure His Prerogative and
their Liberty. Moreover as to the point of Loyalty now in question, the
subversion of the Fundamental Government of this Kingdom could not be
effected, till those Members of Parliament that were Presbyterian were many of
them imprisoned, others forcibly secluded by the violence of the Army, and the
rest thereupon withdrew from the House of Commons. For they had voted the Kings
Concessions, a ground sufficient for the Houses to proceeed to settle the
Nation, and were willing to cast whatsoever they contended for upon a legal
security. In those times the Presbyterian Ministers of London in their public
vindication thus declare themselves. [ We profess before God, Angels and Men,
that we verily believe that that which is so much feared to be now in
agitation, the taking away of the life of the King in this present way of
Trial, is not only not agreeable to the Word of God, the Principles of the
Protestant Religion (never yet stained with the least drop of the blood of a
King) or the Fundamental Constitution and Government of this Kingdom, but
contrary to them, as also to the Oath of Allegiance, the Protestation of May 5.
1641. and the Solemn League and Covenant; from all which, or any of which
Engagements, we know not any Power on earth able to absolve us or others.] And
in conclusion they warn and exhort men to pray for the King, that God would
restrain the violence of men, that they may not dare to draw upon themselves
and the Kingdom the blood of their Sovereign. Let prudent men weigh things in
the balance of Reason. Is there any thing in the nature of Prelacy that frames
the mind to obedience and loyalty? or is there any thing in the nature of
Presbytery that inclines to rebellion and disobedience? If Loyalty be the
innate disposition of Prelacy, how comes it to pass, that in ancient times, and
for a series of many ages, the Kings of England have had such tedious conflicts
with Prelates in their Dominions? If Presbytery and Rebellion be connatural,
how comes it to pass, that those States or Kingdoms where it has been
established or tolerated have for any time been free from broyls and
commotions? or that Presbyterians have never disclaimed or abandoned their
lawful Prince, that they have never ceased to solicit and supplicate his
regards and favor, even when their power has been at the highest, and his
sunk lowest; yea, that they have suffered themselves rather to be trodden under
foot, then to comply with men of violence in changing the Government? Let us
further examine, are the persons that adhere to Prelacy more conscientious in
duty to God and man then those that affect Presbytery? Are the former only
sober, just and godly, and the latter vicious, unrighteous, profane? Certainly
if it has been the lot of the one for a time to comply more with Kings then
the other has done, it arises not from any peculiar innate disposition of the
one or the other, but something extrinsecal and accidental, and what that may
be, let prudent men make their own observations.

Section XV.
Their principles, whose cause is now pleaded, if faithfully received and kept
will make good men and good Christians, and therefore cannot but make good
subjects. When men have learned to fear God, they will honor the King indeed,
and none are more observant of righteous Laws then they that are most a law to
themselves, yea their pattern and practice will be a law to many others, and
consequently a main help to civil Government in a Christian Nation: Whosoever
they be that teach blind obedience, Presbyterians teach faith and holiness, as
also obedience active in all lawful things, and passive in things unlawful
enjoined by the higher power. In the late distracted times the public State
was out of frame, always ready to fall asunder, the minds of people were
unquiet and unsettled; those that held the power could never gain half that
awful regard and reverence which was given to Kings, Nobles, and men of
Authority in former times. Nevertheless; profaneness, intemperance, revellings,
outrages, and filthy lewdness, were not at any time in the memory of the
present age, held under more restraint. Surely some special reason may be
rendered, why in such want of public Order, there should not be a greater
disorder in men's lives and manners then at other times; which I conceive is
manifest, to wit, that by means of a practical Ministry more thick set
throughout the Nation, knowledge and restraining grace did more abound, and the
orderly walking of religious persons did keep others more within compass, and
withal, strictness of life was not openly derided under the name of Puritanism.
Those places where Presbyterian Ministers had the greatest influence, were
evidently the most reformed and civilized, for which cause they were so much
hated by men of loose principles and dissolute lives. Whereupon we affirm
boldly, That those for whom we plead must needs be good Subjects to a Christian
King, and good members of a Christian Commonwealth.

Section XVI.
Neither are they wandering Stars, a people given to change, fit to overturn and
pull down, but not to build up. They do not hang in the air, bur build upon a
firm ground; they have settled principles consistent with the rules of stable
policy. Contrariwise, Fanatics (truly and not abusively so called) do build
castles in the air, and are fit instruments to disturb and destroy and root
out, but never to compose and plant and settle; for which cause their Kingdom
could never hold long in any time or place of the world. Upon this ground
Presbytery, not sectarian Anarchy, has been assaulted with greatest violence
by the more observing Prelatists; against this they have raised their main
batteries, this appeared formidable, for it is stable and uniform, and like to
hold if once settled in good earnest. This party do not run so fast, but they
know where to stop; they are a number of men so fixed and constant as none
more, and a Prince or State shall know where to find them. They do not strain
so high, but they consider withal what the Kingdoms of the world will bear, and
are willing to bring things to the capacity of political Government. They can
have no pleasure in commotions and alterations, for order and regular unity is
their way, and therefore stability of Government and public tranquillity is
their interest. It is most unreasonable to object, that the late wild
postures, extravagancies and incongruities in Government, were the work of
Presbytery or Presbyterians. The Nation had never proof of Presbytery, for it
was never settled, but rather decryed and exposed to prejudice by those that
were in sway, and that in the more early times of the late Wars. The truth of
this matter is cleared by a passage of our late Sovereign in a Letter to his
Majesty that now is.] All the lesser Factions were at first officious Servants
to Presbytery their great Master, till time and Military Success discovering to
each their particular advantages, invited them to part stakes, and leaving the
joint stock of uniform Religion, pretended each to drive for their party the
trade of profits and preferments, to the breaking and undoing not only of the
Church and State, but of Presbytery it self.] Thus the joint stock of uniform
Religion was left, and Presbytery neglected, before the first War was ended:
Yea, and those that stedsastly adhered to it were maligned and reviled by the
exorbitant party for opposing their new models or agreements of the people.

Section XVII.
Neither can Sects or Schisms with any truth or justice be reckoned the
Offspring of Presbytery. Consider the French, Dutch, Helvetian Churches, how
entire they keep themselves in Orthodox Unity from the Gangreen of Sects and
Schisms. A wide Breach was once made in the Netherlands by Arminius and his
Followers, but after some years conflict, it was healed by the Synod of Dort.
The Church of Scotland is inferior to none in the unity of Doctrine and
Church Communion; and their form of Ecclesiastical Policy, and method of
Discipline is very effectual to prevent the broaching of Error. King James in
discourse with an English Bishop, is reported to have rendered this account why
so few Heresies and Errors of Doctrine are united and prosecuted to the
public disturbance of that Church. [Every Parish has their Pastor ever
present with them, and watching over them, and he with his Elders and Deacons
has a weekly meeting for censure of manners, by which he perfectly knows his
Flock, and every abberation of them in doctrine and practice; and lest any
heresy might seize upon the Pastor, they have their Presbyters, which meet
together once also every week in the next chief Town or City; and there they
have their exercise of prophesying, after which the Moderator asks the
judgment of all the Pastors concerning the doctrine then delivered, or of any
other doubtful point then propounded; and if the Presbytery be divided in their
opinions, the question is, under an enjoined silence, put over (...) the next
Synod, which is held twice a (...) which the Pastors of that quarter or
province do duly resort, accompanied with their Elders; and any question of
doubt is either decided by that Assembly, or with charge of silence reserved to
a national Synod which they hold every year once, whither come not the Pastors
only, but the King himself, or his Commissioners, and some of all orders and
degrees, sufficiently authorized for determining of any controversy that shall
arise among them.] Could the Bishops in former times procure a greater unity in
the Church of England? Whence therefore should this charge arise? peradventure
some Presbyterians have turned Sectaries. Surely it would be taken for a weak
arguing, to say, That Prelacy is the way to Popery, because some Prelatists
have turned Papists.

The truth is, Sectarianism grew up in a Mystery of Iniquity and State policy,
and it was not well discerned, till it became almost triumphant by Military
successes. But after that its growth and strength did manifestly appear,
Presbytery began to struggle with it, and so continued, until by the power of
the Army it was enforced to sit down, but never to comply. Whereupon the
tongues and pens of Sectaries were employed against none more then the
Presbyterians. And I should be glad to hear of such bitter Invectives of the
Papists against the Prelatists; not that I rejoice in the sin of the one, or
the suffering of the other; but that the Protestant friends of Prelacy might
more incline to their Protestant Presbyterian Brethren. Surely the way to
prevent the growth of the two utmost extremes, is, for the two middle parties
to draw up and close together. But however the world goes, the Presbyterians
shall ever keep as good a distance from the Sectaries or Fanatics, as the
Prelatists shall from Papists. And verily there is no greater bar against
Fanaticism then the right Presbyterian principles; as not to sever but join the
written word and spirit for direction; the spirit and use of Ordinances for
Edification; to erect a stated Church Order and Discipline; to allow to the
Church a directive, and to every Christian a discretive judgment; to insist
only upon Divine Scripture Warrant, and to wave humane authority in matters of
Religion: For such is the temperament of these Maxims, that they commend and
require a distinct knowledge and illumination in the mind, and in the
affections lively motions and stirrings against Formality and blind Devotion;
and so do satisfy the minds of those, who conceive that in true Religion there
is spiritual light, and life and power; and also they show the necessity of the
written Word, of constant public Ordinances, and private Exercises of
Religion, and of the direction and discipline of the Church; all which do serve
to settle the mind against dilusive impulses, and wild fancies and raptures.

Section XVIII.
But of all the prejudices and scandals taken against this way, there is none
greater then this, that it is represented as tyrannical and domineering, and
that those who live under it must like Issachar crouch under the burdens. In
the first place let us rightly understand the meaning of this prejudice. Is it
because this Discipline does censure scandalous disorders, and enquire into the
state of the flock, as watching over their souls? This is its high commendation
in the sight of God and good men. Does Episcopacy care for none of these
things? Surely a Bishop is an Overseer; to exercise the Office of a Bishop is
to take the oversight of the Church; and those that are over us in the Lord
watch for our souls, as those that must give an account thereof. Howbeit
Presbytery is not more severe in censuring the breach of Gods Commandments,
then the Hierarchy in censuring the breach of their own constitutions. Or is
the offense taken upon pretense that Presbyterians affect and arrogate an
arbitrary power, would rule by faction, and exercise a rigout to the stirring
up of animosities and unquiet humors? Since the friends of Prelacy are loudest
in this crimination, I crave leave to use this mild retortion. Is there no
appearance of domination in Prelacy? Was nothing like unto it objected to the
dignified Clergy? If you say those invectives and clamours were false and
scandalous, then let reason and charity be permitted to make some Apology for
the other discipline which the Nation has hitherto never experienced in any
measure of national uniformity and settlement. But there are remedies at hand
to prevent the abuse of any Government that is of it self lawful and laudable.
Certainly the wisdom of the King and Parliament, with the advice of grave
Divines, may prescribe sure and certain rules of discipline. Moreover, to cut
off all occasion, and prevent all appearance of domineering, all political
coercive jurisdiction in matter of Religion, may be withheld (if need require)
from Ecclesiastical persons; and that mere spiritual power alone which is (...)
to their office, may be left to their management, which is in the Name of
Christ, and by Authority from him, to admonish the untuly; and if they continue
obstinate, by the same Authority to declare them unworthy of Church Communion,
and Christian Society, and to require the Lords people to have no fellowship
with them, that they may be afflicted and humbled. And because spiritual
censures appertaining only to the Conseience may be too little regarded, when
no temporal damage is annexed to them, there may be a collateral civil power
always present in Ecclesiastical Meetings, to take cognizance of all Causes
therein debated and adjudged, in order to temporal penalties.

Upon the whole matter aforegoing we firmly build this position, That the
Presbyterian Party ought not in Justice or Reason of State to be rejected and
depressed, but ought to be protected and encouraged. Nevertheless there being a
seeming complication in this business, and an other ample party appearing in
competition, a difficulty remains, and the matter falls into a further
deliberation. And thereupon we are fallen upon the second main Enquiry.

II Qu. Whether the Presbyterian Party may be protected and encouraged, and the
Episcopal not deserted nor disobliged.

Section XIX.
The grand Expedient in this difficulty is a well grounded Accommodation
producing an entire and firm union. That the Accommodation may be true and
solid, not loose and hollow, it must be such as will content and satisfy for
continuance; and that it may be such, the terms thereof must not be repugnant
to the conscientious principles of either party. Otherwise whatsoever it be, it
is but a botch, and will never hold. Wherefore we now examine whether those
principles are such as set the parties at an irreconcilable distance, or else
make the proposed union possible and hopeful. As touching holy Doctrine, they
both receive the nine and thirty Articles of the Church of England, unless that
one side may demurr upon one or two passages respecting the Form of
Ecclesiastical Government and Ceremonies, being the matters now in question,
and remote from the foundation. And in very deed the Doctrine of the English
Bishops, in general, that lived in the elder times of Protestantism, as Jewel,
Pilkington, Babington, and of the latter Bishops their Followers, as Abbot,
Carleton, Morton, Usher, Hall, Davenant, is entirely embraced by the
Presbyterians; when as many of the latter Prelatists departed from it, in the
great point of Predestination, Redemption, Free Will, effectual Grace,
Perseverance, and Assurance of Salvation, and termed it Puritan Doctrine.
Whereupon I conclude that those Prelatists of this Age, who are the genuine
Offspring of the old Episcopal Divines, will not divide from Presbyterians
upon the account of Doctrine; and that the other sort need not divide from them
any more then from the rest, that are of the Episcopal Persuasion. But in the
Form of Church Government the breach is much wider, and the Reconciliation
seems more difficult. Indeed the Dominion of Prelacy, and the exact
Presbyterian parity are opposite Extremes. Nevertheless, a regulated Episcopacy
and Presbytery may be found so far from mutual opposition and inconsistency,
that they may close together in a sweet Harmony. The Scripture Bishop and the
Evangelical Pastor is one and the same Officer. The Primitive Ecclesiastical
Episcopacy was not reputed by the Ancients a different Order of Ministry. The
Bishop was only a Presbyter in a higher degree, the President of the
Presbytery, and ruled in consociation with all the Presbyters. The better part
of the Scool-men place the difference only in degree, not in order. Of the same
judgment were the old Episcopal Divines in England, and even in the last times
Morton, Hall, and Usher. Whereupon they held the Foreign Protestant Churches
that had no Prelaies to be true Churches, and their Pastors true Ministers of
Christ. And this is very remarkable in the most rigid Prelatists of their
times, when upon the new erecting of Prelacy in Scotland, certain Scottish
Bishops were to be consecrated here in England, Bishop Andrews moved this
question, whether they ought not first to be ordained Presbyters, as having
received no Ordination from a Bishop; Archbishop Bancroft being there present,
maintained there was no necessity of Reordination; for where a Bishop cannot be
had, Ordination given by Presbyters must be esteemed lawful. This Solution
being applauded by the other Bishops, Doctor Andrews acquiesced. On the other
side, an absolute equality among Ministers is not essential to Presbytery: but
a prudential priority according to the Churches occasions, and consequently a
stated Presidency may be admitted: For the main principle of Presbytery is
this, That every Minister is truly a Pastor, and that pastoral Authority
includes both teaching and ruling; for which cause the Presbyters may not yield
up themselves as the Bishops mere Curates or Subjects. For that would nullify
their Pastoral Office, as to one part thereof, which is as essential to it as
the other; in regard whereof the Presbyters are in Scripture called Bishops or
Overseers, and are charged to take the oversight of the Flock. But this is no
way violated by admitting a stated Moderator or president Bishop. As concerning
Worship or Divine Service, we conclude that those who agree in the Doctrine of
Faith cannot disagree in the substance of Worship. They differ only about the
Liturgy and Ceremonies. And the dissenting side oppose not all Liturgy, but
desire that the present form may be changed or reformed. They oppose not any
circumstance of Decency and Order, but desire that mystical Ceremonies of
humane institution may be abolished or not enjoined.

Section XX.
Thus the Coalition of these two Interests into one appears possible, because
their conscientious principles on both sides have not that repugnancy, but that
they may well close together in a due temperament, and constitute one solid
Ecclesiastical polity. And nothing hinders this conjunction, but the obstinacy
either of one or both parties from a humor of opposition, or incurable enmity,
or some carnal design. Among the Bishops and Episcopal Doctors, some of the
most eminent have witnessed to the world their desires of Accommodation by
their endeavors and proposals that way. The Presbyterians prefer an uniting
accommodation, though upon yielding terms, before division with an entire
Toleration. The incomparable Bishop Usher in the beginning of the late Troubles
proposed his model, Entitled, The Reduction of Episcopacy unto the form of
Synodical Government received in the ancient Church, as an expedient for the
comprimizing of the now differences, thus declaring, [ That by Order of the
Church of England all Presbyters are charged to minister the Doctrine,
Sacraments, and Discipline of Christ, as the Lord has commanded, and as this
Realm has received the same. And that they might the better understand what
the Lord has commanded therein, the Exhortation of St. Paul to the Elders of
the Church of Ephesus is appointed to be read unto them at the time of their
Ordination, Take heed to your selves, and to all the flock, among whom the Holy
Ghost has made you overseers, to rule the Congregation of God which he has
purchased with his own blood.] Mark well how this pious learned Prelate
declares his own sense, and interprets the meaning of the Church of England,
that the Holy Ghost has made all Ordained Ministers Bishops or Overseers, to
rule the Congregation of God. He says further, [ Though in our Church this
kind of Presbyterial Government has been long dis-used, yet seeing it still
professes that every Pastor has a right to rule the Church, and to minister
the Discipline of Christ, as well as to dispense the Doctrine and Sacraments:
And the restraint of the exercise of this Right proceeds only from the custom
now received in this Realm; no man can doubt but by another Law of the Land
this hinderance may be well removed.] If the Presbyterians embrace these or
such like Proposals, what hinders the agreement in that great and most
difficult point in difference (to wit) Church Government?

Section XXI.
If both parties refuse to meet each other and to walk together in a middle
way, the weaker party must needs be tolerated. There is indeed a third way, by
subverting the rejected side; but we believe, that in the present case it is so
abhorrent to humane reason and Christian Charity, th^^we will not take it into
consideration. Wherefore the Question lies between an Accommodation and a
Toleration, which of these two shall be chosen; and why the former is more
desirable for both sides then the latter, I offer these arguments: And first,
Multiformity of Religion publicly professed does not well comport with the
spirit of this Nation, which is free, eager, zealous, apt to animosities and
jealousies, besides that it has ever had a strong propension to Uniformity.
Also, it is too well known, that the dividing of Church communion is the
dividing of hearts, and that we shall not live like brethren, till we agree to
walk in one way. Only let this be well observed and ever remembered, that the
necessary and enjoined terms of this Unity be not in things superfluous, but
necessary at least for edification, order and peace. Moreover, Toleration being
not the daughter of Amity but of Enmity (at least) in some degree, supposes
the party tolerated to be a burden, especially if conceived dangerous to the
way established, and commonly holds no longer then mere necessity compels; and
consequently neither party take themselves to be safe, the one always fearing
to lose its authority, and the other its liberty. And if men will lay aside
self-conceit and fond indulgence to the way of their own persuasion, they will
quickly find, that the temper of this Kingdom does not well accord with
extremes on either hand. Certainly, well-minded and serious people were never
better prepared for an equal Accommodation. They are weary of tedious
dissentions in Church and State, and have seen and felt the sad consequents
thereof; and could they once attain to settled union, upon the same grounds they
would do their utmost to hold and keep it inviolable. Without controversy, the
earnest thoughts of such a compoture did expedite the peaceable return of his
Majesty. The Presbyterians vigorously acted for it; although they knew there
were some that breathed out revenge and cruelty against them, yet they hoped
that the prevailing part would be sober, and carry it with all moderation, But
they relied chiefly upon his Majesty's Wisdom, Equity and Goodness, whose
Virtues (attested by faithful witnesses) proclaimed him the Sovereign
Reconciler and Healer of our breaches. And surely they will never repent of
their honesty and loyalty. And let them rest assured, that their moderation
shall plead for them in the time to come.

Section XXII.
If one party coming forward to mere their brethren make a tender of such
propositions, as in all reason may procure unity and order in the Church, and
cannot pass further without regret of Conscience; in this case, for the other
party to go about to strain them higher, is most unreasonable and uncharitable.
Let them remember his Rule who is Lord and Head of the Church; Whatsoever ye
would that men should do unto you, do ye the same unto them. Now such proposals
may suffice for peace, which will not satisfy humor, and faction, and carnal
interest. Unity and order may be obtained by those terms that do not prejudice
the conscientious principles of either party, and are not defective in things
necessary; I mean, not only to salvation, but to the Churches peace and
edification; and verily to insist upon such terms alone, is the most Christian
and most rational way to a solid and sure peace. As for the Presbyterians, what
they offer will sufficiently attain the said ends; and what they stand upon
does not cross the said rule of Charity and Prudence. Their proposals touching
Prelacy, Liturgy, Ceremonies, and Canonical Subscription are in no wise
repugnant to the Church's being or welbeing.

Section XXIII.
That Prelacy, as it stood in England, is not essential to a Church State, we
call to witness the far greater number of Protestant Episcopal Divines, yea the
whole current of them, till the times next foregoing our Civil wars.
Archbishop Bancroft, no way indulgent to Presbytery, withstood the re-ordaining
of those Scottish Presbyters elect Bishops upon this reason, That they might
not seem to question the Ministry of the Reformed Churches. For which cause,
who can forbear to censure the palpable absurdity of some latter Prelatists,
that unchurch all the foreign Reformed Churches, and nullify their Ministry
and Ordinances? They have taken up a most destructive killing opinion, which
(...) the unspeakable advantage of the Romish Church) lets out the Vitals of
the Protestant Cause and Religion. And shall any that are hearty Protestants be
fond of such Opinionists? Moreover, it is no less evident that the Prelacy, as
it stood in England, is without the warrant of Divine right, and that not only
in regard of Lordly titles and exercise of temporal Dominion, but also in
regard of sole Jurisdiction and deputation of power. Is there any text in the
Scripture where the name and work of a Bishop is appropriated to a superior
Order or degree in the Ministry? Do not all the texts of Scripture that
mention the name and work of a Bishop attribute both to all ordained Ministers?
Can there be a clearer evidence that a Bishop and Presbyter is the same
spiritual Officer? Besides, to maintain the Divine right of Prelacy, it
suffices not to show from Scripture any kind of difference between a Bishop
and a Presbyter, unless it can be likewise proved that the Bishop is the alone
subject or receptacle of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, that he alone has rule
and government over all the Presbyters within his limits, yea, and over all the
Churches, leaving no power to the Presbyters but to execute his Injunctions.
But there is nothing more express, then that the Holy Ghost has made all
Presbyters to be Bishops or Overseers, and has commanded them to rule the
Church, and to exercise Episcopacy, or to take the oversight thereof. And that
this is the sense of the Church of England is manifest by appointing the
exhortation of Saint Paul to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, and the
character and qualification of Bishops written by the same Apostle unto
Timothy, to be read unto Presbyters at the time of their Ordination. Hereupon a
late famous Defender of Prelacy was driven to leave the beaten path of
Episcopal Divines, and to take a new way, but to the ruin of the Cause
maintained by him. He says [ That although the Title of (...) Elders, has
been extended to a second Order in the Church, and is now in use only for them
under the name of Presbyters, yet in the Scripture times it belonged
principally, if not only, to Bishops, there being no evidence that any of that
second Order were then instituted, though soon after, before the Writings of
Ignatius, such were instituted in all Churches.] Here it is fully granted that
the Scripture Presbyters were Bishops, and that the second Order of mere
Presbyters, which were no Bishops, was not then instituted; whereupon it
follows, that a mere Presbyter, who is no Bishop, is not of divine institution,
but a mere humane Creature, if the holy Scriptures be the perfect Rule of all
Divine Institutions. Neither is the abatement of Prelacy unto moderate
Episcopacy or Presidency any departure from the practice of the ancient Church,
but a true reviving of the same, which was an election made by the Presbyters
of one of their own number to preside amongst them, and that upon no pretense
of Divine Right, but for remedy of Schism, as Jerome witnesses. And with this
Bishop or President the whole Presbytery joined in the common Government of the
Church. Bishop Usher plainly shows how easily the ancient form of Government
may be revived again, and with what little show of alteration, namely, by
erecting a Suffragan Bishop in every rural Deanery, into which every Diocese is
subdivided, who may every month assemble a Synod of all the incumbent Pastors
within the Precinct, and according to the major part of voices, conclude all
matters that should be brought into debate before them, yet with a liberty to
appeal (if need require) to the Diocesan, Provincial, National Synods. That the
number of Bishops should be very much augmented does evidently appear to all
that know and consider the weight of Episcopal Superintendency; and the learned
Bishop now mentioned gives a hint, that their number might be very well
conformed to the number of rural Deaneries. Surely so many hundred populous
Parishes now under the Government of one Bishop might be well divided into many
Diocesses ample enough. And such a course would make not only for the edifying
of the Church by the more effectual inspection of many Bishops for one, but
also for the advancement of Learning by the multiplication of preferments.
Wherefore nothing of the Churches being or well-being, nothing of Divine
Institution or primitive practice does withstand the reduction of Prelacy to
moderate Episcopacy, or the ancient Synodical government, to which the
Presbyterians may conform without repugnancy to their principles.

Section XXIV.
The point of Ceremonies comes next under debate. And for as much as it
concerns Divine Worship, it is of high importance, and a tender point of
Conscience. And herein we affirm, that the Presbyterian concessions are no way
defective, but sufficient and ample unto all regular devotion in divine
Service. All natural expressions of devotion, or natural external worship they
readily acknowledge, as kneeling and lifting up of the hands and eyes in
prayer, and such like; which are called natural, because nature it self
teaches all Nations to use them without any divine or humane Institution, and
a rational man by the mere light of nature is directed to them, yet not without
some government of counsel and discretion: For in these things nature is in
part determined and limited by the custom of several Ages and Countries, and
by the difference of several Cases. In the act of adoration the prostration of
the body is used according to nature in some ages, places, and occasions, and
not in others. In ancient times the wearing of fackcloth and ashes, and renting
of clothes, were fit expressions of humiliation, and that according to nature;
yet the same suits not with our times: For herein nature is subject unto some
variety; and now adays the wearing of the meanest apparel were suitable in a day
of Humiliation, because it is now a convenient natural expression of
self-abasement, and a kind of abstinence. Likewise kneeling is a natural
prayer-posture; but where it cannot be used conveniently, standing is naturally
agreeable; nevertheless neither the one nor the other is necessary, where
infirmity or other necessity makes it inconvenient Moreover they do not scruple
the mere circumstances of order, as time, place, and method, without which
humane actions cannot be performed. They allow and commend all matters of
decency, as decent Churches or meeting places, and furniture, as a Pulpit
Cloth, Communion Cup, and a grave habit for a Minister, and in holy duties a
grave posture of body and composed countenance, and the wearing of the best
apparel upon solemn sacred times; all which are recommended in the general
Rule, Let all things be done decently and in order: Which Rule properly is of
the Law of nature, and would oblige Christians, though it had not been written
in the holy Scripture.

In the things before mentioned we perceive a good accord; but here lies the
difference.

The Presbyterians stick at Ceremonies properly sacred, and significant by
humane institution, which they conceive to be more than mere circumstances,
even parts of Worship; and whatsoever instituted Worship is not ordained of God
they hold unlawful. To the making up of the Ceremonies now in question, they
observe these things; Humane Institution, mystical and instituted, not natural
signification, and appropriation to divine Worship. And it alters not the case,
that they are by nature apt to signify (for so are all Sacraments) if they do
not actually signify without institution. That such Ceremonies are parts of
divine Worship, they prove from the nature of Worship in general, which
requires no more, then that it has the honor of God for its direct and
immediate end; it is something not reductively, but directly sacred and
religious, and an immediate expression of our observance of God, and obligation
to him. And such is the nature of the controverted Ceremonies, much differing
from matters of order and decency, which properly and immediately respect men
that use them, as the Church or Temple is immediately and directly for the
assembling of people, a Communion Cup for drinking, a Table cloth for covering.
Decency is no part of Worship, but a circumstance thereof not proper to it, but
common, with grave civil actions; and does no more become sacred, when applied
to sacred uses, than a sacred thing (as prayer) becomes civil, when applied to
civil uses. Time considered as a mere circumstance of a sacred action, belongs
to it not precisely as sacred, but as an action, because without time no action
can be performed. And being a mere circumstance, it needs not be determined of
God, but is left to humane prudence according to occasion, whether for private
or public Worship; which is the case of time for private devotion, and days
of public Humiliation and Thanksgiving. But they that scruple our mystical
significant Ceremonies, conceive that they are properly and merely sacred, as
having the honor of God for their direct and immediate end, That the Surplice
is not for gravity, nor merely for decent distinction, but a religious mystical
habit, the character or badge of a sacred Office, or Service conformable to the
linen Ephod under the Law. The signing with the sign of the Cross (they
conceive) is more evidently sacred than the former. As Baptism consecrates the
Child, so does the Cross. It is used as a sealing sign of our Obligation to
Christ, as the words used in the application thereof do manifest; and the book
of Canons does declare expressly, which says. [ That it is an honorable hadge,
whereby the Infant is dedicated to the service of him that died on the Cross,
as by the words used in the Book of Common Prayer it may appear.] And therefore
it is in that respect Sacramental. Besides, if it were not a sealing sign, but
only for mystical teaching, it has the same nature with diverse Levitical
Ceremonies, which were not typical, but doctrinal, teaching some Moral Duty. A
holy day, or time properly sacred, whether by divine institution, as the Lords
day, or humane, as other sacred Festivals, is not a mere circumstance, but a
part of Worship: For it is not only belonging to a sacred action, as an action,
but precisely as a sacred action on that day to be performed; yea, it is of it
self sacred, and is not only sanctified by the Service, but also sanctifies
the Service. The truth is, sacred Ceremonies may in some respect be called
circumstances, as being inferior things subservient to Moral Worship, which is
the main; yet they are also parts of Worship in general, for Worship is either
Moral or Ceremonial; and that Ceremonial Worship which is commanded of God is
lawful and good; but that which is not commanded by him is neither good nor
lawful, nevertheless it is Worship. On this manner the Non-Conformists and
Presbyterians have debated this Controversy, and argue further, That humane
discretion is the rule of Order and Method; Nature and civil Custom is the rule
of Decency, but only Scripture is the rule of instituted Worship, wherein both
addition and diminution is alike forbidden. It the English Ceremonies be
warrantably used, what hinders the use of diverse other Ceremonies used in the
Roman Church? Is it said their multitude will become burthensom and
inconvenient? But who can determine the convenient number? And however, an
exchange of one Ceremony for another were not unlawful. For what reason may not
some other Romish Rites in Baptism be used as well as the Cross, seeing they
are nothing less significant or inoffensive, nay peradventure much more
inoffensive, because the Papists by giving divine Worship to the Cross have
abused it to gross Idolatry. We take this to be sound speech or discourse, that
cannot be gainsaid. And surely those of temperate spirits, that are otherwise
minded, might well conceive that it has such probable appearance, as might
possibly take with learned and pious men. And seeing the one Side allow and
commend all natural external Worship, and all matters of Decency and Order, and
desire to be spared in mystical Ceremonies of humane institution, the other
Side should not in reason or charity insist on the said Ceremonies, as the
terms of Church communion and privileges, and or Christian unity and amity.

Section XXV.
As concerning the Liturgy, the Presbyterians do not gainsay the lawfulness of
a stinted form of Prayer, in as much as the observing either of a Form or a
Directory is not of the substance of prayer, but an accident or circumstance
belonging to it, and left to humane determination. It is further granted by
them, that in some parts of public worship a form is ordinarily necessary; as
in the Sacramental actions, in the act of Baptizing, and of consecrating and
delivering the Lords Supper. And herein will be no dis-harmony, because they
are Scripture forms. Likewise in such parts of Divine Service where it is not
necessary, they can submit unto it for the Churches peace: Nevertheless they
are not satisfied in the present Liturgy, but desire it may be laid aside, or
much reformed. And what solid reason withstands the equity of this desire?
Moderate Prelatists have acknowledged considerable imperfections in the Book of
Common Prayer, and Bishop Usher has collected sundry particulars in his
direction concerning the same presented to the House of Commons upon their
request. Let sober judgments consider, whether this or that form of prayer be
of the substance of that sacred exercise, or only its outward shape and dress.
If it were of the substance of Religious Worship, it would require Divine
Institution to make it lawful, as do other parts of instituted Worship. If it
be only an outward shape and dress left to humane prudence, it is variable
according to the difference of times. Whosoever observes impartially shall find
that Political Prudence was joined with Christian Piety in composing the
English Service Book. In the beginning of Reformation the wisdom of the State
so ordered, that so great a change might be made with as little noise as was
possible, and with regard to what the Nation would bear. Accordingly when a
Rebellion was raised in Coruwal, and Devonshire, about the change of Religion,
King Edward to appease the matter told the people, That it was no other then
the old Service in the English Tongue. Likewise when this form was revived by
Queen Elizabeth, one might conjecture, that care was taken, that no passage
offensive, even to the Papists, might remain therein; for we find an alteration
in the Letany very material. Whereas King Edwards books ran thus, [ From all
sedition and privy conspiracy, from the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all
his detestable enormities, from all false Doctrine and Heresy.] These words [
From the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his detestable enormities] were
left out in Queen Elizabeth's time, and ever since. Whereupon the Papists
throughout this Kingdom resorted to our Divine Service for the first ten years
of that Queens Reign. And this came to pass also by the Popes connivance, who
was not then in despair of reducing England by fair means. But sithence
Papists have been Recusants. Wherefore if forms be variable, according to the
difference of times, and the present Liturgy was compiled with respect to the
peace of former times, and the reconciling of Papists to Protestants, but is
now become by change of times, an occasion of dividing Protestants from each
other, without hope of regaining Papists: Can Religion or Reason plead for the
rigorous imposing of it (especially without very much emendation) upon godly
peaceable Ministers and people that day not use it throughout? Does the Life
and Soul of Religion lie in the Common Prayer? Is it as ancient as
Christianity, yea, or of equal extent with the Protestant Reformation? Whence
is it then that many will have no communion with those that do not use it, or
would cast out of the Church those that cannot use it throughout, who
nevertheless in all necessary parts of worship are conformable to Protestant
Doctrine and practice? Is that efficacy or excellency in it, that the laying it
aside would much impair and weaken Religion, and darken its glory? Let it be
then examined, whether it has made the comers thereunto more perfect then
others, more knowing in Religion, more pious and blameless in their
conversation then those that frequent it not. Let experience come forth and
witness; which (if constant and universal) is the best proof of the efficacy or
imbecility of any institution. Suppose a Liturgy were framed of Confessions,
Petitions, and Thanksgivings, wholly collected out of Sacred Scripture, both
for matter and expressions, would it be inferior to that which is now in
question? Doubtless such a form would be a happy expedient to put an end to
this controversy.

Section XXVI.
Canonical subscription lately imposed is a yoke of bondage, to be considered
by all those that have a true regard to such liberty in Religion, as equity and
necessity pleads for, Blessed be God who has put it into the Kings heart to
extend compassion to a multitude of his faithful Subjects, and to remove this
yoke; let not this or the like be laid on their necks any more. The Canon
requires a subscribing to the thirty nine Articles, to the Common Prayer Book,
to the book of ordering Bishops, Priests and Deacons; that all these contain in
them nothing contrary to the Word of God. This is unreasonable, unprofitable,
and unnecessary. It is unreasonable; for were it just and reasonable, it must
suppose not only perfect verity throughout the whole, without any mixture of
error; but also either a spirit of infallibility in the composers of those
books, or the like measure of judgment and persuasion in all Orthodox and pious
Ministers, concerning all particulars in so large a volume, written by men
subject to error. That there is not perfect Verity without mixture, or grounded
suspicion of error, there is real evidence. To assert a spirit of infallibility
in the composers thereof, is not consonant to Protestant principles. To suppose
the like measure of faith and judgment in all Orthodox godly Ministers
concerning fallible writings is absurd; and to rack men unto it, is an
imitation of that Tyrant, that would stretch miserable creatures unto the
length of that bed of torment upon which he laid them It is also unprofitable:
For these forced large subscriptions are known to be no sure hold-fast of the
multitude drawn into them, whereof many come hand over head, merely as to an
enjoined form; others more considerate do it in their own sense. And indeed the
best service which this Injunction does, is to lie as a bar to exclude the more
deliberate sort, or as a clog to oppress their consciences. If to remedy this
evil you allow men to use their own limitations and explanations, the business
it self is insignificant. It to satisfy several parties, you pen the Doctrines
and Forms in ambiguous terms, the swaying part of the Church will draw them to
their own peculiar sense, and establish their own opinions, to the crushing of
dissenters; as by the potency of some Prelates, Arminianism was asserted for
the Doctrine of the Church of England.

Lastly, it is unnecessary, for we suppose the benefits pretended by it are
unity in Doctrine and uniformity in Practice; both which may be as well
attained and far more kindly, without this enforced Subscription, if no
Minister be suffered to preach or write any thing contrary to the established
Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, nor ordinarily for the main to neglect the
established Rule. But what inconvenience, if in things of lesser weight, a
latitude were allowed? A little variety indulged in some particles, is no
impeachment of Uniformity, but rather an establishment thereof with contentment
and tranquillity. Contrariwise, as the wringing of the Nose draws forth blood;
so over-straining and rigid injunctions distemper the minds of men otherwise
peaceable, and stir up strife.

Section XXVII.
Moreover, the public state of these differences is such, that the Prelatists
may and ought to descend to the Presbyterians in the proposed moderate way; but
the Presbyterians cannot come up to the Prelatists in the height of their way.
For the Prelates condescension stands only in omission or forbearance of
certain things which seem to them lawful and laudable, but the subjection of
the Presbyterians stands in subscribing and conforming to certain things which
to them seem unlawful: And common equity will soon pass its verdict, that the
condescension of the one is far more easy then the subjection of the other.
Bishop Davenant in his Determinations resolves in one question, that a
Protestant may not with a safe conscience be present at the Popish Mass,
because he wounds his conscience by impious dissimulation, thereby making a
show of approving that pretended expiatory sacrifice. In another Question he
resolves, That Papists are bound to be present at the English Divine Service,
because nothing occurs therein, that can be by themselves reproved. In applying
this to our case, it is far from my thoughts to make the comparison between
Presbyterians and Prelatists parallel with that between Protestants and
Papists; but I make the reason of both cases parallel: for as Papists find
nothing in the Protestant Liturgy (according to their own principles) impious
or unsound; in like manner the Prelatists can find no positive thing in the
propounded terms of accommodation, contrary to divine right and primitive
practice; only as the Papists find not so much as they would have in our
Liturgy, so the Prelatists in the said proposals: Nay, the Papists have better
color of reason to separate from our public Service, because, although they
find nothing positively unsound, yet according to the Roman Faith they may
pretend fundamental defects therein; as the want of the sacrifice of the Mass:
but the Prelatists can here allege no such thing; the supposed defects and
omissions being only in things remote from the foundation of Faith and
Religion. For we trust the greater number of them do not hold, that there is no
Church without a Prelate having sole jurisdiction over the Clergy; That there
is no Ministry but what is ordained by such a Prelate; That there is no true
divine Service, where the Common Prayer Book is not used; and that there is no
acceptable worship, without humane mystical Ceremonies. Let them that have
taken up such opinions sadly consider whether they are led therein by
conscience, or by humor and design.

Section XXVIII.
The greatest show of reason opposing this moderation is a pretended fixation
in Religion; and indeed it is but a show and color. That Religion is a thing
unmovable, all that be truly religious do from the heart acknowledge; and for
the immobility thereof, none contend more earnestly then the Presbyterians. But
they fix its unmovable state in the Canonical Scripture, and they continually
cry to the Law and to the Testimony, against humane Traditions and Inventions,
in one Extreme, and against Enthusiasms in the other. Upon occasion of any
aberration in Doctrine or practice they recall us to the primitive rule and
pattern; and what is received from the Lord, that deliver they to the Churches.
That sacred Rule they willingly suffer not to be captivated in its
interpretation by the Churches infallibility, as do the Papists; nor by proud
and arrogant reason, as the Socinians; nor by impulse and imagination, as the
Euthusiasts: but they maintain it in its full authority to interpret it self,
whose authentic interpretation we are enabled to discern by rational
inferences and deductions, wherein we make use of reason not as an argument,
but as instrument.

As for the Decrees and Canons of the Church, what rightful Authority does make
them as the Law of the Medes and Persians that alters not? Must things be
enacted by the Church once and for ever? And whether they be little or great,
clear or doubtful, necessary or superfluous, must they be held unquestionable
and indisputable? Surely this is to Idolize humane Constitutions, and to
equalize them with Divine; and to lead the people to a blind implicit faith,
and a neglect of searching the Scriptures. And upon this ground those large
Churches, as the Roman, Grecian, Aethiopick, Armenian, Indian, and the rest,
are obstinately divided for many ages from each other, and holding to this
principle of unalterable Traditions and Constitutions, they will be divided to
the end of the world. Had not all Ecclesiastical Canons and Decrees a
beginning, and that at sundry times, and in diverse manners? And are not many of
them as it were but of yesterday? And when they were brought in, where was the
pretended fixation? Doubtless Religion may be alike altered by Addition as by
Substraction. Nay, Has there not been Substraction also? Are not diverse
Customs and Ceremonies of great antiquity now quite abolished among us? If the
Church of Rome may err, why not the Church of England? Indeed the Papists that
hold their Church infallible, may hold the Decrees thereof unalterable, but the
Church of England claims no such privilege. Was it necessary that our first
Reformers should see all things at the first daybreak out of the night of
Popery? Or if they saw all things requisite for their own times, could they
foresee all future events, and provide remedies for inconveniences which time
might bring forth. It is a wise saying of a learned man, That time it self is
the greatest Innovator; and again, That Physic is an Innovation. Surely as the
natural, so the body politic, sometimes needs physic, and oftentimes
moderate Reformations do prevent abolitions and extirpations. Besides, a great
alteration in this kind has continued in a stated posture for many years,
which inferres a greater necessity of an accommodation. Nevertheless there is
no attempt or question made of changing any thing, that touches sound faith,
and good life, or the substance of divine worship. Yet in the Doctrine of the
Church something possibly may have been inserted as an Article of Faith, which
is but problematical; and in a fundamental Article some inconvenient expression
may be used, and this questionless may be altered without any imputation of
uncertainty to the established Doctrine. Some change in the outward Form and
Ceremonies, which are but a garb or dress, is no real change of the Worship:
some change in the late external jurisdiction of the Church, which was not
formally Ecclesiastical and spiritual, but temporal and coercive, invested in
the Bishops by the Law of the Land, is no change in the true spiritual power,
that is intrinsecal to their spiritual office. Nay, the reformation may be
encompassed with little variation, as to the outward model and platform, the
Kingdom being already squared for it, as has been above showed in the offers
made by some Bishops. Only the power will be more diffused, being distributed
among Bishops and Presbyters in due proportion. Is it objected; once remove the
ancient bounds, and we know not where to stop, we must serve every humor, and
an inundation of error and Schism will break in? Surely Papists have as much
to say herein against the Protestants, as the Prelatists against the
Presbyterians. For they say, that Protestantism is the womb of all Sects, and
that we having forsaken the infallible Guide, the Church of Rome, have lost our
selves in a Wilderness of error: besides, who were they that removed the
ancient bounds set in the first English Reformation, by introducing many
innovations? but to give a direct answer, are not the sacred Scriptures, and
Christ's holy Institutions, sufficient bounds and landmarks? Cannot prudent and
faithful Church-guides keep the flock from wandering, unless they hedge them in
by unchangeable Canons, even for mere formalities? In the late distempered
times, the Sectaries and masked Jesuits had a free rainge, and all possible
advantages, yet it is manifest, that toward the later end, error was rather
in the wane then in the increase, which we are bold to attribute to the liberty
of constant practical preaching. Wherefore settle discipline, encourage true
Watchmen, restrain seducers, expel the Jesuits, and the Church through Gods
blessing will be kept in peace and order.

Section XXIX.
If these things are so, whence proceeds the present vehemence and importunity
of so many of the Episcopal party, to carry things to the height of their way,
without the least abatement of the ancient rigor. Some of that way, as wise
and learned, and pious, as many among them, did offer terms in the time of
their distraction and distress; and in those times it was a common thing among
the friends of Prelacy, to condemn the violence of some of the late Prelates.
Have present advantages made them of another mind? If they answer by
retortion, Why did not the Presbyterians make a more early offer of agreement,
and close, when time was, with the overtures of some Bishops? Truly we are
willing to argue the case, and have many things to reply. And first it is
freely acknowledged, that we ought to have had a more tender respect to each
other, to have better considered the state of England, and to have studied
moderation. Yet let not one side bear all the blame, when both are faulty.
Impetuous actings on both sides suddenly brought us to extremities, and a War
brake forth, and then both Prelatists and Presbyterians were engaged with such
partakers, that the more moderate on both sides must needs be overacted. And as
the War was prolonged, the breach was widened, Statesmen, and Swordmen, and
particular subdividing interests having their peculiar and hidden designs.
Moreover, when the Regal Power, and the House of Peers were suppressed, and
most of the House of Commons secluded, the Presbyterians had only an interest
of liberty, but not of power, and authority, and favor. You cannot impute to
them the want of unity, which was not possible for them to encompass. But they
were heartily weary of those confusions, and longed for unity and order, and
had much regard to Bishop Ushers reduction then reprinted, desiring to take it
for a groundwork, or beginning of accommodation among all sober Protestants,
that we might not be spoiled of all Religion, but what Papists and Sectaries
would by their leaves allow us. So that not of constraint, but of choice and a
ready mind, they pursue peace and concord. Howbeit, in those times some
Prelatists of the higher strain would condescend in nothing, but gloried in
calling themselves the unchangeable Sons of the Church of England, that is, in
their sense, the unalterable Asserters of the Opinions and practices of the
late English Hieratchy. There were also many more moderate Episcopal Divines,
that were formerly reckoned half Puritans, and upon that account kept from
preferment, till about the beginning of the Long Parliament, some of them were
made Bishops for the support of Episcopacy. These being exasperated by the late
Wars, and the issue thereof violent changes in Government, and their own
sufferings, which happened beyond our first expectations, were set at a greater
distance from us. Let both sides acknowledge their error in departing unto
such a distance from one another. The truth is, men engaged in War aim at
victory, and having peculiar interests, draw to extremes. But now we settle
upon a common bottom; and prudence should guide us to aim at common
satisfaction. It is known that some Episcopal and Presbyterian Divines have
joined hand in hand, and why should not all those of either party do the like,
that are both for Christ? Indeed a calamity may befall sound and good
Christians, to refuse unity in Church Order, when the terms mutually required
seem to one or both parties unlawful. But in the present case, when nothing is
desired in contradiction to Divine Right, Primitive practice, order and
decency, but a forbearance or indulgence in things not of themselves necessary,
yet scrupled as unlawful, and it will not be accepted, surely either secular
interest, or the everlasting enmity, is the root of this dissension. And
certainly, with those that bear so hard upon men's consciences, conformity to
Church government, Rites and Ceremonies, is not sufficient to procure their
amity. We well remember how heretofore the conforming Puritanes were as great
an eyesore to some Prelates as the non-conformists. But in good earnest, shall
such precious things as the peace and edification of the Church, the needful
service of so many able and godly Ministers, and the quiet and comfort of so
many sober-minded Christians, be all sacrificed to the Hierarchy and
Ceremonies? Will not Episcopal Protestant Divines regard the weakening of the
Protestant Cause in Christendom, by treading the Presbyterians under foot? The
more ancient Bishops in England were of another mind, as Bishop Robert Abbot
by name, witness this passage of his Sermon preached, when he was Doctor of the
Chair in Oxford [ That men under pretense of truth, and preaching against the
Puritans, strike at the heart and root of Faith and Religion now establisted
amongst us; that this preaching against Puritans was but the practice of
Parsons and Campians counsel when they came into England to seduce young
Students: and when many of them were afraid to lose their places, if they
should professedly be thus, the counsel they then gave them was, that they
should speak freely against Puritans, and that should suffice.] Let our
Episcopal brethren as Divines, as Protestants, as Christians, consider these
things. O let it not be said of this Generation in the time to come, that the
way of peace we have not known.

From the Discourse aforegoing, I infer this pacifick and healing conclusion,
That the Party called Presbyterian may be protected and encouraged, and the
Episcopal not deserted nor disobliged. His Majesty's wisdom and authority will
draw both Sides to submit to reason.

The third Inquiry having connection with the two former, now follows to close
up the whole matter.

Quest. III. Whether the upholding of both Parties by a just and equal
accommodation, be not in it self more desirable, and more agreeable to the
State of England, than the absolute exalting of one Party, and the total
subversion of the other?

Section XXX.
That state of Prelacy which cannot stand without the subversion of the
Presbyterians, and that stands in opposition to regulated Episcopacy, will
become a mystery of a mere carnal and worldly state, under a sacred title and
venerable name of our Mother the Church. For in such opposition, of what will
it be made up, but of Lordly revenue, dignity, splendour, and jurisdiction, with
outward ease and pleasure? What will its design be from age to age, but to
uphold and advance its own pomp and potency? Read the Ecclesiastical Histories,
and you shall find the great business of the Hierarchy has been to contest
with Princes and Nobles, and all ranks and degrees, about their Immunities,
Privileges, Pre-eminencies, to multiply Constitutions and Ceremonies for props
to their own Greatness, but not to promote the Spiritual Kingdom of our Lord
Jesus Christ in the hearts of people, according to the life and power of
Christianity. The abovenamed Venetian Gentleman, in his Narrative of the Popes
Nuncio, delivers this Maxim. [ That the Court of Rome, in perpetual pursuance
of its old pretenses, is more sollicitous and laborious to reverse and destroy
the Oath of Allegiance, because it seems contrary to its temporal grandeur,
then to extirpate such Heresies as the Realm of England is infected with.] Even
so such an Hierarchy will be more industrious and careful to establish and
enlarge their own Power and Dignity, then to maintain and propagate Christ's
true Religion. What are the weapons of the Warfare, by which this Mystical State
prevails? Not such as are mighty through God, working upon the conscience, but
pecuniary Mulcts; and greater temporal penalties; not to the wounding of the
spirit, but to the breaking of the outward estate. By what ways and methods
must it be advanced? The constant and practical preaching of the Word must be
discountenanced, Snares must be laid for the most zealous Ministers, Sports and
pastimes on the Sabbath days must be held forth with allowance and
approbation, Men of strict lives and serious in Religion must be reproached for
Fanatics. By these means a people being first enthralled to ignorance,
superstition and profaness, will be disposed unto blind obedience and perfect
spiritual bondage. For in very deed, the State here described will never stand
safely among a people that are free, serious, searching and discerning in
matters of Religion.

For this cause an Hierarchy of this nature has a strong bias toward Popery:
Nay, it must for its own safety approach as near it as the Nation can well
bear. The Reformed Religion does not glory in the vast riches, outward pomp and
splendor of Ecclesiastical persons. Wherefore, when the grandeur of Prelates
and pomp of Ceremonies is affected and admired, the Church of Rome is sure to
find favor in the eyes of the Clergy. The said Venetian reports [ That the
Universities, Bishops and Divines of this Realm daily embrace Catholic
Opinions, though they profess them not with open mouth, for fear of the
Puritans.] In this matter let them stand or fall by the evidence of their own
writings. Let it be well observed, that the designs of suppressing Puritans,
and complying with Papists in this Nation, had their beginning both at once,
and proceeded in equal paces. And it has appeared, that the moderate
Cassandrian Grotian Popery was no abomination to many Prelatists.

The Conciliators of our age have judged Papists and moderate Protestants (as
they call them) very reconcilable, but have cast the Calvinists or Puritans
without the limits of the pacification. Wherefore, we cannot conceive that the
excessive height of Prelacy (I say not this of regulated Episcopacy) to be the
strongest Bulwark against Popery, unless by Popery is meant no more then what
the Trent Fathers (except the Italians) generally opposed, to wit, the
stupendous exorbitant power of the Pope, who pretends to be not only Supreme,
but in effect, sole Bishop of the Universe, as reputing all other Bishops his
mere subjects and delegates. We confess, Popery in this new and strict notion,
might be controlled by the height of Prelacy. But, according to a vulgar sense,
we take Popery in the height thereof for the Heresies and Idolatries; and in
the lower degree thereof, for the gross errors and superstitions of the Church
of Rome.

Section XXXII.
Moreover, pure necessity in that state will constrain the Hierarchy to
negotiate with Rome, if they subvert and ruin the Presbyterians. If in such a
case they intend to uphold a Protestant State, they understand not their own
concernment The Bishops must either retreat to a moderate compliance with
Presbyteriaus, or advance to a reconciliation with Papists. If they had a
design to extirpate the Presbyterians, and could accomplish it, are they able
afterward alone and by themselves to bear up against the main force, and to
withstand all the wiles and methods of the popish Faction at home and abroad?
They mistake themselves, if they think their unalterable adherents are so
numerous and powerful, In case they dissipate that other party, which has been
always found most active, vigorous, and vigilant against Romish Encroachments,
what remains, besides themselves and their zealots, but a common dronish
multitude, that will do little for any religion; or men of loose principles,
that would easily embrace Popery as a fleshpleasing Religion. When the common
people are left to ignorance and profaneness for servile ends and purposes, they
are thoroughly prepared for Popery, which is a gross, sensual, formal, pompous
way, agreeable to the multitude; whereas Fanaticism, the other extreme, takes
but with a few in comparison, because it has something of pretended
illuminations, spiritual notions and raptures, to which the common multitude is
not propense. If you ask how has Prelacy held it out hitherto against Popery,
even from the first Reformation; take notice that the Episcopal Clergy did not
go about to exterminate the Puritans before their latter times, and then he
that had half an eye could discern the notable advance, and the confident
expectations of the Popish faction.

Section XXXIII.
Do any persons conceive a Reconciliation with Rome hopeful or possible upon
moderate terms (as they suppose) namely, the permission of the marriage of
Priests, the Popes Dispensation for the Oaths of Allegiance and Supermacy, so
far as it concerns the Kings temporal power, the administering of the Communion
in both kinds, and the Liturgy officiated in the English Tongue? Let them
observe that Panzani the Popes Nuncio in England declared privately to his
intimate friend, that the Pope would never admit any man to govern here as
Bishop (meaning over the Catholics) that should favor the Oath of Allegiance.
And the reason hereof is evident, because it is a thing contrary to the maxims
of Rome. Moreover, in that little History of the said Nuncio there is a
passage, which being well considered does evince that the Courts of England and
Rome are irreconcilable, unless England become entirely papal. That Author
says [ That this Realm is so perversely addicted to maintain its own resolute
opinion of excluding the Popes authority, that this has been the cause why the
Catholics, who for the first twelve years conformed themselves unto the
Polity introduced into the Church of England, have since separated from it;
and to testify their uniting to the Pope, have refused to frequent the
Protestant Churches, and have thereby framed one party in that State] Let a fair
accord in the general be supposed, yet the sole point of the Popes Supremacy
shall dash the whole agreement. We know that Jesuitism is the predominant humor
in the Papacy, and nothing can be done without their influence; and therefore
we cannot be one with the Church of Rome, unless we be subject to the Court of
Rome, and abandon all Protestantism.

Section XXXIV,
Whereupon all approaches and motions toward Rome are dangerous. For popish
Agents will easily over-act the Reconcilers, and peradventure lead them whither
they would not. If we walk on the brink, we may soon fall into the pit.
Although it stands not with Christian Charity to disclaim agreement upon
reasonable terms with any that are named Christians, yet it is not fit for a
purer Church to incorporate with a Church defiled with such abominations.
Besides, as to reason of State, Enmity with Rome has been reputed the
Stability of England; concerning which the Duke of Rhoan has delivered this
Maxim, [ That besides the Interest which the King of England has common with
all Princes, he has yet one particular, which is, that he ought thoroughly to
acquire the advancement of the Protestant Religion, even with as much zeal as
the King of Spain appears Protector of the Catholic.] Indeed, that
Scarlet-colored Whore has this bewitching ingredient in the cup of her
Fornication, that she disposes Subjects to security and blind obedience, and
exalts Princes unto absolute Dominion. But against this poison a sovereign
Antidote is given by a judicious Writer, that this proves that subjects are
more miserable, not that Princes are more absolute among Papists; forasmuch as
where the Pope prevails, there is a co-domination and rivalty in rule, and this
Protestant Princes are freed from: and whereas Popery has been ever infamous
for excommunicating, murdering, deposing Princes, the Protestant Religion aims
at nothing but that the Kings Prerogative and popular Liberty may be even
balanced. If it be said, that this is true of Protestantism, but Puritanism
leads to sedition, rebelIion, Anarchy; let the world know, that Puritanism
(which is no other than sound Protestantism) does abhor these crimes, and defy
the charge thereof. The people that were called Puritans, and now
Presbyterians, have had no fellowship with Politicians and Sectaries in those
pernicious ways: but their principle is for subjection to Princes, though they
were Heretics or Infidels; and if they differ herein from the Prelatical
Protestants, it is only that they plead for liberty settled by known Laws and
fundamental Constitutions.

Section XXXV.
From the reasons aforegoing we conclude, That Protestantism will best consist
in the middle way, by reducing Prelacy to the ancient synodical government or
moderate Episcopacy. And this is a blessed work, worthy of a pacifick King, with
respect to his honor and service, whose title is The Prince of Peace. Herein
his Majesty (with Gods help) may overruled without difficulty or hazard. He
need not say of those that are averse (as David sometimes did of the sons of
Zerviah) That they are too hard for him. Prelacy is not popular, but moderate
Episcopacy is, and the more, because it is a healing expedient for our broken
times. The Bishops depend entirely on the King, but he has no dependence on
them, no need of advantage from them. What if some interessed persons be
discontented? The sober of the Nation (both Episcopal and Presbyterian) will
have great contentment in the King's prudence and moderation. His Majesty is a
Prince by Nature. He is our Native King, and the delight of the English Nation,
and may govern as he please, without fear or hazard, by continuing to show
himself a common Father. For there is none other upon whom the Inrest of
England can bottom it self, but our gracious dread Sovereign King Charles;
whose House and Kingdom let the most High establish throughout all generations.
He has all hearts that are of sober principles earnestly waiting upon him,
longing and panting after his moderation, and rejoicing in the begun
expressions thereof; and of which the Presbyterians have had so great
expectation, that they wished He were both King, Lords, and Commons, as to the
settling of this grand Affair.

Section XXXVI.
The excessive dominion of the Hierarchy, with the rigorous imposition of
humane Ceremonies, was accounted much of the malady of former times, which
ended in those deadly Convulsions of Church and State. Do we here reproach our
Mother the Church of England? In no wise.

This National Church consists of the Body of the Nation combined in the Unity
of Faith, and substance of Divine worship according to God's holy Word. But if
the Church be taken in a more restrained sense for the Clergy or Ministry, yet
so the Hierarchy is not the Church either formally or virtually. When as
according to Camdens report, there are in England above nine thousand four
hundred Ecclesiastical promotions, how comes all the Interest and virtue of
such a numerous Clergy to be gathered up in six and twenty Bishops, with their
respective Deans, and Chapters, and Archdeacons?

And can the self-same state and frame of Ecclesiastics be now revived after
so great and long continued alterations, by which the anti-prelatical party is
exceedingly increased and strengthened?

Machiavel, whose reason in things political may challenge regard, gives these
two directions to a Prince to be alike observed for securing his hereditary
Dominions: First, that he does not transgress the institutions of his
Ancestors: Secondly, That he serve the time according to new occasions; by
which if a Prince be inducd with ordinary diligence in action, he will preserve
himself in his principality. His Majesty returns to the exercise of his Kingly
power after a long interruption in Government, and great alteration in the
State, Civil and Ecclesiastical. And he has this happy advantage presenting it
self to his hand, that he may give general satisfaction, by retaining the
ancient Episcopal Government, with some necessary variation conformable to
these times, in abating the excess of former things, and qualifying the same
with some temperate ingredients. Certainly it concerns an hereditary Prince, as
to maintain the ancient constitutions, so to redress ancient grievances, and to
cure inveterate maladies. The party dissatisfied in former things, were not a
company of precipitate Mutineers, but a Parliament of judicious and
conscientious persons, and their adherents, who for the major part never
intended to dissolve the Government, but have to their power endeavored and
contrived the settling of these Nations on their ancient basis.

Section XXXVII.
Moreover, this dissatisfaction in the old frame of the Ecclesiastical
Government is not a novelty of these times, as appears by those prudent
considerations touching the better pacification and edification of the Church,
presented to King James by that most learned Lord Verulam, sometimes Lord
Chancellor of England, who was no Presbyterian, nor enemy to Episcopacy, in
which are these passages.

There be two circumstances in the administration of Bishops, wherein I confess
I could never be satisfied. The one, the sole Exercise of their Authority, the
other, the Deputation of their Authority. For the first, the Bishop gives
orders alone, excommunicateth alone, judges alone. This seems to be a thing
almost without example in Government, and therefore not unlikely to have crept
in in the degenerate and corrupt times. We see the greatest Kings and Monarchs
have their Councels. There is no Temporal Council in England, of the higher
sort, where the Authority does rest in one person. Again he says, Bishops have
their infirmities, and have no exception from that general malediction which is
pronounced against all men living, Vaesoli, etc. Nay, we see the first warrant
in spiritual causes is directed to a number, Dic Ecclesiae, which is not so in
temporal matters. Again, we see that the Bishop of Rome (fas est and ab host
doceri, and no question in that Church the first Institutions are excellent)
performs all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction as in Consistory; and whereof
consists this Consistory, but of the Parish Priests of Rome, which term
themselves Cardinals, a Cardinibus Mundi, because the Bishop thereof pretends
to be universal over the whole world. Touching the second point, the deputation
of their Authority, he says, the Bishop exercises his Jurisdiction by his
Chancellor and Commissary official etc. We see in all Laws in the world,
offices of confidence and skill cannot be put over, nor exercised by Deputy,
except it be especially contained in the Original Grant, and then it becomes
dutiful. There was never any Judge that made a Deputy. The Bishop is a Judge,
and of an high nature: whence comes it that he should depute, considering all
trust and confidence is personal and inherent, and cannot, or ought not to be
transposed? Surely in this again, ab initio non fuit ita. But it is probable
that Bishops when they gave themselves too much to the glory of the world, and
became Grandees in Kingdoms, and great Counselors to Princes, then did they
deleague their proper Jurisdiction, as things of too inferior a nature for
their greatness; and then after the similitude of Kings and Count Palatines,
they would have their Chancellours and Judges.

This and much more has that great Scholar, Lawyer, and Statesman observed in
that excellent discourse.

Yea, our late Sovereign in his discourse, touching the differences between
himself and the two Houses, in point of Church Government, declares in these
words, that he is not against the managing of the Episcopal presidency in one
man, by the joint counsel and consent of many Presbyters, but that he had
offered to restore it, as a fit means to avoid those errors, and corruptions,
and partialities, which are incident to any one man; also to avoid Tyranny,
which becomes no Christians, least of all Churchmen: besides, it will be a
means to take away that odium and burden of affairs which may lie too heavy on
one man's shoulders, as he thought it did formerly on the Bishops here.

Section XXXVIII.
By the desired reduction of Prelacy, to the coalition of Episcopacy and
Presbytery in a due temperament, His Majesty will be so far from giving up, or
weakening that power and influence, which in right and reason he ought to have
over Church and State, that he will thereby gain a surer and a larger interest.
Bishops lessened in power, and increased in number, and resident in the
Churches, and duly dispencing the Word and Sacraments, are not like to alienate
the King from Parliaments, nor Parliaments and people from the King, but will
become more popular, and able to fix the hearts of the people to obedience and
loyalty. And this popularity of Bishops and Presbyters, being alone, without
potency, is no rational ground of distrust or jealousy to the King. For their
influence upon others will not be from greatness of power and command, but from
venerable esteem and reputation, and that stands upon their prudent, pious, and
peaceable behavior. Besides, his Majesty can easily keep them in such
dependence on himself, as that he shall not hold this interest at their
courtesy. Do any suggest the Presbyterians may grow upon him? Surely there are
and will be enough to balance them, Certainly they have seen so little good of
changes, that a reasonable condition, with security, will be acceptable to
them. Undoubtedly the union of both parties, by an equal accommodation, is the
interest of Prince and people, the strength and stability of King and Kingdom.
Let neither side lay hold on present mutable advantages to press them too far;
but let all consider what will stand with lasting tranquillity. And above all,
let his Majesty's wisdom, who has the high concernment of three Kingdoms for
himself and his Heirs for ever, lay a good and solid foundation for the time to
come.

Section XXXIX.
Finally, this accommodation is the interest of Jesus Christ, the Redeemer and
Head of the Church, in as much as it takes in and secures thousands of godly
able Orthodox Ministers, thousands and ten thousands of godly peaceable
Christians, who otherwise might be rejected and oppressed. And it may well be
acceptable to the whole Christian world, because it bears conformity to the
whole State of Christendom, to the foreign reformed Churches in Presbytery, to
the rest of the Churches in Episcopacy, and to the ancient Church, next to the
Primitive times, in the orderly conjunction of Episcopacy and Presbytery.

FINIS.
THE Second Part OF THE Interest of England, In the Matter of Religion,
Unfolded in a Deliberative Discourse, PROVING, That it is not agreeable to
sound Reason to prefer the Contracted and Dividing Interest of one Party,
before the general Interest of Protestantism, and of the whole Kingdom of
England, in which the Episcopal and Presbyterian Parties may be happily United.

Written by J. Corbet, Rector of Bramshot.

The second Impression Corrected and amended.

LONDON, Printed for George Thomason, and are to be sold at the Rose and Crown
in St Paul's Churchyard, 1661.

I Entreat the Reader to take notice, That in these Discourses I do not mention
parties to maintain Division, but to procure Union; That necessity compels me
to use those names of difference, which I heartily wish might be no more
remembered: But whilst disagreeing Parties last, names of difference cannot
cease, and to forbear their use is to little purpose. My business is to take
things as I find them, and to state the Case between the Dissenters, and to
show how far they agree, and how little they differ, for this end, That Parties
(both Name and Thing) might cease for ever.

Moreover, as I use not the name of Presbyterian in the way of glorying, so I
use not the name of Prelate or Prelatist in way of reproach, but merely for
distinction sake; and I have warrant for it from the friends of Prelacy, with
whom it is not unusual to mention the name of Prelate in an honorable Sense.

The Second Part of the Interest of England in the Matter of Religion.
THe former Treatise of the Interest of England in the Matter of Religion,
makes known the way of peace, in the reconciling of those two grand Parties,
the Episcopal and Presbyterian, which, if made one, would take in, and carry
along the strength of almost the whole Nation. The whole structure thereof
rests upon these Positions as its adequate Foundation.

That whilst the two forenamed Parties remain divided, both the Protestant
Religion, and the Kingdom of England is divided against it self.

That the Presbyterians cannot be rooted out, nor their Interest swallowed up,
whilst the State of England remains Protestant.

That their subversion, if it be possible to be accomplished, will be very
pernicious to the Protestant Religion, and the Kingdom of England.

That the Coalition of both Parties into one may be effected by an equal
accommodation, without repugnancy to their conscientious Principles on either
side, in so much that nothing justifiable by Religion or sound Reason can put a
bar to this desirable Union.

Now for as much as political matters are involved in difficulties and
perplexities, by variety of complicated concernments, all which should be
thoroughly seen, and diligently examined and compared; and because the minds of
men are commonly pre-ingaged, or at least much biased in these matters, and
thereupon are not easily removed from their pre-conceived opinions, I could not
rest satisfied, as having done my part in this healing Work, unless besides a
firm and clear proof of things in general, I endeavor a deeper impression, and
more effectual persuasion, by searching on eevery side, by pressing up close to
those closest concernments and most obstinate prejudices that oppose
themselves, and by opening the passages, and making the way plain to this
desired Pacification.

Section II.
It is a grave and weighty saying of the Duke of Rohan, -- Princes command the
people; and Interest commands the Princes. The knowledge of this Interest is as
much more raised above that of Princes Actions, as they themselves are above
the People. A Prince may deceive himself, the Council may be corrupt, but the
Interest alone never fails: according as it is well or ill understood, it
makes States to live or dye. -- According to this saying it is matter of life
and death political to the Kingdom of England, as it does well or ill
understand its own Interest: In this deliberation two Interests exceeding great
and precious, offer themselves unto us. They are distinct, yet not divided; but
they embrace each other, and they both apparently belong to us, and are
undoubtedly to be owned by us. The one is Religious, the other Civil. The
former is that of the Protestant Religion, and the latter is that of this
Kingdom. Wherefore in this Inquiry, the main and fundamental point of knowledge
lies in discerning the true state of both. Now the true state of any Society
lies in the Universality, or the whole Body, not in any contracting or
sub-dividing part thereof: And the Interest lies in the conversation and
advancement of the Universality.

Section III.
Hereupon this question arises, which is the great Case and Question of the
present times.

Whether we should assert the contracted and dividing Interest of one Party,
before the general Interest of Protestantism, and of the whole Kingdom of
England, in which the Episcopal and Presbyterian Parties may be happily United.

Be it here observed, That such is the joint stock of both Parties in things of
greatest moment, that by declining extremes on both hands, the Protestant
Religion may be strengthened, with Unity in Doctrine, Worship and Discipline,
among all its professors, and the Kingdom of England, by an inviolable Union
between these comprehensive Parties may flourish in peace and plenty: for those
discords that divide the members and distract the whole body, will cease; and
those common concernments which tend to uphold and increase the Universality,
will be acknowledged and pursued.

Section IV.
To turn aside from this common Interest of the whole body, to those inferior
partial ones, is to set up the trade of Monopolizers, which inevitably brings
this mischief, that a few grow rich by impoverishing the Commonwealth, and
this inconvenience also to them that follow the trade, that they grow rich upon
the sudden, but are not secure, because many are oppressed, and more excluded
from sharing in the benefit. In the present case, if the one Party be the only
exalted Ones, and the other trodden under foot, the damage will redound to the
Protestant cause, and to the Church and Kingdom of England. For whatsoever some
men think, this Church and Kingdom is concerned in the one, as well as in the
other Party. In the same case, though one side should rise suddenly to a great
height, yet their Estate would be more secure and lasting, if they held the way
open and secure to those of the other side, seeing they are willing to close
upon terms just and reasonable.

Section V.
Moreover, those Kingdoms, and Commonwealths, and Societies of all kinds,
which are of the largest Foundation, are of the greatest potency. Now a
comprehensive Interest, that takes in vast multitudes, is indeed a large
Foundation, and a Society that builds upon it shall become great and mighty;
but a contracted Interest, that draws all to a fewer number, is a narrow
Foundation; and if it exclude many that should be taken in, it is too narrow
for the Fabric that should rest upon it. As a large house cannot be built upon
a narrow foundation; so a great Kingdom, (such as is the Kingdom of England,)
and an ample Society, (such as is that of the Protestant Religion,) cannot be
built upon a narrow Interest.

Let it be considered, that the adverse Kingdom, to wit, the Papacy, is ample
and powerful: Should not the Protestant Religion, and the Church of England
aim at enlargement, and lengthen their cords, to take within their line all
those that are entirely affected to them? Then might they send forth much more
numerous Forces of able Champions against the Armies of Antichrist: So should
this National Church become terrible as an Army with Banners.

Section VI.
Besides those reasons for Unity, which concern all Kingdoms and Nations in the
like case, there is one reason peculiar to this Kingdom, or rather to this
Island of Great Britain, which is a little world apart. It is a notable
saying, which has been taken up, That England is a mighty Animal, that cannot
dye, except it destroy it self. God has so seated and placed this Island, that
nothing but division within it self can hurt it. If envy and faction do not
make us to forget our dear Country, and destroy our selves, the hope of
Foreign Enemies will be for ever cut off. Wherefore it must needs be the
wisdom of this State to smother all dividing Factions, and to abolish all
partial Interests, that the common Interest of England may be alone exalted.

Section VII.
I am not ignorant that designs of Pacification between disagreeing Parties are
liable to much suspicion, misconstruction, and hard censure; that the attempts
of Reconcilers have commonly proved fruitless, and sometimes matter of
disreputation to themselves: and no marvel that such cross effects should
commonly follow such attempts; for sometimes they are made to reconcile light
and darkness, the Temple of God and Idols. This was the way of a Great One,
even a Prince in Learnings Empire, who would make an accord between the
Augustine Confession and the Council of Trent; and also of a certain Romish
Ecclesiastic, who would make the like accord between the said Council, and the
Articles of the Church of England, than which nothing could be more absurd and
vain; for it could be nothing else but a violent wresting of those Decrees and
Articles to a forced sense, against the propriety of language, and the scope of
the whole matter, and the apparent judgment of both Parties; and so it could
never heal the breach; For if both Parties were drawn to subscribe the same
forms of Confession, but with meanings so far distant from each other, as are
the Doctrines of the Protestant, and Roman Churches, they would not really
advance one step the nearer to peace and concord.

Section VIII.
Such designs as these sometimes proceed from lukewarmness or indifferency in
Religion, and an undervaluing of main Truths, together with a contempt of godly
Zeal, as a thing superfluous and impertinent. And sometimes they proceed from
vastness of mind, whereby some through too great a sense of their vast
abilities, assume to themselves a Dictatorship in Religion, to approve or
condemn, admit or reject, according to their own estimation of things; which is
a dangerous kind of ambition, and (as a learned man speaks) is to take up the
Office of an Umpire between God and men. But many times such a design is set on
foot with much craftiness, for the undoing of one of the Parties, as it has
been undertaken by some Romish spirits, for the undermining of the Protestant
Churches. A Divine of chief rank observes the arts and stratagems of some
Popish Preachers, even of those Orders that have been held most implacable,
whereby far otherwise than the accustomed manner, they extenuate the
controversies, and acknowledge that too much rigor has been used in some
points, and in others too little sincerity: yea, some Jesuits went about making
fair promises, yet in the mean time abating no point of the chief foundations
of Papal Authority, which standing firm, they knew that the other Concessions
granted for a time might easily be drawn back, and the opposite rigors imposed
on those that had been taken in the snare by a pretended yielding to some
reformation. Philip Melancthon (as the same Author observes) being a most Pious
and Learned man, and zealous of the Churches peace, at first whilst he
conceived that some Reformation might be hoped for from a General Council, was
free and forward in some points of yielding to the Papists; but when he found
that such a benefit was neither hopeful nor possible, he testified by his
writings how far distant he was from the aim of the Conciliators.

Section IX.
But the Pacification here propounded is not by aggregating things
inconsistent, nor by devising mongrel ways and opinions, made up out of both
extremes, which can satisfy the consciences of neither Party; but by taking
out of the way such extremes on both sides, as both may well spare and part
with, being such as are acknowledged no part of the Foundation, nor yet of
divine Institution, but mutable according to times and occasions, and therefore
cannot be of that importance as to break unity amongst brethren, that agree in
the Doctrine of Faith, and the substance of Divine Worship. This desired Union
is grounded upon the Apostles Commandment, and the pursuing thereof is no
other then the urging of St. Paul's Doctrine throughout the whole fourteenth
Chapter to the Romans, That none judge or despise another about things
indifferent, or Ceremonious Observances, wherein as several men will abound in
their own sense, so it is meet that every one be persuaded in his own mind
concerning his particular practice, that nothing be done with a doubting
conscience. His MAJESTY'S Wisdom has rightly comprehended this Matter in His
Declaration touching Ecclesiastical Affairs, wherein He says, -- We are the
rather induced to take this upon Us (that is, to give some determination to the
matters in difference) by finding upon a full Conference that We have had with
the Learned men of several persuasions, that the mischiefs under which both
Church and State do at present suffer, do not result from any formed Doctrine
or Conclusion which either Party maintains or avows, but from the passion, and
appetite, and Interest of particular persons, which contract greater prejudice
to each other by those affections, then would naturally arise from their
Opinions. -- In old time there was a partition wall of legal Ceremonies and
Ordinances raised up between Jews and Gentiles; but when the fullness of time
was come, wherein God would make both Jews and Gentiles one in Christ, he was
pleased to take down that partition wall which himself had reared up. In these
latter times there has been a partition wall of man's building, namely,
controverted mutable Rites and forms of Religion, which have kept asunder
Christians of the same Nation, and of the same Reformed Protestant Profession:
Both reason and charity pleads for the removing of these offenses, that
brethren may dwell together in Unity. And to transgress this rule of Charity,
is not only to lay a yoke upon the necks of Christians, but also to lay snares
for their Consciences.

Section X.
Nor will any defect in the State Ecclesiastical ensue upon the removal of
these matters in controversy: for the points of Doctrine, Worship, and
Discipline acknowledged by both Parties, are a sufficient and ample Foundation
for the edification and peace of the Church to rest upon; for which we cannot
have a fuller Testimony than what is given by His MAJESTY in His aforesaid
Declaration, -- We must for the Honor of all those of either Persuasion, with
whom we have conferred, Declare, That the Professions and desires of all for
the advancement of Piety and true Godliness are the same, their Professions of
Zeal for the Peace of the Church the same, of affection and duty to Us the
same; they all approve Episcopacy; they all approve a set Form of Liturgy; and
they all disapprove and dislike the sin of Sacrilege, and the alienation of
the revenue of the Church. And if upon these excellent Foundations, in
submission to which there is such an Harmony of Affections, any Superstructure
should be raised to the shaking of these Foundations, and to the contracting
and lessening of the blessed gift of Charity, which is a vital part of
Christian Religion, We shall think Our Self very unfortunate, and even suspect
that We are defective in that administration of Government with which God has
entrusted Us: -- These His Majesty's Words I receive with much veneration; for
they are a Divine Sentence in the Mouth of the King, and they fathom the depth
of this grand business.

It is therefore manifest, as from Reason, so from His Majesty's Testimony,
that those unhappy discords do not result from any formed Doctrine or
Conclusion, that either touches or borders upon the Foundation; and that
excellent Foundations are contained in those points, in submission to which
there is found such an Harmony of Affections; and consequently, that the laying
aside of all the points in controversy, would not cause any defect in the
State Ecclesiastical. What then is the root of these mischiefs of Division? Is
it the perpetual hatred between the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the
Serpent? or is it an uncharitable and froward spirit of opposition, by reason
of irritated animosity, and deep suspicion or jealousy? or is it some
temporary carnal Design?

It is first inquired, Whether the root hereof be the perpetual hatred between
the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the Serpent?

Section XI.
Nothing is more certain from Scripture and experience, then that a form of the
true Religion may be with a kind of Zeal embraced, and the power thereof hated
and impugned by the same persons. The Scribes and Pharisees were zealous and
exact in the outward forms of the law of Moses, yet their hatred of the power
of that Religion appeared by their obstinate rejecting and persecuting of
Christ, and those that believed on him. Many do embrace a form of the Christian
Verity in the general Doctrines, and in some plausible yet superficial
practice: Nevertheless they cannot abide the genuine and spiritual explication
and close application of the same Verity, leading to the life and power
thereof. Now if this were the true state of the difference, that those of the
one persuasion only did urge the necessity of the New Birth, and of a holy and
circumspect walking in all Christians, and to that end seek the advancement of
such a Ministry as (with blessed Paul) travels in birth, till Christ be formed
in the Hearers, and such as is quick and powerful, entering to the dividing of
the soul and spirit, and discovers the secret rottenness, and destroys the
self-confidence of the deceitful heart, and drives the soul out of self to draw
it to Christ; such a Ministry as is assiduous and instant in the dispensation
of the word by instruction, reproof and comfort, and in all other parts of the
Pastoral duty, that as much as in it lies, it may present every man perfect in
Christ: And if those of the other persuasion account the urging of these things
severe foolishness peevishness, pride, hypocrisy, affected singularity, and
suppose the way to heaven common and easy, and accordingly seek the
advancement of such a Ministry that is more smooth and plausible then searching
and faithful, more slack and cold in the public dispensation of the Word, and
in private admonition, indulging the peoples corruptions, and generally
temporizing with their carnal spirit; I say, if the case were so between them,
I could proceed no further; for in such a case to propose ways of
Accommodation, were to make proposals of Peace to Parties divided by an
everlasting enmity: but God forbid that the state of the difference should be
so deplorable. We trust that neither the one nor the other have so learned
Christ as to exalt a form of Godliness, and deny the power thereof. And that it
is not or ought not to be so, and that it is on all hands disavowed with
detestation, we take it for a principle or groundwork whereon to bottom our
whole design. The King Declares, That the Professions and desires of all those
of either persuasion, with whom he has conferred, are the same for the
advancement of Piety and true Godliness. Let the joint pursuance of these
professions and desires set both Parties agreed, especially since His Majesty
has thus Declared in these gracious words, -- Our purpose and resolution is,
and shall be, to promote the power of Godliness, to encourage the exercises of
Religion both public and private, and to take care that the Lords Day may be
applied to holy Exercises without unnecessary divertisements; and that
insufficient, negligent, and scandalous Ministers may not be promoted in the
Church. --

Is an uncharitable and froward spirit of opposition, by reason of irritated
animosity, and deep suspicion and jealousy, the root of these discords?

Section XII.
We fear indeed that too much tartness, if not bitterness of spirit, keeps the
Breach open. Differences of long continuance and settled prejudices do choke the
exercise of Charity. And the truth is, formerly the current of occasions ran
along to aggravate these differences, and to exasperate these passions* Let us
now at length take hold of the right means to stop this current of contention.
Remove the occasions, lay aside controverted matters, whereof there will be no
miss in the Church of God: Let forms of Worship and Government be so cut out,
that they may not pinch and gall the consciences of either Party, as it may be
done by men of sober and charitable judgments without any impeachment of such
order and decency, as agrees with the simplicity and spiritual Glory of Gospel
Administrations; so after a while the froward humor that works on both sides,
would spend and lose it self: Yea, I am persuaded that some spirits now
exulcerated through these distempers, would not prove incurable or implacable.
After a little experience of such proper healing remedies, both sides will
find themselves brethren that had mistaken one another, and forsaken their
common Interest.

Section XIII.
Most serious thoughts of heart have often led me to contemplate and lament the
peculiar calamity of the Church of God in these Dominions, that from time to
time it has been afflicted with the most unhappy kind of controversies: for
they come not near the Foundation, nevertheless they are very pernicious and
destructive. They consist not so much in speculation as practice, and
particularly their immediate influence is upon the Churches interest, and
inevitably makes a breach in Church-Unity. For Ecclesiastical Offices, and
Church Privileges, and Communion of Worship both in former and latter times,
have been enclosed with such Forms and Rites and other needless rigors, that
the way thereunto was kept shut against many that had received with the heart
that Common Faith which was once given to the Saints. Hence proceeded despising
and judging one another, and deep censures, alienations and separations, which
will undo any Society of whatsoever Profession. The Papists notwithstanding
their great boast of Unity, are much more divided within themselves than any
Protestants from each other; for the rent goes through the main Foundation of
their Faith. With them the Head Cornerstone, or rather the adequate
Foundation, is their Churches infallibility; but where to place this pretended
infallibility, they can by no means agree: for upon the matter one half of them
place it in the Pope, and the other in a general Council. If you ask, How then
does that vast Building hang together? How does that Babylonish Kingdom stand?
Surely they have the skill to make that great point of difference a matter of
speculation more then of practice, and they holdfast two main practical things
which do hold both in one; namely, the Hierarchy, under the Headship of the
Pope of Rome, and the Communion of the Mass. They are all one both in Worship
and Church Communion, and also in the whole body of Ecclesiastics, compacted
by several joints and ligaments under one Papal Head. Thus the children of this
world are wise in their generation; and let the children of Light borrow this
point of Wisdom from them, which is to take care that our different opinions do
not brangle our Church Communion and Ecclesiastical Polity. And in as much as
Protestants have not that Popish way of quick dispatch for all controversies,
which is to acquiesce in the Churches infallibility; but according to their
Principles, they must seek their Warrant from Scripture, by the help of the
Churches directive, and their own discretive Judgment; the only way for them to
hold themselves in the bond of Peace, is to avoid all imposition of things
unnecessary, in which it is exceeding difficult, or morally impossible for all
sound Protestants to be of the same persuasion.

Section XIV.
Let us here take notice of another singular point of Wisdom, followed by the
Church of Rome in the Council of Trent, which was to shun, as a rock, the
determining of such Doctrines as were controverted among the Catholics; and
according to this settled Rule the debates of that Council were governed. Often
times indeed there arose hot contests among the Divines about Scholastical
niceties, the several Orders of Friars being therein passionately addicted to
their several opinions; but the Prelates, who alone had the decisive Voice,
would always bring things to a temper; and the Decrees were so framed, that the
Opinions of neither Party were condemned. Let the Church of Christ mingle this
Wisdom of the Serpent with his Dove-like Innocence, to wit, not to urge with
severity things disputed amongst sound and sober Protestants. But it has
seemed good to some Protestants to walk by a contrary rule, to heighten
differences between themselves, and those whom they called Puritanes, and to
judge them irreconcilable, and to lessen differences between themselves and
the Romanists, in order to a Pacification. We hope that this error is or may
be perceived by those that have been enchanted into it. I am informed by a
Writer of our Ecclesiastical History, who is of the Episcopal persuasion, That
an Episcopal Doctor of great note, and now a Bishop, did within these few years
use his utmost endeavors to gain upon the Sorbonists in Paris, and thereupon
that he complied with them as far as he could do in Christian prudence, and
with a safe conscience. Now the Sorbonists are the most moderate Papists, and
the said Doctor is known to be far enough from the least smatch of Puritanism;
yet not any Accommodation could be heard of between them, but rather the
contrary, even in the point of the Apocrypha.

Seeing these things are so, one might wonder that any learned men, zealous of
the Protestant Religion, should remain averse from the true way of Unity among
disagreeing Protestants, when the pacification between Protestants and Papists
is become desperate. One would conclude that Wise and Learned men could not be
so overseen, if there were not a deeper mystery in this business.

Whereupon I pass to a further Inquiry, Whether the fomenting of these discords
do not proceed from a carnal design? And I shall argue even upon the case of a
worldly Interest? Whether the way of severe Imposing, or of moderate
Condescending, be the more advisable?

Section XV.
If the settlement of the Churches Peace, by giving needful satisfaction and
security to the Presbyterians, and the enlargement of the Churches Interests,
by taking in the multitudes of that denomination, be neglected in this
discerning age, we must needs believe that the root of this dissension goes
deeper then passions, prejudices and mis-apprehensions, and that some carnal
and partial Interest is that root of bitterness that bears this gall and
wormwood.

Papists themselves have noted, that the Court of Rome had rather abandon the
hopes of regaining three Kingdoms to their pretended Catholic Church, then
declare it lawful for the English Papists to take the Oath of Allegiance. When
the Council of Trent was held, and most of the Princes that sent Ambassadors to
the Council were instant that some regard might be had of the Protestants, and
their recovery endeavored by moderation and reformation; the Pope knowing that
their return upon such terms could never be hoped for, without the diminution
of the Revenue and Authority of his Court, judged it most necessary for the
Interest of his pretended Apostolic See, to make the division strong and the
Parties irreconcilable, that those Countries and People which continued in
obedience to him might be kept entirely Popish.

When men contend for the immutability of mutable Orders, and stiffly oppose the
due regulation of things exorbitant and excessive, and resolve to give no
ground for the gaining of dissenting brethren, it is not the love of Christ,
but perverse self-love, and the love of the world that constrains them. Such
interested persons are never good Counselors for the public weal.

Section XVI.
Now in as much as some particular carnal Interest is justly suspected in the
impetuous and obstinate pursuance of the things in controversy, we are willing
here to make it a question of Interest, and upon that account to make an
address to the reason even of those that are carried forth with greatest
vehemence in favor of the Episcopal, and in opposition to the Presbyterian
Party. All enterprises that have their beginning in judgment and not in
passion, are directed to a certain end set up as a mark, and that end is not a
business at rovers, but some particular steady issue of things certainly or
probably apprehended and expected: Wherefore let wise men consider the mark
whereat they level, and to what issue and state of things their actions tend.
Here is a numerous party, not of the dreggs and refuse of the Nation, but of
the judicious and serious part thereof: What will they do with them? and how
will they order the matter concerning them? Would they destroy them? I solemnly
profess that I abhor to think so by the generallity of the Episcopal
persuasion: I would disdain to mention such an unreasonable impiety, were it
not to show the inconsiderate and absurd proceedings of an unalterable
opposition, as that it cannot drive to any formed end and issue. That
Protestants should destroy Protestants for dissenting in the point of
Ceremonies, and sole jurisdiction of Bishops, is so dreadful a violation of
Charity and common honesty, that it is a most uncharitable and dishonest thing
to suppose it of them. What then? would they bear them down, or keep them under
hard Conditions? Shall all persons that cannot yield exact obedience to
Ecclesiastical injunctions concerning all the parts of the Liturgy, and
Ceremonies, be suspended and deprived as formerly? Shall Ministers of this
Judgment be cast and kept out of Ecclesiastical preferment and employment?
Shall all private conferences of godly peaceable Christians, for mutual
edification, be held unlawful Conventicles? It has been thought by wise men to
be against the Rules of Government, to hold under a rigid yoke a free people of
such a number and quality, and intermingled in all estates and rauks, and
intimately conjoined with all parts of the body Politic, that it is almost
impossible to exclude their Interest from a considerable share in public
actions. Besides, is it for the service of Christ, and the increase of his
Kingdom the Church, that so many able Divines should be debarred the use of
their Lords Talents, that so many laborious Ministers should sit still in
silence; that when Christ teaches us to pray that the Lord would thrust forth
Laborers into his Harvest, those Laborers should be thrust out of his
harvest? Surely this would make a cry in the ears of the Lord of the Harvest.
Let me add this, It Is a hard matter to silence them that will preach virtually
in pious Conferences, whose occasional and Table Discourses will be a kind of
Sermon.

Let me offer a third way, Will they afford them liberty of Conscience, and yet
stave them off, as a divided Party, to stand alone in their Principles and
Interest? Verily I cannot think it is in their heart so to do. What then
remains but to prepare the way, and to make the path straight for a solid and
perfect closure, by laying aside those unnecessary occasions of stumbling.

Section XVII.
If the neglect of brotherly Pacification hold on, and the Hierarchy resolve
upon their own advancement to the highest pitch, one may well conclude, That
they make a full reckoning to wear out the Presbyterians, and to swallow up
their Interest, conceiving they are able to effect it by degrees; and that
greater changes then these have been wrought without much ado. And we confess
indeed, that a great change in Religion was made by Qu. ELIZABETH without much
dispute or difficulty: The alteration was not sudden but gradual. Camden
writes, That in the entrance of the Queens Reign, for a whole month and more,
the Roman Religion stood as it did at the death of Queen MARY. On the 27. of
December the Epistles and Gospels, the Lords Prayer, Creed and Ten
Commandments, together with the Letany, were read in the English Tongue. On
the 22. of March the entire use of the Sacrament in both kinds was restored by
Parliament. On the 24. of June the Sacrifice of the Mass was abolished, and the
whole Liturgy restored into English. In July the Oath of Supremacy was given to
the Bishops: And in August Images were taken out of the Churches and broken or
burnt. Why may not the Hierarchical Interest swallow up the Presbyterian, as
easily as Protestantism prevailed over Popery? Surely I take these several
cases to be very different. And first, because Queen ELIZABETH had this
fundameutal maxim as agreeable to her Conscience and the Interest of Her
State, to banish hence the exercise of the Roman Religion. But our Gracious
King in His Christian Prudence and Compassion seeks the uniting of His
Protestant Subjects, and the healing of their breaches, by His Wife and
Gracious condescentions already Declared. Besides, in the beginning of the
Queens Reign the inferior Clergy of this Kingdom universally appeared to be
but lukewarm Papists, and many of them might be supposed to be Protestants in
hearts, and the most of them very unlearned, and indifferent men in Religion.
And a great part of the Hierarchy were not more zealous than the rest: For when
at that time the Ecclesiastical Promotions in England were numbered above nine
thousand four hundred in all, there were not more then fourscore Rectors of
Churches, fifty Prebendaries, fifteen Heads of Colleges, twelve Archdeacons,
twelve Deans, six Abbots and Abbesses, and fourteen Bishops that refused the
Oath of Supremacy. Also the English Service was so prepared, that it might be
no abomination to the Papists, no positive thing therein occurring repugnant to
their Doctrine; for which cause they frequented the same for the first ten
years; and the Pope did not in many years send forth his thunder and lightning
against the Queen. And Popery being in substance a Religion contrary to what
was publicly professed, had no advantage for increase by public Preaching, or
Books publicly allowed, All these accidents did help forward to an absolute
settlement of the Protestant Religion. But we may find the state of things far
otherwise in point of disposition or inclination toward the Dominion of
absolute Prelacy, and the rigorous imposition of Ceremonies, and the
extirpation of the dissenting Party: For there are now in England thousands of
Ministers dis-satisfied in the Hierarchy and Ceremonies, who are all
competently, and many of them eminently learned. They are not generally of
light spirits, but steady and well resolved, and tenderly affected touching
their spiritual liberties. The way which in scorn is called Puritanism, is not
another Religion in substance than Protestantism, but the very same, or one
branch thereof distinguished from the other by an accidental difference.
Protestant and Puritan Doctrine and Worship, all men may know to be the same
for substance; and Puritanism will grow up with Protestantism, notwithstanding
all opposition, as I have manifested in the former discourse.

Commonly those people who try all Doctrines by Scripture, and are swayed more
by its Authority than by the Ordinances and Customs of men, do much hesitate
and stagger concerning the sole Jurisdiction of Bishops, the pomp of the
Hierarchy, and sacred mystical Ceremonies of Humane Institution. And therefore
let the Episcopal Party never look to be rid of these difficulties, till they
remove the matters in Question, whereat a knowing people are always ready to
stumble.

Neither in these times are the Presbyterians so hateful a generation as some
would have them; they are odious to none but those to whom they were ever
odious, or else to such Ignorants as follow the Cry, and speak evil of they
know not what. They have had no considerable loss of their number by revolt;
and whatever comes to pass, they think never the worse of their main Cause,
which I have expressed in the Character given of them: And if some or many of
them have a liberry in their own judgments touching conformity, yet that
conformity will not strengthen the designs of those Prelatists that are most
rigid in such impositions, and seek to tread down the Presbyterians. It was a
notable question which a Carthaginian Senator put to Hanibal's Agents, after
the great overthrow given to the Romans at Canna. When they had magnified
Hanibal's great Achievements, Hanno asked them, Whether any of the Romans had
come to demand Peace; and whether any Town of the Latins, or any of their
Colonies had yet rebelled against the Romans? The Agents denying the one and
the other, Hanno replied, Then is the War as entire yet as at the first. I
apply this, to show how easily men mistake the progress of their own affairs,
and think themselves to be ready for a triumph, when indeed they have gotten
little, and the state of the controversy is still as entire and firm as ever.

Hitherto I have asserted the Interest of the Universality in opposition to the
advancement of a partial Interest. I have endeavored to make it manifest, That
the several Parties by a mutual yielding and waving their partial Interests may
be united to promote the Interest of the Universality: for I have laid these
ground-works, to wit; That the breach is not kept open by any formed Doctrine
or Conclusion of either Party, nor (as I trust) by the spirit of everlasting
enmity; but either by a humor of opposition, that may be qualified and
subdued; or by some carnal design, which may and must be denied when its error
and danger is discovered.

In the remainder of this Discourse I am to show, That the Presbyterians are
fit and worthy to be imbodied with the whole number of the good people of
England; in the next place to persuade the Union by several Arguments; and then
to remove certain impediments, and to argue from the particular concernments of
the King, of the Nobility and Gentry, and of the Episcopal Clergy; and lastly,
to offer some few essays concerning the paths of Peace.

Section XVIII.
Saint Paul was sometimes constrained by the weakness of some and the malice of
others, to boast on his own behalf, and to Apologize again and again for
speaking as a fool: I trust therefore that wise men will bear with that unto
which the like necessity compels me, on the behalf of the people that are now
denominated Presbyterian. In estimating the numbers of this persuasion, it is
not the right way to go by the Poll throughout all sorts promiscuously; but to
take a survey of the intelligent and active sort of the people, and in that
sort to compare their number with others. Howbeit in any way of reckoning
suppose them the lesser, yet they may be found a balancing number. But I am
willing to pass from number to weight. They that will not acknowledge them to
be sincere, cannot deny them to be serious persons; they that will not
acknowledge them to be sober in their judgments, cannot deny them to be sober
in their conversations. But we know they are both serious, and sincere, and
sober, as well in Religion as in Morality: and a few sober people are more
valuable, both for Religious and Civil concernments, than a multitude of
dissolute or vain and empty persons. One serious rational man will carry more
in fit opportunities, than all the vapourers in the neighborhood. Those that
are ill affected to the Presbyterians commonly despise them as an unlearned
dull sort of men knowing nothing. Truly we will not herein boast beyond our
line, nor magnify those of our own persuasion, in derogation to any others;
but we think that this disparagement is cast upon them because they are
commonly no vapourers. Surely they have amongst them both Divines and
Gentlemen, who do not use to turn their backs upon gainsayers, but have been
and will be ready to render a reason of their judgment and practice to any that
shall demand it of them. Nevertheless, we do not envy the learning of any
Episcopal Divines, but gladly acknowledge it, and desire to partake in the
benefit of it, and wish that whatsoever gift is received by any, may be more
and more servicable to the Church of God. Neither are they an ignoble abject
sort; it has not at all appeared that they have degenerated from the English
Virtue and Valor. They have for common tranquillity and safety closed with the
first opportunity for a general accord, and so have knowingly made way for the
reviving of the other Party, supposing that the former enmity would cease. And
they had reason to hope, that amidst the joy of the Nation, they should not be
left in sadness. The present interruption and check given to this expected
reconciliation, we attribute to the hurry of men's minds upon this great and
unexpected change, by which it happens that they scarce know where they are,
and hardly contain themselves within due bounds. But we trust that these
passions will be over, and the spirits of all will settle in a calm and good
temper. Hitherto the contradictions may pass for the effects of passion, not of
inveterate malice, wherefore, dum res est integra, let second thoughts be
milder. A quick passage of Count Olivares touching the right way of
Accommodation, may be pertinent to this business. Our late Sovereign, when
Prince of Wales, being in the Spanish Court in pursuance of the marriage with
the Infanta of Spain, and the Negotiation being clogged with many
interruptions, discontents and jealousies, and all being like to fall asunder,
Olivares whether in humor or earnest propounded these three ways; The first,
That Prince Charles should become a Catholic; The second, That the Infanta
should be delivered unto him upon the former security without further
Condition; The third was, To bind him as fast as they could, and not to trust
him with any thing. Of these three ways, he said, the two former were good; but
the last was a bad one. In like manner might a discerning Prelatist resolve,
that there be three ways of bringing these disputes to an issue; The first,
That the Presbyterians should voluntarily become Episcopal, and thoroughly
conformable; The second, That the way of brotherly accord should be held open
and secure to them by an equal Accommodation; The third, That they be trusted
in nothing, but bound up fast by the hardest Condition that can be imposed* Of
these three ways let him conclude with respect to his own interest, that the
two former are good, but the last very bad.

Section XIX.
Much partiality and prejudice has gotten the sway in those men that speak and
act, as if there were cause to fear none, to curb none, to provide remedies
against none but Presbyterians: Was England acquainted with no troubles, or
infested with no intestine broyls before this kind of men arose? Are these the
proper enemies of England? Let them know, that the true intestine Enemies of
any State are those within it, that depend upon Foreign Interests, and on whom
Foreign States have influence.

A great Statesman makes it one fundamental maxim of Queen ELIZABETH to
banish hence the exercise of the Roman Religion, because it was the only means
to break all the plots of the Spaniards, who under this pretext did here foment
Rebellion. Upon the same ground the Law banisheth Popish Priests, that Foreign
influences might not distemper this Kingdom: But the Presbyterians can have no
temptation to tamper with Foreign Combinations; for their Interest is
precisely and perfectly Protestant, and for their unreconcilableness to the
Church of Rome, their greatest adversaries will bear them witness: And when
ever this Land shall have need of help against its chiefest Enemies, they will
be found so true to the Interest of England, as none more, and consequently
must and will be interessed in its defense. Wherefore let England have regard
to those that must be her fast friends, not only for good will, but also for
perpetual necessity.

Section XX.
Moreover, a wise State is busy in finding out, but not in making Enemies. Who
can produce one solid reason, that renders this Party Enemies to the
Government, or the Person Governing? They are lovers of Monarchy, and of the
Royal Family. From neither of these have they any cause of distrust or
dis-satisfaction. They have nothing to hold in derogation to His Majesty's
Authority, safety, or benefit; and His Majesty has nothing to hold that stands
in opposition to their security. There have been indeed unhappy differences;
but whence proceeding? Not from any thing intrinsecal to His Majesty's
Government or to their condition; but from things very remote from the Interest
of Sovereignty. The Kings Affairs do allow Him to extend Favor and Clemency to
them, as to any other of His Subjects; and His Condescension toward them will
work as happy effects to His satisfaction.

Section XXI.
Some men resolving in all things to detract from the Presbyterians, have said,
That they promoted the Kings Return, not out of good will to His Majesty, or a
love of Order and Unity; but out of fear of being destroyed by the Phanaticks.
Upon the occasion of this surmise, and the evil design thereof, I am willing to
debate this Question.

Whether the Presbyterians closure with the King in all avowed subjection and
service be sincere and solid, that His Majesty may safely confide in them?

The pretended reason of their insincerity seems to me to add much to their
reputation in that behalf: For if the Phanaticks would destroy them, it is
manifest that they are none of them. Phanaticks would not destroy themselves
willingly. The several various Sects will wrangle with each other in verbal
contests; but they never knowingly plotted or banded against each other upon
the account of their different Opinions, but did all unite in one common
Principle of pretended liberty of Conscience, and in one common cause of
Universal Toleration. Be it also granted, that self-preservation engaged the
Presbyterians by any means to obviate and overturn the designs of the
Sectaries, it shows that the Sectarian Interest and theirs are Inconsistent, as
also that they are not unreconcilable to the Episcopal part of Protestants; and
that they had pacifick inclinations, willing to put a period to these
contentions. Let men surmise the worst they can of their intentions in
declaring for the King; yet in as much as they had a choice before them, to
turn this way or that way, it is evident they would betake themselves to that
way that had the lesser evil and the fairer show of good. And could any think
that they would knowingly make a choice of that which should destroy their just
liberty: wherefore were it no more than this, it might gain them some regard,
for that they hoped for some good in this way, when they could hope for none at
all from the wild ways and fancies of Phanaticks: But the truth is, they
turned not to a lesser evil, but to a thing in it self desirable; for it was a
clear case to men of sound minds and sober Principles, that there was no way to
lead us out of that wilderness wherein we wandered, but the uniting of all sound
and sober Protestants in things wherein all agree, and a mutual forbearance in
things not necssary to peace and edification. The Presbyterians knew their
single Interest would not settle the Nation: And the Episcopalians may know as
well that their single Interest will prove dificient. In such a case, what
well-minded persons affecting the peace of the Church and Kingdom would not
promote the restitution of the Royal Family, that the King, in whom alone the
whole Nation can settle, may pare off the superfluities of particular partial
Interests, and make a Union in the general Interest of the Protestant Religion,
and of Great Britain? This was the scope of the Presbyterian design in that
particular: And as touching their cordial affection to His Majesty's Person and
Government, we have their own more affectionate and solemn professions for it,
which are graciously owned by His Majesty. And if any persist to gainsay those
expressions, seeing they are not searchers of hearts, it lies upon them to
prove this pretended disaffection by something discernable in the outward
behavior. But suppose that a peoples Conscience and good inclination and
disposition be called into question, yet this is a maxim unquestionable, That
the main ground of sure and constant benevolence between Prince and People, is
a firm persuasion, that they are the mntual Interest of each other. His
Majesty's Royal Person and His Princely Virtues are amiable to us; He is a
Crown of Glory to the English Nation: But that which got the mastery over all
difficulties, in restoring Him to His Dominions, was an undoubted knowledge
that the Nations Interest was bound up in Him our indubitable Sovereign Lord.
There is a necessity of mere compulsion that drives the unwilling, and there is
a necessity of Interest that draws a willing people: When this latter necessity
does bring a Prince and People together, ingenuous minds will turn this
necessity into a virtue; and so the joining of Interests draws after it the
joying of hearts. The Presbyterians enjoining the same protection and benefit
which other sober Protestants and Loyal Subjects, will see no other probable
nor possible way of repose and safety, but under His Majesty's happy
Government. It is not therefore a necessity of present force, but of constant
Interest, which is here commended, as so great a bond of loyalty, and which
Princes use to take for their best security. The wisest way is, not to reject
and slight a party that are brought to hand, and made for a Princes Interest,
upon a suspicion that they may prove inconstant; but to use the known means of
preventing such inconstancy as is pretended, and to manifest that regard to
their encouragement and satisfaction, as that they may rest assured, that their
own and the public peace do run in the same channel.

From the Reasons aforegoing I conclude, That the Presbyterians are fit and
worthy to be imbodied with the whole number of the good People of England. I
proceed to persuade this Union by several Arguments.

Section XXII.
England has endured conflicts of almost twenty years by Wars, Divisions,
Commotions, and manifold changes; it was abased, enfeebled, and brought very
low; all which do show that some great distemper had taken hold of this Body
Politic, before these things could break forth: There is at length by the late
Revolution a providential offer of rest and peace. After those sad conflicts,
and this happy offer of Providence, shall the seeds of discord lodge
perpetually in this Land? I fear passions of bitterness are too ready to stir
and provoke. Take away this fuel of strife, the urging of things to uphold
distinctions of Parties. Whilst things are at such a pass, animosities will
arise upon every occasion; discontents and quarrels will be ready to break
forth in every Town and Parish, and almost in all mixed companies and
occasional Meetings. But let the propounded Accommodation be accepted and
established, and the former mutual injuries will pass into forgetfulness; and
persons formerly engaged against each other, will be able to look one another
in the face without provocation and new quarrels. Where is our Charity and
regard to public tranquillity, if we reject the sure and only means of Concord?

Section XXIII.
Uniformity in Religion is beautiful and amiable; but we ought to consider not
only what is desirable, but what is attainable. There have been, are, and
always will be such points as the Apostle terms doubtful disputations. When
the severity of Laws and Canons enforce external Uniformity in things of this
nature, it exercises a tyranny over men's judgments, and holds them in a
servile condition, that they are not free, but captivated to the Authority of
men, or suppressed from making a due search into matters of Religion; yea, this
thraldom will inevitably reach to things of an higher nature, even the vital
parts of Christianity. That servile Principle which has the heart of Popery in
it, must be introduced, to wit, that the Laity should not search the
Scriptures, nor try the Doctrines delivered, but acquiesce in what their
Teachers say, without the Exercise of their own reason, or judgment of
discretion. Hereupon will follow gross ignorance and supine carelessness in the
things of God, and in those that any whit mind Religion (which is the best of
the matter) a blind devotion: And a people rude and servile in Religion will be
rude and dissolute in Conversation, as we see in Popish Countries, and in all
places where spiritual tyranny prevails. This is so great an evil that it
cannot be countervailed by all the imaginable benefit of Uniformity: And the
truth is, all profitable Uniformity is mingled with sobriety, and stands not in
an indivisible point, but admits a latitude, and by a little variety in matters
of lesser moment, becomes more graceful, because it is more unstrained and
unaffected.

Section XXIV.
It is a chief point of knowledge in those whose work it is to mould and manage
a Nation according to any order of things, to undrestand what is the temper of
the people, what Principles possess and govern them, or considerable Parties of
them, and to what pass things are already brought among them.

Those who duly observe and regard the disposition and present State of
England, and the principles and affections of the several considerable Parties,
will be able to give the best advice for a happy settlement: For such a course
as is wisely and succesfully taken in one Nation, may in the like business
prove unfortunate in another Nation, or in the same at another time. A State
may probably root out such opinions as it conceives to be heterodox and
inconvenient, by using great severity in the beginning, when the opinions are
but newly sowed in men's minds, and the people are of such a nature, as to abhor
dangers, and aim to live securely, and when the Nation in general is devoted to
the ancient customs of their forefathers. But the same course may not be taken
when the opinions have been deeply rooted and far spread, by long continuance,
in a Nation of a free spirit, and zealous; and the generality of those that in
a Law sense are called Cives, do not detest them. At this day England affords a
multitude of Episcopal Zealots, and a multitude of Presbyterian Zealots,
balancing the former; and between these two there lie a more indifferent sort
of people, whereof a great number care for none of these things; but others are
more intelligent and considerate; and these seem to approve some things, and
again to disapprove some things on either side: As far as I have observed, the
indifferent sort of men do accord with the Episcopal way in affecting the
Common Prayer Book; and those among them, that are of any reckoning for worth
or honesty, do also according to the Presbyterian way, affect the constant
preaching of the Word, and the residency of Ministers in their Parochial
Charges, and disaffect plurality of Benefices. Knowledge has so increased that
the people in general will more observe their Teachers Doctrine and
conversation; and the impertinencies of the one, and the irregularities of the
other shall not pass without noting. The insufficient, idle, and scandalous
will fall into contempt, and be slighted by the common people. The profanation
of the Lords Day by open sports and pastimes is by the Civil part of the Nation
accounted scandalous. Furthermore, the present Age being more discerning, all
sorts affect a greater liberty of Judgment and Discourse then has been used in
former times. Whereupon the State of this Kingdom requires a temper or medium
between two extremes, to wit medium abnegationis, in those unnecessary things
wherein no accord can be expected between the Parties, by abolishing, or not
injoyning them, and medium participationis, in things necessary to Order and
Government, wherein the moderate of both Parties do easily comply with each
other. When the State like a prudent Mother, not led by the passions of her
angry Children, shall not engage in their quarrels on this or that side, but
settle such a temperament for their common good, love and peace may ensue
between the Parties, though difference of judgment still remains. When the
Nation shall not espouse to it self the Interest of a party, but entirely
reserve it self for the good of the Universality, those hot disputes and
contests will of themselves fall to the ground; and men of different judgments
will be less fond of their own opinions, when they observe that the State does
not judge its happiness to rest upon any of them, and that the welfare of the
Church and Kingdom consists without them.

Section XXV.
This Kingdom after the removing of foundations, is by a mavelous turn
re-established upon its ancient basis. And verily that which has wrought the
change will settle it; that which has brought such things to pass will keep
them where they are, if we do not overlook and slight it. And what was it but
the consent of the universality, the Vote of all England? This did produce an
universal motion, exceeding vehement, but not violent: For it was not against,
but according to nature. All things having been out of place, and held in a
state preternatural, when the force was taken off, moved to their center and
place of rest, to wit, the ancient fundamental constitution. And for this cause
the change was not terrible, but calm, kindly and unbloody. Now as that natural
inclination, which carries things to their resting place, will keep them there,
until by violence they are forced thence; so this consent of the universality,
which produced a kindly motion of all things to settle in their own place and
order upon the right foundation, will keep them there, until such external
force shall come, as can break and dissipate the universality. Wherefore seeing
this great revolution has not happened by the prevailing force of one Party,
but by the unstrained motion of all England, what reason is there that one
Party should thrust the other out of its due place of rest upon the common
Foundation? When common consent has laid this excellent Foundation of peace
and quietness, let not the Superstructure of particular unnecessary forms cast
off some as a divided and rejected Party; but let that which has made peace
keep peace; which by Gods help it will surely do, if timely observed and
followed.

Section XXVI.
We cannot gain say but the composure of these differences has much
difficulty, and requires much prudence, care and patience in those that are at
the helm of Government: Nevertheless it may be effected, if the judicious on
both sides will give consent; and they will give consent, if they have a single
aim to procure the peace of Gods Church, and the increase thereof, and
particularly the increase and stability of Protestant Religion: Suppose the
Roman, Grecian, Armenian, Ethiopick, together with all the Protestant Churches,
yea and the whole Christian world might be drawn into one Church Communion and
Order, upon as easy terms as English Prelatists and Presbyterians may, if
they have a heart to it, were it not prodigious uncharitableness and fury of
opposition to withstand it? As all the Lovers of Christianism would pursue the
Union of all Christian Churches, upon such terms, so should all the Lovers of
Protestantism pursue the Union of all Protestant Churches, seeing the Doctrines
wherein they harmoniously agree will enable them to keep the Unity of the
Spirit in the Bond of Peace, if the heart be not opposite to the power of those
professed Doctrines. To heal the wounds of the Protestant Cause, how glorious
is it? But to refuse and withstand this healing, how does it cause the Popish
faction to glory against us? Let not our adversaries rejoice, nor the
uncircumcised glory in our shame.

Section XXVII.
We have the examples of Christian Princes, even of those of the Roman Faith,
who would gladly have made up breaches in Religion among their people, by
yielding in things of greater moment in the Church of Rome, then any of the
points in question are among disagreeing Protestants. In the Council of Trent,
Ferdinand the Emperor, and Maximilian his son King of the Romans, and the
French King, and the Duke of Bavaria made it their business by their
Ambassadors, for quieting of their Dominions, that the Communion of the
Sacrament in both kinds, the Marriage of Priests, and Divine Service in the
vulgar tongue might be allowed. These things are of greater importance among
the Papists, then the things now in question are among the Protestants of
either persuasion, if we judge by their declared Opinions, and not by some
hidden design: And those forenamed Princes would surely have taken that way for
uniting their people, had their power been independent in matter of Religion;
but having dependence upon the Sea of Rome, they could do nothing without the
Authority either of the Pope or the Council; from either of which they
perceived after much instance, that such Reformation could not be hoped for.
Moreover those Princes being of the Roman Faith, had a fairer pretense
according to Popish Principles, to crush the dissenting Part of their Subjects,
by laying Heresy to their charge, and so in time to root them out, then any
Protestant State can have to extirpate the Presbyterians. Likewise the Emperor
Charles the fifth, after his great Achievements, designing to establish an
entire Dominion in Germany, conceived that his way was to unite the German
Nation in point of Religion, by a kind of reformation or Accommodation; for
which he labored so much in procuring and upholding the Trent-Council; until
at length despairing of his Sons succession in the Empire, he laid aside all
thoughts of restoring the ancient Religion in Germany, and by consequence all
care of the Council, though he continued many years after in the Imperial
Authority.

Now though all these Princes were deceived in expecting such a Union by means
of that Council, which by reason of diverse and important Interests of Princes
and Prelates, could not possibly have such an end as was by some of them
desired; yet herein they took not their aim amiss, that the re-uniting of their
broken people, by using a Temper and Accommodation, was the best way to keep
their Estates entire.

Section XXVIII.
I am the more importunate in pressing home the motion of brotherly Agreement,
considering the time, which may be the only time: For the present condition of
these Affairs seem like to the state of a sick body, which Physicians call a
Crisis, when nature and the disease are in the (...) of the conflict, to carry
it for life or death. Peace and Concord in Religion seems now to approach to
its Crisis, whether it shall prevail and live, or dye and fail for ever: It may
justly be feared that the time is now or never: For if after so long and sad
divisions and the calamitous effects thereof, an implacable spirit shall be
seen to bear sway in this time of restoration and expected union, it may beget
a despair of all future reconciliation. If after such and so long calamities,
all the concurring circumstances of the late Revolution will not incline men's
hears to Peace, what will do it? This is a day of gracious Visitation. Happy
England, if in this its day it knows the things that belong to its Peace!

Having pressed the Union by these Arguments, I proceed to remove certain
impediments.

Section XXIX.
One great impediment is an erroneous judgment touching the times foregoing the
late Wars. For as much as great and manifold distempers have happened and
continued in this Land since the beginning of these troubles, the defects of
former times are quite forgotten, as it commonly comes to pass, that latter
miseries, it drawn out to any length, do drown the rememberance of bypast
evils; but he who discerns only things at hand, and not affar off, is purblind.
I abhor to take upon me the defense of our late distracted times, the
distempers whereof I would not in any wise palliate. Nevertheless let this be
noted, distempers have their times of breeding as well as of breaking forth.
Certainly that dismal Tempest which succeeded the long Calm in this Nation, had
its time of gathering in the Clouds. To heal the symptoms of a disease, its
rooted cause being neglected, is but a palliative cure. To take away the
irregularities of these latter times, and not to inquire into the former
causes, is to hide, but not to heal the maladies of this Kingdom.

Section XXX.
Another error which turns away men's eyes from beholding the true state of
their own affairs, is a contempt of the dissenting Party, and of their
Opinions, as silly and irrational; with which is joined a vain conceit, that
the whole Party with their Opinions would soon fall to the ground, if a few
turbulent and factious spirits (as they pretend) were taken out of the way.
This makes men to bear down their opposites more with scorn and contumely, then
with any temperate and solid reasoning. This makes men wilful, precipitate,
unmerciful, and puts them forward by rigid injunctions and severe inquisitions
to suppress those with whom they might walk in one way, if they themselves did
walk in love: But there is as little of Reason as Religion in this
self-admiring humor. It is the part of weak and selfish minds to contract
Religion to certain modes and forms which stand not by Divine Right, but by the
wills of men, and which are of little efficacy, and very disputable, and if
supposed lawful, ought to be governed by the rule of Charity. To think that
none is a good Christian, a sound Protestant, a fit minister, that cannot
subscribe to such modes and forms, proceeds from a narrow and ignoble judgment.
It is also as much pride as weakness to contemn the settled way of a knowing and
serious people, steady in their Principles and practices, as if they were
worthy of no regard, because they dissent in some points which in themselves
are of little moment. This is for men to think, that they only are the people,
and that wisdom shall dye with them. Noble and high capacities and judgments of
a large and deep reach, do know they cannot square the world by the narrow
compass of those conceived Principles that have possessed and seasoned their
own minds: But they look also without themselves, rightly judging, that as
they have their own peculiar Notions, so another sort have theirs; and that
diverse men are carried diverse ways, as they are led by natural temper, custom,
education, or studious inquires. They know likewise that there is no
constraining of all minds to one persuasion, without imbasing their judgments
to perfect slavery, which we see put in practice in the Antichristian Kingdom
of the Papacy: Whereupon men of vastest parts and learning, and of true
nobleness of judgment have been ever favorable to those which dissented only
in such opinions, as amongst wise and sober men are not with one consent
determined, unless their peculiar Interest were bound up in those Opinions: For
this nobleness of judgment, which naturally inclines to allow ones self and
others this righteous liberty, is sometimes driven back and straightened by
politic Interests. Verily a judgment truly noble is truly Catholic; and true
Catholicism is most contrary to that which is so called by pretended
Catholics: For it is to maintain Christian Concord with all Christians, as far
as they hold Christ the Head.

Section XXXI.
It is incident to ruling men to cherish the passion of indignation against the
dissenting Party. Hence arises a great perturbation of judgment: For by reason
of the dominion of this passion, when dissenters modestly assert their
Principles, and do not instantly comply as much as is expected, it is taken for
petulancy and peevishness. When some degree of frowardness breaks forth, it is
encountered with that severity which hazards the undoing of the weak Part, that
should and might be healed: And their dis-satisfaction is judged the effect of
incurable pride and malice. This perturbation of judgment begets a great
distemper in public Councils. Wherefore let persons bearing Rule watch over
this dangerous passion, and dread its tyranny. First, let not perverseness be
always imputed to the non-compliancs of the inferior Party. God has put it
into the Kings heart to extend compassion to multitudes of His Loyal Subjects,
in taking off the rigor of sundry impositions in matters Ecclesiastical; and
they think it good to make use of those His Majesty's Concessions, without the
prejudice of any part of Religion, or of order and decency in the Church.
Others that should have helped forwards His Majesty's design of Peace, are
offended, saying, The Presbyterians yield in nothing, the late indulgence has
made them more resolved against all points of Conformity; but why should their
eye be evil because His Majesty's eye is good? Have the Presbyterians abated
nothing, when, for peace sake they have declared a readiness to part with the
Presbyterian platform of Church Government, which is used in other Reformed
Churches, and to submit to a regulated Episcopacy; as also to wave the
Directory for Worship, and to accept a Reformed Liturgy? Indifferent men would
judge that this is a good advance toward peace, and that a closure is hereby
really intended. But what have the Prelatists done in testimony of their
moderation? Have they desisted from the use of any one of the former
Ceremonies, even such as be not enjoined by any Law or Canon? Suppose some of
the Presbyterians (be they few or many) do as yet forbear the using of some
Forms, which they apprehend not simply unlawful; perhaps some reason of scandal
may cause this forbearance; otherwise to the injudicious they might seem to
contradict their own Principles, out of servile fear, or for worldly ends; and
the malicious might take occasion, though none were given, to reproach them for
temporizing. Now it concerns Christ's Ministers to prevent, what in them lies,
not only a just, but even an unjust and causeless contempt of their Ministry.
Besides, they are not willing that some persons of good affections, but weaker
judgments, should take offense at their early and easy compliance, and so fall
into downright separation. The Presbyterians attend a good Reformation, and
all necessary enlargement that may encompass and gather together in one all
that are of sound belief and good life, who have been so long scattered abroad.
Nothing therefore appears but that they have hitherto conscienciously and
judiciously made use of His Majesty's Favor; and with great thankfulness have
they expressed their sense thereof, in their acknowledgments to God and men:
His Royal and Paternal Charity is precious to them.

But suppose that some of this way were guilty of some provoking frowardness,
should grave Patriots and wise Counselors thereupon destroy the weak part, or
rather heal it? A prudent Father is not so provoked by the stubbornness of a
Child as to cast him out, and make him desperate; whilst there is yet hope
concerning him. It is meet indeed for Princes to express their just
indignation, when Subjects presuming on their clemency do not contain
themselves within their duty; and the seasonable expression of such disdain,
wisely managed, is of great force in Government; nevertheless if it get the
mastery it is exceeding perilous. It was the Counsel of indignation that
proceeded from Rehoboam's young Counselors.

But there is yet a greater mischief, when the cloud of this passion darkens
the Understanding, that it cannot distinguish between present dis-satisfaction,
and incurable pride and malice. When a peoples present dis-satisfaction about
remediable grievances, shall be deemed implacable enmity, commonly pernicions
councels take place: Then it will be suggested to a Prince, that the Acts of
Grace bestowed upon such a people make them but the more insolent: For none may
hope to overcome pride by condescension, or inveterate malice by good turns;
which is indeed a true saying, but perverted by mis-application. In this case
to judge rightly of things that differ, let a Prince consider diligently
whether the present averseness proceeds from rooted Principles, and a fixed
Interest, inconsistent with the security of his Estate; or from the pressures
of the grieved Party, in things which are not the necessary props of his Power,
and without which his greatness may well consist; and let him never question
the gaining of such a people whose Principles and designs are not against the
true and proper Interest of his Estate, whatsoever their present distempers be;
for the grievances being redressed, time will wear out those distempers: And in
that case a people will not less value their Prince, because he yields to
them with respect to his own concernments; for they will not judge it a forced
yielding, because that proceeds from force which is yielded for present
necessity, and against the main Interest; but they will cleave to him the more,
by discerning that his and their good do agree in one; for it makes them hope
that he will seek their good as his own. When Governors resent the
non-compliances of a party, their best remedy is to remove the occasions, when
it may be done without crossing the Interests of State or Maxims of
Government; then will the honestminded be mollified and molded; and toward
the residue of obstinate persons, if there be any such, severity will be used
more succesfully. It is the wisdom of rulers by all means to lessen offenses,
and to contract the number of offenders: For where there are many sufferers
upon a Religious account, whether in truth or pretense, there will be a kind of
glory in suffering, and sooner or later it may turn to the Rulers detriment.

Section XXXII.
Another great impediment of public concord is an erroneous confidence in the
more numerous Party, that they need not seek nor mind the way of peace; for
they reckon themselves sure to carry it by the major Vote in all Councils and
Conventions; they see wind and tide serving them: But they who consider but few
things, do make a sudden judgment, which commonly falls short. Great prosperity
ofttimes blinds the wise as well as fools; and great advantages divert the mind
from heeding many important circumstances of a business, that the judgment made
concerning it is most imperfect: Wherefore in the present case it should be
minded, that the dissenting party is not small, that it is not made up of the
rabble multitude, nor yet of Phanatique spirits, but of honest and sober
people, who act from principles of knowledge, and can render a reason of their
practice, in things pertaining to conscience, with as much discretion as any
sort of men in the Nation; that the instances which they make do not concern
by-matters and mutable occasions, but matters of conscience, that will never
cease nor vary; that they are not a party far distant, but very near; I mean
not only in respect of place (for so the Papists that live among us cannot be
far from us) but of agreement in Principles of Religion, that they cannot be
well severed nor kept in a divided State, nor yet be rooted out; but they will
grow up under the influence of the Doctrine professed in the Church of England;
that in many deliberations they may be able to put things to a stand, and in
debates of great consequence to lead the indifferent sort of men, and also many
temperate spirits of the other persuasion, by the apparent equity of their
proposals.

All these things and more of the like nature, do challenge a due regard from
those that would see through a business, and make a perfect judgment. Besides,
the judicious should consider not only the bulk and corpse of a party, but what
spirit does quicken them, and with what vivacity and constancy their motions do
proceed, and their Interest is pursued. It comes also within the compass of
this inquiry to know the intrinsic strength of the Hierarchy, and what they
can do when they stand by themselves alone, for their adventitious strength may
fail them. We need not tell them, that on their side at present the advantage
is very great, yet happily it may appear in show greater then it is indeed.
Though the English Nation appear to affect a stated Order in the Church,
nevertheless they may not serve the designs of the Hierarchy, nor yet be
conscious thereof. Upon the late great revolution, the multitude do easily run
from one extreme to an other, thinking they cannot run too far from those
troubles and discomposures which last oppressed them. But as the prudent ponder
their paths at present, so the passionate multitude may at length know where
they are, and discern alike the evil of both extremes. Many that are lifted up
may give offense, and fall under great displeasure; they that are cast down may
be better advised by their sufferings, and remove the occasions of stumbling,
and so become, if not indeared, yet inoffensive to the Nation. Such
vicissitudes of love and hatred do happen in every age, and there is no new
thing under the Sun.

Section XXXIII.
Another obstacle in the way of this conjunction is an opinion of many, that
the sure and only means of preventing schism, and maintaining unity in the
Church, is by multiplying Ceremonial injunctions and Canons, by requiring full
conformity to controverted forms, which might well be spared, by exacting not
only submission of practice, but assent of judgment declared by subscription to
all particulars of Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, in every jot and tittle
thereof. But in very deed this is the sure way of endless dissension among a
people that are not bottomed on this principle of believing as the Church
believes. This kind of imposing has discomposed all Christendom, and rends the
several Churches from each other, and makes the rent incurable. It is the way
of the Church of Rome, which upon this account is guilty of the foulest schism
that was ever made in the Christian world. It is a notable saying of
Chillingworth, -- Not Protestants for rejecting, but the Church of Rome for
imposing on the faith of Christians, Doctrines unwritten and unnecessary, and
for disturbing the Churches peace, and dividing Unity in such matters, is in an
high degree presumptuous and schismatical. -- God is jealous for his worship,
and consciences well informed and duly tender are likewise jealous concerning
it, lest they should provoke God to jealousy. Minds truly religious do set an
high price on matters of conscience, and will expose all to sale rather then
cross their principles. Wherefore if in matters of perpetual controversy
between godly wise persons, the Church shall make peremptory decrees and severe
injunctions, it must needs dissolve the band of unity. But the best and surest
means of preventing and suppressing Schisms, is to prevent corrupt
administrations, and real scandals in matters Ecclesiastical, and seasonably
to reform abuses, and not to interpose in lesser differences.

Section XXXIV.
Furthermore, a great prejudice is taken up against Bishops ruling in
conso^iation with Presbyters, and against Classical, or Presbyterian meetings,
as inclining to Faction, and likely to produce alterations, which evils are
supposed to follow tbe distributing of the power among many. Whereupon the
Government of a single Person, or a Bishop having sole Jurisdictson, is
apprehended to be the surest means of keeping Church affairs in a fixed state:
This prejudice having a great show of truth, we must stoop to pry into it more
narrowly. And first we have this political maxim to direct us in this inquiry,
that the condition of the people to be governed is the best rule of discerning
the aptest form of Government. And according to this principle we resolve, that
absolute Prelacy is the only Government to hold a people that content
themselves with a customary service, and the Religion of their Country, and of
their forefathers, whatsoever it be. All Discourses, Debates, Disputations,
and all occasions of contest touching Religion, and particularly that exercise
which is called prophesying, must be avoided. But this Government is not so
agreeable to a people that are given to search the Scriptures, and try
Doctrines. In England where the inferior Clergy or Parochial Ministry is not
rude and ignorant, but in a great part learned and conscientious, where the
common people in a great part try all things, that they may hold fast that
which is good; the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction cannot conveniently reside in a
Prelate alone governing by severe Canons, and denouncing excommunication
against all those that express any dissent from any particulars of the received
Forms of Worship and Discipline. For among such a people, this is a likelier
way to beget some great distemper, then to keep all in quietness and deep
silence. But a form of Government more free by distributing the power among
many, and regular meetings for free debates with in certain limits will be much
more peaceable and succesful. It is here acknowledged that in such an order of
things dissentions may arise, and cause some interruptions. Nevertheless no
great inconvenience, but sometimes much advantage may follow. The stirrings of
warm contests may be unadvisedly condemned, For as Thunder purges the Air, so
these stirrings may purge the Church from Corruptions ingendering in it. Let
the frame and order of things be so established, that both parties may be made
hopeless concerning factious attempts of promoting this or that extreme, that
the contests may not be on the one side for Dominion, nor on the other side for
inordinate liberty, but on both sides for Truths due freedom, and then they
will end in peace. If great mistakes should arise in such meetings, and seem
for a while to pass currently, there may be found some persons of that
wisdom, integrity and reputation, as to be able to show the fallacy, and to
convince those of both sides that intend uprightly. In which case if they
perceive an evil spirit on work, and an evil design hatching among some, they
will turn away with indignation from the contrivers of such mischief. Wherefore
let the frame of Ecclesiastical polity lean neither toward Tyranny nor
Anarchy, but be set upright for just liberty. Let good orders be kept and
privileges not violated, and the greater number of those who mean honestly
will not be led into the snare of faction. And selfish ambitious pragmatick
spirits that trouble them will easily be detected and abandoned.

Section XXXV.
Unto this reasoning let the authority of an Eminent pacifique Bishop be
superadded, concerning the way of order and stability in the conjunction of
Episcopacy and Presbytery. Bishop Hall in his Discourse, Entitled, A modest
offer of some meet considerations to the Assembly of Divines at Westminster,
commends the method of the Church of Scotland for prevention of Error and
Heresy by a gradual proceeding from the parochial meeting to the Presbytery,
from thence to the provincial Synod, and from thence to the general Assembly
for determining any controversy, saying, -- Thus bears the face of a very fair
and laudable course, and such as deserves the approbation of all the
well-willers to that Discipline. -- But let me add, That either we have or may
have (in this very state of things, with some small variation) in effect the
very same Government with us. Instead of Presbyteries consisting of several
Pastors, we have our combinations of Ministers in our several Deanries, over
whom the rural Dean is chosen every year by the Minsters of that Division, as
their Moderator. This Deanery or Presbytery may be enjoined to meet every
month, or oftener, in some City or Town next to them; and there they may have
their exercise of Prophesying, as I have known it practiced in some parts of
this Kingdom, as it is earnestly wished and recommended by that Excellently
Learned Lord Verulam in his prudent Considerations; where if any Question fail
of determination, it may be referred gradually from the lesser to the greater
Assemblies, till it be brought to a National Synod. In the same discourse the
said Bishop commends one constant, prudent, vigilant Overseer, superadded to a
Grave, Judicious Presbytery, without concurrence of which Presbytery, the
Bishop or Overseer should not take upon him to inflict Excommunication, or any
other important Censure.

Having discovered certain general Impediments, I proceed to Argue upon the
particular Concernments of the King, of the Nobility and Gentry, and of the
Episcopal Clergy.

Section XXXVI.
His Majesty's Concernment in this grand Affair transcends the particular
concernments of all others, whether Parties or Persons, and that beyond all
comparison: Others may advance themselves and Families by the present
occasions, and give over in time when they have builded their own houses. Many,
and perhaps the most, if changes come, may retreat and serve the Times for
their own security; but the King never descends from the Stage of public
Action, and can never cease to be interessed in His people. Others having much
to get and little to lose, may make themselves by present advantages; but the
King has little to get, but much to secure; and not the present occasional and
mutable advantage, put perpetual stability is His Inrerest. His Majesty has
worthily gained the Reputation of a Wise and Gracious Prince, of an excellent
spirit and temper for these times: And truly a Prince as wise as Solomon, has
no Wisdom to spare from the weight of these businesses. Let the God of the
spirits of all flesh, and the Father of Lights, continually give to His Majesty
a large heart, and comprehensive Understanding, that may see far and near, and
fetch within its compass all circumstances, consequents and moments that are
requisite to the forming of a perfect judgment concerning these great Affairs.

Section XXXVII.
After so long a War between King and Parliament, and after all the changes in
Government, the King being at length restored to His full Power and Greatness,
and the people being satiated with Civil Wars, tumults and changes; it may be
concluded, that they will not easily run the hazard of abetting any Parties, in
contradiction to Him: But this is happily or unhappily suggested, as it is
turned to a good or a bad use: Though evil Counsels may turn it to a bad use,
yet it yields unspeakable advantage to the wholesome Counsels both of King and
People, for the good of both. The people knowing that acquiescence in present
things is their best security, will not be given to change; and the King
knowing the peoples indisposition to abet a change, will have little occasion
of jealousy. And their mutual confidence, which is the strongest bond of
peace, will lead them without rub or let into a settled mutual happiness. But
it is not good advice to neglect a peoples interest, or to use them with less
regard, because they are willing to hug their own peace in any tolerable
condition. The Sovereigns greatness, and the peoples freedom, are but one
fabric resting upon the same fundamental constitution. If you shake the one,
you shake the other also. I detest and abhor the tumults and insurrections of
the people, and the resisting of the Sovereign power. Let wickedness proceed
from the wicked. But let none that seek a righteous end tread in unrighteous
ways: let no welminded person be drawn into such a snare of reproach and ruin.
I am persuaded that the generality of the Presbyterian denomination would
endure extremities, before they would revenge or defend themselves by unlawful
means, as rebelling against their lawful Sovereign. As I find my own heart,
so do I judge of others. Nevertheless let a wise Prince consider, that the
divine providence can by ways without number change the face and state of
things, when a dissatisfied conscientious party shall not stir one foot to
endeavor a change. Wherefore let Counsels of safety and stability take place,
that a Princes interest may stand firm against all assaults of unexpected
accidents.

Section XXXVIII.
It has been judged a Maxim in Policy, that to head faction is agreeable to
one aspiring to sovereignty, but not to one possessed of it. Also that to
uphold division is the way to subdue a people, but not to hold them in firm
obedience, when subbu'd. Machiavel shows the inconvenience that arises to a
Prince by holding a people under his Government divided into factions, because
he will be inclined (as all by nature are) to take part in any thing that is
divided, and to be pleased more with this then with that party, whereupon the
other is discontented. And he brings in a pertinent story, That in the year
1501. a Gentleman sent by the King of France into Italy, to cause restitution
of certain lost Towns to the Florentines, finding in every one of those
Fortresses men, who, when they came to visit him, said, that they were of such
a faction, much blamed their division, saying, that in France, if one of the
Kings subjects should say he were of the Kings party, he should be punished,
because such a speech would signify no less then that there were in the
Country people enemies to the King; whereas the King wills that all those
Towns be his friends, and united within themselves. Let me rehearse the
Counsel of our late Sovereign to His Majesty that now is -- Take heed of
abetting any Faction, or applying to any public discriminations in matters of
Religion, contrary to what is in your own judgment, and the Churches well
settled. Your partial adhering as head to any one side, gains you not so great
advantages in some men's hearts, who are prone to be of their Kings Religion, as
it loses you in others, who think themselves and their profession first
despised, then persecuted by you. Take such a course as may either with
calmnesse and charity quite remove the seeming differences and offenses by
impartiality; or so order affairs in point of power, that you need not to fear
or flatter any Faction -- Now if the case were such, that one party were the
Kings only Confidents, and that the other cannot be faithful to him upon
immutable grounds and reasons, then policy would advise him so to order things
in point of power, that he need not fear nor flatter the adverse party. But it
is evident that the Presbyterians love the King, and Kingly Government, and
account themselves happy in His Majesty's clemency, allowing them a just and
inoffensive liberty in certain matters of Conscience. It is also evident to all
impartial Judgments, that his Majesty's calmness and charity may remove the
seeming differencies, and offenses on their part. They are ready to comply with
Episcopacy regulated, and Liturgy corrected; and they prefer union by
accommodation before Toleration with Division.

Section XXXIX.
If it be objected, that the King by carrying an even hand between both parties
will insure neither, for both will remain dissatisfied; I reply, this argument
were of force, if the differences must remain uncompounded, and the parties
publicly divided into two opposite societies; but we lay this for a
groundwork, that these twain are to be made one as to public communion in
divine worship, and to an agreement in one common interest relating both to the
Protestant Religion and to this Kingdom, which His Majesty's wisdom may
accomplish by a prudent disposing of those things which indifferently belong to
both, and wherein they both agree; and in diverse things that are peculiar to
this or that side, he may gratify the one and the other with moderation, as
when the favors vouchsafed to the one are not injurious to the others peace:
In which case indeed, here may remain men of different persuasions, but not of
divided parties and interests. Besides, if some on either hand should become
turbulent, and cry we will have all or none, yet the greater number, yea the
main body of either side may be found of calmer judgments and affections, who
together with a multitude of wise and well minded persons that are indifferent
between both persuasions, would cause the violent ones to keep within bounds.
And as many of those passionate men as have any judgment will discern, that
they are without hope of prevailing, and disadvantage themselves by opposing
the common interest and quiet of the Nation.

Section XL.
His Majesty is a great King, he is King indeed, and reigns in great power over
a willing people. He has in his hands the joint stock or common interest of
the whole Nation, Neither of these grand parties can subsist without him; and
this gives him assurance, that they are and must be both his. It is manifest
that his interest has gotten the pre-eminence over all partial interests, as
indeed it ought. For if the Prince be not in this regard transscendent, he is
ready to be laid low. Wise men inform us, that a Prince by adhering to one
Faction, may in time lift it up above his own Imperial interest, which will be
forced to give way to it as the lesser to the greater. And the prime leaders of
the potent Faction will sway more then the Prince himself. They will become
arrogant, unthankful, and boundless in their ambitious designs. It is
observed of Henry the Third of France, that he would be taken into the League
with the Princes of his own Kingdom to root out the Protestants, and after
awhile the same League was turned against him. A Prince may be so entangled,
that he shall not know how to wind out of those ways wherein he has so far
engaged himself; neither shall he be able to turn himself to the necessity of
his own affairs as new accidents arise. Then is a Prince truly potent when he
has all particular Factions lying at his feet, and can compel them to live in
peace with one another. This is the potency of our Sovereign Lord this day. For
he is alone, and there is none besides him, on whom the Nation can have any
stable dependence. Wherefore let His Majesty's high concernments be the primam
mobile to carry about all the inferior Orbs in our political world.

Section XLI.
His Majesty has gained his peoples hearts, and is glorious in their eyes, and
by his continued clemency he will not fail to hold them fast to himself. He
desires to govern well, and they desire to be well governed, and seek no
greater liberty. In some tender points of Conscience they wait upon his
indulgence, and are willing to close with uniformity, not in rigor, but in
some convenient latitude and relaxation: There is an yielding that is no way
abject, but generous and advantageous, a Princely condescension, whereby a King
becomes more absolute, and may have what he will from his loving subjects. And
they will no less fear him then love him, as knowing both his goodness and his
greatness. For he is great indeed to whom the hearts of three Nations are
linked; and it is morally impossible that so vast a people should at once be
lost to a King who continues to deserve well of them, and to make them his
favorites. And then what person or party shall dare to slight his Government,
whose interest and influence is of so large extent?

XLII.
There is a saying, which by many has been taken up for a proverb. No Bishop,
no King. I do not well understand the rise of this saying, and therefore dare
not speak in derogation of their judgments who were the Authors of it. But upon
the matter it self, I crave leave to make this modest Animadversion. And first,
it is some degrading to the transcendent interest of Sovereignty, to affix unto
it a necessity of any one partial interest for its support: for independency
and self-substence, without leaning upon any Party, is a Prince his strength
and glory. Also it makes that Party over-confident, and its opposite too
despondent. Such sayings as import a Princes necessary dependence on any
particular Party, may in the mouths of subjects be too presumptuous, and in the
mouth of a Prince too unwary. But of this particular I dare not so speak, in as
much as I know not its rise and reason. Only this I humbly conceive, that the
coalition of Episcopacy and Presbytery, sets forth a Bishop in conjunction with
Presbyters, of no less dependence on the sovereign, and of more influence on
the people, then a Bishop having sole jurisdiction can have in the present age.

Section XLIII.
As concerning the Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom, who for the greater
part are said to favor Prelacy, They cannot in reason be offended at such a
regulated Episcopacy, when they shall behold its order and harmony, and
tendency to a general peace. It seems agreeable to their Nobleness, to affect a
comely and venerable Order in the Church for the honor of Religion. And let
them judge whether the Worship of God be more holy and reverend for those many
Gesticulations and various postures enterchangeably used in parts of divine
Service that are of the same kind, and require equal Reverence. Whether a
grave habit of civil decency for a Minister, is less decent in sacred
Administrations then certain other Vestments which some scruple, as conceiving
that holiness is placed in them? Whether a Church settled by limited Episcopacy,
cannot attain to its due veneration without the Hierarchical dominion and
splendour: The reduction of absolute Prelacy to Episcopal presidency here
desired, may concern the Nobility and Gentry as well as others. For as others
may be oppressed, so these may be overtopped. Excessive power is commonly
exercised beyond their intentions, that are eager to set it up. And they that
thought only of crushing a party offensive to them, may at length find
themselves obnoxious, or at least neglected and undervalued. On the other side,
they have little cause to fear that which is commonly so much dreaded, namely
the excessive rigor of discipline from a president Bishop, and grave
Presbyters jointly governing. For it is supposed that no act of Discipline
shall be exercised against or besides the Laws of the Land, which cannot be
made without consent of the Nobles and Commons in Parliament.

Section XLIV.
Let the Episcopal Clergy admit an address to themselves touching their own
concernments: Peradventure they either suspect or disdain the counsel of one
that may seem an adversary; but whatever they apprehend, it is the counsel of
one who with his whole heart desires that they may not miscarry, who accounts
them too precious to belost to their brethren, if they will permit themselves
upon any reasonable terms to be gained; who would gladly walk with them by the
same Rule in things received in common, which are sufficient for Christian
concord, and should be so acknowledged by all that mind the things of Christ
more then their own things. Were I a true hater of that Party, or a right
Phanatick, I should wish for their violent irruption upon the Presbyterians
even as vehemently as now I pursue the design of peace; and I verily think my
reasoning, however it takes with them, will convince them of my good intention:
if they decline moderate counsels, and resolve to run high, they may attain to
a lofty standing; howbeit they will always stand on a pinnacle: In a little time
they have greatly enlarged their borders and lengthened their cords; it were
good that now they should strengthen their stakes, and make good their ground:
By moderation only can they be established. Some may say in their hearts, The
bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn stones; the Sycomores are
cut down, but we will change them into Cedars. Indeed their advantage is well
known; nevertheless let them consider their constant strength, and accordingly
limit their hopes; for this is an high point of wisdom. Let them that have
gotten a victory use it wisely, and take care that they lose it not in hope of
a greater. The issue of things often times has proved unfortunate to those that
have waxed insolent and unreasonable upon unexpected successes. There is not a
greater error then to refuse terms of Agreement that are proffered by a Party
which cannot be rooted out, but will be always considerable either as friends
or enemies, especially when those terms do comprise some part of their victory
that should accept them. Let the Episcopal Clergy observe the spirit of the
Nation, and the condition of the Times, that they may rightly comprehend the
measure of their own hopes. The English are a generous Nation, and as they
delight in the Majesty and Glory of their King, so also in the splendid
condition of subordinate Governors, that their manner of living be in some
sort conformable to the dignity and opulency of the Nation: Accordingly they
seem to take pleasure that the Ecclesiastical State be upheld by a fair Revenue
and competent Dignity, yet with moderation: For if the Clergy do rise to
Princely or Lordly wealth and power; they may become the envy of the Nobility
and Gentry: Let them remember, they stand by Grace, not by their own strength,
but by their Prince His Favor. The Nation in general may be taken with a grave
and masculine decency in all Sacred things suitable to their spiritual Majesty;
but I make a Question whether in this noontide of the Gospel they will fall in
love with excessive gaudiness, pompous shows, and various affected gestures in
Sacred Administrations; and not rather esteem them vanities too much detracting
from the dignity and purity of Gospel Worship. In this noontide of the Gospel
the Bishops cannot magnify their Office but by other courses then what were
taken in former and darker times. Mere formalities will no longer dazzle our
eyes: We shall think they have work of an higher nature, then to look only to
the observation of outward Forms, and Rites, ann Ceremonies: they must make a
nearer approach to the Presbyterian practice in the constant Preaching of the
Word, in the strict observation of the Lords Day, in keeping a true watch over
the Flock, and in correcting the real scandals that break forth in men's
conversations: And if they walk in these paths, the Prelatists and
Presbyterians will not be far asunder. Perhaps the friends of Prelacy may
imagine, that in this coalition Presbytery may at length undermine Episcopacy;
but reason shows that Episcopacy will stand more firm in conjunction with
Presbytery, then by it self alone.

In the body natural there is some predominant humor, as sanguine, choleric,
melancholy, or phlegmatic; yet none of these do subsist alone without the
mixture of the rest in a due temperament. In like manner the Body
Ecclesiastical may be of several complexions or constitutions, as Episcopal, or
Presbyterial, according to the predominant quality. Now if the Presbyterian
Churches would become more firm and stable by the superintendency of one grave
President, (and the truth is, in all Presbyteries there appears some
Episcopacy either formal or vertual) so an Episcopal Church may be judged more
firm and stable by a Bishops superintendency in consociation with assistant
Presbyters. And to remove the fear of the encroachments of Presbytery, it is
easy to discern, that Episcopacy if it contains it self within moderate
bounds, will be always in this National Church the predominant quality.

In the Conclusion of this Discourse let me offer these few Essays concerning
the paths of peace.

Section XLV.
The glorifying and pleasing of the highest Potentate and universal Monarch,
and the eternal happiness of immortal precious souls, are the most noble and
blessed ends of Government. Let his Majesty's Reign be happy and glorious in
attaining these ends. A Christian King esteems it the excellency of his regal
Power to hold and manage it as the servant of Jesus Christ, to be a Protector
of the true Church, the Body of Christ the Lambs wife, for whose redemption
Christ dyed, and for whose gathering and perfecting, the world is continued. It
is the Character of this true Church, to make the holy Scriptures the perfect
rule of their faith and life, to worship God in spirit and in truth, according
to the power and spiritual worship of the Gospel, to walk by the rule of the
new Creature in spiritual mortification and crucifixion to the world, to study
holiness in sincerity, to strive to advance it in themselves and others, and
to have influence upon others unto sound knowledge, faith, humility,
godliness, justice, temperance, charity. The true Church lies in the middle
between two extremes, Formalists and Fanatics. They are of circumspect and
regular walking, no way forward in attempting or desiring alterations in a
civil State. A Prince does hold them in obedience under a double bond. For they
know they must needs be subject not only for wrath, but for conscience sake.
Indeed we will not conceal, that in lawful ways they assert that liberty which
is settled by the known Laws and fundamental Constitutions, the maintaining
whereof is the Princ's as much as the Peoples safety.

Section XLVI.
That being the happiest polity that is founded in true Religion, and most
fully suited to men's everlasting concernments, it greatly behooves Governors to
mark and avoid those things which bring Religion into contempt, and tend to the
increase of Atheism and infidelity. The many various Sects and absurd opinions
and fancies, and pretended Revelations of these latter times, have much
lessened the reverence of Religion in England. This is a great evil, and much
observed and decryed by the present times. There is another evil no less
injurious to the honor and estimation of Christian piety, to wit, Ceremonial
strictness with real profaneness, or at the most but lukewarmness in the real
part of Religion. And this is the true state of the Papacy, by occasion whereof
Atheists have so abounded in Italy. Machiavel observes in his time, that
Christianity was no where less honored then in Rome, which is the pretended
Head thereof. Let this evil be seen, prevented and remedied, that the sacred
name of the Church be given to a society not carnal, but truly spiritual,
according to that of the Apostle, We are the Circumcision which worship God in
the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.

Section XLVII.
It is the pre-eminence of His Majesty, as General Bishop of the Land, (for so
He is in a political sense) to visit His people of all ranks by His prudent
inspection: And it is worthy of His chiefest care and search to know whether
every Pastor be resident with his own Flock, and does constantly on every
Sabbath teach them the good Knowledge of God; what Pluralists do seize upon
several Congregations, thrusting or barring out laborious Ministers, and
leaving the sheep in the hands of one who is a mere mercinary, and cares not
for them; whether Preaching in Cathedral Churches be more frequent since the
reviving of Deans and Chapters then before, when those places were supplied by
one or two stipendiary Ministers; whether the Precincts of Cathedrals be the
purest parts of the Land, and the Members thereof the purest parts of the
Clergy, as in reason they ought to be. In all His Majesty's superintendency
there is nothing of greater moment, then to provide that the Order and Frame of
Ecclesiastics have not a tendency to make the superior Clergy proud and
covetous, and the inferior poor and vicious.

Section XLVIII.
A good Constitution or Frame of Ecclesiastical Polity is incomparably more
available to produce good effects, then good Canons or good Governors can be
where the Constitution is naught: For in such a state good Canons and good
Governors will not be able to reform abuses and correct scandals, and promote
the true end of Church Discipline.

In the Trent-Council the Papalins or the Popes Creatures held this for a
maxim, That the Decrees of Reformation could not diminish the profits of the
Court of Rome, as long as the Authority of the Apostolic See was not
impaired. The Council being ended, and the Decrees coming to be ratified by the
Pope, and the Officers of the Court representing their losses and prejudices by
the Ratification, and the Pope thereby perplexed, and the Cardinals divided in
their Opinions, one Bishop, a man well conversant in Court Affairs, said, That
he could not choose but wonder at this great fear, concerning the confirmation
of the Decrees, which he saw did arise without reason; for that Laws have no
power but what is given them by him that Governs; That the Pope by his
Exposition might give them a larger or a stricter sense; yea, and contrary to
that which the words do import, That he might ordain a particular Congregation
for expounding the Council, and affectually provide that none should be able to
allege the Decrees in prejudice of the Court. The Pope was satisfied with
these reasons, being persuaded that it would fall out as the Bishop had said:
And so the Decrees of Reformation proved of no effect to reform the enormities
of the Court of Rome: By this it appears, that new Laws and Decrees work little
where a corrupt Frame remains still in force. If in such a state of things
good men promoted to Government should do their utmost to rule well, they are
no more able to reform the Churches committed to them, then the two Cato's to
reform the Roman Commonwealth, when it was wholly corrupted and out of frame.
Beside, in a corrupt frame of Polity there are these two great evils; the one,
that good men will soon degenerate; the other, that bad men led by ambition and
avarice, will by Arts proper to the times more easily get promotions: and a
good Prince shall see it and not know how to help it. That Polity, whether
Civil or Eccesiastical, is well constituted, that in its frame is apt to bridle
humane desires; but that is ill constituted which lets loose the reins to
appetite. No function or calling is exempted from the corruption that is in the
world through lust. And the grandeur of this world is not more perilous to any
then to Ecclesiastical persons.

Section XLIX.
It is a singular excellency in any frame of Polity, that the power of doing
good be very ample, and that a power to hurt be as much contracted and
restrained as the ends of Government will permit: And verily no wise and
gracious persons would willingly be tempted with a power to hurt, if they be
sufficiently empowered to do good without it: Besides, it is an odious power,
and makes the Office hateful. Now the way to this happy Order of things is
obvious. Let not severe Laws and Canons, concerning things disputable and
unnecessary, which may ensnare the consciences of godly, orthodox and peaceable
persons, remain in force. The most zealous assertors and rigid imposers of
Ceremonies acknowledge, that they are not necessary parts of Worship: the
declaring, That holiness is not to be placed in them, is their best defense
against the charge of will worship. Therefore to suspend and silence able and
painful Ministers, to vex and punish other godly Christians that cannot submit
to those Ceremonies, is to procure much evil without a benefit to countervail
it. A power of doing much harm and little good, is unhappily placed in any sort
of men, but especially in Christ's spiritual officers, who according to the
Apostles words, have received authority from the Lord, for edification, and not
for destruction.

Section L.
The most renowned Politician observes, that those Kingdoms, Republics, and
sects of Religions subsist longest, that are often renewed or brought back to
their first beginnings. For the beginnings of all these must needs contain some
goodness in them, by means whereof they rise to their first reputation and
increase. Now in process of time that goodness will be overgrown by corruption;
and unless something happen to reduce it to the just mark, those Societies must
needs be destroyed. And touching Religions, he proves these Reformations
necessary by the example of the Roman Religion, saying, -- If it had not been
reduced again to its principles by St. Francis, and St. Dominick, it would have
been quite defaced. For these by their poverty, and imitation of Christ's life,
made a new impression thereof in men's minds, which was quite blotted out
thence, and their new rules were so powerful, and are now the cause that the
dishonesty of the Prelates and Heads of Religion do not ruin it, partly by
their living in poverty, and partly by the credit they have in confessing the
people and preaching to them. -- Indeed this Author does not hit the mark, (and
no marvel) touching the true principles of Christianity, and right imitation of
Christ, the reviving whereof he ascribes to those two popish Saints; but his
reason of Religion in general is solid and excellent, and his instances in
particular are right and sound, being applied (as they are) to the upholding of
the popish Religion. As for Religion truly Christian, the way to preserve it in
its power and glory, is frequently to reduce it to its first beginnings; for
then was its goodness most eminent. The primitive spirit of the Christian
Church was a spirit of power and glory, and the primitive order was most
spiritual and powerful. Let Christ's holy Institutions, let Apostolical precept
and practice be the pattern of our Reformation. What sound Protestant will deny
the holy Scriptures to be a perfect rule of all divine Institutions? To them we
appeal, by them would we stand or fall; and they mention no Ministers of the
Gospel, that were not Bishops ruling the flock. But in pursuance of peace,
touching the matter of Episcopacy, the moderate Presbyterians are willing to
descend to the times lower by one degree, and to come to the Ages next
following the Scripture-times, and to accept what they do present unto us, to
wit, a President-Bishop ruling in consort with Presbyters, and Officer not of
an other Order then Presbyters, but of an higher degree in the same Order. We
appeal to those times concerning this matter. And they that admire and almost
adore antiquity should not deny our just appeal.

And wherein stands the power and glory of the Church militant? Does it stand
in the pompous shows of Ceremonious worship, with the glistering furniture
thereof, in the secular dignities and jurisdictions of the higher rank of
Ecclesiastics, in the implicit faith of the Laics, and in a formal
uniformity in the outside of Religion? Or in the powerful preaching of the
Gospel by able Ministers of the New Testament, in the lively and spiritual
manner of prayer, in the dispensation of Sacraments after a manner most
effectual to the increase of knowledge, faith, and virtue, in the exercise of
discipline to correct all contumacious disobedience against the known laws of
Christ our King and Lawgiver, and all performed in a comely order with a grave
and sober decency? Let all unprejudiced minds give judgment; which of these
two different states of Religion does most express the Gospel-ministration,
which is called the ministration of the Spirit, and is incomparably more
glorious and powerful, then the Mosaical dispensation with all its outward and
visible splendour. Let them also judge which of these two is most conformable to
the state of the primitive times, wherein the Christian Church, not by an arm
of flesh and the wisdom of this world, but by weapons mighty through God, as
the Evangelical doctrine and discipline, the holiness of believers, the
constancy of Martyrs, overturned the Kingdom of Satan, and advanced the Kingdom
of Christ, where Satan's Throne was, in opposition to the power of the Roman
Empire, the wisdom of the learned Heathens, the counsels of Politicians, the
potency of ancient Customs, the inveterate prejudice of all sorts of people;
and lastly, in opposition to the Devil reigning and raging in them all.
Wherefore let us mind the true way of restoring the Christian Religion to its
primitive power and glory.

Section LI.
It is a happy frame and order, when things are settled for general
satisfaction, that none or very few of the serious people desire an alteration,
but all, or most of them dread it; as also when things are settled for
stability, that none, who have a will to it, can encompass an alteration. It is
a happy thing to light upon the way that leads to this satisfaction, and to
this stability. In religion the way of general satisfaction is not to gratify
the humor and appetite of one or more parties, but to secure the consciences
of the judicious and sober minded in general. For such on all sides will sway
most for continuance; and if they be satisfied, intemperate and unquiet spirits
would quickly be out of breath in their rash attempts. Likewise the way of
stability, that none may succesfully project a change, is to prevent men's
running into extremes on either hand. For when one extreme prevails, a change
easily follows. In this case it fares with the Church as with civil States. A
principality heightened into Tyranny, tumbles down into Anarchy, and a
Republic too much cherishing popular extravagancies lifts up a tyranny. Now
the way to prevent extremes, is either to choose moderate spirits, or else a
ballancing number of the opposite parties to the managing of public affairs.
In which election a Prince does not appear as a Neuter, but as a moderator and
true Governor, that has the command of all interests.

Section LII.
And now having pursued Peace to the utmost of my small ability in these
pacifick Discourses, I hope this diligent search after the knowledge of good and
evil in this kind will not be judged an eating of the forbidden fruit, an
ambitious and bold inquiry into things not to be made known. For it is not a
curious or presumptuous intruding into the Counsels of Princes, and secrets of
Government; but a modest and sober deliberation upon things open and manifest,
and of public inquisition and discourse. Besides, it is an extraordinary time,
wherein there are great thoughts, yea great searchings of heart in men of all
degrees and all persuasions. It is true, that this Nation is not erecting a new
Kingdom, nor laying new foundations of Government; yet it is no less true, that
this restoration is as it were life from the dead, and we are in some sort
beginning the world anew. It is a notable Epoch, or period of time, giving
opportunity to cut off excesses, to make up defects, and to make crooked things
straight, before we be fixed and engaged in particular ways, from which though
never so incenvenient, we may not be able to draw back or turn aside. It is
affirmed by one of piercing knowledge in affairs of this nature, that it is a
profitable order in a Commonwealth, for any one to propose what is for the
public good. Surely the Kingdom cannot suffer by the proposals of the meanest
persons, when they touch not upon the fundamental Constitution, nor disturb
public peace and order. This Discourse offers no disturbance to such Forms and
Orders as have attained a quiet stated posture in these times. The Laws have
made some alteration in things of former use and practice, as the Act for
abolishing the high Commission. The times have made more alterations in men's
minds and ways; and his Majesty has observed a necessity, or at least
expediency of some alterations, whereby the minds of men may be composed, and
the peace of the Church established, declaring -- That he has not the least
doubt but the present Bishops will think, that the Concessions made by him to
allay the present Distempers, are very just and reasonable.

Lastly, The scope of this Treatise does justify and defend it self, whereof
the bare narration is a full Vindication. For the sum of the whole matter is to
persuade a turning from the advancement of a partial Interest, and a turning to
the obvious and easy way of giving general satisfaction to all those that
acknowledge the Church of England to be a true Church, and are willing to abide
in her Communion.

FINIS.
An Advertisment to the Reader.
THere are lately Printed twenty one Sermons Preached upon several occasions;
By Edward Reynolds, D. in Divinity, and Bishop of Norwich, in quarto; None of
which are contained in his large Volume: And are to be sold at the Rose and
Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1661.


