Self-Imployment IN SECRET; CONTAINING I. Evidences upon Self-Examination. II.
Thoughts upon Painful Afflictions. III. Memorials for Practice.
Left under the Handwriting of that Learned and Reverend Divine, Mr. John
Corbet, Late of CHICHESTER. With a Prefatory Epistle of Mr. John How.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, in
Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel, 1681

THE PREFACE.
THE Character of this Holy Servant of Christ, is already given by an every-way
suitable In his Funeral-Sermon.
Hand, in what Part it lay open to the Observation of others. His more
Interior Portrai^ture, which is contained in these Papers, was (as it could
only be) drawn by Himself.

Why it is now exposed to public view, there is no need to be scrupulously
careful in giving an Account. It must be acknowledged there is usually with the
Holiest Men, a modest shyness of Communicating these privacies of their own
Souls. Their Inner Man does show its own Face with the more difficulty, by how
much it is more beautiful, and worthy to be beheld. And so it was with this
excellent Person as his Inscriptions upon these Papers show, [The State of my
Own Soul] and [Qotes for my Self] signifying their intended Use, was that of a
Mirror to represent himself to his own Eye, not to other Men's.

Yet this Aversion (though great) has not been always Invincible, or such as
no Reasons to the contrary could oversway. What are the Psalms of David, and
sundry Memoires of Holy Men in Scripture, that were remotest from Ostentation
and vain Glory, but records of the most secret Dispositions and Motions of the
hidden man of the Heart, made public for the instruction of their own, and
succeeding Ages. As also the other published Meditations, and Soliloquies, of
some of the greatest Worthies in the Christian Church, must be understood to
have had the same Pious Design. Nor, has a generous Benignity, in some
Heathens, permitted them to Ingross to themselves, or envy to the World those
pleasant Sensations of their own Minds, which they thought might be some way
Instructive and Useful to other Men. As that Marcus Antoni^^
Renowned Philosopher and Emperor is instance, that scrupled not to Write and
leave behind him for this purpose, Twelve Books concerning his own Life.

The thing cannot be Culpable if the Design be Innocent, which will in great
part be discernable in the manner of doing it, when it is with unaffected
simplicity, and without studied Disguise: As we commend a Picture, not so much
for its being Specious, as that it is like the Face. So have good Men in giving
Accounts of themselves not spared to put in the Distempers, and Disaffections
of their Spirits, that are as great Blemishes and Deformities, as a Wart or
Mole on the Face; which the faithful Pencil must as curiously Express, as the
greatest Decencies.

However, if this Publication be Praiseworthy, nothing is to be Arrogated to
the Author, as, if it be thought Blameable; nothing is to be Derogated. For
though the Work it self (which carries its sufficient Praise with it) be owing
entirely to him (or rather to the Grace of God in him) the making it public,
is from the advice, and desire of some Friends, willing to impart what was once
most private, for a public Good.

It is but the Dissection of his Soul; less to be regretted by Friends, when he
is now cut of Sight, and much more Useful, than that of his lately Pained Body.

And as Anatomy discovers all the curious Contexture of our Bodily Fabric:
Here are ^^ived Representations of Faith, Love, an Heavenly Mind, of Humility,
Meekness, Self-denial, Entire Resignedness to the will of God, in their First
and Continued Motions: with whatever Parts, and Principles besides, Compose the
whole Frame of the New Creature, as if we could perceive with our Eyes, how the
Blood in an Humane Body, Circulates through all the Vains and Arteries, how the
Heart Beats, the Spirits Fly to and fro, and how each Nerve, Tendon, Fiber, and
Muscle, perform their several Operations. Here it may be seen how an Heart
touched from above, Works, and Tends thitherward, how it depresses it self in
Humiliation, Dilates it self in Love, Exalts it self in Praise, Submits it self
under Chastenings, how it Draws in its Refreshings, and Succors as there is
need.

To many who have seen so Steady, Uniform, and Amiable a Course and Tenor of
of Life; How grateful is it to behold the secret Motions of those inward latent
Principles, from whence all proceeded? Though Some others, would look no
further than the Advantages in external Respects that accrue by it. As though
Some content themselves to know by a Clock, the Hour of the Day, or partake the
beneficial use of some rarer Engine; The more curious, especially, any that
design Imitation, and to Compose Some like thing, would be much more Gratified,
if through some pellucid Enclosure, they could behold all the inward Work, and
observe how every Wheel, Spring, or Movement, perform their several Parts, and
Offices toward that Common Use.

What is here Presented, as it may be of great Usefulness to all that seriously
design the Christian Life: so it has a special Use for such as design it not,
and who think there is no such thing.

It may peculiarly serve to Convince such, as are willing to think as Ill as
they can of the Calling, and Office of the Ministry, that there are Some that
serve the Lord in that Work, who do not Study such Subjects as are here
Exemplified, only to frame Discourses of them, wherewith to entertain the
People for an Hour; but for their own Use and Practice too. That do Live the
things they Teach. And Eat of the Food they prepare for others. That are in
good earnest, and most intent to Save themselves, and them that hear them: And
do really venture their own Souls upon the same Bottom, upon which they would
persuade their Hearers to venture theirs, taking all possible Care, Left when
they Preach to others, they should themselves be Cast-awayes.

The very Opinion that we Preach, only for Forms sake, and to keep up the
Custom, and believe, or regard not what we our selves say (as well as the thing
it self) is no small (nor perhaps uncommon) hinderance to the success of
Preaching at this Day. It is hard to be serious in Hearing, what I think, he is
not serious in himself who Preaches it. If I Apprehend he Trifles, it is a great
Temptation to me, to do so too! You may see this Worthy Man considered the
Gospel, as a Gospel of Salvation, and not only Taught, but Used it accordingly.
How Sollicitous was he to ground Substantially, and Strongly, his Hope of
Eternal Life! How warily did he feel his Way; and Labor to Understand, and
Know Practically, upon what Terms he might safely appear before his Judge!

To them who do not so, this ought to be taken for a Reprehensive Example, and
may be very Directive to them that do.

That it may attain its proper Ends, is the serious Prayer of

One desirous to promote the Common Salvation, John How.

Mr. CORBET's ENQUIRY INTO THE State of his Soul. His Introduction.
IN order to peace of conscience and assurance of my good estate toward God,
it must in reason be supposed, that I may rightly understand the marks of
sincerity set down in Gods Word, as also the predominant inclination and
motions of my own soul; and that I may be so far assured of my right
understanding of the things aforesaid, as to have no reasonable ground of
doubting thereof. For I have no other ordinary way to know my sincerity in
order to the said peace and assurance, but to examine, it according to my best
understanding by the marks thereof set down in Gods Word. In this
Self-Examination it is requisite that I use all Diligence and Impartiality with
Constancy; and that I earnestly pray for Gods assistance in it, and heartily
offer my self to his search, as David did, Psalm. 139. 23. Wherefore if upon the
most impartial and diligent search, that I can make according to the best of my
understanding, together with earnest and constant Prayer to God to assist me
therein as in my greatest concern; it does most rationally appear to me, that
the predominant inclination and motions of my soul are agreeable to the marks
of sincerity set down in Gods Word, then my conscience doing its office aright
is to judge for me accordingly, viz. that I am sincere. And in this judgment I
am to acquiesce, because it is the Judgment of Gods Agent and Minister, which
he has set up within me to judge under him of my internal state, according to
his Law, by which he himself does and will judge me. God has the same aspect
upon the Soul, which Conscience his Vicegerent has, as it from time to time,
or ordinarily judges not against him or without him, but under him and
according to his judgment, either acquitting or condemning. To this purpose the
Apostle speaks, 1 John 3. 20, 21. If our heart condemn us, God is greater
than our Heart and knows all things; If our heart condemn us not, then have
we confidence toward God.

The State of my Own SOUL According to the strictest Search that I can make.
Psalm. 139. 23, 24. Search me O Lord and know my Heart, try me and know my
Thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in me and lead me in the way
Everlasting, Amen.
The following particulars were set down in December. Jan. Feb. An. 1663.
AS far as I am able to discern my heart and ways, I have chosen the Lord for
my portion, I take up my rest in him and not in the Creature. To love and fear
and admire and bless him, and to have communion with him is my chief joy. And
the eternal Vision and Fruition of God is my great hope. I would not only have
God herafter, but here in this World for my chief good. He is even now better
than all the World.

I come to God by Jesus Christ. And as I believe in God, I believe also in
Christ, and rejoice and glory in him, and acknowledging my own sinfulness and
unworthyness, I rest entirely on him as the ground of my justification to Life,
and of all favor and acceptance with God.

I receive Christ as my Lord, and give up my self to him. I let him into my
heart by Faith. I esteem him precious and am willing to suffer the loss of all,
that I may win him; I desire to know him in the Power of his Death and
Resurrection, and am much grieved, that I do so weakly experience that power,
and feel it no more operative in me in my dying to sin and (...) World, and in
living and walking in the Spirit.

I do not cease to lament the more heinous sins of my Life, and cannot forbear
the continual imploring of the pardon of them. I do not return again to them,
and I resolve never so to do; I watch and pray and strive against all sin, but
especially against those sins, to which I am more especially inclined; my
conflicts are daily, and am put hard to it. But I do not yield up my self to
any sin, nor lie down in it, yea I do not suffer sinful Cogitations to lodge in
me. Howbeit I am many times much discomposed, damped in Spirit, deadned in
Duty, distracted in my Studies, and molested and hindered every way by the sin
that dwells in me. But I resolve that sin shall have no rest in my soul, and
that I will never enjoy it. Though I cannot keep sin out of my heart, yet it
does not reign in my mortal body, nor do I yield my members to the service of
it.

I would fulfill all Righteousness, and owe nothing to any man but love. I had a
hundred - sold rather suffer wrong than do wrong.

It was said of Christ, that no guile was found in his mouth, and of the
faithful Company that followed the Lamb, that no guile was found in their
mouth. And that it may be so with me I endeavor with my whole heart.

I trust God with my chiefest outward Concernment, even with that, about which
I am most Solicitous, and wherein to be satisfied is of great moment to me, for
that it has as great an influence upon my Spirit, as any outward thing has.
And I do believe that God will provide for me herein, or otherwise supply the
want of it. My earnest desire of God is, that my outward condition may be so
stated by his Wife and Gracious providence, as I may be least exposed to
temptation, and best disposed, and furthered unto Duty.

I have an Inclination to seek Self, particularly in vain applause, and that in
Religious services; and herein I have been highly guilty, but I shame my self
for it before God, and I am willing to be satisfied in the Praise, that comes
from him alone; and I trust through his Grace, that I can deny my self in
matter of Reputation to do his Will.

I love the Lord Jesus Christ and all his Saints. The broken estate of the
Church, especialy by intestine Evils, is a great trouble to my Spirit. The
scandals of professors I am truly grieved at, and I would not by their
weaknesses seek to excuse my own faults, or an advancing of my own Virtues.

I have no settled Bitterness and Revenge against my Enemies, but I love, pity
and pray for them. As concerning God's Enemies I am more provoked, but I would
not be inhumane or cruel against them. For the wrath of Man works not the
Righteousness of God.

I contemn none, I would not imbitter the Spirit of any. I would answer all
obligations of courtesy, as accounting it a Righteousness. I would not insult
over the weakness of any; and this is partly out of Natural tenderness and
Moral Considerations, and I find that the goodness, and kindness of God, the
meekness gentleness of Christ has here unto made Impression upon me.

I find upon the review of my Life past according to the clearest judgment,
that I can make, that I have not gone backward, but proceeded forward, in the
ways of Godliness. And this increase I reckon not by sudden fits now and then
hapening, but by the main progress of the work in the total Sum.

I have been grieved that I am no more elevated in the hope of Heaven, and that
I cannot attain to a longing desire to be gone hence, and to be there with
Christ. I have labored to raise up my heart, and have had enlargement, even
when deadness and flatness had been upon me. I think with my self sometimes,
were my Evidences clear for Heaven, I would exalt to be gone hence this very
hour; but I find not this readiness at all times.

When I have had a good enterprise in hand for God's Glory and some public
benefit, I watched against Vanity of mind and vain Glory in carrying it on; and
I desire purely to aim at God' s Glory, and to be satisfied with my reward in
him. And I take heed, that I forget not my Mortality, when I am pursuing that
design; but I would fain bring up my self to this frame, to be contented to be
taken hence in the midst of it, as judging that I shall be no looser by my
removal, and God cannot stand in need of that Service.

Lord forgive my inordinate self-love, which has disturbed the Actings of pure
Charity in diverse passages of Moment. For self-love in my sensitive appetite
has had motions contrary to the Love of God and my Neighbor. Nevertheless my
Judgment has disallowed it, and I have for the most part acted against it, and
for that, which the Love of God and my Neighbor did command.

O Lord forgive my ten thousand Talents. I come to Jesus Christ, who has made
satisfaction, and lay this heavy reckoning to his account. Lord forgive my
Iniquity, for it is exceeding great.

These following passages were set down, March 4. An. 1675.
UPon the Review of the foregoing Evidences, after Twelve Years, I find through
Grace the same abiding in me, and more and more Rooted. And some particulars
which did make me more to doubt of my good Estate, I find to be since that time
in a greater degree vanquished.

I have done what in me lies, to call to remembrance all my remarkable Sins,
from my Childhood and Youth till now: And as far as I can Judge, I have Repented
of them, both generally and particularly. And I now Repent of them all, from
the bottom of my Heart, with a self Abhorrence, if I can know my own Heart by
the strictest, and most impartial search that I can make.

Upon the best Judgment that I can make of the Nature of Sin, and the Frame of
my own Heart, and Course of Life; I know no Sin lying upon me, which does not
consist with habitual Repentance, and with the hatred of Sin, and with an
unseigned consent that God be my Savior, and Sanctifier, and with the Loving
of God above all.

The Mercy of God toward me, in the prolonging of the day of Grace, in the
strivings of his Spirit, in his Chastisements, in the checks of Conscience, in
the Recovery of my Soul out of Distempers and Backslidings, does greatly affect
my Heart, and strongly engage me to Him; and does often call upon my Soul, and
all that is within me, to Bless his holy Name.

Though my Spiritual growth be very low and slow; yet to this present time, I
have not grown Worse, but Better, speaking of growth in the whole space, or
greater spaces of my time past, and not every particular Day.

By Prayer, and Endeavors long continued, I have in some measure overcome a
special very Sinful Distemster of Mind, and gained the contrary Temper against
a natural Propensity.

Though my Faith in Christ be weak, yet to have part in his Promises, I am
ready to part with all that is dear in this World, and I have no hope of
Happiness, but in Christ.

Though I have had doubtings touching the promised Salvation, yet I know that
as to my own Felicity, I prize nothing more than that Salvation, being the
glorifying, and enjoying God for Ever, and I Embrace it as my best Good. I Love
Christ, whom I have not seen, and I am affected toward him, as toward a
person, who taught and did the most excellent Things, and promised a most
excellent State to his Followers, and purchased their Redemption at the dearest
rate.

I am heartily grieved for loving God so little, yet I am sure, This I Wrote
according to a full persuasion at that time. I Love nothing more than God, and
in my esteem and choice, I prefer the Spiritual, Divine, and Heavenly Life,
imcomparably before the Carnal, Animal, Earthly Life. And this esteem and
choice, is made good by performance in Ordinary.

I Love to Love God. And I desire this Love not only as an evidence of my
Salvation, but for it self. I had much rather have a heart to love him
perfectly than to have all the Riches, Honors and Pleasures of this World.

My Conscience bears me witness that in the present exercise of my ministry, I
have no self-end of Worldly Advantage, or Reputation among Men, or any Interest
of the Carnal Mind: but if the Command of Christ, and the necessities of Souls
did not oblige me to this Service, I should gladly retire to Privacy and
Solitude.

My Temporal Estate is mean and low, yet I am Contented with it, and humbly
bless God for what I have. I Live in as narrow a compass for Expenses, as I
can, that I might have something to give to the Poor, and to be helpful to
those that are in Need, according to my Ability. And as God has required of us
to Love Mercy; and our Savior has said, It is a more Blessed thing to give,
than to receive; so I have more pleasure in giving a Portion to the Needy, as
far as my mean Estate will bear, than in laying out for the Delight of my own
Sense, or Worldly Conveniences. And this proceeds not from a conceit of Merit
in any thing that I can do, but from a Love to please God, and do Good.

Though I have a good Knowledge about the premises, yet I am apt to waver about
the Conclusion. And though I apprehend the Evidences of my Sincerity to be
clear, yet a Timorousness remains in me.

Though I have not as yet overcome the Fear of Death, yet I am sure that the
unwillingness that is in me to Dye, is not that I might enjoy the pleasures of
Sense, or any Gratification of the Animal Life.

I feel in my self a burden of Sin and Corruption, much Sensuality,
Earthliness, Selfishness; nevertheless I judge, there is that Predominancy of
Love to God, and Holiness, which I hope is unmoveably seated in my Soul;
whereupon I hope that it cannot be, that I should be cast out of his blissful
Presence into that Perdition, which is a State of immutable hatred of him. And
I apprehend that the most horrid, and hellish state of Hell it self, lies in
its Everlasting, and utmost Enmity against God.

Thus I am searching and trying my heart and ways, and what I find by my self
I write down, that I may have it by me for my relief in an Evil day, and an
hour of temptation. For I must expect the time, when by weakness or anguish of
Body or mind I may be disabled to recollect my self, and duly to state the case
of my own Soul. And the Powers of Nature may so fail, that I may have but a
very weak Apprehension of what I have to do in this great Concernment. I am
warned by the parable of the ten Virgins to look to it, that together with my
Lamp I may have Oil in my Vessel, and be ready to enter in with the Bridegroom
at his coming.

Lord be Merciful to me a sinner, to me one of the chiefest of Sinners. O my
exceeding sinfulness! O the Riches of thy goodness toward me! Should not I
loath my Carnal self, should not I grieve for grieving thy Spirit? I desire to
do so, I hope to do so. Do what thou will with me, so thou pardon, and Sanctify
and save me. I am afraid of thy judgments, I can endure but little, O how weak
is my heart! Nevertheless I will endeavor, and I trust through Grace that that
I shall be enabled to bear thy correcting hand. Thou art Wise and Holy, Thou
art Merciful and Gracious, Thou retainest not thine Anger for ever, because
thou delightest in mercy. O spare me, and consider me, and deal with me not
after my Sins, and reward me not after mine Iniquities; but as far as the East
is from the West, so far remove my transgressions from me; comfort me and
satisfy me, for I wait for relief from thee. Whatsoever befalls me, I will put
my trust in thee. I believe, O Lord help my unbelief. Lord increase my Faith. O
my God I lie at thy feet and Mercy, I put my sinful distressed Soul into the
hands of Jesus Christ, and I rest on the Covenant of grace made in him, as all
my Salvation, and all my desire, Amen.

More Observations touching the State of my Soul. March the 27th. 1676.
O The wonderful mercy of God toward me a most vile and ^^etched sinner, in
convincing, rebuking and awakening me unto a self-abhorrence, and an utter
detestation of my sins, my special sins; so that I cannot be reconciled to
them. Since the more powerful awakening of my Conscience I never have, and am
persuaded never shall return to those former sins which made a breach between
God and my Soul. I hate every sin impartially. A sinful state is in my internal
sense an horrid and an hellish state.

I find my self firmly resolved to give up any part of my worldly Estate, that
I shall be found to hold to another Wrong. If it be doubtful where the Right
lies, I am resolved first to endeavor a Reference to Conscientious knowing
Men; and if that cannot be fitly had, to submit it to a Legal Trial, with a
desire that Right may take place. I know not that I hold any (...) Estate, or
that there is any doubt of my Legal Right to any thing that I possess: but I
have made supposition for the Trial of my own Spirit.

When I had a Father or Mother, I would have trusted them, to defend or deliver
me from any Evil, from which it was in their power to defend or deliver me. In
the same manner I now trust to my loving Wife. Why then should I be suspicious
of God, in whose Hands I am? Why should I doubt of his Dear Love, and Tender
Mercy toward me, or call in question his good Will to preserve, or deliver me
from any Affliction, that would be too hard for me to bear, or to sustain, and
comfort me under any Suffering, which he sees fit to inflict upon me?

If when I was more careless, and forgetful of God, and when I ventured upon
breaches with him, he was pleased to convince, me of my Sin, and to rouse me up
to a greater Care, and to make me more earnest for Pardon, and for Healing, and
for all needful Grace, and more thoroughly Resolved to follow him throughout;
surely he will not refuse me in my Addresses* for more Grace, and a more
confirmed State of Holiness. If I follow on to know the Lord, I shall know him,
and see his Salvation.

Though Death and Judgment be of dreadful Consideration; though God be Holy and
Just, and I be vile, and guilty, and worthy of eternal Perdition; yet why
should I doubt of Mercy and Forgiveness, and of Support and Comfort in the
Darkness of Death, and of Justification in the Day of Judgment, from a Merciful
and Faithful God, through a Powerful Redeemer and Advocate; seeing as a humble
Penitent Believer, I lie at his Feet, and cast my self into his Arms, and wait
on his Grace, and am resolved to keep his Ways, and never to return to Folly.

I more desire to be Sincere, than to know that I am so. The comfort and
delight of being and doing Good, I fet not so much by, as the very being and
doing Good. To Love God, and to be Conformable to him, is that, which I most of
all desire should be in me.

I will trust God in his Ways. I will strive against an over-timorous
solicitude about my own Salvation, and will commit my self to God, who is the
infinite Goodness and Love, and I will lie down, and take my Repose therein.

I am grieved, when I observe, or hear of the Scandals of some Professors, and
the disorders of those, that are in Charity to bejudged Sincere, and the
follies, and frailties of the more Sincere and Upright. And it humbles me, by
causing me to reflect upon my self, and my own Faultiness, and Weakness, and
Proness to Offend; and it makes me more to desire the Heavenly Society, and to
be among the Spirits of Just Men made perfect.

My Sins of Sensuality in every kind and degree, I search out, and Repent of. I
am kept by Grace, from gross Sins of this sort. In the Gratifications of Sense,
which are Lawful in general, I Scrupulously dread Excess, and unduness of
Circumstances. How earnestly do I desire an absolute Purity!

All Envy, Unrighteousness, Uncharitableness, Uncompassionateness,
Undutifulness, and base Selfishness, which is the Root of all, I have Seen,
Lamented, and Abhorred. The motions and stirrings of Mind, that way are
suppressed and dislodged: I will never give way thereunto.

Self-applauding, Self-seeking in matter of Praise and Honor before Men, I
strive against. I desire to be as Sincere to another Reputation, as to my own.
I would not value others, by their regard to me, but by their true Worth. I
would be contented to be little in the Eyes of others. This I unfeignedly
desire and endeavor, and I hope that I have it in some good Degree.

All my Omissions, and Negligences in the Work of the Ministry, in Preaching,
in Personal private Application I bewail, and heartily resolve upon more
diligence and faithfulness.

Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant, O Lord, but Remember me, and Spare
me according to thy great Mercy in Christ Jesus the great Propitiation for Sin,
in whom I desire to be found, and under the Covert of whose Wing I stand, that
I may be Saved from thy Wrath, and enjoy thy Peace, and live in thy Presence,
where is fullness of Joy, and Pleasures for evermore.

Feb. 22. 1678/9
GOd will never Damn in Hell any Soul, that has the habitual, predominant Love
of God, though culpably Remiss, and otherwise Sinful, while he remains such;
yea Hell, and such Love of God are inconsistent.

I Love the Holy Will of God with all my Heart, and hate all Disconformity to
it. Nothing is more Grievous to me, than to* displease God, and nothing is more
Pleasant to me, than to please him.

I strive after Christian perfection.

I labor to be unbottomed of Self, to dye to Self-advancement, to
Self-gloriation, and to all selfish joys, and to live wholly in, and to God,
and to have Self swallowed up in the Love of Him.

I labor in the work of Self-resignation, that my Will may be confined to, and
included in the Will of God.

I strive after Patience in its perfect Work, and do find a willingness to
yield to Gods Will in my Chastisements. I still Justify God, and do not
entertain an hard Thought of his Dealing with me, but conclude that it is
altogether Holy, Just, and Good, and for the best.

I feel my Sin a greater burden to me, than my Affliction. I had rather have
Health of Soul in a Body full of Pain, than Health and Ease of Body with a
Distempered Soul. And the Sense of my great Sinfulness disposes me to
Patience, under my Afflicting Infirmities of Body.

I narrowly watch my Heart, that it may not lodge, or admit a vain Thought.
When I am surprised with Vanity, I suppress it as soon as I observe it.

I am very fearful of offending in a Word. When on the Sudden, and by
Incogitancy I have spoken a Word, which upon Second Thoughts is doubtful to me,
though I had not such doubt in the speaking of it, I have been much perplexed
about it, and have engaged my self to a greater Watchfulness.

Aug. 1680.
SUrely Christ has my Heart. Whenever I swerve from Christ in a Thought,
Word, or Deed, it is by inadvertency and surprizal against my fixed Principle;
and I have great Regret at it, and Loath my self for it.

If I were out of all fear o damnation I had rather be holy then unholy; and I
take pains and use Gods means to be holy in opposition to the flesh, and I make
it my chief care. And I do this, because I make the enjoying of God my chief
good, and rather than lose the hope thereof I would willingly undergo the
sufferings of this Life, which lead to that blessed fruition, not excepting the
fiery-trial it self.

Aug. 1680.
I Hope, when the end comes, my God will say to me, dear Child thy warfare is
accompilshed, thine iniquity is pardoned, enter thou into my Rest. Therefore I
will both hope and quietly wait for the Salvation of God. I will hope to the
end. Strengthen me O my God that I faint not.

October the 4. 1680.
I Have no design, I pursue nothing contrary to God's interest: but all my
designs and pursuits are for God and Holiness. I think I am sure of this, if I
be sure of any thing. My great aim and care and labor is to cleanse my self
from all filthyness of Flesh and Spirit, and to perfect Holiness in the fear of
God.

To whom I yield my self a Servant, to obey, his Servant I am. But I do not
yield my self a Servant to sin, to obey it; but I do yield my self a Servant to
God to obey Him. The design and business of my life is to do his Will.

THE WORKINGS OF MY HEART IN MY AFFLICTION. Aug. the 5th. 1680.
THe Will of God in laying this affliction upon me, I unfeignedly approve as
Holy, Just, and Good; And I am unfeignedly willing to bear the Affliction, as
it is an Evil laid upon me by his Will, till the time come, in which he thinks
fit to remove it. I watch and pray and strive that I may not give way to a
repining thought against his holy Hand. In this point the^ Spirit is willing,
but the Flesh is weak. My mind does really consent to Gods dispensation and to
my submission, and being most agreeable to his wise and gracious Government,
and most conducing to my Salvation. But my sensitive part, and my mind also as
it is in part unrenewed, weak and sinful does greatly reluctate, so that I am
put hard to it, and I must say, I am willing, Lord help my unwillingness. I
have not observed in the several days that a thought of direct or positive
coffeehouse or vexatious commotion of mind has been admitted by me,
nevertheless I see to my grief, that I fall exceeding short of that quietness,
contentation, and cheerfulness in my condition, and of that sreeness of Self
Resignation to Gods Will, that I desire, and his goodness calls for.

I wrestle with God by importunate prayer, that this thorn in the flesh might
depart from me; that this distemper might be removed, or so mitigated, that I
might be in some comfortable ease, and get a more cheerful freedom in doing my
duty. Yet I would not wrest this relief out of his hands unseasonably, and
without his good Will, and his Blessing. I would wait his time, and desire to
have* it with his love and favor, and with a saving benefit. And so my earnest
desire thereof is limited with submission to his holy Will. Yet I find that
this submission is no easy matter, but that I must take pains with my own
heart, and that it is God, who must work my heart to it, and keep under the
flesh, which is always ready to rebel. It is hard to be willing to bear my
wearisom condition. And O how weak is my heart, and ready to sink, if it be not
upheld by a strength above my own! O let His Grace be sufficient for me, and
let His Power be made perfect in my weakness!

I feel my self bettered in the inner man by this chastening. It has furthered
Mortification and Self-denial, and done much to the breaking of the heart of
Pride, and to bring me on toward that more perfect Self-Examination, for which
I labor. It has much deadned the World to me, and my desire to the World. It
makes me know in earnest the Emptiness of all creatures, and how great my
concern is in God. It drives me close to him, and makes me to fetch all my
comforts from him. I see of how little value all outward contentments are; and
not only in my present afflicted state, but if I were at ease and in full
prosperity. The sense of this benefit to my soul is the great means of bringing
my Will to that weak degree of submission to God's Will, to which I have
atatined.

O that I could live more by Faith in this trying affliction. I endeavor to
impress upon my Soul those arguments, which the Scripture affords for Patience
and Long-suffering with joyfulness. But this will not do the work, unless the
Spirit of Faith and Patience be given from him, from whom comes down every good
and perfect gift. I pray, I cry to my Father, that he would give me the Holy
Spirit according to his Gracious promise, that I might show forth the Power of
his grace, and that I might not dishonor him, nor discourage his Children, nor
reproach Religion by my weakness. And in my bearing of it well, my Reputation
is nothing regarded by me in comparison of the honor of Christ. Him I desire
to Gloryfy both in my obedience and patience.

I do not love God the less because of his correcting hand upon me. As my
necessities drive me, so His Love draws me, and my Love brings me to him. I
look to him as my Father. And shall I not honor my Father, and give him
reverence, when I am chastned of him? The Lord is my Portion says my Soul,
therefore will I hope in him. I will wait for the Lord, who hides his face, I
will look after him; He retains not his Anger for ever, because he delights
in Mercy. Therefore he will turn again, and have compassion upon me. If he kill
me I will put my trust in him: for he will not cast me off for ever, if I
cleave to him with Faith unseigned, but even through Death it self will he save
me. He will bring me forth to the Light, and I shall behold his Righteousness.
When I say, what shall I do in case of such or such troublesome or dangerous
consequents, my heart answers, be not careful, God will provide, I will leave
it to him.

Besides a Natural desire of ease and rest, the sense of the temptation which I
am liable in this condition, makes me importunate to be delivered from it. I
feellingly know the weakness of my own heart, and I am not ignorant of the
Devil's malice and subtilty, and how he will make the fiercest assaults, where
I am weakest. Whereupon I tremble in my self for fear of being tempted, and
shaken and greatly amazed. And upon this ground respecting my Souls safety, I
judge an humble and patient importunity with God for the removing or moderating
of my distemper, to be my Duty. Yet to keep me from being over solicitous and
anxious in this thing, I consider that God does govern and limit all our
temptations, and will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able, but
will with the temptation open a way for us to escape. Nevertheless I find, that
I do much offend by too great a vehemence of desire to be delivered from this
grievous burden without due submission; also by too much disquietness and
dejection, when after some expectation of a benefit by that means, I perceive
that my hope thereof is like to be frustrated. The Lord help me to carry it
better, and as I ought to do, and keep my mind in its right frame.

My business under this Affliction is to be careful about my own part, and to
leave God's part to his care. My part is to do my duty, and to get the benefit
of the Affliction, but to remove it is God's part. Let me perform what belongs
to me, and what belongs to God, he will certainly perform in his own time and
way. The Sum of my duty is Graciously to comply with the dispensation and to
behave my self suitably to it, and to please and honor God under it.
Accordingly in this I Labor, and in this way I seek for comfort. And first I
justify God and judge my self. God exercises his own holiness and justice in
this Castigation. His justice and holiness I approve, and accept the punishment
of mine Iniquity, and exercise an hatred of the Sin, for which I now smart. I
will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, and I
repent with a self-abhorrence; And I lie in the dust at his feet, and wait on
him, until that he have Mercy upon me, and I am glad to receive Mercy upon his
terms.

I have fled for refuge to lay hold on the hope that is set before me. I do
most heartily take God for my portion, and I had rather Live the divine Life in
Conformity to him and Fellowship with him, here in the firstfruits of the
Spirit, and hereafter in the fullness of Glory, than live in the fullness of the
delights and Contentments, that belong to the Natural Life upon earth in a way
of Sin, and allienation from the Life of God. I do most heartily take Christ
according to the offer of the Gospel, not only to be justified from my Sins and
delivered from the wrath to come by his merits; but also to be Sanctified by
his Word and Spirit, and to be governed by his Laws, and to be brought by him
unto the aforesaid fellowship with God. And my Life and practice in the main
Bent and ordinary course thereof is according to this choice, in a daily
walking not by sight and sense, but by faith; not after the flesh, but after
the Spirit, in setting my heart not on earthly, but on heavenly things. I cast
off vain desires and hopes, and my expectations of good are from God according
to the tenor of his promises. When I walk in darkness, and see no light of
outward comfort, humane helps, and visible means, I will trust in the Name of
the Lord, and stay my self upon my God. I strive with my own spirit to subdue
it to the will of God; And in whatsoever I am tempted to be most impatient,
therein I labor most for patience. My great care is that I may not sin against
my God in any kind, and more especially that I may not sin by a rebellious
impatience under his correcting hand. In this present distress I look upon my
self, as being upon my Trial, and therefore I look more diligently, to my
behavior in it. Now a price is put into my hand for the proof of my sincerity,
and I labor accordingly to make good proof of it. I am willing to serve God in
pain and patience, else I were unworthy of so good a Master. I am willing to be
conformable to Christ in suffering, else I were unworthy of him. But here I
must say again, the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak; Lord help
my unwillingness. I am called to deny all the pleasures of sense and to mind
them no more; and I am heartily willing of it. I am called to declare to others
by the exercise of Faith and Patience the Righteonsness of the Lord, and his
tender Mercies, and great Faithfulness, and that he alone* is Alsufficent. O
that the power of his grace may be thus magnified in me! This is the fruit of
the Afflictions, that I look after; And in this will I labor more and more.
And through the help of Divine Grace I will not doubt of a good Issue, while I
am found in the Way of Duty. To them, who by Patient Continuance in Well-doing
seek for Glory and Honor and Immortality, God, who cannot lie, has promised
to give Eternal Life.

I am desirous to be delivered from this Affliction (if it be the Will of the
Lord) upon this account, that I might have a more notable proof of my freer
choosing of God for my Portion, when I am not thus driven to Him, as now,
because I can go no where else for Comfort; also of my freer turning from the
World, even then when I am capable of enjoying it. To have such a proof of
these things in my self, I should take for a great Advantage, and be greatly
Thankful. Nevertheless, for the quieting of my Mind, I consider that my present
Afflicted State does better secure me from Temptations, which might draw my
Heart from God to the Love of the World; in which respect, Prosperity is far
more Dangerous than Adversity. Moreover, my present State gives me Advantage
for a higher proof of the Grace that is in me, and of the Power of Divine Aid,
upholding me in a Life of Faith and Patience, by which I Live upon God alone,
when Worldly Comfort fails me, and by which I am enabled to overcome things
Grievous to Nature, and to get above, not only the Pleasures, but the sharp
Pains of Sense, and to Live, and endure with little natural, or bodily Rest.
Also, it gives me the advantage of exercising a resolved, willing
Self-Resignation to God in this Dispensation, which is harsh to Flesh and
Blood, and a resting in Hope, when there is no present appearance of help, and
a waiting, and looking for the Lord, who hides his Face, and a cleaving to him*
by constant Love, though he does fore Bruise me. If I continue in the exercise
of these Graces, they will give me a Good Proof, that the Heavenly Nature is in
me, and will make way for great Assurance toward God, and full Consolation in
Christ Jesus. And yet further, I trust that I have long before this distress,
chosen God for my Portion, and drawn off my Heart from the flattering Vanities
of this World. And I know, that in this Distress, I do not come to Him
constrainedly, or merely as driven. For I delight to draw nigh to Him, to pour
out my Heart before Him in Prayer and Meditation. My Meditation of Him is Sweet
to my Soul, and I do not Love to be Diverted from it. And when my Distemper is
any whit more easy, it Works unto a Rejoicing in Him. And it is for enlargement
of Heart toward Him, that I chiefly desire bodily Ease and Rest.

Hear my Cry O God, Attend unto my Prayer. I will Cry unto Thee, when my Heart
is overwhelmed: Lead me to the Rock that is higher than I.

God the infinite Goodness and Love, will not cast off a poor Soul that lies at
his Feet, and cries for the Help of his Grace, when it is ready to sink under
the Burden, and is willing to have Mercy upon his Terms.

Therefore, I will still cry to Him, and look for Him, and lean upon Him, and
will not depart from Him by an Evil Heart of Unbelief. This I resolve in his
Strength. Lord Strengthen me unto the perfect Work of Patience.

Lord, I heartily consent that Thou should use me as Thou please, so Thou
use me, as one of those that Love thy Name. Disposal is an effect of Propriety,
but it is always a regular, and a loving Disposal of the Subjects of his
Government. O! Deal favorably with thy Servant. Thou Know my Frame,
Remenber that I am but Dust.

The Lord will Perfect that which concerns me: Thy Mercy O Lord Endures for
Ever. Forsake not the Works of thine own Hands. O Lord, without Thee I can do
nothing. Therefore I must Beg, and Thou will give Grace sufficient, without
which I cannot Subsist. For therein is the Life of my Spirit.

For Ever, O Lord, Thy Word is settled in Heaven.

Pity me O Lord, as a Father Pittyeth his Children.

Comfort me O Lord, as one whom his Mother Comfort.

The Lord will wait, that He may be Gracious unto you: For the Lord is a God of
Judgment; Blessed are all they, that wait for Him.

Can I be in a better Hand? As my professed Judgment is concerning Gods
Proceeding, so let me stand Affected toward it.

NOTES FOR My Self.
KEep thy Heart with all Diligence; for out of it are the Issues of Life.

Death and Life are in the Power of the Tongue.

Entertain not a sensual Imagination for a Moment; and give not way to the
least Glance of the Eye toward Vanity.

Be always expecting some Trouble or other, to interrupt thy outward Peace and
Rest.

Never expect any thing from the World; and when it offers thee any thing that
is good for thee, receive it; but catch not at it greedily.

Be always mindful what thou may do for thine own and others Salvation, in
every Instant, upon every Occasion.

Dye daily.

In arguing with another, watch against every inordinate Heat of Passion, loud
Speaking, and every rash Word.

If any neglect or slight thee, care not for it, yet observe it.

Any Matter of Trial to thee, reckon among thy gains.

Take no delight of Sense, but in a manifest and direct Subserviency to
Spiritual Ends; and use not that delight to irritate, but to allay Sensuality.

When a sensual Imagination or Passion breaks in, then excite a Taste of the
Powers of the World to come; and delay not to recover the Divine Frame.

What thou doubtest, do not.

In thy Actions, consider not only what is lawful, but what is best in the
present Circumstances; and do that.

In every Delight of Sense, watch against all Brutishness.

When thou art in Company, where the Talk is but vain, watch to put in a Word,
that may be to Edification.

If any despise thee, do not bear a grudge against him for it. And be not
offended with any, merely because they do not honor thee.

When thou art framing Excuses, take heed of speaking an Untruth, or
approaching near to it; lest in avoiding the Offense of Man, thou make too bold
with God. Take heed of this also, when thou would speak pleasingly, and avoid
Offense in speaking.

Use no Recreation or Delight of Sense, but what thou can at that very time
desire of God, that it may be sanctified to spiritual Ends.

When thou hear that another has spoken any thing to thy Injury or
Disparagement, beware of a Transport of Anger, that thou speak not harshly or
unadvisedly against Him, or too passionately for Self, or as too much concerned
for Self.

Uphold the Reputation of thy Colleague, or any that is joined with thee in
Service, as thou would thine own.

Watch against all secret Pleasure, in the lessening of another for advancing
thy self.

Pray heartily for the Success of thy Colleague and others, who perform the
same Service that thou art engaged in. And rejoice in whatsoever good is done
by them, as in what is done by thy self, and own it before Men.

Use not Animosity and Contention in any Matter, that may be brought to a good
Issue in the way of Peace.

Engage not hastily as a Party in a Difference between others; but reserve thy
self impartial, and uningaged, that thou may moderate between them.

Whilst thou lamentest thy Weakness in some Cases, and seek more Strength,
be sure to use that greater Strength in all other Cases, whereunto thou have
attained; and be not remiss or forgetful in any Duty, that is more facil to
thee: So shall thou have Comfort in thy willing Mind, and honest Care, and do
much toward the Attainment of that, which thou yet want, and reachest
after.

In the Time of Prayer, let no Business divert thee from it, that is not of
present Necessity.

When thou have an Opportunity of speaking a Word for the Good of another
Soul, defer not the doing of it till another time.

Watch against all bitter, and over-passionate Speeches against malignant
Opposers of the Truth. For Meckness of Spirit and Behavior, is more according
to Christ, than wrathful Zeal.

Be not transported with Passion against those Conformists, who are more sober
than many others; yet manifest too little Compassion to their suffering
Brethren. For even in the Regenerate, there is a Remainder of the Spirit of
Envy, Partiality, and Selfishness, and too much of Wrath, and Bitterness, and
other Parts of the Serpentine Nature, though in a mortifyed Degree. And we are
to yield Grains of Allowance, for the Temptations of Prejudice, Interest, etc.
to which good Men, as well as others, are obnoxious.

In thy Zeal against the Sins of others, be mindful of thine own exceeding
Sinfulness: Call to remembrance thy great Offenses, which though they be
unfeignedly repented of, give thee to understand what cause thou have to be
meek, and humble, and patient toward all Men.

Watch against the Motions of Pride and Hypocrisy, in the Presence of any
Person, whose Favor and Opinion thou much esteemest. What is Man that thou
should pass to be judged by Man's Judgment, or seek Applause from Man!

Be not discomposed about some petty Absurdities of Behavior, or little
Indecorums, or Over-sights: For so to be, is Pusillanimity.

When thou have conceived a dislike of any Person, his Ways, or Actions, or
do ill resent his Carriage toward thee; take heed, thou do not take any
secret Pleasure in the Foresight of Evil coming upon him; or in hearing or
observing any such Folly of his, as tends to his Reproach or Ruin, or notable
Damage.

If thou have fore-spoken the Calamity, or any Evil, that in Reason is like to
befall one, who does unadvisedly manage himself, and his Affairs, take heed of
wishing or willing, that the Evil should come to pass, lest thy Judgment or
Foresight should seem to be disparaged; yea, take heed of any Motion rising
toward such a Wish or Will.

My own exceeding Faultiness ingages me in seeing and hearing the Faults and
Follies of others, to pity them, rather than to rejoice or glory over them;
and to cover or lessen those Faults, rather than to aggravate, or display them.

The Mercy and Forgiveness, that I have found and hope for at the Lord's Hand,
ingages and disposes me to forgive Injuries and Abuses done to me. And I should
not think it much, that I, who am so sinful, should bear some Contumelies, or
Abuses from Men.

It is displeasing to me, to hear the Faults of others insisted on, whether
they be Matters of Folly and Inconsiderateness, or of Perverseness and Malice;
but especially if the Matter be not evident.

I find, that petty Damages and Injuries are apt to be Vexatious, especially
in a matter the Whole whereof is but Little; as in a litile Farm or Living.
Wherefore, I endeavor, that I be not surprised with a troublesome Appearance,
and consider the Moment of a thing, how light it is.

Abhor every Thought, Word, and Deed, which is contrary to Love, and tends to
the Hurt of others.

The more Men wrong thee, the more watchfully maintain thy Love toward them.

After thy public Ministrations in Prayer and Preaching, be not thoughtful or
much concerned, how Men like thy Performance; but be concerned for this, how
acceptable it is to God, and how effectual and successful to holy and saving
Means.

If God single me out for special great Suffering, I have no reason to judge
amiss of it: For such is the state of things in the World to come, that some
Individuals must of necessity suffer for the good of the People. And, Why not
I, as well as another? God is my Owner, and he may do with me, as with any
other, even as he pleases; and he is my Father, and he will use me well, and
make me sufficient Amends for all my Suffering; and I shall be no Loser, but an
exceeding Gainer thereby in the End.

In this present State of Trial, it is requisite that there be a sufficient
Difficulty and Hardship, for all those that shall be saved, to grapple with.

For all our Boasts of Free Will, unless there were some heavy Weights of
Sufferings cast by Providence into the Balance, to poise against our
Propensions to follow Lusts, and Pleasures, and Worldly Allurements, we should
never seriously set our selves to the severe and selfdenying Duties, which
belong to true Godliness.

To avoid Inconveniences to thy self, expose not any to Danger, whose Safety
thou art bound to provide for.

In all Accusations, whether public or private, when thou have made a
sufficient Defense, enter not into needless Matters for Ostentation, or such
further Vindication, as is not necessary, if thou stand in a slippery Place;
but lie at a close Guard, lest thou be entangled, or in some point
circumvented.

I will never wittingly and wilfully do amiss, by Commission or Omission, in a
greater or lesser Matter, because I shall too often do amiss, at least in
smaller Matters, through Ignorance, or Inadvertency, or Surprizal of Passion,
do what I can.

Watch every Opportunity to put in a savoury Word, for the good of a Soul, with
whom thou have occasion of Converse.

Remember thou have nothing of thine own, but all is the Lords; and accordingly
use all that thou have to no Carnal Interest, but to serve Him, as being wholly
devoted to Him.

Be as serious and hearty in thy Prayers to God for the Concerns of others, as
for thine own.

Watch against Selfishness, lest it work unto great Uncharitableness.

When thou have Evidences of thy Sincerity, which cannot in reason be
gainsaid, hold to them, and take Comfort in them; yet still endeavor by
Reviews, and further Searchings, to clear it more and more.

We keep our Evidences, by keeping our Graces in their Lively Exercise.

Fetch thy Comforts from Heaven, and not from Pleasures or Hopes here below.

Do not overvalue any Worth that is in thy self; but think it rather less than
more, than it is indeed.

If any slight thee, be neither dejected nor provoked.

Do not value Men according to their Esteem of thee, but according to their
true Worth.

Watch against the Expectation of hearing thine own Praise; and when such a
Thought arises, instantly suppress it.

When thou art commended, let not thy Thoughts dwell on it with Delight; but
let it be to thee as nothing.

Take heed of too great a Valuation of thine own Work, or Usefulness in thy
Place; and lay not too great a stress thereon.

When Friends out of Love overvalue thee, it concerns thee not to overvalue
thy self; nor to take more than thy due, though they give it.

Have a Habit of Compassion toward the Afflicted, firmly fixed in thee, that
the Motions thereof may be sutably stirred up on every Occasion.

Let an Abhorrence of any Content in another Sufferings, be deeply imprinted
on thee; that every Thought thereof may be prevented, or instantly suppressed:
Yea, hate all Disregard to another Misery.

Watch against all Eagerness, and immoderate Delight in Eating and Drinking;
and against minding any kind of Food, for the pleasing of the Sense. Come to
thy Meals not like a Bruit, but as becomes a Saint. Never terminate in the
sensitive Pleasure, but make use of it to raise thy Heart to God.

When thou have eaten so much, so that thou think more is not expedient, or
is better forborne than taken, proceed not to a Bit more, lest thou be entangled
or disturbed.

Still consider, Is this Act, I go about, agreeable to one that has Communion
with God? Will this Act promote Communion with God? Do I come to this Act, so
as to have Communion with God thereby promoted.

Seek the lawful Contentment of any that are about thee, as thou do thy own;
and be as glad to gratify them as thy self, so far as it is convenient for
them. Hate and shun all Motions of unworthy Selfishness: And see, that others
be sharers with thee in thy pleasant Things, and be not content to have them to
thy self alone.

Be not over sollicitous, for humouring thy self in sensitive Suavities, but
rather suspicious of it, and be abstemious from it.

Always mind and do the present Duty. Comply with the present Dispensation, and
make the most of it. Thy business is to please God, and God will provide for
thy Comfort.

Lay thy Heart to Rest in the Will of God. For there is no other Rest for the
Soul, to be thought on.

I will not indent with God for any good, but what is included in the Covenant
of Grace. I will expect no good but according to the Tenor of that Covenant,
which is all my Salvation, and all my Desire.

I am resolved that Pride shall not set me to Study, or Preach, or Pray, or
carry me on in any Service. If thoughts of Men-pleasing or Man's Applause, steal
in with my honest intentions, I will instantly cast them out, as soon as they
be discovered, and I will VVatch and Pray for the preventing of them. I will
Watch, when I go forth in my service for God, that Pride do not send me forth:
Men's Opinion of me shall be nothing with me, but the pleasing of God and the
doing of good, shall be my whole scope.

In performing Prayer, I am intent upon God, and his Hearing, and observing my
Thoughts and Words; and I earnestly purpose and strive against Thoughts about
men's observing and judging of my Performance. Nevertheless, I do find that
together with my sincere and earnest Intention directed to God, Thoughts of
Regard to Men's Esteem, and Judging, will too often thrust in, do what I can, so
as either to be pleased, or troubled, as I think they judge. These Thoughts
have greatly troubled my Spirit. Hereupon I consider, That a due Regard to
Expressions for Men's sake, that they be Affecting and not Offensive, is not
faulty but necessary; and therefore must be heeded. And I think that my
thoughts above men's judging have this intention at last chiefly, that my
Expressions be Affecting, and not Offensive, yet I am jealous of the mixture of
Corruption and Vanity. I earnestly endeavor to have my Heart so filled with
the Apprehension of God's infinite Majesty, and my Infinite Concernment in him,
that all Impertinent thoughts may be quite swallowed up. All designing and
endeavoring to please men for my own praise I do at that very time detest and
abandon, yea at that very time I am sure I do very little regard either the
Approbation and praise, or the disallowance and dispraise of those very
Persons, about whom my thoughts are apt to run out, as aforesaid. I do my
uttermost to prevent, restrain, and suppress all such thoughts, they are a
burden to me. There is scarce any thing that stirs within me, which has less
of my Will, than these thoughts have. There is scarce any thing, against which
I do more watch and pray and strive, than against these thoughts. And
whatsoever tincture of Vanity and Corruption be found in them, I am Heartily
sorry for it, I hate and loath it, and I hope that the merciful God will not
Impute it to me, to the rejecting of my Prayer or to any breach between him and
me.

I find that my very fear of this Evil, and desire to avoid it, does draw my
thoughts to it, as a man's great desire to sleep, and his fear that he shall not
sleep does commonly keep him waking.

These thoughts I abhor, not only before and after, but in the very time they
come in. And I strive with might and main against them. If God approve my
Service and own me in it, I shall be abundantly satisfied, though men (what
soever or how-many soever they be) should despise and loath it. On the
contrary, If men should never so highly approve it, I can never be satisfied,
if God do not accept and bless it. This I am sure of, if I be sure of any thing.

I discern that by care I have brought it to that pass, that my thoughts of
others present with me in prayer are not with regard to their praise^ which I
value not, but to what is fit to be done by me in that service, and to their
being affected with it.

I find I am prone to be anxiously scrupulous: yet I should consider that there
be insuitable weaknesses (as Impertinent thoughts) accompanying the best
Performances.

FINIS.
His WRITINGS Published are:
1. HIs History of Col. Massy's Military-Actions at and near Gloucester.

2. The Interest of England, 1st and 2d Part.

3. A Discourse of the Religion of England, asserting, That Reformed
Christianity, settled in its due Latitude, is the Stability and Advancement of
this Kingdom: In two Parts.

4. The Kingdom of God among Men: With a Discourse of Schism: and an Account of
himself about Conformity,

Books Printed for Thomas Parkhurst.
THe Art of Divine Meditation by Edmund Calamy late of Aldermanbury, London.

Mr. Thomas Wadsworth's Remains, with Remarkables of his Holy Life and Death.

There is Printing a Discourse of Mr. Nathaniel Vincent, of Self-Examination,
and Meditations on the Sacrament.

One Hundred Select Sermons of Thomas Horton, late of St. Hellens, London.

A Discourse of Actual Providence, by John Collings, D. D.

An Exposition on the Six First Chapters of the Revelations, by Charles Phelps.

Sermons of Grace and Temptation, by Thomas Froysel.

Ark of the Covenant by George Gelaspy.

A New-Years-Gift, by Thomas Lamb.

Christ Displayed, by Nathaniel Heywood.

Heaven or Hell, in a Good or Bad Conscience, by Nathaniel Vincent.

Incomparable Excellencies of God, in his Attributes and Word, by George
Swinnock.

Glimpse of Eternity, by Abram Coley.

An Exposition on the Assemblies Catechism, by Thomas Doolitle.

Another Exposition by Thomas Lie.

Another by Thomas Vincent.

Morning-Exercise against Popery, by sundry Ministers of the Gospel.

Four useful Discourses by Je^ Borough, Published by Matthe^ Mead.

Present State of New - England.

Husband-man's Companion, it diverse suitable Meditations, by Edward Bury.

Revival of Grace, by Henry Hurst.

Shepherdy Spiritualized, by John Wood.

Antidote against the Fear of Death, by Edward Bury.


