A COPY OF A Remonstrance LATELY DELIVERED IN TO THE ASSEMBLY. BY Thomas
Goodwin. Ierem: Buroughs. William Greenhill. William Bridge. Philip Nie.
Sidrach Simson. and William Carter.
Declaring the Grounds and Reasons of their declining to bring in to the
Assembly, their Model of Church Government.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1645.

To the READER.
THe Copy of this ensuing Remonstrance (for so I title it, as deeming it no
other) lately delivered in to the Assembly by the Dissenting Brethren, falling
under my view (by a divine providence) I endeavored a transcript thereof,
aiming at no other end but the reserving it by me for my private and particular
satisfaction. Since which time upon occasional converses with diverse of the
Presbyterian party, I have been an often eare-witnesse of many untrue and
unjust aspersions which reflected upon the Reverend Authors, as if the
Independants (so they are pleased to call them) could not, or durst not
(according to the demand of the Assembly) produce a Model and bring in thither,
such a Frame of Church Government with the Reasons and grounds thereof as they
contend for; or rather, that they had in their conceptions some Chima^ra, or
some Utopian Frame, which in the issue would prove either abortive or
ridiculous; and that therefore being privy to the weakness of their own
principles, they have res^^ted only, instead of a perfect Body, an airy, and
(to use some of their own words) a railing accusation against the Reverend
Assembly, intending nothing less then the product of a Completed Frame, and
nothing more than the cheating of the people, whom they know do expect such an
accomplished platform. These and the like undue bespatterings, ^asht from the
mouths of some whom I dare not but call Brethren, and that upon those who for
their personal endowments they themselves acknowledge to be both pious and
learned; and frequently hinted into the minds and thoughts of the godly and
well-affected of either part (who at present by reason thereof are at a loss
both in their judgments and expectations) coming within my hearing and
observation; I found (weighing the rational considerations exhibited in this
Remonstrance for their refusal to deliver in to the Assembly their Model of
Church Government, as was imposed on them) an irresistible dictate from my
conscience, to convert the Manuscript into a printed Copy. Wherein the
ingenious Reader may clearly perceive, and truly judge what was the direct
Remora that deterred them (contrary to their primary resolves) from doing that
which was required by the Assembly, and what likewise are their real
intentions for the future, namely, to let the Churches have the benefit of what
they have prepared to that purpose, which I am confident in as convenient a
time as is suitable to such a work, they will perfect and exhibit to open view.
As for the godly and learned Authors themselves, I humbly crave their pardon
that I have presumed without their knowledge to present this their Copy to the
world, professing that no sinister ends at all biased me: 'Twas only the
satisfying of my own Conscience, and my earnest desires that the truth and
candor of their cause, and their proceedings therein, may (notwithstanding the
besmearings that others endeavor to cast on both) be rightly resented by the
godly and judicious, that has swayed my resolutions: which ends if I attain, I
have enough.

December 12. 1644. We gave in Reasons of our dissenting, to this Assembly,
against the subordination of Synods, and they were committed to be answered and
brought in.
April 4. 1645. An Order was made by this Assembly, that the Brethren of this
Assembly, who have formerly entered their dissents to the Presbyteriall
Government, shall be a Committee to bring in the whole Frame of their
Judgments, concerning Church Government, in a body with their grounds and
Reasons.
It was also by this Assembly, lately imposed on us, to make report of what we
had done in the Committee.
HOw willing and ready we have been from the beginning of the Discussions in
this Reverend Assembly, to make known whatever we hold, concerning Church
government, as we have had public testimony in this Assembly, so we have
manifold instances and evidences of it; Witness that constant, free, and open
expressing our selves upon all occasions, and in all questions propounded to
the debate, with offers to give an open Account at any time, in what ever
should be asked us by any Brother. Our profferring diverse times to bring in
Propositions, stated to our sense for the dispute, and when we were made a
Committee to that purpose, in the point of Ordination, and did bring our
Judgments concerning it for a dispute, It was laid aside. And at another time,
when we ourselves brought in papers, giving the state of the question, about
that extraordinary way of Ordination, which were read, and returned back unto
us, it being publicly professed that that was not an allowed way and course
of this Assembly, for any of the Brethren to bring in papers, unless they were
made a Committee by the Assembly it self. And so we were prevented of doing the
like for time to come.

Likewise our frequent complainings of the stating of questions, so that we
could not fully argue for our Judgments, we being bound up to the questions as
stated by you. The usual answer to our Complaints heerin being, That the
Assembly sat not to argue the opinions of a few men, but that if we had any
thing to say to the assertion brought in, we might.

As also our earnest contending to have some questions ( which you all know are
the greatest and most fundamental points) fairly disputed and debated, is a
sufficient testimony of this our willingness. As in the entrance into the
dispute of Government, the first day, we pressed the handling of this, That
there is a platform of Government for the Churches, under the Gospel, laid down
in the Scripture, and desired to have discussed, what are the sure and certain
ways, whereby we may judge what of Government, is held forth Jure divino
therein, which should have been fundamental to all the disputes that were to
follow: and this was professedly laid aside by you, which therefore in none of
the subsequent debates, we could renew, and thus Arguments were cut off, It
being that great and necessary Medium, by which the particulars should be
confirmed, and in a manner, the whole controversy decided; the greatest
difference that were likely to grow betwixt us, being this, That the forms of
Government, you pretend to, and we deny, are asserted to be Jure divino.

In like manner that other next great question, about the entire power in
Congregations, that have a sufficient Presbytery for all Censures, which as it
is in order the first that presents it self for discussion (as was urged) so
also it is one of the greatest points in difference betwixt us and you: Yet the
debate of this was not only denied the first place in the dispute, but was to
this day declined by you; Although to have it argued was contended for by us,
and not by us only, but by many of those, that are for a subordinate
government thereof to Synods. And though earnest desires and motions for it
were renewed and inculcated, yet were they as often laid aside. Yea and this,
although it was once expressly commended by the grand Committee of the Honorable
Members of both Houses, joined with twelve Divines of the Assembly, to be next
disputed, as the best means, both of expedition, and of ending the Controversy.

And over and above all this, to argue this our willingness to dispute our
way, In the aforesaid Honorable Committee appointed by an Order of the
Honorable House of Commons, to find out ways, of accommodating different
Judgments in the Assembly, the Sub-Committee of Divines, consisting of two of
us, and four others, appointed by that Honorable Committee to prepare ways
and Propositions of Accommodation, brought in the main and most of what
practically we desired, and we therein added, That if such a liberty shall
seem in the wisdom of this Honorable Committee, to be so prejudicial to the
peace of the Church as not to be permitted, we humbly desire, the doctrinall
principles wherein we differ about Church Government, may be taken into serious
consideration, and some other way of accommodation in practice thought upon, as
shall seem fit to this Honorable Committee: and this was presented to that
Honorable Committee and those twelve of the Assembly, to be transmitted,
whether to the Honorable Houses, or the Assembly as they should think meet.

After this, when upon occasion of something brought in by one Brother, and
entertained, we took hold of that example, and one of us, with consent of the
rest, brought in seven Propositions, which contained matter of difference
betwixt us, professing, That if this Reverend Assembly would debate them, or
any one of them, we would bring in more, until we had brought in all the
Frame, and the Assembly themselves should pick and choose what they would
debate, and what not. But these Propositions were rejected with a refusal to
debate any one of them.

And after all this, though the main parts of the Presbyteriall government, had
been then voted by the Assembly, and sent up to the Honorable Houses (as,
namely, that about Ordination, and the Presbyteriall government over many
Congregations, as also concerning the Subordination of National, Provincial
and Classical Assemblies) and there was not much remaining about
Church Government, to be concluded in this Assembly: yet this Reverend Assembly
requiring, (by occasion of a book published, that reflected on these
proceedings, that we had no hand in, nor knowledge of) a whole Frame of
Government, with the grounds and reasons thereof, to be brought in by us, and
voted us heerto to be a Committee, we yielded our selves to be a Committee, to
bring in part by part, in like manner as the Presbyteriall Government was
brought into the Assembly, and disputed: but that was not accepted. And then it
being said, that there was something in Church Government, remaining
undiscussed, and unresolved; and it being further alleged that the Assembly
^ad not sent up all that which they had concluded, but meant to present an
entire Frame and Body to the Honorable Houses: And that we might take away all
occasions of any such jealousies that we were unwilling to discover what we
held (which were commonly in men's mouths abroad) we yielded to be a Committee,
to bring in the whole to this Assembly, though upon all the forementioned
disadvantages, and were purposed and resolved amongst our selves so to do, and
that in as convenient a time as a work of such a compass could, (in such a
manner as was proposed by you) be dispatched by us. And as in the debate about
making us a Committee, the Assembly would not declare (though pressed by us)
what they would do with that Model, and those Reasons we should bring in; so
the voting of what yet remained in Church Government, was hastened by you.

And when not long after, upon occasion of the debate of one particular point,
in which we differed from this Assembly, we moved it might be deferred, because
we should present our Judgments and Reasons about it, with the rest, (for
therein lay that which we accounted the favor of being made a Committee by
you) it was publicly answered, that therefore the Assembly should the rather
go on to the concluding of it, because we intended to bring it in; and before
we could dispatch that Body we intended, so as to report it unto you according
to your order; (the collection of the materials whereof, spent us two or three
months, and we could not obtain the liberty to bring in any thing but the
whole) this Assembly had presented to the Honorable Houses, as well what had
been sent up by pieces before, as what was since concluded, in one entire Frame.
By all which we perceived, that that which was the main end and use of
presenting such a Model to this Assembly, would be frustrated.

And furthermore, we having given in (as this Assembly knows) but two heads of
dissenting reasons: The one against the Presbyterial government over many
Congregations: The other against the subordination of Synods. By the success
of the latter we see, that this Assembly can assume the liberty (if it so
please) to reserve those we shall now present, unanswered, as they have done
those our dissenting Reasons against subordination of Synods, although it
contain a great and main part of that wherein we differ, as also is of all
other, of the greatest moment, both to this Church and State, and has been
given in to this Assembly ten months since, and their votes concerning these
Subordinations, as long since presented to the Honorable Houses, but have not
been answered by any reply brought in to this Assembly, and so not ready to
have been sent up to the Honorable Houses.

And if These we might now bring in, should be undertaken to be answered by
this Assembly, yet we still retain the sense of so much remediless prejudice,
by being bound from replying again, as does make us justly wary: we may for
ever lie under whatever misinterpretations may happen, (suppose but through
mistake of yours, or imperfection of our expression) without clearing our
meaning, and we may be bound up from further urging or driving home that
wherein the strength of any Argument lies, if the dint thereof should be
avoided by some specious diversion. And although our former Reasons given in
after dispute to both the Honorable Houses, according to their Order, were
therefore not our own, but to be disposed of according to their appointment;
yet what we should now give in, we conceive to be in our own power.

Upon these considerations we think that this Assembly has no cause now to
require a Report of us, nor will that our Report be of any use, seeing that
Reports are for Debates, and Debates are for Results to be sent up to the
Honorable Houses, who have already voted another form of Government then what
we shall present. However it may be of more use some other way, which by this
course may be prevented, And therefore we are resolved to wait for some further
opportunity, to improve what we have prepared.

FINIS.

