The point of CHURCH-UNITY AND SCHISM Discussed, BY A NONCONFORMIST With
respect to the Church-Divisions IN ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns at the
Lower end of Cheapside. 1679.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
Of the Church and its Polity.

WHat the Church is both in its invisible and visible state. The state of the
Church Catholic. The state of particular Churches, and their Pastors, Elders
or Bishops. Of the partition of Churches by local bounds. Of the Interests of
Bishops or Pastors in any assigned circuit of Ground. Of the association or
combination of Churches. Of a National Church. Of the Interest of Civil
Magistrates in the state of the Church. Of a Diocese and a Diocesan Bishop. Of
exercising the Ministry without Subordination to a Diocesan Bishop. No human
power may prejudice Christ's Interest in his Ministers or People. All have a
judgment of Discretion about their own acts.

CHAP. II.
Of true Church-Unity.

The names of Unity and Schism should be rightly applied. True Church-Unity is
the Unity of the Spirit; what is included therein. True Unity is primarily of
the Church in its mystical, secondarily in its visible state. Holy love is the
Life and Soul of this Unity. Church-Unity considered in three points. 1. In the
essentials and all weighty matters of Christian Faith and Life. 2. In the
essentials and integrals of Church State. 3. In the accidentals of Religion.
The different value of these different points of Unity. The Rule of Unity is
Gods Word. Of the Scriptures sufficiency as a Rule thereof. Of things left to
human determination, with the Pastors and Magistrates Interest therein. The
Rulers Wisdom in settling the right bounds of Unity. The burden of things
unnecessary not to be laid on the Churches. Unity of external order is
subservient to Faith and Holiness.

CHAP. III.
Of Schism truly so called.

Schism is the violation of the Unity of the Spirit. Separation and Schism are
not of equal extent. The violation of holy Love is the root of Schism. Schism
lies primarily in a breach made upon the Unity of the Church as mystical, and
secondarily as visible. The highest point of Schism against the Church as
visible, is that which is about the essentials and weighty matters of Christian
Faith and Life. How both Persons and Churches may be guilty of it. The next
point of Schism is about the essentials and integrals of Church state. This may
be either against the Catholic or a particular Church; Instances of both
kinds. The lowest point of Schism is about the accidentals of Religion. How any
are guilty or not guilty in this point. A preposterous valuation made of the
aforesaid different points, tends to Schism. The setting of other bounds of
Unity, than Gods word allows, is to make a breach upon it. Terms of Unity may
be allowed of God as to the Submitters, when they are not allowed as to the
Imposers. The danger of acting against conscience rationally doubting. It Is a
false Unity that is set up to the hindrance of Faith and Holiness; and not to
adhere to it is no Schism but Duty; Instances hereof. Of the right of drawing
together into new Congregations on such occasion. What endeavor of Reformation
is unlawful to Subjects. A difference between inimical separation and amicable
necessary Segregation. The objected inconveniences against the amicable
Segregation answered. The import of the Text, Romans 16. 17. opened.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Schisms that were in the more ancient times of the Church, and the
different case of the Nonconformists in these times.

Of the Donatists. Of the Novatians. Whether the case of the present
Nonconformists be the same with the case of these or any others anciently
reputed Schismatics. The case of such Nonconformists, as be more remote from
accommodation with the Established Order. The case of such of them, as be more
disposed to accommodation. An Answer to objections against relaxing the terms
of Conformity. Of diverse other remarkable Schisms in the ancient times; and
the Nonconformists case different from theirs. An appeal to Antiquity and to
our Superiors.

CHAP. V.
Of making a right estimate of the guilt of Schism, and something more of the
right way to Unity.

The great abuse of the name Schism, and the bad consequence thereof. The
degree of the Schism to be duly considered for making an equal judgment of the
guilt thereof. Examples of Schismatical animosities in Worthies of ancient
times. Charity in censuring thence inferred. True Unity is founded in true
Holiness, and promoted by impartiality and equity toward all real Christians,
and by the due exercise of true Church Discipline, and by removing the snares
of Division; and as by the equity and charity of Superiors, so by the humility
and due submission of Inferiors. A Question considered about the
warrantableness of submission to things not in themselves unlawful, but
inexpedient.

Errata.
Page 2. lin. 2. r. regeneration, p. 12. l. 8. r. without, ib. l. 16. r. and
in, p. 22. l. 6. r. due extent, p. 25. l. 14. r. account of accidental. p. 32.
l. 16. r. injured Christians as are, p. 33. l. 25. r. Segregation, p. 42. l.
27. r. renouncing, p. 47. l. 21. r. deposed.

The point of CHURCH-UNITY AND SCHISM Discussed.
CHAP. I.
Of the Church and its Polity.

THe Church is a Spiritual Commonwealth, which according to its primary and
invisible State is a Society of regenerate Persons, who are joined to the Lord
Christ their Head, and one to another as fellow Members by a mystical Union
through the Holy Spirit, and are justified, Sanctified, and adopted to the
inheritance of Eternal Life; but according to its secondary and visible state,
it is a Society of Persons professing Christianity or Regeration, and
externally joined to Christ, and to one another by the Symbals of that
Profession, and made partakers of the external privileges thereunto belonging.

There is one Catholic Church, which according to the invisible Form, is the
whole company of true Believers throughout the World; and according to its
visible Form, is the whole company of visible Believers throughout the World,
or Believers according to human judgment.

This Church has one Head and Supreme Lord, even Christ, and one Charter and
System of Laws; the Word of God and Members, that are free Denizons of the
whole Society, and one Form of Admission or solemn Initiation for its Members,
and one kind of Ministry and Ecclesiastical Power.

This Church has not the power of its own Fundamental Constitution, or of the
Laws, and Officers, and Administrations intrinsecally belonging to it, but has
received all these from Christ its Head, King and Lawgiver, and is limited by
him in them all. Nevertheless, it has according to the capacity of its acting,
that is, according to its several parts a power of making Secondary Laws or
Canons, either to impress the Laws of Christ upon its Members, or to regulate
circumstantials and accidentals in Religion, by determining things necessary in
genere, not determined of Christ in specie.

As the Scripture sets forth one Catholic Church, so also many particular
Churches, as so many Political Societies distinct from each other, yet all
compacted together as parts of that one ample Society, the Catholic Church.

Each of these particular Churches have their proper Elder or Elders, Pastor or
Pastors, having authority of teaching and ruling them in Christ's name. An
Ecclesiastical Order of Presbyters or Elders, that are not Bishops, is not
found in holy Scripture. For all Presbyters or Elders, being of a sacred Order
in the Gospel Church that are any where mentioned in Scripture, are therein set
forth as Bishops truly and properly so called, and are no where set forth as
less than Bishops. These Elders or Bishops are Personally to Superintend all
their Flock, and there is no grant from Christ to discharge the same by
Delegates or Substitutes.

A distinction between Bishops and Presbyters, and a Superiority of the former
over the latter, was after the Scripture times anciently and generally received
in the Christian Church. Yet it was not a diversity of Orders or Offices
essentially different, but of degrees in the same Office, the essential nature
whereof is in both. The Bishop of the first Ages was a Bishop not of a
multitude of Churches, but of one stated Ecclesiastical Society or single
Church, whereof he was an immediate Pastor; and he performed the work of a
Bishop, or immediate Pastor toward them all in his own Person, and not by
Delegates and Substitutes; and he governed not alone, but in conjunction with
the Presbyters of his Church, he being the President.

Though several Cities in the same Kingdom have their different municipal Laws
and Privileges according to the diversity of their Charters, yet particular
Churches have no Divine Laws and Privileges diverse from each other, but the
same in common to them all, because they have all the same Charter in specie
from Christ. Therefore each of them have the same power of Government within
themselves. And the qualifications requisite to make men Members or Ministers
of the Universal Church, do according to Christ's Law sufficiently qualify them
to be Members or Ministers of any particular Church, to which they have a due
and orderly call.

Local, presential Communion in Gods Ordinances, being a main end of erecting
particular Churches, they should in all reason consist of Persons, who by their
cohabitation in a vicinity are capable of such Communion, and there may not be
a greater local distanc^ of the Persons than can stand with it.

A Bishops Church was anciently made up of the Christians of a City or Town,
and the adjacent Villages, who might and did Personally meet together, both for
Worship and Discipline.

All Christians of the same local Precinct are most conveniently brought into
one and the same stated Church, that ^here might be the greatest Union among
them, and that the occasion of straggling and running into several Parties
might be avoided. Yet this local part^^ion of Churches is not of absolute
necessity and invariable, but if there be some insuperable impediment thereof,
the partition must be made as the state of things will admit.

No Bishop or Pastor can by Divine right or warrant, claim any assigned circuit
of Ground as his propriety for Ecclesiastical Government, as a Prince claims
certain Territories as his propriety for Civil Government; so that no other
Bishop or Pastor may without his License, do the work of the Ministry, in any
case whatsoever within that Circuit.

It is not the conjunction of a Bishop or Pastor with the generallity or the
greater number of the People, that of it self declares the only rightful
Pastor or true Church within this or that Circuit. For many causes may require
and justify the being of other Churches therein.

Seeing particular Churches are so many integral parts of the Catholic Church,
and stand in need of each others help in things that concern them jointly and
severally, and they have all an influence on each other, the Law of Nature
leads them to Associations or Combinations greater and lesser, according to
their capacities. And the orderly state that is requisite in all Associations,
does naturally require some regular Subordination in the several parts thereof,
either in way of proper authority or of mutual agreement. And the Associated
Churches and particular Members therein, are naturally bound to maintain the
orderly state of the whole Association, and to comply with the Rules thereof,
when they are not repugnant to the Word of God.

A Bishop or Pastor and the People adhering to him, are not declared to be the
only true Church and Pastor within such a Precinct, by their conjunction with
the largest Combination of Bishops or Pastors and their Churches. For the
greater number of Bishops may in such manner err in their Constitutions, as to
make rightly informed Persons incapable of their Combination.

A National Church is not a particular Church properly so called, but a
Combination or Coagmentation of particular Churches, united under one Civil
Supreme, either Personal as in a Monarchy, or Collective as in a Republic. And
the true notion thereof lies not in any Combination purely Ecclesiastical and
Intrinsecal, but Civil and Extrinsecal, as of so many Churches that are
collected under one that has the Civil Supremacy over them. The National
Church of England truly denotes all the Churches in England united under one
Supreme Civil Church-Governour, the Kings Majesty.

Civil Magistrates as such, are no Constitutive parts of the Church. The
Christian Church stood for several Centuries without the support of their
authority. But Supreme Magistrates have a Civil Supremacy in all Ecclesiastical
matters, and a political, extrinsecal Episcopacy over all the Pastors of the
Churches in their Dominions, and may compel them to the performance of their
Duties, and punish them for negligence and mal-Administration; and they may
reform the Churches, when they stand in need of Reformation.

The possession of the Tithes and Temples does not of it self declare the true
Pastor and Church, nor does the Privation thereof declare no Pastor and no
Church. For these are disposed of by the secular power, which of it self can
neither make, nor make void a Pastor or Church.

A Diocese is a collective body of many Parishes under the Government of one
Diocesan. If the several Parishes be so many particular Churches, and if their
proper and immediate Presbyters be of the same order with those which in
Scripture are mentioned by that name, and were no other than Bishops or
Pastors; then a Diocese is not a particula^ Church, but a Combination of
Churches, an^ the Diocesan is a Bishop of Bishops, or Governor over many
Churches and their i^mediate Bishops. If the Parishes be not a knowledged to be
Churches, nor their Presbyters to be realy Bishops or Pastors, but the Diocese
be held to be the lowest Political Church, and the Diocesan to be a Bishop of
the lowest rank, and the sole Bishop or Pastor of all the included Parishes; I
confess, I have no knowledge of the Divine right of such a Church or Bishop, or
of any precept or precedent thereof in Scripture. For every particular Church
mentioned in Scripture was but one distinct stated Society, having its own
proper and immediate Bishop or Bishops, Elder or Elders, Pastor or Pastors, who
did Personally and immediately Superintend over the whole Flock, which
ordinarily held either at once together, or by turns Personal, present
Communion with each other in Gods Worship. But a Diocese consists of several
stated Societies, to wit, the Parishes which are Constituted severally of a
proper and immediate Presbyter or Elder having cure of Souls, and commonly
called a Rector, and the People which are his proper and immediate charge or
cure. And the People of the Diocese do not live under the Personal and
immediate oversight of their Diocesan, but under his Delegates and Substitutes.
Nor do they ordinarily hold Personal present Communion with each other in Gods
Worship, either at once together or by turns. Nevertheless, which way soever a
Diocese be considered, I have nothing to object against submission to the
Government of the Diocesan, as an Ecclesiastical Officer established by the Law
of the Land under the Kings Supremacy.

There is nothing in the nature of the Office of Presbyterate (which according
to the Scripture is a Pastoral Office) that shows it ought to be exercised no
otherwise than in Subordination to a Diocesan Bishop. Christ, who is the Author
and only proper giver of all Spiritual Authority in the Church, has not so
limited the said Office, and men cannot by any act of theirs enlarge or lessen
it as to its nature or essential state, or define it otherwise than it is
stated of Christ in his word.

No power Ecclesiastical or Civil can discharge any Minister of Christ from the
exercise of his Ministry in those circumstances, wherein Christ commands him
to exercise it, nor any Christians from those duties of Religion, to which the
Command of Christ obliges them.

As the Magistrate is to judge what Laws touching Religion are fit for him to
enact and execute, so the Ministers of Christ are to use a judgment of
discretion about their own Pastoral acts; and all Christians are to do the same
about their own acts of Church Communion. The too common abuse of the judgment
of discretion cannot abrogate the right use thereof, it being so necessary that
without it men cannot act as men, nor offer to God a reasonable Service.

CHAP. II.
Of true Church-Unity.

WHen the names of Unity and Schism are by partiality and selfishness commonly
and grossly abused and misapplied, the nature of the things to which those names
do of right belong, ought to be diligently inquired into, and clearly and
distinctly laid open. For a groundwork in this inquiry I fix upon two very
noted texts of Scripture. The one is Ephesians. 4. 3. Endeavoring to keep the unity
of the Spirit in the bond of Peace. The other is Romans 16. 17. Mark them that
cause Divisions and Offenses contrary to the Doctrine that ye have learned, and
avoid them. The former guides us to the knowledge of true Church-unity, and the
latter shows us the true nature of Schism.

By the former of these Texts, all Christians are obliged to maintain that
Spiritual Unity, which they have one with another under Christ their Head, by
the Holy Ghost in all due acts of holy Communion in Peace and Concord. Several
important things are here to be taken notice of.

1. There is a Spiritual unity between all Christians in the form of one
mystical Body, as there is a natural unity between all the members of the
natural Body. The members being many are one body and members one of another.
2. This Unity is under Christ as the Head of it. What the head is to the
natural Body, that is Christ and much more to his mystical Body the Church. 3.
This Unity of Christians one with another under Christ, is by the Holy Ghost,
and therefore called the Unity of the Spirit. The Spirit of Christ the Head,
does seize upon and reside in all the Faithful, by which they become Christ's
mystical Body, and are joined one to another as fellow members. 4. This Unity
of the Spirit among Christians is witnessed, maintained, and strengthened by
their holy communion of Love and Peace one with another, but is darkened,
weakened, and lessened by their uncharitable Dissentions.

Hence it is evident that the Unity here commended, is primarily that of the
Church in its internal and invisible State, or the Union and Communion of
Saints, having in themselves the Spirit, and Life, and Power of Christianity.
It Is the unity of the Spirit we are charged to keep in the bond of Peace. But
concord in any external order with a vital Union with Christ and holy Souls,
his living members, is not the unity of the Spirit, which is to partake of the
same new Nature and Divine Life. Secondarily, it is the Unity of the Church in
its external and visible State, which is consequent and subservient to the
internal, and stands in the profession and appearance of it, in the professed
observation of the duties arising from it. Where there is not a credible
Profession of Faith unfeigned and true Holiness, there is not so much as the
external and visible Unity of the Spirit. Therefore a sensual Earthly
generation of men, who are apparently lead by the Spirit of the World, and not
by the Spirit that is of God, have little cause to glory in their adhering to
an external Church order, whatsoever it be.

Holy love, which is unselfed and impartial, is the Life and Soul of this
unity, without which it is but a dead thing, as the Body without the Soul is
dead. And this love is the bond of perfectness, that Cement, that holds
altogether in this mystical Society. For this being seated in the several
members, disposes them to look, not to their own things, but also to the
things of others, and not to the undue advancement of a Party, but to the
common good of the whole Body. Whosoever wants this love, has no vital Union
with Christ and the Church, and no part in the Communion of Saints. The Church
is much more ennobled, strengthened, and every way blessed by the Communion of
holy love among all its living members, or real Christians, than by an outside
uniformity in the minute circumstances, or accidental modes of Religion. By
this love it is more beautiful and lovely in the eyes of all intelligent
beholders, than by outward pomp and ornament, or any worldly splendour.

The Unity of the Church as visible, whether Catholic or particular, may be
cons^dered in a threefold respect, or in three very different points. The
first and chief point thereof, is in the essentials and all weighty matters of
Christian Faith and Life. The second and next in account is in the essentials
and integrals of Church state, that is, in the Christian Church-Worship,
Ministry and Discipline, considered as of Christ's institution, and abstracted
from all things superadded by men. The third and lowest point is in those
extrinsecal and accidental Forms and Orders of Religion, which are necessary in
genere, but left in specie to human determination.

Of these several points of Unity, there is to be a different valuation
according to their different value. Our first and chief regard is due to the
first and chief point, which respects Christian Faith and Life; The next regard
is due to that which is next in value, that which respects the very
constitution or frame of a Church; And regard is to be had of that also which
respects the accidentals of Religion, yet in its due place and not before
things of greater weight and worth. Things are of a very different nature and
importance to the Churches good Estate; and a greater or lesser stress must be
laid upon Unity in them, as the things themselves are of greater or lesser
moment.

The Rule or Law of Church Unity is not the will of man, but the will of God.
Whosoever keeps that Unity which has Gods word for its Rule, keeps the Unity
of the Spirit; And whosoever boasts of a Unity that is not squared by this
Rule, his boasting is but vain.

An Hypothesis that nothing in the Service of God is lawful, but what is
expressly prescribed in Scripture, is by some falsely ascribed to a sort of men
who earnestly contend for the Scriptures sufficiency, and perfection for the
regulating of Divine Worship, and the whole state of Religion. God in his Word
has prescribed all those parts of his Worship, that are necessary to be
performed to him. He has likewise therein instituted those Officers that are
to be the Administrators of his public Worship in Church Assemblies, and has
defined the authority and duty of those Officers, and all the essentials and
integrals of Church state. As for the circumstantials and accidentals belonging
to all the things aforesaid, he has laid down general Rules for the regulation
thereof, the particulars being both needless and impossible to be enumerated
and defined.

In this point God has declared his mind, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Ye shall not add unto
the word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it. Deuteronomy.
12. 32. What soever thing I command you, observe to do it, Thou shall not add
thereto nor diminish from it. The prohibition is not merely of altering the
Rule, Gods written Word by addition or diminution, but of doing more or less
than the Rule required, as the precept is not of preserving the Rule, but of
observing what is commanded in it.

Such human institutions in Divine Worship, as be in mere subserviency to
Divine institutions, for the necessary and convenient modifying and ordering
thereof, are not properly additions to Gods commandments. For they are of
things which are not of the same nature, end and use with the things which God
has commanded, but of mere circumstantials and accidentals belonging to those
things. And these circumstantials are in genere necessary to the performance of
Divine Institutions, and are generally commanded in the Word, though not in
particular, but are to be determined in specie by those to whom the power of
such determination belongs.

They that assert and stand to this only Rule, provide best for the Unity of
Religion, and the Peace of the Church. For they are ready to reject whatsoever
they find contrary to this Rule, they are more easily kept within the bounds of
acceptable Worship, and all warrantable obedience, they lay the greatest weight
on things of the greatest worth and moment, they carefully regard all Divine
institutions and whatsoever God has commanded, and they maintain Love, and
Peace, and mutual forbearance toward one another in the more inconsiderable
diversities of Opinion and Practice.

Those things that are left to human determination, the Pastors, Bishops or
Elders, did anciently determine for their own particular Churches. And indeed
it is very reasonable and naturally convenient, that they who are the
Administrators of Divine institutions, and have the conduct of the People in
Divine Worship, and know best what is most expedient for their own Society,
should be entrusted with the determination of necessary circumstances within
their own Sphere. But forasmuch as the Supreme Magistrate is entrusted of God
with the care of Religion within his Dominions, and has a Civil Supremacy in
Eclesiastical affairs, and a great concern in the orderly management of public
Assemblies, he is authorized of God to oversee the determinations and actings
of Ecclesiastical Persons, and may assume to himself the determination of the
aforesaid circumstantials for the honor of God, the Churches edification and
the public Peace, keeping within the general rules prescribed in Gods Word.

For the maintaining of Church-Unity, that is according to Gods word, it is the
part of Subjects to submit to what their Governors have determined, so far as
their submission is allowable by the said rule; and it is the part of
Governors to consider well the warrantableness of their determinations. More
especially their wisdom and care is much required in settling the right bounds
of Unity. In this regard the terms of admission to the Communion and Ministry
of the Church must be no other, than what the declared will of God has made
the terms of those privi^edges, and which will shut out none, whom God has
qualified for and called to the same. The setting of other boundaries, besides
the iniquity thereof, will inevitably cause divisions.

The Apostles, Elders and Brethren assembled at Jerusalem, Acts 15. 28. writing
to the blieving Gentiles declare, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us to
lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary things. From which it is
evidently inferred that the burden of things unnecessary ought not to be laid
on the Churches.

The things enjoined by that Assembly were antecedently to their Decree, either
necessary in themselves or in their consequents according to the state of
things in those times and places. And whatsoever is made the matter of a strict
injunction, especially a condition of Church Communion and Privileges, ought
to have some kind of necessity in it antecedent to its imposition. Symbolical
Rites or Ceremonies instituted by man to signify Grace or Duty, are none of
those things, which being necessary in general, are left to human determination
for this or that kind thereof. They have no necessary Subserviency to Divine
institutions, they are no parts of that necessary decency and order in Divine
Worship, without which the Service would be undecent. And indeed they are not
necessary to be instituted or rigidly urged in any time or place whatsoever.
The being and well being of an^ rightly constituted Church of Christ, man (...)
without them.

St. Paul resolves upon the cases of using or refusing of meats, and the
observance or non-observance of days, which God had neither commanded nor
forbidden, and of eating of those meats which had been offered in Sacrifice to
Idols, Romans 14. and 1 Cor. 8. That no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion
to fall in his Brothers way. The Command here given, extends to Pastors and
Governors as well as to other Christians, and is to be observed in acts of
Governments as well as in other acts. St. Paul was a Church Governor and of
high authority, yet he would not use his own liberty in eating Flesh, much less
would he impose in things unnecessary to make his Brother to offend.

In the cases aforementioned, there was a greater appearance of reason for
despising, censuring or offending others, than there can be for some
impositions now in question among us, viz. on the one side a fear of partaking
in Idolatry, or of eating meats that God had forbidden, or of neglecting days
that God had commanded, as they thought; on the other side a fear of being
driven from the Christian Liberty, and of restoring the Ceremonial Law.
Nevertheless, the Apostle gives a severe charge against censuring, despising or
offending others of different Persuasions in those cases. And if it were a Sin
to censure or despise one another, much more is it a Sin to shut out of the
Communion or Ministry of the Church for such matters.

The word of God, which is the Rule of Church-Unity, evidently shows that the
unity of external order must always be Subservient to Faith and Holiness, and
may be required no further than is consistent with the Churches Peace and
Edification.

The Churches true Interest lies in the increase of regenerate Christians, who
are her true and living Members, and in their mutual love, peace and concord,
in receiving one another upon those terms which Christ has made the bond of
this Union. The true Church Unity is comprised by the Apostle in these
following Unities; One Body, one Spirit, one Hope, One Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, one God. But there is nothing said of one ritual or set Form of Sacred
Office, one policy or model of Rules and Orders, that are but circumstantial
and accidental in a Church state and very various and alterable, while the
Church abides the same.

CHAP. III.
Of Schism truly so called.

HEre I lay down general positions about Schism without making application
thereof; Whether these positions be right or wrong Gods Word will show; and who
are, or are not concerned in them, the state of things will show. Schism is a
violation of the Unity of the Spirit, or of that Church-Unity which is of Gods
making or approving. This Definition I ground on the aforecited Text, Mark them
that cause Divisions and Offenses contrary to the Doctrine that ye have learned.

Separation and Schism are not of equal extent. There may be a Separation or
Secession where there is no Schism. For Schism is always a Sin, but Separation
may be a Duty, as the Separation of the Protestants from the Church of Rome.
Moreover, there may be Schism where there is no Separation. The violation of
Unity or the causing of Divisions may be not only by withdrawing, but by any
causing of others to withdraw from the Communion of the Church, or by the undue
casting or keeping of others out of the Church, or by making of any breaches in
Religion contrary to the Unity of the Spirit.

By looking back to the nature, and rule, and requisites of true Church-Unity,
we shall understand the true nature and the several kinds and degrees of Schism.

As holy love is the life and Soul of Church-Unity, so that aversation and
opposition which contrary to love, is that which animates the sin of Schism,
and is as it were the heart root of it. Whosoever maintains love, and makes no
breach therein, and whose dissenting or withdrawing from a Church is no other
than what may stand with love in its extent, is no Schismatic.

The Unity of the Spirit being primarily that of the Church as mystically, the
breach thereof lies primarily in being destitute of the Spirit and Life
Spiritual, much more in being opposite thereunto, under the show of
Christianity; also in the languishing or lessening of Spiritual Life,
especially of the acts of holy love.

The Unity of the Spirit being secondarily, that of the Church as visible in
its external state, and the first and chiefest point thereon being in the
essentials and weighty matters of Christian Faith and Life; the highest
violation thereof and the chiefest point of Schism lies in denying or
enormously violating the said essentials or weighty matters. And it directly a
violation of the Unity of the Catholic Church, and not of particular Churches
only.

Not only particular Persons, but Churches, yea a large combination of Churches
bearing the Christian name, may in their Doctrine, Worship and other avowed
Practice, greatly violate the essentials, or very weighty matters of Christian
Faith and Life, and be found guilty of the most enormous breach of Unity.

It is no Schism to withdraw or depart from any the largest combination or
collective body of Churches, (though for their amplitude they presume to style
their combination the Catholic Church) that maintain and avow any Doctrine or
Practice, which directly, or by near and palpable consequence overthrows the
said essentials.

The next point of external Unity being about the essentials and integrals of
Church state, the Sacraments and other public Worship, the Ministry and
Discipline of the Church considered as of Christ's institution, the next chief
point of Schism is the breach hereof. And this may be either against the
Catholic, or a particular Church.

Of such Schism against the state of the Catholic Church, there are these
instances.

1. When any one part of professed Christians how numerous soever, combined by
any other terms of Catholic Unity, than what Christ has made, account
themselves the only Catholic Church, excluding all Persons and Churches that
are not of their combination.

2. When a false Catholic Unity is devised or contended for, viz. a devised
Unity of Government for the Catholic Church un^er one terrene Head, personal
or collective, ^^uming a proper governing power over all Christians upon the
face of the whole Earth.

3. When there is an utter disowning of most of the true visible Churches in
the World, as having no true Church state, no not the essentials thereof, and
an utter breaking off from communion with them accordingly.

Of Schism against a particular Church in point of its Church state, there be
these instances.

1. The renouncing of a true Church as no Church, although it be much
corrupted, much more if it be a purer Church, though somewhat faulty.

2. An utter refusing of all acts of communion with a true Church when we may
have communion with it, either in whole or in part, without our personal sin of
commission or omission.

3. The causing of any Divisions or Distempers in the state or frame of a true
Church contrary to the Unity of the Spirit.

But it is no Schism to disown a corrupt frame of Polity, supervenient to the
essentials and integrals of Church state in any particular Church or
combination of Churches, like a leprosy in the Body, that does grossly deprave
them, and in great part frustrate the ends of their constitution.

The last and lowest point of external Unity lying in the accidental modes of
Religion, and matters of mere order, extrinsick to (...) essentials and
integrals of Church State, the violation thereof is the least and lowest point
of Schism, I mean in it self considered, and not in such aggravating
circumstances as it may be in.

Those accidental Forms and Orders of Religion, which are necessary in genere
but left in specie to human determination, are allowed of God, when they are
determined according to prudence, and charity for Peace and Edification, and
accordingly they are to be submitted to. Consequently it is one point of Schism
to make a Division from or in a Church upon the accountal of accident Forms and
Orders so determined according to Gods allowance.

But if any of the accidentals be unlawful, and the maintaining or practicing
thereof be imposed upon us as the terms of our communion, it is no Schism but
Duty to abstain from communion in that case. For explicitly and personally to
own errors and corruptions even in smaller points is evil in it self, which
must not be committed that good may come. In this case not he that withdraws,
but he that imposes causes the Division. And this holds of things sinful
either in themselves, or by just consequence.

And herein he that is to act, is to discern and judge for his own practice,
whether the things imposed be such. For Gods Law supposes us rational
creatures able to discern its meaning, and to apply it for the regulating of
our own actions; else the Law were given us in vain. Submission and reverence
toward Superiors obliges no man to resign his understanding to their
determinations, or in compliance with them to violate his own conscience.
Persons meek, humble, peaceable and thoroughly conscientious and of competent
judgment, may not be able by their diligent and impartial search to see the
lawfulness of things enjoined, and it is a hard case if they should thereupon be
declared contumacious.

Seeing there be several points of Unity, the valuation whereof is to be made
according to their different value, men's judgment and estimation of Unity and
Schism, is very preposterous, who lay the greatest stress on those points that
are of least moment, and raise things of the lowest rank to the highest in
their valuation, and set light by things of the greatest moment and highest
value; as indeed they do, who set light by soundness of Faith and holiness of
Life, and conscientious observance of Divine institutions, where there is not
also unanimity and uniformity in unscriptural Doctrines and human ceremonies.
And they that make such an estimate of things, and deal with Ministers
accordingly, do therein little advance the Unity of the Spirit, or endeavor to
keep it in the bond of Peace.

Seeing the word of God is the rule of Church Unity, a breach is made upon it,
when other bounds thereof are set than this rule allows. An instance hereof is
the devising of other terms of Church Communion, and Ministerial liberty, than
God has commanded, or allowed in his Word to be made the terms thereof; Also
any casting or keeping out of the Church or Ministry such as Gods Word does
not exclude from either, but signifies to be qualified and called thereunto.

God does not allow on the part of the Imposer such terms of Church communion
or Ministerial station, as are neither Scriptural nor necessary to Peace and
Edification, nor are any part of that necessary order and decency, without
which the Service of God would be undecent, nor are in any regard so necessary,
but that they may be dispensed with for a greater benefit, and the avoiding of
a greater mischief. And they are found guilty of Schism that urge such
unscriptural and unnecessary things unto a breach in the Church. Such Imposers
are not only an occasion of the breach that follows, but a culpable cause
thereof, because they impose without and against Christ's warrant, who will not
have his Church to be burdened, nor the consciences of his Servants entangled
with things unnecessary.

Nevertheless, such unscriptural or unnecessary things, if they be not in
themselves unlawful nor of mischievous consequence, may be of Gods allowing as
to the submitters. Thereupon they are guilty of Schism, who merely for the sake
of those unnecessary things yet lawful as to their use, though wrongfully
urged upon them, forsake the communion of the Church or their Ministerial
station, where things are well settled as to the substantials of Religion, and
the ends of Church order, and when they themselves are not required to justify
the imposing of such unnecessaries. Here I speak of contumacious refusers, who
will rather make a breach than yield. But refusers out of conscience believing,
or with appearance of reason suspecting the said lawful things to be
unlawful, are either accquitted from Schism, or guilty but in a low degree,
and much less culpable than the Imposers, who might well forbear to impose.

Be it here noted that when Superiors sin in commanding a thing exempt from
their authority, it may be the Subjects duty to observe the thing commanded. In
this case the said observance is not an act of obedience, for that can arise
only from the Rulers authority to command. But it is an act of prudence, equity
and charity, and it is good and necessary for the ends sake, and in that regard
it is an act of obedience, though not to the Earthly Ruler, yet to God who
commands us to follow Peace and maintain Unity in all lawful^ (...) and means.

In the judgment of the Apostle it is no slight matter to act against
conscience rationally doubting, or suspecting a breach of Gods Law, Romans 14. 5.
Let every man be fully persuaded in his mind, v. 14. To him that esteems any
thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean, ver. 23. He that doubts, is damned
if he eat, because he eats not of Faith, for whatsoever is not of Faith is
sin. The command of Rulers is no good security for acting against a rational
doubting conscience. When I am in doubt touching the lawfulness of the thing
enjoined, I have no certainty of being on the safer side, by complying with
Rulers. For though in general obedience to Rulers be a certain Duty, yet in the
particular doubted case, I cannot be certain that my compliance is right and
warrantable obedience, and not a breach of Gods Law. Is it plain that I ought
to obey the commands of Rulers in things that have Gods allowance? so it is as
plain that I ought not to obey their commands in things which God has
forbidden. Moreover, it is as plain that I ought not to act against my own
conscience, which as being the discerner of the will of God concerning me, is
of right the immediate director of my actions. Indeed my conscience cannot
alter Gods Law, or make that which God has made my duty to be not my duty, yet
it will not suffer me to act in disconformity to its directions.

Seeing the Unity of the Spirit is always in conjunction with Faith and
Holiness, to which the Unity of external order is always to be subservient, it
follows that when Unity of external order does not tend to advance but hinder
sound Faith and true Holiness, then a false Unity is set up, and the true Unity
is abandoned, and divisions and offenses are caused. And it is no Schism but a
duty not to adhere to a Unity of external order so set and urged, as that it
tends to the destruction or notable detriment of Faith and Holiness, which are
the end of all Church Order. The means are good in reference to their end, and
must never be used in a way destructive to it. Of the hinderance of the said
ends, there be these following instances.

Here laid down in general, without intendment of particular application to any
Churches now in being, which are left to be tried and judged by that rule by
which all must stand or fall.

1. When a Church or Churches, a Congregation or Congregations have an
establishment of external Polity, and an ordained Ministry, and a Form of
Divine Worship, but are destitute of such Ministers as are qualified to feed
the Flock, and are burdened with such as are altogether unfit to have the
charge of Souls committed to them, who are either unable to teach, or teach
corruptly, either teaching corrupt Doctrine, or abusing, mishandling and
misapplying sound Doctrine, to encourage the Ungodly and discourage the Godly.

2. Where there are some Ministers able and apt to teach and duly qualified;
but their number is in no wise proportionable to the number of the People, and
there be multitudes that cannot have the benefit of their Ministry, so that if
they have no more placed among them than those few, they have in effect none.

3. Where sincere Christians, or credible Professors of Christianity are cast
out of an established Church by wrong sentence, or are debarred from its
communion by unlawful terms enjoined them, or unnecessary terms which are to
them unlawful by real doubts of conscience, and which Christ has not
authorized Rulers to enjoin as terms of Church communion.

4. When Ministers, whom Christ has furnished and called, are driven out of
their public station by unlawful terms enjoined, or by terms unnecessary and
to them unlawful by real doubts of conscience, and which Christ has not
authorized Rulers to enjoin as terms of the public Ministry.

Upon the cases here mentioned, I inquire whether the said Ministers and People
may not draw together into new congregations. Let it be considered whether the
determinations of men may be a perpetual bar to true visible Christians, (it
may be to multitudes of them) against the enjoyment of those most important
privileges, to which God has given them right. Yea, suppose their consciences
were culpably weak in scrupling things imposed, yet they may suffer wrong by
such an excess of punishment, as so great a deprivation. And Christ does not
reject them for such weaknesses.

Let it be also considered, whether such injured as Christians are wrongfully
excluded from Gods Ordinances, and such neglected Souls as are left destitute
of the necessary means of Salvation, may lawfully be deserted by Christ's
Ministers. Should not the Stewards of the mysteries of God endeavor to supply
what is lacking to such by reason of the rigourousness or negligence of others?
If it be said, we may not do evil that good may come, nor break the laws of
Unity for such respects, the answer is, that this is not to do evil, but a good
work and a necessary duty, and here is no breach of Unity that is of Gods
making or allowing. The necessary means of saving Souls are incomparably more
precious than uniformity in external, accidental order, especially when it is
unwarrantably enjoined, and attended with such evil consequents. If within any
local bounds assigned for the Pastoral charge of any Ecclesiastic, the People
be left destitude of competent provision for their Souls, it is no intrusion or
breach of Unity if an other Pastor perform the work of the Ministry within
those bounds.

Subjects may not by coercive power reform the public State and change the
Laws, which is the work of the Supreme Magistrate. But let it be considered
whether they may not have their voluntary Assemblies for Gods Worship, when
they are driven from the communion of the legal Churches by the imposition of
^nlawfull terms, or unnecessary terms appre^ended by them to be unlawful. For
in this ^ase they are forced either to hold such Assem^lies, or to abide
perpetually without those ^piritual privileges which are their due, and ^^e
ordinary means of their Salvation.

There is a great difference between inimi^l Separation, like Sedition in a
Common^ealth, and Secregation upon necessary causes without breach of charity.
And among the ^ecessary causes this may be one, that all sober ^hristians, who
for conscience sake cannot ^^bmit to the way of the Established Churches, ^ay
be relieved; and that none may be exposed for lack of that relief to be lead
aside into the error of the wicked, as Heresy, Infidelity, or any other course
of Impiety. Indeed here is some variation from the ordinarily regular bounding
of Churches. But the partition of one Church from another by local bounds, is
not of absolute necessity and invariable, but naturally eligible from the
convenience thereof, when it may be had. But the state of some Christians may
be such, as to compel them to vary from it. The scope hereof is not to set up
Churches against Churches, but either occasional and temporary Assemblies, or
at the most but dive^^ Churches distinguished by their several place of
assembling, or by diversity of external order, as the allowed Congregations of
Foreigners in London, are distinguished from the Parish Churches.

If any object the inconveniences that man follow the permitting of Church
Assemblies b^ sides those of the Established Order, the answer is, That the
wisdom and clemency Rulers in any Nation where this case may supposed can
provide, that as few as may should stand in need of that permission, fixing the
terms of Church communion a^^ Ministerial liberty to such a latitude, as m^^^
comprehend all the more moderate Dissente^^ And after such comprehension,
Christian ch^rity will plead, that all tolerable Dissenters (that is, all who
believe and live as Christians) may be tolerated within such limits, as may
stand with public Peace and safety. That which is here proposed, may make for
the relief of many thousand serious Christians without breach of the external
order, which is necessary to be maintained, and is not set up to the hinderance
of things more necessary.

It is to be noted that the offenders expressly marked out by the Apostle in the
Text, Romans 16. 17. were ungodly men that opposed or perverted the Christian
Doctrine, and being Sensualists and deceivers disturbed and polluted the
Christian Societies, and seduced the simple into destructive error and
practice. Wherefore the Text is ill applied to the rigorous condemnation of
honest and peaceable men, that dissent only in some accidental or, ^nferior
points of Religion, for which the Apostle forbids Christians to despise or
judge one another. Yet not only false Teachers, but all ^chismaticks are here
condemned under this de^^ription, viz. those that cause Divisions and Offenses.
And though they be not direct op^osers of sound Doctrine, yet being Dividers
(...) Disturbers, they practice contrary to the ^octrine of Christ, which
teaches Unity, love and Peace. But still it must be observed ^^at the reality
of Schism lies not in being divided or disordered, but in causing the division
or disturbance, or in a voluntary violation of or departing from true
Church-Unity.

They that cause Divisions are not excused from Schism by the support of
Secular Power, nor are others convicted of it merely by the want of that
Support. The Magistrates power in Sacred things is accumulative, not
destructive o^ diminitive to the rights of Christ's Ministers and People. It
takes not from them any thing that Christ has granted them, but gives them a
better capacity to make use thereof.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Schisms that were in the more ancient times of the Church; and the
different case of the Nonconformist^ in these times.

OF those parties which were anciently r^upted Schismatics, as violating the
Un^ty of the Church, yet not Heretics, as d^nying any Fundamental point of the
Chris^^an Faith, the Novatians and Donatists are the chiefest note. Forasmuch
as both the^ are looked upon as the greatest instances Schism, it may be
requisite for me to consid^^ the true state of their separation from the main
body of the Christian Church, passing by accidental matters, and insisting on
the merits of their cause according to their main Principles and Practices.

As concerning the Donatists, the breach made by them had this rise. Donatus
with ^is Accomplices vehemently opposed Cecilianus, who had been chosen Bishop of
Carthage, in design to thrust him out of his Bishopric. They accuse him of
being ordained by one that had been a Proditor, and of having admitted into
Ecclesiastical Office one that was guilty of the like fault. This Cause was by
the Emperor Constantine's appointment heard before several Councils and many
Judges. The Accusers still fail in their Proofs of the things objected,
Cecilianus is acquitted and confirmed in his Office. The Party of Donatus
failing in their design, were carried in a boundless rage of opposition to a
total, and ^rreclaimable Separation from all the Churches that were not of
their Faction, and became very numerous upon a pretense of shunning ^he
contagion of the wicked in the Communion of the Sacraments. Their principles
were, that the Church of Christ was no where ^o be found but among themselves
in a corner of Africa; also that true Baptism was not Administered but in their
Sect. Likewise they proceeded to great tumult, and violence, and rapine. And a
sort of them called Circumcelliones gloried in a furious kind of Martyrdom,
partly by forcing others to kill them, and partly by killing themselves.

The Novatians took their name and beginning from Novatus a Presbyter, first at
Carthage, afterward at Rome, who held that they who lapsed in times of
Persecution unto the denying of Christ, were not to be readmitted unto the
Communion of the Church, though they repented and submitted to the
Ecclesiastical Discipline of Penance. He separated from the Roman Church, and
was made a Bishop by Bishops of his own judgment, in opposition to Cornelius
Bishop of Rome Cyprian gives a very bad character of him, a^ a turbulent,
arrogant and avaritious Person But of what Spirit soever he was, his Judgment
and Canon was received among many that were of stricter lives; and he himself
i^ reported to have suffered death in the persecution under Valerian.

At the Council of Nice, Acesius Bishop o^ the Novatians being asked by
Constantine whether he assented to the same Faith wit^ the Council, and to the
observation of Easte^ as was there derceed, answered that he full assented to
both. Then being again aske^ by the Emperor, why he separated from the
Communion, he recited for himself things done in the Reign of Decius, and the
exquisite observation of a certain severe Canon, that they who after Baptism
had fallen into that kind of sin, which the Scripture calls a sin unto death,
ought not to be partakers of the Divine mysteries; but to be exhorted to
repentance, and to expect the hope of remission not from the Priest but from
God, who has power to forgive. By this it appears that the Novatians did not
deny the Salvability of the lapsed, or others that had fallen into a sin unto
death, but only refused to admit them to Sacerdotal Absolution and
Church Communion. And thus they made a very unwarrantable separation, grounded
upon an unjust rigor of very bad consequence.

Nevertheless their error was no other, than what holy and good men might be
ensnared ^n by the appearance of a greater detestation of ^in, and its tendency
to prevent the lapse of Christians into Idolatry, and to make them more
resolved for Martyrdom. And by as ^redible History as any we have of the
an^ient times, they are reported to have had among them men eminently Pious,
and some ^amous for Miracles. They unmovably ad^ered to the Homousian Faith,
and for the maintenance of it together with the Orthodox, ^uffered dreadful
Persecutions. They had some Bishops remarkable for Wisdom an Godliness, and
such as were consulted with by some of the chief of the Catholic Bishops, and
that with good success for support of the Common Faith against the Arrians and
such like Heretics. Under a certain Persecution, wherein they were Companions
of the self same suffering, it is said that the Catholics and Novatians had
Prayers together in the Novations Churches, and that in those time^ they were
almost united, if the Novations had not utterly refused that they might keep up
their old institutes; yet they bare such good will one to another, that they
would die one for another. These and many other things of like nature are
reported of them by Socrates, whom some indeed suspect to have been addicted to
them, yet upon no other ground, but because he gives them their due upon
evident proof. And besides what he has reported, Sosomen thus testifies of
them, L. 2. C. 30. That when other Sects expired, the Novatians because they
had good men for the Leaders of their way, and because they defended the same
Doctrine with the Catholic Church, were very numerous from the beginning, and
so continued, and suffered not much damage by Constantines Law for suppressing
of Sects; And Acesius their Bishop being much favored by the Emperor, for the
integrity of his life greatly advantaged his Church. Also L. 4. C. 19. He
reports the great amity that was between them and the Catholics in a time of
common Persecution.

Whether the case of the Dissenters from the Uniformity now required, be in
point of Schism of the same or like reason with the above mentioned, or any
other anciently reputed Schismatics, is now to be considered. And it is the
case of those that dissent not in the substance of Religion, but only in things
pertaining to the Ecclesiastical Polity or external Order in the Church, that
it here taken into consideration. Of these, some being persuaded of the
necessity of their own Church Order, desire to remain as they are in their
severed Societies; yet they do not nullify the legal Churches or Ministry, or
the dispensation of the Word, Sacraments and Prayer therein performed. Others
being satisfied in the constitution of Parochial Churches, and in the substance
of the Established Form of Worship, would gladly embrace a freedom of
Communicating and Administering therein, upon the removal of some bars that lie
against them, and which they think may well be removed. Thereupon they seek an
Accommodation and Union by a sufficient comprehensiveness in the public
constitution; and withal a reasonable indulgence toward those Brethren, who
for the straightness of their judgments cannot be comprehended.

Neither Party of the Dissenters here described can be charged with any thing
like the Donatistical fury before expressed. If Austin sought the suppression
of that Sect by the secular power, in regard of the horrible outrages committed
by them, it cannot reasonably be urged for a precedent (as it has been by
some) for the suppression of men Sober and Peaceable, and sound in the main
points of Christian Faith and Life. Nor can either Party of us be charged with
that intolerable presumption and arrogance of the Donatists, in confining the
Flock of Christ to their own Party, or the disannulling and utter denouncing of
all Churches besides their own. Nor is the ground of our dissatisfaction like
theirs, which began in a quarrel against a particular Bishop, and was
maintained by animosity against those that would not condemn him. It is well
known that another manner of account is to be given of our Dissents.

If it be objected, that those Dissenters whose principles bind them up to
persevere in their severed Societies, seem in this respect to be as the
Novatians, who would not admit a Reunion with the other Churches; it may be
answered for them, that reasons have been offered in the foregoing parts of
this Discourse for indulgence to conscientious People, who are entangled by the
narrowness of their principles touching Church Order. Besides, they do not
stand off upon so harsh and rigorous a point as the Novatians did, viz. The
utter repelling of the lapsed, though penitent from the Communion of the
Church. And they have ordinarily communion in the Word and Prayer with
Congregations that are not of their Church way, and occasionally in the
Sacrament with those Congregations, where they apprehend a care of the exercise
of Discipline. Nor may they be judged so irreconcilable to the Established
Order, but that the holy lives of those in the public Ministry, and their
lively Preaching, and a greater care of true and real Church Discipline, might
do much to their recovery.

In the mean time, why may not these be upon as good terms under the present
Government, as the Novatians were under the Government of their times? Church
History reports that they were cruelly Persecuted by the Arrian Emperors and
Bishops, and that they had great indulgence under Orthodox Emperors, and with
many Catholic Bishops and Patriarchs, whose prudent and moderate Government
did best provide for the Peace of their Churches. But those Orthodox Bishops,
who took from them their Churches and Estates, were chiefly either such as took
to themselves a Secular Power, and ruled imperiously and with violence, or such
as with their zeal had more of wrath and rashness than of meekness and
prudence. This can be easily proved in the particular instances, if need were.

But this is not the case of all Nonconformists. For part of them (and upon
good experiment made, they may be found the greater part) do not seek to abide
in a severed State, but desire a Union. It is well known they are as sensible
of the evil of Schism, and as Studious of the Churches Peace and Concord, as
any others. And though they have not the same latitude of judgment with others
in some points, yet they have a right Catholic Spirit to promote the common
Interest of Religion, and more especially the Protestant Reformation, and dread
the weakening and shattering of it by needless Divisions, and are ready to go as
far as conscience will allow in compliance with the injunctions of Rulers. But
they are cast and kept out of the Established Order by the injunction of some
terms, which in regard of their present judgment, they can not comply with, but
under the guilt of so great a sin as dissembling in the matter of Religion.

Touching Church Government, they admit the Episcopacy that was of ancient
Ecclesiastical custom in the time of Ignatius, yea, or of Cyprian. Bishop
Usher's model of Government by Bishops and Archbishops with their Presbyters,
was by some of them presented to the Kings Majesty for a groundwork of
Accommodation. They acknowledge the Kings Ecclesiastical Supremacy according to
the Oath in that case required. His Majesty in his gracious Declaration
concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs, gives a Testimony concerning the Ministers
that attended him in Holland, in these words, viz. To our great satisfaction
and comfort, We found them Persons full of affection to Us, and of zeal to the
Peace of Church and State, and neither Enemies (as they had been given out to
be) to Episcopacy or Liturgy, but modestly to desire such alterations in
either, as without shaking foundations might best allay the present Distempers.

They are ready to engage that they will not disturb the Peace of the Church,
nor endeavor any point of alteration in its Government by Rebellious
Seditions, or any unlawful ways. Those points of Conformity wherein they are
dissatisfied, are but some accidentals of Religion and external modes, and the
Declarations and Subscriptions importing an allowance of all and every thing
contained in the Liturgy. And they think that these points are not so necessary
in themselves or in their consequents, but they are very dispensable as the
Wisdom of Governors shall see cause.

If it be objected, that if any thing should be yielded to them, there would be
no end of their cravings, that which I have to say is, That reasonable men will
be satisfied with reasonable concessions; and if Subjects know not what is fit
for them to ask, Governors know what is fit for them to give. By granting the
desired relaxation, the Church would not (as some allege) be self-condemned,
as confessing the unlawfulness of her injunctions, or as justifying the
Opinions of the Dissenters. For it can signify from her no more than either
her indulgence to the weak, or her moderation in things less necessary and more
controverted, which would not turn to her reproach, but to her greater
justification.

I have here nothing to say to them that object against any relaxation after
that manner, as if they desired not our Conformity but our perpetual exclusion.
Such may be answered in due season. And I have here nothing to do with those
that argue against ^s from Politic considerations, respecting a particular
Interest too narrow for an adequate foundation of Church-Peace and
Christian-Concord. But my scope is to consider what may be done by the Higher
Powers and Church Guides for the healing of breaches, according to the Wisdom
which is from above, which is first pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to
be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality and without
hypocrisy.

I have made particular observation of those too most remarkable Parties, which
have been looked upon as the chief instances of Schism in the more ancient
times. The other Schisms that I find of any remark in those times were raised,
sometimes by Persons cast out of the Church for their Crimes, and thereupon
drawing Disciples after them, as was that of Meletius a Bishop ^n Egypt, who
was desposed for having sacrificed to Idols. Sometimes by offense unjust^y
taken at some supposed faultiness in a Bishop, as was that of an Orthodox Party
^n Antioch, against another Meletius, an Orthodox and right worthy Bishop of
that City, only because he was at first brought ^n by the Arrians; sometimes by
the exasperations of the People for injuries done to them or their Pastors, and
outrages committed by their opposites, as was that of the Johannites at
Constantinople upon the banishment of Chrysostom; and sometimes by mere
animosity and humor of coffeehouse, as was that of Lucifer a Bishop in
Sardinia^ who separated from Eusebius Bishop of Vercellis and others, because
they disliked his rash act of Ordaining Paulinus to be Bishop of Antioch, as
tending to perpetuate the Schism there begun.

Touching all the said Parties, it may be observed that they did not plead that
any Opinions or Forms were imposed on them to which their consciences did
reluctate, no^ did they desire others forbearance toward them in such things
as might bear too har^ upon them; but they themselves would not bear with
others in that which they supposed faulty, but did rather choose wholly to
abandon the Communion of the Churches and did not seek nor care for
accomodatio^ with them. But this is not the case of (...) least a great part of
the Dissenters of the^ times. For they importune an accommodatio^ with the
Churches of the Established Orde^ and for Peace sake, are willing to bear wit^
the practice of others in that which themselves dislike or doubt of; but they
cannon obtain a Dispensation from others, in some things which are very
dispensable points according to their judgment, but are forced to abide in a
severed state, unless they will profess what they believe not, or practice what
they allow not.

Now because the judgment and practice of antiquity is much insisted on, I pray
that it may be considered, whether in the Primitive, or ancient times of
Christianity, men, yea, many hundreds of men duly qualified for the Ministry
by sound Faith and good Life, as also by their Learning and Industry, and
offering all reasonable security for their submissive and peaceable demeanure,
were or would have been cast and kept out of the Church for their Nonconformity
to some Opinions, Forms and Ceremonies, which at the best are but the
accidentals of Religion, and of the truth or lawfulness whereof, the Dissenters
were wholly dissatisfied, and which the Imposers judged to be but things in
themselves indifferent.

And I further pray that it may be considered, whether it be easier for the
Nonconformists to be self-condemned in Conforming to some injunctions against
their consciences, and in deserting the Ministry to which they are dedicated,
than for Superiors either by some relaxation to make them capable of
Conforming, or to bear with their peaceable exercise of the Ministry in a
state of Nonconformity, while some of their injunctions confine them to that
state.

CHAP. V.
Of making a right estimate of the guilt of Schism, and something more of
taking the right way to Unity.

THe confused noise about Schism, and the unjust imputation thereof, that is
commonly made, has greatly disordered the minds of many. Some have been
thereby swaid to an absolute compliance with the most numerous or the most
prevailing Parties. Others discerning the abuse of this name, but forgetting
that there is something truly so called, have made light of the thing it self,
which is indeed of a heinous nature. I have been engaged in this Disquisition
by a deep sense of the evil of Schism, and an earnest care of keeping my self
from the real guilt thereof, and what is here written, I willingly submit to a
grave and just examination. Errare possum, Haereticus, Schismaticus esse nolo.
I am liable to Error as others are, but I am sure I am no wilful Schismatic.

It is commonly given to men to pass a severe judgment upon every dissent from
their own Opinions and Orders. Whereupon, as that has had the character of
Schism stamped upon it, which is not such indeed; so that which is Schism in a
low and tolerable degree, has been aggravated to the highest, and prosecuted
against all rules of prudence and charity.

To make an equal judgment of the guilt of Schism in Persons or Parties, the
degree of the Schism is duly to be considered. Our Savior teaches that
reviling language, contemptuous words and rash anger, are breaches of the Sixth
Commandment, yet in degree of guilt, they are vastly different from the act of
wilful Murder. And indeed in the kind of delinquency here treated of, there
are as great differences of degrees as of any other kind. The case of those
that are necessitated to a noncompliance in some lawful things by them held
unlawful, yet seeking union would gladly embrace a reasonable accommodation, is
much different from theirs, who upon choice and wilfully sever themselves,
because they love to be severed. In like manner the case of those who desire
and seek the conformity of others, and would gladly have fellowship with them,
yet through misguided zeal, are approvers of such unnecessary impositions as
hinder the conforming of many, is much different from theirs, who designing the
extrusion of others, contrive the intangling of them by needless rigors. Many
other instances might be given to express the great disparity of cases in point
of Schism, all which may teach us in the estimate that we are to make thereof,
to put a difference between honest minds, that by mistake are drawn into
Division, and those that out of their corrupt minds and evil designs do
wilfully cause Division.

In many things we offend all, and therefore it behooves us to consider one
another, as subject to the like errors and passions. We should not judge too
severely, as we would not be so judged. There be many examples of Schismatical
animosities and perversnesses, into which in the ancient times such Persons
have fallen, as were otherwise worthily esteemed in the Church. Cyril with the
greater number of Bishops in the Ephesine Council, too rashly deposed John of
Antioch, and his Party of Bishops upon a quarrel that arose between them. And
John with his Adherents returning to Antioch, did more rashly depose Cyril and
his Party, and yet both Parties were Orthodox, and in the issue joined in the
Condemnation of Nestorius. But the most remarkable instance in this kind, is
the disorderly and injurious proceeding of so venerable a Person as Epiphanius,
against so worthy a Person as Chrysostom, to which he was stirred up by the
instigation of that incendiary Theophilus of Alexandria. The said Epiphanius
goes to Constantinople, and in the Church without the City held a sacred
Communion, and Ordained a Deacon; and when he had entered the City, in a public
Church he read the Decree made by himself and some others in the condemnation
of Origens Books, and excommunicated Dioscurus and his Brethren called the long
Monks, worthy and Orthodox men persecuted by the Anthromorphites. And all this
he did without and against the consent of Chrysostom the Bishop of the Place,
and in contempt of him. I may further instance in the long continued division
between Paulinus and Meletius, with their Parties at Antioch, though both of
them were of the Nicene Faith; likewise in the long continued Separation made
from the Church of Constantinople, by the followers of Chrysostom after his
banishment, because they were exasperated by the injuries done to their worthy
Patriarch.

These weaknesses in good men of old times, I observe not to dishonor them,
but that we may be thereby warned to be more charitable and less censorious
toward one another, in case of the like weaknesses and disorders, and to be
sollicitous to maintain Peace, and to prevent discord among all those that are
united in the substantials of Christian Faith and Practice, and for this end to
be more careful in avoiding unreasonable oppositions, unwarrantable
impositions, and all causless exasperations.

True Holiness is the basis of true Unity. For by it the Faithful cleave to
God, and one to another in him and for him, and are inclined to receive one
another on those terms, on which God has received them all. And by it they are
turned from that dividing selfishness, which draws men into several or opposite
ways according to their several or opposite ends.

Let not a carnal wordly Interest in a Church state, be set up against Holiness
and Unity. Let the increase and peace of the Church visible, be sought in order
to the increase and peace of the mystical. Let no one Party be lifted up
against the common Peace of sound Believers; and let not any part of the
legitimate Children of Christ's Family be ejected or harassed upon the
instigation of others, but let the Stewards in the Family carry it equally, and
so gratify one part in their desired Orders, that the other part be not
oppressed. Let not them be still vexed, who would be glad of tolerable terms
with their Brethren. In Church Governors let the power of doing good be
enlarged, and the power of doing hurt restrained, as much as will stand with
the necessary ends of Government.

Let the Discipline of the Church commend it self to the consciences of men.
Let the edge of it be turned the right way and its vigor be put forth, not
about little formalities but the great and weighty matters of Religion. Zeal in
substantials and charitable forbearance in circumstantials, is the way to gain
upon the hearts of those that understand the true ends of Church Government,
and what it is to be Religious indeed.

Let the occasions of stumbling and snares of division be taken out of the way,
and let controverted unnecessaries be left at liberty. Discord will be
inevitable, where the terms of concord remain a difficulty insuperable. The
Conscientious that are willing to bid high for Peace, cannot resign their
consciences to the wills of men, and humility and soberness does not oblige
them to act contrary to their own judgments out of reverence to their
Superiors; they cannot help themselves, but their Superiors may. It Is the Spirit
of Antichrist that is fierce and violent; but the Spirit of Christ is dovelike,
meek and harmless, and that Spirit inclines to deal tenderly with the
consciences of Inferiors. Tenderness of conscience is not to be despised or
exposed to scorn, because some may falsely pretend to it. The Head of the Church
and Savior of the Body is compassionate toward his Members, and he has said,
Whosoever shall offend one of these little ones, that believe in me, it were better
for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in
the depth of the Sea.

As the way of unity lies much in the wisdom, equity and charity of Superiors,
so in the humility and due submission of Inferiors, in their ready closing
with what is commendable in the public constitutions, in their bearing with
what is tolerable, in making the best improvement of what is therein improvable
for their own and others Edification, in a word, in denying no compliance,
which piety toward God and charity toward men does not forbid.

Matters of public injunction, which Inferiors stick at, may be considered by
them either as in themselves unlawful, or as inexpedient. Now it is not only
or chiefly the inexpediency of things commanded, but the supposed unlawfulness
of diverse of those things that the Nonconformists generally stick at, whereof
they are ready to render a particular account, when it will be admitted.
Howbeit a question may arise about the warrantableness of submission to things
not in themselves unlawful but inexpedient, especially in respect of scandal,
the solution whereof may be requisite for the clearing of our way in such
things.

Upon this question it may be noted, That in those cases, wherein there is no
right of commanding, there is no due of obedience. Nevertheless, things
unwarrantably commanded are sometimes warrantably observed, though not in
obedience, yet in prudence, as to procure Peace, and to show a readiness to all
possible compliance with Superiors. Moreover, Rulers have no authority to
command that, which in it self is not unlawful, when Christian charity forbids
to do it in the present circumstances by reason of evil consequents. For all
authority is given for Edification and not for Destruction. Likewise our
Christian liberty includes no License to do that act at the command of Rulers,
the doing of which in regard of circumstances, is uncharitable. But here it
must be considered, how far the law of charity does extend in this case, and
when it does, or does not forbid my observance of what the Ruler has
unwarrantably, because uncharitably commanded.

True charity does not wholly destroy Christian Liberty, though it regulates
the use thereof; and it does not extend it so far one way as to destroy it self
another way. If I am bound up from doing every indifferent thing, at which weak
consciences will take offense, my liberty is turned into bondage, and I am left
in thraldom to other men's endless Scrupulosities. This is I think a yoke which
Christians are not fit nor able to bear. This bondage is greater and the burden
lies heavier upon me, if by reason of others weakness, I must be bound up from
observing an indifferent thing at the command of Rulers, and by them made the
condition of my liberty for public Service in the Church, when my conscience
is fully satisfied that it is lawful, and otherwise expedient for me to do it.
As for the warrantableness of enjoining, the Ruler must look to that. Are some
displeased and grieved that I do it? As many or more may be displeased and
grieved if I do it not. Do some take occasion by my necessary use of a just
liberty, to embolden themselves to sin? My forbearing of it may be an occasion
of sin to others, as their persisting in some troublesome Error to their own
and others Spiritual damage, and in unwarrantable noncompliance with their
Governors. And the loss of my liberty for public Service consequent to such
forbearance, must also be laid in the balance.

When both the using and forbearing of m^ liberty is clogged with evil
consequents, I kno^ no safer way than duly to consider of what moment the
consequents are on either side, and t^ incline to that which has the lesser
evil. Here in the Wisdom of the prudent is to direct his wa^ upon the impartial
view of all circumstance which come under his prospect. And if goo^ conscience
and right reason, guided by the general Rules of Gods Word, lead me to make us^
of my Christian liberty in compliance with m^ Superiors, I must humbly and
charitably apply my self to remove the offense, that some take by clearing the
lawfulness and expediency o^ my act to their judgments. But if that cannon be
discerned by them, I am by my Christian good behavior to make it evident to
their consciences, what in me lies, that what I do, (...) do sincerely and
faithfully, and that I am n^ temporizer, man-pleaser and self-seeker. (...)
humbly conceive that that high saying of the Apostle, If meat make my Brother
to offend, (...) will eat no Flesh while the World stands does admit such
equitable interpretation, as the circumstances of time, place, person, and the
whole state of things declares to be most reasonable.

A humble representation of my own case touching the exercise of the Ministry.
I Have been in the Ministry near forty years, having been ordained Presbyter
according to the Form of Ordination used in the Church of England. And being
called to this Sacred Order, I hold my self ^ndispensibly obliged to the work
thereof, as God enables me and gives me opportunity. The nature of the Office
is signified in the Form of Words, by which I was solemnly set apart thereunto.
viz. [Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins thou do forgive, they are forgiven,
and whose sins thou do retain, ^hey are retained: And be thou a faithful
Dispenser of the Word of God and of his holy Sacraments, in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen.] The former part of these
Words being used by ^our Savior to his Apostles, in conferring upon them the
Pastoral Authority, fully proves that the Office of a Presbyter is Pastoral,
and of the same nature with that which was ordinary in the Apostles, and in
which they had Successors.

Likewise, this Church did then appoin^ that at the ordering of Priests or
Presbyters certain portions of Scripture should be read as belonging to their
Office to instruct them in the nature of it, viz. That portion o^ Act. 20.
which relates St. Paul's sending to Ephesus, and calling for the Elders of the
Congregation with his exhortation to them, To take heed to themselves and to
all the Flock, over which the Holy Ghost had made them Overseers, to rule the
Congregation of God. Or else 1 Timothy 3. which sets forth the Office and due
qualification of a Bishop. And afterward the Bishop spoke to them that were to
receive the Office of Priesthood, in this form of words, (Ye have heard,
brethren, as well in your private examination, and in the exhortation and holy
Lessons taken out of the Gospels and Writings of the Apostles, of what dignity,
and how great importance this Office is whereto ye are called, that is to say
the Messengers, the Watchmen, the PASTORS and Stewards of the Lord, to teach,
to premonish, to feed, to provide for the Lords Family.

I mention my Ordination according to the Episcopal Form, because it is of
greatest esteem with them, to whom this Representation is more especially
tendered. Nevertheless, I own the validity of Presbyterial Ordination, and judge
that Ministers so Ordained, may make the same defense for exercising the
Ministry, in the same case that is here represented.

Christ is the Author and the only proper Giver of this Office; and though he
give it by the mediation of men, yet not by them as giving the Office, but as
instruments of the designation, or of the solemn investiture of the Person to
whom he gives it. As the King is the immediate Giver of the power of a Mayor in
a Town Corporate, when he gives it by the Mediation of Electors and certain
Officers, only as instruments of the designation, or of the solemn investiture
of the Person.

I am not conscious of disabling my self to the Sacred Ministrations, that
belong to the Office of a Presbyter, by any Opinion or Practice, that may
render me unfit for the same. Touching which matter, I humbly offer my self to
the trial of my Superiors to be made according to Gods Word.

Nothing necessary to authorize me to those Ministrations is wanting that I
know of. I am Christ's Commissioned Officer; and I do not find that he has
revoked the authority which I have received from him; And without the warrant
of his Law no man can take it from me. Nor do I find, that the nature of this
Office, or the declared will of Christ requires, that it be exercised no
otherwise, than in subordination to a Disocesan Bishop.

That I do not exercise the Ministry under the regulation of the Bishop of the
Diocese, and in other circumstances according to the present established Order,
the cause is not in me, who am ready to submit thereunto; but a bar is laid
against me by the injunction of some terms in the lawfulness whereof I am not
satisfied, whereof I am ready to give an account when it is required.

I do not understand that I am under any Oath or Promise to exercise the
Ministry, no otherwise than in subordination to the Bishop, or the Ordinary of
the Place. The promise made at my Ordination to obey my Ordinary and other
chief Ministers, to whom the government and charge over me is committed,
concerns me only as a Presbyter, standing in relation to the Bishop or
Ordinary, as one of the Clergy of the Diocese, or other peculiar Jurisdiction,
in which relation I do not now stand, being cast out and made incapable
thereof. Moreover, in whatsoever capacity I now stand, the said Promise must be
understood either limitedly or without limitation. If limitedly, as in things
lawful and honest, (as I conceive it ought to be understood) then I am not
bound by it in the present case. For it is not lawful nor honest for me to
comply with the now enjoined Conformity against my conscience, or in case of
such necessitated noncompliance, to desist from the Ministry that I have
received in the Lord. If it be understood without limitation, ^t is a sinful
promise in the matter thereof, and ^hereupon void. Absolute and unlimited
obedience to man may not be promised. Let ^t be considered also that the
objected promise could not bind me to more than the Conformity then required.
But since my Ordina^ion and Promise then made, the state of Con^ormity has
been much altered by the injunction of more, and to me harder terms than
^ormerly were enjoined. When I was Or^ained, I thought that the terms then
requir^d were such as might be lawfully submitted to. But young men (such as I
then was) may be ^asily drawn to subscribe to things publicly ^njoyned, and so
become engaged, before they have well considered.

The Ordainer or Ordainers, who designed me to this Office of Christ's donation,
and not ^heirs, could not by any act of theirs lessen it ^s to its nature or
essential state. Nor can they ^erogate from Christ's authority over me, and ^he
obligation which he has laid upon me, ^o discharge the Office with which he
has ^ntrusted me.

That a necessity is laid upon me in my present state to preach the Gospel, I
am fully persuaded, in regard of the necessities of Souls which cry aloud for
all the help that can posibly be given by Christ's Ministers, whethe^
Conformists or Nonconformists. The necessary means of their Salvation is more
valuable than mere external Order or Uniformity in things accidental.

I receive the whole Doctrine of Faith an^ Sacraments, according to the
Articles of the Church of England, and am ready to subscrib^ the same. I have
joined, and still am ready to join with the legally established Church in
their public Worship. The matter o^ my sacred Ministrations has been always
consonant to the Doctrine of the Reforme^ Churches, and particularly of the
Church o^ England. I meddle not with our present differences, but insist on the
great and necessar^ points of Christian Religion. I design not the promoting of
a severed Party, but of me Christianity or Godliness.

I am willing to comply with the will (...) my Superiors as far as is possible
with a saf^ conscience, and to return to my Ministeri^^ station in the
Established Churches, may I b^ but dispensed with in the injunctions, wit^
which my conscience, till I be otherwise informed, forbids me to comply. In the
whol^ of my dissent from the said injunctions, I ca^ not be charged with
denying any thing essen^^al to Christian Faith and Life, or to the ^onstitution
of a Church, or any of the weigh^er matters of Religion, or with being in any
thing inconsistent with good Order and Go^ernment.

My Case, as I have sincerely set it forth, I ^umbly represent to the Clemency
of my Go^ernours, and to the charity, equity and candor ^f all Christ's
Ministers and People. I am sure design to follow after the things which make
^or Peace; and I hope I am not mistaken in ^he way to it.

J. C.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheap
side.
ONe Hundred of Select Sermon upon several occasions, by Tho. Horton, D. D.

Sermons on the 4th. Psalm. 42. Psalm. 5^ and 63. Psalm. by Tho. Horton, D. D.

A Complete Martyrology, both of Fo reign and English Martyrs, with the Lives
of 26 Modern Divines, by Sam Clark.

A Discourse of Actual Providence by John Collings, D. D.

An Exposition on the 5 first Chapter of the Revelation of Jesus Christ, (...)
Charles Phelpes.

A Discourse of Grace and Temptat^on, by Tho. Froysall.

The Revival of Grace. Sacrament Reflections on the Death of Christ Testator.

A Sacrifice and Curse, by John Hur^

A Glimps of Eternity to Awaken Sinners and Comfort Saints, by Ab. Coley.

Which is the Church, or an Answer to the Question, Where was your Church
before Luther? by Rich. Baxter.

The Husbandmans Companion, or Meditations suitable for Farmers, in order to
Spiritualize their Employment, by Edward Bury.

Mr. Adams Exposition of the Assemb. Catechism, showing its Harmony with the
Articles and Homilies of the Church of England.

The present State of New England, with the History of their Wars with the
Indies.

Popery an Enemy to Truth and Civil Government, by Jo. Sheldeck.

Spelling Book for Children, by Tho. Lie.

Principals of Christian Religion, with Practical Applications to each Head, by
Tho. Gouge.

Almost Christian, by Matthew. Mead.

Godly Man's Ark, by Edmund Calamy.

Heaven and Hell on Earth in a good or bad Conscience, by Nath. Vincent.

Little Catechism for Children, with short Histories, which may both please and
profit them, by Nath. Vincent.

Ark of the Covenant, with an Epistle prefixed by John Owen, D. D.

This Author has lately Published this Book Entitled,

The Kingdom of God among men. A Tract of the sound state of Religion, or that
Christianity which is described in the holy Scriptures, and of things that make
for the security and increase thereof in the World, designing its more ample
diffusion among Professed Christians of all sorts, and its surer propagation to
future Ages. Printed for Tho. Parkhurst.


