A COPY OF THE RESOLUTOIN OF THE States Provincial OF FREEZLAND, Relating to
the LEVYES under Debate in the States General, Friday the 15./25. Feb. 1684.
THE States of Freezeland having seen and examined two Messages from H. H. M.
dated February 1684. tending to the end that H. E. M. with the first, would
bring in their Consent for Levying 16000 Men, upon which, this Government, upon
a serious Consideration, and full Agreement of all parties, concluded to bring
in their Advice, That H. E. M. cannot understand of what Necessity or Advantage
it will be to agree to the said Leveys; but that it ought to be rather
apprehended and looked upon, as that which will tend to a ruining destructive
War: To carry on which, this Province do look upon themselves unable to bear
their part, by reason of their being so much in Arrear already; As also by
reason of the Low Prices of their Corn, Fat Cattle, and their Estates; as also
other Inconveniences that attend them; but especially, considering that the
States are destitute of all Alleys, from whence they may certainly expect any
assistance; and therefore it must be looked upon as a Matter of so much the more
Danger; for that in the former War they received several assistances from
others, and yet obtained no Remarkable advantages against France: Besides
which, it ought to be considered, That the Forces which are to be raised, will
not be so easy to be attained, but if raised not of sufficient strength, to
obtain a better Peace from the K. of France, then he himself has offered. As
also it is considered and apprehended, and not without great reason, the
unexpressable Disasters which may befall this Province in particular, from the
French Confederates, as being deprived of all the Forces of this City for their
defense, which will be little enough to oppose the French Force in the
Netherlands, where the Spaniards show so little Zeal in their Conduct, and do
hardly put any Order in execution with earnestness, except such as may serve to
engage this State in a War, and have hardly one share of those Troops ready
which they ought to have, before this State was obliged to send them any
assistance; much less to think of a Rupture for their sakes, it being
Notorious, That none of those Alternatives are so considerable as to equalize
the greatness of the Danger to which this State must not only expose
themselves, but all the Spanish Netherlands, by a War; and not only England but
the Emperor, have already declared their ^i^^atisfaction, as also very
unacceptable to this State, That His Catholic Majesty should publish a
Declaration of War, without accquainting His Alleys therewith.

The King of England has also already declared, That it were better to accept
of those Alternatives, as so suddenly to engage in so destructive a War*
Adding withal, That he is not obliged in such Case to assist either Us or
Spain. For all which reasons, We think it best to desist from those Leveys,
and to let the Spaniards see by that, that this State cannot think it good,
That for preservation of a little, for which they take so little care of the
whole, to expose themselves to such eminent Dangers; and therefore they do give
their Advice, That they be earnestly pressed to accept of one of the
Alternatives, and that such Methods be used with all speed; with Conferences
and Treatys, as may tend to the securing of this State in a desired Peace, and
that the Barreir may remain without danger. The States of this Province do
apprehend, That if a Peace cannot be obtained, that then a Truce for 20 years
is more to be desired, then a War in the Spanish Netherlands; especially
considering, that in process of time, the Emperor may be freed from his
Turkish War, and the K. of England from his National Troubles, and so in a
better Capacity to secure the Peace. Thus concluded in our Stadt-House.

FINIS.
Printed at Rotterdam, Feb. 19. 1684. New Style, by Peter Martin, and Reprinted
in London for Walter Davis, in Amen-Corner.


