A PANEGYRIC TO THE KING'S Most Excellent Majesty.

By CHARLES COTTON.

Mart. Epigr. Iam Caesar, vel nocte veni: sint astra licebit,
Non deerit populo, Te veniente, dies.
LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, 1660.

To the most High and Sacred Majesty OF CHARLES By the Grace of GOD, KING of
GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE and IRELAND, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Most Dread Sovereign,
IT has been an ancient and a laudable custom, and even in latter times not
altogether out of use, to celebrate the Inaugurations, Triumphs and Virtues of
Princes, upon every happy Turn of State, memorable Success, or glorious Action;
and that by way of Panegyric, or laudatory Oration. Thus Isocrates to Philip,
Mamertinus to Julian, Ausonius to Gratian, Nazarius to Constantine, and Pliny
to Trajan. And it ought chiefly to continue, where the Peoples peace, liberty
and safety become enfranchised and restored by so happy a revolution, as the
Divine providence has now wrought in restoring Your Sacred Majesty to us, who
have so long bowed and groaned under the yoke of Tyranny and Oppression. And
although I Your Majesty's most loyal Subject am far unfit for so great an
undertaking, a work that requires the best and most assured Pen to the due
celebration of the virtues and greatness of so Excellent and so mighty a
Prince; yet it may not be the greatest wonder that the happy Influence of your
Royal beams have wrought, that a man how much soever a stranger to all the
ornaments, and even the method of Art, should nevertheless pour out his Joy at
the sacred feet of so gracious and so indulgent a King and Sovereign. Now then
is a time to imitate so beautiful Examples, and after our Hosanna's and
Hallelujahs to Almighty God for your many great and miraculous Deliverances, to
give Your Majesty a most loyal and hearty Welcome to Your just, and so long
unjustly usurped Inheritance, and to all that (by Your gracious Indulgence) we
do or may call ours.

It is not unknown to Your Majesty's faithful Subjects, by what an unparalled
Rebellion, what vile confederacies, and what unexampled cruelty Your Royal
Father (of blessed memory) was deposed from his undoubted and hereditary
Empire; nor by what an irreligious power Your Majesty has since been so long
opposed and kept from the Government of Your faithful and affectionate people:
Nor with what admirable patience, and absolute resignation of your self and
affairs to the will of the most Mighty, You have embraced dangers, and
sustained afflictions, that nothing but so Heroic a Spirit could oppose, or
suffer. And certainly, the great mercy, and mighty power of God was never more
manifested in any humane affair, then in the miraculous preservation and most
happy restoration of your Royal Person to your Crowns and Kingdoms.

It were an unseasonable, and perhaps an inofficious work, to repeat a story
Your Majesty in Your own grace and goodness are willing to forget: It were
otherwise not hard (chiefly to a mind not yet weaned from the sense of Your
past sufferings) to trace You through the unhappy progress of Your misfortunes;
and to let Your Majesty know, that although our hands were manacled from the
service of Your cause, and our feet fettred from the pursuit of Your fortunes,
yet our hearts went along, and were wounded with every impious stroke that was
made to the danger of Your Sacred Majesty's life, or to the prejudice of Your
Royal Interest.

Thus far (Sir) we dare speak our selves honest, even when we lay griped in a
Tyrants talons, and panting under his weight; when upon every Parasites
suggestion, or his own perpetual Jealousy (his more frequent Intelligence)
men's lives, which were his sport, only served to make way to their fortunes,
which were his business. And although good and prudent Subjects ought to
measure their happiness or affliction by the Rulers scale, yet since all men
are not principled at that honest and knowing rate, it may not be impertinent
to consider, that as Your own particular sufferings (if a Prince can be said to
suffer alone) have made Your Majesty's person most welcome to some, so I hope
the common calamity they were involved in, and are now freed from, will endeare
it to all, even the most blind and violent, of Your most seduced, or most
wilfully offending Enemies. Men now look back into their lives, and see so many
deformities behind, that they run affrighted from themselves, and can find no
refuge but in Your Princely arms, no safety but in Your mercy, nor no peace of
mind till Your Royal word has assured them of Your Love, without which Your
Pardon would only reproach them of their unnatural guilt.

But (Mighty Sir) we find You apt to forgive, and so sweetly inclined to
mercy, that You prevent the offender, by obliterating the offense; so that the
most obnoxious find themselves absolved before they ask; and become more
ashamed of their misdemeanors, then afraid of their punishment. Seneca de
Clem. lib. 1
Verecundiam peccandi facit ipsa Clementia regentis; and Your Majesty has made
so admirable an improvement of this excellent Maxim, that methinks the Crimes
could be no less, that could serve to manifest so Christian, and so Heroic a
virtue.

By Your gracious Pardon to your people, this Nation that has been for some
unhappy years, and that through the particular guilt of a few, a general
scandal to all her Neighbors, shall now become reconciled to the other
obedient parts of the world, and wipe off a blemish, that such as were
strangers to the true English nature, unjustly laid upon the whole. Plin. Pan.
Tra.
Magnum quidem illud Seculo dedecus, magnum reipublicae vulnus impressum est;
Imperator and parens generis humani obsessus, captus, inclusus, ablata
mitissimo seni servandorum hominum potestas, ereptumque principi illud in
principatu beatissimum, quod nihil cogitur. A reproach too fitly applied to the
condition of this unfortunate Kingdom, and perhaps not unbeseeming this
occasion; should we not, whilst we celebrate Your Mercy, seem to awake Your
Majesty's reposing Justice.

Let us therefore now celebrate our Countries Redemption, Joy and Dignity, and
forget her old bondage, wounds, and afflictions. A Nation rescued from the
barbarity and insolence of Straws and Tylers, and restored to a flourishing
Kingdom under the blessed Government of an Heroic, and a lawful King. A King
so gloriously eminent in his piety, magnanimity, fortitude, wisdom, and mercy.
A King like Saul, in the stature of his Virtues, more conspicuous then all the
potent Princes of the earth, endowed with all the true real ornaments and
graces, that may render a Monarch feared, and adored of his own people, or make
him an illustrious and unimitable president to all the future Rulers of
mankind. A Prince nourisht and bred up in all the extremes of adverse Fortune,
who by the great favor and assistance of a miraculous Providence, has
victoriously run through all the threatening accidents of treacherous Designs,
bloody Arms, deaf and tumultuous Seas, unnatural sickness, and what ever else
may in the greatest malignity of force, or fortune, threaten or attempt the
life of man.

Ista virtus est quando usu'st qui malum fert fortiter.
Fortiter malum qui patitur, Idem post patiter bonum.
A Prince who has not only, and that fearless, opposed his magnanimous breast to
all these; but which is more, and still more shining, even in the midst and
fury of mischance, and in the lowest ebb of his greatest necessities, through
the purety of his Innocence, and the constancy of his virtue, has defended
himself from the snares of insinuating policy, when dressed in all the gaudy
ornaments of temptation, and disguised in all the subtilty of distorted reason.
A Prince whom no allurements, no securety of His own endangered person, no
reflections upon His immediate and clamorous wants, could ever draw from His
firm piety toward God, or from the Dignity and Majesty of His own Honor.

These trials (Royal Sir) have made you thus superlatively eminent, and
acquired not only the consent of all, even the worst of men, but have added
also one Jewel more to the Crown, and given You a general and undisputed
choice, to Your undoubted and hereditary succession. And these are those trials
that have approved You to be that good King, that other people pray their Kings
may be, and have taught You to prize a lasting and immarcessible virtue, before
all the unstable and fading glories of Crowns and Scepters. Erasm: Ep. 17. lib,
3.
Ab hoc cardine praecipue pendet orbis faelicitas, si principibus maxim cordi
fuerint, quae sunt optima. And it is from this natural and constant love to
virtue, that we expect a reformation of times and manners, and steadfastly hope
(through a continued providence) that we and ours shall see Your Majesty's
happy Throne established to all posterity. And doubtless that great and
unerring Council, that has still had the conduct of all your Majesty's affairs,
saw this the fittest time to restore You to Your desolate people; for never yet
was so great necessity of a good Prince, nor ever so good a Prince to supply so
great a necessity. Never so distracted a face of men, and business, such
confusions of Arms and Councels, such fears and jealousies, whisperings and
expectations, every one ignorant of his distinct office, and few resolved upon
their common duty: Nothing but clouds, and murmuring noise and fluctuation,
shifting and unsetledness, while the Actors themselves were amazed at all they
did, neither knowing how nor why. But when the forerunning Phospher of Your
Majesty's bright, and so long missed day, The thrice Noble and ever to be
recorded General appeared, and that the face of affairs began to unvaile it
self, then the glorious and Majestic light even of Your dawning, so cheared
the hearts of some, and illuminated the minds of others, that they all returned
into the natural channel of their duty, and ran with a smooth and untroubled
current, to kiss and court those noble feet, which the violence of their giddy
and intestine storms had once tript up, and hurried the sacred Frame as a prey
to the insensible Ocean.

Neither was this an ordinary conflux of men either in respect of their number,
or quality, but such an one as might rather seem to oppose, then secure Your
way; and in a better sense serve to inform Your eye of the strength, and Your
Princely heart of the Joy and Loyalty of this Your Majesty's now most happy
Kingdom. Plin. Pan: Tra.
Videres reserta tecta, ac laborantia, ac ne eum quidem vacantem locum, qui non
nisi suspensum, and instabile vestigium caperet. Oppletas undiabque; vias,
angustumabque; tramitem relictum tibi. Alacrem hinc, atque inde populum
vbiabque; par gaudium paremabque; clamorem, tam aequaliter ab omnibus ex
adventu tuo laetitia percepta est, quam omnibus venisti, quae tamen ipsa cum
ingressu tuo crevit, ac prope in fingulos gradus adaucta est. So hearty and so
general was the Joy they met You with, that they scarce left you a path to your
lawful possession: And it may be worthy your Majesty's Princely consideration,
and best thanks to Almighty God, that your way was laid open by your peoples
love, and not forced by your own just Vengeance, that your Throne is
established in the Judgments, and supported by the voluntary and united
Strength of your People, fixed and riveted to the Center of your Laws, not
floating in Blood, nor raised upon heaps of Ruin, but built upon its true and
ancient Foundation: Not one Wound to blemish your Triumph; not one Opposer to
dispute your Title, nothing but Praise and Acclamation for your safe return,
everyone doting of the Majesty of your Person, admiring the Luster of your
Virtues, and crying as it were with one Mouth, God save the King! Never was so
great an harmony of mind, in so prodigious and so mixed a number of men; Never
so wonderful and so sudden a change in men's persons, minds and manners: Old men
forgetting their infirmities, and Young men their wildness; Good men their
injuries, and Ill men their vices; all offenses and animosities laid aside and
forgot, as if they had never been: The worst men secured by Your Pardon, and
the best rewarded by Your Presence; not only concurring in their Allegiance to
their Prince, but mutually reconciled to one another. No man now regards his
danger, or suspects his safety; Every man's loyal love to his Prince, has
overcome the fears he had of himself. We look upon our selves now as under
protection, and the protection of a King that can, and will protect us; A King
that has vanquished Danger, and fettered Mischance; A King that with his own
victorious sword has cut through thousands of prevailing Enemies, and even in
the miscarriage and treachery of an unfortunate day, remained a Conqueror, and
won the hearts of those men, whose ill taught hands were exercised to an
unnatural war against their own lawful Head.

It were (without flattery, Most Gracious Sovereign!) an endless work in it
self, however unacceptable to Your Majesty, to repeat the number, much less to
celebrate the value of Your approved virtues, which have shone forth with
dazeling splendour, through the clouds and horror of those impious times we have
too lately seen: And though their natural luster need no foil to set them off
to the worlds eye, yet they must appear more excellently beautiful, when
immediately confronted to the bestial, and most odious qualities of the late
usurping Tyrant: Aman (if he ought to be called by that name) made up of all
the vicious inclinations, Machiavilian councels, bloody designs, and execrable
executions that ever yet blotted the face of History; and in his unbridled and
inhumane will, apping'd by the numerous and successful arms of a corrupted and
a rebellious power, a crew of veterane Vilains, whose Pay was their god and
cause, and whose admirable design was no less then the subversion of what has
ever been most dear to all good men in this life, to wit, Religion, Prince,
Laws, and Country; disciplined to nothing but Blood and Rapine, Plunder and
Insolence; till He (who is indeed the Glory of Military Commanders) taught a
new Army a new lesson, appeased their fury, moderated their ambition, and
reformed their riots. Plin. Pan: Tra.
Corrupta erat disciplina castrorum, ut ille Corrector Emendatorque
contingeret. 'Twas his Conduct that has made up an honorable body out of the
most infamous Army in the world; an Army formidable to all, but beloved of
none; an Army employed to destroy them they pretended to defend, and to subject
a Nation, not to be subjected by other then the spurious issue of her own
bowels: But now by the prudence and integrity of their Leader, become an Army
faithful to their Prince, such an one as may be useful and necessary to the
most important affairs of all Christendom.

What things, with Your own courage, Your Kingdoms wealth, and Your Peoples
fidelity, may Your Majesty not do? Secure Your Subjects at home, and enlarge
Your Dominions abroad; repay injuries, reward friendships, and shake foreign
Scepters, as well as defend Your own: Your clemency may nourish us, whilst Your
arms chastise Your Enemies; and when Your Royal pleasure shall summon Your
Subjects to the test, they who have smiled at Your misfortunes, may see that
You can command, and that You govern men who dare and will obey.

A Prince that grasps three Scepters in one hand, may conquer all he will, with
both. Neither is there any thing so impossible to do, or so hard to suffer,
that You have not already suffered, or done; and although Your Majesty cannot
outdo Your self in the quality, yet You may increase the number of Your
glorious actions, at your own generous choice.

We have found Your Majesty a King throughout, in all Your trialls and
misfortunes: Nothing in all your dangers, and calamities, unworthy Your birth,
and greatness; no low addresses to Your flourishing Neighbors, no unprincely
offers or unmanly apprehensions; no more abated with Your mishaps, than we find
you elated with Your success, but constant and unshaken in all the storms and
violencies of fortune. Plin. Pan. Tra.
Nihilabque; magis a te subjecti animi factum est, quam quod imperare coepisti.

These virtues of Your Sacred Majesty, as they have made You the best Prince,
so they must consequently make us the happiest people; A people that are to be
governed by a Prince, that has begun His Empire in himself, and made himself
absolute Sovereign over his own passions; A Prince that has made all the world
to admire, but left none to dispute the prerogative of His virtues; A Prince
that in the youth, beauty, and carriage of his own person, without any addition
of His more lasting graces, speaks himself truly and magnanimously what he is.
Plin. Pan. Tra.
Jam firmitas, jam proceritas corporis, jam honor capitis, and dignitas oris,
ad hoc aetatis indeflexa maturitas; nec sine quodam munere deum, festinantis
senectutis insignibus ad augendam Majestatem ornata caesaries: nonne long
lateabque; Principem ostentant? In fine, Sir, there is nothing we could desire
either in the Majesty of Your person, the experience and stability of Your
mind, or the sweetness of your Royal disposition, that God and Nature have not
prevented our prayers in, and blessed us withal, even (if it be possible) beyond
the weak aim of our own wishes: And we were certainly the most stupidly
ignorant, and impiously ungrateful of all that ever wore the characters of men,
if we should not acknowledge it in our Devotions to God, our Loyalties to Your
Majesty, and endeavors by all the obedient affection, and industrious services
of a good and Loyal people, to deserve it in our selves.

Live then, Great King, the true Defender of the Catholic Faith, the Sacred
and uncorrupted Fountain of the Law, and the Gracious and tender Father of Your
people! May Your Majesty prosper by sea, and land; at home, and abroad, in all
You design and enterprise; and the merciful, omnipotent and only-wise God
fortify Your arm in War, and direct Your Justice in Peace! May Your Majesty
live long, and fortunate, full of Peace, Honor and happy days, ever secured
(by the same waking Providence) from the malevolence of wicked men! May Your
Crown and Dignity shine brighter to the distant World by the addition of a
hopeful and numerous Posterity, A Posterity to inherit their Fathers Virtue,
and the great Name of their illustrious Ancestors! Lastly may there never want
a Prince of Your Royal Line to govern these Kingdoms, from Race to Race, in the
same Justice and Reputation, while there are men to obey, or a man to rule upon
the face of the earth! and may that disloyal Subject perish in his ingratitude
to God and You, that will not sincerely, joyfully and heartily say,

AMEN.
FINIS.

