Licensed,

April 5. 1676. Roger L'Estrange.

THE COMPLETE ANGLER.

Being Instructions how to angle for a TROUT or GRAYLING in a clear Stream.

PART. II.

Qui mihi non credit, faciat licet ipse periclum: Et fuerit scriptis aequior
ille meis.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Marriott, and Henry Brom in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXVI.

TO My most Worthy FATHER and FRIEND, Mr. IZAAK WALTON The Elder.
SIR,
BEing you were pleased some years past, to grant me your free leave to do what
I have here attempted; and observing, you never retract any promise when made
in favor even of your meanest friends; I accordingly expect to see these
following particular Directions for the taking of a Trout, to wait upon your
better and more general Rules for all sorts of Angling: And, though mine be
neither so perfect, so well digested, nor indeed so handsomely coucht as they
might have been, in so long a time as since your leave was granted; yet, I dare
affirm them to be generally true: And they had appeared too in something a
neater dress, but that I was surpised with the sudden news of a sudden new
Edition of your Complete Angler; so that, having but a little more than ten
days time to turn me in, and rub up my memory (for in truth I have not in all
this long time, though I have often thought on it, and almost as often resolved
to go presently about it) I was forced upon the instant to scribble what I here
present you: which I have also endeavored to accommodate to your own Method.
And, if mine be clear enough for the honest Brothers of the Angle readily to
understand; (which is the only thing I aim at) then I have my end; and shall
need to make no further Apology; a writing of this kind, not requiring (if I
were Master of any such thing) any Eloquence to set it off, or recommend it; so
that if you, in your better Judgment, or kindness rather, can allow it passable
for a thing of this nature: You will then do me honor if the Cipher fixed and
carved in the front of my little fishing-house may be here explained: And, to
permit me to attend you in public, who in private, have ever been, am, and
ever resolve to be

Sir, Your most affectionate Son and Servant Charles Cotton.
Berisford 10th. of March 1675-76.
THE COMPLETE ANGLER; OR, The Contemplative Man's Recreation.
PART. II.
CHAP. I.
Piscator Junior and Viator.
PISCAT. You are happily overtaken Sir; may a man be so bold as to enquire how
far you travel this way?


Viator. Yes sure Sir very freely; though it be a question I cannot very well
resolve you; as not knowing my self how far it is to Ashborn, where I intend to
night to take up my Inn.


Piscat. Why then Sir, seeing I perceive you to be a Stranger in these parts; I
shall take upon me to inform you, that from the Town you last came through,
called Brelsford, it is five miles, and you are not yet above half a mile on
this side.


Viat. So much! I was told it was but ten miles from Derby, and methinks I have
rode almost so far already.


Piscat. O Sir, find no fault with large measure of good Land, which
Derby-shire abounds in, as much as most Counties of England.


Viat. It may be so, and good Land I confess affords a pleasant prospect: but
by your good leave Sir, large measure of foul way is not altogether so
acceptable.


Piscat. True Sir, but the foul way serves to justify the fertility of the
soil; according to the Proverb: There is good Land, where there is foul way;
and is of good use to inform you of the Riches of the Country you are come
into, and of its continual Travel, and Traffic to the Country Town you came
from; which is also very observable by the fullness of its Road, and the laden
Horses you meet every where upon the way.


Viat. well Sir, I will be content to think as well of your Country, as you
would desire, and I shall have a great deal of reason both to think, and to
speak very well of you, If I may obtain the happiness of your company to the
forementioned place, provided your affair lead you that way, and that they
will permit you to slack your pace out of complacency to a Traveller utterly a
Stranger in these parts, and who am still to wander further out of my own
knowledge.


Piscat. Sir, you invite me to my own advantage, and I am ready to attend you:
my way lying through that Town; but my business, that is, my home, some miles
beyond it: however I shall have time enough to lodge you in your Quarters, and
afterward to perform my own Journey. In the mean time may I be so bold as to
enquire the end of your Journey.


Viat. It Is into Lancashire Sir, and about some business of concern to a near
Relation of mine: for I assure you, I do not use to take so long Journeys, as
from Essex upon the single account of pleasure.


Piscat. From thence Sir! I do not then wonder you should appear dissatisfied
with the length of the Miles, and the foulness of the way: though I am sorry
you should begin to quarrel with them so soon; for, believe me Sir, you will
find the Miles much longer, and the way much worse before you come to your
Journies end.


Viat. Why truly Sir for that, I am prepared to expect the worst; but methinks
the way is mended since I had the good fortune to fall into your good company.


Piscat. You are not obliged to my company for that: but because you are
already past the worst, and the greatest part of your way to your Lodging.


Viat. I am very glad to hear it, both for the ease of my self, and my Horse;
but especially because I may then expect a freer enjoyment of your
conversation; though the shortness of the way will, I fear, make me lose it the
sooner.


Piscat. That Sir is not worth your care; and I am sure you deserve much
better, for being content with so ill company: but we have already talked away
two Miles of your Journey; for from the Brook before us, that runs at the foot
of this Sandy Hill, you have but three Miles to Ashborn.


Viat. I meet every where in this Country with these little Brooks, and they
look as if they were full of Fish; have they not Trouts in them?


Piscat. That is a question, which is to be excused in a Stranger as you are;
otherwise, give me leave to tell you, it would seem a kind of affront to our
Country, to make a doubt of what we pretend to be famous for, next, if not
before, our Malt, Wool, Lead, and Cole; for you are to understand, that we
think we have as many fine Rivers, Rivulets, and Brooks, as any Country
whatever, and they are all full of Trouts, and some of them the best (it is
said) by many degrees in England.


Viat. I was first Sir in love with you, and now shall be so enamored of your
Country by this account you give me of it, as to wish my self a Derby-shire
Man, or at least that I might live in it: for you must know I am a pretender to
the Angle, and doubtless a Trout affords the most pleasure to the Angler, of
any sort of Fish whatever; and the best Trouts, must needs make the best sport:
But this Brook, and some others I have met with upon this way, are too full of
Wood for that recreation.


Piscat. This Sir! why this, and several others like it, which you have past,
and some that you are like to pass, have scarce any name amongst us: but we can
show you as fine Rivers, and as clear from wood, or any other encumbrance to
hinder an Angler, as any you ever saw; and for clear, beautiful streams,
Hantshire it self, by Mr. Izaak Walton's good leave, can show none such; nor I
think and Country in Europe.


Viat. You go far Sir in the praise of your Country Rivers, and I perceive have
read Mr Walton's Complete Angler by your naming of Hantshire, and I pray what
is your opinion of that Book?


Piscat. My Opinion of Mr. Walton's Book is the same with every Man's, that
understands any thing of the Art of Angling, that it is an excellent good one,
and that the forementioned Gentleman understands as much of Fish, and Fishing
as any Man living: but I must tell you further, that I have the happiness to
know his person, and to be intimately acquainted with him, and in him to know
the worthiest Man, and to enjoy the best, and the truest Friend any Man ever
had: nay, I shall yet acquaint you further, that he gives me leave to call him
Father, and I hope is not yet ashamed to own me for his adopted Son.


Viat. In earnest Sir I am ravished to meet with a friend of Mr. Izaak Walton's,
and one that does him so much right in so good and true a Character; for I must
boast to you, that I have the good fortune to know him too, and came acquainted
with him much after the same manner I do with you; that he was my Master who
first taught me to love Angling, and then to become an Angler; and to be plain
with you, I am the very Man deciphered in his Book under the name of Venator,
for I was wholly addicted to the Chase; till he taught me as good, a more
quiet, innocent, and less dangerous diversion.


Piscat. Sir, I think my self happy in your acquaintance, and before we part
shall entreat leave to embrace you; you have said enough to recommend you to my
best opinion; for my Father Walton will be seen twice in no Man's company he
does not like, and likes none but such as he believes to be very honest men,
which is one of the best Arguments, or at least of the best Testimonies I have,
that I either am, or that he thinks me one of those, seeing I have not yet
found him weary of me.


Viat. You speak like a true Friend, and in doing so render your self worthy of
his friendship. May I be so bold as to ask your name?


Piscat. Yes surely Sir, and if you please a much nicer question, my name is --
and I intend to stay long enough in your company, if I find you do not dislike
mine, to ask yours too. In the mean time, because we are now almost at Ashborn,
I shall freely, and bluntly tell you, that I am a Brother of the Angle too, and
peradventure can give you some instructions how to Angle for a Trout in a clear
River, that my Father Walton himself will not disapprove, though he did either
purposely omit, or did not remember them, when you, and he sat discoursing
under the Sycamore Tree. And being you have already told me whether your
Journey is intended, and that I am better acquainted with the Country than you
are; I will heartily, and earnestly entreat, you will not think of staying at
this Town: but go on with me six Miles further to my House, where you shall be
extremely welcome; it is directly in your way, we have day enough to perform our
Journey, and as you like your entertainment, you may there repose your self a
day or two; or as many more as your occasions will permit, to recompense the
trouble of so much a longer Journey.


Viat. Sir, you surprise me with so friendly an invitation upon so short
acquaintance: but how advantageous soever it would be to me, and that my have
perhaps is not so great, but it might dispense with such a divertisement as I
promise my self in your Company; yet I cannot in modesty accept your offer, and
must therefore beg your pardon: I could otherwise, I confess be glad to wait
upon you, if upon no other account but to talk of Mr. I. Walton, and to receive
those instructions you say you are able to give me for the deceiving a Trout;
in which art I will not deny, but that I have an ambition to be one of the
greatest deceivers; though I cannot forbear freely to tell you, that I think it
hard to say much more, than has been read to me upon that subject.


Piscat. well Sir, I grant that too; but you must know that the variety of
Rivers, require different ways of Angling: however you shall have the best
Rules I am able to give, and I will tell you nothing I have not made my self as
certain of, as any Man can be in thirty years experience (for so long I have
been a dabler in that art) and that if you please to stay a few days, you shall
not in a very great measure see made good to you. But of that hereafter, and
now, Sir, if I am not mistaken I have half overcome you; and that I may wholly
conquer that modesty of yours, I will take upon me to be so familiar as to say,
you must accept my invitation, which that you may the more easily be persuaded
to do, I will tell you that my House stands upon the margin of one of the
finest Rivers for Trouts, and grayling in England; that I have lately built a
little Fishing House upon it, dedicated to Anglers, over the door of which you
will see the two first Letters of my Father Walton's name and mine twisted in
Cipher; as in the Title page.
that you shall lie in the same Bed he has sometimes been contented with, and
have such Country entertainment, as my Friends sometimes accept, and be as
welcome too, as the best Friend of them all.


Viat. No doubt Sir, but my Master Walton found good reason to be satisfied
with his entertainment in your House; for you who are so friendly to a mere
Stranger who deserves so little, must needs be exceedingly kind and free to him
who deserves so much.


Piscat. Believe me, no! and such as are intimately acquainted with that
Gentleman, know him to be a Man, who will not endure to be treated like a
Stranger. So that his acceptance of my poor entertainments, has ever been a
pure effect of his own humility, and good nature, and nothing else. But Sir, we
are now going down the Spittle Hill into the Town, and therefore let me
importune you suddenly to resolve, and most earnestly not to deny me.


Viat. In truth Sir, I am so overcome by your Bounty, that I find I cannot, but
must render my self wholly to be disposed by you.


Piscat. Why that is heartily, and kindly spoken, and I as heartily thank you;
and being you have abandoned your self to my conduct, we will only call and
drink a glass on Horseback at the Talbot, and away.


Viat. I attend you, but what pretty River is this, that runs under this
Stone-Bridg? has it a name?


Piscat. Yes, It Is called Henmore, and has in it both Trout, and Grayling; but
you will meet with one or two better anon. And so soon as we are past through
the Town, I will endeavor by such discourse as best likes you to pass away the
time, till you come to your ill Quarters.


Viat. we can talk of nothing with which I shall be more delighted than of
Rivers and Angling.


Piscat. Let those be the Subjects then, but we are now come to the Talbot,
what will you drink Sir, Ale, or Wine.


Viat. Nay, I am for the Country liquor, Derby-shire Ale, if you please; for a
Man should not methinks come from London to drink Wine in the Peak.


Piscat. You are in the right; and yet let me tell you, you may drink worse
French-wine in many Taverns in London, than they have sometimes at this House.
What hoe! bring us a Flaggon of your best Ale, and now Sir my service to you, a
good health to the honest Gentleman you know of, and you are welcome into the
Peak.


Viat. I thank you Sir, and present you my service again, and to all the honest
Brothers of the Angle.


Piscat. I Will pledge you Sir, so, there is for your Ale, and farewell. Come Sir,
let us be going; for the sun grows low, and I would have you look about you as
you ride; for you will see an odd Country, and sights, that will seem strange
to you.


CHAP. II.
PISCAT. So Sir, now we are got to the top of the Hill out of Town, look about
you, and tell me how you like the Country.


Viat. Bless me! what Mountains are here! are we not in Wales?


Piscat. No, but in almost as Mountainous a Country, and yet these Hills though
high, bleak, and craggy, breed and feed good Beef, and Mutton above ground, and
afford good store of Lead within.


Viat. They had need of all those commodities to make amends for the ill
Land-schape: But I hope our way does not lie over any of these; for I dread a
Precipice.


Piscat. Believe me but it does, and down one especially, that will appear a
little terrible to a Stranger: though the way is passable enough, and so
passable, that we who are Natives of these Mountains, and acquainted with them,
disdain to alight.


Viat. I hope though that a Forraigner is privileged to use his own
discretion, and that I may have the liberty to entrust my neck to the fidelity
of my own feet, rather than to those of my Horse; for I have no more at home.


Piscat. 'Twere hard else. But in the mean time I think 'twere best while this
way is pretty even, to mend our pace, that we may be past that Hill I speak of,
to the end your apprehension may not be doubled for want of light to discern
the easiness of the descent.


Viat. I am willing to put forward as fast as my Beast will give me leave;
though I fear nothing in your Company. But what pretty River is this we are
going into?


Piscat. Why this Sir is called Bently Brook, and is full of very good Trout,
and Grayling; but so encumbred with wood in many places, as is troublesome to an
Angler.


Viat. Here are the prettiest Rivers, and the most of them in this Country that
ever I saw; do you know how many you have in the Country?


Piscat. I know them all, and they were not hard to reckon, were it worth the
trouble; but the most considerable of them I will presently name you. And to
begin where we now are (for you must know we are now upon the very skirts of
Derby-shire) we have first the River Dove, that we shall come to by and by,
which divides the two Counties of Derby, and Stafford for many Miles together,
and is so called from the swiftness of its current, and that swiftness
occasioned by the declivity of its course, and by being so straightened in that
course betwixt the Rocks; by which, and those very high ones, it is hereabout
for four, or five Miles confined into a very narrow stream. A River that from a
contemptible Fountain (which I can cover with my Hat) by the confluence of
other Rivers, Rivulets, Brooks, and Rills, is swelled, (before it fall into
Trent a little below Egginton, (where it loses the name,) to such a breadth,
and depth, as to be in most places navigable, were not the passage frequently
interrupted with Fords, and Wires, and has as fertile Bancks, as any River in
England, none excepted. And this River from its head for a Mile or two is a
black water (as all the rest of the Derby-shire Rivers of note, originally are,
for they all spring from the Mosses) but is in a few Miles travel so clarified
by the addition of several clear, and very great springs (bigger than it self)
which gush out of the Limestone Rocks, that before it comes to my House, which
is but six, or seven Miles from its source, you will find it one of the purest
Chrystalline streams you have seen.


Viat. does Trent spring in these parts?


Piscat. Yes in these parts; not in this County, but somewhere toward the
upper end of Staffordshire, I think not far from a place called Trentham, and
thence runs down not far from Stafford to Wolsly Bridge, and washing the skirts
and purlews of the Forest of Needwood runs down to Burton in the same County;
thence it comes into this where we now are, and running by Swarkston, and
Dunnington, receives Derwent at Wildon, and so to Nottingham, thence to Newark,
and by Gainsborough, to Kingston upon Hull, where it takes the name of Humber,
and thence falls into the Sea: but that the Map will best inform you.


Viat. Know you whence this River Trent derives its name?


Piscat. No indeed, and yet I have heard it often discourst upon, when some
have given its denomination from the forenamed Trentham; though that seems
rather a derivative from it; others have said it is so called from thirty Rivers
that fall into it, and there lose their names, which cannot be neither, because
it carries that name from its very Fountain, before any other Rivers fall into
it; others derive it from thirty several sorts of Fish that breed there, and
that is the most likely derivation: But be it how it will, it is doubtless one
of the finest Rivers in the World, and the most abounding with excellent
Salmon, and all sorts of delicate Fish.


Viat. Pardon me Sir for tempting you into this digression, and then proceed to
your other Rivers; for I am mightily delighted with this discourse.


Piscat. It was no interruption, but a very seasonable question; for Trent is
not only one of our Derby-shire Rivers, but the chief of them, and into which
all the rest pay the Tribute of their names; which I had perhaps forgot to
insist upon, being got to the other end of the County, had you not awoke my
memory. But I will now proceed, and the next River of note (for I will take
them as they lie Eastward from us) is the River Wye; I say of note, for we have
two lesser betwixt us and it, namely Lathkin, and Bradford, of which Lathkin is
by many degrees the purest, and most transparent stream, that I ever yet saw
either at home or abroad, and breeds it is said, the reddest, and the best
Trouts in England; but neither of these are to be reputed Rivers, being no
better than great springs. The River Wye then has its source near unto Buxtons,
a Town some ten Miles from hence, famous for a warm Bath, and which you are to
ride through in your way to Manchester, a black water too at the Fountain; but
by the same reason with Dove, becomes very soon a most delicate clear River,
and breeds admirable Trout, and Grayling, reputed by those, who, by living upon
its Banks are partial to it, the best of any, and this, running down by
Ashford, Bakewell, and Haddon; at a Town a little lower called Rowsly falls
into Derwent, and there loses its name. The next in order is Derwent a black
water too, and that not only from its Fountain, but quite through its progress,
not having these Crystal springs to wash and cleanse it, which the two
forementioned have; but abounds with Trout and Grayling (such as they are)
toward its source, and with Salmon below; and this River from the upper and
utmost part of this County, where it springs, taking its course by Chatsworth,
Darly, Matlock, Derby, Burrow-Ash, and Awberson, falls into Trent at a place
called Wildon, and there loses its name. The East side of this County of Derby
is bounded by little inconsiderable Rivers, as Awber, Eroways, and the like,
scarce worth naming, but Trouty too, and further we are not to enquire. But Sir
I have carried you, as a Man may say by water, till we are now come to the
descent of the formidable Hill I told you of, at the foot of which runs the
River Dove, which I cannot but love above all the rest, and therefore prepare
your self to be a little frighted.


Viat. Sir, I see you would fortify me, that I should not shame my self: but I
dare follow where you please to lead me, and I see no danger yet; for the
descent methinks is thus far green, even, and easy.


Pisc. You will like it worse presently when you come to the brow of the Hill,
and now we are there, what think you?


Viat. What do I think? why I think it the strangest place that ever sure Men,
and Horses went down, and that (if there be any safety at all) the safest way
is to alight.


Pisc. I think so too for you, who are mounted upon a Beast not acquainted with
these slippery stones; and though I frequently ride down, I will alight too to
bear you company, and to lead you the way, and if you please my Man shall lead
your Horse.


Viat. Marry Sir, and thank you too, for I am afraid I shall have enough to do
to look to my self; and with my Horse in my hand should be in a double fear,
both of breaking my neck, and my Horse's falling on me, for it is as steep as a
penthouse.


Pisc. To look down from hence it appears so, I confess, but the path winds and
turns, and will not be found so troublesome.


Viat. Would I were well down though! Hoist thee! there is one fair escape! these
stones are so slippery I cannot stand! yet again! I think I were best lay my
heels in my neck, and tumble down.


Pisc. If you think your heels will defend your neck, that is the way to be
soon at the bottom; but give me your hand at this broad stone, and then the
worst is past.


Viat. I thank you Sir, I am now past it, I can go my self. What Is here the
sign of a Bridge? Do you use to Travel with wheel-barrows in this Country?


Pisc. Not that I ever saw Sir, why do you ask that question?


Viat. Because this Bridge certainly was made for nothing else; why a mouse can
hardly go over it: It Is not two fingers broad.


Pisc. You are pleasant, and I am glad to see you so: but I have rid over the
Bridge many a dark night.


Viat. Why according to the French proverb, and it is a good one among a great
many of worse sense and sound that language abounds in, Ce que Diu guard, est
bien guard. They, whom God takes care of are in safe protection: but, let me
tell you, I would not ride over it for a thousand pounds, nor fall off it for
two; and yet I think I dare venture on foot, though if you were not by to laugh
at me: I should do it on all four.


Pisc. Well Sir, your mirth becomes you, and I am glad to see you safe over,
and now you are welcome into Staffordshire.


Viat. How Staffordshire! what do I there trow! there is not a word of
Staffordshire in all my direction.


Pisc. You see you are betrayed into it; but it shall be in order to something
that will make amends; and it is but an ill Mile or two out of your way.


Viat. I believe all things Sir, and doubt nothing. Is this your beloved River
Dove. It Is clear, and swift indeed, but a very little one.


Pisc. You see it here at the worst; we shall come to it anon again after two
Miles riding, and so near as to lie upon the very Banks.


Viat. Would we were there once; but I hope we have no more of these Alps to
pass over.


Pisc. No, no Sir, only this ascent before you, which you see is not very
uneasy, and then you will no more quarrel with your way.


Viat. Well, if ever I come to London (of which many a Man there, if he were in
my place would make a question;) I will sit down and write my Travels, and like
Tom Coriate print them at my own charge. Pray what do you call this Hill we
come down?


Pisc. We call it Hanson Toot.


Viat. Why farewell Hanson Toot, I Will no more on thee; I Will go twenty Miles
about first: Push. I sweat, that my shirt sticks to my back.


Pisc. Come Sir, now we are up the Hill, and now how do you?


Viat. Why very well I humbly thank you Sir, and warm enough I assure you. What
have we here, a Church! As I Am an honest Man a very pretty Church! Have you
Churches in this Country Sir?


Pisc. You see we have: but had you seen none, why should you make that doubt
Sir?


Viat. Why, if you will not be angry, I Will tell you, I thought my self a Stage,
or two beyond Christendom.


Pisc. Come, come, we will reconcile you to our Country before we part with you;
if showing you good sport with Angling will do it.


Viat. My respect to you, and that together may do much Sir; otherwise, to be
plain with you, I do not find my self much inclined that way.


Pisc. Well Sir, your raillery upon our Mountains has brought us almost home;
and look you where the same River of Dove has again met us to bid you welcome,
and to invite you to a dish of Trouts to morrow.


Viat. Is this the same we saw at the foot of Penmen-Maure? It is much a finer
River here.


Pisc. It will appear yet much finer to morrow. But look you Sir here appears
the House, that is now like to be your Inn, for want of a better.


Viat. It appears on a sudden, but not before 'twas looked for, it stands
prettily, and here is vvood about it too, but so young, as appears to be of your
own planting.


Pisc. It is so, will it please you to alight Sir; and now permit me after
all your pains and dangers to take you in my arms, and to assure you, that you
are infinitely vvelcome.


Viat. I thank you Sir, and am glad with all my heart I am here, for, in down
right truth, I am exceeding weary.


Pisc. You will sleep so much the better; you shall presently have a light
supper, and to bed. Come, Sirs, lay the Cloth, and bring what you have
presently, and let the Gentleman's Bed be made ready in the mean time in my
Father Waltons Chamber; and now Sir here is my service to you, and once more
welcome.


Viat. I marry Sir this glass of good Sack has refresht me, and I Will make as
bold with your meat; for the Trot has got me a good stomach.


Pisc. Come Sir fall to then, you see my little supper is always ready when I
come home, and I Will make no Stranger of you.


Viat. That your Meal is so soon ready is a sign your Servants know your
certain hours, Sir; I confess I did not expect it so soon; but now it is here,
you shall see I will make my self no Stranger.


Pisc. Much good do your heart, and I thank you for that friendly word: and now
Sir my service to you in a Cup of More-Lands Ale: for you are now in the
More-Lands, but within a spit, and a stride of the peak; fill my Friend his
Glass.


Viat. Believe me you have good Ale in the More-Lands; far better than that at
Ashborn.


Pisc. That it may soon be: for Ashborn has (which is a kind of a Riddle)
always in it the best Malt, and the worst Ale in England. Come take away, and
bring us some pipes, and a bottle of Ale, and go to your own Suppers. Are you
for this diet Sir?


Viat. Yes Sir, I am for one pipe of Tobacco; and I perceive yours is very good
by the smell.


Pisc. The best I can get in London I assure you: But Sir, now you have thus
far complied with my designs, as to take a troublesome Journey into an ill
Country, only to satisfy me; how long may I hope to enjoy you?


Viat. Why truly Sir, as long as I conveniently can; and longer I think you
would not have me.


Pisc. Not to your inconvenience by any means Sir, but I see you are weary, and
therefore I will presently wait on you to your Chamber, where take Counsel of
your pillow, and to morrow resolve me. Here take the lights, and pray follow
them, Sir; Here you are like to lie, and now I have showed you your Lodging, I
beseech you command any thing you want, and so I wish you good rest.


Viat. Good night Sir.


CHAP. III.
PISC. Good morrow Sir, what up and dressed so early?


Viat. Yes Sir, I have been dressed this half hour; for I rested so well, and
have so great a mind either to take, or to see a Trout taken in your fine
River, that I could no longer lie a bed.


Pisc. I am glad to see you so brisk this morning, and so eager of sport;
though I must tell you, this day proves so calm, and the Sun rises so bright,
as promises no great success to the Angler: but however we will try, and one way
or other we shall sure do something. What will you have to your breakfast, or
what will you drink this Morning.


Viat. For Breakfast I never eat any, and for Drink am very indifferent; but if
you please to call for a Glass of Ale, I Am for you; and let it be quickly if
you please: for I long to see the little Fishing-house you spoke of, and to be
at my Lesson.


Pisc. Well Sir, You see the Ale is come without Calling; for though I do not
know yours, my people know my diet, which is always one Glass so soon as I am
dressed, and no more till Dinner, and so my Servants have served you.


Viat. My thanks, and now if you please let us look out this fine morning.


Pisc. With all my heart, Boy take the Key of my Fishing-house, and carry down
those two Angle-Rods in the Hall window thither, with my Fish-pannier, Pouch,
and landing Net, and stay you there till we come. Come Sir we will walk after,
where by the way I expect you should raise all the exceptions against our
Country you can.


Viat. Nay Sir, do not think me so ill natured, nor so uncivil, I only made a
little bold with it last night to divert you, and was only in jest.

You were then in as good earnest as I am now with you: but had you been really
angry at it, I could not blame you: For, to say the truth, it is not very
taking at first sight: But look you, Sir, now you are abroad, does not the Sun
shine as bright here as in Essex, Middlesex, or Kent, or any of your Southern
Countries?


Viat. It Is a delicate Morning indeed, and I now think this a mavelous pretty
place.


Pisc. Whether you think so or no, you cannot oblige me more than to say so;
and those of my friends who know my humor, and are so kind as to comply with
it, usually flatter me that way. But look you Sir, now you are at the brink of
the Hill, how do you like my River, the Vale it winds through like a Snake, and
the situation of my little Fishing-house?


Viat. Trust me it is all very fine, and the house seems at this distance a neat
building.


Pisc. Good enough for that purpose; and here is a bowling Green too, close by
it, so though I am my self no very good bowler, I am not totally devoted to my
own pleasure; but that I have also some regard to other men's. And now Sir you
are come to the door, pray walk in, and there we will sit, and talk as long as
you please.


Viat. Stay, what is here over the door? Piscatoribus sacrum. There is under
this Motto, the Cifer mentioned in the Title Page and some part of the
Fishing-house has been discrib'd; but, the pleasantness of the River,
Mountains, and Meadows about it, cannot; unless Sir Philip Sidney, or Mr.
Cotton's Father were again alive to do it.
Why then I perceive I have some Title here, for I am one of them, though one
of the worst, and here below it is the Cifer too you spoke of, and it is
prettily contrived. Has my Master Walton ever been here to see it; for it seems
new built?


Pisc. Yes he saw it cut in the stone before it was set up; but never in the
posture it now stands: for the house was but building when he was last here,
and not raised so high as the Arch of the door, and I am afraid he will not see
it yet; for he has lately writ me word he doubts his coming down this Summer,
which I do assure you was the worst news he could possibly have sent me.


Viat. Men must sometimes mind their affairs to make more room for their
pleasures; and it is odds he is as much displeased with the business, that keeps
him from you, as you are that he comes not. But I am the most pleased with this
little house of any thing I ever saw: It stands in a kind of Peninsula too,
with a delicate clear River about it. I dare hardly go in, lest I should not
like it so well within as without; but by your leave, I Will try. Why, this is
better and better, fine lights, finely wainscoted, and all exceeding neat, with
a Marble Table and all in the middle!


Pisc. Enough, Sir, enough, I have laid open to you the part where I can worst
defend my self, and now you attaque me there. Come Boy set two Chairs, and
whilst I am taking a Pipe of Tobacco, which is always my Breakfast, we will,
if you please, talk of some other Subject.


Viat. None fitter then Sir for the time and place, than those Instructions you
promised.


Pisc. I begin to doubt, by something I discover in you, whether I am able to
instruct you, or no; though, if you are really a stranger to our clear Northern
Rivers I still think I can; and therefore, since it is yet too early in the
morning at this time of the year, to day being but the Seventh of March, to
cast a Fly upon the water, if you will direct me what kind of Fishing for a
Trout I shall read you a Lecture on, I am willing and ready to obey you.


Viat. Why Sir, if you will so far oblige me, and that it may not be too
troublesome to you, I would entreat you would run through the whole body of it;
and I will not conceal from you, that I am so far in love with you, your
courtesy, and pretty Moreland Seat, as to resolve to stay with you long enough
by Intervals (for I will not oppress you) to hear all you can say upon that
Subject.


Pisc. You cannot oblige me more than by such a promise, and therefore without
more Ceremony I will begin to tell you; that my Father Walton having read to
you before, it would look like a presumption in me, and peradventure would do
so in any other man, to pretend to give Lessons for angling after him, who I do
really believe understands as much of it, at least as any man in England, did I
not pre-acquaint you, that I am not tempted to it by any vain opinion of my
self, that I am able to give you better directions; but having from my
Childhood pursued the recreation of angling in very clear Rivers (truly I think
by much (some of them at least) the clearest in this Kingdom) and the manner of
Angling here with us by reason of that exceeding clearness, being something
different from the method commonly used in others, which by being not near so
bright, admit of stronger tackle, and allow a nearer approach to the stream; I
may peradventure give you some Instructions, that may be of use even in your
own Rivers, and shall bring you acquainted with more Flies, and show you how to
make them, and with what dubbing too, than he has taken notice of in his
Complete Angler.

I beseech you Sir do, and if you will lend me your Steel, I will light a Pipe
the while, for that is commonly my Breakfast in a morning too.


CHAP. IV.
PISC. Why then Sir, to begin methodically, as a Master in any Art should do
(and I will not deny, but that I think my self a Master in this) I shall divide
Angling for Trout or Grayling into these three ways, At the Top, At the bottom,
and In the Middle.
Which three ways, though they are all of them (as I shall hereafter endeavor
to make it appear) in some sort common to both those kinds of Fish; yet are
they not so generally and absolutely so, but that they will necessarily require
a distinction, which in due place I will also give you. That whicb we call
Angling at the top, is with a Fly; At the bottom with a ground-bait. In the
middle with a Minnow, or Ground-bait.
Angling at the Top is of two sorts, With a quick Fly: or, With an artificial
Fly.
That we call Angling at the bottom is also of two sorts, By hand: or With a
Cork, or Float.
That we call Angling in the middle is also of two sorts. With a Minnow for a
Trout: or With a Ground-bait for a Grayling.
Of all which several sorts of Angling, I will, if you can have the patience to
hear me, give you the best account I can.


Viat. The trouble will be yours, and mine the pleasure and the obligation: I
beseech you therefore to proceed.


Pisc. Why then first of Flie-Fishing.


CHAP. V.
Of Flie-Fishing.
PISC. Flie-Fishing or Fishing at the top, is, as I said before, of two sorts,
With a natural and living Fly: or, With an artificial and made Fly.


First then of the natural Fly; of which we generally use but two sorts, and
those but in the two months of May and June only, namely the Green Drake, and
the Stone-Flies; though I have made use of a third that way, called the
Chamblet-Flie with very good success for Grayling, but never saw it angled with
by any other after this manner, my Master only excepted, who did many years
ago, and was one of the best Anglers, that ever I knew.

These are to be angled with, with a short Line, not much more than half the
length of your Rod, if the air be still, or with a longer very near, or all out
as long as your Rod, if you have any wind to carry it from you, and this way of
Fishing we call Daping, Dabbing or Dibling, wherein you are always to have your
Line flying before you up or down the River as the wind serves, and to angle as
near as you can to the bank of the same side whereon you stand, though where
you see a Fish rise near you, you may guide your quick Fly over him, whether
in the middle, or on the contrary side, and if you are pretty well out of
sight, either by kneeling, or the Interposition of a bank, or bush, you may
almost be sure to raise, and take him too, if it be presently done; the Fish
will otherwise peradventure be removed to some other place, if it be in the
still deeps, where he is always in motion, and roving up and down to look for
prey, though in a stream, you may always almost, especially if there be a good
stone near, find him in the same place. Your Line ought in this Case to be
three good hairs next the hook, both by reason you are in this kind of angling,
to expect the biggest Fish, and also that wanting length to give him Line after
he is struck, you must be forced to tugg for it; to which I will also add, that
not an Inch of your Line being to be suffered to touch the water in dibbling;
it may be allowed to be the stronger. I should now give you a Description of
those Flies, their shape and color, and then give you an account of their
breeding, and withal show you how to keep and use them; but shall defer that to
their proper place and season.


Viat. In earnest, Sir, you discourse very rationally of this affair, and I am
glad to find my self mistaken in you; for in plain truth I did not expect so
much from you.


Pisc. Nay Sir, I can tell you a great deal more than this, and will conceal
nothing from you. But I must now come to the second way of angling at the top,
which is with an artificial Fly, which also I will show you how to make before
I have done, but first shall acquaint you, that with this you are to angle with
a Line longer by a yard and a half, or sometimes two yards than your Rod, and
with both this, and the other in a still day in the streams, in a breeze, that
curles the water in the still deeps, where (excepting in May and June, that the
best Trouts will lie in shallow streams to watch for prey, and even then too)
you are like to hit the best Fish.

For the length of your Rod you are always to be governed by the breadth of the
River you shall choose to angle at; and for a Trout River, one of five or six
yards long is commonly enough, and longer (though never so neatly and
artificially made) it ought not to be, if you intend to Fish at ease, and if
otherwise, where lies the sport?

Of these, the best that ever I saw are made in Yorkshire, which are all of
one piece; that is to say, of several, six, eight, ten or twelve pieces, so
neatly piec't, and tied together with fine thread below, and Silk above, as to
make it taper, like a switch, and to ply with a true bent to your hand; and
these are too light, being made of Fir wood, for two or three lengths, nearest
to the hand, and of other wood nearer to the top, that a Man might very easily
manage the longest of them that ever I saw, with one hand; and these when you
have given over Angling for a season, being taken to pieces, and laid up in
some dry place, may afterward be set together again in their former postures,
and will be as strait, sound, and good as the first hour they were made, and
being laid in Oil and color according to your Master Waltons direction, will
last many years.

The length of your line, to a Man that knows how to handle his Rod, and to
cast it, is no manner of encumbrance, excepting in woody places, and in landing
of a Fish, which every one that can afford to Angle for pleasure, has some body
to do for him, and the length of line is a mighty advantage to the fishing at
distance; and to fish fine, and far off is the first and principal Rule for
Trout Angling.

Your Line in this case should never be less, nor ever exceed two hairs next to
the hook, for one (though some I know will pretend to more Art, than their
fellows) is indeed too few, the least accident, with the finest hand being
sufficient to break it: but he that cannot kill a Trout of twenty inches long
with two, in a River clear of wood and weeds, as this and some others of ours
are, deserves not the name of an Angler.

Now to have your whole line as it ought to be, two of the first lengths,
nearest the hook, should be of two hairs a piece, the next three lengths above
them of three, the next three above them of four, and so of five, and six, and
seven, to the very top: by which means your Rod and tackle will in a manner be
taper from your very hand to your hook; your line will fall much better and
straiter, and cast your Fly to any certain place to which the hand and eye
shall direct it, with less weight and violence, that would otherwise circle the
water, and fright away the fish.

In casting your line, do it always before you, and so that your fly may first
fall upon the water, and as little of your line with it as is possible, though
if the vvind be stiff, you will then of necessity be compelled to drown a good
part of your line to keep your fly in the water: and in casting your fly, you
must aim at the further, or nearer Bank, as the wind serves your turn, which
also will be with, and against you on the same side several times in an hour,
as the River winds in its course, and you will be forced to Angle up and down
by turns accordingly; but are to endeavor, as much as you can, to have the
wind evermore on your back, and always be sure to stand as far off the Bank as
your length will give you leave when you throw to the contrary side, though
when the wind will not permit you so to do, and that you are constrained to
Angle on the same side whereon you stand, you must then stand on the very brink
of the River, and cast your Fly at the utmost length of your Rod and Line, up
or down the River as the gale serves.

It only remains, touching your Line, to enquire whether your two hairs next to
the hook, are better twisted, or open; and for that, I should declare that I
think the open way the better, because it makes less show in the water, but
that I have found an inconvenience, or two, or three, that have made me almost
weary of that way; of which one is, that without dispute they are not so strong
twisted, as open; another, that they are not easily to be fastened of so exact
an equal length in the arming, that the one will not cause the other to bag,
by which means a Man has but one hair, upon the matter, to trust to; and the
last is, that these loose flying hairs are not only more apt to catch upon
every twig, or bent they meet with; but moreover the hook, in falling upon the
water, will very often rebound, and fly back betwixt the hairs, and there stick
(which in a rough water especially, is not presently to be discerned by the
Angler) so as the point of the hook shall stand revers't, by which means your
Fly swims backward, makes a much greater circle in the water, and till taken
home to you, and set right, will never raise any Fish, or if it should, I am
sure, but by a very extraordinary chance, can hit none.

Having done with both these ways of fishing at the top; the length of your
Rod, and Line and all: I am next to teach you how to make a Fly; and
afterward of what dubbing you are to make the several Flies I shall hereafter
name to you.

In making a Fly then (which is not a Hackle or Palmer Fly for of those, and
their several kinds we shall have occasion to speak every Month in the Year)
you are first to hold your hook fast betwixt the fore finger and thumb of your
left hand, with the back of the shanck upwards, and the point toward your
fingers end; then take a strong small silk of the color of the Fly you intend
to make, wax it well with wax of the same color too (to which end you are
always (by the way) to have wax of all colors about you) and draw it betwixt
your finger and thumb, to the head of the shanck, and then whip it twice or
thrice about the bare hook, which, you must know, is done, both to prevent
slipping, and also that the shanck of the hook may not cut the hairs of your
Towght, which sometimes it will otherwise do) which being done, take your Line,
and draw it likewise betwixt your finger and thumb, holding the Hook so fast,
as only to suffer it to pass by, until you have the knot of your Towght almost
to the middle of the shanck of your hook, on the inside of it, then whip your
silk twice or thrice about both hook and Line, as hard as the strength of the
silk will permit, which being done, strip the feather for the wings
proportionable to the bigness of your Fly, placing that side downwards, which
grew uppermost before, upon the back of the hook, leaving so much only as to
serve for the length of the wing of the point of the plume, lying revers't from
the end of the shanck upwards, then whip your silk twice, or thrice about the
root end of the feather, hook, and towght, which being done clip off the root
end of the feather close by the arming, and then whip the silk fast and firm
about the hook, and tought until you come to the bend of the hook: but not
further (as you do at London; and so make a very unhandsom, and, in plain
English, a very unnatural and shapeless Fly) which being done, cut away the
end of your tought, and fasten it, and then take your dubbing which is to make
the body of your Fly, as much as you think convenient, and holding it lightly,
with your hook, betwixt the finger, and thumb of your left hand, take your silk
with the right, and twisting it betwixt the finger and thumb of that hand, the
dubbing will spin it self about the silk, which when it has done, whip it about
the armed hook backward, till you come to the setting on of the wings; and then
take the feather for the wings, and divide it equally into two parts, and turn
them back toward the bend of the Hook, the one on the one side, and the other
on the other of the shanck, holding them fast in that posture betwixt the fore
finger, and thumb of your left hand, which done, warp them so down, as to
stand, and slope toward the bend of the hook, and having warpt up to the end
of the shanck, hold the Fly fast betwixt the finger and thumb of your left
hand, and then take the silk betwixt the finger, and thumb of your right hand,
and where the warping ends, pinch or nip it with your thumb nail against your
finger, and strip away the remainder of your dubbing from the silk, and then
with the bare silk whip it once or twice about, make the wings to stand in due
order, fasten, and cut it off; after which with the point of a needle raise up
the dubbing gently from the warp, twitch off the superfluous hairs of your
dubbing, leave the wings of an equal length (your Fly will never else swim
true) and the work is done. And this way of making a Fly (which is certainly
the best of all other) was taught me by a Kinsman of mine, one Captain Henry
Jackson, a near neighbor, an admirable Fly Angler, by many degrees the best
Fly maker, that ever I yet met with. And now that I have told you how a Fly
is to be made, you shall presently see me make one, with which you may
peradventure take a Trout this morning, notvvithstanding the unlikeliness of
the day; for it is now nine of the Clock, and Fish will begin to rise, if they
will rise to day; I will walk along by you, and look on, and after dinner I
will proceed in my lecture of Flie-Fishing.


Viat. I confess I long to be at the River, and yet I could sit here all day to
hear you: but some of the one, and some of the other will do well: and I have a
mighty ambition to take a Trout in your River Dove.


Pisc. I vvarrant you shall: I would not for more, than I will speak of but you
should, seeing I have so extolled my River to you: nay I will keep you here a
Month, but you shall have one good day of sport before you go.


Viat. You will find me I doubt too tractable that way; for in good earnest,
if business would give me leave, and that if it were fit, I could find in my
heart to stay with you for ever.


Pisc. I thank you Sir, for that kind expression, and now let me look out my
things to make this fly.


CHAP. VI.
PISC. Boy, come give me my dubbing bagg here presently; and now Sir, since I
find you so honest a man, I will make no scruple to lay open my Treasure before
you.


Viat. Did every any one see the like! What a heap of Trumpery is here!
certainly never an Angler in Europe has his shop half so well furnished, as you
have.


Pisc. You perhaps may think now, that I rake together this Trumpery, as you
call it, for show only, to the end that such as see it (which are not many I
assure you) may think me a great Master in the Art of angling: but let me tell
you here are some colors (as contemptible as they seem here) that are very
hard to be got, and scarce any one of them, which if it should be lost, I
should not miss, and be concerned about the loss of it too, once in the year;
but look you, Sir, amongst all these I will choose out these two colors only,
of which this is Bears-hair, this darker no great matter what; but I am sure I
have killed a great deal of Fish with it; and with one or both of these you
shall take Trout or Grayling this very day, notwithstanding all disadvantages,
or my Art shall fail me.


Viat. You promise comfortably, and I have a great deal of reason to believe
every thing you say; but I wish the Fly were made, that we were at it.


Pisc. That will not be long in doing: and pray observe then. You see first how
I hold my hook, and thus I begin. Look you here are my first two or three whips
about the bare hook, thus I join hook and line, thus I put on my wings, thus I
twirle and lap on my dubbing, thus I work it up toward the head, thus I part
my wings, thus I nip my superfluous dubbing from my silk, thus fasten, thus
trim and adjust my Fly, and there is a Fly made, and now how do you like it?


Viat. In earnest, admirably well, and it perfectly resembles a Fly; but we
about London make the bodies of our Flies both much bigger and longer, so long
as even almost to the very beard of the Hook.


Pisc. I know it very well, and had one of those Flies given me by an honest
Gentleman, who came with my Father Walton to give me a Visit, which (to tell
you the truth) I hung in my parlour Window to laugh at: but Sir, you know the
Proverb, They who go to Rome, must do as they at Rome do; and believe me you
must here make your Flies after this fashion, or you will take no Fish. Come I
will look you out a Line, and you shall put it on, and try it. There Sir, now I
think you are fitted, and now beyond the farther end of the walk you shall
begin, I see at that bend of the water above, the air crisps the water a
little, knit your Line first here, and then go up thither, and see what you can
do.


Viat. Did you see that Sir?


Pisc. Yes, I saw the Fish, and he saw you too, which made him turn short, you
must fish further off, if you intend to have any sport here, this is no
New-River let me tell you. That was a good Trout believe me, did you touch him?


Viat. No, I would I had, we would not have parted so. Look you there was
another; this is an excellent File.


Pisc. That Fly I am sure would kill Fish, if the day were right; but they
only chew at it I see, and will not take it. Come Sir, let us return back to
the Fishing-house; this still water I see will not do our business to day; you
shall now, if you please, make a Fly your self, and try what you can do in the
streams with that, and I know a Trout taken with a Fly of your own making will
please you better than twenty with one of mine. Give me that Bag again, Sirrah;
look you Sir, there is a hook, tought, silk, and a feather for the wings, be
doing with those, and I will look you out a Dubbing, that I think will do.


Viat. This is a very little hook.


Pisc. That may serve to inform you, that it is for a very little Fly, and you
must make your wings accordingly; for as the case stands it must be a little
Fly, and a very little one too, that must do your business. Well said! believe
me you shift your fingers very handsomely; I doubt I have taken upon me to
teach my Master. So here is your dubbing now.


Viat. This dubbing is very black.


Pisc. It appears so in hand; but step to the doors and hold it up betwixt your
eye and the Sun, and it will appear a shining red; let me tell you never a man
in England can discern the true color of a dubbing any way but that, and
therefore choose always to make your Flies on such a bright Sunshine day as
this, which also you may the better do, because it is worth nothing to fish in,
here put it on, and be sure to make the body of your Fly as slender as you
can. Very good! Upon my word you have made a mavelous handsome Fly.


Viat. I am very glad to hear it; it is the first that ever I made of this kind
in my life.


Pisc. Away, away! You are a Doctor at it! but I will not commend you too much,
left I make you proud. Come put it on, and you shall now go downward to some
streams betwixt the rocks below the little foot bridge you see there, and try
your Fortune. Take heed of slipping into the water as you follow me under this
rock: So now you are over, and now throw in.


Viat. This is a fine stream indeed: There Is one! I have him!


Pisc. And a precious catch you have of him; pull him out! I see you have a
tender hand: This is a diminutive Gentleman, even throw him in again, and let
him grow till he be more worthy your anger.


Viat. Pardon me, Sir, all is Fish that comes to'th' hook with me now. Another!


Pisc. And of the same standing.


Viat. I see I shall have good sport now: Another! and a Grayling. Why you have
Fish here at will.


Pisc. Come, come, cross the Bridge, and go down the other side lower, where
you will find finer streams, and better sport I hope than this. Look you Sir,
here is a fine stream now, you have length enough, stand a little further off,
let me entreat you, and do but Fish this stream like an Artist, and
peradventure a good Fish may fall to your share. How now! what is all gone?


Viat. No, I but touched him; but that was a Fish worth taking.


Pisc. Why now let me tell you, you lost that Fish by yout own fault, and
through your own eagerness and haste; for you are never to offer to strike a
good Fish, if he do not strike himself, till first you see him turn his head
after he has taken your Fly, and then you can never strain your tackle in the
striking, if you strike with any manner of moderation. Come throw in one again,
and fish me this stream by inches; for I assure you here are very good Fish,
both Trout and Grayling, lie here; and at that great stone on the other side,
it is ten to one a good Trout gives you the meeting.


Viat. I have him now, but he is gone down toward the bottom, I cannot see
what he is* yet he should be a good Fish by his weight; but he makes no great
stir.


Pisc. Why then, by what you say, I dare venture to assure you, it is a
Grayling, who is one of the deadest hearted Fishes in the world, and the bigger
he is the more easily taken. Look you, now you see him plain; I told you what
he was, bring hither that landing net, Boy, and now Sir, he is your own; and
believe me a good one, sixteen Inches long I warrant him, I have taken none
such this year.


Viat. I never saw a Grayling before look so black.


Pisc. Did you not? Why then let me tell you, that you never saw one before in
right season: for then a Grayling is very black about his head, guills, and
down his back, and has his Belly of a dark gray, dappled with black spots, as
you see this is, and I am apt to conclude, that from thence he derives his name
of Vmber. Though I must tell you this Fish is past his prime, and begins to
decline, and was in better season at Christmas than he is now. But move on, for
it grows toward dinnertime, and there is a very great and fine stream below,
under that Rock, that fills the deepest pool in all the River, where you are
almost sure of a good Fish.


Viat. Let him come, I Will try a fall with him; but I had thought, that the
Grayling had been always in season with the Trout, and had come in, and gone
out with him.

Oh no! assure your self a Grayling is a winter-fish: but such a one as would
deceive any but such as know him very well indeed; for his flesh, even in his
worst season, is so firm, and will so easily calver, that in plain truth he is
very good meat at all times; but in his perfect season (which, by the way, none
but an overgrown Grayling will ever be) I think him so good a fish, as to be
little inferior to the best Trout that ever I tasted in my life.


Viat. Here Is another skip-jack, and I have raised five or six more at least
whilst you were speaking: Well, go thy way little Dove! thou art the finest
River, that ever I saw, and the fullest of fish. Indeed, Sir, I like it so
well, that I am afraid you will be troubled with me once a year, so long as we
two live.


Pisc. I am afraid I shall not Sir; but were you once here a May or a June, if
good sport would tempt you, I should then expect you would sometimes see me;
for you would then say it were a fine River indeed, if you had once seen the
sport at the height.


Viat. Which I will do, if I live, and that you please to give me leave, there
was one, and there another.


Pisc. And all this in a strange River, and with a Fly of your own making!
why what a dangerous man are you!


Viat. I, Sir, but who taught me? and as Dametas says by his man Dorus, so you
may say by me, If my man such praises have,
What then have I, that taught the Knave?


But what have we got here? A Rock springing up in the middle of the River!
this is one of the oddest sights, that ever I saw.


Pisc. Why, Sir, from that Pike It Is a Rock, in the foshion of a Spire-Steeple;
and, almost as big. It stands in the midst of the River Dove; and not far from
Mr. Cotton's house, below which place this delicate River takes a swift Carere
betwixt many mighty Rocks, much higher and bigger than St Paul's Church, before
'was burnt. And this Dove being opposed by one of the highest of them, has at
last, forced it self away through it; and after a miles concealment, appears
again with more glory and beauty than before that opposition; running through
the most pleasant Valleys and most fruitful Meadows, that this Nation can
justly boast of.
, that you see standing up there distant from the rock, this is called
Pike-Pool: and young Mr. Izaac Walton was so pleased with it, as to draw it in
Landschape in black and white in a blank Book I have at home, as he has done
several prospects of my house also, which I keep for a memorial of his favor,
and will show you, when we come up to dinner.


Viat. Has young Master Izaak Walton been here too?


Pisc. Yes marry has he Sir, and that again, and again too, and in France
since, and at Rome, and at Venice, and I cannot tell where: but I intend to ask
him a great many hard questions so soon as I can see him, which will be, God
vvilling, next Month. In the mean time, Sir, to come to this fine stream at the
head of this great Pool, you must venture over these slippery cobling stones;
believe me, Sir, there you were nimble or else you had been down; but now you
are got over, look to your self; for on my word if a Fish rise here, he is
like to be such a one, as will endanger your tackle: How now!


Viat. I think you have such command here over the Fishes, that you can raise
them by your word, as they say Conjurers can do Spirits, and afterward make
them do what you bid them: for here is a Trout has taken my Fly, I had rather
have lost a Crown. What luck's this! He was a lovely Fish, and turned up a
side like a Salmon.


Pisc. O Sir, this is a War where you sometimes win, and must sometimes expect
to loose; Never concern your self for the loss of your Fly; for ten to one I
teach you to make a better. Who Is that calls?


Serve. Sir, Will it please you to come to dinner?


Pisc. We come. You hear Sir we are called, and now take your choice, whether
you will climb this steep Hill before you, from the top of which you will go
directly into the House, or back again over these stepping stones, and about by
the Bridge.


Viat. Nay, sure the nearest way is best; at least my stomach tells me so; and
I am now so well acquainted with your Rocks, that I fear them not.


Pisc. Come then, follow me, and so soon as we have dined; we will down again
to the little House; where I will begin at the place I left off about
Flie-Fishing, and read you another Lecture; for I have a great deal more to say
upon that Subject.


Viat. The more the better; I could never have met with a more obliging Master,
my first excepted; nor such sport can all the Rivers about London ever afford,
as is to be found in this pretty River.


Pisc. You deserve to have better, both because I see you are willing to take
pains, and for liking this little so well; and better I hope to show you before
we part.


CHAP. VII.
VIAT. Come Sir, having now well dined, and being again set in your little
House; I will now challenge your promise, and entreat you to proceed in your
instruction for Flie-fishing, which, that you may be the better encouraged to
do, I will assure you, that I have not lost, I think, one syllable of what you
have told me; but very well retain all your directions both for the Rod, Line,
and making a Fly, and now desire an account of the Flies themselves.


Pisc. Why Sir, I am ready to give it you, and shall have the whole afternoon
to do it in, if no body come in to interrupt us; for you must know (besides the
unfitness of the day) that the afternoons so early in March signify very
little to Angling with a Fly, though with a Minnow, or a Worm something might
(I confess) be done.

To begin then where I left off, my Father Walton tells us but of 12 Artificial
flies only, to Angle with at the top, and gives their names; of which some are
common with us here; and I think I guess at most of them by his description,
and I believe they all breed, and are taken in our Rivers, though we do not
make them either of the same Dubbing, or fashion. And it may be in the Rivers
about London, which I presume he has most frequented, and where it is likely he
has done most execution, there is not much notice taken of many more: but we
are acquainted with several others here (though perhaps I may reckon some of
his by other names too) but if I do, I shall make you amends by an addition to
his Catalogue. And although the forenamed great Master in the Art of Angling
(for so in truth he is) tells you that no man should in honesty catch a Trout
till the middle of March, yet I hope he will give a Man leave sooner to take a
Grayling, which, as I told you, is in the dead Months in his best season; and
do assure you (which I remember by a very remarkable token) I did once take
upon the sixth day of December one, and only one, of the biggest Graylings and
the best in season, that ever I yet saw, or tasted; and do usually take Trouts
too, and with a Fly, not only before the middle of this Month, but almost
every year in February, unless it be a very ill spring indeed, and have
sometimes in January, so early as New-years-tide, and in frost and snow taken
Grayling in a warm sunshine day for an hour or two about Noon; and to fish for
him with a Grub it is then the best time of all.

I shall therefore begin my Flie-fishing with that Month (though I confess very
few begin so soon, and that such as are so fond of the sport as to embrace all
opportunities, can rarely in that Month find a day fit for their purpose) and
tell you, that upon my knowledge these Flies in a warm sun, for an hour or two
in the day, are certainly taken.


January.
1. A red brown with wings of the Male of a Malard almost white: the dubbing of
the tail of a black long coated Cur, such as they commonly make muffs of; for
the hair on the tail of such a Dog dies, and turns to a red Brown, but the hair
of a smoth coated Dog of the same color will not do, because it will not dye,
but retains its natural color, and this fly is taken in a warm sun, this
whole Month thorough.

2. There is also a very little bright Dun Gnat, as little as can possibly be
made, so little as never to be fisht with, with above one hair next the hook,
and this is to be made of a mixed dubbing of Martins fur, and the white of a
Hares scut; with a very white, and small wing; and it is no great matter how
fine you fish, for nothing will rise in this Month but a Grayling, and of them
I never at this season saw any taken with a Fly, of above a foot long in my
life: but of little ones about the bigness of a smelt in a warm day, and a
glowing Sun, you may take enough with these two Fishes, and they are both taken
the whole North through.

February.
1. Where the Red-brown of the last Month ends, another almost of the same
color begins with this, saving that the dubbing of this must be of something a
blacker color, and both of them warpt on with red silk; the dubbing that
should make this Fly, and that is the truest color, is to be got of the black
spot of a Hogs ear: not that a black spot in any part of the Hog will not
afford the same color; but that the hair in that place is by many degrees
softer, and more fit for the purpose: his wing must be as the other, and this
kills all this Month, and is called the lesser Red-brown.

2. This Month also a plain Hackle, or palmer-Flie made with a rough black
body, either of black Spaniels furr, or the whirl of an Estridg feather, and
the red Hackle of a Capon over all, will kill, and if the weather be right make
very good sport.

3. Also a lesser Hackle with a black body also, silver twist over that, and a
red feather over all, will fill your pannier if the Month be open, and not
bound up in Ice, and snow, with very good Fish; but in case of a frost and
snow, you are to Angle only with the smallest Gnats, Browns and Duns you can
make, and with those are only to expect Graylings no bigger, than sprats.

4. In this Month, upon a whirling round water, we have a great Hackle, the
body black, and wrapped with a red feather of a Capon untrim'd; that is, the
whole length of the Hackle staring out (for we sometimes barb the Hackle
feather short all over; sometimes barb it only a little, and sometimes barb it
close underneath, leaving the whole length of the feather on the top, or back
of the Fly which makes it swim better, and as occasion serves kills very great
Fish.

5. We make use also in this Month of another great Hackle the body black, and
rib'd over with Gold twist, and a red feather over all, which also does great
execution.

6. Also a great Dun, made with Dun Bears Hair, and the wings of the gray
feather of a Mallard near unto his tail, which is absolutely the best Fly can
be thrown upon a River this Month, and with which an Angler shall have
admirable sport.

7. We have also this Month the great blew Dun, the dubbing of the bottom of
Bears hair next to the roots, mixed with a little blew Camlet, the wings of the
dark gray feather of a Mallard.

8. We have also this Month a Dark-Brown, the dubbing of the brown hair of the
Flanck of a brended Cow, and the wings of the grey-Drakes feather.

And note, that these several Hackels, or Palmer Flies, are some for one Water,
and one Sky, and some for another, and according to the change of those, we
alter their size, and color, and note also, that both in this, and all other
Months of the Year, when you do not certainly know what Fly is taken; or
cannot see any Fish to rise, you are then to put on a small Hackle, if the
Water be clear, or a bigger if something dark, until you have taken one, and
then thrusting your finger thorough his Guils, to pull out his Gorge, which
being opened with your knife, you will then discover what Fly is taken, and
may fit your self accordingly.

For the making of a Hackle, or Palmer Fly my Father Walton has already given
you sufficient direction.

March.
For this Month you are to use all the same Hackels, and Flies with the other,
but you are to make them less.

1. We have besides for this Month a little Dun called a whirling Dun (though
it is not the whirling Dun indeed, which is one of the best Flies we have) and
for this the dubbing must be of the bottom fur of a Squirrels tail and the wing
of the gray feather of a Drake.

2. Also a bright brown, the dubbing either of the brown of a Spaniel, or that
of a Cows flanck, with a Grayling.

3. Also a whitish Dun made of the roots of Camels hair, and the wings of the
gray feather of a Mallard.

4. There is also for this Month a Fly, called the Thorn Tree Fly, the
dubbing an absolute black mixed with eight or ten hairs of Isabella colored
Mohair, the body as little as can be made, and the wings of a bright Malards
feather, an admirable Fly, and in great repute amongst us for, a killer.

5. There is besides this another blew Dun, the dubbing of which it is made
being thus to be got. Take a small tooth comb, and with it comb the neck of a
black Gray hound, and the down that sticks in the teeth, will be the finest
blew, that ever you saw. The wings of this Fly can hardly be too white, and he
is taken about the tenth of this Month, and lasts till the four and twentieth.

6. From the tenth of this Month also till toward the end, is taken a little
black Gnat; the dubbing either of the fur of a black water-Dog, or the down of
a young black water-Coot, the wings of the Male of a Mallard as white as may
be, the body as little as you can possibly make it, and the wings as short as
his body.

7. From the Sixteenth of this Month also to the end of it, we use a bright
brown, the dubbing for which, is to be had out of a Skinners Lime-pits, and of
the hair of an abortive Calf, which the lime will turn to be so bright, as to
shine like Gold, for the wings of this Fly, the feather of a brown Hen is
best; which Fly is also taken till the tenth of April.

April.
All the same Hackles, and Flies that were taken in March will be taken in this
Month also, with this distinction only concerning the Flies, that all the
browns be lapt with red silk, and the Duns with yellow.

1. To these a small bright brown, made of Spaniels fur, with a light gray
wing; in a bright day, and a clear water is very well taken.

2. We have too a little dark brown, the dubbing of that color, and some
violet Camlet mixed, and the wing of the gray feather of a Mallard.

3. From the sixth of this Month to the tenth, we have also a Fly called the
violet Fly, made of a dark violet stuff, with the wings of the gray feather of
a Mallard.

4. About the twelfth of this Month comes in the Fly called the whirling Dun,
which is taken every day about the mid time of day all this Month through, and
by fits from thence to the end of June, and is commonly made of the down of a
Fox Cub, which is of an Ash color at the roots, next the skin, and ribb'd
about with yellow silk, the wings of the pale gray feather of a Mallard.

5. There is also a yellow Dun, the dubbing of Camels hair, and yellow Camlet,
or wool mixed, and a white gray wing.

6. There is also this Month another little brown, besides that mentioned
before, made with a very slender body, the dubbing of dark brown, and violet
Camlet mixed, and a gray wing; which though the direction for the making be near
the other, is yet another Fly, and will take when the other will not,
especially in a bright day, and a clear water.

7. About the twentieth of this Month comes in a Fly called the Horseflesh
Fly, the dubbing of which is a blew Mohair, with pink colored, and red Tammy
mixed, a light colored wing, and a dark brown head. This fly is taken best in
an Evening, and kills from two hours before Sun set till twilight, and is taken
the Month thorough.

May.
And now Sir, that we are entering into the Month of May, I think it requisite
to beg not only your attention; but also your best patience; for I must now be
a little tedious with you, and dwell upon this Month longer than ordinary;
which that you may the better endure, I must tell you, this Month deserves, and
requires to be insisted on, for as much as it alone, and the next following
afford more pleasure to the Flie-Angler, than all the rest; and here it is that
you are to expect an account of the Green Drake, and stone-flie, promised you
so long ago, and some others that are peculiar to this Month, and part of the
Month following, and that (though not so great either in bulk, or name) do yet
stand in competition with the two before named, and so, that it is yet
undecided amongst the Anglers to which of the pretenders to the Title of the
May-flie, it does properly, and duly belong, neither dare I (where so many of
the learned in this Art of Angling are got in dispute about the controversy)
take upon me to determine; but I think I ought to have a vote amongst them, and
according to that privilege, shall give you my free opinion, and peradventure
when I have told you all, you may incline to think me in the right.

Viat. I have so great a deference to your judgment in these matters, that I
must always be of your opinion; and the more you speak, the faster I grow to my
attention, for I can never be weary of hearing you upon this Subject.


Pisc. Why that is encouragement enough; and now prepare your self for a tedious
Lecture; but I will first begin with the flies of less esteem (though almost
any thing will take a Trout in May) that I may afterward insist the longer
upon those of greater note, and reputation; know therefore that the first fly
we take notice of in this Month, is called the Turky-flie, the.

1. The dubbing ravell'd out of some blew stuff, and lapt about with yellow
silk, the wings of a gray Mallards feather.

2. next a great Hackle; or Palmer-flie, with a yellow body ribb'd with Gold
twist, and large wings of a Mallards feather dyed yellow, with a red Capons
Hackle over all,

3. Then a black fly, the dubbing of a black Spaniels fur, and the wings of a
gray Mallards feather.

4, After that a light brown with a slender body, the dubbing twirl'd upon
small red silk, and raised with the point of a needle, that the ribs or rows of
silk may appear through the wings of the gray feather of a Mallard.

5. Next a little Dun, the dubbing of a Bears dun whirled upon yellow silk, the
wings of the gray feather of a Mallard.

6. Then a white Gnat, with a pale wing, and a black head.

7. There is also this Month a fly called the Peacock-flie, the body made of a
whirl of a Peacocks feather, with a red head, and wings of a Mallards feather.

8. We have then another very killing fly, known by the name of the Dun-Cut,
the dubbing of which is a Bears dun, with a little blew, and yellow mixed with
it, a large dun wing, and two horns at the head, made of the hairs of a
Squirrels tail.

9. The next is the Cow-Lady, a little fly, the body of a Peacocks feather,
the wing of a red feather, or strips of the red hackle of a Cock.

10. We have then the Cow-turd fly; the dubbing light brown, and yellow mixed,
the wing the dark gray feather of a Mallard. And note that besides these
abovementioned, all the same Hackles and Flies, the Hackles only brighter, and
the Flies smaller, that are taken in April, will also be taken this Month, as
also all Browns, and Duns: and now I come to my Stone-Flie, and Green-Drake,
which are the Matadores for Trout and Grayling, and in their season kill more
Fish in our Derbyshire Rivers, than all the rest past, and to come, in the
whole Year besides.

But first I am to tell you, that we have four several flies which contend for
the Title of the May-Flie, namely, The Green-Drake, The Stone-Flie, The Black
Fly, and The little yellow May-Flie.


And all these have their Champions and Advocates to dispute, and plead their
priority; though I do not understand why the two last named should; the first
two having so manifestly the advantage, both in their beauty, and the wonderful
execution they do in their season.

11. Of these the Green-Drake comes in about the twentieth of this Month, or
betwixt that, and the latter end (for they are sometimes sooner, and sometimes
later according to the quality of the Year) but never well taken till toward
the end of this Month, and the beginning of June. The Stone-Flie comes much
sooner, so early as the middle of April; but is never well taken till toward
the middle of May, and continues to kill much longer than the Green-Drake stays
with us, so long as to the end almost of June; and indeed, so long as there are
any of them to be seen upon the water; and sometimes in an Artificial Fly, and
late at night, or before Sun rise in a morning, longer.

Now both these Flies (and I believe many others, though I think not all) are
certainly, and demonstratively bred in the very Rivers where they are taken,
our Caddis or Cod-bait which lie under stones in the bottom of the water, most
of them turning into those two Flies, and being gathered in the husk, or crust,
near the time of their maturity, are very easily known, and distinguished, and
are of all other the most remarkable, both for their size, as being of all
other the biggest (the shortest of them being a full inch long, or more) and
for the execution they do, the Trout, and Grayling being much more greedy of
them, than of any others; and indeed the Trout never feeds fat, nor comes into
his perfect season, till these Flies come in.

Of these the Green-Drake never discloses from his husk, till he be first there
grown to full maturity, body, wings, and all, and then he creeps out of his
cell, but with his wings so crimpt, and ruffled, by being pressed together in
that narrow room, that they are for some hours totally useless to him, by which
means he is compelled either to creep upon the flags, sedges, and blades of
grass (if his first rising from the bottom of the water be near the banks of
the River) till the Air, and Sun, stiffen and smooth them! or if his first
appearance above water happen to be in the middle, he then lies upon the
surface of the water like a Ship at Hull (for his feet are totally useless to
him there, and he cannot creep upon the water as the Stone-Flie can) until his
wings have got stiffness to fly with, if by some Trout, or Grayling he be not
taken in the interim (which ten to one he is) and then his wings stand high,
and closed exact upon his back, like the Butterfly, and his motion in flying is
the same. His Body is in some of a paler, in others of a darker yellow (for
they are not all exactly of a color) rib'd with rows of green, long slender,
and growing sharp toward the tail, at the end of which he has three long small
whisks of a very dark color, almost black, and his tail turns up toward his
back like a Mallard, from whence questionless he has his name of the
green-Drake. These (as I think I told you before) we commonly dape, or dibble
with, and having gathered great store of them into a long draw box, with holes
in the Cover to give them Air (where also they will continue fresh, and
vigorous a night or more) we take them out thence by the wings, and bait them
thus upon the Hook. We first take one) for we commonly Fish with two of them at
a time) and putting the point of the Hook into the thickest part of his Body
under one of his wings, run it directly through and out at the other side,
leaving him spitted cross upon the Hook, and then taking the other, put him on
after the same manner, but with his head the contrary way, in which posture
they will live upon the Hook, and play with their wings for a quarter of an
hour, or more: but you must have a care to keep their wings dry, both from the
water, and also that your fingers be not wet when you take them out to bait
them; for then your bait is spoiled.

Having now told you how to Angle with this Fly alive; I am now to tell you
next, how to make an Artificial Fly, that will so perfectly resemble him, as
to be taken in a rough windy day, when no Flies can lie upon the water; nor are
to be found about the Banks and sides of the River, to a wonder, and with which
you shall certainly kill the best Trout, and Grayling in the River.

The Artificial Green-Drake then is made upon a large Hook, the Dubbing, Camels
hair, bright Bears hair, the soft down that is combed from a Hogs bristles, and
yellow Camlet well mixed together, the body long, and ribb'd about with green
silk, or rather yellow waxt with green-wax, the whisks of the tail of the long
hairs of sables, or fitchet, and the wings of the white gray feather of a
Mallard dyed yellow, which also is to be dyed thus.

Take the root of a Barbary Tree, and shave it, and put to it Woody viss, with
as much Alum as a Walnut, and boil your feathers in it with Rain water; and
they will be of a very fine yellow.

I have now done with the Green-drake excepting to tell you, that he is taken
at all hours during his season, whilst there is any day upon the Sky; and with
a made Fly, I once took, ten days after he was absolutely gone, in a Cloudy
day, after a shower, and in a whistling wind, five and thirty very great Trouts,
and Graylings betwixt five, and eight of the Clock in the Evening, and had no
less than five, or six Flies with three good hairs a piece taken from me in
despite of my heart, besides.

12. I should now come next to the Stone-Flie, but there is another Gentleman
in my way: that must of necessity come in between, and that is the Grey-Drake,
which in all shapes, and dimensions is perfectly the same with the other, but
quite almost of another color, being of a paler, and more livid yellow, and
green, and ribb'd with black quite down his body, with black shining wings, and
so diaphanous and tender, cob-web like, that they are of no manner of use for
Daping; but come in, and are taken after the Green-Drake, and in an Artificial
Fly kill very well, which Fly is thus made, the Dubbing of the down of a Hogs
bristles, and black Spaniels fur mixed, and ribb'd down the body with black
silk, the whisks of the hairs of the beard of a black Cat, and the wings of the
black gray feather of a Mallard.

And now I come to the Stone-Flie, but am afraid I have already wearied your
patience, which if I have, I beseech you freely tell me so, and I will defer
the remaining instructions for Flie-Angling till some other time.


Viat. No truly Sir, I can never be weary of hearing you: but if you think fit,
because I am afraid I am too troublesome, to refresh your self with a glass, and
a pipe; you may afterward proceed, and I shall be exceedingly pleased to hear
you.


Pisc. I thank you Sir for that motion; for believe me I am dry with talking,
Here Boy, give us here a Bottle, and a Glass; and Sir, my service to you, and
to all our Friends in the South.


Viat. Your Servant Sir, and I Will pledge you as heartily; for the good powdered
beef I eat at Dinner, or something else, has made me thirsty.


CHAP. VIII.
VIAT. So, Sir, I am now ready for another Lesson so soon as you please to give
it me.


Pisc. and I, Sir, as ready to give you the best I can. Having told you the
time of the Stone-Flie's coming in, and that he is bred of a Caddis in the very
River where he is taken, I am next to tell you, that

13. This same Stone-Flie has not the patience to continue in his Crust, or
Husk till his wings be full grown; but so soon as ever they begin to put out,
that he feels himself strong (at which time we call him a Jack) squeezes
himself out of Prison, and crawls to the top of some stone, where if he can
find a chink that will receive him, or can creep betwixt two stones, the one
lying hollow upon the other (which, by the way, we also lay so purposely to
find them) he there lurks till his wings be full grown, and there is your only
place to find him (and from thence doubtless he derives his name) though, for
want of such convenience, he will make shift with the hollow of a Bank, or any
other place where the wind cannot come to fetch him off. His body is long, and
pretty thick, and as broad at the tail almost, as in the middle; his color a
very fine brown, ribb'd with yellow, and much yellower on the belly than the
back, he has two or three whisks also at the tag of his tail, and two little
horns upon his head, his wings, when full grown, are double, and flat down his
back of the same color, but rather darker than his body, and longer than it;
though he makes but little use of them, for you shall rarely see him flying,
though often swimming, and padling with several feet he has under his belly
upon the water, without stirring a wing: but the Drake will mount Steeple
height into the Air, though he is to be found upon flags and grass too, and
indeed every where high and low, near the River; there being so many of them in
their season, as were they not a very inoffensive insect, would look like a
Plague; and these Drakes (since I forgot to tell you before, I will tell you
here) are taken by the Fish to that incredible degree, that upon a calm day you
shall see the still deeps continually all over circles by the Fishes rising,
who will gorge themselves with those Flies, till they purge again out of their
Guills; and the Trouts are at that time so lusty and strong, that one of eight,
or ten inches long, will then more struggle, and tug, and more endanger your
Tackle, than one twice as big in winter: but pardon this digression.

This Stone-flie then we dape or dibble with as with the Drake, but with this
difference, that whereas the green-Drake is common both to stream and still,
and to all hours of the day, we seldom dape with this but in the streams, (for
in a whistling wind a made Fly in the deep is better, and rarely, but early
and late, it not being so proper for the mid-time of the day; though a great
Grayling will then take it very well in a sharp stream, and here and there a
Trout too: but much better toward 8, 9, 10. or eleven of the clock at night, at
which time also the best Fish rise, and the latter the better, provided you can
see your Fly, and when you cannot, a made Fly will murder, which is to be
made thus: The dubbing of bears dun with a little brown and yellow Camlet very
well mixed; but so placed that your Fly may be more yellow on the belly and
toward the tail underneath than in any other part, and you are to place two or
three hairs of a black Cats beard on the top of the hook in your arming, so as
to be turned up, when you warp on your dubbing, and to stand almost upright,
and staring one from another, and note that your Fly is to be ribb'd with
yellow silk, and the wings long, and very large, of the dark gray feather of a
Mallard.

14. The next May-Flie is the black Fly, made with a black body of the whirle
of an Ostridg-feather, rib'd with silver twist, and the black hackle of a Cock
over all; and is a killing Fly, but not to be named with either of the other.

15. The last May-Flie (that is of the four pretenders) is the little yellow
May-Flie, in shape exactly the same with the green Drake, but a very little
one, and of as bright a yellow as can be seen; which is made of a bright yellow
Camlet, and the wings of a white gray feather died yellow.

16. The last Fly for this month (and which continues all June, though it
comes in the middle of May) is the Fly called the Camlet-Flie, in shape like a
moth with fine diapred* or water-wings, and with which (as I told you before) I
sometimes used to dibble; and Grayling will rise mightily at it. But the
artificial Fly (which is only in use amongst our Anglers) is made of a dark
brown shining Camlet, rib'd over with a very small light green silk, the wings
of the double gray feather of a Mallard; and it is a killing Fly for small
Fish, and so much for May.


June.
From the first to the four and twentieth, the green-Drake and Stone-Flie are
taken (as I told you before.)

1. From the twelfth to the four and twentieth late at night is taken a Fly,
called the Owl-Flie; the dubbing of a white Weesel's tail, and a white Gray
wing.

2. We have then another Dunne, called the Barm-flie, from it is yesty color,
the dubbing of the fur of a yellow dun Cat, and a gray wing of a Mallards
feather.

3. We have also a hackle with a purple body, whipped about with a red Capons
feather.

4. As also a gold twist Hackle with a purple body, whipped about with a red
Capons feather.

5. To these we have this month a Flesh-flie, the dubbing of a black Spaniels
furre, and blew wool mixed, and a gray wing.

6. Also another little flesh-flie, the body made of the whirle of a Peacocks
feather, and the wings of the gray feather of a Drake.

7. We have then the Peacock-flie, the body and wing both made of the feather
of that bird.

8. There is also the flying Ant, or Ant-flie, the dubbing of brown and red
Camlet mixed, with a light gray wing.

9. We have likewise a brown Gnat, with a very slender body of brown and violet
Camlet well mixed, and a light gray wing.

10. And another little black Gnat, the dubbing of black mohair, and a white
Gray wing.

11. As also a green Grasshopper, the dubbing of green and yellow Wool mixed,
rib'd over with green Silk, and a red Capons feather over all.

12. And lastly a little dun Grasshopper, the body slender made of a dun Camlet,
and a dun hackle at the top.

July.
First all the small flies that were taken in June, are also taken in this
month.

1. We have then the Orange Fly, the dubbing of Orange Wool, and the wing of a
black feather.

2. Also a little white dun, the body made of white Mohair, and the wings blew
of a Herons feather.

3. We have likewise this month a Wasp-flie, made either of a dark brown
dubbing, or else the furre of a black Cats tail, ribb'd about with yellow silk,
and the wing of the gray feather of a Mallard.

4. Another fly taken this month is a black Hackle, the body made of the
whirle of a Peacock's feather, and a black hackle feather on the top.

5. We have also another made of a Peacocks whirle without wings.

6. Another fly also is taken this month called the shel-flie, the dubbing of
yellow-green Jersey Wool, and a little white Hoggs hair mixed, which I call the
Palm-flie, and do believe it is taken for a Palm, that drops off the willows
into the water; for this fly I have seen Trouts take little pieces of moss, as
they have swam down the River, by which I conclude that the best way to hit the
right color is to compare your dubbing with the Moss, and mix the colors as
near as you can.

7. There is also taken this month a black blew Dun, the dubbing of the furre
of a black Rabbet mixed with a little yellow, the wings of the Feather of a blew
Pigeons wing.

August.
The same Flies with July.

1. Then another Art-flie, the dubbing of the black brown hair of a Cow, some
red warpt in for the Tagg of his tail, and a dark wing, a killing fly.

2. Next a fly called the Fern-flie, the dubbing of the fur of a Hares neck,
that is of the color of Fearn, or Brackin, with a darkish gray wing of a
Mallards feather, a killer too.

3. Besides these we have a white Hackle, the body of white Mo-hair, and
wrapped about with a white Hackle Feather, and this is assuredly taken for
Thistle-down.

4. We have also this month a Harry-long-leggs, the body made of Bears dun, and
blew Wool mixed, and a brown hackle Feather over all.

Lastly in this month all the same browns and duns are taken, that were taken
in May.

September.
This month the same Flies are taken, that are taken in April.

1. To which I shall only add a Camel-brown Fly, the dubbing pulled out of the
lime of a Wall whipped about with red Silk, and a darkish gray Mallards feather
for the wing.

2. And one other for which we have no name; but it is made of the black hair
of a Badgers skin mixed with the yellow softest down of a sanded Hog.

October.
The same Flies are taken this month, that were taken in March.

November.
The same Flies that were taken in February, are taken this month also.

December.
Few men angle with the Fly this month, no more than they do in January: but
yet if the weather be warm (as I have known it sometimes in my life to be, even
in this cold Country where it is least expected) then a brown that looks red in
the hand, and yellowish betwixt your eye and the Sun; will both raise and kill
in a clear water, and free from snowbroth: but at the best it is hardly worth a
man's labor.

And now Sir, I have done with Flie-fishing, or angling at the top, excepting
once more to tell you, that of all these (and I have named you a great many
very killing flies) none are fit to be compared with the Drake and Stone-flie,
both for many and very great fish; and yet there are some days, that are by no
means proper for the sport, and in a calm you shall not have near so much sport
even with daping, as in a whistling gale of wind, for two reasons, both because
you are not then so easily discovered by the fish, and also because there are
then but few flies can lie upon the water; for where they have so much choice,
you may easily imagine they will not be so eager and forward to rise at a bait,
that both the shadow of your body, and that of your Rod, nay of your very line,
in a hot calm day will, in spite of your best caution, render suspected to
them: but even then, in swift streams, or by sitting down patiently behind a
willow bush, you shall do more execution than at almost any other time of the
year with any other fly, though one may sometimes hit of a day, when he shall
come home very well satisfied with sport with several other Flies: but with
these two, the green Drake and the Stone-flie, I do verily believe I could some
days in my life, had I not been weary of slaughter, have laden a lusty boy,
and have sometimes, I do honestly assure you, given over upon the mere account
of satiety of sport; which will be no hard matter to believe, when I likewise
assure you, that with this very fly, I have in this very River that runs by us
in three or four hours taken thirty, five and thirty, and forty of the best
Trouts in the River. What shame and pity is it then, that such a River should
be destroyed by the basest sort of people, by those unlawful ways of fire and
netting in the night, and of damming, groping, spearing, hanging and hooking by
day, which are now grown so common, that, though we have very good Laws to
punish such Offenders, every Rascal does it, for ought I see, impune.

To conclude, I cannot now in honesty but frankly tell you, that many of these
flies I have named, at least so made as we make them here, will peradventure do
you no great service in your Southern Rivers, and will not conceal from you,
but that I have sent flies to several friends in London, that for ought I could
ever hear, never did any great feats with them, and therefore if you intend to
profit by my instructions, you must come to angle with me here in the Peak; and
so, if you please, let us walk up to Supper, and to morrow, if the day be
windy, as our days here commonly are, it is ten to one but we shall take a good
dish of fish for dinner.

CHAP. IX.
PISC. A good day to you, Sir; I see you will always be stirring before me.


Viat. Why, to tell you the truth, I am so allured with the sport I had
yesterday, that I long to be at the River again, and when I heard the wind sing
in my Chamber window, could forbear no longer, but leap out of bed, and had
just made an end of dressing my self, as you came in.


Pisc. Well, I am both glad you are so ready for the day, and that the day is
so fit for you, and look you I have made you three or four flies this morning,
this silver twist hackle, this bears dun, this light brown and this dark brown,
any of which I dare say will do; but you may try them all, and see which does
best, only I must ask your pardon that I cannot wait upon you this Morning, a
little business being fallen out, that for two or three hours, will deprive me
of your Company: but I Will come call you home to dinner, and my man shall attend
you.


Viat. Oh Sir, mind your affairs by all means, do but lend me a little of your
skill to these fine flies, and, unless it have forsaken me since yesterday, I
shall find luck of my own I hope to do something.


Pisc. The best Instruction I can give you, is, that, seeing the wind curles
the water, and blows the right way, you would now angle up the still deep to
day; for betwixt the Rocks where the streams are, you would find it now too
brisk, and besides I would have you take fish in both Waters.


Viat. I Will obey your Direction, and so a good morning to you. Come young man,
let you and I walk together. But hark you, Sir, I have not done with you yet;
I expect another Lesson for angling at the bottom, in the afternoon.


Pisc. Well, Sir, I Will be ready for you.


CHAP. X.
PISC. Oh Sir, are you returned? you have but just prevented me. I was coming
to call you.


Viat. I am glad then I have saved you the labor.


Pisc. And how have you sped.


Viat. You shall see that, Sir, presently, look you Sir, here are three Spoke
like a South-Country man.
brace of Trouts, one of them the biggest but one, that ever I killed with a
fly in my life, and yet I lost a bigger than that, with my Fly to boo't, and
here are three Graylings, and one of them longer by some inches than that I
took yesterday, and yet I thought that a good one too.


Pisc. Why you have made a pretty good mornings work on it, and now Sir, what
think you of our River Dove?


Viat. I think it to be the best Trout River in England; and am so far in love
with it, that if it were mine, and that I could keep it to my self, I would not
exchange that water, for all the Land it runs over; to be totally debarred
from't.


Pisc. That Complement to the River, speaks you a true lover of the Art of
angling: And now, Sir, to make part of amends for sending you so uncivilly out
alone this Morning, I will my self dress you this dish of fish for your dinner,
walk but into the parlour, you will find one Book or other in the window to
entertain you the while, and you shall have it presently.


Viat. Well Sir, I obey you.


Pisc. Look you Sir, have I not made haste?


Viat. Believe me Sir, that you have, and it looks so well, I long to be at it.


Pisc. Fall too then; now Sir what say You! am I a tolerable Cook or no?


Viat. So good a one, that I did never eat so good Fish in my life. This Fish
is infinitely better, than any I ever tasted of the kind in my life. It Is quite
another thing, than our Trouts about London.


Pisc. You would say so, if that Trout you eat of were in right season: but
pray eat of the Grayling, which upon my word at this time, is by much the
better Fish.


Viat. In earnest, and so it is: and I have one request to make to you, which
is, that as you have taught me to catch Trout and Grayling, you will now teach
me how to dress them as these are dressed, which questionless is of all other the
best way.


Pisc. That I will Sir, with all my heart, and am glad you like them so well,
as to make that request, and they are dressed thus.

Take your Trout, wash, and dry him with a clean Napkin; then open him, and
having taken out his guts, and all the blood, wipe him very clean within, but
wash him not, and give him three scotches with a Knife to the bone on one side
only. After which take a clean Kettle, and put in as much hard stale Beer (but
it must not be dead) Vinegar, and a little Whitewine, and Water, as will cover
the Fish you intend to boil; then throw into the Liquor a good quantity of
Salt, the Rind of a Lemon, a handful of slic't Horseradish root, with a
handsome little faggot of Rosemary, Time, and Winter-Savory. Then set your Kettle
upon a quick fire of wood, and let your Liquor boil up to the height before you
put in your Fish, and then, if there be many, put them in one by one, that they
may not so cool the Liquor, as to make it fall; and whilst your Fish is
boiling, beat up the Butter for your Sauce with a Ladle full or two of the
Liquor it is boiling in, and being boyld enough, immediately pour the Liquor
from the Fish, and being laid in a Dish, pour your Butter upon it, and strewing
it plentifully over with shaved Horse-Raddish, and a little pounded Ginger,
garnish your sides of your Dish, and the Fish it self with a slic't Lemon, or
two, and serve it up. A Grayling is also to be dressed exactly after the same
manner, saving that he is to be scaled, which a Trout never is: and that must
be done either with ones nails, or very lightly and carefully with a Knife for
bruising the Fish. And note, that these kinds of Fish, a Trout especially, if
he is not eaten within four, or five hours after he be taken, is worth nothing.

But come Sir, I see you have dined, and therefore if you please we will walk
down again to the little House, and there I will read you a Lecture of Angling
at the bottom.


CHAP. XI.
VIAT. So Sir, Now we are here, and set: let me have my instructions for
Angling for Trout, and Grayling at the bottom; which though not so easy, so
cleanly, nor (as it is said) so Gentile a way of Fishing, as with a Fly; is yet
(if I mistake not) a good holding way and takes Fish when nothing else will.


Pisc. You are in the right, it does so: and a worm is so sure a bait at all
times, that, excepting in a Flood, I would I had laid thousand pounds that I
killed Fish more, or less with it, Winter or Summer every day throughout the
Year; those days always excepted, that, upon a more serious account always
ought so to be. But not longer to delay you, I will begin, and tell you, that
Angling at the bottom is also commonly of two sorts (and yet there is a third
way of Angling with a Ground-bait, and to very great effect too, as shall be
said hereafter) namely. By Hand: or With a Cork, or Float.


That we call Angling by hand is of three sorts.

The first with a line about half the length of the Rod, a good weighty plum,
and three hairs next the Hook, which we call a running Line, and with one large
Brandling, or a dew-worm of a moderate size, or two small ones of the first, or
any other sort, proper for a Trout, of which my Father Walton has already given
you the names, and saved me a labor; or indeed almost any worm whatever; for
if a Trout be in the humor to bite, it must be such a worm as I never yet saw,
that he will refuse; and if you Fish with two, you are then to bait your hook
thus. You are first to run the point of your hook in at the very head of your
first worm, and so down through his body till it be past the knot, and then let
it out, and strip the worm above the arming (that you may not bruise it with
your fingers) till you have put on the other by running the point of the Hook
in below the knot, and upwards through his body toward his head till it be but
just covered with the head, which being done, you are then to slip the first
worm down over the arming again, till the knots of both worms meet together.

The second way of Angling by hand, and with a running Line, is with a Line
something longer than the former, and with Tackle made after this same manner.
At the utmost extremity of your Line, where the Hook is always placed in all
other ways of Angling, you are to have a large Pistol, or Carabine Bullet, into
which the end of your Line is to be fastened with a Peg, or Pin even and close
with the Bullet, and about half a foot above that, a branch of Line, of two, or
three handfuls long; or more, for a swift stream, with a Hook at the end
thereof baited with some of the forenamed worms, and another half foot above
that another armed, and baited after the same manner; but with another sort of
worm, without any lead at all above: by which means you will always certainly
find the true bottom in all depths, which with the Plums upon your Line above
you can never do, but that your bait must always drag whilst you are sounding
(which in this way of Angling must be continually) by which means you are like
to have more trouble, and peradventure worse success. And both these ways of
Angling at the bottom are most proper for a dark, and muddy water, by reason
that in such a condition of the stream, a Man may stand as near as he will, and
neither his own shadow; nor the roundness of his Tackle will hinder his sport.

The third way of Angling by hand with a Ground-bait, and by much the best of
all other, is, with a Line full as long, or a yard and half longer than your
Rod, with no more than one hair next the hook, and for two or three lengths
above it, and no more than one small pellet of shot for your plum, your Hook
little, your worms of the smaller Brandlings very well scoured, and only one
upon your hook at a time, which is thus to be baited. The point of your hook is
to be put in at the very tagg of his tail, and run up his body quite over all
the arming, and still stripped on an inch at least upon the hair, the head and
remaining part hanging downward; and with this line and hook thus baited you
are evermore to angle in the streams, always in a clear rather than a troubled
water, and always up the River, still casting out your worm before you with a
light one-handed Rod, like an artificial Fly, where it will be taken,
sometimes at the top, or within a very little of the Superficies of the water,
and almost always before that light plumb can sink it to the bottom, both by
reason of the stream, and also that you must always keep your worm in motion by
drawing still back toward you, as if you were angling with a fly; and believe
me, whoever will try it, shall find this the best way of all other to angle
with a worm, in a bright water especially; but then his rod must be very light
and pliant, and very true and finely made, which with a skilful hand will do
wonders, and in a clear stream is undoubtedly the best way of angling for a
Trout, or Grayling with a worm, by many degrees, that any man can make choice
of, and of most ease and delight to the Angler. To which let me add, that if
the Angler be of a constitution that will suffer him to wade, and will slip
into the tail of a shallow stream, to the Calf of the leg or the knee, and so
keep off the bank, he shall almost take what fish he pleases.

The second way of angling at the bottom is with a Cork or float; and that is
also of two sorts. With a worm: or, With a Grub or Caddis.


With a worm you are to have your line within a foot, or a foot and half as
long as your rod, in a dark water with two, or if you will with three; but in a
clear water never with above one hair next the hook, and two or three for four
or five lengths above it, and a worm of what size you please, your plums fitted
to your Cork, your Cork to the condition of the River (that is to the swiftness
or slowness of it) and both, when the water is very clear, as fine as you can,
and then you are never to bait with above one of the lesser sort of Brandlings;
or, if they are very little ones indeed, you may then bait with two after the
manner before directed.

When you angle for a Trout, you are to do it as deep, that is, as near the
bottom as you can, provided your bait do not drag, or if it do, a Trout will
sometimes take it in that posture: if for a Grayling, you are then to fish
further from the bottom, he being a fish that usually swims nearer to the
middle of the water, and lies always loose: or however is more apt to rise
than a Trout, and more inclined to rise than to descend even to a Groundbait.

With a Grub or Caddis, you are to angle with the same length of Line; or if it
be all out as long as your Rod, it is not the worse, with never above on hair
for two or three lengths next the hook, and with the smallest Cork, or float,
and the least weight of plumb you can that will but sink, and that the
swiftness of your stream will allow; which also you may help, and avoid the
violence of the Current, by angling in the returns of a stream, or the Eddies
betwixt two streams, which also are the most likely places wherein to kill a
Fish in a stream, either at the top or bottom.

Of Grubs for a Grayling, the Ash-Grub, which is plump, milk-white, bent round
from head to tail, and exceeding tender with a red head; or the Dock worm, or
Grub of a pale yellow, longer, lanker, and tougher than the other, with rows of
feet all down his belly, and a red head also are the best, I say for a
Grayling, because, although a Trout will take both these (the Ash-Grub
especially) yet he does not do it so freely as the other, and I have usually
taken ten Graylings for one Trout with that bait, though if a Trout come, I
have observed, that he is commonly a very good one.

These baits we usually keep in Bran, in which an Ash-Grub commonly grows
tougher, and will better endure baiting, though he is yet so tender, that it
will be necessary to warp in a piece of a stiff hair with your arming, leaving
it standing out about a straw breadth at the head of your hook, so as to keep
the Grub either from slipping totally off when baited, or at least down to the
point of the hook, by which means your arming will be left wholly naked and
bare, which is neither so sightly, nor so likely to be taken; though to help
that (which will however very often fall out) I always arm the hook I design for
this Bait with the whitest horse-hair I can choose, which it self will resemble,
and shine like that bait, and consequently will do more good, or less harm than
an arming of any other color. These Grubs are to be baited thus, the hook is
to be put in under the head or Chaps of the bait, and guided down the middle of
the belly without suffering it to peep out by the way (for then (the Ash-Grub
especially) will issue out water and milk, till nothing but the skin shall
remain, and the bend of the hook will appear black through it) till the point
of your hook come so low, that the head of your bait may rest, and stick upon
the hair that stands out to hold it, by which means it can neither slip of it
self; neither will the force of the stream, nor quick pulling out, upon any
mistake, strip it off.

Now the Caddis, or Cod-bait (which is a sure killing bait, and for the most
part, by much, surer, than either of the other) may be put upon the Hook, two
or three together, and is sometimes (to very great effect) joined to a worm,
and sometimes to an Artificial Fly to cover the point of the Hook; but is
always to be Angled with at the bottom (when by it self especially) with the
finest Tackle; and is for all times of the year, the most holding bait of all
other whatever, both for Trout, and Grayling.

There are several other baits besides these few I have named you, which also
do very great execution at the bottom, and some that are peculiar to certain
Countries, and Rivers, of which every Angler may in his own place, make his own
observation: and some others that I do not think fit to put you in mind of,
because I would not corrupt you, and would have you, as in all things else I
observe you to be a very honest Gentleman, a fair Angler. And so much for the
second sort of Angling for a Trout at the bottom.


Viat. But Sir, I beseech you give me leave to ask you one question, Is there
no art to be used to worms, to make them allure the Fish, and in a manner
compel them to bite at the bait.


Pisc. Not that I know of; or did I know any such secret, I would not use it my
self, and therefore would not teach it you. Though I will not deny to you, that
in my younger days, I have made trial of Oil of Ospray, Oil of Ivy, Camphire,
Assa-faetida, juice of Nettles, and several other devices that I was taught by
several Anglers I met with, but could never find any advantage by them; and can
scarce believe there is any thing to be done that way, though I must tell you I
have seen some men, who I thought went to work no more artificially than I, and
have yet with the same kind of worms I had, in my own sight taken five, and
sometimes ten for one. But we will let that business alone if you please; and
because we have time enough, and that I would deliver you from the trouble of
any more Lectures, I will, if you please, proceed to the last way of angling
for a Trout or Grayling, which is in the middle; after which I shall have no
more to trouble you with.


Viat. It Is no trouble, Sir, but the greatest satisfaction that can be, and I
attend you.


CHAP. XII.
PISC. Angling in the middle then for a Trout or Grayling is of two sorts. With
a Pink or Minnow for a Trout: or, With a Worm, Grub or Caddis for a Grayling.


For the first, it is with a Minnow half a foot, or a foot within the
Superficies of the water, and as to the rest that concerns this sort of
angling, I shall wholly refer you to Mr. Walton's direction, who is undoubtedly
the best Angler with a Minnow in England; only in plain truth I do not approve
of those baits he keeps in salt, unless where the Living ones are not possibly
to be had (though I know he frequently kills with them, and peradventure more,
than with any other, nay I have seen him refuse a living one for one of them)
and much less of his artificial one; for though we do it with a counterfeit
fly, me thinks it should hardly be expected, that a man should deceive a fish
with a counterfeit fish. Which having said, I shall only add, and that out of
my own experience, that I do believe a Bull-head, with his Guill-fins cut off
(at some times of the year especially) to be a much better bait for a Trout,
than a Minnow, and a Loach much better than that, to prove which I shall only
tell you that I have much oftener taken Trouts with a Bull-head or a Loach in
their Throats (for there a Trout has questionless his first digestion) than a
Minnow; and that one day especially, having Angled a good part of the day with
a Minnow, and that in as hopeful a day, and as fit a water, as could be wished
for that purpose, without raising any one Fish; I at last fell to it with the
worm, and with that took fourteen in a very short space, amongst all which,
there was not to my remembrance, so much as one, that had not a Loach or two,
and some of them three, four, five, and six Loaches, in his throat and stomach;
from whence I concluded, that had I Angled with that bait, I had made a notable
days work often.

But after all, there is a better way of Angling with a Minnow, than perhaps is
fit either to teach or to practice; to which I shall only add, that a Grayling
will certainly rise at, and sometimes take a Minnow, though it will be hard to
be believed by any one, who shall consider the littleness of that Fishes mouth,
very nnfit to take so great a bait: but is affirmed by many, that he will
sometimes do it, and I my self know it to be true, for though I never took a
Grayling so, yet a Man of mine once did, and within so few paces of me, that I
am as certain of it, as I can be of any thing I did not see, and (which made it
appear the more strange) the Grayling was not above eleven inches long.

I must here also beg leave of your Master, and mine, not to controvert, but to
tell him, that I cannot consent to his way of throwing in his Rod to an
overgrown Trout, and afterward recovering his Fish with his Tackle. For though
I am satisfied he has sometimes done it, because he says so; yet I have found
it quite otherwise, and though I have taken with the Angle, I may safely say,
some thousands of Trouts in my life, my top never snapt, though my Line still
continued fast to the remaining part of my Rod (by some lengths of Line curled
round about my top, and there fastened with waxt silk, against such an accident)
nor my hand never slackt, or slipped by any other chance, but I almost always
infallibly lost my Fish, whether great, or little, though my Hook came home
again. And I have often wondered how a Trout should so suddenly disengage
himself from so great a Hook, as that we bait with a Minnow, and so deep
bearded, as those Hooks commonly are, when I have seen by the forenam'd
accidents, or the slipping of a knot in the upper part of the Line, by sudden,
and hard striking, that though the Line has immediately been recovered, almost
before it could be all drawn into the water, the Fish cleared, and gone in a
moment. And yet to justify what he says, I have sometimes known a Trout,
having carried away a whole Line, found dead three, or four days after with the
Hook fast sticking in him: but then it is to be supposed he had gorged it,
which a Trout will do, if you be not too quick with him when he comes at a
Minnow, as sure and much sooner than a Pike; and I my self have also, once, or
twice in my life, taken the same Fish with my own Fly sticking in his Chaps,
that he had taken from me the day before, by the slipping of a Hook in the
arming: but I am very confident a Trout will not be troubled two hours with any
Hook, that has so much as one handful of Line left behind with it, or that is
not struck through a bone, if it be in any part of his mouth only; nay, I do
certainly know, that a Trout so soon as ever he feels himself pricked, if he
carries away the Hook, goes immediately to the bottom, and will there root like
a Hog upon the Gravel, till he either rub out, or break the Hook in the middle.
And so much for this first sort of Angling in the middle for a Trout.

The second way of Angling in the middle, is with a Worm, Grub, Caddis, or any
other Ground-bait for a Grayling, and that is with a Cork, and a foot from the
bottom, a Grayling taking it much better there, than at the bottom, as has been
said before; and this always in a clear water, and with the finest Tackle.

To which we may also, and with very good reason, add the third way of Angling
by hand with a Ground-bait, as a third way of Fishing in the middle, which is
common to both Trout, and Grayling, and (as I said before) the best way of
Angling with a Worm, of all other I ever tried whatever.

And now Sir, I have said all I can at present think of concerning Angling for
a Trout and Grayling; and I doubt not, have tired you sufficiently: but I will
give you no more trouble of this kind, whilst you stay; which I hope will be a
good while longer.


Viat. That will not be above a day longer; but if I live till May come twelve
Month, you are sure of me again, either with my Master Walton, or without him,
and in the mean time shall acquaint him how much you have made of me for his
sake, and I hope he loves me well enough, to thank you for it.


Pisc. I shall be glad Sir, of your good Company at the time you speak of and
shall be loath to part with you now; but when you tell me you must go, I will
then wait upon you more Miles on your way, than I have tempted you out of it,
and heartily wish you a good Journey.


FINIS.
To my most Honored Friend, Charles Cotton, Esquire
SIR,
YOu Now see, I have returned you, your very pleasant, and useful discourse of
the Art of Flie-Fishing, Printed, just as 'twas sent me: for I have been so
obedient to your desires, as to endure all the praises you have ventured to fix
upon me in it. And, when I have thankt you for them, as the effects of an
undissembled love: then, let me tell you Sir, that I will really endeavor to
live up to the Character you have given of me, if there were no other reason;
yet for this alone, that you, that love me so well; and always think what you
speak, may not, for my sake, suffer by a mistake in your Judgment.

And Sir, I have ventured to fill a part of your Margin, by way of Paraphrase,
for the Readers clearer understanding the situation both of your Fishing-House,
and the pleasantness of that you dwell in. And I have ventured also to give him
a Copy of Verses, that, you were pleased to send me, now some Years past; in
which, he may see a good Picture of both; and, so much of your own mind too, as
will make any Reader that is blessed with a Generous Soul, to love you the
better. I confess, that for doing this, you may justly Judge me too bold: if you
do, I will say so too: and so far commute for my offense, that, though I be
more than a hundred Miles from you, and in the eighty third Year of my Age, yet
I will forget both, and next Month begin a Pilgrimage to beg your pardon, for,
I would dye in your favor: and till then will live.

Sir, London, April. 29th, 1676. Your most affectionate Father and Friend,
Izaak Walton.

THE RETIREMENT.
Stanzes Irreguliers TO Mr. IZAAK WALTON.
FArewell thou busy World, and, may
We never meet again:
Here I can eat, and sleep, and pray,
And do more good in one short day,
Than he, who his whole Age out wears
Upon the most conspicuous Theaters,
Where naught, but vanity and vice appears.
2.
Good God! how sweet are all things here!
How beautiful the Fields appear!
How cleanly, do we feed and lie!
Lord! what good hours do we keep!
How quietly we sleep!
What peace, what unanimity!
How innocent from the lewd fashion,
Is all our business, all our recreation!
3.
Oh, how happy here is our leisure!
Oh, how innocent our pleasure!
Oh, ye Valleys, Oh ye Mountains!
Oh, ye Groves, and Crystal Fountains,
How I love at liberty,
By turns, to come and visit ye!
4.
Dear solitude, the Souls best friend,
That Man, acquainted with himself do make,
And, all his makers wonders to intend,
With thee, I here converse at will,
And would be glad to do so still,
For, it is thou alone, that keep'st the Soul awake.
5.
How Calm, and quiet a delight,
Is it, alone
To read, and meditate, and write;
By none offended, and, offending none?
To walk, ride, sit, or sleep at ones own ease!
And, pleasing a Man's self, none other to displease.
6.
Oh my beloved Nymph fair Dove;
Princess of rivers, how I love
Upon thy flowery Banks to lie,
And view thy silver stream,
When gilded by a Summers beam!
And in it, all thy wanton fry
Playing at liberty:
And, with my Angle upon them
The all of treachery
I ever learnt industriously to try.
7.
Such streams, Romes yellow Tyber cannot show,
The Iberian Tagus or Ligurian Po;
The Mause, the Danube, and the Rhine
Are puddle water all, compared with thine:
And Loyres pure streams yet too polluted are
With thine much purer to compare;
The rapid Garonne, and the winding Seine,
Are both too mean
Beloved Dove, with thee
To vie priority;
Nay, Tame and Isis, when conjoined submit,
And lay their Trophies at thy silver feet.
8.
Oh my beloved Rocks that rise
To awe the Earth, and brave the Skies:
From some aspiring Mountains crown,
How dearly do I love,
Giddy with pleasure, to look down.
And from the vales, to view the noble heights above!
Oh my beloved Caves! from dog-stars heat,
And all anxieties, my safe retreat:
What safety, privacy, what true delight,
In the artificial night,
Your gloomy entrals make,
Have I taken, do I take!
How often when grief has made me fly
To hide me from society,
Even, of my dearest friends, have I
In your recesses friendly shade;
All my sorrows open laid.
And, my most secret woes, entrusted to your privacy!
10.
Lord! would men let me alone;
What an over happy one
should I think my self to be!
Might I in this desert place
(Which most Men in discourse disgrace)
Live but undisturbed and free!
Here, in this despised recess
Would I, maugre Winters cold,
And the Summers worst excess,
Try, to live out to sixty full years old!
And, all the while
Without an envious eye,
On any thriving under fortunes smile,
Contented live, and then, contented dye.
C. C.
FINIS.
Courteous Reader,
YOU may be pleased to take notice, that at the Sign of the Three Trouts in St.
Paul's Churchyard, on the North side, you may be fitted with all sorts of the
best Fishing Tackle, by

John Margrave.


