The Planters Manuell Bij Charles Cotton eqs


London Printed for Henry Brom 1675

F. H. von. Houe. fec:

THE PLANTERS MANUAL: BEING INSTRUCTIONS FOR The Raising, Planting, and
Cultivating all sorts of Fruit Trees, whether Stone-fruits or Pepin-fruits,
with their Natures and Seasons. Very useful for such as are Curious IN Planting
and Grafting.

BY CHARLES COTTON Esquire

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1675.

TO THE READER.
THough this little Treatise of Fruit Trees was only written for the private
Satisfaction of a very worthy Gentleman, who is exceedingly curious in the
choice of his Fruits, and has great Judgment in Planting; yet having heard that
Gentleman say it had given him the greatest Satisfaction of any Bauble he had
seen of this kind, I began to think it might not be altogether unuseful to the
Public also, and therefore sent it to the Press, which is all the excuse I can
make, either for the writing or publishing of it: But I think it fit to tell
you, That although the Planter, who shall pursue the following Directions, may
possibly find himself defeated in his expectation (especially in the more
Northerly Provinces of this Kingdom) as to the precise time of his Fruits
maturity, and that a Fruit planted and extended against a good Brick-wall, is
more proper here with us (where we have never too much Sun) than an Espallier
Pallisado'd at some inches distance from it; yet he will infallibly find his
Industry abundantly gratified in the promised effects, at something a later
Season. And although the Reader will here meet with several names of Fruits he
peradventure never heard of before; yet we know and see, that more tender
Plants, as Oranges, Lemons, Citrons, etc. are yearly imported from much remoter
Countries than France; and seeing that (for ought I ever heard) Fruit Trees are
no Contrabanded Commodity betwixt the Nations, I cannot conceive but that it is
worth the curiosity, pains and cost to furnish our selves from thence with
those of the greatest excellency, both for Beauty and Flavor; nor why we
should not as well better our selves by them this way, as altogether be
debauched by their effeminate manners, luxurious kickshaws, and fantastic
fashions, by which we are already sufficiently Frenchified, and more than in
the opinion of the wiser sort of men, is consistent either with the
constitution, or indeed the honor of the English Nation.

Licensed March 18. 1674/5.

Roger L'Estrange.

THE PLANTERS MANUAL.
Instructions for the Planting and Ordering of Fruit Trees.
1. Fruit Trees are to be considered, either according to the different natures
of the Fruits they bear, or according to the various Figures and Forms into
which cultivated Trees are by the Art and Industry of the curious and skilful,
for their better advantage and improvement, commonly ordered and disposed.

2. In the first of which Considerations, we generally and ordinarily divide
them into Stone-fruits, as Cherries, Plumbs, and Peaches; and Pepin-fruits, as
Apples and Pears.

3. In the second, Fruit Trees are raised with good success four several ways;
to wit, in tall Trees growing upright upon their own Bole or Stem, commonly
called Standards; in An Espallier is a Hedg-row of Fruit Trees set pretty near
to one another, so that their boughs and branches are interlaced and interwoven
into one another, and in that posture supported by a frame of Wood something
like a lattic'd Pale, or with rails, stakes, and other retentions, to keep them
firm in the form the Gardener has laid them.

Contrespallier, a hedgrow planted after the same manner with the other, only
differing in this, that the fruit is against a Wall, and the latter in the open
Air.


1. Espalliers along by the walls, in Hay-d'appuy, or Espallier in the open
Air, in Contrespallier, and in Shrubs or Dwarf-trees.

4. After these four ways all sorts of Fruit Trees are successfully to be
raised, nevertheless there are that prosper much better in one manner than
another, as we shall observe in treating of every one apart, without speaking
in general of Stone-fruits, and Pepin-fruits, for as much as both the one and
the other of these kinds are comprised in these four Figures or Postures.

Of Standards.
1. THis Figure is more natural to Fruit Trees, than to any other, for as much
as experience has demonstrated to us, that all Apple Trees, Pear Trees and
Apricots, as also Cherries, and Peaches do of themselves, (when let alone)
thrust up a Stem, and rise from the earth to a certain stature, before they
begin to form their Heads, and to shoot forth their Branches; for which reason
many are of opinion, that the fruits of this sort of Tree, are better, and of a
better taste, than those which are gathered from Espalliers and Dwarf-trees; and
they are in the right as to the most part of fruits, particularly the A
delicate little Pear so called.
Rousselet, which is one of the most excellent and delicate sort of fruit we
have.

2. Plantations of this sort are very proper for Apple Trees, which ought never
to be forced into any other posture, unless for pleasure, or out of curiosity,
one would make Dwarf-trees of Pomme de Paradise is an excellent sweet Apple,
that comes of a Pear-main grafted upon a Quince.
Apples of Paradise grafted. They are also very good for all sorts of hard
Winter baking Pears, and almost all Summer and Autumn Pears. Plumb-trees also
prosper very well after this manner, as also Cherries, particularly those which
are grafted upon stocks of the Merise, the small and bitter Cherry.
Merisier, as also the Quaere Bigarotier, I think a party-colored Cherry.
Bigarotier, and Griotier, a sour Cherry.
Griotier. But to do well, you must not mix these different kinds together, by
reason they require an unequal distance, Pepin-fruits naturally requiring to be
set at greater distance from one another, than Stone-fruits.

3. And herein there are two things chiefly to be observed; first, the
fertility of the Soil, and secondly, the security and shelter from winds.

4. As to the first, a man should never attempt to make a Plantation of
Standards, if the ground he designs for that purpose be not very good; for
otherwise it will require very great expense to make them prosper, and ofttimes
this expense proves fruitless, the Trees then coming to fail, at the time when
they ought to be in their perfection, as being more in debt for their growth to
the Art and labor have been employed about them, than to the bounty of the
Soil where they were planted.

5. To insist upon the different natures of Moulds, and to explain the marks of
their fertility or barrenness, would require a long discourse; and besides, all
Gardeners, and others, who have been accustomed to the earth, are by their own
experience and observation sufficiently acquainted with them. It will therefore
be sufficient to observe in general, that there are Soyls proper for all sorts
of fruits, as well Stone-fruits as others, as a black sandy Soil, when it is
fat; and that we call Terrefranche (which is a pure Mould or Soil of it self,
without sand, gravel or stones) when it is not too stiff, and is easy to be
stirred, because in these sorts of earth, Trees find a great deal of juice to
nourish them, and with great facility extend their Roots and fibers to extract
nourishment from all parts. There are also other soyls, that are very good and
proper for some certain fruits, and not for others, as a stiff earth is much
more proper for the Apple than the Pear, and yet more for the Pear than for
Stone-fruit; as on the contrary, light and sandy soyls, are more proper for
stone-fruits.

6. For what concerns covert and shelter from the winds, you are to choose a
situation least exposed to those inconveniences; for which reason naked Plains
and high Mountains are by no means proper situations for fruit trees; the
hollows of Valleys, or the gentle declivities and easy risings of little
Hills, are much more proper: But it is withal to be observed, that the winds
are to be suspected for two things; first for the fruits in the Spring, when
the Trees are in blossom, and those are the North and Northwest winds, which
are the most to be feared in this case: secondly, for their violence and
impetuosity, which not only beat the fruit from the Trees, but very often break
the Trees themselves, or at least shake them in such sort, that they become
crooked and writhen, and can never rise again, nor possibly prosper; and this
is a West-South-West wind, which Vent d'Aval.
is the most pernicious, and of all others the most to be feared for these
accidents. And as ordinarily we do not in these kind of Plantations, plant
other than hardly fruits that are there able very well to defend themselves
from the frosts, and that even the wind it self does also often hinder the
frost, which it self brings along with it, we ought to be more heedful to
secure a fruit-tree from the winds that blow betwixt the South and West, than
from those that blow from the North-West, and the North.

7. These two things being duly observed, when you would make a Plantation of
Standards in a good soil, you must set them, if you plant Apples only, at eight
fadom distance in the Order of Quincunx, which forms an Alley every way; or in
simple, that is, single Alleys only, where the Trees at equal distances, stand
directly, and in two right lines opposite to one another. The Quincunx Order is
the more delightful, provided the Trees be set at a very great distance the
onefrom the other, for otherwise they are apt to shoulder and crowd one another
in this kind of Order, and to shade one another on every side. If you would mix
Pear Trees in equal number with your Apples, six or seven fadom is then
distance enough, and for Pears only, six is as much as is required.

8. And although all Planters almost commit an error in not duly observing this
distance (for they covet a great number of Trees, and think they should not
husband their ground to sufficient advantage, if they did not set them more
thick) nevertheless it is most certain, that two Trees set at a fit distance,
and that have all day long the benefit of the Sun, without being skreen'd from
it by any too neighboring shade, are worth above twenty that touch and offend
one another. And when the Plants are set too near together, it is not discerned
at first, but just at the time when they should be in their perfection, they
are found to be good for nothing; but when they are placed at the forementioned
distance, they still grow better and better, and bear both much more, and far
better fruit, as having had greater benefit, both of the Air and Sun. Moreover,
they hinder not the Plot where they grow, from being employed to other uses, to
the producing of all sorts of Grain, wherein also the labor that is bestowed
upon the one, is of very signal advantage to the other.

9. This separation and equal distances of Trees, is very necessary, not only
for the pleasure of the eye, which is infinitely delighted with this symmetry
and uniform Order; but also by reason that this equal distance is the cause
that the earth equally distributes nourishment to them all alike, and gives
them equal strength and vigor.

10. The distance of Trees being thus observed, holes are next to be made to
plant them in, which are also to be dug and turned up six foot square, or
thereabouts, and two or three foot deep; which if they were made a whole year
before you plant your Trees, so that the earth which is cast up, and that which
remains in the bottom, might receive the Air, the Sun and the Rain, during the
four Seasons of the Year, the Trees would doubtless prosper infinitely better;
the reason of which is, that the earth being cold and dry in its own nature
(both of them qualities contrary to generation) can produce nothing of it self,
and only becomes fruitful by the mixture of the contrary qualities it receives
from the Sun, the Air and the Rain. And therefore it is, that a stiff or stony
Soil produces nothing to purpose, by reason they are so thick and stiff, that
they cannot be penetrated by the other Elements. It is with the earth in some
sort, as with the water, of which the best is that which soonest, and with
greatest facility receives the strange and uncouth qualities that are applied
unto it, which is the reason that we experimentally see, that the new earth
drawn from the bottom of some deep Pit, remains a long time barren, till it has
received its fertility from the mixture and participation of the other
Elements, and then, that is to say, a year after, or thereabouts, it begins to
produce Grass and Simples. And that also is the reason why the uppermost Mould
of the earth is always better, more fat and fertile, than that which is lower
within. Now if the earth drawn out of these holes, had been in like manner long
exposed to all the influences of the Air, without doubt it would assume these
good qualities, as well at least as that in the bottom (which also in some sort
participates of the benefit) by which means whoever should plant his Trees in
this earth, would find it much more nourishing, and should have a better
account of his Plantation.

11. This Rule may indifferently serve for all sorts of Trees, and chiefly for
the Trenches you make for the Espalliers, because that way of planting, both
requires and deserves more care than all the others, but it is nevertheless
seldom or never put in practice; for as much as very few have the patience to
stay a whole year after they have once taken a resolution to plant, and have
set forth ground for that purpose, and they look upon this long preparation as
a loss of so much time, wherein a Tree might already have taken good root, and
have advanced so much toward its perfection. As for what concerns Espalliers,
there is yet another inconvenience that hinders them, which shall also be
spoken of in its due place.

12. The holes being thus made, you are in the next place to cull out Trees all
of one and the same stature, and those either already grafted (which is by much
the best, for the reasons shall be given when I come to speak of Pepin-fruits)
or if those are not to be had, then stocks of the same height to graft upon,
that is of six or seven foot on the Bole, and about two or three inches thick
(for you must ever be careful to measure the height to this proportion of
thickness) which also are to be chosen straight, and carefully pulled up with
all their roots. In planting of which, it will be very good to give them some
help under the root, of fat earth, or dung well rotten, and earth mixed together
(wherein you are also to be careful, that the dung do not touch the root) for
one may easily assist a Tree already planted from above, but we never rifle
again under the root to help it there.

13. Before you place the Tree in the hole designed for it, you must refresh
the root by neatly cutting off the extremities with your pruning-knife; and you
are always to cut them on the under-side, so that the wounds and cuttings may
exactly be placed upon the earth; for it is from those cuts that the Tree
thrusts out its first rays and fibers, which by this means creep into, and
disperse themselves through the upper Mould, and cause the Tree to take faster
hold, and to stand firm.

14. Dung, fat earth, and all the other improvers which shall be treated of,
when we come to speak of planting Espalliers, are also very good for great
Trees; but they are not so necessary. And as it would be a matter of great
difficulty to employ this particular care in great Plantations, that take up
great spaces of ground; so also when the Soil it self is very good, Trees
prosper well enough without all these helps.

15. You must not set them too deep in the earth; for besides that, Roots
buried too low in the ground, do not sufficiently participate of the influences
of the Air, there is another inconvenience in it, which is, that the earth
above being always the better, and the Tree receiving the nourishment that
comes from thence, as that which is most proper for it; if it be set too deep,
it thrusts forth new roots above to attract the nutriment of the better earth,
and often suffers those below to decay and perish, which does not only
incommodate, but very often wholly destroys the Tree. It will therefore be
enough to set the root a foot deep only in the earth, wherein you are to take
care to cover it with new Mould that is not lumpy, and with your hand to
dispose it all about the little strings and fibers of the roots, that there may
be no cavities betwixt the earth and the root; for such vacuities would
infallibly beget rottenness and ruin.

16. It is good also to shoulder or clod up the Tree for three foot about, and
some four foot high, and afterward in laboring it over again by little and
little, to abate the heap, till the earth be again settled to its former level.

17. It is also very convenient to cover the Trees by raising straw to a
certain height round about the Stem, by which means the bark will retain its
beauty, the sap will not be exhausted by the heat of the Sun, and it will be
preserved from Moss.

18. If the root of the Tree be not of it self strong enough to withstand the
force of the winds, it ought to be propt and supported with a stake, or a good
strong Pole almost of its own height; but then you must take heed this prop be
not of cloven or sawn Wood with edges, neither gouty, nor full of knots, lest
it should hurt the Tree, and gall or wound the bark; but it must be round, and
tied after such manner, that it do not interfere with the Tree; to prevent
which, there must also be straw or hay lapt betwixt them.

19. Some use to prune the Trees before they set them, both by reason it is to
be done at greater ease in hand, than when they are planted; and moreover,
because the force of pruning is apt to shake them when they are already set in
their places; but withal, men usually planting in the beginning of Winter, the
frosts and other injuries of that rude Season, do sometimes incommodate a Tree
so lately wounded, and pierce deeper into its heart by such overtures.
Wherefore it is better to stay till the Spring before you lop or cut them,
especially if year-old graffs, which also must be so done, as almost to leave
them no branches at all, to the end, that having so much less Wood to maintain,
they may the better recover and take new root with greater vigor.

20. It is very requisite to rank the Trees according to their kinds: as for
example, to set one whole row of Renate-Apples, and another of Summer-Pears,
and all in such sort, that the principal fruits, and those that are the best,
and will longest keep, be in much greater number than those which are planted
for curiosity only, and will not keep so long as Summer-fruits, though they are
very excellent in their kind.

21. In the whole body of a Plantation ranged in this Order, you are by no
means to mix any Stone-fruits at all; but you may plant them in the Alleys that
are round about it, placing Plumbs, Cherries, Griotiers, A sweet sort of
Cherries
Guiniers, and Bigarotiers, at six and six yards distance one from another, or
further off, especially the Bigarotiers, which extend their branches very far
when grafted upon the Merisier.

22. Now all these Instructions presuppose a good Soil, without which a man
should not over-easily be induced to undertake these kind of Plantations, but
content himself with Espalliers and Dwarf-Trees only, which take up less
ground, and that consequently is with greater ease to be prepared, by
introducing good earth into barren and ungrateful places: but notwithstanding,
if you will needs plant in an ill Soil, you must then open your holes eight
foot square, and three foot deep, and separate the better and more likely earth
that is turned out (which is commonly the uppermost) from the rest, and
afterward fill them up with that select Mould, and other that shall be brought
in, of the best can be found, with a great deal of very old and rotten dung and
marl, or the scowring of Pools or Fish Ponds, provided it have lain at least a
year before; for it would otherwise be too cold for the Trees, and make them
die, as on the contrary, dung is too hot, if not well consumed; and especially
(as has been before observed) you must take good heed, that the Roots touch
not the dung, but that there be always earth between.

23. With this expense Trees may be made to prosper in any Soil whatever.
Nevertheless, if it be so stiff a clay, or so stony a ground, that the Trees
cannot at all pierce it with their roots, then the forementioned holes will be
yet too little to supply a Tree with so much nourishment as is necessary for
its due and expected growth; and you must make them still more large, for
otherwise the roots of the Trees coming to touch the earth, which is so much an
enemy to them, stop short, and curl themselves back again into the hole from
whence they came, where they work the same effect with Trees planted in boxes,
and presently devour all the virtue of the good earth was put into them.

24. Plantations of great and fullgrown Fruit Trees, require also to be
husbanded as well as the others, and you must bestow labor upon them at least
four times a Year; to wit, in the beginning, and at the end of Winter, and then
as deep as you can; and twice in Summer only to kill the grass, and to keep the
earth from growing hard and parching with the Sun; wherein you are to rely very
much upon the laborers dexterity and care, to cultivate all these Plantations
with the Plough, and yet there is no other way to turn up so much ground as
they possess when they are of great extent, without an excessive charge; but
you may give the Husbandman caution to bring his Plough within a certain
distance of the Trees only to avoid accidents, and to turn up the remainder
with the Spade, the Hoe, and the Mattock.

25. Now the deep husbandry or digging that is used to Trees in the beginning,
and at the end of Winter, produces several good effects; for by this means the
good earth, which is always uppermost, is turned down to nourish the Tree, and
the lower earth is laid aloft to be made better and more fertile, by the fame
reasons; and it will also fall out, that all the moisture and fatness which
comes from above, will penetrate to the bottom, which by that means will be
kept supple and light, and consequently easy to be penetrated by the new roots
that put out, which are like so many little emulgent veins by which the Tree
extracts its nourishment from all parts.

26. But on the contrary, in Summer you are by no means to stir the earth too
deep, lest the heat pierce too far into it, and hurt the roots of the Trees;
and besides, the Husbandry will be sufficient if you kill the ill weeds, and
hinder the earth from crusting too much with the heat of the Sun.

27. You may also make Plantations of this sort of Stone-fruits in tall Trees,
and they are very pleasant when separated according to their different kinds;
as for example, a Cherry-Orchard in one place, a Plumb-Orchard in another, and
a Peach-Orchard in a third, which Plants are also to be cultivated after the
same manner as the others, observing only the difference of their distances and
stations. Plumbs, Apricots, Cherries, Bigarotiers and Griotiers require to be
planted at six yards distance betwixt Tree and Tree, and rather more. Cherries
not grafted, or that are grafted upon other Cherry-stocks, do not require so
great a distance, and it will be sufficient to plant them at the distance of
betwixt twelve and fifteen foot, and Peach-trees the same: But it is to be
noted, that Peaches and Apricots are very impatient of frosts and great winds,
and therefore cannot prosper if not planted in such a place of advantage, as
shall secure and shelter them from these assaults.

28. There are two seasons proper for planting, namely, Autumn, and the Spring,
for Summer is totally unfit, both by reason of its violent heat, and also the
sap of the Trees being then in their branches, they would wither in
transplanting, and cause the Tree it self to die; neither is Winter proper, by
reason of the frosts and great rains which deprive the earth of such a
disposition as is necessary for the entertaining of Plants, unless in a dry
Soil, where the earth does not clog nor run into mortar, and in such a place
one may plant even in the rain. The beginning of the Spring, when the earth
begins to dry a little, is good for several sorts of Trees; but for
Fruit Trees, Autumn is incomparably better, than any other season. One may
plant presently after September, that is to say, in the middle of October, or
about that time, by reason that then the sap retires from the branches into the
root, which so soon soever as it shall happen, a Tree is to be removed without
any manner of danger, for as much as the sap of the Tree is no longer in the
heart, but in the rind or bark only, and that is the reason why we sometimes
see Trees totally decayed and rotten at the heart, which yet fail not for all
that of bearing fair and good fruit, the sap communicating its nourishment to
the branches by the bark only; wherefore when the sap shall no more appear in
the bark, it is a good time to plant. The advantage of planting betimes is
twofold; for in this season one may easily make choice of fair days, and a fair
Sun for this purpose, which is a thing that very much contributes to the making
Plants to prosper; and moreover, the earth that is then stirred being sound,
and not as yet oversoakt, easily crumbles and moulders about the root, and
keeps it in a good Mould the whole year about. But there is yet another, and a
very considerable reason, which is, that Trees early planted, recover
themselves before Winter, and find themselves already strong, and well
acquainted with the Soil when they are to put out in the Spring; for the sap
which in Winter is retired into the root, does no more lie idle in this Season,
than any of the other three, but puts out new threads and fibers from the root,
as experience shows; and it is most certain, that plant a Tree in good earth in
October, and take it up again in January, and you will find it has put out new
roots; and so by this early planting you secure the Tree against the heat of
Summer, and moreover, gain half a year in its growth.

29. Yet is it not all, to have planted Fruit Trees well, and to have prepared
the ground with all imaginable pains and care, you must moreover be careful to
correct them, to take away the superfluous branches, and to hinder the good
from being pestered and incommodated with those that are useless and good for
nothing. Nature it is true, does ever labor toward her perfection, but she
cannot arrive at it without being assisted by Art. Trees when planted in a
fruitful Soil, do voluntarily dispose themselves toward their most
advantageous Figure and Proportion; but you must also help and assist them,
that they may arrive at the perfection for which they strive. This, whilst they
are yet very young, and that the branches you would take away are small, is to
be done with the pruning-knife, and when grown stronger, with the Joyners
Chizel and a Mallet; but that is never to be done the first year, for it is
enough at first if the Tree take, without demanding any more, you must be
content to receive all the branches it will present you, and it will be time
enough a year after to make your choice, to take away the bad, and to preserve
the good. It is with Trees newly planted, as with young Horses, which we never
go about to manage in their first years, but are content to see that they feed
well and thrive. You must notwithstanding begin betimes to cut your Trees, that
is to say, the second year, or at the latest, the third; for it is much easier
to bring them to a handsome head, when you begin so soon, than if you should
defer it longer, and the Tree suffers less when the superfluous branches are
taken away in their shooting, than when you shall be obliged to cut them off
when thicker, and grown more strong.

30. There is no precise instruction to be given for the cutting of great
Trees, and therefore the eye and judgment of the Workman must be his rule; only
you are in general to observe, whether in pruning young Trees lately planted,
or cutting those of longer standing, not to suffer branches to grow over one
another, nor to leave too much wood upon the Tree, and so to cleanse it, that
the branches may not shade one another; as also to take away a great number of
the little branches that grow within the Tree, and that almost never bear any
fruit; but withal, you are to have a special care to cut what you take away
very even, and close by the trunk of the Tree, to the end that the sap which
rises may presently cover the wound with a new bark. For this purpose the
Joyners Chizels are exceeding proper, and those you are to have of several
bredths, according to the branches you would cut. This instrument is also of
better use for this kind of work, when helved upon the end of a broken
half-Pike, or any other staff of eight, ten, or twelve foot-long, by which
means, without climbing a Tree, you may at great ease take away all you desire,
and may better choose out the useless branches mixed with the others, to cut them
with much greater facility than with a pruning-knife. You must also evermore
observe to cut and prune your Trees always in the wain, especially that of
January and February; not but that you may cut strong and able Trees in the
wain of November and December also.

31. All sorts of Trees endure the knife, and willingly part with their
superfluous wood whilst young and growing; but the Apple Tree will not part
with his branches when a little in years, and that he is already arrived at his
perfection, for as much as he has much ado to recover, and oftentimes perishes
by the wound. The Cherry-tree also, the Bigarotier and Apricot, are impatient
of dressing when old, unless totally lopt off, to make them shoot forth new
heads. The Pear and Plumb submit better to the knife, especially the Pear.

32. When there is rotten Wood got into a Tree, you must be careful to cut it
out with a kind of hollow Chizel the Joyners call a Gouge, which is to be
handled after the same manner you do the ordinary Chizel, and is a very proper
instrument to enter into the body of the Tree, and to scoop out all that is dry
and rotten, without endamaging the rest.

33. Moss is prevented from growing round a Tree, by littering them up with
straw, as has before been directed; but when it is once come, you must take
care to scrape it off with a wooden knife, or by rubbing the bark of the Tree
to which it clings, with a new coarse cloth, or a good hard wisp of straw after
rain, when it will fall off with greater ease.

34. As Standards have many things proper for them in common, with the others
that are raised in different forms, so many of these instruments that are
properly made for the one, may indifferently be employed about the other; and
it is also certain, that if we would take the same pains, and make the same
preparation for the planting of Standards, which ought to be observed in
Espalliers, they would prosper infinitely better; wherefore, the curious, who
will not spare for cost, would do well to prepare the earth after the same
manner, both for the one and the other.

Of Espalliers.
1. WE call those Trees Espalliers which are pallisado'd along the Walls, and
are with good reason esteemed above all other ways of planting, principally for
four things.

2. First, for their Beauty, for they are an exceeding great ornament to a
Garden, when well sustained, and neatly kept, and that we see them interwoven
in good order along by the Walls, and all covered over with their leafs and
fruits.

3. Secondly, for the rarity of their fruits, for as much as the best, and
those that are most rare, as the Bergamot, the Winter Boncrestien, and most of
those Peaches and I take a Pavie to be a Nectrine, though Cotgrave calls it a
bastard Peach, or a fruit like a Peach.
Nectrines, which prosper not in Standards, easily ripen and come to perfection
in Espalliers.

4. Thirdly, for the quality of their fruits, it being most certain, that even
those which prosper best in the open Air, are incomparably better in
Espalliers, both for largeness and color.

5. Fourthly, for their abundance, which is such, that when an Espallier is
well supported, you must always pull off above half the blossoms with which it
overcharges it self, and very often a great many more after they are knit,
whereas this abundance is very rare in Standards; and if it one year happen by
chance, the two following shall either be totally without fruit, or at least
they will be very thin.

6. All which advantages proceed from the heat of the Sun, which is very much
augmented by the repercussion of the Wall, and from the shelter they receive in
such a location from the injury of winds, to the violence whereof these Trees
are not subject, as being totally defended on the one side by the Wall, and on
the others, being tied and complicated within one anther, they can receive no
harm.

7. Espalliers also require more care and labor than all other sorts of
Plantations, wherefore well to examine all that is necessarily required to
bring them to their perfection, it will be convenient to consider, what is to
be done before you plant them, both as to the preparing of the earth, and the
choice of the situation, which are both to be duly considered in planting this
sort of Trees; as also what is to be done after they are planted, to cultivate
and improve them.

What is to be observed before the Planting of Espalliers.
1. THe first thing that he who will plant an Espallier is to observe, is to
expose it to a good aspect of the Sun. Art and labor can effect all other
necessary things in any situation whatever, but for this it is impossible to
have it, if we do not meet him at his first arrival.

2. There are two good Positions which ought always to be observed in the
planting of Espalliers in Gardens, and that may also indifferently serve for
all other sorts of Plantations; of which the first is that which has the Sun
full upon it at his first rising, or presently after, and retains it till two
or three of the clock in the afternoon; the second is that which begins to
receive the Sun about ten a clock in the morning, and loses it not till it go
down. These two Positions are almost equally good, for they have the one as
much heat as the other, though there is notwithstanding a certain principal
virtue observed in the rising Sun, which causes those Espalliers which are
exposed unto it, to be both sooner ripe, and of a better color than those in
the other Position; which also proceeds from this, that at the end of Winter,
and in the beginning of the Spring, the Sun dwells much longer upon this
Position, than upon the other, for it almost continually shines upon it, from
the rising to the setting. The second Position has also another advantage
particular to it, which is, that it is less exposed to the danger of frosts
than the other, by reason that the frost does little harm to Trees in the
Spring, unless the Sun dash upon them whilst the frost is yet hanging on; for
then the two contrary qualities of heat and cold beget a conflict, which the
Tree is so sensible of, that the leafs and blossoms thereof appear stricken and
blasted; but when the frost dissolves of it self, before the Sun comes to shine
upon it, it does no harm at all, and afterward drops off as innocently as dew.
The first Position receiving the Sun from its first rising, if there have a
frost happened in the night upon the Trees, they are then subject to this
accident; but on the contrary, the Sun only beginning to shine upon the second
at ten or eleven of the clock, if a frost have happened in the night, it is
absolutely thawn and dissolved of it self before the Sun comes to strike upon
it. There are also some Soyls so burning, that the first Position is too hot,
so that often times the fruits by the excessiveness of the heat, cannot arrive at
their full proportion and fairness. But, to conclude, all things duly
considered, the first is the better for fruits that require a very hot Sun, as
A Musk Cherry also a Muscadine grape.
Muscats and Peaches; and the second is as much to be esteemed for Pears.

3. These two Positions are the best of all others, not only in respect to the
heat of the Sun, which is doubtless the principal reason; but also because they
defend the Espalliers from the North and Northwest winds, which are the worst
for frosts, especially the Northwest, which commonly blows in the Spring, and
which is so much the more dangerous, because it very often brings with it a
frost after little rains, which soften the Trees, and render them more
penetrable, and apt to freeze. Of these two Positions the first is totally
covered from that, and the second from the North.

4. All the principal and most delicate fruits, as Peaches, Pavies,
Bonchrestiens and Bergamots, ought to be placed in these Positions. There are
others nevertheless which are not wholly to be rejected, and may do very well
for more hardly fruits, as all Summer-Pears, and some Winter-Pears also, as
shall be explained in the Catalogue of Fruits.

5. The place being thus chosen, the Wall which is to support the Espallier,
must be twelve or thirteen foot high, to the end the Tree may have its utmost
stretch when it shall come to perfection. It ought also to be pargeted or
rough-cast, either with Plaster or Lime, not for ornament only, and to make it
more handsome; but also by reason that a thousand mischievous things, snails,
worms, and other corruptions, breed in Walls that are made of mud only, and
Rats, Mice, and other Vermin, shelter themselves in the holes and cavities
which they there find, and very much annoy the fruits. If in building these
Walls you would there place little Sheep-shancks in the Order of a Quincunx,
the Lozenges whereof to be four or five inches square, and those to peep an
inch only out of the rough-cast, you would find them of great use, and the
Pallisado of your Trees would be made at much greater ease, and much less
expense. It Is true, one may make shift to fasten them into the Walls already
made, but never in so good order, as if placed in building the Wall. The use of
these Sheeps-bones shall be explained, when we come to speak of the manner
after which Espalliers ought to be Pallisado'd.

6. These things thus done, nothing more remains, but only to prepare the
earth, of which there is some so good of it self as seems to require no manner
of help, and to be capable of producing fruits in their greatest excellence,
without other assistance than the ordinary pains and culture. There is also on
the other side some Soyls of so malevolent a nature, as can never be made to
produce any thing that is good; and that a man is forced totally to remove, to
bring better into its place, if he intend to have his Trees to prosper.
However, that which is contained in this Article, ought notwithstanding to be
equally observed in all sorts of Soil, if not in that which is so abominably
bad, as that it must be totally removed. But a man ought never so much to
presume upon the bounty of a Soil, as to neglect any part of his preparation;
for if it be able of it self to produce fruit that is very good, it will
produce incomparably better if seconded and assisted, and that to its own
fertility it shall receive all the advantages and improvements, the Art and
industry of the Gardener can add unto it. You are then to open a Trench eight
foot wide, and three foot deep, and to dig it sloping, that is, wider at the
top than the bottom, on that side next the Wall, to the end that this overture
may not endanger the Walls foundation; and in casting out the Earth, you must
separate the good from the bad, that the Trench may only be filled up again
with the best, and that the worst may not again be thrown into it. If you could
leave this Trench open a whole year before you fill it up again, undoubtedly
the earth, at the bottom, by so long lying exposed to the open Air, as also
that which has been thrown out, would receive a very great advantage, for the
reasons before given, in the tenth and twelfth Articles of the Chapter
concerning Standards: But besides, that a man can very hardly persuade himself
to so much patience, it is to be feared, that the Wall in the mean time would
fall, or be very much weakened, the foundations of it being in a manner wholly
laid open. The earth being thus thrown out, you should then lay in the bottom
of the Trench a bed of half a foot or eight inches thick of good fat earth,
drawn a year or two before out of the bottom of some Marish or Fish Pond, and
well consumed in that time; or Turf dug out of some green highway, where
there is only short grass, and no twitchgrass, nor other sorts that devour the
fatness of the earth. This Turf ought not to be flead off above four inches
thick, and being got betimes in the year, is excellent for Trees; for the salt
of this earth, which has long lain idle, still mounts upward, and is attracted
by the heat of the Sun, and the little nourishment that short grass requires,
has nothing wasted its substance, so that it remains entirely in the Turf; but
then you must break and mince it in the Trench, till it be in a manner reduced
to powder. You are then to lay a bed of old dung very well rotten, and well
wasted, of four inches, or half a foot thick, and another bed of the best of
the earth that was turned out of your Trench; which three different beds must
be wrought with very great labor, and such as shall shuffle and mix them with
one another (which is to be done with the spade) until all these different
things make up one body together; after which you are also to lay three other
distinct beds of the same substances, which must also be labored after the
same manner, till the Trench be heapt up half a foot above the level of the
Alley, forasmuch as the earth so tossed and tumbled will shrink so much at least,
when the Winter or the rains have deprest and washed down the Husbandry. If you
have none of this fat Soil of Pond-earth or Turf, you must then put in so much
the more dung, you may also throw in the shovlings of some old ditch exposed to
the South-Sun, which are commonly very good, or the sweepings of Courts, and
any thing whatever that Gardiners know to be good to mend the Soil, provided it
be well wasted, and is not too hot: but you shall have a particular Chapter of
what is to be observed in the choice of all sorts of Dung and Manure.

7. It is of very great importance to give all these Manurings to the earth you
prepare for Espalliers at the first, to the end that the Trees being once
planted, you may not need to give it any more improvement, at least of a very
long time after; and by this means also, when the Trees shall come to bear, the
Dung being totally consumed and turned to earth, will give no ill relish to the
fruits they shall produce, which oft-times falls out, when they lay a great
deal of Dung to Trees already settled in their place.

8. If peradventure you shall not have sufficient store of dung plentifully to
furnish the bottom, and your upper bed too, you must then dispose the greatest
quantity into the bottom, still reserving some, but the lesser share for the
bed above, because you may at ease, at any time, supply that defect in the
upper part of the earth, and as often as you shall think fit; but the Trees being
once planted, you can no more dive under their roots to give them any
improvement there.

9. It is good to lay the Alleys of your Espalliers round and high ridged in
the middle, so that the midst of your Walk may lie higher than your Espallier,
to the end that the rain which shoots from the Alley may run into it; and also,
that the helps you give it may remain, and not be washed away.

10. This way of preparing the earth is principally for Pear Trees; for Peaches
and Apricots are to be planted with less ado, and do not indeed require so much
dung; but you must not fail, even for them as well as the other, to open the
earth the same wideness and depth, though you turn in the same earth simply as
it came out, without any mixture or help at all, for as much as the roots of
the Trees delight in this rifled and lightened earth, and come on more in one
year, than they would do in any other in many.

Of what is to be observed in Planting Espalliers.
1. ALl these things being thus ordered and disposed, you are next to observe
the distance at which your Trees are to be set; wherein also you are to be
guided by the nature of the Trees themselves, and are to plant them at several
distances according to their different kinds: For Plumbs, Apricots and Cherries
are to be planted at six yards distance from one another, by reason that their
branches extend themselves very far; and Pear Trees at the distance of fifteen
foot, or four yards at the least, because they do not spread so wide.

2. In the earth prepared after the manner prescribed in the foregoing Chapter,
you are to make little holes of about three or four foot square, and a foot
deep, in such sort that it may easily receive all the roots of the Tree you
design for that place; which being done, you must take old dung very rotten, or
fat earth that has lain very long, and mix it very well with twice as much
earth, and put part over, and part under the roots of the Tree, which you are
to set half a foot within the earth, and a foot from the Wall, sloping and
leaning toward it, so that the Bole appearing above ground, may not be above
three inches from the Wall; for to tie and fasten the branches as they ought to
be, it must not be too far off, and the root being more remote, extracts also
some nourishment from the earth, that is betwixt the Wall and it. You must also
refresh the roots with the Pruning-knife, after the manner set down in the
thirteenth Article of the Chapter of Standards, leaving all the hairy Fibers
you can possibly save; and be sure the roots be well covered with that mixed
earth, so that no vacuities remain, as has been said before.

3. You are also to have a care, that the Dung touch not the roots, because it
would heat them too much, and the Summer following peradventure make them die,
unless it be so old and rotten, as that it has lost all its heat, and that it
be in a manner reduced to earth. It is good to forbear cutting the Trees you
set, till after the great colds are past, that is to say, till the wain of
January and February, and set them at first entire, without taking away any of
their branches, for the reasons already given, in the tenth Article of the
forenamed Chapter of Standards.

4. When you prune Trees, you are to cut them sloping in form of a Hind's foot;
and observe, that the Cut be on that side next to the Wall, to the end it may
not be exposed to the Sun, which otherwise would make a cleft and a wound, that
would hurt it very much; which place so cut, should also be plaistered and
covered over with the purest earth, or that and hay tempered and mixed together,
or plaistered with a certain Gum the Embroiderers commonly use.

5. You ought to leave but very few branches upon the Trees you plant after
this manner; for those that shall sprout out new will be much better, and more
easy to govern, than those you take away.

6. You may begin to plant immediately after the Month of September, that is to
say, in the beginning, or in the middle of October, and the sooner you begin
the better; but if the earth should then prove too dry, and not yet soakt
enough with the rain, you must then abundantly water the Trees that are set so
soon.

7. Some there are, who in planting have a great regard to the Moon, and
believe the wain to be much more proper for this work than the increase; but
experience shows this Observation to be vain: It is much better ('it is true) to
prune in the decrease, than the increase; but you may (as I have said
elsewhere) defer pruning a long time after they are planted.

8. You ought to be very curious and careful in the choice you make of those
kinds of Fruit you intend for Espalliers, and never should plant any, but those
that can prosper no other way, or that are so excellent you desire they should
never fail, or that you would have in greater perfection; for they thrive to a
greater largeness, and come to a better color in Espalliers, than otherwise,
and infallibly bear every year. Of these the Bonchrestien, and the Bergamot are
the chief; the Rousselet, and the little Muscat of the Summer-Pears, the
Amadoste, the Portail, and the Saint Lezin of the Winter-Pears are the next.
All which different kinds shall be more fully handled in the Catalogue of
Pears, in which every one shall find the kinds he most affects, and has the
greatest desire to have, and how they are to be planted for their better
propagation. Only you may in the mean time observe, that the Bonchrestien being
without comparison by much the best of all Pears, as well by reason of its
beauty, as because it keeps longer than any other, you ought to plant in your
Espalliers six times as many of them, as of any other kind.

9. As to what concerns Stone-fruits, besides what shall be said of them in
their Catalogue, you are to observe the two same things in your choice of them.
Apricots prosper no other way but in Espalliers only; but although their fruit
be beautiful and very good, you are not notwithstanding to plant many of them,
for they bear in too great abundance, and continue but a very little while. As
for Plumbs, they prosper very well in the open Air, and well enough resist the
frosts and winds, and therefore it would be to no purpose to usurp the place of
Espalliers for them, if not for the white and red Pordrigon only, which are the
tenderest of all Plumbs, and of which the Fruit is also preferred before all
the rest. Peaches of all other Fruit Trees, do most require all the advantages
of an Espallier, that is to say, a very hot Sun, and a good shelter against the
agitation of the winds, for which reason there are very few places where they
can come to their perfection, unless they be clapped up close to a Wall;
wherefore as their fruit is of the best sort, both for relish and beauty, so it
ought to make up the greater and more principal part of your best Espalliers,
if not an entire Espallier of themselves. Those therefore who have a great many
Walls, would do well to make a whole Espallier of Peaches only, on that side
where the Sun is most violent, which is the first of the two Positions observed
in the foregoing Chapter, and plant the Pear Trees in the second. And being
that Peach-trees require a greater distance for the extention of their
branches, one may with great ease, and very good success, make an Espallier of
Peaches and Muscat Grapes.
Muscats, of three foot high along by the Wall, which is the ordinary height of
the stocks of Vines, and plant Peaches of three foot of the Stem, which will
begin to extend their branches over the Muscats; but then for this purpose you
must choose Peach-trees raised from the stone, or that are grafted upon stocks
of Almonds or Apricots, which are raised from the stone, and not upon
Plumb-stocks, by reason that the roots of the Plumb-trees too much importune
their neighbors, and run out so soon every way to seek for nourishment, as
even to thrust new sprouts or suckers out of the ground, which would very much
endamage the Muscats growing near them.

10. Such as are well acquainted with the difference betwixt Pear Trees grafted
upon Quinces, and those which are grafted upon wild stocks, always choose the
first for their Espalliers; for ir is certain that the Pear Tree grafted upon a
Quince-stock, Pallisado's much better, puts not out so much wood, bears twenty
times more fruit, and nourishes them incomparably larger and fairer, than that
upon the wild stock; and moreover, the Trenches and improvements have been
added to the earth in which they are planted, continues much longer with the
Quinces, than the others, by reason they spread not their roots so far, and yet
attract every whit as much nourishment, as appears by their putting out many
more hairy suckers and fibers. It is true, that the Beure, the Orange-Pear, the
Bezidery and the Portail, prosper as well upon the wild stock; but they are
much better upon the Quince, though the Portail (to say the truth) is not so
tart upon the wild stock, and has ordinarily a better taste. As to what concerns
the choice of Apple and Pear-Quinces, and their different natures, you are to
consult the Chapter of Pepin-fruits.

11. Pear-Quinces not yet grafted, are sometimes planted in Espalliers to graft
them afterward upon the place, which is done the second year, in the Month of
August, en Which is by way of Inoculation.
oeil dormant, which is the best way for Pear-Quinces, after the manner set
down in the Chapter of Nurseries for Pepin-fruits. In case it be grafted after
this manner, the Quince that is planted is not to be above an inch, or two
inches higher than the earth, for as much as you are to set the oeil dormant
upon the first years shoot; and when you plant Trees already grafted, you must
take good heed, that the Graft be always four fingers above the earth, lest the
Tree should take root from the graft, by which means it would loose the
advantages it receives from the root of the Quince, in having others of another
quality, and such as would make it bear a great deal more wood than fruit;
which Observation may also serve for all sorts of Trees grafted upon the
Quince, and for Apple Trees grafted upon a stock of a Pepin, of the
Pomme-de-Paradis, which are exceedingly subject to take root from the Graft;
wherefore, if the Trees have been planted too deep at first, so that the Graft
be covered with earth, you must have a care at the time when you give them the
greatest culture, in the beginning and at the end of Winter, to bare them, to
see if they do not put forth some threads and little roots from the Graft, and
if they have, always to cut them away.

12. Those who at first only plant Quinces afterward to graft upon, may deliver
themselves from the impatience of expecting so long till their Walls were
covered, and their Espalliers come to bear fruit, if in separating their
Quinces fifteen foot from one another, which is the usual distance, they would
plant a Peach between, which shoots much sooner, and presently surnishes the
Wall, both with his leaves and fruit; by which means one may stay very well
till the Pear Trees come to perfection, enjoying the Peaches in the mean time,
and by that time the other shall be arrived at their perfection, the
Peach-trees, which are not so long-lived, will begin to decline, and in a few
years easily yield them their whole room.

What is to be observed in cultivating Espalliers already planted.
1. THe principal care you ought to have the first year the Trees are planted,
is that they take well below, and put out above with vigor; and therefore it
is, that you are not so much to think of taking away their superfluous
branches, as of guiding and conducting them in this beginning, and to preserve
them from the great droughts and ardours of the Sun, from the grass that would
choke them, and other things that often make them die in Summer, if not
preserved by the Gardiners care. In case therefore that the Trees do not shoot
with very great force and vigor, I would not meddle with their branches, if
not gently, and without violence to ply and bend them toward the form they are
afterward to receive; as also, when you see their branches shoot straight up,
and that they are lusty and liking shoots, you may sometimes stop their
progress by nipping off the extremities with your nail only, to the end that
they may fork out below, and put out to furnish the two sides: but generally
speaking, you are to observe touching Espalliers, what has been said concerning
tall Standards, in the third Article of that Chapter.

2. The chief care of him who cultivates an Espallier in this first year, after
he has given it its due labor in the beginning of March, ought to be to defend
it from dryness, which sometimes in that Month is very great, and to that
degree, that the drought of March is often times more dangerous than the heat of
the whole Summer by reason that the Trees are not at that time yet enough
established in the earth; and therefore are by so much the more obnoxious to the
accidents contrary to them, by how much they are of less power to resist them.
The remedy of which is, to put about the Tree, for four foot, or thereabouts,
half a foot thickness of dung not yet sufficiently consumed, upon the
newstirred earth; which covering will keep the earth in the same condition it
finds it, and defends it well from the drought: but in case you may not have
dung enough to cover all your Trees, you may lay heaps of grass and weeds; but
then they must have no roots, lest they should take hold of the earth; or for
need you may also supply that defect with Hay, and in the Month of June there
is nothing better for this purpose, and to keep the great heat of the Sun from
overdrying and parching the earth, than to lay Fearn, that is yet green, and
not much withered; a covering that does very much defend the earth, both from
this dryness, as also to keep it supple, and to hinder it from washing away, if
there should happen any violent rain. The dung does however more befriend the
Soil, in that its saltness and fat still sinks into the earth, especially when
the rains fall, and makes it still more and more fertile.

3. As to the several labors that are necessary for the prosperity of your
Plantation, all Trees, whether newly planted, or of older standing, require at
least four every year. The first at the end of Winter, that is to say, in the
beginning of March, which ought to be very deep; the second in May, after a
little rain, which is not to be deep, and wherein half a Spades depth is enough
only to kill the grass, and by a little stirring the surface of the ground, to
hinder that the heat of the Sun and dryness do not too much crust and bind it;
the third in July, after the same manner, and for the same reasons; and the
fourth in October, and then you are to dive as deep into the earth as you can,
as you may see in the 26th. Article of Standards. In case the earth shall put
out grass in great abundance (as it often falls out in that which is prepared
after the manner required for Espalliers) you are then to take it away by
giving it a little labor, which shall only, as it were, scratch the earth so
often as the grass shall begin to appear; for above all things you must take good
heed, that the fat of the earth does not spread it self in unprofitable
productions, that it may be wholly preserved for the nourishment of the Trees
and their Fruits.

4. You are the second year to begin to bend your Trees well to their right
posture, and to prune them in such sort, that no superfluous branches may
remain, and that all those that are to be spared from the Knife be laid into
good order.

5. Pallisado's are made three ways, either with Poles set Lattice-wise along
by the Walls, or by fastening the branches to the Wall with leather and nails,
or by fixing Sheep-shancks in the Walls, and afterward fastening the branches
to them.

6. Of these the first way is the most ancient, and the only one that was in
use at first; which to make such as they ought to be, the Poles are to be tied
very fast together, and the openings of the Lattices no more than half a foot
square at most, and there must be hooks in the Wall from four foot to four
foot, and three inches out, of which there are to be three ranks in the height
of ten or twelve foot, to sustain and suspend the Poles in the Air, so that
none of them may enter into the earth, or at least very few; for thus they will
continue much longer, which is a thing to be desired, not only for the saving
of expense, but also because it is very hard to put new Poles or other pieces
of wood into an Espallier, without the Trees running a hazard of being broken,
or very much incommodated. You are to choose your Poles for this purpose, of
Chest-nut, or of Elm, which also are to be pill'd, and without any Bark; and it
would moreover be very good to lay them a long time in water before you use
them, for Elm, especially, grows very hard after having been seasoned in water,
and lasts much longer: you may also make use of Sallows, and all other sorts of
wood, provided the Poles be very straight. Great laths of Oak painted green,
and fastened with Wire, are likewise sometimes made use of in this kind of Work.

7. The second way, which is done with leathers and nails, is more proper,
because it is not at all discerned when the Tree is again covered with his
leaves; and moreover, one may by this means more easily place the branches
exactly as he desires; but this cannot be made use of but upon Walls that are
shot over with plaster, for as much as otherwise the nails cannot hold; and
moreover, it costs thrice the time the others do, and therefore is by no means
proper for those who have a great many Espalliers to order.

8. The third way, which is done with Sheep-shancks fastened in the Walls, is
doubtless the best and most commodious of all, and that which is done with
least charge; but the bones must be set so near together, as not to be above
four or five inches from one another, to the end that they may every where be
met with, where a branch is to be tied, otherwise the Trees can never be laid
in any tolerable order. These ought to be placed in the Wall, in the order of
Quincunx, and set so far in withal, that they may not stand out above an inch,
or very little more, which is sufficient to fasten a Branch to, with an Ozier,
a Withy, a Bull-rush, or Spanish Broom; and it were to be wished that they were
placed in building the Walls, for they can never be so rightly placed, when
they are already built. There are, who instead of these bones, make use of
little sticks of Dog-tree, or heart of Oak; but the bones are much better,
smoother, and more commodious, and cost less than all the rest.

9. You are to raise the Trees you pallisado, after the Figure of an expanded
hand, or of a Fan spread out to the utmost, so that the middle branch be always
higher than the rest; and that ought never to be bowed, but to be stopped in its
speed at the top, when it aspires too high, for fear, lest in drawing too much
nourishment, the Tree should want it below, and not put out branches enough to
furnish the sides; after which you must draw out, and spread the branches in
such sort, that the extremities be always tied higher than the place where they
part from the Tree; that is to say, you are never to bow them downward; for
naturally all Trees tend upward, and shoot their branches that way, so that if
you should force them to return toward the earth, that contrariety would
exceedingly hurt them. You are also to take heed, that the middle of the branch
be not bowed in such sort, that the two extremities be lowest, and by no means
suffer the branches to cross, or be laid over one another, which is commonly
seen in Espalliers that are not very carefully looked to; and in the mean time,
it is impossible the Trees should prosper, when put into so incommodious a
posture. The branch is therefore to be extended in a right line, from the Stem
where it comes out, to its utmost extremity, still mounting a little upward,
but very little; for if it were carried up too straight, the bottom of the Tree
would be wholly disfurnisht, and disspoyled of its due ornament and proportion.

10. You must begin to pallisado the lower branches, within half a foot of the
earth, and so continue them up to the top; and to the end that the Tree may
furnish it self in the lower parts, and shoot forth branches on either side,
you ought to stop the extremities of the Graft in pinching them with your
nails, so soon as it shall be shot up two or three inches high, as shall be
better explained, when we come to speak of Pepin-fruits.

11. Rightly to understand how to raise a Tree, you are necessarily to know how
it is to be cut, and in that principally does consist the care that is to be
taken about Espalliers. To which end you are to consult the 30th. Article of
the Chapter of Standards; for although the pruning of those, and of Espalliers,
are very different in many things, they have nevertheless some relation, and
the Gardener, who knows what Figure his Tree ought to bear, knows also very
near, what branches ought to be taken away. In the first place, you are never
to suffer any branch on the backside of the Tree, that is to say, betwixt the
Wall and it, nor on the forepart neither, but on the two sides only. Secondly,
you must take away, or stop all the branches that shoot out in length, without
putting out on the sides, and that are not sufficiently furnished with leaves,
and little springs in their extention; for otherwise it will fall out, that the
middle of the Tree will be in a manner naked, and cannot recloath it self with
leaves or fruit. Which Rule is to be observed for all sorts of Trees, but
principally Peaches; as to which, if this particular care be not taken, you
will presently see neither fruit nor leaf, but at the extremities of the
branches only.

12. The principal pruning of Trees ought to be in the decrease of the Moon in
January and February; and if the Trees be weak, you are always to stay till the
decrease of February, lest the cold should pierce into the wounds after they
are cut; nay, it is oft-times better to stay till the decrease of March; for
the cutting of the Tree it imports not, though it were already in the blossom.

13. In this Season you are to take away all the superfluous branches that
would deface the Figure of the Tree, stop the good that shoot out too far, and
prune away all the ill wood which was of the August-shoot, that never bears
fruit, and does only burden and incommodate the Tree, because it has not had
heat to mature it, and (according to the Gardiners phrase) is not sufficiently
Augusted. In a word, to speak properly, there is only this one Season for
pruning, for as much as during the rest of the year, we never cut off any
branches, but only stop and hinder them from shooting irregularly and to ill
effect.

14. In pruning you are evermore to spare those Branches which are nearest to
bearing, which after you have been a while used to Trees, will easily be
distinguished from others. Those who covet to have long fruits, ought to
consider the little branches which are short and well-liking, and full knotted
with Blossoms, and that grow nearest to the Bole of the Tree, as fittest to
gratify their desire; of which knots or buttons, they must also nip off so
many, as to leave no more than one or two only, and also be careful that there
still remain some knots for leaves over, and at the extremity of the little cut
branches, to the end that they may make a little tuft of leaves to defend the
fruit it is to bear, from the heat of the Sun, and also the branch from
withering. This little cutting so made, will cause the sap which would
otherwise have dispersed it self to the nourishment of a great many buttons, to
bestow its virtue upon those only which remain: but you are yet to take notice,
that as commonly there are several blossoms in every knot or button, so also
there remain several Pears; wherefore to have them very large and fair, you are
again to take away the greater number, and leave no more than one or two at
most.

15. Notwithstanding, that you have pruned your Trees in the forenamed Season,
you are nevertheless yet to take care to stop them in the decrease of May and
June (for the decrease of the Moon is evermore to be observed in this Work)
which is to be done, to the end that the Tree may fork into several little
branches and sprays, and to hinder it from disfurnishing it self; which besides
that, it preserves the ornament and beauty of a Tree, does also very much
contribute to the liberal bearing thereof, for those little branches commonly
are they which are most charged with fruit. Peaches and Apricots require to be
often poll'd, even every decrease of the Moon during the Summer, and so long as
the sap is in them, and that they shoot; for you are to have an especial care
no more to touch the Trees before Winter when their sap is staid, or that they
have not much remaining in them, for as much as they then can never again cover
the wound they have received, but the injuries of the Season, and the Winters
piercing cold would mortify the part in such sort, that you will soon after be
compelled to cut off the whole branch. Pear Trees grafted upon wild stocks and
not upon Quinces, require as frequent dressing, as either Apricots or Pears,
otherwise they shoot all into wood, and bear no fruit at all.

16. The abundance which every one covets in all things, is exceedingly hurtful
to Espalliers, for as much as it is naturally too usual and over-excessive in
these kind of Trees, if good heed be not taken to prevent their over-bearing;
wherefore, the Trees will neither long be preserved, nor fair and large fruit
gathered from them, if care be not taken to take away a great number so soon as
they are knotted, and before they have taken much nourishment from the Tree;
and you are ever to leave some fewer than it is able to maintain, that it may
not find it self oppressed, and may not disperse and wast its force in this
production. This Rule ought chiefly to be observed for Trees that bear long
fruits, as the Bonchrestien, and the Bergamot; but you are to make choice of
the fruits you take away, and of those you leave you are never to suffer any at
the extremities of the branches, not so much as a blossom, for they never
prosper in that part; and yet though they cannot arrive at their just greatness
and perfection, they nevertheless totally drain the whole branch, and hinder it
from thriving; you are therefore also to leave the fruit the nearest to the
thick branches, and to the trunk of the Tree.

17. When you disburden a Tree from an over-abundance of fruit, you are not to
tear them, or pull them off with your hand, by reason that in so doing you
would lay open the branch in those parts where the stalks of the fruits are
fastened, and so cause the sap to evaporate, which often makes the neighboring
fruits to wither, or at least hinders them from thriving to their just growth;
but you are to cut the stalk as far off from the Tree as you can, which may be
most commodiously done with a pair of sissers.

18. These observations principally serve for Pear Trees, nevertheless
Peach-trees do also require to be discharged of part of their fruits, that the
remainder may come to greater perfection, and that the Tree may longer endure.

19. You are never to spare dung, nor any of the other helps and improvements
which are necessary for well enriching the Soil wherein you intend to plant
Fruit Trees, it being to be wished that it were in such a condition at first,
that it may stand in no more need of their help when the Trees come to bear, it
being impossible but that the mixture of this strange body, must of necessity
evermore give some ill relish to the fruits, or at least take away something
from the good savor of the earth, and render them more wallowish and faint:
but when the dung is well consumed, both by time, and by frequent laboring and
stirring, it assumes it self the same quality of earth, leaving only its salt
and fatness, so that the natural excellency of the fruit receives no manner of
diminution; wherefore you are to have a great care to preserve this fatness,
and not suffer it to be squandered away in unprofitable productions, that you
may not afterward be obliged to renew your improvement. To which end you are
never to sow good herbs, nor suffer ill ones to grow near your Trees, but are
always to weed them up, that the earth may only labor for them, by which means
it will not be necessary of a long time to supply them with any more dung, the
earth being once well enricht, if it be not of it self so burning, as in a
short time to consume all these improvements; for when you perceive that it no
longer retains its virtue, that the fruits dwindle from their ordinary
largeness, and that the Trees visibly languish from their usual vigor, it will
then be necessary again to supply it with new helps.

20. When you perceive a Tree to languish, that the leaves turn yellowish, and
no more retain their natural and usual verdure, it is good in the beginning of
Winter, after having well stirred the earth, to lay Pigeons dung, two or three
fingers thick upon the earth, and four foot compass about it, and so let it lie
all Winter there to spread its force and too great heat, and afterward in
laboring the Tree when the cold season is past, to turn it into the earth,
which will restore it to its former vigor. It is also very good to apply a
great quantity of Swines dung, but for that itis presently to be buried in the
ground, and you are not to leave it on the top, for as much as it is not too
hot, but on the contrary, the coldest of all other improvements. In turning up
the earth, you will often find some parts of the root of the Tree diseased and
decaying, which with the pruning-knife is neatly to be cut, to make it thrust
out new fibers, and so to recover new strength, in which case you are to cover
the root anew, with good fat soil well consumed, and old dung well mixed with
mould, and take heed not too much to bare the root of the Tree, or lay it too
open, lest intending to relieve, you totally destroy it.

Of Espalliers in the open Air, called Hay-d'appuy.
ALl that has been directed for the raising Espalliers against Walls, may also
be indifferently observed in Espalliers in the open Air, for they require the
same preparation of the earth, the same manner of planting, the same way of
cutting, and the same extention of their branches. They have not indeed the
advantage of the Wall the others have, which by repercussion very much augments
the heat of the Sun, and by its shelter secures them from the violence of the
winds; but if they are not so well skreen'd as the first, they are yet in much
greater security than the Standards, and even than the Dwarf-trees and Shrubs,
for as much as the Poles to which they are fastened, keep them firm from being
shaken with the wind; for which reason, the large fruits they bear stand in
greater security, than in other Trees; and moreover, this kind of Plantation
being ordinarily set over against the Espalliers, which are planted against the
Walls, to make an Alley betwixt them (and for that reason called a Contre
Espallier) they still in some measure participate of the advantages those enjoy
which are planted by the Walls, and therefore delicate fruits succeed very well
in this posture, the Bergamot excepted, and some of the tender Pavies, which
constantly require to be planted against a Wall. This sort of Pallisado is not
to be made but with Poles, and that after the manner set down in the sixth
Article of Espalliers. In planting this sort of Trees, whether Stone, or
Pepin-fruits, the same distance is to be observed with Espalliers against
Walls; and for what concerns Pear Trees, it is much better to plant those
grafted upon Quinces, than any other.

Of Shrubs or Dwarf-Trees.
THis sort of Trees costs much less than the two former, and yet the fruits
nevertheless fail not to prosper very well, some of the more delicate and
tender Trees only excepted.

Pear Trees succeed very easily this way, if grafted upon Quinces, and not
otherwise, the others being hard to be made submit to this little stature, by
reason they thrust out so much wood, and the more you cut them, the more they
put out, and besides, naturally aspiring to be tall; they never bear fruit to
purpose, if deprest and subdued to another Figure. They are to be pruned in the
same season with the Espalliers, their form ought to be round, you must take
from them the branches that cross one another, not leave them too much wood;
take heed that the branches do not shade one another, and that they are not too
thick, especially within of the Tree, which is evermore to be discharged of
wood, for as much as it is useless in that part, and never bears any fruit. The
Pear Trees of this sort ought to be planted at the distance of twelve, or at
least ten foot from one another; they may be planted in the Contre-Espalliers
instead of Pallisado's, or you may make entire Plantations of them, being set
in the Quincunx order, at the forenamed distance. Apricots are by no means to
be planted after this manner, by reason that, besides, they will not have
sufficient security from the winds, their Trees will not be subjected to this
Figure. Peaches do better this way, and yet they extend themselves too far, and
put out such abundance of wood, that it is much better to leave them to their
natural liberty in Climates where they can prosper in the open Air.

Cherries and Plumb-trees are very beautiful, and bear exceeding well in
Dwarf-trees; but you must then set them at six yards distance from one another,
for as much as they stretch out their branches very far, and so far extend
their heads, that they bow back again toward the earth, as if they were raised
in tall Standards.

The Plumb-tree is much more patient of the knife, and suffers his superfluous
wood to be taken from him, much more willingly than the Cherry, from which
nevertheless it is also requisite to prune away a little in the middle of the
Tree when it is too thick; and to bring it into this Figure, you must stop the
Grafts betimes, so soon as they have shot three or four inches, and make them
turn down again toward the ground. The Cherry-tree will not be so often cut as
the Plumb, and it is sufficient to take away his superfluous wood from the
middle of the Tree only, when you perceive it to be too thick. Apple Trees do
also very well in bushes, when grafted upon a stock of Paradise; but those
which are grafted upon ordinary crab-stocks will be raised in Standards, and
come to be great Trees; but those which are grafted upon the Paradice-stock,
put out very little wood, and nevertheless bear plentifully well; these are to
be planted at two yards, or at the most, at seven foot distance only from one
another, if you will make the best use of your ground, for they require no
greater extent than that little space will allow; they will hardly endure to be
cut at all, neither do they need, for as much as they put forth no more wood
than is necessary for their bearing.

As to all the rest, that is to say, for what concerns planting, laboring and
cultivating Dwarf-trees, you are to observe the same Rules, or very near, that
you do for your Espalliers.

Of Composts.
OVer and above the foregoing Observations, in the Chapters for the Manuring of
Trees, and for distinguishing the Soyls wherein they are planted, it will not
be amiss to observe something in general touching the nature of Composts in
their different qualities.

Cow Dung then well rotten, is of all others the best for Trees, both because
it continues longer than any other, and also by reason that it is not too hot;
and therefore is to be turned into the earth in laboring the ground at the
beginning of Winter.

Sheeps-dung is hotter, and therefore not so proper for dry and burning Soyls,
if not first very well consumed, but then may be turned into the ground at the
same Season.

Horse-dung is yet hotter than the other, and not very proper for any but moist
places, and in such Soyls it is of all other the best; it is true, that when it
is very well wasted and decayed, it may be used in all places, and put to all
uses; but, generally speaking, it is much more proper for potherbs and for
Pulses, that is, all sorts of Pease and Beans, than for Trees; and is best to
be laid upon the earth in the beginning of Winter, that the rains and forsts
may perish it, and make it lose its too great heat; after which, when you give
your Trees the first Husbandry in the Spring, you may turn it in.

Swines-dung is of all other the coolest, and consequently very proper for
Trees, especially in a burning Soil. It ought ever to be turned in at first,
and not to be laid upon the earth, and not being too hot, may as well be made
use of in the Spring, as the beginning of Winter.

Pigeon-dung is the most violent and hot of all, but its ardour being
onceextinct, does wonders in reviving the vigor of a Tree, and helping it to
put forth large and well-colored leaves; but it is never to be turned into the
earth, till first it has been long exposed to the frost and rain; and to do
well, you should always spread it upon the earth in the beginning of Winter,
and not turn it in till the Spring; but as its effect is prompt and sudden, so
its virtue is but of short duration; for no dung whatever so soon spends it
self in the earth as this; and when you have used it with all the Art you can,
in a year or two the Soil will be as poor as before, and receive no manner of
advantage by it.

Of Creatures that infest Trees and Fruits, as also sundry accidents that are
hurtful to them.
1. IT is not enough to set a Tree in a good place, and to husband and
cultivate it well when it is planted; but you must also preserve it from
several accidents to which it is subject, and defend it from a thousand little
enemies that attack it. Caterpillars, Locusts, Cantarides, Ants, and a number
of other sorts of little animals, denounce open War against your Trees, with
innumerable arms without, and Moles, field-mice, and certain little white worms
that eat the roots, persecute them within the earth. Nay, there are certain
little worms that breed in the very substance of the very Tree it self, and in
the most vital part of it, which is betwixt the wood and the bark, which cause
the branches to wither, and by little and little, if not looked unto, will
totally destroy it. The Rats and the Wasps will also make profit of their
Spoils, and in a short space devour and corrupt the fruits for which the
Gardener has labored the whole year about. Take here then the remedies which
are to be used against all these different sorts of Vermin.

2. As to Caterpillars, you are to have an especial care during the winter
season, to take away all the Kells, or web-like receptacles that hang upon the
Trees, wherein the seed of this pernicious vermin is concealed; in doing of
which, it will not be enough to cleanse the fruit trees only, and those that
chiefly require the Gardiners most particular care; but you are moreover to cut
all the hedges, and the branches of the other Trees that grow within three or
four hundred yards round about, the vicinity whereof would otherwise infallibly
within a little space, infect your more precious plants with this fatal
pestilence, so soon as the vermin should come to disclose. You are also to
take care to burn all those Kells, it being not sufficient to cleanse them from
the Trees, and still to leave them upon the ground, where they would breed as
well as upon the Trees themselves. Of these there is a certain sort, that breed
in little rings, which wrap themselves about the smaller branches of the Trees,
and are by so much the harder to take away, by how much they are almost
invisible till they are disclosed, and then it is that you are to dispatch them
as well as the others, that are immediately engendered by the impression of the
Air, when the evening and morning cold makes them to knit and crowd together.
To remedy which, it is said, that if you bind a Tree with green Rye, or tie the
branches of Elder or Dane-wort amongst those of the Tree, the Caterpillars will
not come near it. Some also sprinkle the branches and leaves of the Tree with
water, wherein saltpeter has been infused, or the juice of bruised Rue to kill
this sort of Vermin.

3. Touching Locusts, if you have not the patience to wait for the first great
rain that shall fall, you need do no more but shake the Trees only to which
they cling, to make them fall off, and you may then crush them to pieces.

4. Cantharides may be destroyed after the same manner, or otherwise by
sprinkling the Trees with water, wherein Sage or Rue have been boiled, after it
is cold, which will kill them. It Is also said, that Rose-trees secure their
neighbors from this sort of Vermin, and that they will never come into a
Pallisado where they are planted.

5. As for Ants, saw-dust powdered and strewed about the Tree they spoil by
their frequentation, totally hinders their access, by reason that these little
Creatures dare not pass over the powder they feel stir under them. Also a
pretty broad circle of pit-coal ashes drawn round the Tree, does the same
thing, by reason they can have no footing, by which to come to climb the Tree
so fenced about; a circumference of Glue or Bird-lime, does also keep them off.

6. For what concerns Moles and field-mice, the Gardener must be careful to
take them with certain traps made for that purpose. It Is also said, that a
certain Simple called Horti palma, has the property to chase away the Moles
from all places where it is planted.

7. The branches of Ground-Elder fresh gathered, and mixed with those of the
Tree, also hinder Rats from coming near them.

Of Nurseries.
1. SUch as are curious in planting, ought betimes to take care to raise great
and spacious Nurseries of all sorts of fruits, for as much as one is much more
assured of the vigor of Trees, and the rightness of the sorts he desires, when
he has them of his own raising, than when he is constrained to look out for
them in other places; and besides, it is much better to be in a condition to
supply others who stand in need, than to be obliged to buy for ones own use.

2. Nurseries seem to be chiefly proper for Pepin-fruits, from whence the word
Pepiniere, a Nursery, derives it self; nevertheless, under this denomination is
comprehended all sorts of Plantations of young Trees, after what manner soever
raised, to be transplanted afterward into other places.

3. To make a good Nursery of Apple Trees and Pear Trees, you are to make
choice of a light and easy Soil, to the end that the roots may with greater
facility penetrate into it, and put out a great number of hairy fibers. You are
then to make little rigots or trenches of a Spades graft only, and three foot
distance from one another, and there in November, and a fair Season, plant your
little Pear, and Apple plants, which you are to choose well of the most kindly
and hopeful shoots, and of no more than one, or two years growth at most, and
plant them at seven or eight inches distance from one another in the Trenches,
and take heed withal not to set them deeper in the earth, than they were before
in the place from whence they were drawn, to cut off half of the roots in
planting them, and not to meddle with the tops till after Winter; and after you
have well supplied the roots with small and light mould, and filled up the
trenches, you are to bank them up handsomely with earth in their rows or ranks,
so that the Plant be scarcely seen; and after Winter is past, when they begin
to put out in April, you must cleanse them with your fingers, so as to leave no
more than one Burgeon, or upright shoot only.

4. About three weeks before Midsummer, when Fearn is yet tender, it is very
good to lay it green and fresh got about the ranks or rows, at the same time
you have labored them, to preserve the freshness of the earth, and to hinder
the heat of the Sun from incommodating those little Trees, that, have not yet
strength to defend themselves; but then in the labor you bestow upon them, you
must be careful not to touch the roots; it will therefore be sufficient to stir
the earth half a Spades graft near unto the rows, provided you give them in the
middle their due and usual depth. When Winter shall be come, you should bury
this Fearn in the middle of the Trenches or Gutters, to the end it there may
rot and bare the Trees, by taking away part of the earth by which they had been
shouldered and molded up; yet so, nevertheless, that there still remain
something above the ordinary level of the Plot, to defend the Trees from the
frosts of the Season.

5. You must the Spring following take the first fair weather in March to
labor this Nursery, and in laboring it, the Gardener is with his Spade to
chop and mince the Fearn that was buried in the beginning of Winter, and that
will then be half rotten; with which, mixed with earth, he shall again bank up
the Trees after the same manner he did with simple earth at the planting of
them, and is to continue so to do three or four years successively, till the
Trees shall be grown of sufficient strength to be grafted.

6. As the Plant increases in growth, you are still to cleanse it from all the
little branches it shoots forth for half a foot above the earth, to keep that
part clean, where the graft is to be placed; but you are to cut nothing higher
than that, nor by any means the stock, that being to no purpose at all, for as
much as it imports not after what manner the wood grows that is to be cut off,
when the Tree shall come to be grafted; and it would mightily hinder its
growth, by reason that the sap evaporates by the wounds you make in cutting the
little branches, and the substance of the Trees as yet but small and weak,
instead of preserving and fortifying it self, wastes and consumes away to
nothing.

7. If your Pepin-stocks are planted in a good Soil, and husbanded after this
manner, they will in the fourth year be ready to be grafted, and then you must
observe to put but one graft upon a stock, how thick soever it may be; which
graft ought also to be proportioned to the thickness of the stock, and be
chosen bigger or less, according to the strength of the other.

8. You are to cut the stocks you graft upon in the form of a Hindsfoot, for as
much as after this sort the Tree is more apt to bark over again, and does much
sooner cover the wound.

9. You are ever to observe to place the backside of the cut toward the South,
that the Sun may not dart plum down upon it, and cause it to rift or chop; for
which reason also you are to take good heed, that the clay you put upon it be
so well tempered, as not to crack off, and leave the part where it is grafted
open, and naked. A Maxim which is also to be observed in all sorts of Trees
whatever that you cut.

10. The graff in cleft being the best and the most usual for Standards, we do
not commonly think of any other for these sort of Nurseries; not that
inoculating is not very good, especially for Pear Trees, but it is more proper
for Stone-fruits and Quinces, than for Apples and Pears upon Pepin-stocks; and
Apple Trees come on very slowly when grafted after this manner.

11. There is hardly any Season in the year wherein you may not graft; for all
Summer long, and in Autumn you may inoculate, and in Winter you may graft after
the ordinary way; nevertheless, the best and most certain Season for this sort
of grafting is in March, and then in the decrease of the Moon: but for
gathering your grafts, you may indifferently do it, either in the wain, or the
increase.

12. You are ever to cull your grafts from well-liking Trees, and that are in
their year of bearing; that is to say, that are well knotted with blossoms; for
the Tree you graft will evermore retain the estate and condition in which the
Tree was, from which he derives his graff, at the time it was taken from it,
and will commonly bear exceedingly well, if the Tree (which imparts its whole
nature to it) was then well set with fruit; as on the contrary, it will remain
barren, and very rarely bear any fruit, if the Mother-Tree was then in her year
of repose.

13. When the graff begins to put out, you are to clean it with your fingers,
so that only one sprout remain, to the end it may not fork, and that the entire
vigor of the Tree may go to maintain the branch you would preserve; but after
that, you are no more either to cleanse, or cut any thing from the Tree, what
branches or sprouts soever it may put out, till the third year; and then you
are not only to take away the unprofitable ones, but moreover, form the Tree
into the Figure wherein it ought to be, which is chiefly to be understood for
Trees that you raise in Standards.

14. In your Nurseries your Apple Trees ought to be separated from your
Pear Trees, and to observe an exact decorum indeed; your different fruits ought
to be distinguished by the several ranks or ranges of Trees. In the following
Chapter, I intend to speak of the several sorts of fruits, together with the
manner of choosing and disposing of them.

15. You may also graft after the same manner, observing the same rules, Apples
of all sorts, upon little Apples of Paradise for Dwarf-trees, which prosper
exceeding well, and prove very great bearers; but as this sort of stock shoots
out but very little wood, if those you shall plant in your Nurseries be of any
thickness, you are not to meddle with pruning the root, and are to preserve
half a foot, or thereabout, of the Bole, to the end, that when it shall sprout,
you may place the graft upon the old stock; for if you should be obliged to
expect till the new wood it shall put out be of sufficient thickness to bear a
graft, it would too much stretch your patience, and defer your Plantation too
long. You are also to be careful not to graft too low, lest the Tree (which
Apple Trees are very subject to) should take root above the graft, which,
should it so fall out, it would no more be a Dwarf-tree, but would assume the
nature and form of an ordinary Apple.

16. All the same Rules are also to be observed for Apricots, Plumbs, Peaches
and Cherry-Trees, when you graft them in cleft to raise tall Trees, excepting
that you are to take notice to graft them sooner, and in the decrease of the
Moon in January or February. It is very true, that most of the forenamed fruits
(especially Peaches) delight more in inoculation; but in case you purpose to
extend them into Espalliers, or to plant them in Shrubs, you are then to
observe the Rules already prescribed for Pear Trees designed for those Figures.

17. Grafting or inoculating in Escutcheon, is proper for all Stone-fruits, but
in truth, less for the Cherry, than any other, by reason that they usually spew
out much Gum from the part which is opened to receive the shield, which very
often suffocates the eye or bud, from putting out in the Spring; for which
reason it is much better to inoculate Cherries in the decrease of May or June,
for as much as the Escutcheon put in at those Seasons, immediately sprouts upon
the inoculation. You may also make use of this way of grafting for other
fruits, but not with so certain success; and in so doing, you are always to cut
the stock at the same time you inoculate. Such as choose to graft after this
manner, are evermore to take heed never to place two graffs over against one
another, on both sides the Tree, by reason that one cannot afterward
conveniently come to cut away the superfluous part of the stock, when the
grafts have taken and made their shoots, so that there would still remain a
part of the old wood betwixt them; wherefore you are always to place the grafts
in such sort, that the one be always higher, and the other lower.

18. When you have inoculated a Tree, you are not by any means to cut away any
thing of the stock above, till the Winter be past, and when in the Spring the
eye of the graft shall begin to sprout, you are then to cut off the stock two
or three inches above, but no nearer, for fear of killing the graft, for want
of sap to nourish it; and the following year, when the graft shall have well
retaken, you may cut away the stock close by the shield.

19. Inoculation is evermore to be performed, or in the decrease of July, or
sometimes in June, if it be pretty well advanced into the following Month of
July; for you are always to inoculate at these times, or else in the end of
July, or in the beginning of August.

20. If you shall perceive that the eye of the Escutcheon will put out before
Winter, you may check it by early slackning the ligature of the Escutcheon or
shield.

21. For ligament, Cotton, or Woollen thread is much better than that of Hemp
or Flax, both by reason it does not press so hard upon, nor so eat into the
bark, and that it stretches and gives way as the branch swells and increases.

22. Cherry-trees grafted in cleft prosper exceedingly well, as also in
Escutcheon, if inoculated at Midsummer upon the red Merisier; for the Black
cherry is not so well stored with sap, and they prosper better after this
manner, than if planted upon old rooted stocks, especially if you would raise
them in Standards, which has also the same effect in Bigarotiers and Griotiers;
only when you design them for Dwarf-trees, you are to take notice to graft them
very low, and to check the graft so soon as ever it shall begin to put out, to
the end that it may spread into branches, and the Tree may form his head from
below.

23. Apricots are usually grafted upon stocks of their own kind, raised from
the Stone, as also upon Plumbs, Peaches and Almonds, and prosper well upon them
all. It Is said, that they will also take upon the Mulberry, and that they are
not subject to frost being so grafted, that sort of Tree being naturally
exceeding slow, and not inclined to put out till after the frosty Season; but
it is hard to believe that two so different saps can ever agree and mix
together, and several who have tried the experiment have lost their labor.

24. The Peach desires to be grafted upon a Plumb, a Peach raised from the
Stone, an Almond, or an Apricot, and chiefly delights in Inoculation. You may
also raise very good Peaches from the Stone, and there are certain sorts, as
the Peaches of Pau, and several others that succeed every whit as well, and
bear as good fruit from the stone as by grafting. Those grafted upon a Plumb,
prosper marvellously well; but the root of the Plumb-stock is a very ill
neighbor, both by reason that it devours too much ground, and also shoots
forth suckers on every side; but Trees so grafted, continue longer than on a
Peach. As to those that are inoculated upon an Almond, they continue also very
long, and in a sandy Soil are much better than any other; but they very
unwillingly retake when transplanted: for which reason it is much better to sow
the Almonds in the stations themselves you design for the constant standing of
your fruit, and afterward to graft them upon the place, then to sow them in
Nurseries for future transplantation. Such as are grafted upon other Peaches,
do yet bear longer and better fruit than any other, because being of the same
nature, they more easily unite, and better agree together; but they are much
shorter lived than any of the rest. The Apricot stock is also very proper for a
Peach, especially for early Peaches; and yet they are sometimes subject to spue
out Gum, as well as the Cherry, when inoculated, though that does but rarely
fall out.

25. Plumbs are ordinarily grafted upon stocks of their own, unless you design
to plant them near other Trees; and then to avoid the inconvenience of their
putting out too many suckers from their roots, you may graft them upon Apricots
or Almonds raised from the Stone.

26. Apricots are grafted, either upon other Apricots raised from the Stone, or
upon Plumbs, and sometimes even upon Peaches and Almonds.

27. You must note, that your black Damson-Plumb, and that of St. Julian, are
incomparably better than all others to graft upon, and such as are curious in
their Plantations, will never store their Nurseries with any other, where those
two sorts are to be had.

28. The distances before set down for Plants in Nurseries, are proper for
those Trees you design for Standards, and for such as you intend for Espalliers
and Dwarf-Trees, the same distance betwixt the rows and ranks may be
indifferently observed; but in the order of the ranks themselves this
difference is to be noted, that the latter must always be planted at two foot
distance the one from the other, whereas for those you design for Standards,
six or eight inches will suffice. The reason of which is, that you are betimes,
and at first, to extend the Trees you intend for Shrubs and Espalliers, into
their destined Figure, whereas, if they were crowded and shouldered in the
Nursery, they would shoot upward, instead of spreading into the other form. A
Rule, that may indifferently serve for both Stone and Pepin-fruits, according
to the office for which they are designed.

29. Pear Trees destined for Espalliers or Bushes, are ordinarily grafted,
either upon Wildings raised from the Pepin, or upon Quinces; as to the first of
which, you may indifferently either graft or inoculate; but for the Quinces,
they prosper infinitely better being inoculated; and being graftted in cleft,
do very hardly recover.

30. Quince-stocks are much more proper for all sorts of Dwarf-pears and
Espalliers, than the Wildings, by reason that they naturally incline to that
Figure, whereas the other are evermore aspiring, and must be eternally cut and
slasht, to subdue and correct them; and experience has made it plain, that
Pears grafted upon Quinces, bear much more and fairer fruit, and are more
easily persuaded into the Figure for which they were designed, than the others,
which are apt to spend themselves into wood. It is true, that at the first
bearing, the fruit that comes from the Quince-stock, does often retain a smatch
of its kind, especially in a stiff sturdy Soil; but that is soon gone, and the
two or three first years so carry it off, that there afterward remains no
difference in the taste. The following Chapter shall set down some sorts of
fruits, that will succeed well in this Figure, being grafted on the Wilding;
but of those there are very few: In the mean time, you are only in this place
to observe, that in a light Soil, you are to make use of no other Trees for
Shrubs and Espalliers, but such as are grafted upon Quinces only, in stiff and
sandy situations; I confess those raised from the Wilding do sometimes better
succeed.

31. There is a vast difference betwixt the Apple-Quince and the Pear-Quince,
of which the first has a greyer bark enclining to white, more smooth and sleek,
his branches thicker and more forked, the leaves not so large, and the fruit
less, and more full of core. The Pear-Quince shoots out his branches more
straight, has a blacker bark, and downy withal, the leaves much larger, and the
fruit fairer, and not so full of core. And this is it you are to choose to graft
upon, for the Tree will ever retain all the good qualities of the stock, will
put out a much finer head, and will bear a much better fruit; whereas on the
contrary, the Apple-Quince stock, not being able to keep pace with the graft
you put into it, when the Tree arrives at its stature, and has formed his head,
it will appear that the foot, which is the stock, does by no means answer to
the growth above, but leaves a deformed tumor in the part where the graft and
stock are united; which not only disgraces the beauty of the Tree, but moreover
gives us to understand, that the stock is not able sufficiently to nourish the
parts above. There is of late found out a sort of Pear-Quince, called the
Portugal-Quince (I believe for being brought from thence) that bears an
exceeding broad leaf, and is by much the best of all others.

32. When you plant Pear-Quinces in Nurseries, or in the place where you design
to graft them, you are to cut them within an inch of the earth, that they put a
new Bole from the foot, by reason that it is upon that new shoot, that you are
to inoculate; which also you are to observe in the planting of such
Plumb-stocks in your Nurseries, as you intend to inoculate.

33. The same Tree may be several times inoculated, and it is convenient to
have very large fruits for that purpose, and to graft them of several kinds. As
for example, to inoculate Pound-pears, or Summer Bonchrestiens upon the
Quince-stock, and afterward to reinoculate the Winter Bonchrestien, and the
Bergamot. You are especially to have evermore in your Nurseries a great many
stocks of Pear-Quinces grafted with the forenamed large fruits, or with those
de valee, of which sort the sap is excellent to entertain and nourish all sorts
of grafts; by which means you may graft upon the branches of those Trees in
cleft, grafts that are sometimes brought from very remote places, and have been
long in coming, and even from parts so distant, as Escutcheons are not to be
brought in Summer, neither indeed does the Quince prosper very well grafted in
cleft.

We have only here made mention of three ways of grafting, to wit, in cleft, in
Escutcheon (which latter is to be performed in the decreases of May and June)
and in Oeil dormant; not that there are not yet several other ways of grafting,
which may also be made use of with very good success; but these, as being the
principal, shall suffice. Many are of opinion, that it is not good to plant
Nurseries in a fruitful Soil; for which, the reason they give is, that the
Trees being drawn out of such a Soil, and not finding elsewhere so good
entertainment, cannot prosper, having been used to a better diet, and on the
contrary, thrive and come on to a miracle, if transplanted from a lean and
hungry Soil, to a better and more fruitful. Nevertheless, experience makes us
see and know, that Trees raised in a bountiful Soil, and particularly in a
light mould, are much better to transplant into any Soil whatever, than the
other; of which the reason is also most evident, for as much as those Trees
have manifestly evermore fairer Roots, and more hairy Fibers; and moreover, a
more generous sap, and more force in a good Soil, which gives them a great deal
more vigor in any place to which they shall be removed, than the other; which
being taken out of an ill Soil, have never good Root, and are always
languishing and sickly.

Now let me tell you, that in order to great and continual planting, it is not
sufficient to have Nurseries only, but you must have Nurseries of Nurseries,
that is to say, you are to have sufficient out of your own stock, wherewith
continually to furnish and supply your Nurseries. To which purpose you are to
sow Apple and Pear-Pepins (but separately, that they may not be promiscuously
confounded together) in a Plot, or Plots well prepared to that effect; to do
which, you need only to strew the pulse of Cider or Perry upon the earth dug
and made ready for it, and afterward rake it in, as Gardiners do their ordinary
Garden-seeds, and a year or two after you may draw them thence, and plant them
in your Nurseries. As for Peaches and Apricots, they are always raised from the
stone, and Plumbs are to be taken of the suckers which shoot out from the roots
of black Damsons, or the St. Julian Plumb. And for what concerns Quince-stocks,
you are to raise great ones to no other end, but to shoot forth suckers, which
is done by cutting them close by the ground, and nipping off the branches they
put out from the top every year, by which means those that shoot from within
the earth, or layers covered with it, will take root enough to be transplanted
the year following, into any place for which they shall be designed. Plumbs of
Paradise are also raised after the same manner.

Of the different kinds of Fruits, and after what manner they best prosper.
THere are some who are of opinion, that all the fruits that were not known a
hundred years ago are not worth planting, and good for nothing; and on the
contrary, some others, who are curious to have of all sorts indifferently good
and bad, and think they excel all other Planters, when they have got into their
Plantations a great number of uncouth names, and such as peradventure were by
most others never heard of before: But both these extremes are equally to be
avoided, for as much as it is most certain we are in this age acquainted with a
great many excellent fruits, that were either totally unknown, or utterly
neglected by our Forefathers; as also, because they who are overcurious to
have of all sorts, do unprofitably fill up good and choice places with many bad
Trees, which would be much better bestowed upon those that are good. It will
therefore be convenient to take notice of such as are the best, and best
deserving the Gardiners pains and care, whether stone Pepin-fruits, and
accordingly to furnish our selves with such, from which most pleasure and
profit are reasonably to be expected.

Of the different kinds of Stone-Fruits.
ANd first, concerning Cherries, there is no great Observation to be made, by
reason there are not many kinds of them, and those to every one sufficiently
known. Of which there are principally these five sorts.

Cerises precoces, or the early May-Cherry. Cerises Hatifs, the early
Hasting-Cherry. Cerises a feuille de sauge, which I take to be the Duke-Cherry.
Grosses Cerises a court queue, perhaps our Carnation-Cherry. Cerises tardifs a
longue queue, the Cluster-Cherry.
Of these the Precoces seem to be but of late years taken notice of, or at
least in request, and not considerable for any thing, if not for being ripe the
soonest of all other fruits; which yet, to make more early, are to be grafted
upon the Hasting-Cherry-stock, and planted to the utmost benefit of the Sun, in
Espalliers against a Wall, to the end that the extraordinary heat may yet
advance their maturity.

The Guigne, or Guscon-Cherry, the Bigarreau, or motley-Cherry, and the Griote,
or Crab-Cherry, are of the same nature with the other Cherries, and therefore
merit no particular Observation, if not that Cherries and Griotes are very
proper for Shrubs and Dwarf-Trees, as we have already observed in the Chapter
of Shrubs and Bushes; but the Bigarreaux and the Guignes, do not prosper so
well that way, by reason the Trees run too much into wood, and therefore would
be raised in Standards. Of Guignes there are three sorts, white, red, and
black, which are called Hearts; but of Bigarreaux and Griotes, we know but one
kind of each only.

Of Apricots we know no more than two or three sorts, namely the little Musk
Apricot, another whose Almond or kernel is sweet, and the ordinary Apricot; all
which require a very great shelter and security from the weather, and are more
proper for Espalliers, than either Dwarf-trees or Standards. There are many
more different kinds and sorts of Plumbs, than of Cherries and Apricots, of
which these are the chief.

Petit Damas noir de Tours, the little black Damson. Gros Damas noir, the great
black Damson. Petit Damas blanc, the little white Damson. Gros Damas blanc, the
great white Damson. Damas gris musque. Damas violet ordinaire, the violet
Plumb. Gros Damas violet. Damas verd. Damas gris violet. Damas gris blanc.
Perdrigon blanc. Perdrigon violet. Brignoles violettes. Gross Imperiale, the
great Imperial Plumb. Imperiale Tardive. De Gaillon. d'Attilles de Gouvar.
d'Attilles du Man's. Prunes de Naples, autrement Damas gris de Caihan.
All which sorts of Plumbs are exceeding good to eat raw, and these that
follow, proper for Prunella's and sweetmeats.

Moyens de Bourgongne, an excellent preserving Plumb. Mirabelle, saint
Catherine. Diapree de la Roche Courbon. Prunes d'Apricot, de Tours. Mirabons
transparans. Montmirot, d'Attille jaune. l'Isle verd.
All these Plumbs prosper very well, both in Dwarf-Trees and Standards. But the
Perdrigon is by much the most delicate of them all, and therefore deserves to
be planted in a good Sun in Espalliers.

Of Peaches.
PEaches deserve to be husbanded with the greatest industry and care, as well
out of respect to their beauty, which surpasses that of all other fruits, as
also to their natural delicacy and tenderness.

These are commonly distinguished into Pavies, that do not part from the stone,
and are the males; and Peaches which do cleave from the stone, and are the
females. I am of opinion that there is no male, that is to say, no Pavie, who
has not his female, that is to say, a Peach of the same sort; nor on the
contrary, no Peach that has not his Pavie; for we know and distinguish both the
one and the other in most of the different kinds we have, which makes me
conclude, that it is the same in all the rest, which we are not yet acquainted
with, or at least but with the one or the other of them; Nature having
doubtless alike coupled all these sorts of Fruits. The principal Peaches and
Pavies that we know, following their order and nature, are these:

Avaunt Pesche blanch, Pavie, ripe at the end of June. Monsieur, Ferrant.
Avaunt Pesche d'Italie, that parts from the stone immediately after. Pesche de
Troix, blanch, that parts from the stone at the same time. Pesche de Troix,
jaune, fort musquee, parts at the same time. Pesche de Troix double, parts from
the stone also, and both of them at the same time with the white. Alberge,
which is the Pavie to the Peach of Troix, is ripe immediately after, and does
not part from the stone. Pesche Magdeleine, parts from the stone, and is ready
in the end of July, or the beginning of August. Pesche blanch batifue, ready
immediately after. Pavie blanc hatif, which is the male to the one or the other
of these two last kinds. Pesche Cerize, or the Cherry-Peach, parts from the
stone, and is ripe at mid- August. Pesche violette licee, parts from the stone
at the same time. Brignon violet, ou musque. Pavie, male to the Violet-Peach,
immediately after. Monsieur le Petit Marest.
Brignon jaun, Pavie at the same time. Pesche Royale, or the Peach-Royal, parts
from the stone, and is exceeding red at the same time. Grosses Roussanes,
Pavies ready at the same time. Petites Roussanes, extremely muskt, Pavies ready
at the same time. Monsieur Martin.
Gros Pavies jaunes and rouges, at the same time. Persiques, part from the
stone, and are ready in the beginning of September. Monsieur de Lamegnon.
Pesches de Pau, ou Persiques ronds, at the same time. Grosses Pesches jaunes,
or the great yellow Peach, part from the stone in the middle of September.
Pesches Bourdes. Pesches Abrigotines, or the Apricot-Peach. Pesches Ollieres.
Pesches de Corbiel, part from the stone, and are good at the same time.
Monsieur Montrecot.
Pesches blanches, and vermeilles. Pesches de Narbonne, and Pesches admirables,
an excessive great fruit, part from the stone at the end of September. Monsieur
de Choisin.
Pavie admirable, which is the male to the two former, a very large and
colored fruit, en cul de lamp, in the beginning of October. Pesche violette
tardifue, ready at the same time. Pavie de Chinon, an exceeding large fruit.
Brignon violette tardifue, at the same time. Millecotons vermeils, red within
about the stone, excellent Pavies ready in the beginning of October. Pesche
blanch and rouge, an excellent fruit also in October. Pavies blancs tardifs,
in the middle of October, there are several kinds that are ready about the same
time, which are hard to distinguish, of which some are earlier, others later.
Pesche tout blanch, that parts from the stone, and comes at the end of
October. Au Val saint Germain.
Pesche beste-rave, gray, and downy, and sanguine within, parts from the stone
at the end of October. Brignon Beste-rave, a Pavie of the same sort, excepting
that it has a smooth skin. Brignon tout noir, a Pavie ready at the end of
October.
You are to take notice, that Peaches which part from the stone, do sooner and
more easily ripen, and are more hardly to endure the frost and nipping air,
than the others. And amongst them none so strong as the Persiques and
Pau-Peaches; for which reason, you would do well to raise a great many of these
two kinds in Standards in the open Air (but withal, in as much security from
the winds as is possible in such a posture) for they have a much better taste,
and are much a finer fruit from the Standard, than the Espallier. But all the
other sorts are much more proper for Espalliers and Contre-Espalliers, than for
any other Figure.

Of Apple Trees.
Apple Trees are to be raised in Standards in the open Air, by reason it is the
strongest and most hardly of all other Fruit Trees; but if you have a fancy to
raise them in Dwarf-trees, you are then to graft them upon an Apple of
Paradise, and by that means they will be very proper to plant against Walls, or
in such other places as have not Sun enough to ripen other fruits. And of these
it will be sufficient to have the best kinds only; for being a fruit that keeps
long, one should not be so covetous of many several kinds, as curious of those
that are good; which are,

Pass Pomme blanch hatisve, ripe in the beginning of August. Pass pomme
Cotellee. Calville d'Este, Rambour blanc. Rambour rouge, Cousinette. Pomme de
violette. Pomme de neige. Calleville blanc. Calleville rouge. Pomme d'Apict.
Renette blanch. Meillieur Renette rousse. Renette toute grize. Petit Courpendu
gris. Courpendu vermeil. Gros Courpendu Bedeau. Francatu. Pomme-Poire.
Chataigner.
Of Pears.
THere are of Pears more different sorts, that deserve to be cultivated, than
of any other fruit; which that you may the better know, I shall distinguish
them according to the seasons of their maturity by the Months, beginning with
that of June, at which time the earliest Pears begin to be ripe; acquainting
you withal, on what sort of Tree, and in what situation every of them does best
succeed; as also, which are good to eat raw, and which to bake. Wherein you may
by the way observe, that all Pears, especially Winter-pears, which are good
raw, are also excellent to bake.

JUNE.
Petit Muscat, in the open Air, grafted either upon a Wilding or a Quince,
prosper very well in Dwarf-trees, provided they be well sheltered from the
weather; but mavelous well in Standards in the open Air. Petit Certeau
d'Este, either in Dwarf-tree or Espallier. Janet, the same. Pucelle, or Palm,
in all Figures.
JULY.
Gros Muscat ordinaire, prosper well in the open Air, either upon a Wilding or
Quince. Muscat a longue queue, the same. Muzette, the same. Gros Muscat, or
Belissime, the same. Muscat Robert, the same. Cuisse Madame, the same, and some
of them in Espallier not to fail. Rousselet hatif, the same, and some in
Espallier.
AUGUST.
Orange Commune, in all Figures. Orange Musquee, in all Figures. Amiral commun,
the same. Amiral musquee, the same. Petite Blanquette, the same. Gross
Blanquette, ou Poire de Perle, ou Cornicapre, the same. Oigonnet, the same.
Poire de Prince, the same. Poire Royale, the same. Poire au deux testes, the
same. Poire raze, the same, but better in Espallier, or dwarf-Tree, by reason
that having a long and slender stalk they are apt to fall. Fin, or hatif,
prospers well in all Figures. Poire Carmesine, the same. Friolet, prospers well
in all Figures. Mouille-bouche d'Este, the same. Bon-Chrestien d'Este, the
same. Franc-Sureau, or Poire de Papes, the same.
SEPTEMBER.
Rousselet ordinaire, prospers well in all Figures. Gros Rousselet de Rheims,
the same. Jargonette, the same. Caillau Rozart, prospers best in Standard, and
grafted upon a Quince, has a kind of unpleasant tartness. Parfum, prospers well
in all Figures. Poire sans Pepins, the same. Poire de Sain, the same.
OCTOBER.
Beure rouge, prospers well in all Figures. Beure blanc, the same.
Mouille-bouche d'Automne, or Jonguet, the same. Rozar d'Ingrande, succeeds best
in Dwarf-trees or Espalliers. Bergamotte d'Este, Summer Bergamot, in Espalliers
only. A Chilly, chez Monsieur de Seves.
Oignon Rozar, otherwise called Brutte-bonne, in Dwarf-trees or Espalliers.
Poire d'Angleterre, succeeds well in all Figures. Poire d'Ambre-gris, succeeds
best in Dwarf-trees, or Espalliers. Poire de vigne, prospers well in all
Figures. Petit Oing gris, the same. Chat Brulle, the same.
NOVEMBER.
Messire Jean ordinaire, succeeds well in all Figures. Messire Jean blanc, the
same. Ruel.
Bezidhery, the same. Damadote, the same. Gross queue d'Hyver, the same.
Bergamotte ordinaire, is to be planted in Espalliers only, A caution not very
necessary to us in England.
but then to have them keep till January, you must have one place in your
Espallier, where there is little Sun. Martin sec, succeeds well in all Figures.
Bergamotte musque, or Poire de Sicile, thrives best in Espalliers and
Dwarf-trees.
DECEMBER. To eat raw.
Micet, prospers best in Espalliers, and keeps till January. Poire-Figue,
prospers well in all Figures. Rousselet d'Hyver, the same. Bon-Chrestien,
d'Anche cottele, does best in Espallier, or in a good shelter from winds, in
Standard. Bon-Chrestien rond, the same. Bon-Chrestien long, the same.
Bon-Chrestien door sans Pepins, the same.
And note, that you are to have as many Bon-Chrestiens alone in an Espallier
rightly placed, as of all other Winter-fruits put together; both because it is
in taste incomparably better than all the rest, and also it begins to be fit to
eat in November, and keeps good till the end of August following.

Poire de Froment, an excellent baking Pear, does well in Standards.

Baking Pears in December.
Fin Or, or Franc-real, in tall Standards, a few in Dwarf-Trees. Dame Jeanne,
the same. Bon Evesque, the same. Foulon, the same.
JANUARY. To eat raw.
Rambouillet, and Monsieur de Noyers a Paris.
Gatellier, or the Winter Beure, prospers well in all Figures. Monsieur Galand,
and Monsieur de Money.
Bergamotte d'Hyver, to be eaten in February and March. Bon-Chrestien, of all
sorts. Orange d'hyver, prospers well in all postures.
JANUARY. To Bake.
Poire d'Argent, does very well in great Standards. Ratcau, the same. At
Ponthoize.
Herpiene, the same. Angobert, or Languedoc, the same. Gros Certeau, the same.
FEBRUARY. To eat Raw.
Saint Lezin, as also in March and April, prosper well enough in all postures;
but are subject to fall, if not planted in Espalliers, and moreover, require a
very great Sun. Saint Lezin Beure, a very Monsieur Ferrant.
rare and excellent fruit, will be planted in Espallier. de la Chenaye.
Messire Jean tardif, either Dwarf-tree or Espallier. Bon-Chrestien, the same.
FEBRUARY. To Bake.
Petit Certeau, prospers well in Standards or Dwarf-trees. De la Domville, in
tall Standards.
MARCH. To eat Raw.
Portail, would be planted in Espalliers, and rather grafted upon a Wilding
than a Quince, by reason it is not apt to run into much wood. Ponthoize, la
Chesnaye.
Gros Muscat d'Hyver, a gross queiie, does well either in Espalliers or
Dwarf-trees.
MARCH. To Bake.
Poire de livre, or Pound-pear, in tall Standards.
APRIL. To eat Raw.
Bergamotte de Beugi, in Espalliers, or Dwarf-trees. Aux Gobelins du Fauxbourg
St. Marceau.
Poire d'Estranguitton, an excellent fruit, the same. Monsieur Ferrant.
Virgoulette, the same, an excellent fruit.
APRIL. To Bake.
Liquet rond, in tall Standards. Parmain, the same. Bouvart, or Chesne Galen,
the same.
MAY. To eat Raw.
Double Fleur, prosper very well in Dwarf-trees in the open Air, but better in
Espalliers. Ponthoize.
Fontarabis, in Espalliers.
MAY. To Bake.
Ponthoize.
Girolle.
Of the Times wherein Fruits are to be gathered.
ALl Stone-fruits, and Summer-Pears, would not be separated from the Tree, till
they are first arrived at their full maturity; but for the Autumn-Pears, as the
Messire Jean, the Beure; nay, even the Summer Bon-Chrestien, and the
Bergamotte, if you desire to have them keep any time, it will be convenient to
gather them before they be wholly ripe, to the end they may complete their
maturity in the place where they are to be bestowed; by which means they will
both keep much longer, and also taste much sweeter and less tart, than those
gathered ripe from the Tree. As to the Winter-fruits, whether to eat raw, or to
bake, and whether Apples or Pears, you are to let them hang so long as ever you
can upon the Tree, even to the end of October, and then take heed always to
gather them in fair weather, and a bright shining Sun, to the end the fruit may
be very dry, and without any kind of moisture upon them at the time of their
gathering.

You should also be careful not to break the stalk of the fruits you intend to
keep, and in gathering to touch them as little, and as nicely as you can.

The same thing is done to Fig Trees, that is done to the Espalliers, both in
planting and Pallisadoing; and they are to be cut after the same manner with
Apricots and Peaches in the decrease of the Moon in March, for as much as they
are pithy and tender, and are impatient of the cold.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books, Printed for, and sold by H. Brom, since the
dreadful Fire of London, to 1675.
Divinity.
A Large Concordance, by S. N. to the Bible, Folio, price 16 s. 130 Sermons by
Mr. Farindon, in 3 Vol. in fol. 2 l. 5 s. 51 Sermons in fol. by Dr. Franck, 15
s. Dr. Heylin on the Creed, fol. 15 s. A Guide to the Humble, by Tho. Elborow,
B. D. in octavo 2 s. A Guide to Eternity, by John Bona, octavo, 2 s. A Guide to
Heaven, with a Rule of Life 10 d. A Companion to the Temple, or a help to
public devotion, by Th. Cumber, in 24o 4 s. Holy Anthems 2 s. 6 d. A
Looking-glass for Loyalty 2 s.
Sermons.
Dean W. Lloyd's Sermon before the K. against Miracles. 6 d. -- his Sermon at
the Funeral of John L. Bishop of Chester 6d. -- his Sermon before the King, in
Lent, 1673. 6d. Mr. Sayers Sermon at the Assizes at Reading 6d. Mr. Tho.
Tanner's Sermon to the scattered Members of the Church 6d. Mr. Stanhopp's four
Sermons on several Occasions, octavo bound 1s. 6d. Papal Tyranny, as it was
exercised over England for some Ages, with two Sermons on the fifth of Nov. in
quarto, 1s. 6d. -- his Sermon at the Funeral of Dr. Turner, Dean of Cant. 6d.
Histories.
The Life of the Duke Espernon, the great Favorite of France, from 1598. where
D'Avila leaves off to our times, by Charles Cotton, Esquire in fol. price 18s. The
State of the Ottoman Empire, with Cuts, by P. Ricaut, Esquire in octavo, 6s. B.
Cosin's De Transubstantiatione, oct. 2s. -- in English 2s. 6d. The Commentaries
of M. Blaiz d' Montluck, the great Favorite of France, in which is contained
all the Sieges, Battles, Skirmishes, for 3 K. reigns, by Charles Cotton Esquire in
fol. 14s. The Fair One of Tunis, a new piece of Gallantry, by C. Cot. Esquire in
oct. 25. 6d. Erasmus Coll. in English, octav. 5s. Elvira, a Comedy by the E. of
Bristol, 1s. M. A. Bromes S. and Poems, oct. 3s. 6d. -- His, with other
Gentlemen's Translation of Horace, in oct. 4s. Virgil's Travesty, by C. Cot. Esquire
1s. 6d. Lucian's Dialogues, Burlesque, by C. Cotton Esquire in oct. 2s. 6d. Horace,
with a Song at every Act, by Charles Cotton Esquire 1s.
Physic.
Dr. Barbettes and Dr. Deckers excellent practice of Physic, and Observations
Sir. K. Digby, his excellent Receipts in Physic and Chyrurgery, and of Drinks
and Cookery.
Miscellanies.
Dr. Glisson, De vita Naturae, quarto 8s. Lord Bacons Advancement. Dr.
Skinner's Lexicon, in fol. 1l. 5s. 12 Controversial Letters, in quar. 3s. 6d.
Essays of Love and Marriage, duod. 8d. The Vindication of the Clergy, 1s. 6d.
Toleration discussed, by R. Estrange, Esquire 2s. 6d. A Practice of Human Reason,
in twelves 8d. Centum Fabulae, in octavo 1s. Artis Oratoriae, in duodec. 2s.
Law.
The Lord Cook's Institutes, in four Vol. fol. price 2l. 5s. Sir James Dyer's
Reports, fol. 18s. The Clerks Guide, in four Parts, and the first part alone. A
Lecture to the people, or a Satyr against Separatists, by Mr. Cowly 4o 6d.
Controversies.
The seasonable Discourse against Popery, in quarto 6d. -- the Defense of it,
quarto 6d. -- the Difference betwixt the Church and Court of Rome, in quarto
6d. The Apology to the Parl. answered 6d. The Papists Bait, or, The way to get
Proselytes, by Chapter Gataker, B. D. 1s.

