To the KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY.
A True and Exact Relation of the Proceedings of the Petitioner James Carol, in
discovering the Treasonable words, spoke by one Thomas Allin, and unjust
Prosecution used by the Earl of Clanriccard against the Petitioner for the
same, to the Petitioners Damage above 1000 l. already; tending not only to the
Petitioners utter undoing, if not speedily Relieved by your Majesty, but
likewise to the discouragement of all Loyal Subjects, from discovering the like
Treasons hereafter.

To the King's most Excellent MAJESTY.
THe Petitioner, together with James Caroll the Elder, the Petitioners Father,
having occasion to Travel in your Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, to buy Wool,
Skins, and other Commodities relating to the Calling of your Petitioner, did on
the 12 th day of April 1672. arrive at Tortumlin in the County of Galloway, a
Town belonging to the Earl of Clanriccard, and took up their lodging at the
house of the abovenamed Thomas Allin an Innkeeper living at the
Blackspread-Eagh there.

The said Thomas Allin falling into discourse with them, and supposing them to
be Irish, (your Petitioners Father speaking that tongue) did demand of them
What News there was abroad? to which they replied, that they had been
Traveling up and down the Country, but had heard no strange News, whereupon
the said Allin told them in English as follows, Viz.

If ( said he) we have news that the Dutch are beaten, then my Lord of
Clanriccard will presently sound a Trumpet and I will go along with him, and
three or four score more of this Town, well Horsed and well Armed, and every
man five pounds in his pocket, and I hope I shall kill one hundred of the
Protestants, Anabaptists, Independants, and such like Phanatick people, before
I am killed: for I expect a Quartermasters place myself, and I will have some
of them upon the point of my Sword before the last of June. And as for those
that are here in this Country, we will soon cut them off, for they shall have
no help to come from the other side of the Brook ( meaning England) there shall
be no shipping to come to help them, for we will cut them off in a Months time,
we shall be twelve to one, we will leave them neither Root nor Branch, and not
spare them as in the former Rising.

The Petitioner sitting at the Table with the said Allin, and his said Father,
took out his Pocket book, and his Pen and Ink, and in his said Pocket book did
write down the aforesaid words as the said Allin spoke them.

The Petitioners Father hearing the said Allin speak the words aforesaid
replied, This is strange news indeed; to which the said Allin rejoynd: Why did
you not hear what was spoken at Mass last day, (Which was the Easter. Monday
before) at every word cursing the English, and declaring their wicked and
bloody intentions against them.

The Petitioner upon his return to Dublin, holding himself obliged in bounden
duty and Allegiance to your Sacred Majesty, and natural affection to his
Contrymen the English Prorestants of that Kingdom, to make known such
Treasonable words against your Majesty's Crown and Dignity, did repair to
Doctor Toppham a Master of Chancery there, and upon his corporal Oath, did
declare to him the whole business as aforesaid.

The next day after which Declaration, your Petitioner was sent for to appear
before the Lord Berkeley, your Majesty's then Lord Lieutenant there, by whom he
was examined concerning the premises, which he again confirmed upon three
several Examinations, before the said Lord Lieutenant and your Majesty's
Council there; after which he was sent for before Sir Robert Rooth Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, and by him engaged to prosecute the said Tho.
Allin for the Treasonable words aforesaid.

The said Tho. Allin being sent for by a Pursevant, who mist to attach him, did
soon after appear at Dublin, and with him the Earl of Clanriccard, the said
Allin being examined before the said Lord Lieutenant and Council, concerning
the Treasonable words spoke by him as aforesaid, did deny the same with
dreadful execrations and Oaths confirming the same, with asserting that the
Petitionar was neither at his house nor at the said town of Portumlin, at the
time before mentioned, whereupon the Petitioner being examined in the presence
of the said Allin confirmed the Accusation aforesaid, and did further prove his
being there contrary to the assertion of the said Allin, by a Bond taken at
that time for performance of a Bargain of Goods the Petitioner had bought and
to which one Simon Allin Brother of the said Tho. Allin, was witness, whose
hand the said Tho. Allin could not deny, offering further to prove the truth of
what he had asserted by his said father James Carrol, if his Excellency and
Council would please to send for him. But they being fully satisfied of the
truth of the Premises from the Petitioners circumstantial Evidence sought for
no more, but then proceeded to press the said Allin to make an ingenious
confession of the whole truth, telling him if he did not, it would be worse for
him; But he persisting obstinately in denial thereof it was by them ordered to be
committed close Prisoner without Bail or Main-price, commanding the Jailer to
take him away. Nevertheless, the said Allin was at liberty the same day, upon
what motives the Petitioner troubled himself not to inquire, being satisfied
that he had discharged his duty.

About two Months after, the Petitioner with his said Father, having a new
occasion to travel into the said County of Galloway, arrived at the River
Shanon near Portumlin aforesaid, where the wind being high, it was late before
the Ferry-Boat could pass them over to Portumlin side, where arriving on a
Saturday night and finding the Inhabitants of that place to gaze upon them, and
to draw Tumultously together they believed it not safe to continue there, and
though very Wet and Weary, did rather choose to travel four Miles farther, to a
lone house standing on the road to Laughrea, but six miles short of that place
whether they intended to go had not the delay at the Ferry prevented them, but
the next morning being the Lord's day, came into Laughrea aforesaid, about
seven in the morning, and there stayed all day and night.

But very early on Monday morning (at the Instigation of the said Tho. Allin
and other his accomplices) the Constable of Laughrea, with others with them,
rudely throwing open their Chamber door, and affrighting the Petitioner and his
said father out of their sleep, did attach them by Virtue of a Warrant from one
Donnolan Steward to the said Earl of Clanriccard and Justice of Peace, on
pretense of Traveling on the Sabbath day (though several of the Neighborhood
had come in with Cart and Horses laden from a fair the day before, twenty Miles
from thence, and were for their more Notorius traveling on the Sunday, no ways
molested by them) they further Seized on a case of Pistols and two Swords
belonging to this Petitioner and his said Father, lying on the Table, and only
used for their defense, telling them thy believed they intended to kill some
body with them, which Arms they never yet could get restored, so forcing them
out of their Beds, they carried them six miles before one Justice Dean, who
reproving them for traveling on the Lord's day; told them withal, that he had
heard they had given in Evidence against the said Earl of Clanriccard, and so
committed them to Prison to Laughrea, whither he commanded the Constable to
carry them, and not to take Bail, though he pretended to this Petitioner and
his said Father, they might give Bail.

In this Prison of Laughrea they remained five days without any covering but
the Clothes on their backs, or any Bed to lie on; none daring all that while to
relieve them (though willing enough) either by Bailing them, speaking to them,
or conveying a Letter for them to Galloway, but eleven Miles thence, though
they proffered any money for it, and their own Horses to ride on, being charged
at their Perils to the contrary, and fearing the displeasure of the Earl of
Clanriccard: The better to color which proceeding, they Instigated some to
report that the Petitioner's Father had a design to Burn the said Town of
Laughrea, pretending that besides that information they had seven or eight
Indictments to bring against them at Galloway Assizes. Thus they lay in that
Goal, and might perhaps till this time, had not the Petitioner by strange
accident out at a window, obtained the conveyance of a Letter to some friends
of theirs at Galloway, who thereby understanding their sad Condition, made
Application to the Judges of Assize then there, and obtained an order for their
removal thither wither they were brought by the Jailer late at night, and clapped
into the vildest Prison in all that Town, amongst the condemned Rogues and
Malefactors, without any Accommodation.

The next morning they were brought before the Judges, where an Indictment for
Traveling on the Sabbath day, was read against them both. And another
Malicious one against your Petitioner's Father, for the Fictitious intent of
firing Laughrea beforenamed, which no man appeared for to make good: To the
first on the Courts demands they submitted: to the last your Petitioner's
Father put in a Traverse, and though no Prosecutors appeared, they were forced
to give One thousand Pounds Security not to depart the Town till the end of the
Assizes; at the end of which, being fifteen days after, they were again bound
to their good Behavior, and to appear the next Assizes after, which they
accordingly did, though above 100 Miles from their habitations, where, after
staying fifteen days more, and no evidence appearing to make good their
Indictment, they were discharged by Proclamation, paying Fees: No remedy being
found for so great Afflict ions, as they sustained by the aforesaid ernel
Usage, and hard Travel, extraordinary Expenses, loss of Time, and hindrance in
their Callings and Business.

But as if all this malicious proceeding had been nothing, your Petitioner had
not been returned to Dublin above a week, to follow his employment, but he was
Arrested in the name of the said Earl of Clanriccard, in an Action of 10000 l.
on pretense that he had slandered the said Earl, to the damage of the said
Sum: And thereupon was hurryed to Prison: where, after lying four days, he
procured Bayl, and being ready to come forth, had another Action of 20000 l. in
the said Earls name laid upon him, when having after two or three days more
procured Bayl to that too, he was again detained on a third Action at the same
Earls Suit for 30000 l. all three amounting to Threescore thousand pounds, laid
upon him utterly to ruin him, by keeping him in Prison all days of his life;
but after fourteen days durance, your Petitioner procured by Habeas Corpus to
be brought to the Common Pleas Bar, where tendering Bayl to all the said
Actions, the said Earls Council moved to have time to consider of the
sufficiency of the said Bayl, which was granted by the Court till next day, and
the Petitioner remanded. But then the said Earls Council in open Court, told
the Judges that they had no advice from the said Earl to prosecute the
Petitioner, and that they conceived some persons had prosecuted him out of
malice, or purpose to curry fovour with the said Earl, and desired he might be
set at liberty, and accordingly he was paying Fees without Bayl, but left
without all remedy to recover his charges and damages, the said Earl being now
declared to be no prosecutor, though the Actions were in his name.

But all this vexation suffised not, but being fully resolved on the
destruction of the Petitioner, for his innocent, though zealous performance of
his duty in revealing the said Treasonable words: he was again, about a week
after, Arrested by a Action out of the Kings Bench at the said Earls Suit, to
which he gave Bayl, and again, about a week after, was Arrested at the same
Earls suit in another Action out of the said Court, to which he likewise gave
Bayl: The first of which actions was dismissed for Non Pros. on the second was
declared that the Petitioner had slandered the said Earl, to the damage of
2000l. and though the said Action was brought in Dublin and the Declaration put
in there, the said Earls Council moved the Venne might be laid in Galloway and
the Action tried there; whereupon the said James Petitioned the Court that it
might be tried in Dublin, setting forth that Dublin was the place where he had
made discovery of the Treasonable words spoken by Allin, on which the Action
was grounded, that his Witness to prove Allin spoke those words, was in Dublin,
that Galloway was a place where the Earl was very potent, he keeping his Courts
there, and above One hundred Miles from the Petitioner, and his witnesses
habitation, which travel would be to his Cost, Charge, and Damage, besides, the
eminent danger of his Life in coming thither from those rude and Exasperated
persons that lived on the way: That what he had done, was in faithful discharge
of his duty to your Sacred Majesty, wherein he had done the said Earl no wrong,
nor never had cause to do that, if the said Earl was any ways slandered, it was
by the said Thomas Allin, against whom in right and justice, he ought to take
his remedy, and not against the said Petitioner. Yet notwithstanding, several
Petitions, to the Effect aforesaid, preset'd to like Court, they were all
overruled by Judge Jones, the only Judge then upon the Bench, and he forced to
Travel with his Witness to Galloway, to attend the said Trial; where arriving,
he could get no Counsel for Money, to plead for him, when Petitioning the
Judges to Assign him some, the Earls Counsel urged there were three at the
Bar, unretain'd by the said Earl, which proving all Irish Papists: Yet the
Petitioner was forced to be contented to retain them or none.

The Matter in Issue, was for the Petitioner to prove that the said Allin had
spoke the Treasonable words aforesaid, which he did so well, that one of his
Counsel told the Court, that the Evidence was so full, that if it had been
given against a Malefactor, it had been sufficient, but was overruled by Judge
Jones's saying that was not the Case now, and beckoning with his hand when he
spoke the word, so that none of the Petitioners Counsel opened their mouth
after; yet Judge Povey told the Jury that it was sufficiently proved, Allin had
spoken those words: However, the Jury being some of them Outlawed, some of them
Tenants, some Bailiffs, and all one way or other related to the said Earl, he
himself being present at the said Trial, brought in a Verdict against the
Petitioner for 2000 l. Damages, and 6 d. Cost, and has since in Dublin,
obtained Execution against the Petitioner for the same.

This Petitioner has been since persuaded to submit himself to the said Earl,
and confess his Fault, and to say that what he has done, was at the
Instigation of some others, which was his only way to be safe; else, it was
added, that let the Petitioner return to Dublin which way he would, there were
those related to the Earl would meet with him, and do his work for him: (This
was in Galloway soon after the said Trial) to which this Petitioner replied,
that he was never put on by any one, that what he had declared, was no more
than what Allin had said: and what if he was to do again, he would do as became
him in duty, but that he would take the best care of himsef he could, in
returning home, trusting to God to preserve him from such as sought unjustly to
do him hurt: And to that purpose finding himself often threatened and sometimes
struck, in Galloway he was forced, together with his said Father, to get thence
in the night, to forsake the common Road, and to go all the by ways they could,
to secure their Lives, they having been since credibly informed, that they were
persued by seven persons near sixty Miles, who missing of them returned.

May it therefore please your Majesty, in tender Consideration of the Premises:
That is,
First. That what the Petitioner did in discovering, the said Treasonable
words, was in duty to your Majesty, and Obedience to the Law.

Secondly. That he proved the same to the full-satisfaction of your Majesty's
Lord Lieutenant and Council, who else would have deservedly Committed him.

Thirdly. That his undoing by the same, tends to the Discouragement of all
Loyal Persons for discovering Treasons coming to their knowledge hereafter.

Fourthly. That if the said Earls Prosecution had been just, as it is most
notoriously otherwise, yet his manner of proceeding against your Petitioner
has been full of all kind of violence, by suffering his Servants to prosecute
him by illegal Imprisonments, Indictments, Arrests, and other ways, forcing him
to so many chargeable Journeys, to the loss of his Credit, and employment, to
his Detriment above 1000 l. already, besides by a Jury of his own Creatures
taken by a Tales in Court, utter strangers to the Petitioner, and therefore not
to be excepted against by him, the retaining all indifferent Council, procuring
the venue to be laid where he was most powerful, etc. to procure a Verdict,
Judgment, and Execution against the Petitioner, for the said Sum of Two
thousand Pounds, thereby driving him from his Habitation, Aged Parents and
Calling, to his utter Ruin, if not relieved by your Majesty.

All which is humbly submitted for a remedy.

FINIS.

