Nashauanittue Meninnunk WUTCH MUKKIESOG, Wussesemumun wutch Sogkodtunganash
Naneeswe TESTAMENTSASH; WUTCH Ukkesitchippooonganoo Ukketeahogkounooh. Negonae
wussukhumun ut Englishmanne Unnontoowaonganit, nashpe ne anue, wunnegenue
Nohtompeantog.

Noh asoowesit JOHN COTTON. Kah yeuyeu qushkinnumun en Indiane
Unnontoowaonganit wutch conenehikqunaout INDIANE MUKKIESOG, Nashpe GRINDAL
RAWSON. Wunnaunchemookae Nohtompeantog ut kenugke INDIANO^.

Onatuh mishketuog kodtantamook pahke meninnunnu^ Wuttinnoowaonk, onk woh
kenashpekinean. 1 Pet. 2.2. CAMBRIDGE: Printe^oop nashpe Samuel Green, ka^
Bartholomew Green, 1691.

Meninnunk wutch MVKKIESOG.
Not. TOH kutusseaunshuk GOD?


Namp. GOD nukkezhuke, nanawunuk, kah woh nuppohquohwhunuk.


Not. Howan GOD?


Namp. GOD nashauanittoooo, wutch nehenwonche, kah nashpe nehenwonche.


Not. Tohsuooog Manittooog?


Namp. Pasuk nont GOD, qut nishuoo, Wuttooshimau, Wunnaumoniin, kah
ooneetupanatamwe nashauanit.


Not. Vttoh kittin keezhukqunaz GOD?


Namp. Ut negonne nunneechetuonganog-Sampweseae, kah ooncetupanatamwe.


Not. Sun kunneetimus Sampweseae, kah ooneetupanatamwe?


Namp. Matchaog. Negonne noochetuonganog, matcheseuppanneeg, kah neen
nutapehteauooog.


Not. Sun matcheseae kunneetimus?


Namp. Nukkuhkenaihetteap ut matcheetup^natamooonganit kah nunneeteup ut
matcheseonganit.


Not. Vttiyeu keneetue Matcheseonk?


Namp. Adame matcheseonk nutogquontamon^ean, kah anittue
wuttinnepomantamooonganit nuttiyeuwonukqun.


Not. Chagua anittne Kuttinnepomantamooonk?


Namp. Nuttmnepomantamooonk mohchiyenoo wutch kitteamonteanitteaonk, numwohreau
marcheseonk, kah ne webe, kah nagwutteohteau.


Not. Chagua Matcheseonk?


Namp. Matcheseonk, pannenehheaonk Nauma^uon^.


Not. Tohsunash Naumatuongash GOD?


Namp. Piogquttash.


Not. Chagua Negonnohtag?


Namp. Umman^^toomehkon onkatogeeg mani^ooog ut anaquabeh.


Not. Toh nauwuttamoooo yeu Naumatuonk?


Namp. Onk woh noowowossumomun webeyeue, wunnamuhkuttee GOD, kah matta
onkatagk, qut webe nagum.


Not. Vttiyeu Nahohtoeu Anooteamooonk?


Namp. Aiyimauuhkon kuhhog nuuneukontunkoh. etc.


Not. Toh nauwuttamoooo yeu Anooteamooonk?


Namp. Onk woh noowowossumomun wunnamuhkuttee GOD nashpe wunnamuhkuttee
wowossumuaonk, neane GOD anooteamup, kah matta neane wosketomp namehte^^kup.


Not. Uttiyeu Nishwe Anooteamooonk?


Namp. Neemunoohkon oowesuonk JEHOVAH kummanittoom tahnooche.


Not. Toh anauwuttamoouk OOwesuonk God?


Namp. GOD nehenwonche Nagum, kah wunneseongash GOD ne nashpe waheomuk, neane
wosketomp waheomuk nashpe oowesuonk, kah uppahkeyeue wunnegenuongash,
oowowossumuaonk, wuttinnoowaonk, kah wutanakausuongash.


Not. Vttiyeu matta tahnooche attumunumoounate oowesuonk GOD?


Namp. Auwohkonate GOD, kah ooneseongash GOD, wutch wussohsumooonganit, kah
nehenwonche nuttinniyeuonganun mat tahnoocheyeue, mat matwabesue, matta
matcheetooe.


Not. Vttiyeu yaue Anooteamooonk?


Namp. Mehquontash Sabbath day woh kuppahkereauun.


Not. Toh nauwuttamoooo ne Anooteamooonk?


Namp. Onk woh nutanwohsinnoowontamumun wutch anakausuonk; nano moocheke wutch
pompooonganit, onk woh nuppasoosukauoomun GOD, nashpe oonee^rpanatamwe
peantamweseongash.


Not. Vttiyeu Nepanna tashe Anooteamooonk?


Namp. Quttianum Koosh, kah Kokas onk woh kussepe pomantam ut kutohkeit uttiyeu
JEHOVAH Kum Manittoom a^i^numu^kquean.


Not. Toh nauwuttamoooo yeuut, nashpe wuttooshimau, kah wuttokasumau?


Namp. Wame anukunkqueageegk, asu^^ ut chashiyeuonganit, ut Schoolhuwaonga^i^.
ut Moeuwehkomunganit, kah ut wame Neetohteaumunganunnonog.


Not. Vttiyeu Quttianumaonganoo ne nashpe woh quttian^madt?


Namp. Quttianittuonk, noswehtamooonk, kah (tapenont) onkquatunk.


Not. Vttiyeu nequtta tashe Anooteamooonk?


Namp. Nushehteohkon.


Not. Toh nauwuttamoooo ^e Anooteamooonk?


Namp. Onk woh mat nuttioliquehteomun nuppomantamooonganun, asuh
noonamammooonganun, asuh uppomantamooonganoo onkatogeegk, qut naneeswe
wadchanumunate.


Not. Vttiyeu nesansuk tashe Anooteamooonk. (Nam) Mam^ss^hkon


Not. Vttiyeu ne nashpe anoonittamuk?


Namp. Kohkonantamooonk ne nashpe nishn^h pasuk woh oowahteauun wutahteauunate
oowisq ut pahke^eahahuwaonganit, kah quttianittuonganit.


Not. Vttiyeu matchesconk ne nashpe quah^^^ittimuk?


Namp. Nishkeneunkqheonate nuhhogkanonog asuh onkatogeeg nashpe niskeneunkque
matche^od^antamooongash.


Not. Uttiyeu Swosuk tashe Anooteamooonk?


Namp. Kommootohkon.


Not. Uttiyeu Kommootooonk quahtinittimuk?


Namp. Neemu^umuna^e onkatogeeg umma^machiy^^moooosh, matta ^nuanumukook, ^^uh
ogk^hteanunate rehenwonche nummaumachinonash matta toh hen
Ennompaumukquod^in^o, en nuhhogkanon^g, asuh onka^ogeh.


Not. Uttiyeu ne nashpe anoonittumuk?


Namp. Sampweseae achuuhtiunate nummaumachiyeumash, wunnadchanumunate, ka^^
waanramwe ogketeauunnate.


Not. Uttiyeu. Paskoogun tashe Anooteamooonk?


Namp. Pannoowae wauwaonuhkon ketatteaumunk.


Not. Uttiyeu matcheseonk quahtinittimuk?


Namp. Pannoowae pehtuonate, mat wunnamuhkuttee Unnantamunnate, asuh
keketookontamunate, papaume nuhhogkanonog, asuh onkatogeeg.


Not. Uttiyeu ne nashpe anoonittumuk?


Namp. Wunnamuhkutteyeuuk, kah wunnomwausseonk.


Not. Uttiyeu Piogque Anooteamooonk?


Namp. Ahchewontogkon.


Not. Uttiyeu Ahchuwontamooonk yeu ut quahtinittimuk?


Namp. Ahchuwontamunate Ummaumachiyeumash onkatogeeg asuh ma^^a tapontamoounate
nehenwonche nummaumachinonash.


Not. Sun kenanawehteoh wame yeush Anooteamooongash?


Namp. Matchaog: Neen, kah wame missinninneumog marcheseupan^eeg.


Not. Chagaa Wutonkquatunk-matcheseonk?


Namp. Nuppoowonk, kah Awakompanaenk.


Not. Howan nashpe wadchanitteaan?


Namp. Webe nashpe JESUS CHRIST.


Not. Howan JESUS CHRIST?


Namp. Michemohtae wunnaumoniin GOD* noh wutche nuhhogkanonut wosketompoooo,
onk woh kummanouhukqun, kah koowadchanukqun.


Not. Toh kittin manohukqunane, kah wadchanukqunnane JESUS CHRIST?


Namp. Nashpe wussampwe pomantamooonganit, kah weesogke nuppooonganit, kah
wussohsumoe pomantamoe wonk omohkeonganit.


Not. Toh kittin nuhwuttacbonumun, kah moappooman CHRIST ^ut wunnuppooonganit,
kah wutomohkeonganit?


Namp. Nashpe Ummenuhkesue wuttin^oowaonk, kah nashauanit Uttiyeush nashpe
pasookqueogish, en Christur, kah ut wuhhogkate wadchanukqueogish.


Not. Chagua Wuttinnoowaonk?


Namp. Quoshodtumwaeninue, kah Apostlesue ooneetupanatamwe Wussukwhosunganash,
Negonne, kah Wusku Testament, Naumatuonk, kah Wunnaunehemookaonk:


Not. Uttiyeu nashpe nohtompeantogkae Naumatuonk kuppasookqunate en Christut?


Namp. Nashpe noowahheauwahikqunate nummatcheseonk, kah Ummusqualtamooonk GOD
nutaiyeuhkonukqun.


Not. Uttoh ut, yeu nashpe kuppasoosukau Christoh?


Namp. Ne nashpe noowaamattam numataanumitteae enniyeuonk, kah
nukquenauhikooonk pohquohwussuaenin.


Not. Uttiyeu nashpe wunnaunchemookae kukkootomo^dtuo^k kutanianumank qun yeu
ut kummataanunitteae Enniye^onk?


Namp. Nashpe nanomoocheke nu^^^^^^pahukqunate, kah neit wussuhwhunukqun wutch
ne Enniyeuonk.


Not. Vttiyeu nashpe wunnaunchemookae kahkootomoadtuonk kummoocheke
hohpahukqun?


Namp. Nashpe wahteauwahuwonate Ukkitteamonteanitteaonk JESUS CHRIST, noh
weekontamwe napuk wadchanonate matcheseaenuog, kah nummatcheseonk mat
noonamptamooonoun, kah nunnoochumweseonk peyauononate kah ne nashpe
noowaamattam nuhhog papaquanne noowanheit.


Not. Vttiyeu nashpe wunnannchemookae kuhkootomoadtuonk kussuhwhunnkqu^ wutch
ne wanhittue Enniyeuonk?


Namp. Nashpe nukkuhkootomunkqun misho^drue, kah ummenuhkesue nuppoowonk
CHRIST, kah ooweenauweetue kitteamonteanitteaonk en wanhitcheeg matcheseaen^og,
kah nashpe noowahteauwahikqun Ukkitteamonteanitteae quoshomuaonk neanesitcheeg,
kah nutinninnumunkqun monaneteae Nashauanit ne nashpe woh nutat^umun CHRIST,
kah ukkitteamonteanitteae quoshomuaonk, kah nooweetom.


Not. Vttiyeu nashpe monaneteae Nashananit kutaninnumunk attumunonate CHRIST,
kah Ummonaneteae quoshomuaonk, kah kooweetomukq?


Namp. Monaneteae Nashauanit kezteauun wunnamptamooonk ut nuhhogkate
attumunonate CHRIST, peantamooonk peantam^uonate, a^uskoian^amooonk
maunnitteauonate kah, noswehtamooonk noswehtau^nate.


Not. Chagua wunnamptamooonk?


Namp. Wunnamptamooonk ne nashauanittue kitteamonteanittuonk ne nashpe
nukquenuwaon nuhhog. kah noonamptam JESUS CHRIST, wutch Sampweseonk, kah
wadchanittuonk.


Not. Chagua Peantamooonk?


Namp. Peantamooonk ne wehquehtumuwaonk GOD wutch JESUS CHRIST nashpe
wutanninuhsuonk ooneetupanatamwe Nashauanit, neaunak wuttenantamooonk God.


Not. Chagua Aiuskoiantamooonk?


Namp. Aiuskoiantamooonk ne nashauanittue kitteamonteanitteaonk ne nashpe
nishkontam wame Nummatcheseonganunnonash, kah nussampooonash ut anaquabit GOD,
kah nummauunittau CHRIST wutch ahquontamoadtuonk, kah wutch
wusku-pomantamooonganit.


Not. Chagua wusku-pomantamooonk? Asuh wusku noswehtamooonk?


Namp. Wusku-Pomantamooonk ne Monaneteaonk nashauanit ne nashpe nunnuhkon wame
nuhkone nummatcheseonganunnonash, kah nummatcheseae wee^omukeeg, kah
nuppomsstam ut anaquabit GOD ut wut innowaongane wequai, kah ut
ooweetomuaonganit ooneetupanatamweyeuitcheeg.


Not. Chagua Weetomuaonk ooneetupanatamweyeuitcheeg?


Namp. Weetomaonk ooneetupanatamweyeuitcheeg ne Moeuwehkomungane moeu^htooonk
ut wunnanittuongash kitteamontea^itteae wunnoowaonk, kah menuhketeaong^sh naut.


Not. Chagua Moeuwehkomunk?


Namp. Moeuwehkomunk ne mukkinneaonk wunneetupanatamweyeuitcheeg
weechaiyeuh^uog nashpe wunnoowae kenepissuonganit, wowossumonate GOD, kah
oonenehittina^ut ut wame ooneetupanatamwe ukkuhkoowaongash.


Not. Chagua wunnoowae kenepissuonk ne nashpe Moeuwehkumunk w^echaiyeuhtumuk?


Namp. Wunnoowae kenepissuonk ne nashpe Moeuwehkomunk weechaiyeuhtumuk, ne
Pah^e sampooaonk wunnoowaonk ne GOD kezteunkup nashpe wussampwutteahae
missin^inneumoh Godoounate nah en, kah wunneechanooouh.


Not. Toh hen kishpinnau GOD ummissinninncumoh yeu ut wunnoowaonganit?


Namp. Wuske magunate wuhhogkauh, kah wunneechanooooh en Lordut
missinninneumunate, kah neit Woeuwehkomungane Nohtompeantogomoh kah
weemattinneunk kodchittonumunate wowossumaonk GOD, kah ooneuehittinnaout.


Not. Vttiyeu nashpe maghettit wuhhogkauh kah wunneechanoout en Lordut?


Namp. Nashpe wunnamptamoe wuttattumunumooonganoo JEHOVAH, kah oowunnoowaouk,
wutch wuhhogkauh, kah wunneechanaoout, kah nashpe uppomshaonganoo neaunak, kah
nashpe wutanookauwaonganoo wunneechanooouh ut wame wunnoowae Ummayish.


Not. Vttiyeu nashpe maghettit wuhhogkauh, kah wunneechanoouh ea
M^euwehkomungane noht^mpeautogomoh, kah weem^ttinneunk?


Namp. Nashpe wussampooaonganoo umma^cheseonganoooash, kah wunnamptamooonganoo,
kah wunnoswehtamooonganoo wunnaunchemookaonk CHRIST, kah ne nashpe n^g, kah
wunneechanoouh attumunumooog en moeuwehkomongane wehtomaonk, kah
menuhkereahaongash naut.


Not. Vttiyeush menuhketeahaongash wunnoowaonk, yeuyeu ut wunnaunchemookae
kesukodtash?


Namp. K^tchessumoooak, kah LORD mi^hadtuppooonk.


Not. Toh k^tusseaunshit ut Kutchessumooonganit?


Namp. U^ Kutchessumooonk, nukkutchessumooonk nashpe nippe menuhketeausue
kukkinneasuonk nukku^sumitteaonk ut oosqheonganit, kah nash^uanit Christoh, kah
ne nashpe nunnompenitteaonk eu Christut, kah ahquontam^adtuonk, kah
uppahkheaonk nummatcheseongash, kah nutomohkeonk wutch wame nutonkapunaongash,
kah wonk nutomohkeonk wutch nuppunnate majish ne kesukod.


Not. Toh kutusseannshit ut LORD Ummishadtuppooonganit?


Namp U^ LORD Ummishadtuppooonganit attumunumooonk Sohqunumoe pe^^gqanneeg,
kah s^hkanumwe Wine ne menuhketeausue kuhkinneasuonk weetomae Nutattumunumooonk
wuhhog Christ wutch neen, Sohqshae oosqheonk Christ wutch neen, kah ne nashpe
nunneetuonk ut Christut; ahquontamoadtuonk, kah neetskehettuonk
Nummatcheseongash, weetomaonk Wunnashauanittoomoh, nunnummenuhkesuonk, kah
nuppomantamooonk ut kitteamonteanitteaonk, kah nummoappuonk nashpe Christ ut
wussohsumoe appuonganit ut majish Wussittumoe Resukod.


Not. Chagua Omohkeonk wutch Nuppunnate?


Namp. Christ peyont majish oosittumooonk wame neeg apitcheeg ut weenohkehtu
pish wonk omohkeog, naneeswe Sampwesecheeg, kah mat Sampweseecheeg.


Not. Chagua majish OOsittumooonk?


Namp. Majish ne kesukod wame pish peyauog ut anaquabit oosi^umooe appuonganit
Christ nompagunumunate wutanakausuonganoooash kah attumunumunate neaunak
wutonkquatonganoo.


Not. Chagua wutonkquatunk neit pish actumunumwog?


Namp. Sampweseecheeg pish auog en micheme pomantamooonganit, kah matcheetukeeg
pish nukkonog en michemohtae nootaut, ut k^nugke Mattannit, kah Wut Angelsumoh.


FINIS*

