THE LIFE OF LEWIS of BOVRBON, LATE Prince of Conde.

Imprimatur,

Jan. 9 1092/3. EDMUND BOHUN.

ADVERTISEMENT.
MEMOIRS of Emeric Count Teckely, in Four Books: Wherein are Related all the
most considerable Transactions in Hungary and the Ottoman Empire; from his
Birth, An. 1656, till after the Battle of Salankement, in the year 1691.
Translated out of French.

Printed for Tim. Goodwin at the Maidenhead against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleet Street.

LOUIS DE BOURBON PRINCE DE CONDE.


THE LIFE OF LEWIS of BOVRBON, LATE Prince of Conde.

Digested into ANNALS.

With many Curious REMARKS on the Transactions of EVROPE for these last Sixty
Years.

Done out of French.

LONDON: Printed for Tim. Goodwin at the Maidenhead against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. MDCXCIII.

TO The Right Honorable WILLIAM Earl of Devonshire, Lord Steward of Their
MAJESTY'S Household, Lord Lieutenant of the County of DERBY, Knight of the most
Noble Order of the Garter, and One of Their Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council, etc.
My Lord,
BY Encouraging the Translating of useful Books, the French Nation have made an
Universal Conquest upon Learning. They have by this Method possessed themselves
of the Wit, Wisdom, and Experience of all Ages and Climates.

It Is no Scandal to take Example by an Enemy, in what is Commendable; and our
imitating them in this Practice is one way of making Reprizals. I confess, that
Translations from French Originals, are only for the Advantage of common
English Readers; but they being the Generality, the Benefit is Public: For
which Reason it is not below the Dignity of our Court and Nobility to
Countenance such Endeavors.

'Twas upon this Account that I presumed to Offer the following Translation to
Your Lordship's Protection, in order to its Public Reception. You are the
English Varus.

Nec gratior ulla est
Quam sibi quae Vari praescripsit Pagina Nomen.
This Piece may be thus Recommended to our Countrymen, and find that welcome
Entertainment which a Useful History deserves. It likewise gave me an
Opportunity (as Zeal is always Officious) of expressing (in some measure) the
Respect I am obliged to Entertain for Your Lordship, as an Eminent Patron of
the Muses. But if I were an utter Stranger to them, I have at least an
Englishman's Right of Offering my small Tribute of Acknowledgments among the
Crowd of Your Admirers. It Is impossible for Sublimest Wits to say what they
ought upon this Theme, and for the Meanest not to say something; since the
ablest Panegyrist in Attempting Your Character can only speak the Sense of
Nations. Even Foreign Courts are sufficiently Acquainted with Your Worth; and
if any are so little Civilized as to be Strangers to Your Name, they may inform
themselves wherever Good Sense or Gallantry are in any Esteem. It Is both Your
Happiness and Merit to be Admired Abroad, and Beloved at Home.

Your Lordship appears so much a Favorite of Heaven and Nature, that I can
never think of You without calling to Mind that Horatian Character of the Roman
Tibullus; I know not how the Description squared with Him; but if it were then
a Complimen^, it is now proved a Prophecy.

Dii tibi Formam
Dii tibi Divitias dederant Artemque fruendi.
Quid vovest dulci Nutricula ^ajus Alumno
Quam fap^re and fari possit quid Sentiat; and Cui
Gratia, Fama, Valetudo, contingat abunde.
Your Advantages of Fortune and Person might create Envy in some, if Your
greater Accomplishments of Mind, and most obliging Nature, did not irresistably
command the Affections of All. Your Noble Ancestry bequeathed You those
Endowments that were capable of being bequeathed; and You have furnished Your
self with such as are not to be transmitted by Descent, but obtained by the
particular Virtue of the Successor. Courage, Constancy, Magnificence, Justice
and Liberality, are derived to You with Your Blood, and, with relation to the
Public, true English Principles are Yours by Inheritance. You are happy in
Examples of Your Ancestors, and more happy in Personally maintaining the Honor
and Reputation of so Illustrious a Family. You preserve with their Greatness,
their Condescension and Affability.

Generous Actions are Your delight; and when You dispense Your Favors, Your
Judgment as well as Generosity is exerted. Want and Merit are ever the Objects
of Your Compassion. You have the Art of supporting Grandeur without Formality;
even Business it self by a peculiar Felicity, sits easy upon You. You manage
the Hurry of Affairs with that Tranquillity, that is scarce to be found in the
Cell or Cloister. Your Method resembles that of Nature, whose greatest
Progresses are carried on with Serenity: The shallowest Streams are always the
most noisy; the deeper the Current, the greater the Silence. Your Retirement
again is never unactive; and he that follows You to your Retreat, shall find
you, Tacitum Sylvas inter reptare Salubres
Curantem Quid sit dignum Sapiente Bonoque.


Your Lordship has shown the world that a Statesman can be a Friend, and a
Courtier an Englishman; that Complaisance and Gallantry can consist with
Sincerity and good Sense. I will not pretend to enumerate all those
Qualifications that endear You to Your Country, being sensible how imperfectly
I have touched what is obvious to every man's Eye; my comfort is, That the
Readers Private Sentiments will do You Justice: I will only presume to join
with them in hearty Wishes, That Your Lordship may long continue in your
flourishing Prosperity, an Ornament to the Court of Great Britain, an Assistant
to Their Majesty's, and the Nation's Affairs, beloved by Your Country as much
as You are a Lover of it. This is every true Englishman's Prayer, and
particularly of

My Lord, Your LORDSHIP'S Most Humble and Devoted Servant, N. TATE.

The PREFACE.
THE Life of the Prince of Conde has been inquired after so long since, that
considering my disability to answer the Public Expectations, for want of all
the Memoirs that I stood in need of (for it would require an Age to get 'em
all) I designed to have set forth a Collection of all the Printed Relations of
the Campaigns, wherein the Prince had commanded in chief, of the Battles he had
won, the strong Holds of which he had made himself Master, and of such other
Pieces which I had taken care to get together; to which purpose no diligence
was omitted, though some of 'em were become very scarce. And there is no
question to be made, but that such a Rude Collection alone would have been very
grateful. For People would have been glad to see such a Prospect of the
Achievements of so great a Hero as the Prince of Conde; and the greatest part
of those Pieces, though printed long before, would have been Novelties to many
People. Nevertheless, considering that if those Pieces were read successively
according to the Order of Time, and shaped into a Methodical Form of History,
they would please much better, I determined to take that course. So that when
you find entire the greatest part of those Relations which have already
appeared, and of which some begin already to be quite out of print, you will
find an Abstract of the Life of that great Personage sufficiently guarded with
the Circumstances of Relation, and the Principal Matters that complete his
History. We are to inform the Reader farther, That by the Assistance of
Particular Memoirs which we received from several Officers who had served under
the Prince, and Letters written by Persons who had free access to Chantilli,
there are many Circumstances here mentioned which were never Printed, nor are
any other where to be found. As to what remains, we must acknowledge, That we
have made use of the Memoirs of Rochefoucault, Tavanes, Puysegur; the History
of Marshal Gassion, the Theatrum Gallicum, M. de Leti, the History of the
French Monarchy; The History of the Present Age; That of the Wars of Holland;
That of Sweden by Puffendorf, Labardaeus de Rebus Gallicis, Prido, P. Rapin, P.
Bergier, and the Principal Funeral Orations that have been preached in honor
of the Prince's Memory.

THE HISTORY OF LEWIS de BOVRBON, Prince of Conde. First Book.
THE World has no such reason to wonder, The Design of the Work.
that though the Prince of Conde has been dead for so many Years, yet no Body
attempted any sooner to write his Life.

He was a Prince whose Life was intermixed with so many Varieties and Changes
of Fortune, 1621.
who signalized himself by so many great and glorious Actions, and whose
retiring from Business had something so Heroic in it, that it must be thence
concluded, that such a History, delightful in the General Knowledge of it,
could not choose but be acceptable, when enlarged into particulars. And it
would be so much the more kindly entertained, in regard the Public is
encouraged to believe that some Body will undertake it. For my part I have
neither Memoirs anow, nor Ability sufficient to Enterprise so great a Work; so
that I shall not adventure to presume so far. The Design which I propose to my
self, is only to collect together such Relations, as have been made from time
to time, of the most remarkable Actions of this Prince, and to tack these
Pieces in such a manner, one to another, as to make an Epitome of his Life,
from his Birth to the time of his Decease: to the end, the Reader may have a
view of the Battles which he won, or wherein he signalized his Courage; the
Sieges of the Towns which he took, and of the Consequence of those great
Victories, to which indeed the Monarchy of France is beholding for her Grandeur.

The Birth of the Prince of Conde.
Lewis of Bourbon, the II. of that Name, that is to say, the Hero of whom I am
now to speak, was born at Paris, the 8 th. of September, in the Year, 1621.
Lewis the XIII. his Godfather, gave him his own Name, and while his Father
lived, he bore the Title of Duke of Enguiens. This Young Prince was Grandson
to Lewis the I. that famous Prince of Conde, who after the Death of Henry II.
put himself at the Head of the Malcontents, in the Civil-Wars about Religion,
for those Reasons which are known to all the World; and Son of Henry of
Bourbon, and Margaret of Monmorenci.

After the Death of Lewis I. Prince of Conde, who was slain after a most
execrable manner, by a Captain of the Duke of Anjou's Guards, Hen. IV. who to
preserve his Crown, found himself constrained to renounce his Religion, was
desirous that the Young Henry should be bred up in the same Principles which he
had embraced himself, and had begun both to practice and profess. To which
purpose, he was put into the Hands of those who were made choice of for his
Education. And such extraordinary Care was taken to infuse into this Young
Prince an early good Opinion and Affection for the Catholic Religion, that
never was any Prince more Zealous then He for the Roman Worship. Insomuch, that
it may be said of him, that he was born for the Re-establishment of the
Catholic Religion, which the Prince, his Father, would have rooted out of
France; that he only lived to defend it; and that he was the Ornament and Glory
of it.

It may be readily conjectured by this Portraicture, 1629.
that Prince Henry of Bourbon was no less desirous that his Son, the Duke of
Enguien, His Studies.
should be brought up betimes in the knowledge of a Religion of which himself
was in some measure the Support and Column. And he had a Passion so
extraordinary for it, that so soon as he arrived to be 8 Years of Age, his
Father sent him to Bourges, to the College of Jesuits, where he was committed
to the Tuition of two Persons of that Order, the most able and learned that
could be found. Thus the Young Prince continued Three Years in that House,
going regularly every day to his Form or Classis, as well as the Rest of the
Inferior Scholars. And in regard he had a quick and piercing Wit, a retentive
Memory, and a great number of Natural Endowments, his Tutors understood so well
to cultivate his Genius, that at Twelve Years of Age he was able to discourse
of Religion after a very rational manner, and at Thirteen Years of Age, he had
improved himself so perfectly in his course of Philosophy, that he maintained
several Thesis's and Arguments in public, with that subtlety and solidity that
he became the wonder of all that heard him.

Certain it is, that this Great Prince was a proper Receptacle for all manner
of Sciences and Learning, but his predominant Passion led him to a Martial
Life. For that reason he was desirous to understand the Art of War, so soon as
he found himself in a Condition to undergo the Fatigues and Hardships that
attend it. And he no sooner set forward in that Illustrious Career, but he made
surprising Progresses. His most Early Years were remarkable and signalized with
all the happy Presages that usually accompany the Infancy of Extraordinary Men;
and the Accomplishment of 'em was so quick, that People had hardly time to
distinguish the Effects from the Hopes.

The Marshalls de Chaunes, de Chatill^n, and de la Meilleraye, besieged the
City of Arras, in the Year, 1640. 1640.
And having repulsed the Cardinal Infanta, He is present at the Siege of Arras.
who attempted to raise the Siege; they carried the Place two months after. The
Duke of Enguien performed his first Campaign, under these Generals, as a
Volunteer: and he signalized himself, in this Siege, for his Bravery, all
along, from the very first day that the Trenches were opened; nor was it a
little that he contributed to repair the Ignominy of that ill Success which had
some days before befallen the French Army at the Sieges of Charlemont and
Mariembourg, which they were constrained to raise.

He was Marrid the Year following, and espoused Clara Clementia de
Maille-Breze, 1641.
who was Wealthy to abundance; for she was the Daughter of Marshal de Breze,
who being Cardinal Richlie^'s Brother-in-law, H^s Marriage.
had been advanced to Places of great Dignity and Importance.

It Is said, that the Duke of Enguien, who aspired to a higher Alliance, showed
at first a Reluctance to match himself into the Family of that Minister, and
that he stood upon his Punctilioes, like a Person of great Honor and
Gallantry. But in regard that Cardinal Richlieu, to speak properly was then
King; some there are who say, that Lewis XIII. gave him to understand, that
'twas his Pleasure to have the Match concluded, unless he had a mind to incur
his Anger; and that the Cardinal, whose will was a Law, had laid a Contrivance
to have him arrested under some specious pretense, if he should hesitate never
so little upon the Proposal which was made him; nay, if he did not make the
first steps of Courtship to the Lady. However it were, the Duke of Enguien went
to visit the Cardinal, who at that time was at Ruel: So that the Match was
concluded at that Visit; and the 11 th. of February the Nuptial Ceremonies were
performed with Royal Magnificen^e.

War, as I have already said, being the prevailing Passion that swayed the Duke
of Enguien, He is present at the Siege of Air.
no sooner the French took the Field, in the Year, 1641. but he accompanied
Marshal de Meil^eray into Elanders, and was at the Siege of Air, which was a
most remarkable Siege, and where he signalized himself with no less Gallentry
then in the Trenches of Arras.

Air Surrendered upon Composition; but the Spanish Garrison was hardly marched
out of the Town, before the Spaniards made themselves Masters of Lil^ers, and
immediately after, were resolved to fall upon the French in their Lines, or to
starve 'em in their Entrenchments, if they refused to fight.

General Lamboy's Army, which the Spaniards had brought into Alsatia, puffed up
with the Victory which they had won at La Marfee, near Sedan, An occasion
wherein the Prince of Conde signalizes himself.
marched just before the Vanguard, in the very Face of the French Army. Of
which, so soon as Marshal Gassion had Intelligence, he Salli'd out of the Camp,
with a part of his Regiment, to observe the March of the Enemy, and to Charge
'em in the Rear, if they passed forward. But he was so surpised to see so
numerous an Army making toward him, that he retreated about a Mile, and made a
stand, upon a Rising Ground, at the corner of a little Copse, where he stood
secure. But that which stopped the Marshal de Gassion, could not stop the Duke of
Enguien, who being mounted a Horseback, in Company with Marshal de la
Meilleray, and about three or fourscore Lords, and some Volunteers, to view the
Enemy, advanced so far, that all of a sudden they found themselves environed
with two great Squadrons of Horse, from which they had much ado to free
themselves; but at length they did get rid of 'em, in such a manner as
redounded highly to their Honor: For after a short, but very hot Conflict for
the time, they regained their Lin^s, without much loss; and particular
Commendations were bestowed upon the Young Duke, for the Bravery and undaunted
Courage which he had showed upon that Occasion.

1642.
In the Year 1642. Lewis XIII. being desirous to make himself Master of
Perpignan, he ordered the Marshalls de Schomb^rg and Meilleray to besiege it;
and that great Monarch was present, in Person, at the Siege, He is at the S^ege
of Perpignan, and ^ommands the Arrierb^n of Langu^d^c.
for some time. Nor could the D. of Enguien, who followed the King, fail of
Employment in an Enterprise of that Nature. He commanded the Gentry and
Nobility of Languedoc, and behaved himself with so much Honor, that the Town
being constrained to yield, after a Resistance of four Months, believed she
could not make a more glorious Surrender then by delivering the Keys of her
Gates to the Young Prince. How many Lives would those Marks of Valor have
suffis'd to Honor, which the Duke of Enguien gave in his first three
Campaignes! He showed an Ability to Command so extraordinary, mo^e especially
at the Siege of the last Place, that Lewis XIII. who in part had been a Witness
of his great Actions, thought he could not do France a greater piece of
Service, He is made General of the King of France his Army.
then to put him at the Head of his Armies.

After the taking of Perpignan, which was attended with the Surrender of
Salces, and the total Reduction of the whole Country of Roussillon. Cardinal
Richlieu died upon the 4 th. of December, 1642. Death of Card. Richlieu.


All People imagined, that upon the Death of that Minister, the Face of Affairs
would have strangely altered; and that Lewis the XIII. who had been as it were
a Slave for twenty Years together, would take that opportunity to break his
Chains. But through a strange Fatality, not easy to be paralleled, that Prince
who had boasted, upon the News of the C^rdinals Death, that now he should begin
to be a King, had not however the Courage to shake off so base and ignominious
a Yoke; and notwithstanding the aversion he had for the Memory of that
Cardinal, he saw himself constrained, through his own Cowardliness, not only to
dissemble one part of his Sentiments, but to authorize the Disposal, which that
Minister had made by his last Will, of the Principal Employments, and most
important Preferments in the Kingdom. In a word, the Kindred and Favorites of
Cardinal Richlieu enjoyed all the Advantages which he had procured 'em,
altogether as peaceably after his Death, as they did in his Lifetime. And
Cardinal Mazarin, who was the only Person of all his Creatures, in whom he most
confided, and who was most deeply engaged in his Interests, was made choice of
to Succeed him in the Government of Affairs. Bu^ according to all probability,
there was some Prospect of a sudden Change. For Lewis XIII. had so long
labored under a decaying and languishing Distemper, that there was no hope of
any Cure, and then all People believed that so soon as the Queen, or the Duke
of Orleance cam^ to the Regency, that Richlieu's Party would be utterly
discarded; but they fla^ter'd themselves in vain. For Cardinal Mazarin, who
foresaw every thing that could happen, and who moreover had very powerful
Reasons to side with the Queen, and preserve his Authority by that means, made
use of all his Power over the King, to infinuate into his mind, that it behooved
him of necessity to declare that Princess Regent.

The King was no way dispo'd to follow the Cardinals Advice. For besides the
little Kindness which he had for the Queen, he was so ill satisfied with her
Conduct, in regard of the Ties which he believed she had with the Spaniard, by
the Mediation of the Duchess of Chevreuse, who was fled for Sanctuary to
Brussels; and he was otherwise so preposess'd, that out of the design which the
Duchess had to Marry the Duke of Orleans, she had had a hand in the Conspiracy
of Chalaes, Grand Master of his Wardrobe, who would have assassinated him, that
though he gave great Credit to the Cardinals Advice, yet he would not give him
any positive Answer touching that Matter. And indeed the King was at a great
loss which way to turn himself. There was no Body could pretend to the Regency,
if the Queen were Excluded, or obliged to have a Partner; and both the Queen,
and the Duke of Orleans, were equally hateful to him. But Cardinal Mazarin
would not be so put off. For in regard he soothed the Queen with every thing
that could flatter her Hopes, he lost no time either in soliciting the King,
or causing him to be importuned in Favor of that Princess. And the better to
bring about his Design, and that at the same time he might have the greatest
part himself in the Management of Affairs, he took a Resolution to propound
Conditions, so little to the Queens Advantage, that Lewis XIII. who saw himself
just dropping into his Grave, thankt him for having disengaged him out of that
Irresolution, wherein he had hesitated so long. For in short, although he
consented, at last, that the Queen should be declared Regent; yet the Power
which he gave her was extremely limited, that Princess not being able to
undertake any thing of her self, without first imparting the Business to the
Counsel, of which the Cardinal was to be the Chief, and where things were to be
carrid by Plurality of Voices.

But how disadvantageous soever these Conditions were to the Queen, the King
however thought he had done enough, and the Queen, and the Cardinal, who had
their Prospects, and their Ends, were highly satisfid that Things were brought
to that point. Nevertheless, in regard the Business was not concluded, and for
that the Kings mind might alter, the Cardinal left nothing omitted to keep the
King steady in the Resolution he had taken, while the Queen, The Queen
endeav^ur^ to draw the Prince of Conde to her Party and succeeds.
on her side, labored to win to her Party all the considerable Persons in the
Court; of which number was the Duke of Enguien: and it was a long time before
she thought of him.

But the Duke de la Roche Foucaut, who had always an Antipathy against Cardinal
Richlieu, and sought all Opportunities to be serviceable to the Queen, having
one day put it into her Head, that it would be of great Advantage to her to
gain this Young Prince, she took it for good Advice. And the Duke of Enguien,
who was glad of an opportunity to oppose the Authority of the Duke of Orleans,
who aspired to the Regency, willingly accepted the Queens offer. The Queen
promised to prefer him before the Duke of Orleans, not only by the Mark of her
Esteem and Confidence, but also in all Employments from whence it lay in her
Power to Exclude the Duke of Orleans, by such ways as they two should agree
upon together, and which might not provoke that Prince to a Rupture with her^
On the other side, the Duke of Enguien promised to be inseparably devoted to
the Queens Interest, and to be beholding to her alone for all the Favors which
he desired at Court. And now the Queen thought her self strong enough, when she
saw her self assured of the support of this Young Prince; and therefore relying
on the other side upon the Cardinal, she waited for the Kings Death with a
great deal of Confidence.

1643.
About that time the Duke of Enguien departed to Command the Army in Flanders,
and lay the Foundations of those great Things which he performed with so much
Honor. Lewis the XIII. also died within a short time after, The Death of Lewis
XIII.
that is to say, the 14 th. of May, in 1643. the very same day that he began
his Reign.

After the Death of this Monarch, there happened one thing which perhaps never
happened before in France, where there is a greater regard had to the Kings
Pleasure, then in any other Monarchy, that the Parliament of Paris, The Queen
confirmed Regent, by a De^laration of Parliament.
which according to the Institution of it, is the Trustee and Guardian of all
the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and which derives its Jurisdiction only
from the King, cancelled the Declaration of Lewis XIII. by which, as has been
already said, he ordered a Council for the Regency, to the end, the Queen, whom
he thought incapable to manage the Government, might be under a kind of
Tutelage. For the Queen, Four days after the King's Death, went to the
Parliament, and there did what she pleased her self, in a manner so
Advantageous to her self, that ^here could nothing more be done; the whole
As^embly testifying that they desired nothing with so ^uch fervency, as that
her Authority should be ^bsolute. In short, the Queen was confirmed Re^ent by a
Declaration of Parliament, bearing date ^he 18 th. of May.

This Digression was absolutely necessary, as you ^ill find by what ensues. Now
therefore to return ^o the Duke of Enguien, while these things were ^hus
transacted in France, and that they were pre^aring to carry the King's Body to
St. Denis, the ^paniards besieged Rocroy, and so vigorously pressed ^he City,
that it was greatly to be feared it would ^all into the Enemies hands, unless
it were speedily ^uccour'd. But the Duke of Enguien, who was al^eady set
forward to Command the Army in Flan^ers, resolved to relieve the Place, and no
less ^riskly to attack the Enemy, who seemed as willing ^o come to a Battle;
and he performed what he ^ndertook, as he had laid his Design. This Prince was
then not above Two and Twenty Years of Age, and one of his Panegyrists has
said, and that not without doing him Justice, that he had formed ^ Design which
was above the reach of the Old Experienced Hoary-headed Captains; but which
Victory however justified. The Enemies Army ^as much more numerous then that
which he Com^anded. It was composed of those Old Bands of Walloons, Italians
and Spaniards, which never had ^een broken before; but all that could not make
^he Young Duke desist from his Enterprise. Don ^rancisco de Melos stayed his
coming, with a firm Resolution to engage him. He was a Captain formidable for
his Consummate Experience, and for ^ great many Victories which he had won, and
be^ides all that, he lay entrenched among Woods and ^oggs. All the Forces of
the Kingdom, were ^ow to be ventured in one single Combat. Upon that day
depended the good or bad Fortune of the Regency. For in short, had the Duke
lost that Battle, it would have been impossible for France to have stopped a
Torrent, which would certainly have delug'dall Champaigne, Picardy, and the
Neighborhood of Paris. The Consideration of so many Dangers would have
terrified any other Person but the Duke of Enguien. However, never did any
General appear more Sedate, or more Undaunted. He lay the Night preceding that
famous Battle, as if he had not thought of any such thing as fighting, and
slept so soundly, that they were forced to wake him the next Morning. This
Prince, who by that Battle opened the way for so many others; upon that
Occasion acted not only like a Man of his Birth, but like a Common Officer. He
was in all places where danger appeared. He received several Shot in his
Clothes, and in his Boots; he had a Horse wounded under him, with Two Musket
Bullets; and he underwent all the Hazards and Fatigues of Combat, with so much
gaiety, and a Look so cheerfully unconcerned, that he was the equal wonder as
well of the Spaniards as the French.

Toward the end of Lewis the XIII. Reign, the Spanish Army was Master of the
Field. A Relation of what passed in the Campaign of Rocroy, in 1643. by M. de
i^ Chapelle.
Don Francisco de Melos, Governor of the Low Countries, had re-taken Air, and
La Bassee, and won the Battle of Hannecourt. The Designs which were laid were
vast; nor was his Ambition satisfid with re-taking only those Places which
Spain had lost. He foresaw that the King's Death would occasion great Troubles
in France, and the Physicians had all adjudg'd his Distemper incurable; and
every body was studying to make their best Advantages of the ensuing Minority.
The French also, who were wont to loose by their Dissentions all the Advantages
which they used to get in their Foreign Wars, were about to have furnished
Melos with a favorable opportunity to extend his Conquests.

Upon these Considerations he alters his design of Besieging Arras, the
Preparations for which had taken him up all the Winter, and he resolvd to
attacque Rocroy; as being a serviceable Post that gave him an Entrance into
Champaigne, and therefore fit to make a Place of Arms, that lay convenient for
all his Enterprises. In a very short time after, Lewis the XIII. dyed, and his
Death divided all the Court, as Melos well foresaw. The Cabals that were
secretly held to get the Regency, threatened France with a General Revolution.
All the States of the Kingdom were unwilling to fall again under a Ministry
like that of Cardinal Richlie^. The great Lords and Peers could not be easily
induced to buckle before a Minister, who possessed a Station, of which every
one thought themselves more worthy then himself. The Magistrates were unwilling
to depend upon any Person, but the King, in the Exercise of their Duties, and
could not brook the receiving Laws from a private Subject. And as for the
People, they never fail to charge upon the Counsels of the chief Minister, all
the Taxes and Impositions which have been laid upon 'em; and generally all Men
are inclined to envy the Fortune. and hate the Person of a Favorite.

Thus the Remembrance of what was past became Odious, and the future was to be
feared; the Present was full of Trouble, and therefore great Care was to be
taken of the Kingdom under so great a Change. All People wished for a
Government more Gentle and Free, but no Body agreed upon the means to bring it
to pass.

Nevertheless, the King, before his Death, had nominated and appointed the
Persons that were to compose the Council of the Regency. He had also, at the
same time, given the Command of his Armies to the Duke of Enguien; but to curb
and moderate the Early Flames and Heats of Youth, frequently transported with
desire of Glory, he gave him the Marshal de l' Hospital for his Lieutenant
General and Counselor. But notwithstanding this same Settlement of Affairs,
and all the Intreagues at Court, the Queen was declared Sole Regent with
Absolute Power.

There was some likelihood at first, that she would have called the Bishop of
Beauv^is to the Ministry; and she had also some thoughts of procuring a
Cardinals Cap for him upon the first Promotion. But that Prelat, instead of
managing himself prudently and cautiously in the dawn of Favor, went about to
ruin all those that Richlieu had advanced, and by that means drew upon himself
a great number of Enemies. Now while he was unseasonably endeavoring to
overturn all which that Minister had done, Mazarin took his Advantage of the
whole, and made his Leagues with the Persons that were in most Credit with the
Queen. They whom the Bishop sought to pull down had recourse to the Cardinal's
Protection. The Q. therefore fearing least he should create her a great deal of
Trouble, took distaste at his Services; finding the Cardinal, at length, much
more fit to supply the Place of Chief Minister. And they in whom ^he most
con^ided, persuaded her to make this choice so that she resolved to send the
Bishop back to his Diocese, and openly to declare her Inclinations to the
Cardinal.

At first she met with great Obstacles; the very Name of Cardinal dreaded the
minds of Men, recalled past Mischiefs to their Memory, and caused 'em to fear
worse for the future. Thus the Queens Creatures were divided, every one took
his side, and Affairs were worse embroiled then before. Ne^ertheless, the
Cardinals Policy, and good Fortune, ^he Services which he had done France, the
Queens ^esolution^ and the respect which all People had ^or her appeased the
Malcontents. Nor did the ^lot laid against him by the Duchess of Cheuruse,
and the Duke of Beaufort serve to any other pur^ose then to Settle and Confirm
his Authority. And thus Melos was deceived in his Prognostics, as ^re all
Foreigners that ground great hopes upon the Divisions of the French. For though
their Natural Levity sometimes excites 'em to revolt; yet the in^ate respect
and affection which they have for their King, reduces them always to their
Obedience. In short, the Grandees, the Parliament, and the People, submitted to
the Queens Choice, and all Authority bowed under the Ministry of Cardinal
Mazarin, though he were a Foreigner, and that his Enemies published him to be
Originally a Subject of Spain, which was a Nation that had no Kindness for the
French; and though but a little before he appeared under an Eclipse far distant
from so splendid an Elevation.

The Duke had carried himself imprudently in the management of the Enterprise
against the Cardinal, and the Duchess believing her self more Crafty, and more
in the Queens Favor, scorned his Submissions. So that at the same time that
the Duke and she were consulting to destroy him, the Duke was arrested, the
Duchess disgraced, the rest of the Cabal dispierc'd themselves, and France
en^oy'd a more pleasing Calm then ever.

While the Court was busi'd in these Intreagues, The Prince of Conde desirous
to relieve Rocroy.
the Duke of Enguien was preparing for the next Campaign. Amiens was the place
appointed for the Rendezvouse of the Army, where the Prince ^rriv'd toward the
end of April, 1643. and there ^et Gassion with part of the Forces: Espenan drew
others together about L^on. Marshal de Grammen^ had put himself into Arras at
the beginning of the Winter, and had a considerable Body in that place. The
Duke of Enguien stayed Three Weeks in Amiens in expectation of the Forces that
were to meet there, and to penetrate the Designs of the Spaniards: He had also
sent Gassion to Dourlens, with Orders to observe 'em more narrowly. At length
he understood that Melos had drawn all his Forces together about Dovay, and
that he was upon his March toward Landrecies, with a great Train of Artillery.

The Duke of Enguien mustered as many men as possibly he could draw together
near Amiens, and sent Orders to those that were more remote to join him in his
March. The second day he lodged his Army near Peronne, whither La Ferte
Seneterre brought him some Reinforcements of Infantry, and the Troops that had
Wintered in Arras, joined him at the same place.

And now the Prince began to be impatient of coming to a Battle, choosing
rather to hazard all, then to bear the ignominy of seeing a Town lost at the
beginning of his Command. But in regard the Marshal de l' Hospital was
altogether averse to this Design, the Duke of Enguien thought it requisite to
bring that about by Policy, which he was unwilling to overruled by his Absolute
Authority.

For this Reason he discovered himself to no Body but Gassion only; who being a
Man that made slight of the most dangerous Attempts; he had soon brought the
Business to the point which the Duke desired. For under pretense of putting Men
into the Place, he had insensibly drilled on the Marshal de l' Hespital so near
the Enemy, that it was not in his Power to avoid a Battle.

The Army marched forward to Guise, which was a place the most exposd of the
Frontiers, and which might have been with ease relieved by the Spaniards. But
the French Vanguard was hardly lodged in Fansome, when the Duke of Enguien was
informed that the Spaniards were past by Landrecies, and Capelle, and that they
made long marches toward the Meuse.

This made the Prince believe they had some design upon the Garrisons in
Champaign; and he had reason to fear that he should not be able to overtake
Melos, till the intrenchments of his Camp were finished, and perhaps not till
he had taken some one of those places, which he knew to be ill furnished with
Men and Ammunition. This foresight caused him to send Gassion before, with a
Body of two thousand Horse, to observe the designs of the Spaniards; and to put
the Dragoons and Fuzeliers in such places as had most need.

All this while the Duke of Enguien contrived his March with all speed, and the
Troops which Es^enan Command'd, met him at Ieigny: and there it was that he
receivd certain intelligence that Mel^s had invested R^c^oy, and that he had
began the same night to open his Trenches.

Upon which the Prince laid all thoughts aside, but those of speedily
succouring that Place, when the news was brought him that Lewis the XIII. was
Dead. Perhaps upon the same occasion, any other then the Duke of Enguien would
have laid aside his Design of relieving Rocroy. His high Quality, his Affairs,
the interest of his Family, the advice of his Friends recalled him to the
Court. Nevertheless, he preferred the General Good before his Private
Advantages; nor would his eager persuit of Honor permit him to take a moments
Consideration. Thereupon he concealed the news of the Kings Death, and marched
the next Morning toward Rocroy; making Marshal de l' H^spital believe that his
March so near that place, was only to supply it with a Reinforcement of Men and
Ammunition, through the Woods that environ it.

Gassion rejoined him in his March at R^migni, and gave him full information of
all the Spaniards Proceedings; described all their Posts, and showed him which
way to come at 'em. For Gassion had marched with that speed, that being arrived
at the entrance into the Wood of Rocroy, in a very short time after they had
posted themselves before the Place, he had put in a hundred and fifty men into
it, and had observed by the s^ituation of the Places, that the whole Success of
the Enterprise consisted in passing the Lanes, and presenting the Army in
Battle Array between the Wood and the Town.

Rocroy is seated in the midst of a Plain environed with Woods so thick, and
full of Boggs, that which way soever you go to it, it is impossible to avoid
very long and incommodious Lanes, and narrow Passes. It Is true, that on that
side next Champagne, there is not above a quarter of a League of Wood, and the
Lane it self, which is very narrow of it self, grows broader and broader
afterward; and the Plain is discovered by degrees. But in regard the Country
is full of heathy Ground, and very Boggy, there is no marching but in small
Companies, till you come near Rocroy it self, where the Ground insensibly
rising is much more dry then in the Wood; and affords a spacious Field
sufficient for the drawing up two great Armies.

Melos, being arrived the 10 th of May before the place, had divided his Army
into six Quarters, made his Entrenchments, and placed the principal of his
Forces on that side next the Lanes and narrow Passes, contenting himself to
secure the rest by the general disposal of his Men; to the end he might spare
that time which is usually employed in raising a Circumvallation. Besides these
precautions, which he had observed in the Enemies Posts, he found that they had
placd a great Body of a Guard upon the Road to Champagne: And his Sentinels,
and his Scouts were so well laid, that nothing could enter into the Plain but
they must have knowledge of it. His Army was compos`d of Eight thousand Horse,
under the Leading of the Duke of Albuquerque, and Eighteen thousand Foot,
Commanded by the Count of Fontaine, among which were the Select Spanish
Infantry.

The Duke of Enguien, being informed of all these things, called together all
the Officers of his Army at Rumigni, and after he had laid before 'em all that
Gassion had informed him, he declared that 'twas his resolution to do all that
could be done for the relief of Rocroy, to which purpose he would pass the
narrow Lanes with all the speed he could. That if the Spaniards undertook to
defend 'em, they must be obliged to leave their Quarters ungarded, and
consequently there would be a way left open for the Relief, which he intended
to put into the Town; or if they suffered him to pass the Lanes without
fighting, it would prove otherwise to their advantage, so that the Army having
room and space enough in the Plain, the Spaniards might be induced to come to a
Battle; or at least that the French might be able to take Posts, and fortify
themselves, till they could amply provide for the Relief of the Besieged.

At last, the Prince told 'em, that the King was dead, and that at such a
Conjuncture of trouble and Confusion, it behooved 'em to hazard all, rather then
loose the Reputation of the Arms of France. That for his part, there was not
any thing which he would not venture, to prevent the taking of Rocroy.
Thereupon they all concluded upon giving Battle, and the Marshal de ^' Hospital
made a show of giving his consent.

For he imagined it may be, that the Spaniards would dispute the narrow Pass,
The Battle of Rocroy.
and so the Enterprise would end in a bickering within the Wood; that in the
mean time relief might be put into the Town; and that the Army not being engagd
beyond the Pass, it would be easy to make a retreat, without coming to a
General Battle.

Upon this a resolution was taken to march directly toward Rocroy: and the Duke
of Enguien advanced the same day as far as Bossu, and disposed the Order of his
Battle, to the end that every one might prepare himself for an Action, the
success of which was of such importance to his Glory and the safety of France.

His Army was composed of Fifteen Thousand Foot, and Seven Thousand Horse, and
they were to fight upon two Lines, supported by a Body of a Reserve; the
Command of which was given to Sicot. The Marshal de l' Hospital took care of
the Le^t Wing, and La Ferte Seneterre serv^d under him as Camp-Marshal. Espenan
commanded all the Infantry; Gassion was under the D. of Enguien, in the Right
Wing; and because they were to fight in difficult places, there was a Devision
of fifty Musketeers put between every Interval of the Squadrons. The Carbines,
the Dukes Guards, and those of the Marshal de L' Hospital, together with the
remainder of the Dragoons and Fuzeliers were placed on the right and left side
of the Wings. These Orders being given, the Duke sent away the Baggage to
Aubenton, and whatever else was useless in a day designed to fight, and marched
in Battle Array, to the entrance of the Wood.

Mel^^ pressed Rocroy so vigorously, that had it not been for the S^cour which
Gassion had put into it, the French would hardly have had time to raise the
Seige. The Garrison was so weak and ill provided, that the Spaniards made no
attempt but what succeeded. And indeed they had been rightly informed of the
bad condition of the place, which made 'em believe that the Town could never
hold out till the arrival of any Succor, in regard the Duke of Enguien was at
such a distance from them.

But the French Army was reinforcd by degrees with little Bodies of men which
joynd them in their march, which was the reason that the Spaniards could not
discover their Strength: besides that Intelligence was hard to come by, in
regard the Country was all French. So that M^los never knew the true number of
the Duke of Enguien's Army, till the very day that they enterd the Pass. The
last intelligence that he had of it was, that they were not above Twelve
Thousand men; but he understood when it was too late that they were three and
Twenty Thousand fighting Soldiers, and that they were also marching into the
Wood.

Melos was constrain^d to a quick deliberation, whether he should defend the
Pass, or whether he should stay in the Plain till they came to Attack him. It Is
true there was nothing more easy for him to have done, then to have disputed
the passage of the French Army, by planting his Infantry in the Wood, and
supporting them with a good Body of Horse. It was also in his power, by a good
management of the advantages which he had of the Woods and Boggs, to have found
work enough for the French Army with one part of his men, and to have pusht
forward the reducing of the Town with the other, which could not have held out
above two days longer. This seemed to be the most certain Course, and every
body thought that Melos would have taken it. But his Ambition was not be to
limited by the taking of Rocroy. He imagined that the winning of a Battle would
open him a way into the very Bowels of France; and the Victory which he had won
at Honnecourt, put him in hopes of the same good Success before Rocroy. Besides
that in hazarding a Fight, he thought he could venture no more then the least
part of his Army, and some Frontier Towns. Whereas by the defeat of Enguien, he
proposed to himself infinite advantages, in the beginning of a Regency not well
settled.

Upon these considerations Melos, who according to the Spanish genius, let go
the Present, out of an extraordinary greediness after the Future, resolved upon
a General Battle. And to the end he might the more easily induce the D. of
Enguien to it, he stayed for him in the Plain, and made not the least Effort to
dispute the Passage of the Narrow Lanes. Not but that Melos might have been
constrained to have done that by Force, which he did of his own accord; in
regard that while he stood consulting, the time was almost over for debate. For
the foremost Troops of the Dukes already appeared, and the French Army had
already past the Lanes, before Melos could draw all his Quarters together.
Nevertheless, had he done in time what he ought to have done to oppose his
passage, the Duke of Enguien would have been hard put to it to have ^orc'd him;
in regard there is nothing so difficult as to get clear of long encumbrances of
Woods and Marshes in the sight of a Potent Army drawn up in a Plain. However it
were, we find that Melos had prepared himself for a General Battle, since he
took all the care he could to get his Forces together; and had sent for Beck,
who was gone ^oward the Palatinate, to join him with all speed.

The Duke marched in Battalia, drawn up in two Columns, from Bossis to the
entrance of the Pass; while Gassion rod before with a Party of Horse to observe
the Enemy; and finding the Pass defended with no more then an ou^ Gaurd of
Fifty Horse, he repulsed 'em, and brought the Duke word how easily he had made
himself Master of the Pass.

In this place it was that the Duke thought it convenient to speak his mind
more plainly to the Marshal de l' Hospital, because the Marshal saw, that if
they advancd forward into the Plain, it would be impossible to avoid a Battle.
Gassion also usd all his Rhetoric to engage him to it, but still the Marsh^l
opposed him. But the Duke put an end to the Dispute, and told him in a
Commanding tone, that he would take the event upon himself.

Upon that the Marsh^l no longer contested, but put himself at the Head of the
Saquadrons which he was to Command. He then causd the right Wing to advance
through the narrow Passes, lodging the Infantry in the most difficult places,
to secure the passage of the rest of the Army. At the same time also he advancd
with a Party of Horse to a small rising ground, within half Canon shot of the
Spaniards. So that if Melos had then Chargd the Duke he had certainly Defeated
him. But immediately the Duke so well covered that rising ground, with the
Squadrons which he had about him, that the Spaniards could not discover what
was done behind.

Melos could not imagine that so great a Body of Horse, would have advanced so
far without being seconded by Infantry; however; all he did was only to try by
slight Skirmishes, whether he could open a way to see behind the Rear of the
Squadrons: but not being able to break through, he began to think of nothing
else but putting his men into Battalia.

Thus both Generals concurred in one and the same Design^ The Prince made it
his whole business to pass the Woods, and M^los labored only to unite his
separated Quarters together. The place which the Duke made choice of for the
field of Battle was wide enough to range his whole Army in the same order as he
had contrived before. The ground was there somewhat more raisd then in the
parts adjoining, and extended it self insensibly into all the rest of the
Plain. There was a great Bogg upon the lefthand, and the Wood not being very
thick in that part was no hindrance to the Squadrons from drawing into Order.
Just opposite to that Eminency which the Duke possessd, there was another
rising Ground almost resembling it, where the Spaniards planted themselves, and
made the same Front as the French, and between the two Battles a hollowness ran
along in the nature of a Valley.

By the situation of this place it is easy to judge, that neither of the two
Parties could attack each other without ascending. Nevertheless, the Spaniards
had this advantage, that upon the declension of their rising ground and before
their Left Wing, there grew a Cops of Underwood, which descended a good way
into the Valley, where it was an easy thing for them to plant Musketeers to
gall the Duke as he marchd toward 'em.

The Two Generals labored with extraordinary Diligence to Marshal their Troops
as they came severally up, and instead of Skirmishing, as is usual when Two
Armies meet, they spent their whole time in ordering their Men.

All this while, the Spanish Canon annoyed the Fr^nch much more then the French
Canon did the Spaniards, because they had a greater number, more advantageously
planted, and better plied. Therefore still as the Duke extended the Wings of
his Army, the Enemy played furiously with their Canon, that had it not been for
their extraordinary Resolution, the French could never have kept the Ground
which they posess'd. There were above three Hundred Men that day slain and
woundded by the Canon Shot, among whom the Marqui^s of Persan, Camp-Master of a
Regiment of Infantry, received a Shot in his Thigh.

About Six a Clock in the Evening, the French Army had passed the Defile, and
the Body of the Reserve being got clear of the Wood, advanced to the Ground
which was assigned it. The Duke also, unwilling to give the Spaniards any
longer time to secure their Posts, prepared to begin the Fight; and the Order
of March was given throughout the whole Army, when an unlucky Accident not to
be foreseen had like to have put all into an extreme Confusion, and given the
Victory to Melos.

La Ferte Seneterre alone commanded the left Wing in the Absence of the Marshal
de l' Hospital, who was with the Duke. That Wing of the Army was defended by a
Bogg on the one side, so that the Spaniards could not attack it; and therefore
la Ferte had nothing to do but to keep ^irm in his Post, and expect the signal
of Battle. The Duke had never quitted the right Wing, where while the O^ficers
were ranging the Squadrons in their proper Places, he made it his chief
Business to observe the Countenance of the Enemy, and in what places it would
be most to his Advantage to Charge 'em. But then it was that la Ferte, perhaps
by some secret Order of the Marshal, or else out of Emulation and Envy to
Gassion, to Signalize himself by some extraordinary Exploit, would needs be
trying to put a considerable Reinforcement into the Town. And to that purpose
ordered all the Cavalry to pass the Marsh, together with Five Battalions of
Foot; by the sending away of which Detachment the Left Wing became naked of
Horse and much weaknd by the want of a great Body o^ Foot.

But so soon as the Duke had Intelligence of it^ he ordered both Horse and Foot
to make a halt, and flew to the Place where the Confusion called him. At the
same time also, the Spanish Army moved forward, their Trumpets sounding a
Charge, as if Melos had designed to take his Advantage of the Disorder. But the
Prince having supplied the void space of the first Line. with some Troops of
the second, the Spaniards stopped; which showed that they had no other intent
then to gain Ground to range their second Line.

There are certain Critical Minuits in War, that fly away with the winged
swiftness of Lightning, if a General has not a piercing Eye to watch 'em, and a
presence of Mind to seize upon the Opportunity. Fortune never sends 'em again;
nay, many times she turns with Indignation against those that were so blind as
not to lay hold of her Favors. The Duke of Enguien therefore sent to Command
la Ferte back again, so that the Detachment re-pass'd the Bogg, with all speed,
and before Night, the whole Army was re-settl'd in their appointed Posts. Thus,
this Accident did but only delay the Battle, and wrought no other
Inconvenience, only that it gave the Spaniards time to spread themselves more
at large, and put themselves into somewhat better Order then they were before.

The Night was very dark, but the Forest being near, the Soldiers kindled such
a vast number of Fires, as enlightn'd all the Plain, and both Armies were
surrounded with an Enclosure of Wood, as if they had been to ^ight in a Box.
Their Corpse du Guards were so near each other, that there was no distinguishing
the French Fires from the Spanish, and both Camps seemed to be but one.

So soon as it was Day, the Duke gave the signal to March; and the Duke
himself, at the Head of his Cavalry, charged a Thousand Musketeers, which the
Count of Fontaines had lodged in the Wood; and though they fought in a place, as
it were entrenched by Nature, and advantageous for Foot, the Attack was so
Vigorous, that they were all cut to pieces upon the Place. However, for fear
the Squadrons should be Disordered, and Broken, by crossing the rest of the
Wood, where that Infantry was Defeated, the Duke, with the second Line of the
Cavalry, turned to the Left, and commanded Gassion to lead the first Line about
the Wood upon the Right. Thereupon, Gassion extended his Squadrons, marching
under the Covert of the Wood, and Charged the Enemies Cavalry in Flank, while
the Duke attacked 'em in Front.

All this while, the Duke of Albuquerque, who commanded the Left Wing of the
Spaniards, knew nothing as yet of the first Action, nor had he foreseen that he
might be Attacked in two places at once. For he relied upon the Musketeers
that were lodged in the Wood, and covered his first Line; to that finding
himself in some Disorder upon this Attack, he thought it proper to oppose some
Squadrons against Gassion, by whom he was ready to be surrounded. But there is
nothing so dangerous for a General, as to make great Motions before a Potent
Enemy just ready to assail him. For those Squadrons, already tottering, were
broken at the first Charge, and all Albuquerques's Troops overturned one
another. The Duke seeing 'em fly, commanded Gassion to pursue 'em, and turned
short against the Foot.

Marshal de l' Hospital fought not with the same Success, for having gallopp'd
his Horse upon the Enemy, they were out of Breath before they came to join. The
Spaniards therefore stood firm to receive 'em, and broke the French upon the
first Encounter. The Marshal, after he had fought with an extraordinary Valor,
had his Arm broken with a blow of a Pistol, and had the Misfortune to see all
his Wing betake themselves to headlong flight. The Spaniards followed their
Blow vigorously, cut some Battallions of Infantry to pieces, gained the Canon,
and never stayed till they came within sight of the Reserve, which put a stop
to their Victory.

While the two Wings fought with such unequal Success, the French Infantry
marched against the Spanish. And already some Battallions were engaged. But
Espenan, who commanded the Foot; understanding the Misfortune that had befallen
the Left Wing, and seeing that all the Spanish Infantry stayed for him in good
Order, and with a more then ordinary fierceness in their Countenances, thought
it convenient not to be too rash, but to hold the Enemy in play with light
Skirmishes, till he saw which of the two Cavalries had the better.

In the mean time, the Duke of Enguien had overthrown all the Walloon and
German Foot, and the Italians had betaken themselves to flight, when he
perceived the Rout of the Marshal. Then the Prince clearly saw that the Victory
depended wholly upon the Troops which he had with him; and therefore giving
over the pursuits of the Foot, he marched behind the Spanish Battallions,
against their Cavalry, which gave Chase to the Left Wing of the French Army;
and finding the Enemy Disordered by the pursuit, he easily put 'em to a total
Rout.

La Ferte Seneterre, who was taken Prisoner in the Rout of the Left Wing, where
he fought with an extraordinary Courage, was found wounded in several places,
and rescued by the Duke. Thus the Right Wing of the Spaniards enjoyed their
Victory but a short time. They that pursued were now forced to fly themselves;
and Gassion meeting 'em in their flight, put the greatest part of 'em to the
Sword.

Of all Melos's Army, there now remained only the Spanish ^oot; and they were
serrid in one Body together near the Canon. More then that, the good Order
which they kept, and their sower Looks, showed that they would sell their Lives
at a dear Rate. They were commanded by the Count of Fontaines, who was one of
the greatest Captains of his Time, and tho he were forced to be carried in a
Chair, because of his Infirmities, yet he would be every where giving Orders.

But the Duke understanding that Beck was Marching with Six Thousand Foot
toward the Entrance of the Wood, never stood to consider whither he should
Charge the Infantry or not, though he had but a small number of Horse with him.
The Count of Fontaines also stood him with a brave Resolution, not suffering
his Men to Fire till the Fernch were within Fifty Paces of him. But then his
Battallion opened, and of an Instant a Discharge of Sixteen Canon, laden with
Cartouches, saluted the French Infantry, which was accompanied with a shower of
small Shot, as thick as Hail. This was such a terrible welcome that the French
were not able to brook it, so that if the Spaniards had had but Horse to have
followed their Blow, the French Foot could never have been rallied.

But having no Horse to disturb 'em, the Duke soon rallyd 'em again, and
brought 'em on to a second attack; which had the same Success as the former:
and in short, he charged those Veterane Spaniards Three times without being
able to break 'em. But then the Body of the Reserve came up, and several
Squadrons returning from the pursuit of the Spanish Horse re-joyn'd the
Prince^s Body. And then the Spanish Infantry being surrounded on every side,
and overlay^d with Multitude, was constraind to give way to Number. So that the
Officers laid aside all Thoughts of any longer defending themselves, but by the
motion of their Hats made a sign of calling for Quarter.

Upon this the Prince advancing to receive their Parole, and give them his, the
Spanish Foot thought that the Prince had been going to make another Attack upon
'em, and upon that mistake discharged a full Volly at him, which was the
greatest danger he was in, during the whole bloody Work of the Day. Which his
men perceiving, and attributing it to the Treachery of the Spaniards, chargd
'em on every side without expecting any Orders, and revenged the Risco which
their General had escapd, with a most dreadful Slaughter of the Spaniards.

The French pierced into the midst of the Spanish Battallion, killing all that
stood in their way, and notwithstanding all that the Duke could do, gave
Quarter to none, but more especially to the Switzers, who are usually more
Merciless then the French The Prince flew about every where, calling to the
Soldiers to give Quarter: The Spanish Officers also, and likewise the Common
Soldiers, crowded about him for shelter, and Don George de Castelui,
Camp-Master, was taken by his own hand. In short, all that could escape the
Fury of the Soldiers ran in heaps to beg their Lives of him, and beheld him
with Admiration.

So soon as the Prince had given Orders for securing the Prisoners, he made it
his Business to ^ally his Men, and to put himself in a Condition ^o fight Beck,
if he should happen to worst Gassion, ^r if he should adventure to engage him
in the ^lain. But Gassion returning from the pursuit of ^he Fugitives, told the
Duke, that Beck made no haste to come out of the Forest, only contented himself
to pick up the shatterd Wrecks of the Defeat. That he had done it in so great
Disorder, and with so little Knowledge of the Advantages he might have made of
the narrow Passes of the Forest, that any one might plainly perceive that the
Terror of Melos's Men, had struck his Soldiers with the same dismay. In a
word, after he had savd some remnants of the Spanish Army, he retreated with an
incredible precipitancy, leaving behind him two pieces of Canon.

The Duke finding his Victory absolutely secure, fell upon his Knees in the
midst of the Field of Battle, commanding all his Men to do the same, and gave
God Thanks for his great Success. And certainly all France was no less obligd
to pay her Thanksgivings to Heaven, and her Thanks to Him. For assuredly it may
be said that for many Ages, France had never won a Battle more Glorious, nor of
greater Importance.

And indeed great Actions were performed on both Sides. The Valor of the
Spanish Infantry can never be sufficiently applauded. For it is a thing but
rarely heard of, that after the Rout of an Army, a Body of Foot deprivd of
Cavalry, ever had the Resolution, in open Field, not only to stand One but
Three Attacks, without being so much as stirred; and it may be truly said, that
if the Reserve had not come up, the Prince as Victorious as he was over the
rest of the Army, could never have broken that stout and Courageous Infantry.

One extraordinary Action of the Regiment of Velandia was remarkable. In the
first Onset which the Duke made on that Regiment, the Musketeers being cut in
pieces, and the Body of Pikes being surrounded on every side by the French
Horse, they made a ^low retreat, in a Body, to the Gross of the Spanish
Infantry.

When the Left Wing of the French was broken, Word was brought to Sirot that he
should save the Body of the Reserve, and make his escape; that there was no
other remedy, in regard the Battle was lost. To which he answered, without
being moved in the least, It Is not yet lost, because Sirot and his Companions
have not yet fought. In short, his Courage contributed very much to the
Victory. But by the report of the Spaniards themselves, nothing appeard so
worthy of Admiration as the Presence of Mind, and Sedateness of the Duke, in
the hottest Fury of the Battle: particularly when the Enemies left Wing was
broken; for instead of greedily following the pursuit, he presently turned upon
their Infantry. By which reserv'dness he kept his Men from breaking their
Order, so that he was in a Condition to assail the Spanish Cavalry who thought
themselves Victorious. Gassion won Eternal Honor, and the Duke gave him great
Marks of his Esteem. For upon the Field of Battle it self, he promisd to
procure him a Marshal of France's Battoon, which the King granted him some time
after.

Of Eighteen Thousand Foot, of which Melos's Army consisted, there were above
Eight Thousand slain upon the Place, and near Seven Thousand Prisoners. The
Count of Fountains, Camp-Master General, was found dead near his Chair, at the
Head of his Men. The Loss of him was a long time after bewaild by the
Spaniards. The French applauded his Courage, and the Prince himself said, That
if he ^ould not have got the Victory, he wo^ld ^^ve died as he did. Valandia,
and V^lalva, underwent the same Fate: All the Officers were either taken or
slain.

The Spaniards also lost Eighteen Pieces of Canon, and Six Battering Pieces,
Two Hundred Colors of Foot, and Sixty of Horse. The Pillage was great; for
that besides the Booty of the Baggage, there was the Money of a whole M^ste^,
which the Army was to have receivd after the taking of Ro^roy. Of the French
were killed in all about Two Thousand, but very few Officers or Persons of
Quality.

The D. lodgd his Army in the Enemies Camp, and after he had given Order for
the wounded, ente^'d a Victor into Rocroy. The next day, he understood that
Melos retird out of the Battle, upon the rout of the right Wing of his Army,
and never minded the rallying of the Fugitives till he was got under the Canon
of Philip^ille.

His Cavalry re-join'd him in the same Place, but the Foot were utterly ruind,
and the following Campaigns made appear the Vastness of the Loss, which Spain
could never yet repair. So true it is, that a good Army of Foot cannot be too
carefully preservd, whether in War or Peace; seeing it is not in the power of
the greatest Kings, in a long time to recover a lost Body of Old Officers and
Soldiers, accustomed to fight together and endure the Fatigues of War.

The Duke, after he had stayed at Rocroy Two days, led his Army to Guise, the
same way that he came. There he rested some days, during which the Prince
prepared every thing ready to enter the Enemies Country. For in regard the
Magazines had been only provided for the Defensive part, there was a necessity
of Storing up Provisions and Ammunition, in the most advancd Places of the
Frontiers.

Flanders lay open on every side; which way soever the Duke had a Design to
Lead his Victorious Army, there was nothing to oppose his Passage. He might
either attack Mets, or the Towns upon the Scheldt, or the Moselle.

There was also great probability that all these Enterprizes^ might prove
extremely Beneficial. But the winning of the Sea-Towns seemd the most
Advantageous, which would not only be an Assistance to the Hollanders, but
deprive the Low Countries, at the same time, of the most speedy Succors which
they received from Spain. But the Duke of Enguien knew, that the Hollanders
were afraid of nothing so much, as of having the French to be their Neighbors,
and that they would rather make a Peace, and Confederate themselves with the
Spaniards, tho their Natural Enemies, then endure that France should extend her
Conquests over those Places, which serve as Barricades between the Spanish
Territories, and those of the United Provinces. Moreover it was impossible to
take either Gravelin or Dunkirk, without a Fleet: Nor were the Kings Fleets in
a Condition to keep the Sea. So that there wanted both Time, Money, and
Negotiations, to vanquish the Mistrusts and Jealousies of the States General,
and engage em to lend their Ships; so that the Duke gave over that Design.

There remain^d Two other Places, the Scheldt and the Moselle. The first was
very difficult, in regard the Remains of the shattered Spanish Army were got
thither, besides that the French had no Magazines on that side. The last Design
was of great Importance toward the Conquest of Flanders, because Thionville,
and all the other places upon the Moselle opend an Entrance for the German
Armies into Flanders. So that the Duke not being in a Condition to take Sea
Towns, could not undertake any thing more Advantageous then the Siege of
Thionville, to the end that by possessing himself of this Place, he might
hinder the Enemies Communication between Germany and Flanders, and by this
Conquest settle the posture of his Affairs, against the next Campaign, for
greater Enterprises.

It was easy to furnish his Army with Subsistence on that side next Champaign.
All Preparations necessary for a great Siege had been Stord up there during the
Winter. The Deceasd King had caused Provision and Ammunition to be transported
thither, with a Design to carry the War into Fr^nche Conte: and Marshal de
Meilleray was to have undertaken that Enterprise. But the Kings Death having
overturnd all those Projects, and the Army in Italy being too weak to keep the
Field, Meilleray's Forces were parted into Two Bodies. One part passed the Alps
under Viscount Turenne, and the other commanded by the Marquess de Gesvres,
servd under the Duke. Nevertheless, it required time to fetch out of Burgundy
and Champaign, all the Ammunition and Train of Artillety. And therefore the
Duke would not incline toward Thionville, for fear General Beck should
reinforce it with Men. The Prince therefore Marchd into the middle of Flanders
on purpose to alarm the Principal Cities, and to oblige the Enemy to
strengthen the Garrisons, his Designs being to return the same way he came, and
to sit down unexpected before Thionville.

To this purpose he dispatchd away St. Martin, Lieutenant of the Artillery,
with Order to bring Ammunition to the Frontiers of Champaign; and he wrote to
the Intendant of that Province to provide great quantities of Corn and
Provision for the Subsistence of the Army, and then marchd toward Hanault,
through Landrecies. Emery and Barlemont The taking of Emery, Barlemont and
Mauberge.
Surrendered after some few Discharges of the Great Guns, and Mauberge opened
her Gates without Resistance. He moved forward as far as Binch, which the Enemy
had reinforced with some Men; and that he might still carry on his Counterfeit
show, he attackd that small Place, which Surrende^'d the same day at
Discretion. There the Prince stayed Fifteen days without undertaking any thing,
till the Preparations for the Siege of Thionville were all ready. On the other
side, as the Prince foresaw, the Spaniards were retired, with their Cavalry,
under the Guns of the fortified Towns, and the remainder of their Infantry was
disperc'd into the Cities adjoining to the French Army. So that 'twas easy for
the Prince to get before 'em by wheeling of a sudden toward Thionville.

He sent strong Parties from Binch, to the Gates of Brussels, and struck a
Terror into the Cities that lay most remote. But at length, word being brought
him that every thing was ready in Champaign for the Siege, and that the
Marquess of Geseres was arrivd with the Body under his Command; the Duke set
forward from Binch, and returned by the way of Barlemont and Mauberge,
re-entring into the Plain of Roeroy, through the same Pass, thorough which the
Spaniards retreated after the loss of the Battle.

Upon his departure, he sent away d^ Aumont with Twelve Hundred Horse to join
the Marquess of Gesvres, and invest Thionville. Sicot was ordered to convoy the
heavy Artillery by the way of Toul and Mets, while the Infantry, with some
Fieldpieces, marchd toward Thionville.

All these things were executed according to the Duke's Orders. Nevertheless d'
Aumont, and de Gesvres did not arrive before Thionville, till Two days before
the Prince. For, notwithstanding the great falls of Rain, and the Hardships
which the Foot suffered in their March, he was but Seven days marching between
Binch and Thionville; choosing some of his way through the Country of France,
the more to conceal his Design, and passing the Meuse at S^dan, he crossed
Luxemburgh, and sat down the Seventh day before Thionville.

This Town is Seated upon the Banks of the Moselle, on Luxemburgh side; not
above Four Leagues below Metz. The Plain where it is Seated is very fertile;
and Bordered on Two sides with little Hills covered with thick Woods. The
Advantage of the Place, and Beauty of the Country, was the reason that great
Expense and Art had been bestowed upon the Fortifications of it. It had been
all along in the Possession of the House of Austria, only when it was taken by
the Duke of Guise, in the Reign of Henry the II. till the First Treaty of
V^rvins, at what time it was restored to the Spaniards. The Misfortune that
befell F^quieres in 1639. had rendered it Famous, during the last Wars, and
every Body looked upon it as a Conquest of Importance, but which would cost dear.

The Moselle secures it wholly on the one side; so that on that side there is
only one Rampart terminating in a right Line. The remaining Circuit is
fortified with Five great Bastions, lined with Freestone, and Two
Demi-B^stions at the Two Ends that re-join the River. The Mote is large, deep
and full of Water. The Counterscarp is very broad, and the Courtins covered
with Five Half Moons; and before the Gate on that side next to Cirque, stands a
great Horn-work. The Country round about it is so plain and level, that there
is no approaching the Town without being exposed to great and small Shot; and
the adjoining Hills command the Plain in several Parts, which makes the raising
a Circumvallation difficult. There were Eight Hundred Foot in the Town, and
Store of Ammunition and Provisions when the Duke sat down before it.

So soon as the foremost Troops began to enter the Plain, he caused the
Commander Grancy to pass the River, with the Cavalry, to hinder the Entrance of
any Relief, before the Quarters were assigned. This Grancy, had commanded at
the First Siege in 1639. and was ^ully acquainted with the Situation of the
Places and Passes, through which the Spaniards could steal in Relief. But many
things happen in War which all the Prudence of a General, and his Principle
Officers, cannot prevent.

While Grancy passed the River, the Prince stayed in the Plain, and as his
Forces came up, ordered 'em to be posted in all the Avenues which were most to
be suspected; referring till the next day the Appointment of their several
Quarters, and the Settlement of the Camp. The whole Army also stood to their
Arms all that Night, without hearing the least News of the Spaniard. Yet by
break of day word was brought to the Duke, that a Reinforcement of near Two
Thousand Men was got into the Town, through the Count of Gran^y's Quarters.

Nevertheless, the Count had placed his Corpse du Guard with all the Care
imaginable; besides that he visited all the Posts himself, with an
extraordinary Vigilance. Nor had he had any Alarm all the Night long. However,
an Hour before day one of his Parties brought Two Countrymen to him, who
affirmed that some Spanish Troops had p^ss'd the River at Cirque, and that they
marched along the Bank of the River, and got into Thionvil^e; and they told
their Story with so many Circumstances, and so much Probability, that Grancy
believed 'em. At the same time therefore he changed the Order of his Guards,
and leading all his Forces to that Place which the Peasants had described to
him, he left but Two Regiments to Guard the Post toward Mets.

In short, Two Thousand Men had passed the River at Cirque, but they took
another way, then that which the Peasants Information mentioned. For, instead
of keeping close to the River, they had taken a compass round about the Wood to
enter into the Plain on that side next Metz. And indeed the Spantards performed
their Business with extraordinary Diligence and Courage, so that by peep of day
they were discovered, marching directly to the Half Moon; so that the French
Guards, astonished at this Alarm, Charged the Relief too late, and with some
Disorder. And whether the Spaniards performed any Exploit more remarkable then
usual, or whether the Guards were remiss in their Duty, that Reinforcement
entered Th^onville without any loss.

The Duke was not a little displeased at the News; he saw it would much retard
the taking of the Place, and by Consequence delay those other Conquests which
depended upon this, if it did not quite put 'em off till the next Campaign. A
place like Thionville well fortified and defended by a numerous Garrison, could
not be carried in a small time, nor without a great Loss of Men. But all these
Inconveniences did not hinder the Prince from continuing the Siege: On the
contrary, he applied himself to it with so much the more Diligence, as the
peril and difficulties were the greater which he had to surmount. He foarded
the River that he might be able to assign his Soldiers their Posts on that
side, and he ordered Two Bridges of Boats to be made both above and below the
Town. After he had Lodged his Men also in Two little Villages on that side next
Lorraine, he appointed the Guards, and marked out the Place where he would have
the Line of Circumvallation drawn along; which done, he re-pass'd the River to
give the same Orders on Luxemburgh side.

Immediately he divided his Army into Five Quarters. The greatest Body of his
Horse he encamped in a Meadow, along the River, on that side next Mets; where
Gassion was also Quartered to Command 'em. The Head Quarters were taken up near
Gassion's, in a small Village, almost a Mile from the Plain, upon the Bank of a
Rivolet which crosses it, and which falls into the Moselle at the Foot of the
Counterscarp of Thionville.

There the Duke Lodged himself, with the Principal Body of the Infantry, and
extended his Camp into the Plain, as far as the Foot of the Mountains; and the
Regiments of ^ambuzes, and the Swisses under Molendin Posted themselves upon
the rising Grounds, near the Woods, with which the Hills were covered.

There was one much higher then the rest, which Commands not only all the Plain
of Thionville, but all the Hills that lie round about it. The Importance of
that place constrained the Duke to settle there a Powerful Quarter; for which
the Camp was marked out in the middle of the Hill, and d' Aumomt had the
Command of it. Dand^^^t commanded the other Quarter. Ges^res undertook with his
little Army to Guard that side next to Cirque, from the River to the rising
Grounds. Palluau and Sicot had the Care of all that lay beyond the River, in
regard Grancy was fallen Sick, and had left the Camp.

So soon as the Quarters were disposed, the Duke ordered the Line of
Circumvalation to be cast up, and large Forts to be traced out upon the rising
Grounds, which commanded the greatest part of the Plain. At the same time he
also secured his Line with Redoubts, supplying the weakest parts with sharp
pointed Piles of Wood; and Pallisadoes.

All this while the Convoys arrived from all parts with Ammunition and
Provisions; and for twenty days together that the Circumva^lation was
finishing, the Duke caused to be brought from Mets thirty battering Pieces, and
ordered great provision to be made of Planks and Oken Timber, Sacks of Earth
and Bavi^s to carry on the Trenches, and for the service of the Artillery. On
the other side, the Besieged prepared all things necessary for their Defense;
and while their Infantry was employed in raising new Works, and repairing the
Old, their Cavalry Sallied out every day to annoy the Besiegers.

The Sally which they made two days after the Division of the Besiegers
Quarters, was so vigorous that they came on so far as the Duke of Engui^^'s
Camp; and the Count of Tavans had his Arm broken with a Pistol Shot^ The Plain
was every day full of Skirmishes, and some of them happened to be such
obstinate Conflicts, that as many men were lost on both sides as in many more
remark^ble Encounters. But the last was the most vigorous of all. For at the
time that the Duke was providing a great number of Gabions and Faggots near a
Chapel in the midst of the Plain; the Besieged, resolving to see what he was
doing, ^all^'d out with the greatest part of their Horse, to view those
preparations near at hand, which they could not so well discern at a distance.

The Afternoon was almost spent in skirmishing, when the Duke incensed to see
the Enemy keep the Plain so long, commanded Dandelot to drive 'em into the
Town. Dandelot performed his Orders with extraordinary Courage, but with great
precepitancy, for that he could not be followed but by a small number of
Volunteers: the Skirmishers also gave way upon the first Charge that he made,
and retreated under the Counterscarp of the Town, but then the Squadrons that
were to second 'em advancing, Dandelot found himself surrounded on every side,
and he had been taken, but for a small Guard of thirty Troopers led by
Moussaye, who rescued him out of the hands of the Enemy.

However those Squadrons still pressed upon Dandelott and Moussaye, with so much
vigor, that they could never have made good their Retreat, had not the Duke
ran to the main Guard, and brought it on himself in all have to their relief.
Gerze and Dandelot were wounded; and so the Spaniards retired after an
obstinate Combat.

However all this could not prevent completing the Circumvallation, nor
fortifiing the Camp with all things requisite, the Duke being every where
present, as well to encourage the Workmen, as to observe what places were most
proper to make his Attacks. And after due consideration he resolved upon two;
Both upon the Face of one of the two Bastions, that looked toward the middle of
the Plain, to the end that being near together, they might the more easily
support each other.

There was a wide space left between the two openings of the Trenches, and that
space lessend, as the Trenches advanced toward the Town: One of these Trenches
covered it self to the Right, and the other to the Left, and the Regiments of
Pi^a^dy and Nav^rre, were the first that Mounted the Guard. In the night time
two Great Shouldrings of Gabions were raised, which covered two places of Arms,
wide enought to contain each a hunderd Horse; for that they stood in need of
Horse behind the Trench, to support it against the terrible Sallies of the
Enemy. The same Night the Duke order da long Line to be drawn, and two Redoubts
to be begun, Spacious enough to lodge a hunderd Men: and in all the returns of
the Lines he ordered large places of Arms to be made, and that that Trench
should be carried on with all speed; so that maugre the continual firing of the
Besieged it was advancd the fourth Night within two hundred Paces of the
Counterscarp.

In that part the Duke resolved to have a Communication between the two
Attacks, which were already in good forwardness. And instead of making his
Communications with the usual Line, he joined 'em together with a large Battery
of four and twenty Pieces of Cannon. The diligence of the Officers was so
great, that the sixth Day after the Trenches were opened, the Cannon began to
play upon the Town. In the same place of Communication also, the Two Batteries
took a different way, and separated at some distance one from the other, to
turn themselves toward the Face of the two Bastions which were opposite to 'em.

On the right Hand of the Duke of Enguien's Trench, stood a Mill, upon the
Rivolet already mentioned, which was fortified with a good Palisado, and
wherein the Besieged had planted some Musketeers, who very much annoyed the
carrying on of the Trenches, in regard they had a view of 'em behind. There
upon, the Duke resolving to clear that Post the same Night, which was the
Seventh after the opening of the Trenches, ordered it to be Stormd,
notwithstanding the obstinate Resistance of the Besieged, and their continual
Firing from the Rampart and Counterscarp. And before Day, this Lodgment was
joined to the Trench by a Line, and the Mill served the Besiegers, instead of a
Redoubt, against the Sallies out of Mets-Gate.

At the other Attack, the Line was carried on with equal Diligence; but the
Eighth^Day the Besieged made a furious Sally upon Dandelot, who was upon the
Guard, with the Regiment of Harcour^. And while all the Cavalry that belonged
to the Besieged fought against the Horse that seconded the French, their
Infantry powered upon the Head of the Works, and forced the Out-guard to retreat
to the Battery. Thereupon, Dandelot who was in the other Attack near the
Prince, marchd along the Counterscarp to Succor the F^ench; so that the
Besiegd, fearing to be intercepted, retreated in great haste. The Horse-Guard
also being reinforcd with some Cavalry from the Camp, repelled the Town-Cavalry
to the very Barricados of the Gate, and the Infantry was forc^d back by
Dandelot to the Counterscarp.

But the more the Duke labored to advance the Works, the more the Besieged
re-doubl'd their Efforts. For before the Besiegers were got to the
Counterscarp, they had cut in the Glacis a second Covert-way well Pallisado'd,
and more difficult to take, then that of the Counterscarp; in regard the
Defense it obtained from the Town was nearer, and had a greater power to cut
off those that came to attack it. Nevertheless, the Ninth Night, this new
Covert-way was carried on two sides. But it cost the Lives of a great many Men,
and it was impossible it should be otherwise, when Men are to be Lodged at the
Foot of a Glacis of a Counterscarp open on every side to the Enemies Defense.
Among the rest, Perseval, who had the Leading of the Duke's At^ack was here
mortally wounded.

This Lodgment of great Importance being made, they labored in the next place
to Lodge themselves upon the Counterscarp; to which purpose, upon the Tenth
Night Musketeers were planted on the Right and Left to support the Enterprise,
which was put in Execution the Eleventh Day. They who understand what belongs
to War agree, that there is nothing more difficult in Sieges then Lodgments
upon Counterscarps, when the Besiegers are resolved to carry it by the point of
the Sword, instead of making use of the longer delays of Sapping and Mining.
That of Thionville was very strong, by reason of the breadth of it, and the
Traverses which the Besieged had made in it: Besides, that it was not an easy
thing to choose out a Place proper to make a Lodgement; for whether you made it
opposite to the Face of the Half Moon, or the Bastion, the Besiegers Works must
lie open to one of those two Fortresses.

But notwithstanding all these Difficulties, a Resolution was taken to force
the Covert-way in those Parts which looked toward the Face of the Bastion. For
the Duke was of Opinion that while the two Trenches gave their Onsets both at a
time, they that defended the Counterscarp would give way, for fear of being
enclosed betwee^ the two Attacks, and so the Lodgement might be made by
Shouldrings, high-raisd, to cover 'em against the Defenses of the Bastions, and
the Half Moon.

Upon the Night appointed for this Attack, Espenan commanded the Right, and
Gesvres the Left; and so soon as the Signal was given, their Men marchd
directly to the Palisado's; at what time the Granadeers, that were foremost,
fired their Grenades so furiously, that the Besieged could not make much
Resistance; but observing in their Retreat, that they who opposed the Marquess
of Gef^res had made a more stout Defense, they joined with them, which
occasiond such a desperate Conflict in that part, that the Marquess lost
abundance of Men before he could drive the Besieged from the Covert-way.

In the mean time, Espenan, who met with no other Opposition then that of the
Half Moon and Bastion, began his Lodgement; but La Plant, who performed the
Duty of an Engineer in that Action, was wounded, while he was tracing out the
Work. This Accident put those that carried the Materials into Disorder; for the
Line was but half drawn; no Body knew where to throw the Faggots, nor how to go
about to begin the Lodgment. And indeed, a good Ingeneer, is as one may say,
the Soul of an Attack; nor can they be too much valued who have both Courage
and Understanding to acquit themselves well of such an Employment.

To this part therefore the Duke of Enguien flew, and set all the Tail of the
French at work to carry empty Barrels, Faggots, Sacks of Earth, while some of
the Officers traced out the Lodgment as well as they could. In this Lodgment,
such as the Disorder would permit 'em to make; Fifty Men secured themselves
before Daybreak, and afterward more strongly fortified themselves with Blinds
and Two pieces of Wood five or six foot long, set up an end upon a Traverse
five or six foot one from the other, the Spaces being filled with Bavins.
Chandeleers, in such Places where they saw themselves exposed. Thus the Duke
became Master of the Covert-way; nor could the besieged any longer defend their
Traverses between the two Attacks.

The Nights following, they did nothing but extend their Lodgments; to the end
they might embrace the point of the Half Moon and the Bastions. But so soon as
they had lodgd themselves before the Face of the Half Moon, the D. gave Orders
for making a Descent into the Mote: He also caused a vast number of Faggots to
be thrown into it to fill it up, and at the same time the Miners went down. But
the besieged had made a little Lodgment with Barrels of Earth upon the A way
three foot broad, at the foot of the Rampart, between the Rampart and the Moate.
Berme of the Half Moon, which sometimes with Bombs, sometimes by stroke of
Hand hindered the Miners from Lodging themselves. The Duke therefore seeing that
unless he could destroy the Lodgment upon the Berme, with his Canon, it would
be impossible to secure the Miners, caused a Battery to be raised of Four
Pieces of Canon, against the Face of the Half Moon, which ruined the Lodgement
upon the Berme in a short time.

The Works of the other Attack were advanced very far, and the Lodgments were
enlarged in such a manner to the Right and Left, that the Batteries designed to
ruin the Flanks were raised almost the same day. The Lodgments closed together
at the head of the Half Moon, and in less then Eight days the Counterscarp was
secured. And then it was that they began their Descents into the Moat, just
opposite to the Faces of the Bastions; and the Duke orderd the Materials to be
got ready for building Galleries.

This is a Work long and difficult, when the Moat is wide and deep, like that
of Thionville. Besides, the Impatience of the French will not permit 'em to use
all the Precautions which the Art of War requires for the sparing the Lives of
Men. Till the Siege of Hesdin, they contented themselves with only filling up
the Moat, by throwing Faggets into it at hap-hazard, without covering
themselves either above or in the Flanks. The Marshal de Meil^eray who
commanded at that Siege, being assisted with all things necessary to procure
his good Success, and having in vain attempted all the usual ways to Pass the
Moat made use of a means till then unknown in France. For Courteilles found out
the Invention of a Gallery of Bavins, so ingeniously contrived, that it was
fortified with a Covering, and Parapets like a Gallery of Earth.

With such Galleries as these it was, that the Duke of Enguien past the Moat of
Thionville. For he ordered a great number of Bavins to be brought to the Tail
of the French, where he had Men ready to carry 'em continually to the Head of
the Works. So that as soon as the Descents were in a little forwardness, he
began his Work in this manner. He ordered Bavins to be thrown into the Moat,
till they came to be five or six foot high above the Water. When the Heap of
Bavins was raised so high as he would have it, they finished the Sapping for
entrance into the Moat. Six Men went into the Sapping, and secured themselves
against the Face of the Bastion, behind the Heaps of Faggots^ and so soon as
they were secure, they began to range the Bavins, to the Right and Left, in
order to make the Parapets, enterlacing 'em sometimes long ways, sometimes a
cross, and sometimes a^ the ends, to render the Work more Solid. Now as the
foremost Workmen disposed the Bavins, others thrust 'em together with Forks;
and the Men appointed to fetch 'em from the Tail to the Head of the French,
threw 'em without ceasing into the Moat. Afterward they placed all the length
of the Gallery, Blinds and Chandeleers, to the end that the Workmen might not
be seen from the top of the Rampart. They also carried on their Works by
degrees toward the Wall, at what time the besieged were amazed to see a heap of
Faggots insensibly crossing the breadth of their Moat, and yet not to be able
to discover the Persons that advanced the Work. Moreover, while these Galleries
were finishing, Batteries were raised against the Flanks of the Bastions. The
Canons also were so well plied, that the Great Shot from the Town, no longer
annoyed the Works; besides, that the besieged were constrain^d to remove the
greatest of the Guns to a Chand^leer, from whence they might shoot into the
Plain, and play upon the Tail of the French.

The Battery raised to break their Lodgement upon the Berme of the Half Moon,
had so shaken the Rampart, that it was an easy thing to make a Lodgment there
without Springing a Mine. For which reason the besieged despaired of being able
any longer to defend the Half Moon, and therefore had made a Mine in that part
where they fore^aw the Besiegers would Lodge, and when they saw ^em preparing
for an Assault, they gave (...) to it, but it Sprung before the Men Commanded
were mounted the Half Moon. So that the Effect was so fortunate for the
Besiegers, that it opened 'em a convenient space to fix their Lodgment, and did
that in an Instant, which the Labor of several Men could not have done in a
day.

So soon as that Post was secured, the Duke ordered 'em to go on with other
Lodgements upon the Gorge of the Half Moon. Which done, a Battery was raised
against the Curti^s and the ^lanks; and while the Canon played to ruin all
those Defenses, the Duke ordered a Bridge to be laid like the rest, directly
to the middle of the Curtin.

At the same time that the Bridges were building, the Duke orderd holes to be
made with Canon, which he planted at the bottom of the Covert-way, to fix the
Miners in the midst of the Faces of the Bastions; and these holes being wide
enough to lodge two Men, he orderd the Miners to be wa^^ed over in little
Boats, to the end the Mines might be ready against the Bridges were finished.

On the other side, the Besieged omitted nothing on their part to hinder the
Progress of these Works; for besides their continual firing with their
Small-sho^ from the Bastions, they plied without ceasing, the besiegers, with
Bombs, Grenades, and other Artificial Fireworks, and from t^me to time made
such Resolute Sallies, that had it not been for the continual Vigilance and
Diligence of the Duke, the Soldiers would have been wearied out and repuls^d.

In one of the Sallies, upon the Attack on the Right hand, the besieged beat
the Guard from the Batteries upon the Counterscarp, made themselves Masters of
the Canon, nailed 'em, and retreat^^ without any loss: And this Accid^nt (...)
the Duke to raise two good Redoubts to (...) defend the Batteries. However, the
besieged wo^^^ not desist; but attempted one of the most ex^r^ordinary Actions
that were ever known in a Siege^ For while they kept the Guard of the French in
Play with a numerous Sally, some Foot crossed the Moat in Boats, threw
themselves upon the Counterscarp, and enterd into the Battery through the
Embrasures, killed or drove away the Guards, naild the Canon, and retired safe
into the Town.

Such dangerous Actions are not performd without the Loss of many Officers and
Soldiers. Among the rest, the Marquess of L^non Court, Governor of Lorrain,
being come from Nanci, to visit the Duke of Enguien, out of Curiosity would
needs go view the Works, but he was hardly got to the First Battery, but he was
shot through one of the Embrazures. At the same time a Canon Bullet fell upon a
Sack of Earth, against which Dandelo^ was leaning, and threw all the Dirt in
his Face, without doing him any other Harm, only that it caused a swelling, and
pain in his Eyes.

So soon as the Galleries were finishd, and the Mines had played, the Duke
caused an Assault to be given, with an Intention to try whether they could make
a Lodgement upon the top of the Bastion. The Conflict was very sharp on both
sides, but the Besiegers were repulsed with Loss. The Duke therefore perceiving
that the Mine had only beaten down the Lining of the Wall, which was not
sufficient to Lodge themselves upon the Bastion, made a little Lodgement only
at the Foot of the R^ine which the Mine had made.

In the same place also he began another Mine to fetch down the Earth of the
Bastion; but it was a difficult thing to carry on new Mines, in regard ^he
Ground was so loosened, that they could not ^^ke a Gallery there, but with
Oaken Plants and Chandeleers, under-setting it by degrees; for that when they
shoar'd up the Earth on the one side, it tell down on the other.

However, the Miners finishd two little Mines, under each of the two Attacks,
and the Besiegers prepared for a considerable Effort. So that after an
obstinate Combat at the Attack on the Right Hand, notwithstanding the Bombs,
Grenades and Stones that flew from the besieged, the Besiegers made themselves
Masters of the top of the Breach, but they were constrained to quit it a
quarter of an hour after, not being able to stand the firing from an
Intrenchme^t which the Besieged had thrown up upon the Gorge of the Bastion.

Gassion, who commanded the Guard of the French, was there dangerously wounded
in the Head, and Lescon, Lieutenant of the Duke^s Guards was killd. The
Ch^va^^^^ d^ Chabot also, and several O^ficers of the King's Guards were
wounded. Nor was the Onset given at the other Attack any thing more Successful.
For the two little Mines not springing at the same time, the Marshal of Gesvres
went on at the noise of the first, so that as he was just going to fall on with
several Officers, they were overwhelmd with the Ruins of the second Mine. The
Loss of so brave a Commander cooled the Courage of those that were under him.
Thus the Attack on the Left hand was made with little Order, and less Vigor;
and the Duke saw well that it behov^d him to proceed with more caution, against
Men that defended themselves with so much Stoutness and Resolution.

There was a necessity therefore to penetrate above the Intrenchment, and to
level with the Ground those Bastions which they could not carry by Assault. La
Pomme, Capt^i^ of the Pion^^^ undertook this Work, notwithstanding the
co^^inual Rains and difficulties which he met with^^ the Ground. The River had
so overflowd her Banks, that the two Bridges for the Communi^^^tion of Quarters
were carryd away by the for^^ of the stream; so that Pallua^'s, and Sicot's
Qua^ters were in great danger; for that if General Beck who lay at Luxemburgh
with his Army, had attacked 'em before the Bridges were repaird, the Duke could
never have relievd 'em.

In the mean time the Miners which the Duke had set to the middle of the
Curtin, found only so much Earth behind as just su^fizd to Lodge themselves;
which showed that the better way was to ruin it by a battery. In short^ Four
Great Guns in three days made a considerable breach; and in less then Six days
the Mines under the Bastions were finishd.

Upon this, the Duke ordered the Enemy to be informed of the Condition they
were in; to the end, that by a speedy Capitulation they might avoid the
Destruction of their Men, the Ruin of their Fort^fications, and the
Misfortunes and Calamities which usually at^end the Sack of Cities taken by
Assault. There^pon, the besieged viewed the Mines, and seeing themselves
assaild on every side, without hope of Relief, they desird to Capitulate. The
Duke allowd ^em Honorable Conditions, so that after a long and stout
Resistance, the Garrison marched out the 22 d. of August, and the 30 th. day
after the opening of the Trenches.

Of two Thousand eight Hundred Men, of which the Garrison consisted at the
beginning of the Si^ge, the whole number was reduced to twelve Hundred. ^he
Governor was slain, and the greatest part of ^^e Offi^ers that remained were
either slain or ^ounded. The Duke ordered 'em to be conducted (...) Luxemburgh,
where Beck had layn during the ^hole time of the Siege, with the Body which
(...) commanded^ And now besides that the French ^^fantry was very much
impaired, the Season was (...) spent^ and the Mines had ruined the Place to
that degree, that the Fortifications required long ^ime to repair 'em. So that
the Army did nothing more for three Weeks together then only labor to repair
the Fortifications, and to level the Line of Circumvallation. The heavy Canon
were sent back to Mets; the Place was furnished with Ammunition and Provisions,
and Maro^^es made Governor of the Town.

But for the further security of this Conquest, and to render himself absolute
Master of the Moselle, the Prince spent the rest of the Campaign in taking
Cirk, and some Castles between Treves and Thionville. Cirk is a small Village
in Lorain, The taking of Cirk.
seated upon the Banks of the Moselle, in that part where the Channel of it is
very much straightened by the Hills on both sides. It has no Fortification, all
the security of it depending upon a Castle which commands the Town, and which
is Flanked with very large and thick Towers, and is accounted the strongest
C^stle in all the Country; and the Duke of Lorrain kept a Garrison in it of a
Hundred Men^ The same Evening the Duke arrived before the Town he made himself
Master of it, caused a Battery to be raised before the Castle, and fixed his
Miners to the Walls. Thereupon, the Governor terrified with the Attack, and
being hopeless of Succor, was unwilling to hazard the Loss of the Men which he
commanded: So that after a defense of Four and twenty Hours, he Capitulated and
Marched out upon an Honourabble Composition.

The Duke also sent to take in several other Castles that lay upon the River,
which made no Resistance. Which done, he led back his Army into France, where
he put 'em into Quarters of Refreshment; Esp^nan and Dandelot stayed with the
Army^ and the Prince ordered 'em to March toward Estai^ while he made an
Incursion with two thousand Horse into the Heart of Luxemburgh. He advanced to
the very Gates of the Capital City, where Beck with his Cavalry were
constrained to keep themselves close, not daring to stir out. After that, he
Marched into the Neighborhood of Arlon, without meeting any Enemy, in all
which Places his Men having got considerable Booty, he re-joyn'd his Army at
Villers La Montagne.

This done, he gave the Command of the Army to the Duke of Angoulesme, The
Prince of C^n^e arrives at Court, and leads a numerous Reinforcement into
Germany.
who had been during the Campaign, with a small Force upon the Frontiers of
Picardy; and having left such other Orders as he thought requisite, he returned
to Court, in hopes that he might have stayed there for some time, and take his
Repose; but he was no sooner arrived, when the Affairs of Germany enforced him
to return to the Army.

Mercy had cha^'d Marshal de Guebriant on this side the Rhine; his Army being
so enfeebl'd, that without a speedy and numerous Re-inforcement, he was no
longer able to keep the Field. And there was a necessity for some Person of
equal Quality to the Duke of Enguien to lead that Re-inforcement, for fear they
should Mutiny and Disband of themselves, in regard the Soldiers were afraid of
Marching into Germany.

The Count of Ranzau therefore was made choice of to Head that Army, which was
to join Marshal de Guebriant; nor did the Duke of Enguien stay above Fifteen
days at Paris, being forced to Ride Post, that he might join Ranzau in Lorrai^;
where he found him near Delme, which was the General Rendezvouse, and marching
through Sarebourgh, at length he joined the Marshal at Dackstem, near
Stras^^rgh, with five thousand Men.

After he had viewed the whole Army, and assured the Marshal that he would
return as soon as the season would permit to take the Field, H^ returns to
Court.
he went and visited the Places upon ^he Rhine, and by the way made himself
Master of Saint Marie aux Mines, where he assigned the Army their Winter
Quarters. At last he returned to Court, having in one Summer gained a Famous
Batt^l, won a Town of great Importance, and carried a considerable
Reinforcement into Germany.

The Battle of Rocroy was attended with several other Conquests, but chiefly
with the taking of T^^^nville, The Advantages of the taking of Thionville
the reducing of which place was of extraordinary Moment. For it was a place
that secured Mets and the Pays Messin from the Incursions of ^uxemburgh; it
made the French Masters of the Moselle; it ass^rd a Communication between
France and the Electorate of Treves, which it behooved the French to be no less
chary of, then of their own Country, by reason of the Elector, who with an
extraordinary Zeal^ and incredible Resolution, had espoused the Interests of
France. And lastly, it was a Barricado for the French, between Luxemburgh and
the Lower Palatinate, where the Spaniards were then powerful.

Cardinal Mazarin had a long time had it in his Head to attempt this Siege, Why
the Siege of this place was op^os^d.
for the Reasons alleged. He had caused it to be twice proposed to Lewis the
XIII. by Marshal de ^ Hospital, who was much in his Favor. But the Design
would never take in his Life time. However, the King was no sooner Dead but the
Cardinal proposd the same thing to the Queen, who seeing the Success of the
Battle of Rocroy, surrendered her self wholly to the Cardinals Counsels, and
withstood the open Opposition, and secret Thwartings which lay i^ her way in
reference to the design of this Siege, which others would by no means have to
go forward, because most People believed that the Cardinal was swayed by a
Spirit of Jealousy, and that because he began to suspect the growing Favor
and Glory of the Duke of Eng^ien, his main end was, that he should miscarry
before Thionvil^^ However it were, ever after this Campaign, the Duke was look^
upon as a great Captain, no less formidable in Sieges then in Battles. And here
observe one thing in a Young Victorious Prince, no less great then the Victory
it self. The Court which had prepared against his Arrival those Applauses which
he deserved, The Prince refuses the Encomiums of the Court.
was surpised at his manner of receiving of 'em, as if he had been insensible
of the Honor which they did him. He rejected their Encomiums^ as if they had
been affronts, and as one indocible to Flattery, he gave them to understand
that he was afraid even of the shadow of it. Such was the Niceness, or rather
the Solidity of this Prince. In like manner, he observed this for a Maxim, that
it was for a Person of Honor only ^o mind well-doing, and to let Glory follow
Virtue.

The Queen turns out some Ministers ^^kes Mazarine.
While these things were transacting in Flanders, the Queen turns out of Favor
those who had had the greatest share in the management of Affairs. The Bishop
of Beauvoise, who had been in Credit, was enforced to retire to his Diocese.
Des^uyers and Chavigny were excluded, and Mazarine taken into the chief
Ministry.

The Queen, who was willing to show that 'twas none of her fault that the War
between France and Spain was not brought to a Conclusion, Nego^iations o^ Peace
Fruitl^^s.
by fair and moderate ways, gave ear to the Propositions of Peace that were
made her; and to that Effect, the Court appointed two ^lenipotentiaries, 1644.
the Counts l^ Av^^^^ and de Serviers, with Orders forthwith to repair to
Munster, where the Peace was to be nego^^^^ed. But certain Broils that
happened between the Swedes and Danes prevented the good Success of that
Assembly, which was the reason that nothing more was thought of but to make the
best of the Advantages they had gaind upon the Spaniards. Flande^s therefore
was to be the Theater of the War^ during the Campaigne of the next Year, 1644.
and the Command of the Army was given to the Duke of Orleans, who design^d to
Pesiege Gravelin. Now in regard that Prince had no mind that his Enterprise
should be known, he divided his Army into three Bodies. The Marshal de
Meilleray, as Lieutenant General commandd one part, with Orders to enter
Flanders on that Side next Am^ens; the Count of Ranzaw commanded another part,
as Sub-Lieutenant General, with Instructions to enter on that Side next to
Abbeville. And as ^or the Duke, he reserved a longer March for himself, and the
most hazardous, that is to say, through Peronne and Bapaume, where the Marshal
Gassion, who commanded a separate Body was to join him. And in regard there
were several Forts that might obstruct the Siege of Gravelin, Gassion, after he
had laid a Bridge over the River Aa, pos^est himself of Bajette^. Afterward,
the Forts of La Capelle, and St. Folquin, were taken in to facili^ate the great
Work. In a Word, Gravelin was besiegd; the Town was taken; The Prince of Conde
acts in Germany, where he resolves to relieve Friburgh, or fight the Enemy^
and the French made themselves Masters of Sas de Gand, and of all the Forts
that could impede their Entrance into Flanders.

Now, at the same time, the Duke of Orleance was acting in Flanders, the Duke
of Enguien Signalized himself in Germany, whether he was gone, to Succor
Friburgh, which the Bavarians had besieged. To which purpose he ordered his
Forces to March with all the speed imaginable; but all his haste proved
Fruitless. For that City was in so bad a Condition to hold out, that it was
Surrendered before he arrived. However, this Accident, which the Duke did never
expect, no way disheartend him; for since he could not relieve the Town, he was
now in hopes to join, and Fight the Enemy, and no less confident of Victory. He
had no Design however to retake the Place, nor to force the Imperialists; for
that his Forces were not strong enough to undertake those Enterprises: But he
thought he might repair himself by a Battle, for the Loss of a Town which he
had not time to rescue. The Design was great and hazardous, and there was
something more formidable that presented it self to his Eyes then at Rocroy. He
had not only to Fight against Men, but inaccessible Mountains, against
Innundations and Precipices, on the one Side; on the other, against an
impenetrable Wood, at the bottom of which was a large Bogg; against Rivers and
Prodigious Entrenchments; against Forts raised up and down in every Place;
against Timber, Trees cut down, and laid athwart most deep and dreadful Roads;
and in a Word, against one of the Greatest Captains of the Age. Nevertheless,
not all these Obstacles together were sufficient to daunt this Youthful Hero.
Nothing would content him but a Battle, wherein he proved Victorious; tho the
Victory was not so considerable for the Number of the Slain, as for the
Importance of the Conquests that ensued. For the Field of Battle, as barren as
it was, in appearance, was worth whole Provinces to France, through the Conduct
of this General; so well he understood to make the best of his Advantages.
Which is that we are going to make out, by the following Relation of the
Campaign of Friburg.

The Battle of Rocroy, and the taking of Thionville had restored the Reputation
of the Arms of France, in the Low Countries. The Spanish Infantry was quite
Ruined; A Relation of the Campaign of Friburgh, 1644. by M. La Chapelle.
terror and dread had seized the Enemies Forces; the greatest part of the
Cities of ^landers, were in no Condition to hold out long; and a General might
do what ere he pleased with good Success, and the Duke of Orleance had taken
upon himself to manage the War in those Parts.

In Germany, the Service was not so easy; for after the Duke of Enguien had
led a Reinforcement thither, the Marshal de Guebriant was Slain before Rowil,
and the Army had no other Chieftains, but Ranzan and Roze. Ranzan was a Person
of great Courage and Wit; he was also end^'d with a certain Natural Eloquence,
which was very persuasive in Councils of War, and which drew others to be of
his Opinion; but his Conduct did not always answer his Elegant Discourses; for
Wine causd him to commit great Errors, and many times put him out of being in a
Condition to Command. He had Quartered the Foot at Tutlinghen, without taking
any Care to prevent their being Surprizd, and he had embroiled himself with all
the German Princes. So that the Bavarians, and Lorrainers, fell upon him before
he had the least Intelligence of their March, and John de Were having enforced
him to Surrender, with all his Men, all the Officers were Prisoners of War. The
German Cavalry being dispiers'd into several Parts, retired toward Brisack,
under the Command of Raze, and took up their Winter Quarters in Lorrain and
Alsatia.

As soon as the News of this arrived at Court, Turenne, had Orders to rally
together the shattered Remnants of that Army, and take upon him the Command of
it; and he spent all the Winter in bringing it into better Order; but
notwithstanding all his Care, it was not in a Condition to oppose the
Bavarians, whose Army was become more Numerous after Ranzan's Defeat. Mercy
therefore who commanded it, seeing himself Master of the Field, invested
Friburgh, which was not in a Condition to hold out a long Siege.

The Duke of Enguien had Intelligence of it at Amblemont, near Mouzon, and
received Orders from the Court to join the German Army, and endeavor the
Relief of the Town. To that purpose, he Marched the 20 tith. of July to Mets,
where his Forces past the Moselle, and left their heavy Baggage. Which done, in
thirteen Days he marchd threescore Leagues, and came to Brisack, with Six
thousand Foot, and Four thousand Horse.

By the way, the Prince understood that Friburgh was Surrendered to the
Bavarians, that Turenne was Encamped not far from em, and that Mercy made no
show of having any design to change his Station. Upon this Advice, he Marched
toward T^renne, with Marshal Grammont, and gave Orders to Martin to cross the
Rhine, at Brisack, with the Army; which he did the 13 th. of August.

The Duke stay^d no longer in Turenne's Camp then to observe the Post where the
Bavarians lay, and to consider where to attack 'em. So that he returned to his
Army the same day that it cross^d the Rhine, and the next day he Marched to put
in Execution the Enterprise which he and Tur^nne had consulted and contrived
together.

Friburgh is Seated at the Fort of the Mountains of the Black Forest. They
enlarge and open themselves in this part of the Country in the Form of a
Crescent, and in the middle of this space you may discover, near to Friburg, a
Plain bounded on the Right Hand, by very high Mountains, and surrounded on the
Left by a Boggy Wood. This Plain is watered with a R^volet, which glides along
by the Wood, and afterward falls upon the Left of Friburgh, into the Hollow of
a Narrow Valley^ inter^nt with Woods and Marshes. They that Travel from Brisack
cannot enter into this Plain, but through narrow Lanes and close Passes, at the
Foot of a Mountain almost inaccessible, which commands it on every side, and
the other ways that lead into it are much more difficult.

Merry was Posted in a place thus Advantageous; and in regard he was one of the
greatest Captains of his time, he had omitted nothing to make the best of the
Situation. His Army consisted of Eight thousand Foot, and Six thousand Horse.
He had extended his Camp all along the Rivolet; but besides that Defense, and
the Advantage of the Woods and Boggs, he had fortified it, toward the Plain,
with a large Entrenchment. Nor was there any way to get at him but by the road
that leads from Brisack to Friburgh; and by consequence, there was a necessity
of passing by the Foot of that Mountain which defended the best part of his
men. And for that reason, this great General had employed all his Industry to
secure that part of his Camp from being forced.

Upon the sloping of the Mountain toward the Plain, he had raised a Fort with
Pallisadoes, wherein he had put Six hundred Men, together with his Artillery;
by which means he assured himself of that part of the Mountain which was most
easy of Access. From thence he carried on a Line, a long a Wood of Firr-Trees,
still ascending to the top, where it was impossible to be past. This Line was
defended by Redoubts, at the distance of two hundred Paces one from the other;
and to give those that designed to molest him still more trouble, he had laid
all the whole length of the Line, a great Number of Fir-Trees, the Branches of
which were half cut, and inter-twisted one within another, and were as
Effectual for the same use as Friesland Horses.

Great Beams of Timber with Stakes driven into 'em, bearing their points
outward, resembling a Hedg-hog.
Between this Mountain which the French Army met with upon the Right Hand, and
another that lay nearer Friburgh, there was a Hollowness, which gave entrance
into the Bavarian Camp, but to come at it, there was a necessity of going a
great way about, and to pass through Places which had never been viewed. This
part was naturally fortified, by a large and deep Innundation of Water; and
Mercy thought it sufficient to cut down a great number of Trees, and lay
athwart that Inundation. In short, never was an Army Encamped in a stronger
Situation, and better Entrenchd.

Nevertheless, the Duke of Enguien was resolved to drive Mercy out of it, and
he prepared for his Attack in this manner. He marched with all his Army against
the Line, at the top of the Mountain that ran along the Wood of Firr-Trees,
leaving the Fort upon the Left hand, and making it his sole business to carry
the Redoubts that defended it; to the end, that having gained the top, which
commanded all the rest, he might make himself Master of the Fort, and so
descend in Battle Array into the Bavarian Camp.

Turenne was to make his Onset where the Trees lay that defended the Valley, and
provided that both Onsets were made at the same time, there was great Hopes,
that the Enemy being busied in two Places at once, would be hard put to it to
defend themselves; and that if they should happen to be forced on that side
next the Water, the Duke coming down from the High Grounds, and Turenne, at the
same time, entering the Plain, Mercy would not be able to withstand 'em.

So soon as the Forces were all arrived, the Duke gave Order that they should
prepare over Night to fight the next Morning: and Turenne having a great
Compass to fetch, set forward before break of day; but the Difficulties which
he met with in his March retarded the Onsets which both Armies should have made
at the same time.

The Duke disposed of his Men, in this manner. His Infantry was composed of Six
Battallions, each consisting of Six hundred Men. Espenan, Camp-Marshal, was
commanded to make the first Assault, with two Battallions of the Regiments of
Persan and Enguien. The Count of Tournon, put himself at the Head of the
Regiments of Conti, and Mazarine, to Second Espenan. The Duke reserved two
Regiments to himself, to be employed as occasion shall require, and Marshal
Grammont, Martin, L' Eschelle, and Mauvily, remained about his Person. Palluau
Seconded the whole Attack, with the Regiment of Horse of Enguien, and the
Gentlemen were posted at the Entrance into the Plain, in a very close Place, to
hinder the Bavarians from flanking the Infantry.

To come at the Enemy there was a necessity of clambring up a very steep side
of a Place, cross a Vineyard, wherein were Walls, at such a distance, about
four foot high, that served the Bavarians, instead of Entrenchments. However,
the commanded Men got up into this Vineyard, and drove the Bavarians into their
Entrenchments of Firr-Trees, behind which they fired with more then ordinary
fury. Nor could the French Infantry force those Trees, so entangl'd one within
another, as they were, without loosing a great many Men, and breaking their
Body.

The Duke therefore, who was advanced to (...) the Effect of the Onset,
observed that the fir^^ Line of his Men gave ground, and that they we^^ got
part within the Entrenchments of Firr-Tree^^ and part without, neither flying,
nor moving forward. They began also to slide along the Bavarian Camp, toward
the Right hand, and fall upon ^em at the top of the Mountain. But the Prince,
who had observed before that that same part was not to be forced, rightly
judged that the Success of his Enterprise depended more upon carrying the
Enemies Line in the middle.

For that reason, he resolved to renew the Assault with what remaind of the
first Regiments, tho he had no more then two with him self, and those
discouraged by what they had seen then Fellow^ suffer. And indeed, at first it
seemed a piece of Rashness, with two thousand repulsed Men, to attempt the
forcing of three thousand well Entrenched, and puffed up with the Advantage the^^
had got. But it was impossible otherwise to disingage and bring off those that
had got beyond the Entrenchment of Fir-Trees. For in abandoning them, the Duke
must have been forced to have retreated with Vexation, to have failed in his
Enterprise, and Sacrificed in vain the best part of his Infantry: Besides that,
all the Bavarian Army would have fallen upon Turenne, not having any other to
oppose.

The Prince considered all these things in an Instant; alights from his Horse,
and putting himself at the Head of Conti's Regiment, marched directly against
the Enemy. Tournon, and Castelnau-Ma^^villiere, did the ^ame, with the Regiment
of Mazarine; Grammont, Martin, L' Eschelle, Mauvilly, La Moussaye, Ierze, the
Chevaliers Chabot and Gra^mont, Isigny, Me^lles, La Baulme, Tourville,
Barbantane, Disbrotteaux, Asp^emont, Viange, together wi^h all the Officers and
Volunteers alighted, (...) this Action gave new Life to the Soldiers, (...)
the Duke being the first that passed the En^^enchment of Firr-Trees, all the
rest following (...) Example thronged over the Entrenchment, (...) they that
defended the Line f^ed into the Wood, by the favor of approaching Night.

After this first Advantage won, the Duke moun^ed into a Redoubt which he found
quitted^ but the Condition he was in, was no less dangerous ^hen the Action he
had performed. One part of his Infantry was killed, the rest had broken their
Order in pursuit of the Fugitives. The Enemy (...) held the Fort where they had
planted their Artillery, and Mercy was in a Posture able to Charge the Prince
in this Confusion; but it may be the Night which drew on a pace, hindered him
from making the best of his Advantage.

Therefore, while there remaind as yet some glimmerings of day, the Prince
rallied his ^^ot^ fortified the Redoubts which he had won, and notwithstanding
the Di^^iculty of the way, caused his Cavalry to mount to the top of the Hill
which he possessed: And after he had got all his Men together he ordered all
^is Trumpets to sound, and all the Kettle-Drums to beat, that so he might give
Turenne notice that he had gained the Top of the Hill; and then prepared every
thing ready to renew the Conflict the next Morning.

Ti^^nne, on his side, had with great Vigor attacked the Trees that were laid
in the Valley, between the Mountain^ which the Duke had carried, and that which
lay near Friburgh. But Mercy, not dreaming they could force his Camp on that
side next the Mountain, considering how it was fortified, h^d sent away his
Principal Strength to defend the Valley; and this is that which usually happens
in the attacking of Lines, that those parts which are deemed to be the
strongest are soonest taken. The Place was wide enough behind his Entrenchment
to draw up his Men in order of Battle; so that when Turenne's Men had driven
back the Infantry which defended the Entrance into it, all the Bavarian Cavalry
were ready, and in a Capacity to second their Foot, without breaking their
Squadrons, which was the Reason that Turenne meeting with so vigorout a
Resistance, could by no means force the Bavarians. Sometimes he gained some
Posts, then he lost 'em again; so that Tur^nne's Attack was nothing but
continual Skirmishing, without being able to break into the Enemies
Entrenchments; the he did all that the Courage and Conduct of a Great Captain
could do, to surmount the Disadvantages of Ground and Number.

The Duke of Enguien had heard from the Top of the Mountain, the Noise of this
Attack, and prepared for another Onset the next Morning. And his Design was to
March over the High Grounds^ to the Bavarian Camp, on purpose to make the Enemy
turn one part of their F^rces against him^ to ^acilitate Turenne's Entrance
into the Plain^ and every body prepared for this Enterp^ise, as it they had
been assured of Victory; it being impossible that Mercy should sustain Two
Onsets, at the same time, one from above, and in the Rear of his Army, while
the other assailed him every where else.

Nevertheless, Mercy would not run such a dangerous Risco, but got away as fast
as he could^ To that purpose he drew off his Men from the Top of the Mountain
next to ^riburgh, and before day sent away his Canon that was under the Duke^s
Arm^^ ere the French Generals had notice of it. So that they were surprised the
next Morning to see the Bavarian. Entrenching themselves upon the Mountain next
to Friburgh, the Camp deserted, and the Fort quitted.

The Duke seeing that Turenne's Men had spread themselves over the Plain, came
down with his Army; but no sooner had he a near view of the ^everal Places, but
the thundering from the Bava^i^ns new Camp, gave him to understand that they ^ad
wholly possessed themselves of the Mountain ^djoining to Friburgh. Thereupon,
the D. not a little ^exed to have missed in his Enterprise, ordered his Army to
be drawn up in Battalia, notwithstand^ng it had Rained hard all that Night. But
finding his Men wearyd with their hard Duty the day before, and the bad
Weather, he deferred driving the Enemy from their new Entre^chments till the
next day: So^ that the Army had all that day and the next night to rest
themselves.

Upon the Right Hand of Friburgh, coming from ^^isack, lies a Mountain, which
is not so extremely rugged, for above the third part of the Highth; but
afterward becomes very steep: Yet when you come to the Top, there is a wide
space of level Ground, sufficient for the drawing up Three or Four Tho^sand
Men, in good Order of Battle. At the end of this little Plain stood also
certain Ruins of a Tower, at the Foot of which, the Highest Mountain of the
Black Forest rises insensibly. But in regard that as it rises, it runs very far
backward, the Highest part of it commands but very little over the Plain.

Mercy had posted the greatest part of his Infantry in the Parts adjoining to
the Tower; the rest was Encamped behind a Wood approaching to Friburgh. His
Cavalry was planted all along from the Wood to the Walls of the City. In short,
that General had as well managd the Advantages of his Ground, in that Place, as
the former. He had also added for the Defense of it all the Inventions which
the Art of War, and the Conveni^^cies of the Wood could afford him in so little
time. The Lines which he had cast up during the Siege, served him in part to
enclose his new Cam^ so that he had no need of ^ortifying any more (...) that
part which looked toward the Valley, where (...) laid rows of Trees, with their
Bows entangle^ one within another, and his choicest Infantry la^ behind this
Entrenchment supported by his Cavalr^ the Squadrons of which possessed all the
Ground be^tween the Row of Trees and the City.

So soon as it was Day, the Duke advanced to the Foot of the Mountain, where
Mercy lay entrenched and in his March took in some Redoubts which were still
guarded in the Valley by the Enemies Dragoons. Turenne's Army had the Vanguard
that day and was to make the greatest Onset. D' (...), Lieutenant General,
commanded the Infantry^ L' Eschel^e marched at the Head of all the rest, with a
Thousand Musketeers, drawn out of both Armies; and his Bu^iness it was to
attack the entrance that covered the biggest Body of the Bavarian Foot^ next
the ruined Tower; which was the place most easy of Access to get at 'em. For
which reason^ Turenne caused all the Canon of the Weymarians to be drawn on
that side.

The Dukes Body of Infantry, commanded by Espenan, was commanded to force the
Trees. Between these two Attacks also, there was a false Assault to be made,
with a few Men only, to favor the real Onset. Marshal Grammont had likewise
Orders to keep himself drawn up in Battle array in the Plain, with the Cavalry,
to act as the Success should direct him,

The Bavarians Camp afforded 'em great Advantages, whither it were to defend
themselves, or attack the Enemy. One of their Wings was supported by the Canon
and Small-Shot of the City^ the other was posted upon a Mountain, the Heighth^
of which alone was sufficient to secure the Forces ^^at po^sess'd it. But they
had too large an ex^^nt of Entrenchment to defend, that the Infantry ^^ch
weakn'd by the Hardships of the Siege, and (...) preceding Combats, was not
sufficient to guard (...) Camp.

^' Eschelle began already to play with the Arti^^^^ of his Attack, never
staying for the Arrival (...) the Rear-^uard, or the Signal of Battle; tho
(...) Duke had commanded that all the Attacks and ^nsets should be given
together. Besides that, ^' Eschelle had Orders not to March up to the Ene^y,
till he heard the noise of the Muskets toward ^^e Tre^s, and toward the false
Attack in the middle. But an Accident, not to be foreseen, as fre^uently it
happens in the best consulted Contri^ances of War^ overturned all the Dukes
Orders, and saved the Bavarians from a Total Defeat.

For while the Rear-guard was expected, which ^ould not come up so soon, by
reason of the bad^ess of the ways; the Duke attended by Turenne and G^a^ment,
was got up to the top of the highest ^ountain, to discover the Rear of the
Enemies ^rmy, and observe their Order of Battle. In his ^bsence, Espenan
detached some men to make a ^alse Attack, upon a small Redoubt that lay in h^s
^ay to the Enemy. And tho he sent but very few ^en at first, both sides were
insensibly engaged in a ^oody ^ight, while the Bavarians seconded those that
defended the Fort, and Espenan relieved those that attacked it; insomuch, that
it came to a very (...) C^nflict in that part. Upon the noise of which, ^'
Eschelle thought it high time for him to begin his ^ssault, and his Error
ranvers'd all the Designs of ^he Day.

The Duke beholding the Enemies firing from the ^op of the Mountain, rightly
judgd that Espenan, and L' Eschelle, had made a mistake, and that his ^rders
had not been obeyed. So that he ran into the very thickest of the Engagement,
where (...) found L'Eschelle slain, and his men neither darin^ to fight nor
retreat. ^or remedy of this Disorder he commanded Tournon to put himself at the
(...) of the astonished Soldiers, and to assu^e ^em tha^ he himself would
second 'em with a Powerf^^ Succor.

Thus the Pre^ence of the Prince giving new Lif^ to the Soldiers, the Ba^^rian
Infantry began (...) totter: two Battallions, and that which defende^ the
Entrenchment, began to Face about with their Colors, and gi^e all the marks of
men that we^^ just ready to be^^ke themselves to their Heels. Bu^ they that
were next the Line fired so furio^sly; th^^ the Fr^nch Infantry were qui^e
disheartened they that were far^hest off began to retreat, the (...) were in a
terrible fright, and the Officers also began to give ground.

In vain the Generals told 'em of the Disorder which they beheld in the
Bavarian Camp, they press 'em, threaten 'em, and drag 'em back to the Fight.
But when a panick dread has once seized upon a Soldier, he neither see^ nor
hears any longer either the Example, or the Orders of his General^ so that the
Duke was forced to give over the Attack, and draw off his Men; and in this
Action, the Prin^e, and all that attended him were in very great danger. For he
was still (...) Horseback, not above Thirty Yards distance from the Enemies
Entrenchments. So that of Twenty Men that were about his Person, there was not
one that did not carry away some marks of the danger to which he was exposed.

The Duke himself had the Pommel of his Saddle ta^en off with a Canon Bullet,
and the Scabbord of his Sword was broken with a Musket Shot; Grammont had his
Horse killed under him, and all the rest were wounded. Nevertheless, this
Acciden^ did no way dishearten the Prince; so that he only altered the design
of this Attack, and instead of making his greatest Onse^ upon the Lines as he
had resolvd in the Morning, he ordered the most furious Onset to be given upon
the Entrenchment of Trees. To that purpose D' Aumont was commanded to keep the
Bavarians in Play with the Soldiers which had fought already, causing a
Diversion thereby in the same place where the first Onset had ill succeeded.
The Duke and Turenne, with the whole Body of the Infantry, lead by Mauvilli,
suppor^ed by the Gensd'armes and Roze's Cavalry, marched directly to the
Entrenchment of Trees.

Scarce were the foremost Ranks of this new At^ack entered into the Wood, but
the Bavarians fired with an extraordinary fury; nevertheless, the French
advanced in very good Order, with a Resolution to try whether they could force
the Ent^enchments of Trees or no. And the fight was so obstinate that after
they had been driven back sever^l times, and several times had repulsed the
French, at length Gasper de Mercy, Major General of the Cavalry was forced to
make his Horsemen alight, to second his Infantry that began to give Ground.
Upon that, the Dispute grew hotter then before, and both Parties fir^d with so
much Fury that the Noise and the Smo^k put all things into ^onf^sion, so that
they could not distinguish one another but by the Flashes of the Artillery and
Small Shot. All the surrounding Woods and Forests b^llow'd forth most dreadful
Eccho's, and augmented the Horror of the Battle. The Soldiers were so
bloodily eager, the one to force, the other to defend the Entrenchment, that if
Night had not parted 'em, there had been one of the most deadly Slaughters tha^
had been in our days.

The French Gend^r^eri^ performed a very noble Exploit at that time. They were
commanded by Boulay, who led on the Squadrons to the very brink of the
Entrenchmen^ and ma^g^e the Enemies furious firing, fought a long time within
Pistol^ Shot. Never was so desperate a Combat, where without grappling Hand to
Hand, so many fell upon the spot on both sides. The French in this Conflict
lost Ma^villy, and the Bavarians, Gaspa^^^ Me^cy, their General's Brother.

After this, the Duke having brought back his Army into the Camp, laid aside
all other thoughts, but those of cutting off the Bavarians Provisions, to the
end he might enforce 'em to quit so Advantageous a Post. To that purpose, he
gave his Men four days time to refresh themselves, and the wo^nded, of which
there was a great number, were sent away to ^risach, that there might be
nothing left in the Camp which might retard the Design which the Duke had
contrived in his Mind.

The Mountains of the Black Forest derive their Original from the Mountains of
Switzerland, and follow the Course of the Rhim, till they join with the Hills
that lie upon the Banks of the Ne^^^. These Mountains are very long, and more
or less broad, according to the Countries where they ^xtend themselves; but
their widest breadth is from Friburgh to Filinghen about ten or twelve Le^g^es.
There is no way of Communication between these two Cities, but through a Valley,
which is very narrow, and very Incommodious for the marching of an Army.
Nevertheless, this was the Part through which Mercy, in all probability, would
make his Retreat. Which, nevertheless he would not presume to do in view of the
French Army; ^o that the Duke of Enguien was of Opinion that (...) intercepting
this way between Friburgh and Fi^inghen, he should cut him off from his
Provision and For^ge, and thereby c^nstrain him to a General Battle, or to
retre^t in Disorder.

With this Resolution, the Ninth of August, the Prince caused his Army to march
toward Langsdelingh^n, a Village ^eated in the most easy place of A^^ess in
all those Mountains. This Place was very proper to annoy the Bavarians, or to
fight 'em in their Retreat. For, as for the Duke, he could have Provisions from
Brisack, in case he advanced any f^rther among the Mountains. But the Road
which gave him entrance into this Valley was extremely difficult, by reason of
the Boggs, of which the Woods are full. Besides, that the Front of the Army
being once engagd in these Woods, and having passed the Rivolet that runs along
by 'em, the Rear-guard would be exposed to the Bavarians, without any
possibility of being relieved by their own Men.

The Duke therefore took all the Precaution which the Advantages of the Ground,
and the Presence of a vigilant Enemy required. To this purpose, in regard the
Horse could not march but one and one, and for that many times the men were
forced to alight and lead their Horses, the Prince ordered a great body of
Infantry, at the Tail of the Army, to support the Rear of his Cavalry; he also
placed little Bodies of Musketeers, upon the Wings, to defend the Passes
through which the Bavarians might come to charge 'em.

By break of day, Turenne set forward with his Army, which composed the
Vanguard that day. The D. took care to bring up the Rear, and kept himself in
view of Mercy's Army till all his Men were past; and after he had in this
manner crossed the Woods and Boggs, rejoined his Vanguard at Langsdelinghen,
the Bavarians not making the least attempt to dispute his Passage over the
River, or his Entrance into the Wood.

Mercy observing the March of the French, readily apprehended their design, and
as he was one of the most politic Generals in the World, he presently judged
that his safety consisted in preventing the Duke, and not in disputing the
Encumbrances of the Pass. Nor indeed had he more then just so much time to
retreat before the foremost Troops of the French Vanguard could overtake him;
and doubtless, this was that which hinderd him from falling upon their R^^r.
Therefore, so soon as he saw the French upon their March, he decampd his Army,
keeping the top of the Mountains, and ordering his Baggage to be conducted
through St. Peter's Valley, which leads toward Filinghen.

Upon notice of Mercy's March, the Duke hastened his own as much as it was
possible. But he had Mountains almost inaccessible to cross that he might
shorten his way, besides that his Men were extremely tired. For which reason he
was enforcd to de^ach Roze with all speed, only with eight hundred Horse to
amuse the Bavarians, and disturb 'em in their Retreat, while the rest of his
Army passed the Defiles.

Roze performed his Orders vigorously, and began to Skirmish with the Bavarians
near St. Peter's Abby^ and so soon as he had overtaken the Bavarians^ he gave
notice to the Duke that he was at their Heels. In the mean while, the French
Army passd File after File through a very narrow Valley, at the end of which
they were to ascend to the top of a very high Mountain, and withal, so steep
and covered with Wood, that there was no going forward but for one single Man
at a time. Nevertheless, the Duke surmounted all these difficulties, and his
Vanguard was no sooner got to the top of the Mountain but he discovered the
Bavarians in Battali^, and Roze close at the Heels of their Rear.

Now to go from the Mountain where the Head of E^g^in's Army stopped, to the
place where the Bav^^^^ns were posted, there was a necessity of passing two
Defiles, in the midst of which was a space wid^ enough to contain four
Squadrons; but before ^ou could get at it, there was a Descent through a ^ery
narrow Hollow way, and then an Ascent again more difficult then the former,
which gave an En^rance into the Plain where Roze skirmis^'d with the Enemies
Rereguard.

Mercy no sooner discovered the foremost Battallion of the French Vanguard upon
the top of the Mountain, but he rightly judged that the whole Army was behind.
And in regard that Roze very much disturbed the hindmost part of his Rear, he
resolved to make a push for it, that he might rid himself of so great an
Encumbrance, before the Duke got any nearer to him, and had Men ^now to second
him; and that he might do his Business all at once, he whell'd about to the
Right with his whole Army, and marchd directly against Roze's Cavalry.

But Roze, instead of retiring speedily into the Defile, rallied his Squadrons
together, and daringly stood the whole Bavarian Army in the Plain. He had the
Enemies Army, and the Plain before him; on the Right Hand the Great High Road
to ^^ling^en, crowded with the Bavarian Baggage; upon the Left a vast
Precipi^e, and behind him the Defile through which he was to rejoyn the Duke.
Presently, Roze detached one of his Squadrons to cut the Harness of the Horses
that drew the Carri^ge Wagons, and with the rest he advanced to charge the
foremost Squadrons of the Bavarian Army. But to preserve the Defile open and
free to himself, he left four Squadrons to guard it, behind the Rear of which
he retreated, after he had made-three Charg^s upon the Enemy. Those four
Squadrons sustained the shock of the Bavarians, till the rest of their Cavalry
entered Pell Mell into the Defile. At length Roze left no more then two of the
four Squadrons to defend the Pass, who after an incredible Resistance, seeing
their Fellows out of danger, threw themselves into the Precipice upon the Left
Hand, through Places that never had been passed before by Men nor Horses.

This was a vigorous Action of Roze, and managed with all the Art which it was
possible to pu^ in practice in so great a danger. But it was impossible for him
to have escaped, if Mercy had no^ discovered upon the Neighboring Mountains
the Bodies that drew into Order by degrees, and that the Duke was advancing to
second Roze's Cavalry. For in regard he was afraid of nothing so much as of
coming to a General Battle, he rather chose to let those Squadrons escape, then
enter too far into the Defile.

In a word, the Duke observing from the Top of the Hill this valiant Action of
Roze, and what a Condition he was in, had rallied as many Men as he could get
together about his Person, with a Resolution to bring him off. He was already
got within the space of enclosed Ground between the two Defiles, at what time
Roz^ rejoined him. And thus the Resolution of the Duke, and the Prudence of
Mercy, were in part the cause of that Honor which Roze acquired by his Retreat.

Mercy at the same instant began to make his Retreat likewise, but withal that
good Order which could be expected from a Great Captain, who would never be
constrained to a Battle, and understood how to take his Advantages when
opportunity offered 'em. Nevertheless, he quitted his Artillery and his
Baggage, and leaving some Dragoons to dispute the Passage out of the Defile,
h^^ marched with that speed thro^^h the High Road to Filinghen, that the French
Army lost sight of him in a moment.

While Mercy thought of nothing else but to hasten and secure his Retreat, the
Duke rallied his Men together with a Resolution to follow him; but it proved a
thing so difficult to do, that before he could get his Army in a Body together,
the Bavarian had gai^'d above a League of Ground before him.

There is a Mountain between St. Peter's and Filinghen, much higher then any of
the rest; at the top of which there is a level sufficient to contain an Army
drawn up in Battalia, and which commands all the Hills round about. The Water,
the Past^^^ge, and the Fertilty of the Soil, which is every where manured under
that place, both very Commodious and very Secure to Encamp in. They who were
acquainted with the Country made no question but Mercy would have pitched his
Tents there^ which made the Duke to hasten his March with all Diligence.
Nevertheless, when the Advanced Curriers of the French Vanguard were got to the
top of Holg^^ve (for so the place is called) they found that the Bavarians,
after they had only broke Ground, in Order to Entrench; were advancd farther,
with more haste then the French could follow 'em.

Thereupon, the Duke being quite out of hopes to overtake 'em returned the same
way he came, and ^ncampd at St. Peter's Abbey. His Men were so tird, that he was
constraind to let 'em rest the next day, while they burnt the Bavarians^
Baggage, and brought away their Canon, and two Morters, which the Bavarians
left behind 'em. The next day he took in a little Castle seated upon the
Mountai^s, and which might prove serviceable to his Designs, and sent the Count
of Tournon to convey the Artillery to Brisack.

Thus the Retreat of Coll. Roze was the last remarkable Action performed at the
Battle of Friburgh, which is more properly to be called a series of several
bloody Conflicts, then a pitched Battle. On the one side was to be observed a
Courage which not being to be daunted either with the badness of the Weather,
nor the disadvantages of Ground, hazards all for Victory, and proves Victorious
at length. On the other side, behold a Prudence which nothing could shake, that
made the best of every thing for defense, yet still accompanied with
extraordinary Valor. It is a difficult thing to judge which of the two merited
most Honour^ Whither he that attackt an Army entrenched in places almost
inaccessible, and forced ^em to quit their Holds; or He that preserved a
resolute and undaunted Judgment in a long Retreat, in view of a Restless,
Urging and Victorious Enemy, and at length, made choice of a Post, from whence
he could never be forced. However, this may be truly said, that a General who
quits his Artillery and Baggage may be said to be beaten, and that the Honor
of the Retreat cannot be thought to be complete, unless he saves all. It may be
also said that all Mercy's Prudence could never have preserv^d him from a Total
Rout, had it not been for the Error which Espenan and L' Eschelle committed in
the Execution of the Duke's Orders. In short, it so falls out for the most part
that an Army which Vigorously Attacks an Enemy in his Trenches, has generally
the Advantage of him that defends 'em.

After the Duke of Enguien had sent away the Count of Tournon, he returned
toward Landsdelinghen, where his Cannon and Baggage stayed for him. And then he
thought of nothing more then of what Advantages he might make by Mercy's
Retreat. 'Twas the opinion of the Principal Officers that he should retake
Friburgh; that their March into Germany was only to relieve that Place, and
consequently it ought to be the first Fruits of their Victory. That the
Bavarians had not been able to level their Lines, that they were already far
remote, that there was but a slender Garrison in the Place, ill provided of all
things, and terrified with the ill Success of the Combats which they had beheld
from their own Ramparts.

But the Duke was of Opinion, that 'twas of greater Consequence to undertake
the Siege of Philipsburgh, The Siege and Taking of Philipsburgh.
the other Design not appearing Great enough at the end of a Campaign, which it
behooved him to crown with some Exploit much more Illustrious^ Besides, that by
bounding his Conquests with the taking of Friburgh, the Arms of France would be
no farther advancd into the Country, and would be also constraind to repass the
Rhine, to take up their Winter Quarters in Alsatia.

Not but that the Siege of Philipsburgh was extremely difficult; in regard it
required a long March to lie down before it; because the Infantry was much
lessend in number, and for that their Money was spent, and Provisions were to be
brought a great way; but the Duke contemning these Difficulties, the Siege of
Philipsburgh was resolvd upon. To that purpose he sent Champlastreux, the
Intendant of his Army to Brisack, to bring away ten battering Pieces, in Boats,
which would be also farther serviceable to lay a Bridge over the Rhine.

Champlastreux, who was both Active and understood his Business, soon dispatchd
away those Preparations; and the Prince set forward from Langsdelinghen, the 16
th. of August, with his whole Army, and Marched along by the Rhine, after he
had sent Tu^al before, with one part of the Weymarian Cavalry, some Musketeers
and some Dragoons. Roze follow^d Tubal with the remainder of the Weymarians;
the Duke reserving to himself the leading of the Infantry of both Armies, and
the French Cavalry.

In this Order he marched toward a Castle, seated five or six Miles from
Strasburgh, fortified with Towers after the ancient manner, and defended with a
good Moat full of Water, which he took by the way, to secure himself of a
Communication with Strasburgh. From thence he advanced to Kupenheim, which Roze
had taken as he marched along^ Tuball had also possessed himself of Ethinguen,
Forsen, Bretten, Durlack, Baden, Pruessel and Willock, small Villages enclosed
with Moats, the most of which had Castles also belonged to 'em. And Turenne
went on and invested Philipsburgh it ^elf, with three Thousand. Horse and seven
Hundred Foot, and the Duke arrived before the Place in ten days March from
Langsdelinghen.

Philipsburgh is Seated near the Rhine, upon the Confines of the Duchy of
Wirtemberg, and in the lower Palatinate, three Leagu^s from Spire. From Brisack
to Hermestein there is not any strong Hold but Philipsburgh. It was formerly
called Vdenheim, and was the Seat belonging to the Bishops of Spire; and the
Troubles of Germany insensibly constrained the Bishops to fortify it. But when
they had put it into a condition to defend it self, it remained no longer in
their Hands. For the Imperialists, and afterward the Swedes, made themselves
masters of it: the French also possessed it for some time^ but afterward it
returned under the Emperors Dominion.

To this Town belongs a Fort which commands the Rhine, and which Communicates
with the City, by means of a Causey six foot broad, and eight hundred foot
long. Over against Philipsburgh, the River forms a large Elbow, and causes a
great many Boggs round about half the Place. The Forti^ication is only of
Earth, but the Ramparts are very thick: It is surrounded with large and deep
Moats, nor is there any more then one way to a^^roach it; and the Body of the
Place is composd of seven^ Bastions almost regular. The Berm is so large that
it serves for a false Bray, and this B^^^ is secured by a Quick-set Hedge very
thick. The Moat is full of Water, two hundred foot wide, and four fadom deep,
with a Counterscarp well Pallisado'd. On that side next the Elbow, which the
Rhine makes, there is only a Bogg covered with Wood in some parts; on the other
side the Ground is somewhat higher, and intermixed with Heath, Wood and Ploughd
Fields.

When the Duke invested it, Bamberg was Governour^ the Garrison was composed of
two hundred Horse, and five hundred Foot; there were a hundred pieces of Canon
mounted, and Ammunition sufficient for a long Siege.

After the Duke had viewed the most Advantageous Places to secure his
Circumvallation, he spent the rest of the day in taking his Posts, and
appointed the Night for attacking the Fort upon the Rhine. The French Army took
up their Quarters from K^audenheime to a River that Waters the Plain, halfway
from Rheinhausen, and the German Army was posted from the River to Rheinhausen.

Night being come, the Soldiers prepared to Storm the Fort. The Duke marched
thither through the Woods, while Tu^ennne approachd it over small Damms that
are raised athwart the Mersh. But the Duke could not get thither till break of
day, because the way he had chose was long and difficult.

Bamberg, not having Foot sufficient, sent for into the Town both the Men and
every thing else that was provided for the defense of the Fort; so that Turenne
finding it quitted took Possession of it, and fortifid it with all things
necessary against the Attacks of the City.

After that, the Duke minded nothing but to secure his Circumvallation. He
caused Forts and Redoubts to be raised in all places where the Ground was
proper, and cut down the Trees in the Boggs to stop up the Highways. Turenne
met not with so many Obstacles in the Fortifying his Quarters; for he made use
of a great Flood of Water that ran along from one end of his Camp to the other,
which he made a good defense by adding a Parapet to it. So that the
Circumvallation was finished in four days, and the Camp enclosd on all sides
from Knaud^nheime to Rheinhausen.

In the mean time, the Bridge of Boats arrived, laden with Canon, Ammunition
and Provisions. In twenty four Hours it was laid over against Germesheim and
Knaudenheime. Germesheim is a small City of the lower Palatinate, seated upon
the Banks of the Rhine, fortified with Bastions of Earth and a dry Moat, on
that side next Spire, but full of Water on that side next Philipsburgh. The
taking of it was necessary to command the upper part of the Rhine; for in
regard there could be no Circ^mvallation made beyond the River, they could no^
be assurd of the River without taking in those places which commanded it.

Therefore, so soon as the Bridge was finishd, the Duke ordered d' Aumont to
pass the River with six hundred Foot, and three hundred Horse, and attack
Germensheim, which he did in two days after the Trenches were opend; and after
that he marchd toward Spire. This City, tho it stands upon the Rhine is only
considerable for being the Seat of the Imperial Chamber; for it is only
surrounded with a Wall, garnishd with Towers, after the Ancient manner, and a
nasty Moat.

Thus, while D' Aumont made himself sure of the most necessary Posts upon the
Rhine, the Duke began the Attack of Philipsburgh. And it has been already by us
observed that there is but one way to approach the Town, where the Earth is
Gravelly, all along to the very Counterscarp of the two Bastions of the Place.

In this part the Duke orderd two Attacks to be raised; o^ which Grammont
undertook to carry on the Left, and Turenne took Care of that on the Right
Hand. Both the one and the other made use of above fifteen hundred paces of the
Course of a little Rivolet that waters the Plain, after they had turned the
Water another way, in order to make their Approaches toward the two Bastions
which they were to Attack. The Trench was opened the first of September, and
the same Night they made a Place of Arms common to both Attacks; each of which
carried on their Approaches to the opposite Bastion.

Espenan, with the Regiment of Persan, commanded the Guard, the first Night in
Grammont's Trench, and after he had carried on the Line near 200 Paces, he
began to raise a great Redoubt, where he settled a Corpse du Guard of a hundred
Gendarms at the Head of the Workmen; and those Horsemen had Orders to retire,
in the day time, behind the Ruins of an old Building, near the opening of the
Trench.

The Night was quiet enough; and the Besieged who knew not as yet where the
Pioniers were at work, never gave any Interruption to the Besiegers. But so
soon as day appeared, and that they descried the Earth cast up, they resolved
by a Salley to ruin the Work which had been carried on in the Night. To that
purpose they detached two Hundred Foot, and a Hundred Horse, who advanced
toward the Line; and tho it were full of Pioniers Espenan prepared to receive
'em, commanding the Gendarms to oppose their Cavalry.

But that Squadron marchd against the Enemy in so much Disorder, that they were
utterly broken at the first Charge, and la Boulay was there slain upon the
Place. However Espenan had put the Line in so good Order, that the Besieged
durst not attack it; nor pursue this their first Advantage any farther; in so
much that the Gendarmes had time to rally and return to the Charge; and this
second time they so well acquitted themselves, that notwithstanding all their
firing from the Bastions, all that remaind of those that sallied were driven to
their Counterscarp.

Thus the Besiegers continued their Work without Opposition, but that their
Infantry was lessened to that Degree, that the Dukes Army did not amount to
above three thousand Me^, and the the other was not above two thousand strong.
With so few Men the Prince had an Incredible deal of Trouble to guard so
spacious a Circumvallation, and to furnish Men sufficient to guard the
Trenches, and other necessary Occasions.

His Infantry consisted of Four Battallions; of which that which was relievd in
the Trenches was ordered for the extraordinary Guard of the Camp. The other two
wrought in the Approaches, and the last provided Faggots to fill up the
Trenches. Palluau, with the Regiment of Enguien relievd, the second Night,
Espenan and Persan, and carried on the Line and finishd the Redoubt. Tournon
and Marsin, the two next Nights advanced the Works much farther, and made a
Battery of six Canons.

Turenne had made n^ less haste on his side. The fifth Night the two Attacks
made a Lodgement upon the Counterscarp; neither did Bamberg oppose these Works,
but with his Canon and Small-Shot. Neither did the Duke hear any thing of the
Bavarian Army; only he had Intelligence that John de Were was upon his March
with a Thousand Horse and as many Musketeers, to try whether he could put any
Relief into Philipsburgh; and this advice constraind the Duke to redouble his
Guards, and to ride the Rounds every Night.

So soon as the two Attacks had made their Lodgements upon the Counterscarp,
the Workmen began to pierce it, and raise Batteries to ruin the Defenses of
the Place. As for the Descent into the Moat, it was not very difficult, but it
would be very troublesome to secure it. For in regard the Water was almost even
with the Counterscarp, the Besiegers could not come at it under Ground, and it
requird a great deal of time to make a Gallery coverd with Oaken Planks. So
that the D. only drew a straight Line which butted upon the Moat, and which was
coverd with Bavins upon Blinds and Chandeleers.

Espenan and Palluau, during the two Nights that they kept Guard, brought their
Works to so much Perfection as to be able to fill up the Moat. Tournon also had
already thrown into it a great number of Bavins, bu^ as he passd along the
piercd Line that led to the Work, he was slain with a Musket Bullet.

La Pomme the Engeneer was expert at making Mines and passing Moats: but he met
with a great many Difficulties by reason of the Canon that played from the Town,
which the Besiegers Canon c^uld not Master, for that having so great a number
as they had, no sooner was one Piece dismounted, but presently another was
mounted in the room; and beside those which they had in their Flanks with which
they battered the Bridge side-ways, they had a Row upon the Face of the
Bastions which pierced and ruined the whole Approach.

It Is true the Flanks were so small that they could not plant above three
pieces of Canon upon 'em. Which is a usual Fault in the best Fortifications to
have the Flanks either too narrow or too open^ But the first of these defects
is the worst, in regard that between the two opposite Batteries the greatest
number of Canon always prevails. In a word, the Besiegers having raised two
Batteries, each of four pieces of Canon, presently put to silence the Enemies
Canon from the Flanks. But the Besieged planted so many upon the Faces of the
Bastions, the Rampart of which was very low, that they ruined those of the
Besiegers. For which reason, the Duke was constrained to raise Shoulderings to
hide his Batteries, and cover the Faces of the Bastions. By which means his
Canon got the Mastery, and the Besiegers labored with more security to perfect
their Bridge.

Then Bamberg found that it would not be in his Power to hinder the M^at from
being filled up, and therefore knowing his Garrison to be but weak, he thought
it not convenient to stay till the Miners were set to work, in hopes before
that, to make a more Advantageous Capitulation. Thereupon, he beat a Parley,
Hostages were given on both sides, and the Garrison marched out the twelfth of
September, to the number of five Hundred Men, with two Pieces of Canon. The
Duke put Persan's Regiment into the Town, and made Espenan Governor.

The winning of this Place, tho more easy then the Prince fore^saw or
expected, gave great Reputa^ion to the Arms of France; insomuch that several
Cities sent their Deputies^ Nor did (...) till D'Aumont summoned 'em, but sent
Commissioners with their Keys to the D. who received 'em Honorably; and after
he had confirmed their Privileges, sent 'em back with Order to dismiss the
Imperialists, and receive a French Garrison, which a' Aumont had Instructions
to put into the Town.

But the Duke could not reap himself the Fruits of the taking of Philipsburgh,
nor could he remove from thence before he had repaired the Fortifications. For
the Enemy was at hand; his Men were much lessened and wearied; his Canon had
made great Ruins which were to be repaired; nor was the Prince in a Condition
to stand Mercy, who had both refreshed and recruited his Army since his retreat
from Friburgh. So that all the Duke could do was to settle his Quarters in the
Places along the Rhine, in such a manner, that the Enemy could neither regain
what he had won, nor force him to a General Battle.

He had the River on the one side, the City on the other, the Fort of Rhine
before him, and the Mersh, and the Woods behind him. His Army being thus
Advantageously Posted, he detached Turenne, to go and attack Worms. This City
is not Inferior either in Dignity or number of Inhabitants to any of the
Cities of Germany, being Seated upon the B^nks of the Rhine, and fortifid as
much as the Largeness and Situation of it would permit. Duke Charles of Lorrain
kept Garrison there, and since the Loss of his Territories, he had hardly any
other Place of Retreat but that.

Turenne sent away the Foot, Worms, Ma^ence, and several ^ther ^lg^es taken.
his Canon and all other things necessary for his Design by Water. Which done,
he marched through the Palatinate, with two thousand Horse, and defeated six
hundred M^n, which General Beck had sent to Frankendale. The Inhabitants of
Worms also opened their Gates, and sent away the Lorrainers. Thereupon Turenne
continued his March toward Mayence, and detached away Roze to take in
Oppenheim, a little City seated in a Pain, ill fortified, but defended with a
very good Castle. Roze found no Resistance there; and Turenne at the same time
presented himself before Mayence, and Lodging himself in the Subburbs, sent a
Trumpe^ to those that commanded in the City, with Offers of Honorable
Conditions.

M^y^nce is the Seat of an Archbishop, who is one of the Electors, and one of
the Principal Cities of Germany; besides that, it is Large, Populous, and well
Built, considering that it lies in a Country where good Architecture was never
much known or practiced. The Situation renders it considerable, being seated
just opposite to the mouth of the Mein, which washes one part of the Walls: On
the Land side it is defended by a Citadel, with four Bastions. But as it is
usual in great Cities, the Fortifications had been long neglected, so that the
Principal defense of the Town consisted in the number of Inhabitants, not in
the strength of the Ramparts.

At the lower end of the City, upon the Bank of the Rhine, st^n^s a Magnificent
C^stle, which is the Residence of the Elector. In the time that this City was
under the Power of the Swedes, the King had caused a Fort of six Bastions
called Gustawburgh, to be built in that part where the two Rivers meet. But the
Imperialists having at length retaken Mayence, the Fort was quitted by the
Swedes, and the Electors let it run to ruin.

When Vicount Turenne entered the Subburbs, there was in the Town an Imperial
Garrison of eight Hundred Men: Nevertheless, the Elector not believing he could
remain there in safety, was retired to Hermestein; so that the Chapter, which
has all the Authority of the Government in the Absence of the Archbishop,
caused all the Bodies of the City to meet together, and after several
Deliberations, they resolved to send their Commissioners to the Duke of
Enguien, and to present the Keys of the Town to himself, to make their
Capitulation the more Honorable, by the Quality of the Person that received
'em.

Turenne sent this Answer to the Duke, who lay still with his Army near to
Philipsburgh; who thereupon departed with a Convoy of four Hundred Horse, and
came to Mayence in a day and a half. And while both sides were drawing up the
Articles of the Surrender. Mercy lay posted upon the Hills between Hailbrun and
Neckersulm, leaving the Necker before him.

Hailbrume is not above fourteen Leagues from Philipsburgh, and M^rcy pretended
from thence to put a stop to the Progress of the Duke. To which purpose he
detached Wolfs, a famous Colonel among the Bavarians, with two hundred Horse,
and five Hundred Dr^goons to put himself into Mayence; tho Wolfs could not get
thither above a quarter of an hour before the Duke of Enguien. So that the
Trumpet which the Duke sent to give the City notice of his coming found Wolfs
harang^ing the Townsmen, and encouraging them to stand upon their own defense,
offering the Reinforcement which he had lef^ on the other side of the Rhine, as
also the Assistance of the whole Bavarian Army, which would follow him in a
little time.

But the Inhabitants, who knew the Duke was in their Subburbs, stood to their
Word which they had given to Turenne, and after they had dismissed Wolfs out of
the City, sent their Deputies to the Duke to conclude their Treaty of
Capitulation. The Chapter also obliged themselves to send out the Garrison,
which they kept in Binghen, a small City, and to admit the French. The Duke
gave the Government of Mayence to the Count of Courval, and put a strong
Garrison into the Town, with all things necessary to repair the old
Fortifications and make new ones.

Turenne likewise took Creussnack in his March, and d' Aumont invested Landau
with twelve hundred Foot, and fifteen hundred Horse. This is a City seated in a
Plain, four Leagues from Philipsburgh, well Peopled, and having a Rampart
flanked by two Towers, after the ancient manner, with a Moat defended by some
Half-Moons and a Covert way. There were in the Town four hundred Lorrainers;
and it was the only place which the Palatinates had preserved in the
Palatinate, on this side the Rhine, except Frankendale, where the Spaniards
kept a very strong Garrison.

While ^' Aumont was taking up his Quarters, and beginning his Approaches
before Landau, the Duke rejoined his Army close by Philipsburgh, that he might
be near the Siege which d' Aumont had undertaken; where he understood that the
Trenches were already opened, but that d' Aumont going to visit the Works was
dangerously wounded. Thereupon Turenne was sent to continue the Siege^ who
carried on the Trenches with that speed, that in three days a Battery was
raisd, and a Lodgement made upon the Counterscarp. He dyed at Spire, within a
^^w days after.
The fifth day, the Duke being come to visit the Works, the Lorrainers
capitulated with Turenne, and marched out of the Place.

After the taking of Landau, Newstad, Manhei^ and Magdeburgh, made but little
Resistance. So that in one Campaign, the Duke saw himself three times
Victorious over the Bavarian Army, Master of the Palatinate, and the Course of
the Rhine, from Philipsburgh to Hermenstein, and of all the Country between the
Rhine and the Moselle.

There are three things which have not been observed in the Campaign of
Friburgh, Three things not observed in the Campaign of Friburgh.
which are not to be omitted. The First is, that the Duke, as it is credibly
reported, the more to encourage his Soldiers to force the Bavarian Camp, threw
his Ba^toon, the Ensign of his Generalship, over the Entrenchments, showing by
that Action, that to prevent his Ba^toon from falling into the Enemies Hands,
there was a nece^^ity of gaining that part where he had thrown it, and that it
was to be looked upon as the Prize which the Duke proposed to himself to win;
and which it behooved all the Soldiers also to be no less eager of gaining.

The Second thing necessary to be observed is this, that the Defeat of the
Bavarians at the Battle of Friburgh, gave the French an easy opportunity to
make such considerable Progresses, that they no sooner presented themselves
before a Town, but the Garrison surrendered. So that the Marquess d' Aumont
having summoned Gemersheim to open her Gates, she did it immediately. The
Deputies also of that Place, accompanied with the Clergy and Magistra^y, met
the Marquess, to assure him of their Obedient Submission to the King of France,
and besides Landau, which Marshal Turenne took, they made themselves Masters of
Magdeburgh, and the City of Bacara^

The Third thing worthy to be observed, and which will show the Terror which
the Duke of Eng^i^n's Name had struck into the Hearts of the Enemies of France
was this, that when Turenne had sent Roze to invest Mayence, and that Mercy had
sent Wolfs with six hundred Dragoons, and four hundred Horse, to Succor the
Place, with promise of all other Assistance necessary, those Offers were
rejected. The Besieged answered that they were only fair Promises. That never
the less the City was Besieged, and that when they were to resist the still
Triumphant Arms of the King of France, they must make use of other Weapons the^
Words, and that the Duke of Enguien's continud Victories gave them great reason
to fear that they should not be able successfully to withstand a Force that
carried all before it. Which Answer to surpised Coll. Wolfs, that he
immediately retird. And then the Chapter of Mayence sent their Commissioners to
the Duke, to inform him of the Resolution they had taken, to Surrender the City
into his Hands, upon Condition that the Prince would Sign the Capitulation as
it was drawn up, and that he would come and receive their Oaths of Fidelity.
These Offers and Conditions were accepted the Sixteenth of September. The
Principal Articles of the Capitulation being, That the Administration as well
Ecclesiastical as Secular should remain Free to the Chapter. That Justice
should be administered according to the usual manner; and that under that
Clause, the Officers should be preserved in their Employments and Privileges.
That the Chapter having put themselves under the King of France 's Protection,
the Duke should not Charge 'em with any new Impositions; and that he should put
a Garrison of Five Hundred Men into the Fort. The Duke also made a particular
Agreement with the Governor, which immediately concernd the Emperor and the
Imperial Garrison that was in the Place. So soon as the Capitulation was Signd,
the Duke sent advice of it to their Majesty's, and then made his Entrance into
the City, where he was receivd with that Pomp and Magnificence which carried
along with it the Air and Show of a Triumph. All the Corporations of Mayence
went forth to meet the Prince, and made their Compliments to him in Latin. And
the Duke, who understood other things as well as the taking of Towns, and
winning of Battles, answered all their Complements, and all their Speeches in
Latin, in so Eloquent a manner, that not only they who had the Advantage to
hear him speak were charmed and ravished with Admiration, but the noise of his
Wit and Learning spread it self all over Germany, if I may not say all over
Europe. Some compard him to Alexander, others to Caesar. The First observd in
him that Impetuosity, that Ardour, that Activity, that Heroic Bravery, and
Daring Boldness, which in Alexander were joined to the Love of Letters and
Learning; and the others believed him to be the Living Image of C^sar, not only
in respect of the Capacity, Prudence and Conduct of that Illustrious Roman, but
also in regard of his Eloquence.

The End of the First Book.
THE HISTORY OF LEWIS de BOVRBON, Prince of Conde. The Second Book.
The Prince of Conde made Governor of Champagn and Brie.
THE Duke of Enguien was become so considerable at Court, that after the Battle
of Friburgh, and the reducing of Philipsburgh and Mayence, he was made
Governor of Champaigne and Brie; and it was also farther resolved that he
should again Command in Germany.

1645.
The French took the Field betimes in that Country, and at the beginning of the
Spring they made themselves Masters of three considerable Places, by the
prudent Conduct and Bravery of Major General Erlac. The 15 th. of April he
descended toward the Rhine, where Moser, who commanded the Queen of Sweden's
Forces, joined him with three Hundred Foot, and his own Troop of Horse. All
their Forces being embodyd into an Army, besieged Lichtenaw, a Castle which the
Germans made use of as a convenient Post, to seize the Boats that fell down
from Strasburgh to Philipsburgh. That Place held out some Discharges of the
Canon for Honors sake, and then surrendered upon Composition. After that the
Marquess of Baden surrendered the Castle of Stolburn which belongd to him, The
taking of Lichtenaw, the Castle of Stolbur^ and Kirppenheim^
tho it were strongly seated, and well provided with Victuals. This do^e,
General Erlac besieged Kirppenheim, well fortifid with Half-Moons, and defended
by a broad Moat, lined both within and without. The Inhabitants who relied upon
their Fortifications prepared themselves for a stout Defense; but they were
constrai^d to give way to the Vigorous Onsets of the Bes^egers, and surrendered
upon Composition.

While Erlac made these lesser Progresses, Turenne acted with Success against
the Imperialists. It Is true that the Advantages which he won at the beginning
of the Campaigne were attended with a sad Event, for in regard he thought he
had no reason to fear his being attacked by those he had so vigorously driven
before him, and that he thought 'em a great way off, he was all of a sudden
assailed by Mercy, who was one of the most experienced, most vigilant, most
piercing, and most politic Captains that ever were. Mercy then surpris^d
Marshal Turenne near Mariendal, where the King^s Quarters were, and the Marshal
was beaten before he could joy^n his Men. But certain it is, that if Turenne
committed a fault in suffering himself to be surpised, Ture^ne beaten at
Merienda^.
he made amends for it with as much Honor as it was possible. For by that
presence of Mind which made him find out Remedies in Conjunctures more
difficult, and more imminent Dangers, he made a very Honorable Retreat; still
defending himself with a Heroic Bravery and Conduct, till he got to the
Passage of the Rhine, and fighting rather like a Victor then Vanquishd.

But the loss which France sustaind by that Ill Success was more Advantageously
repaired by the D. of Enguien, who was sent into Germany in June. The Prince's
Presence gave new Confidence to the French, who were something terrified, and
infus'd^ into 'em that Courage, that Boldness and Resolution, as prepared 'em
for the most difficult Undertakings, and put 'em into the greatest Hopes.

So soon as he arrived, he possessed himself of several Places, which gave a
free Passage over the Rhine, and made himself Master of Wimphen, a little City
seated upon the Necker. And at this time it was that he fought the Battle of
Norling, The Battle of Norling.
according to the following Account.

The Loss which the French had sustained by the Battle of Mariendal, was soon
repaired by the Duke of Enguien, who was sent into Germany, a little while
after. The Presence of the Young Prince, who had won so many Victories, not
only enlivend the Courage of the French, but so hotly alarmed the
Imperialists, that at first they knew not what Course to take; and the Prince
made the best of the Terr^ur which he had struck into the Enemy. Immediately he
seized upon the most considerable Places upon the Rhine, and cast the Enemy
into a perfect Consternation, by the taking of Wimphen and Ro^tambu^gh.

But in regard he designed a Nobler Expedition^ to make himself Master of
Heilbrun, he thought it behooved him to do all he could to weaken the Bavarian
Army, which would ^e still opposing his Enterprises. So that without consulting
any farther, after he had prepared every thing ready, he fell upon the Enemy,
who lay Encamped upon several Hillocks between Wending and Norling. Marshal
Grammont commanded the Right Wing, where was the French Cavalry with Arnaut,
Camp-Master General of the Carbines; Turenne le^ the Left Wing, where was all
the German Cavalry. Belten^ve, Marsin, and the Marquess of Castel^a^ commanded
the Foot between the Wings. Major General Geis, and ^c^in commanded the Second
Line, composed of two Regiments of Turenne's, six of Foot, and twelve of Horse,
that were all Hessians, which were reunited with the Dukes: And the Body of the
Reserve was commanded by Chabot.

The Bavarians, who as I have already said, were Posted upon several rising
Grounds, no sooner perceived the Approach of the D's. Army, but they placed
themselves very advantageously under a Mountain, for on the one side they had a
Village that stood in the Plain, and on the other a Castle, where they had
already put their Canon and some Infantry.

Now in regard that from the Village to the Mountain there was an easy Ascent
for an Army embattell'd, the Duke had a Design in the first place to make
himself Master of that Post, as soon as an opportunity should present it self.
Nevertheless, the Enterprise was not so easy; for there was a necessity of
passing between the three Flanks of the Mountain, the Castle and the Village
which he designed to take. But being resolved upon it whatsoever Risco he ran,
he undertook to make an Onset with the Infan^ry only; to the end that as he
drove the Enemy from the Place he had an Eye upon, the two Wings which marched
toward their Cavalry might receive no Annoyance from the Bavarians, but that
on the other side, they might advance under the Favor of their own Men's
Firing.

There was also another Inconvenience which was to be remedied: for there was a
necessity of assay^ing the Village in Flank; and it was to be feared lea^t the
Men who made the Onset should be bea^en by those that stood at the top of the
Mountain. (...) (...) of the Bavarians, so that they pushed forward into the
Plain, and were going to fall upon the French Baggage, when a German Regiment
not only (...) 'em, but gave^ em chase.

The French also were in a kind of Disorder, i^somuch that 'twas greatly to be
feared they (...) loose the Victory. The Right Wing was u^ter^y broken, in
regard they had made no Res^st^^^, being vanquished almost without striking a
(...). But Turenne, with the first Line of the L^ft Win^ which he commanded,
broke into the first ^i^e of the Enemies Right Wing, tho much more n^^erous
then his, which had been extremely (...) by the continual firing of the
Bav^ri^n In^an^ry; and by that means he made amends in some sort ^or the
Cowardice of the French Soldiers. The s^co^^ Line of the Enemies put
themselves at the sa^^ Instant in a Condition to second their ^ir^t, a^^ chargd
some Squadrons in the Flank; but a^^ ^his nothing terrifid Turenne. In the mean
time, (...) Enemies began to make their best of some little Advantage which
they might have had, if Ture^ne h^d been left to himself. But the Duke having
spied him in that Condition, advanced all of a sudden with his second Line, and
having rallied the first with all the speed imaginable, He and Turenne charged
the En^my both at the same time, and having broken so^e of their Squadrons, put
all their Troops in Disorde^^ Here the Duke having performed all the D^ties of
a private Soldier, as well as of a great Captain^ was shot in the Elbow with a
Pistol B^llet, which however did not hinder him from act^ng.

It may be said that till then there had been only some slight Skirmishes, tho
there had already bee^ a great deal of Blood spilt, and a great many O^^icers
of Note Slain on both Sides. But because they found it necessary to come to a
General Battel^ the Bavarians having brought down their Body of Reserve, and
the Troops which had broken the Right Wing, that Turenne seconded, the Duke
ordered the He^sians to advance, together with his own Infantry and Cavalry,
and marched himself at the Head of 'em ^^ainst the Enemy. The Dispute was
obstinate and bloody for two hours together, and during that time there was no
Quarter given on either side. They ^^ught on both sides with so much valor and
equality of Advantage, that it was a difficult thing, while the heat of the
Combat lasted, to judge which way the Victory would incline; but at last it
fell to the Duke. One part of the Enemy was cut to pieces, the other routed and
put to flight. The Ba^arians lost four thousand Men in this Battle. ^Tis true
that it cost the Duke fifteen hundred, counting in the wounded; but withal he
got fifteen pieces of Canon, took forty Colors, and a great number of
Prisoners, of which He was forc^d to release the greatest part, because he
could not keep 'em without great Inconvenience to his own Army. But that which
completed this Victory was the taking of Gleen, General of the Imperial Army,
who was afterward exchanged for Marshal Grammont; and the Death of General
Mercy, one of the greatest Captains o^ his Age. That very Mercy, of whom the
Duke himself and Turenne gave that Honorable Testimony; that it was he alone
who for along time sustained the tottering Imperial Troops; that he had never
been surpised in any Irregular Motion^ that he had never lost a favorable
opportuni^y, nor ever failed of preventing the taking of any, as if he had been
present in their Councils. In a word, this Loss of the Bavarians was so great,
that it seemd at first as if the Prosperity of their Army had expired with
their General. And certain it is, that that same Body which had so many times
signalized themselves, never after that moved as it w^nt to do.

(...) (...) day with his, and the D. of Enguien marched another way with his
men, toward the General Rendevo^z.

The D. of Lorrains Army had already passd the Scheld, with a Resolution to
oppose the Designs of the D. of Orleance, and D. of Enguien, But so soon as he
understood that the three Bodies of the French Army were marching directly
toward him, he repassed the River at Montagne, in expectation of P^colomini,
Beck and Sambry, that were to join him. But tho that Army were five and twenty
thousand strong; tho it coasted all along, in view, the March of the French
Army, and that it were already posted along the River under the Walls of
Tournay; the French however forbore not to advance a little below the same
place, and to seize upon a Pass over the Scheld, over against Trinity Mount.
That Pass gave the French an easy opportunity to attack Tournay or Oudenara.
But the difficulty was how to pass the River in view of a powerful Army, which
in all probability would not sit still and look on. Nevertheless, at a Council
of War all the General Officers concluded, that there was necessity for 'em to
attempt the Passage. The only difficulty they met with was to secure the
Convoys; but the D. of Eng^i^^ had already found out a Remedy for that. For he
had attacked the Castle of Lannoy, Lannoy ^a^en.
seated between Tournay and L'^^^^, and took it in a days time. Which being
done, all their Conveys were securd, and they had no more to do but to put
their Resolutions in Execution. But upon a sudden the D. of Orleance alterd
his Design, and concluded upon the Siege of Courtray. First of all the two
Brigades led by Gassion and Ranzau, got before the Place, and invested on both
sides the Ri^er (...), upon which it was seated, till the D. of E^guien came up
with his Army on that side next ^o Moncouron and Rolingue. But the little Care
they ^ook to Invest it ^etimes, gave the Enemy leisure to put a considerable
Succor into the Town. Delpon^^^, a (...) in great ^epute for holding out of
Towns^ got in with his own Regiment and twelve Companys of Foot^ however all
this did but animate the French Generals so much the more.

The next day the Trenches were opened: but the Neighborhood of the Enemy so
near the Trenches, was the reason that the Besiegers were in continual fears of
being surpised. The Enemy also made some motions. And the Duke of Enguien gave
notio^^ the same day that the Trenches were opened, that the Spanish Army was
advanced very near his Camp, with a design to fight him. Thereupon one part of
the French Army drew off and prepared to meet the Spaniards, who were
constrained to retreat a long by the Scheldt, into their first Entrenchments.
After their Retreat Enguien joined Gasson and Ranzau, to the end they might
invest the Town with more ease and assurance.

All the French Forces being reunited, the Circumvallation was begun^ and
finished in less then four days, tho it took up almost five Leagues in Compass,
in reguard that both Horse as well as Foot were set to work. Orleans with
Ranza^'s Men took up his Quarter beyond the Li^, and on that side next to
Flanders, from one end of the City to the other; and he had his Communication
with the Quarters of Enguien and Gass^on, by means of several bridges la^'d
over the River. Enguien took up his Quarter on this side the River, from
Orleance's Quarter to Gassion's, on that side next Tournay; and Gassion from
Enguien's to Orleanc^'s, on that side next Audenard and Gand. The
Circumvallation as I have already said, was so vast, that the French Armies
were not numerous enough to guard the whole extent of it, so that there were
many void ^paces, through which the Spaniards might have put Re^ie^ into the
Town, had not the spaces been in^lo^'d with a Line, supported and d^fended with
a great number of Redoubts. 'Twas thought by the Besiegers that by this means
they had removed the Enemy so far off, that it would be impossible for him to
come on. But Charles the IV. Duke or Lorrain, in a sit of Despair, usual with
unfortunate Heroes, advanced with all his Army, leaving his Baggage behind him
and posted himself within Canon Shot of the French Camp, making a show as if he
would attack 'em. And had they marched directly against the Duke of Lorrain, as
it was Enguiens advice, they had doubtless given him a total Defeat. But
Orleance did not relish that Counsel, whose opinion it was that they should
only mind reducing the Town, without running any hazard. So that every Quarter
entrenched themselves, and went on with the Siege, tho very slowly, by reason
that Lor^ain's Army gave fresh Alarums every moment.

In the mean time Lorrain being forcd to retreat, upon the news which was
brought him, that the Hollanders had taken the Field, and his Presence was
necessary in the Neighborhood to those Quarters where they were drawn
together, endeavored before his departure to put some considerable relief into
the Town. But the attempt proved fruitless, and cost him also a World of Men,
which extremely abated the Courage of the Besieged, who flattered themselves
with being relieved. At the same time Gassion attacked a Half Moon and carryd
it. Enguien also having opened his Trenches on that side where he lay, soon
after lodged himself upon the Counterscarp of the Half Moon which he attacked.
The extreme facility that he met with, was the reason that he only made a brisk
Onset without any Formality. His Enterprise proved successful, and was so much
the more applauded, because it made him Master of what he de^^^'d much sooner
then if he had gone regularly to w^^k. However because the Trench was pearc'd
thorough, and not supported with any ^^dg^ments^ Traverses or places of Arms,
and for that the ^o^gment which he had made upon the Half Moon was not well
secured, it was three times regained, and the French were driven out with great
loss. Nevertheless, nothing but bare necessity restrained the Co^rage of the D.
of Enguien. His desire to repair his loss by main force, had like several times
to have transported him beyond his Judgment, and made him abandon himself
wholly to his Valor. But this same Prince, who as valiant as he was, was no
less Judicious then Brave, gave ear to reason, and pref^^^'d the security of
formal Approaches, before his boiling Indignation, and the troublesome delays
which the Maxims of besieging taught him, before an irregular Daring. And now
Lorrain being joynd by the Marquess of Caracena, there happened some Skirmishes
between the French and Spaniards^ The Besieged likewise, who still expected
Succor, made continual Sallies^ and moreover, they relied upon their Garrison
which was very numerous, and the strength of the Fortifications. For it was
surrounded with a good Wall flankd with Towers, with a Rampart and a Moat
supplied with water by the River. But Delpon^^ finding that he could not hope
to be relieved; that all the Half-Moons were taken and that the Besiegers began
to fill up the Moate, and fix their Miners upon the 28 resolved to beat a
Parley, and had very honorable Articles granted him. After the taking of this
Place the French Army rested a while in their Camp, and for sixteen days did
nothing else but repair the Breaches of the City; Level some part of their
Lines, and Fortify the weakest places with five or six Half-Moons.

So soon as the French had rested, they began to think of New Conquests. For
the Dutch Army, to which the D. of O^leince had sent a Reinforcement of six
thousand Men, were passed the Sheldt; and the French and Dutch Armies being
joined Orleance advanced toward Berguen St. Winox, which is a large City,
seated upon the River Colme, which about a hundred Paces below, falls into the
Canal of Dunkirk, with a resolution to Attack that place. To which purpose,
Orleance with Ranzaus Brigade posted himself along the Colme, on that side next
Sanberkhen^ Enguien fixed himself from his left Hand as far as the Fort of
Ventismul^r; so that they had invested the City on both sides the River.
Gassion took his Post from the Fort of Ventis^^^, beyond the Colme, as far as
the Grand Canal from Berghen to Dunkirk, and farther to the Banks of Colme,
where he joined to Orleance's Camp.

The Place was no sooner invested, but Berghen and Dunkirk, pulled up all their
Sluices; but the French had posted themselves upon two Rising Grounds, and opend
two Trenches, one in the Duke of Orleance's, the other in the D. of Enguien's
Quarter. So that the Besieged, seeing the French advance so furiously with
their Approaches, and that the Cannon from Enguiens Attack had already broken
down their Walls, and that they lay naked to the Shot, demanded to Capitulate.
Which being concluded, the Garrison marchd out the 31. of July, in very good
order, and was conducted to Dunkirk.

So soon as they were Master of Berguen a design was laid for the besieging of
Mardicke. To which purpose Messengers were sent into Holland to solicit
Admiral Trump to lie with his Men of War before the Place. But the Marquess of
Caracena, judging rightly, by the March of the French Troops, of the design
which Orleance and Enguien had formed, sent away forthwith to Fernando de
Solis^ who was Governor of Mardicke, two thousand Foot and a hundred Horse,
with all other things necessary for the defense of the Place. The
Circumvallation was finished in three Days, and upon the 8 ^h of August at
Night, Orleance opened two Trenches, and Enguen one. The besieged on the other
side made several Sallys; and that which was the least advantageous, and made
upon Enguien^s Trench, proud to be the most Fatal to the French, for the
Prince, upon the first noise of the Sally, flew upon the Enemy with a great
number of Volunteers, and the Horse Guard of his Attack, brake through all that
opposed him, and put all to the Sword, hardly one escaping back. But the
Besieged ^^^d so furiously that their Shot from the Counterscarp, the Hornwork,
the Half-Moons and the Bastions was fatal to a considerable number of the
French. The Counts of Flaiz and Rocheguyon were both slain, with the Chevalier
de Fiesque. The D. of Nemours was wounded in the Leg with a Musket Bullet, and
the D. of Eng. scorcht in the Face with a Fire-post. Thus the Besieged
continued their Sallys till the 23 d. But all their Canon being dismounted, and
the French pressing upon 'em with an unresistable Fury, they thought it their
best course to Capitulate, Mardicke taken.
which they did the 24 th. and by their Articles they were all made Prisoners
of War; to the number of two thousand five hundred Common Soulders, two
Colonels, and Forty Captains.

Some days after the Surrender of Mardicke, the Duke of Orleance returned to
Court, leaving the General Command of the Army to the Duke of Enguien, who
after he was cured of his Wounds, pursued his Conquests with the same Vigor as
before.

The Post before Mardicke, was too inconvenient for the Army to make any long
stay in those parts. The Prince therefore dislodgd two days after, and passed
the Colme. But at the same time that Mardicke (...) (...) I am apt to think
that the Dignity of this History^ may raise my mind to that pitch as to (...)
to hope, without wounding my Modesty, that the Recital will deserve to be
suffered among the Learned, if it may not deserve their Applause.

All people thought, that the Campaign in Flanders during the Year 1646. would
have ended with the taking of Mardicke. The Season was far spent, our hardships
had been extreme, and our Victories highly Honorable. Gaston Duke of Orleance,
after he had Commanded our Armies was recalled to Court; and all things laid
together, made people believe that the Army would have been laid up in their
Winter^Quarters; and that the War would not have been renewed again till the
Spring. Never the less, Lewis Prince of Conde, never accustomed to end his
Campaignes without the having performed some great Exploit above the Common
rate of Courage, did not find his Honor yet satisfied. And tho that after the
departure of the Duke of Orleance, who left him General, he had in two days
passd several Rivers, repulsed the Armies of Lamboy and Caracena, and taken the
City of Furnes; he could not consent to retreat, the Winter being yet at some
distance^ but formed designs befitting his Reputation and his Fortune. For so
long as the Spaniards, who knew that the loss of a General Battle would be the
total Ruin of Flanders, refused to put it to the venture, and that there was
no other way to continue the War but by Seiges, the Prince resolved to
undertake one more this Year, and to that purpose called his Council together,
to consult which place he should fall upon: and all opinions were reducd to
two, either Menene, or Dunkirk.

Menene is a Town seated upon the Lis, between Armentiers and Courtray, in a
Fertile and Pleasant Country, famous for the Trade it drove formerly in Co^^ and
^eer, and which boasts her Original (...), and we had fortunately won (...)
Gassion afterward thought fit to (...), and by his care it was put into a
Condition able to ^^stain the Siege of a great Army, when C^^^cena surprizd it
rather through the weakness of the Garrison, then for any defect of the Place.

They who were for regaining it, alleged, That was absol^tely necessary to
join those places which we held upon the Lis^ That Menene being in the Enemies
hands, (...) Convoys to Courtray could never go sa^e; that it wo^ld r^quire a
whole Army to bridle that one City. On the other side, that if we had it in our
own hands Provisio^s might be ^arryd up the River with little danger and
expence^ that we should be in a condition to make farther Proposals^ without
leaving any thing behind to give us annoyance; that Armentieres and Courtray
would facilit^te the conve^i^ncies of the Siege; that it was not fitting to
suffer an Enemy in the midst of our strong Holds; and lastly that it was for
the Honor of the Nation to preserve by our Arms^ what our Arms had acquired
us. These Reasons were plausible and solid in appearance; but they who did not
approve 'em, argued after this manner.

That the Siege of Menene required the crossing of several Countries, and to
undertake a hasty march to prevent the Enemies Diligence, and to be at leisure
to entrench themselves before the whole Army could join; which appeared the
less feasible, because their Forces encamped about Newport, near Furnes; they
were always restless to know our designs, and that they were ready to follow us
which way soever we bent our march. Moreover, the Siege of Courtray accomplishd
in view of the Enemy, with contin^^l hardships, the Succors sent away to the
Hollanders, during a violent heat, beyond the Nature of the Climate, in a
Country open and without water, unless that of C^nals, and stinking Mershes,
bitter and noisome; our q^ick march toward the Sea Coast, the taking of
Berguen, the Siege of Mardike, the Expedition against Furnes, had almost
rendered the Army unfit for Service. On the other side, the Enemy having
undertaken no Siege, keeping themselves the best part of the Summer under the
shelter of their City, abounding in all sorts of conveniences, and Provisions
were as fresh as when they first quitted their Garrisons, and were in a
condition rather to get before us to Menene, then to follow us: but tho we were
assured of getting there before 'em, and putting our Lines in a posture of
defense, yet the River of Lis running round the Place, would oblige us not only
to make a large Circumvallation, but moreover to divide our Army into two
parts; and this Army would be so l^ssen'd, as it happens alw^ys at the end of a
Campaign where the Soldiers have suffered great Hardships, that we shall not
have Soldiers anow to defend our vast Entrenchments, much less sufficient to
carry on the Siege. On the other side, the Enemy will have the Advantage with
all his Forces to assail the half of ours, and afterward to defeat the
remainde^, if their first attempts succeed. More especially since the Return of
the Infantry, which had repassd the Sea, would not admit 'em the least hopes of
any Diversion from the Hollanders, tho the Prince had sent Tourville to 'em to
persuade 'em, if he could, to sit down before some Town, were it only to divide
the Spainsh Forces, consequently to dream of taking Menene, considering the
Condition they were in, was visibly to hazard for a Town of small Importance,
the Honor of so many Victories, the Reputation of the Prince, and the Loss of
the Army. Add to this, that after the Siege of Mardike, the first Advice was to
regain Menene, which tho then it seemed good, nevertheless, the Surrender of
Furnes, which was as it were a Blockade upon Dunkirk, and opend a way to that
nobler Expedition, ought to make 'em alter their Counsel^, and therefore that
of the two designs they were to make choice of that which promised most Profit
and most Honor.

These Considerations having made 'em lay aside that Enterprise which few
People contested after the taking of Furnes, they fell to examine the Attempt
upon Dunkirk, where they could not expect to meet with fewer Difficulties. For
tho the Situation rendered the Circumvallation more easy, and that it were but
a small March for the Army, yet there were so many Obstacles to obstruct the
Design, that it was morally impossible to surmount.

There is a necessity, said they, that one part of the Army must Encamp upon
some Hills, and the other among standing Pools, and muddy Grounds. There was no
Wood in all the Neighborhood, nor any Straw for the Soldiers Hutts; no
conv^nience for Lodging the Cavalry; no Forage for their Subsistence. One part
of the Country desert and untilld^ the War had ruined the rest: So that there
was no likelihood that the Army could subsist there one day; much less continue
a Siege. The trouble of procuring Victuals was also as great, which could be
brought no way but by Calais, or by Sea. But the Dunkirkers might easily drown
so much Ground as to deprive 'em of any Communicat^^n by L^nd, and the way by
Sea was no less hazardous, because of the Fla^s and Shoals, and want of Ports;
and altogether impossible in stormy weather: So that if it should happen to be
bad weather, and that chance to continue but a little, we must either famish,
or be forced to raise the Siege, with the Ignominy of having attempted it
without foresight. Moreover, as it was a most difficult thing to force Dunkirk^
so long as her Port was open, so there was no probability that the great Dutch
Ships that had lain in the Road ever since the taking of Mardike, could be able
to come to an Anchor near the Shore, if the Winds began to blow so furiously
as they had done, more especially in the Engl. Channel, where the Waves are
short, and the Sea runs high in bad weather. And when the Dutch are forced to
keep out at Sea, the Enemy with their small Vessels, will run all hazards to
fetch Relief for the Besieged. They farther observed, that during the September
Tides that swelled high, 'twould be a hard thing to hinder the Barks from
Newport or Ostend from creeping along the Shore, and getting with the Tide of
Flood (...) himself confirmed in his desire to a^tack it by this, that the
Enemies Generals would hardly hazard the event of a Battle, so long as it
appear^d to them uncertain; for which reason he might the more daringly
undertake what he pleased, and that there was no fear of those whom their own
Interests held to be half vanquished already.

Thus then the desire of the public Benefit joined with the hope of more then
ordinary honor, having made him resolve to fall upon Dunkirk, he determined to
vanquish all manner of Obstacles, and to overcome Nature her self that opposed
his great Design. Nevertheless, to testify his Moderation in an Action of so
great Importance, and to avoid as much as in him lay, the effects of envy the
inseparable Companion always of great Achievements, he caused the Opinions
which had been debated in Council to be written out, and without imparting his
mind publicly to any Body, sent away La Moussaye to Court, to inform Ann of
Austria, who during the Minority of Lewis the XIV. her Son, successfully
governed our Empire, in Expectation of her Orders, with a Submission so much
the more acceptable to her, that he might have Permission to act without
consulting the rest of the great Ministers.

Now in regard he had so ordered his Message that he made no question but that
the Queen would leave all things to his Management, and that she would permit
his Prudence to take the Liberty of his choice, he resolved while he stayed for
her Approbation, to employ his time in getting all things which he thought
necessary in such a Readiness, that when the Answer came from Court, there was
nothing to retard his going forward. Four things chiefly put him to a great
deal of Trouble; the bad condition of his Men, that lessened every day, and
which however he designed for new hardships, greater then those they had
already undergone; the barrenness of the Place whither he was to lead 'em; the
difficulty of hindering the Dunkirkers from communicating with Ostend and
Newport, and the weakness of Furnes, which left him exposed to the Enemy, if he
drew off his Army.

After he had for some time debated with himself the m^ans to remedy these
Inconveniences, his Prudence at last furnishd him with such as proved
effectual. La Ferte Seneterre remained upon the Lis with a volant Camp of eight
hundred Horse, and fifteen hundred Foot, with a design to secure the French
Conquests, and if the Enemy made any Diversion, to march where necessity called
him. The Prince also gave him Directions with all speed to fortify those
Places which the French held in those Quarters, and to put ^em into such a
Condition, that if he sent for him, he might have 'em well secured. He wrote
likewise to the Vidame of Amiens, the King's Lieutenant in Picardy, to draw out
of the Frontier Garrisons as many Men as possibly he could, and to bring 'em to
the Camp. He sent Villequien into Boulonnois to rally the Mil^tia of the
Country that were returned home after the taking of Mardike. And foreseeing
that the French Infantry which had followed Grammont into Holland, and which
were to return into France in two of the States Vessels, might Land at Mardike,
a little before he marchd for Dunkirk, he designd to make use of those Men, and
ordered that as soon as they Landed, they should be distributed into Mardike,
Bourbourgh and Berghen, to the end they might refresh themselves a little after
the Inconveniences of the Sea, and be ready so soon as there should be any
occasion for 'em at the Siege. He ordered also the Polish Regiments of Priamski
and Cabree to take some rest in the Neighborhood to Calais. Those Foreigners
were above seventeen hundred in all, and were newly come into France under the
Leading of Sicot.

After he had taken those just Measures, that he might bring together when he
pleased as many Men as were sufficient to fight the Enemy, should they resolve
to fall upon him rather then suffer the Town to fall into his hands, and to
carry on all the Labors of the Siege, his next care was to provide for their
Subsistence. To which purpose he dispatched the Intendant Champestr^ux to
Callais, to make Provision of Ammunition and Victuals, and told him which way
he would have 'em brought, notwithstanding the Inconveniency of the Season, and
the deepness of the Roads; remitting to him the performance in general of what
he orderd him in particular.

Now, tho that the Dutch Admiral, Trump, a Man famous for Sea Affairs, and
whose valor had raised his Fortune, was come, by the States Order, with ten
Men of War to an Anchor in Dunkirk Road, and that number were sufficient to
block up the Port, while the French Navy found the Spaniards Employment in the
Mediterranean; nevertheless in regard the small Vessels of the Enemy might
creep along the Coast and slip into the Place, the Prince thought it convenient
to send for some few Frigates from the French Ports. So that Montigny sent away
twelve from Dieppe; Villequier two from Bologne, which were joined by one from
Calais, together with some Beelanders which they picked up upon the Coast.
Beelands are small Vessels, longer and narrower then Hoys which they very much
resemble, and much in use among the Flemings, for the convenience of their
Trade; and all these small Vessels were under the command of Andonville.

There was nothing more now to be done but to put Furnes in a Condition to stop
the Enemy while Dunkirk was taken; and to furnish it with Forage for the
Subsistence of the Horse, which the Prince took care of in Person; to the end
his presence might make 'em more diligent to hasten their work, and to see that
they spent no more time then what was necessary in finishing the
Fortifications, and supplying the Magazines.

Furnes is seated between Newport and Dunkirk, at some distance from the Sea,
tho it may be conjectured that formerly it was very near it, when the Ocean
driven by the violence of the North Winds, overflowed all the Land about it, if
not stopped by the Mounds that lie in the way. For Fueren or Wueren, as the
Flemings now pronounce it, signifies to Navigate; and Nae^wueren to arrive in
Port; as if Furnes had formerly been a Haven for Ships, and that it had derived
the name of it from thence. And as a mark of this, the Vicount of Furnes holds
the first Rank among the Castell^ns of Flanders, who are called Riverians, in
regard it was their Business to guard the Coasts. A great number of Churches
and considerable Edifices render the City very beautiful. There is the Chamber
still to be seen where Lewis the XI. kept himself close, when being Da^phin, he
retired to Charles the VII. and that the D. of Burgundy protected him from the
Anger of his Father, and that Chamber is still adorned with the Arms of France
and Burgundy. The Country about Furnes is pleasant in Summer, chiefly that
which extends to the East and South, by reason of the Meadows and Woods: but
the Mershes render it very noisome at other Seasons. It Is true that this
Inconvenience is amply recompensed by the fertility of the Pasturages, which is
the reason that in several places they neglect all the care of good Husbandry;
and by the great number of Canals, which are infinitely advantageous for Trade.
Nevertheless, there is good store of Plough'd Land, which bears plenty of Corn;
and in a word, the Riches of these Parts is such, that Charles the V. was wont
to say, That if the rest of Flanders were but like that corner of the World, it
would be more worth then the Indies. The Foundation of it is very ancient; for
we find in the year 958. Baldwin Count of Flanders fortified it with outworks
of Earth, against the Invasions of the Normans. After that, notwithstanding it
^ad been several times ruined by Fire, by Domestic^ Seditions, Civil Wars, and
the funy of the French Arms, under Robert of Arra^, and Philip de (...), yet
still it has recovered it self after so many Disasters, and was then in a
flourishing condition, when the French took it. So that besides the necessity
the French had of it, in order to their design upon D^nkirk, they had reason to
preserve it, for the sake of it self. So that the Prince after he had
considered the Situation, and the nature of the Place, resolved to environ it
with several Half-Moons, a Hornwork and a Counterscarp; having no other defense
at that time then a Wall flankd with Towers, and a Moat full of Water. To this
purpose he distributed the Foot into those places where he intended to break
Ground; divided and appointed the Quarters of the Regiments; orderd a
Camp-Master to every Quarter to take care of the Work; settled the Hours of
Rest; named the Bodies which were to relieve one another, and methodizd all
things with so much equality, that there might always be a good number of
Soldiers at work all day long. In the mean time, the Cavalry were ordered to
cut Wood, and every Troop brought Piles to make Palisadoes and Stakes for the
Use of the Fortifications. He had also before this commanded the Magistrates of
Furnes, to order the Peasants through the whole extent of their Jurisdiction,
to gather Fo^age, and bring it into the City. He sent for Boats from all parts
to facilitate the Transportation of it; and appointed an Officer to receive it
as they hundled it up, and store it up in the Magazines. Never was seen so much
Diligence, and so much Order, both at the same time. The Fortifications were
raised, the City furnished with Provisions, the Cavalry, Infantry, Burgesses,
Peasants, Seamen, every Body quick, and without Confusion, in the performance
of what was enjoined 'em. All this while, the Prince was every where giving
Directions, and showing that he had a perfect Understanding of Military
Economy. Which to me, seemd so much the more worthy of Applause, because
Valor is common to the meanest private Soldier, whereas Foresight, and
Knowledge in the Art of War, are the distinguishing Qualities of Great Men. So
that it appeared, in a short time, how much the Pr^sence and Ability of a
General puts all things in forwardness. For in the space of 14 days, the
Fortifications were fi^ishd, and the Magazines well filld.

Now these great Preparations not being unknown to the Spaniards (for the
Flemmings spurred on with that Affection, which People reserve a little while
for the Masters they have lost, gave them continual Intelligence) they readily
c^njecturd that the French had a design to attack Dunkirk. Caracena, who lay
nearest to the French, was the first who dispatched away advice of it to Castle
Rodrigo, Governor of the Low Countries, at Brussels. He sent him Information
of what he learnt day by day, and by redoubld Couriers, de^ir'd his Counsel and
Assistance, in a Matter of so high Importance as this. The chief Commanders of
the Flemmish Armies, after they had shared among 'em the defense of these
Countries, were at that time seaprated in Posts remote from one another. Their
Generalissim^, Charles of Lorrain, was drinking Waters at the Spaw; and his Men
lay quarterd upon the Frontiers of Holland; as was also Beck with his Body of
Flemmings and Walloons, Picolomini, with the princip^l strength of the Country,
was encamp^d upon the Scheldt, near Dendermonde. Curacena, lay at Newport,
commanding the Royal Army of Spaniards and Italians, as also the Germans, and
the Liedigeois, which the Emperor had sent at the beginning of the Campaigne;
while Lamboy, General of those Forces, constrained by Sickness to quit the
Service for some time, was gone for the Recovery of his Health to one of his
Houses in the County of Liege. This Disposal of the Spanish Forces, seemed
absolutely necessary to Casti^rodridgo, for the security of the Provinces which
he governed; and upon the sole conjecture of Appearances, usually false,
frequently fraudulent, he durst not disfurnish those Places, which they
possessed, for fear of exposing 'em to the Armies of the French or Hollanders.
But tho there were not so much reason to be afraid of the Hollanders, for that
they carried on the War more remissly, since their Plenipotentiaries had begun
a Negotiation of a Truce, with the K. of Spain, in the Assembly at Munster,
where the Ministers of the Christian Princes met to settle Peace over Europe;
yet it was plain, that tho both the Armies of Flanders should have joined,
there was no likelihood they would come to encamp near Dunkirk, so long as the
French lay at Furnes; for that being deprived both by Sea and Land of all
Communication with Newport, it would have been their visible ruin, and to have
been exposed an easy Prey to the French, all Flanders being deprived of their
Veterane Bands, which till then had hindered 'em from hastening their
Destruction. Thus Castelrodridge, being ^^opt by these Considerations, and the
slow manner of acting, customary to that Nation, who wait upon time, which they
often loose, in hopes that either the Season, or the Places, would either
hinder or ruin the French, deemd it su^ficient to keep in a Readiness what he
thought necessary for the Relief of Dunkirk, when the Town should be Besieged.
To the end therefore that nothing might be omitted which he thought might be
serviceable to him in this important necessity, he resolved to try whither he
could excite the Parliament of England against the French, in regard they
seemed to look upon it as their Interest not to let Dunkirk fall into their
Hands. To this purpose, after he had imparted his Resolutions to the Generals
he dispatched an Express to the Spanish Ambassador at London, to the end he
might be informed of his Designs, and make use of his Credit, which was very
great with the Republicans at that time, to obtain a considerable Succor.

This was the posture of Affairs on both sides, when the Answer from the Court
was brought to the Prince. It was written in such a manner, that tho the
Ministers started some difficulties in the Ent^rprise of Dunkirk, 'twas easy
to perceive that they inclined to the Design of Attempting it; rightly judging,
that if it succeeded, the taking of that place would prove a great Honor to
the Queens Regency. Thereupon they referred it again to the Prince, to consider
whither he would undertake the Enterprise or no.

The design therefore being resolved upon, there was nothing more in the
Princes Thoughts but going to work, and to make the best of the Season, Winter
drawing on a pace, and already beginning to pinch the Army. For the security
therefore of Furnes,, the Prince left Bosquet Governor, with a Gar^ison of
1200 Foot, and 100 Horse, with Instructions to send continually to the Camp,
Corn, Hay and Straw.

All the Soldiers h^d orders then to be ready to March, and the 19th. of
September, the whole French Army set forward from Furnes to Dunkirk, consisting
of between nine and ten thousand Foot, and five thousand Horse, without any
Baggage, or that Rabble of useless People, that usually follow great Armies.
Gassion and Ranzan Marshalls of France, commanded under the Prince. The first
having passed through all the Degrees of Warfare, had attaind by his own Merit
to be chief in the Princes Favor. The other a Native of Germany, but long
devoted to France, found his Services recompensed with the greatest Honor to
which the French Nobility could aspire. These two had under 'em, for
Lieutenants, Villequier and la Fer^e Imbrand, Chastillon, la Moussaye, Arnauld,
Pallua^, Lavat, Chabot, Castelnau and Marsin, Camp^Marshals to the Prince.
Quince, Roane^te, and Miossans, were the same under Gassion. Normantier, Sicot,
and Clanleu, under Ranzau. They had under them very good Officers, few
Volunteers^ but amongst those that were was the Duke of Rets^ whose Diligence,
near the Person of the Prince, during the whole Campaigne, made him to be
greatly taken notice of; and Montauzier who rode Post to wait upon the Prince,
upon the first Rumo^r of the Siege.

The Country between Furnes and Dunkerk, is intercut with several Canals,
between the New River, and the Colme, beyond which, toward the North, the Downs
extend themselves, and the Sea-Sands. The Prince therefore resolved to divide
the Army into three Parts, as well to possess himself of this Country, as to
invest Dunkirk, so soon as he was got out of Furnes. This Disposal rendered his
March more easy and swift, and by this means, all the three Bodies which he
had separated might arrive before the Town, all at the same time. He chose that
side next the Town, as the most dangerous, by reason of Newport, where the
Enemy lay encampt. He had with him the Regiments of Pers^n; Enguien, Conti,
Albert, and Mazar^n, Vattevil^e's Regiment of Switzers, and the Battallions of
English under Tilliot, Hacquins and Hansfers. His Cavalry consisted of the
Queens Gendarmes, those of Conde, Enguien, Long^eville, de l' Hospital, and
Grammont, the Light Horse of Conde, and Enguien; the Royal Regiment; those of
Enguien, Mazarin, Grammont, Sceaux, Meille, Marsin, Binse, and four Troops of
Arnauds Carabines. The most part of these Bodies had always served under him,
and the Trials he had put 'em upon, gave him such reason to confide in 'em,
that it was much to their Honor. Gassion took the Left Hand of the Prince^
along the River that runs from Furnes to Dunkirk, with the Companies of French
Gu^rds, six Companies of Swiss Guards, the Regiments of Picardy and Navarr, one
of Walloons under Borrnonville, one of Switzers under Guy, and a Battallion of
English under Rocpy. For his Cavalry he had his own Regiment, with those of
Coas^in, de la Fueil^ade, Villequier, Rocheguyon, Coeuvres, Bergere, Stref^
Tillar, and Bussyalmoru. Ranzau marched thorough the Country that lies on the
other side of the New River, with six Companies of the French Guards, the
Regime^ts of Piemont and Orleance, and the Switzers of Molondin. His Cavalry
consisted of the Regiments of Orleance, dela Ferte Imbaud, Roquelaure,
Beaujeau, Eclinvilliers, Noirlieu^ with his own, together with the Fusel^ers
and Cravates. The Artillery, commanded by Cosse, St. Marsin, Chouppes, and le
Borde^, consisted of fifteen heavy Canon, some Middling and small Pieces, some
Bombs, and a great number of Grenades.

After a March of six Hours, the whole Army arrived before Dunkirk, not having
met with any considerable Obstacle. Only Ranzau was constrained to drive the
Enemy from four Redoubts, which they held upon the Canal, that leads from
Dunkirk to Bergues, through which he passed. Nor would it have been an easy
thing to have forced 'em in some hours, would they have held out till their
Canon could have been brought up; which could not have been done so soon, by
reason of the deep and miery ways, which the Rain had broken. But whither they
wanted Resolution, or whether they thought to spare their Soldiers, they
quitted the three first Redoubts, so soon as they saw the Bridges laid to get
at 'em, and retreated to the fourth, which was defended by the Canon of the
Town; and immediately a hunderd and fifty Horse fall^'d out of Dunkirk, and put
themselves behind the Fort; as it was thought, with a design to dispute it. But
afterward it appeard, that their Intention was only to favor the Retreat of
their Foot, which was there engaged. For Noirmonstier, who was commanded to
take in the Forts, and who had already possessed himself of the rest, was
marching to fall upon the latter. At the same time he also caused the first
Squadron of the Regiment of Orleance to advance, and ordered Genlis to take a
hunderd Musketeers of the French Guards, and seize upon certain old Ruins that
lay between the Fort and the Town. But that struck a fear into the Enemy, lest
we should hinder their return, and made 'em judge it was dangerous for 'em to
stay any longer; so that they made away after a slight Skirmish, and the French
Van Curriers drove 'em to their very Counterscarp.

Dunkirk is seated among the Downs, that rise up with their white Heads, on the
North side, from Eschelle to Calais. On the East it is bounded by Furnes and
Newport. Southward, it looks toward Berguen and Flanders: Mardike lies to the
West of it; and the Sea washes it to the North. The Territory that belongs to
it is very small, and almost every way enclosed by that of Berguen. The
largeness and strength of it proceeds from the convenience of the Sea^ St.
Eloy, preaching the Gospel, built a Chapel there in former Ages, of which
there are some Remains still to be seen near the Towers of the City; from
whence it derives both Name and Original. Dunkirk, signifying no more then the
Church upon the Downs; and it seems that for that Reason they have built the
Steeple of St. Eloy^s Church so high, that the rising of the Hills does not
hinder it from being seen out at Sea; and from the Platform at the top, you may
discover in a serene day, the Mou^tains of Dover, and the Coast of Englan^^ At
first, Dunkirk was only a poor Hamlet, composed of Fishermens Hutts, erected
for the convenience of the Haven. Afterward, Antiquity and Carelessness having
spoiled the Harbor of Mardike, famous at that time, it became considerable by
the Ruin of that Port. Baldwin Count of Flanders, Sirnamd the Young, made a
City of it in the Year nine hundred four score and sixteen. Afterward it was
peopled by the Favor of Philip of Vermandois, who endowing it with several
Immunities, drew great numbers of Inhabitants to it. It would require a
particular History to relate, how often it has changd Masters; how often it
fell in Partition to Robert de Cassel; how it past to Robert de Barr^ who by
the Marriage of his Daughter, he fixed it into the Family of St. Pol; how it
fell afterward to the Families of Vendosm and Bourbon; afterward under the
Dominion of the Spaniards. It would be also no less Delightful to understand
the various Misfortunes it has undergone; how the English burnt it in the Year
1388. how it was surpised by the French, a long time after, under the Marshal
Terms; what are the Privileges of the Lords of it? what are the Laws it is
governed by? what is the Trade which it drives? what is the Supreme Marine
Council which is there settled? what is their Herring-fishing, and the great
v^nt they have for that Commodity? and what the Privileges wherewith the
Emperor Charles the V. endowd ^em. But in regard our Design is only to write
the Siege of this place, without intending any other Divertisement for the
Reader, we shall only give an account of the State of the City, at the time
when the Prince's Army sat down before it.

(...) divided into two Cities, the old and (...) The old is seated upon the
Seashore, en(...)hick Wall, after the ancient man(...) a great many large
Towers, sup(...) a sp^cious Rampart, accompanied with (...) with Brick, above
26 foot wide, and (...) Colme Water, which swells in that (...) Tides are
higher or lower. On Mardike (...) Sea runs up into the Land, and extending
(...) the Wall of the old City, forms a Ha(...) to contain 200 great Ships:
however, (...) it is very narrow and dangerous, by (...) of the Shelves and
Sands that lie full in the (...) it. Within the Canal, which is no less (...)
then the Haven, above a hundred Vessels may ^ide (...) safety. Out of this
Haven sailed the (...) blockd up the mouths of our Rivers, and were ^^c^me so
formidable upon all the Weste^^ (...) France. Antiquity never knew Men (...)pon
the Sea then the Dunkirkers. And indeed i^ i^ ^ thing hardly to be believed,
that this C^^y alo^e should have almost spoiled the Trade of (...) potent
Kingdoms of Europe, and (...) D^tch Fleets that Sail to the New World^ (...)
from the Spaniards whole Provinces (...) were not our Merchants Losses as
Fa(...) Scandalous Testimony of their Fury and ^alour. O^ that side next to
France, from the (...) against the Walls of the old City, the H^ve^ is defended
by the Fort de Leon, built upon the (...), and by consequence ill flanked, by
reason (...) the Inconvenience of the Place, otherwise small, but strongly
Pallisad^'d, and furnished with a (...) of great Canon. On the other side of
the Haven, rises ^ Causey which running 5 or 600 Paces (...) the Sea, covers it
on Flanders side and juts upon a small wooden Fort, planted with some Canon.
The new City joins to Fort Leon, and enclosing the rest of the Harbor;
afterward enlarges and extends it self about the Old one, beyond the way that
leads to Newport. It is environed with an enclosure of 12 Bastions of Earth,
with a Moat full of Water, and a Counterscarp; and two Hornworks fill up the
whole space that remains between the hind most Bastion, and the Causey that
shoots into the Sea. Toward the South, three large Canals run out of Dunkirk,
and afford the advantage and convenience of transporting in their Beelands,
these Commodities which they vend up and down the Country. These Canals fall
into the Haven, and serve either to cleanse it, or to drown the Parts adjoining
to the City, as they pull up, or let down their Sluices. The first leads to
Berg^^n, the second to Hons^otte, the third to Furn^s, Newport, and then to
Bruge^. The Magistrates having begun this latter in the year 1640. and having
finished it the next year, gave it the name of the New River; the other two are
very Ancient. Dunkirk was guarded within with two thousand six hundred Foot, in
a 11 Regiments; and without by the Armies of Caracena and Lamboy. In those
Regiments, the number of Officers equaled almost that of the Soldiers. There
were also in the Town 300 Horse, and 2000 Seamen, accustomed to Sea Fights; the
fury of which makes 'em contemn all other dangers; the Fortifications were well
provided with Artillery; and as we have said already, there was nothing wanting
in the City that might serve for the defense of it.

So soon as the Army came before the City, the Prince assigned the Quarters,
and resolved to dispose of his Men in such a manner, that if the Enemy should
attempt to raise the Siege, they could not be able either to succor the Town,
nor force his Camp, On the East side of him, there was a space of Ground which
separates the New River from the Sea. This space of Ground is covered in part
with unequal Hills or Downs, both in regard of their Situa^ion and Height, and
perfectly extends it self into a Plain, which is watered by the New River, and
then runs on as far as the Canal of Honscotte. From this Canal going to
Mardike, there are two Mershes, which are cut out of the Canal of Berguin, and
some other Rivers. To the West, you meet with a Plain opposite to the former,
other Downs, and then the Sea Shore. These la^ter Places seemed sufficiently
defended by the Canals, and the Mershes, which made the Access very difficult
to those that were not Masters of 'em; as also by the Neighborhood of Mardike
and Berguen, which secured ^em. The greatest danger was toward the East; for
that the Enemy setting f^rward from Newport, which is but ^5 Miles from
Dunkirk, might come to the Camp in a few Hours, without any Molestation, which
oblig^d the Prince to make sure of that place. To which purpose he caused
Gassion to encamp with his Brigade, from the Sea Shore to the middle of the
Downs^ the rest he took up himself, and all the Plain as far as the New River.
There he lodged the Men which he himself lead; and that he might wholly fill up
the Place that remained void along the Ca^al of Furnes, he joined to his own
Men, ten Companies of French Gendarmes, and Beaujeu^s Regiment of Horse, which
were of Ranzau's Brigade. From the New River, drawing toward the Canal of
Berg^en, Ranzau had Order to Line the rest of the Plain, with the Bodies of
Horse and Foot which the Prince had left him. The Places which the French
possessed, and the inconvenient Situation of the Country served for the rest of
the Circumvallation. Only upon the Downs, which lie to the West; the Prince
placed Villequier, with the Militia of Boulogne, his own Regiment of Horse, and
that of Rocheguyon, to the end that the Spaniards, if they should pass the
C^lme, after they had drawn together at St. Omers to put in Succor into the
Town, between Berguen and Mardike, meeting with that Obstacle might be quite
out of hopes. By Sea, the Dutch Ships, and the French Frigates, blockt up the
Port, and thus was Dunkirk enclosed on every side. Moreover, a Bridge was laid
over the Canal of Furnes, for the Communication of Quarters; and two more over
the Canals of Honscotte and Berguen, for the Carriages to come over that
brought Victuals from Calais to the Camp.

The next day the Circumvallation was begun; at which the whole Army wrought.
The Prince undertook to cut, and sink a Moat, six Foot deep, and twelve Foot
wide, from the Downs, next the Sea, to the Canal of Furnes; and to consolidate
the Work, and hinder the Sand from falling into it; he order^d the Lines, which
were to be Canon Proof, to be lined with Turf. Then he marked out the most
easy Places for the Attacks, and to secure 'em with Pallilado's and Turnpikes;
and about 30 or 40 Paces beyond the Moat, he drew out another of an ^qual
bigness. Now, in regard the risings of the Downs were un^qual, and for that
there were some along the Lines, that might annoy the Army, he was constraind
to possess himself of all those upper Grounds, to fortify 'em, and extend his
Works a great way, chiefly toward Newport Road, and Gassion's Quarter. There
was one of these Hills, which being much higher then the rest, commanded the
Camp, from the top of which, the French were to be seen drawn up in order of
Battle, and it was dangerous to let the Enemy be Masters of it, so as to plant
their Cannon upon it. The Prince therefore, to obviate all Annoyances, resolved
to possess it; and whatever pains it cost him to environ it with two Lines,
which should join to those of the Circumvallation, to raise a Fort at the top
of it, and to plant a Battery upon it.

The Sea Shore still remained to be fortifid. But by reason of the Flux and
Reflux of the Sea, there was no probability of working in the Sand, without
being able to fix it; and besides, the shortness of time would not permit the
casting up of Mounds. Nevertheless, the rest of the works were insignificant,
if such a space of Sandy Ground should be left unguarded, during low Water. The
Prince therefore resolved to plant a kind of Rail, well fortified with Stakes
anow to put a stop to the Enemy for some time, and easy to repair if the Tide
should carry any part of it away. He ordered therefore Piles of Wood to be
driven in by main force, the better to sustain the fury of the Waves, and to
range 'em so close one to another, that there might be no room to go between
'em; yet still at such a distance as to give way to the violence of the Sea,
and break the strength of the Innundation.

Nor did he employ less Industry to defend himself from the Water, which the
Dunkirkers, had let into the Highways, from the New River to Mardike, which
were overflowed in such a manner, that the Wagons that came with Victuals from
Calais could not pass. But tho, when the Prince thought of the Siege, he had
provided against this Inconvenience, by ordering Champlastreux to cause a great
quantity of Ammunition Bread to be baked at Berguen, from whence it was brought
down the Canal to the Camp, and to send for all the Provision he could in
Boats, that crept along the Coasts from Calai^: Nevertheless, because this way
was uncertain and troublesome, and for that the Army was still in fear of want,
^he thought it necessary to clear the Highways by turning away the Water. And
first they thought to stop the Sluices with Planks, rampar'd with Earth, which
would be easily done, and take up but little time. But the Fury of the Waves,
which with a wonderful Rapidness, drives back the stream of Rivers, when the
Tide flows in, having twice carried away all their Toil and Labor, therefore
they determined with great pains to drive in great Piles near the Hollowness of
the Sluices, thorough which the Sea rowl^d in, and to forti^ie the Piles with
great Stones, and throw in a vast quantity of Earth, till at length the Sluices
were stopped.

At the same time also that he entrenched himself against the Enemies Forces,
and the Obstacles of Nature, the Prince with no less Prudence provided for the
Necessities of the Army. He sent away out of the Camp all the Baggage Horses,
and a thousand of those that belonged to the Troopers, which were most harassed
to recruit themselves in the Pasturages about Calais. The Forage which the
Barrenness of the Place, and the difficulty of Carriage rendered scant, was
very sparingly distributed; taking the pains himself to go twice a day to the
place where the Forage was Landed, to see it equally shared. At the same time
he commanded Roanette to fetch the Infan^ry that returned from Holland, and
sent Rambur^'s Regiment to Villequier's Post, the better to secure it; and for
that purpose, the Companies of the Garrison of Lorrain and Havre, and
Grammon^'s Regiment took Furnes Road. Those of Noirmonstier and F^bert, stayed
at Berghen, with Directions to come in their Turns, and serve in the Camp, by
mounting the Guards of the Trenches. He also order^d Sicot to bring the
Polonians within the Lines. In the place where he encamped, he retained the
Battallions of Cabree, and sent the Third which Priamiski commanded to
reinforce Gassion's Quarter. That Nation contemns danger, which their Natural
Fierceness is ignorant of. The Nobility however are Civil and Ingenious, but
Haughty, as are all the rest of the Northern People. Now in regard the
Polanders know little what belongs to Sieges, the most part of their Wars being
carried on in the Field, they came into the Camp without any conveniences for
the making of Hutts. Nor did the Place, which was Barren enough of it self,
afford 'em any; so that they were constrained like Beasts, to dig themselves
holes in the Sand, to shelter themselves from the weather.

During all this variety of Labor and Toil, the Prince was up and down every
where, leaving nothing exempted from his Care; yet still appearing with that
Sedateness of Mind, which was easy to be discerned in his Countenance. So that
the Soldiers imitating the Example of his Cheerfulness, and redoubling their
Labor with the same Alacrity, in four days, notwithstanding the continual
Rains and Winds, all the Fortifications of the Camp were finishd, and the
Sluices prevented from doing any more harm. The Downs also that were fortifid
for defense, looked like so many great Bastions, and surpised the Eyes of those
that beheld 'em. Nay, even they that fortified 'em could not but wonder how
such prodigious Works could be brought to perfection in so short a time.
Surely, if we consider ^eriously all the Circumstances of those Works, which I
have so faithfully described, and afterward examine those which are to be
found in the Greek and Roman Histories, which we never read without
astonishment, will find by a just Comparison, that the Prince has hardly been
out done.

While they were working at the Entrenchments, the Prince received news that
the Orders which he had sent for securing the Places which the French held upon
the Lis, had been punctually obeyed. That La Ferte Seneterre, together with
Rovigny and de Piennes were departed from Bethune, with all their Men, to put
in a Convoy of 500 measures of Corn, and some bundles of Match into Courtray,
which that Place stood in need of. And it was said, that because they would
make the more haste, and for that they understood, that the Enemy had thrown
Trees cross the Highways, they left the Wagons, and loaded the draught Horses
which they unspang'd from the Wains, beside that every Horseman was ordered to
carry a Sack behind him, and so crossing the Enemies Country, in the Night, got
safe to Courtray, where they left 500 Men of the Regiments of Antragnes,
Tavanes, Lamberte, and the Swiss Guards, and Provision enough for two months
for 3000 Soldiers. Lastly that they were returned to Armentiers, from whence,
they could send all there Men to the Prince.

At the heels of this came other News no less acceptable. Tourville returned
from Holland, and gave a better account of the Success of his Negotiation, then
the Inclination of that Republic seemed to promise. Frederick Henry Prince of
Orange, whose Authority till then had constrained the United Provinces to
continue the War, then lay laboring under a lingering Distemper, which had much
enfeebld the Vigor of his mind, and renderd him less capable of Business. In
the mean time, the Deputies of the States taking the Government into their
hands, several among ^em swayed by their old Inclinations to Peace, others
corrupted with the Gold of Spain, and deeply concerned for their want of Trade,
had set forward their Treaty with the Spaniards, and the Catholic King
granting almost all their demands, 'twas much to be feared that the Treaty
would be concluded; which happened to be an ^^seasonable Conjuncture for the
French, in regard they could expect no succor from Holla^d^ However, Tourville
had so dexterously followed his Instructions, which the Prince had given him,
that in spite of all these troublesome Obstacles, the Dutch not only promised
to break the Trace, but engag^d to make a great Diversion in Brabant, and to
undertake the Siege of Liere or Malines. Now, tho the Prince built no great
hopes upon these Promises of the Holland^^^^ (...) pompous then real^
nevertheless, bec^^se he made no question but their Army would be (...) Motion,
were it only to make some show of fulfi^^ng their Promises, he thought he
should get advantage e^^ugh by their March, since it would oblige (...)
Spaniards to divide their Forces; and in regard they that lay at Newport, were
too feeble to fight him alone, he should the more easily accomplish the Siege.

While things thus passed in the Camp, the Enemies Generals, no longer doubting
but that Dunkirk was besieged, assembled at Newport, which was the next place
to the Siege, and therefore most Commodious for Conference and Execution.
Picolominy and ^^amboy were there, being come to join Caracena, who had never
stirred since the taking of Furnes. Beck was also expected, who was hastening
thither with long Marches. These Captains being of several Nations, and having
various Interests, pretending to be Independent one from the other (tho
Picolominy had some Authority above the Rest) frequently retarded the welfare
of their Party, through their private and particular Passions; and many times,
while they opposd those Counsels which were not given by themselves, their own
misunderstandings frustra^ed good designs. At this time, the Importance of the
thing, being joynd with the loss of their Reputation, which the continual
Victories of the French had very much lessend, obliged 'em to give their
opinions generously, and to bethink themselves of an entire Union, and which
way to force the French to raise their Siege. Nor were they at the b^ginning
without hopes. They found themselves more numerous then the French, promising
themselves, as they desired, and not without great probability, that the
Hollanders, by a quick conclusion of the Peace, would leave 'em at liberty to
draw out their Frontier Garrisons, and oppose the D. with very great Forces.
Besides, the Inconveniences of the D's. being encamped in such a place, and
the badness of the Season gave 'em hopes that they might defeat the French Army
full of Diseases and tired, and enclosed between their Forces and ^he Town;
besides, that they lay open toward the Sea, and were but badly entrenched along
the Downs. For they could not imagine that in so f^w days it had been possible
to fortify the Seashore, nor to raise in the Sand such good Defenses as the
French had done. Nevertheless, not being willing to hazard any thing rashly,
and because Beck was not yet come to Newport, to take the most certain
measures, they concluded to draw out of all their Bodies a good number of Horse
to take Prisoners, and to inform themselves the best they could of the state of
the French Camp. They also thought it necessary to prepare at Newport as many
Frigates as they could get ready, to the end, that if their Negotiation with
England succeeded, they might assist the English Men of War to force the
Confederates Fleet; or if they missed of Foreign Aid, that they might attempt
the putting in Relief into Dunkirk, by the Favor of Wind and Tide.

In the mean time, the Prince resolvd to carry the Place by main Force; for
being a Person of a deep Foresight, he rightly conjectured, that only the
length of the Siege could ruin his Design. Victuals came with great di^ficulty
to the Camp; the Sea grew tempestuous, and ran high; and the Seamen being
forced out of Calais, and not daring to venture for fear of losing their
Vess^ls, kept themselves within the Canal of Mardike, with so much obstinacy,
that the Officers of that Fort, were constrained to let fly with their Great
Guns upon 'em, and to sink one of the Beelands to terrify the rest, and cause
^em to bear away to the Camp. Nor was the Shore more favorable to 'em then the
Sea; many of their Vessels being thrown against the Sands, and stav'd to
pieces. Moreover, the Rain continually falling, soaked into the Soldiers
Hutts, so that they lay half in the Dirt; the Wind caused 'em to catch great
colds^ nor had they ^ires sufficient (...) dry themselves; the terrible blasts
blew the small Sand among their Victuals, and in their Eyes; and amidst all
these hardships, together with their Military Duties in the Gua^d of the
Trenches and Camp; there was a necessity of continually repairing the Breaches,
which the Sea made in their Fences, or in the Sluces^ and emptying the Moats of
the Lines which the Wind filld with Sand, which redoubld their Toyl^ Ill
Stabling, and bad food for the Horses, reduced 'em into a very bad Condition;
and sickness began to seize both Men and Beasts.

These vast Inconveniences nothing dismayed the Prince, who had seen 'em all
present in his thoughts, from the very moment that he formed the Design; and
who as we have already said, had from that time so well taken his Measures that
by his extraordinary Dillig^nce and Industry, his Army might support it self
longer, then he judged it necessary to take the Town by force. For in regard it
was to be feared, that if they went about to Storm the Town with those
Securities and Defenses usually prepared for other Soldiers, le^^ after they
had spent a long time in raising Works, the approaching Winter might render all
their Labor Fruitless, and an ensuing mortality consume the Army, the Prince
took up his first Resolution, which was to make Trial of the quickness of
Execution, and Judiciously persuaded himself, that it was the Preservation of
the Soldiers, to hazard a small number in Glorious Attempts, for the Safety of
the rest. By that means he proved a good Husband of time, the loss of which is
never to be recovered. He satisfied the desire of the whole Army, impatient of
their Su^ferings, and brought to pass this renowned Enterprise, maugre all the
Opposition of Men and Nature: having this to comfort him, That whatever
happened, his Honor would retain entire, not only because it did not depend
upon hazard, against which he had fortified himself as much as it was possible^
but the rather because his Virtue had raised him above the reach of ill Fortune.

With these thoughts, the very same day that the Entrenchments were finish^d,
he went to view the Place, together with Gassion and Ranzau; and after he had
well considerd it, he resolved upon two Attacks; the one upon the last Bastion,
the other upon the Hornwork against it. He ordered the first onset to be made
by his own Army, which he reinforced with two Battallions, which he took by
turns from both the Marshals; leaving the more easy Attack to the two Brigades
that were to relieve 'em^ They attacked the Bastion in the Face next the Sea,
and the Hornwork on that side which was most exposd to the Bastion. In the
Evening the Trenches were opened, and a great Redoubt was raised at the
beginning of each, and between the two Redoubts they raised a Battery of 15
Great Guns. This was done without any Disorder, the Besieged never molesting
the Workmen; whether it were that they thought that what was yet done, would do
'em but little harm; or whither they believed it more necessary to employ
themselves in finishing certain Outworks which they had already begun, and to
surround 'em with Pallisado's.

The Marshals Attack was the first place where any fighting happened to be. For
between the Pallisados and the Besiegers Trenches, there was an indifferent
high Hill, which the Enemy possessed, and from whence they were to be driven,
before the French could carry on their Works. Therefore Noirmanstier, being
upon the Guard that day with ten Companies of the French Guards of Ranzau's
Briga^e received orders to make himself master of that Down. Thereupon having
drawn out a Company of choice Men, under the command of Saujon, Chail^y and
Rousille, seconded by the rest of the Body which Courcelles lead, he fell on
with great Resolution. The Soldiers were daring, the O^ficers prudent, and as
it happens in the first Action of Sieges, every one strove with Emulation to
signalize himself. So that the Attack was undertaken with so much Vigor, and
in so good Order, that the Enemy astonishd at the fury of the first Onset, gave
ground without much resistance, not being able in their Confusion to consider
the number of the Assailants, nor to make the best of those Advantages, which
the Light of the Moon, and the white Sands, over which the French advanc^d
without any shelter, might have given 'em. However, they did not suffer the
Attackers to rest long. For all of a sudden, as soon as they had recollected
themselves, they returned to the Charge. Three times they came on again, and
were three times repulsed. In the mean time, Niorm^nstier, tho he ran up and
down where ever the Exigency of Command and Danger summoned him, had broke
ground with so much speed, that maugre those Attacks, he had finishd a
Lodgement upon the Down which he had gaind; and they had joined it by a Line of
Retreat, a hunderd and fifty paces in length, with the Works of the French.
Nevertheless, the Work was not brought to full Perfection, for want of Bavins,
when about six a Clock in the Morning, the Dunkirkers resolvd to drive the
Besiegers out of their Lodgment. Noirmonstier immediately ran with Courcelles,,
and the other Captains, to the Head of the Work, by their presence and Conduct,
to encourage the Combatants. At the same time the Enemy threw a great number of
Granados, the breaking of which did the Besiegers the more mischief, in regard
there was not one that fell in vain among the Soldiers that were thick crowded
together. The Besieged were in hopes that their Granado's would have put the
French in Disorder; and that afterward they might be repelld with more ease.
But when they saw the Officers resolute and accustomed to Discipline, succeeded
one another when any one was wounded, and that fresh Soldiers took the place
of those that fell, then hopeless to see the small effect of their Granado's,
they came to Handiblows with the Besiegers. This encounter which lasted 3
hours, was very bloody, the manner of Combat augmenting their Fury. The Fortune
of the Day also waver'd for a long time, the French not willing to abandon
their Victory, and the Spaniards striving with all their might to regain it.
But at length the Spaniards recoyl'd, and tho they made 3 other Attacks with
the same obstinacy, they were still repulsed, and the Lodgement made capable
before Night to contain above 300 Men. The Besiegers lost a great number of
Men; they had 10 Sergeants killed; Porcheux, a Captain of the Guards;
Mondebise, a Lieutenant, and two other Officers wounded. Nor was the Enemies
Loss less considerable. On their side there died a Volunteer of the House of
Cro^y; and of the French, Barrouliere, an Ensign of the Guards. Saujon,
Chailly, Rousille, Loignac, Genlis, Campagnole, and du Voulch, Officers of the
same Regiment did signal Service, chiefly Courcelles, who next to Noirmonstier
might well assume to himself the greatest part of the Honor of that Action.

On the other side, at the Principal Attack, where Aubeterre was wounded with a
Musket Shot, the Approaches were briskly carryd on. Chatillon, in a little time
had advanced the Works so far, that there was not much ground to be gaind to
come at the Counterscarp; all things went on prosperously, and the speed of the
work answered the Prince's expectation.

In the mean time Intelligence came, that the Enemies Armies were set forward
out of Newport to ^ight the Besiegers; and that the foremost Squadrons of their
Vanguard appea^'d between Furnes and Dunkirk. This Intelligence was grounded
upon the Advantageous Rumors which the Spaniards caus^d to be spread about, of
great Succors which they were preparing, and of their assurance to force the
French Lines; and all this to cheer up the dejected Minds of the People. Which
Reports, the V^lgar believing, had increased 'em with great Additions,
according to Custom, and the Cavalry that appeared, seemd in some Measure to
confirm 'em. However, the Prince being informed that the Forces of Flanders
were drawing together about Newport, and desirous to know the truth of the
Rumor of their March, that he might prepare for all Accidents, sent out for
News, and dispatched away Orders to La Ferte Seneterre to approach with his
Flying Camp. The next day the French Scouts brought word, that the Cavalry
which had alarmed the Peasants and the Spies, was nothing else but a great
Par^y sally^d out of Newpor^, which fell upon the French Foragers, and that
having taken some of 'em, they were retired again in have.

Now tho this Report of Relief had spread it self among the Besiegers, yet it
wrought no disturbance. There was no Alteration made in the Guard of the ^amp,
which was still disposed in the same manner as if the Enemies Army had been in
view; the works a^ the Trenches, and the attack of ^he Bastion went o^, and
Arnaud and Marsin were advanc^d almost to the Foot of the Counterscarp; but
with some trouble and danger; the Difficulties increasing ^s they drew nearer
and nearer to the Enemies defe^ces. At length, La Moussay^ coming in his turn,
undertook to make a Lodgement. He mounted the Guard with the Battallion of
Switzers under Molondin, (...) (...)ring their great (...) which (...)fore,
with extraordinary Fury; (...) who were altogether exposed by (...) workmen,
^ighting with disadva^(...) had already received two mor^^l (...) most daring
of his men not will(...) but prefer^ng death before igno(...) by him. The
T^mult, the Night, the (...) Arms, the Gro^ns of the Wounded, (...) Combatants
caused a hidio^s (...) the news of this disorder wa^ carrid (...) who
immediately flew into the (...) the danger, and by his Pre^ence settled all
(...) order again; he caused the Men to (...) ^o the Works, which La Moussaye
repaired (...) on with the same Courag^, as he had (...) survived some days the
Honor (...)ervice; but Death deprived him of all (...)ut the praises of
Posterity. At (...) on the Marshals side, the Tumult was (...) nor the Combat
no less furious. For (...) carried on the Trenches, and Chan^^^ (...) possessed
the place of a Fortification, (...)sieged had begun near their Counter(...)
mounting the Guard after them, had (...) P^llisadoes, one of which looked toward
the ^ea, the other coverd the Hornwork whither the ^esi^ged were carrying on
their W^rks. The (...) of Navarr had attacked the first, and the (...) Pic^r^y
the other. Now the Spaniards (...) while they defend any strong Hold, th^^ when
once the Garrison is distributed to the (...) most likely to be a^tack'd, they
never change (...) d^ring the Siege. When the Besiegers have (...) Outwork, the
Men that defended it, retreat to (...) Guard of the next Ent^enchment. Now
(...) had been all along opposed to the (...), from the beginning of the Sie^e.
And ever since the opening of the Trenches, tho always at Hand^blows with the
Assailants, had defended their Outworks with Resolution and Valor. But now,
tired with watching and hardship, they quitted their Pallisadoes to the
Besiegers almost without any Contest. The Besiegers were Masters of em for some
hours, and had finished their Lodgments, when Leda, bringing along with him two
Companies of natural Spaniards, which he took out of Fort Leon, and animating
^he Wallo^^s with this Succor, and his Personal Presence, made a S^lly at the
head of ^em, tho fruitless as to the Decision of the main Business, yet
prosperous at the beginning. He regain`d the Pallis^do, with an extraordinary
fury, which led to the Counterscarp of the Hornwork, and overthrew all that
oppos`d him. Grave, Blancafort and Poix, Officers of the Regiment of Picardy,
were wounded in sustaining the Assault, and Breaute was kill`d. The Death of
the latter added to the Mournful Examples of the Misfort^ ne of his Ances^ors,
of which the French Histories are full, and confirm`d the common opinion, that
the Destiny of the Wars of Flanders, is always fatal to those of that Family.
La Vieuville, Camp-master of the Regiment of Picardy, assisted Mi^ssans, under
whom he mounted the Guard. He perceiving that the Soldiers gave ground, and
that the Commands of the Officers were not at all regarded, and not bro^king,
while he liv`d that his Regiment should receive an affront, ran with some of
his Men where the Conflict was hottest, and throwing himself into the thickest
of the Enemy, put a stop to their Victory by his daring Boldness. His Soldiers
also, spurr`d on by his danger, and his Example, returned to the Onset with so
much fury, that they laid the Spaniards sprawling, and regain`d the Lodgement
which Mi^ssans brought to Perfection, without any Opposition.

This was the Posture of things in the Attacks of the Place. In the mean time
Beck arrived at Ne^port, and joyn^d the rest of the Armies with three thousand
Foot, and five and twenty Cor^^^s of Horse. He found the affairs of his Party
in very great Disorder, and that there was no possi^^lity of succouring
Dunkirk. For their Spies, and the French Prisoners which they had taken had
informed 'em of the strength of the Besiegers Lines, and they judged the work
so complete, that they ^o^ld not without extreme rashness, undertake to force
(...). They knew the Prince who defended 'em, to be a Person accustomed to
Victory, prudent in Danger, and that success attended his Wisdom. So that although
their Armies consisted of above twelve thousand Men, that number was not
sufficient to accomplish the Enterprise, where multitude only could overlay the
Valor of the B^siegers; and which is of great moment in ma^ters of War, the
Reputation of the Prince had imprinted such a violent Terror in the minds of
the Soldiers, that they dispair'd of Victory, had they been to fight him in the
open Field much less to force him out of Entrenchments that were fortif^^d and
better guarded.

As for their Negotiations in England, they had m^t with little success in 'em.
They could obtain but a very inconsiderable supply from the Parliament, and all
the Credi^ of their Faction, the Policy and Solicitations of their Ambassadors
proud ineffectual. Not but that the English for good Reasons of State would
have been glad to have crossed the French in the Conquest of Dunkirk: but more
pre^si^g considerations, and the urgency of Affairs at home restrained 'em from
looking abroad, and obliged 'em to preserve their Men and Money for more
pressing occasions.

But that which utterly broke the design of the Spaniards was this, that the
Hollanders, in expectation of a Peace, of which there were very plausible
Probabilities, were preparing for some Expedition, not willing so soon to quit
the Public ^ause, nor their Allies. 'Twas certainly reported also that they,
were marching in have toward Liere or Malines, and the report ran already of
the taking of one of those places. Now tho the danger was not so great, and for
that the Hollanders marchd but very slowly, yet certain it is, they would have
besiegd some place or other, could they have met with any that had been
unprovided for ^esistance. So that the Spaniards were as much constrained to
oppose their Proceedings, as they were at the beginning of the War; and were
not only deprivd of the Succor of their Frontier Garrisons, but obliged to
reinforce ^em with part of their Army.

For which reasons those Gen^rals were no sooner met at Newport, but they were
forced to separate again; which renderd all their Consultations ineffectual.
For being alone they were not strong enough to repair the loss of Dunkirk, by
any other considerable Conquest^ and they durst not keep any longer together
for fear of the Hollanders.

In the midst of these Extremities, they resolvd before they parted to march
toward Dunkirk, as if they intended to relieve it, and to fall on a sudden
upon Furnes, not dispairing to take it with the same speed as the Prince had
won it; and hoping by such a Conquest not only in some measure to satisfy the
expectation of the People, but to incommode the French by depriving them of
their Forage. With this resolution, the next day after Becks Arrival, they took
a review of all their Forces, and setting forward from Newport, they En^ampt at
a Village called Adinkirk, and round about the Abbey of Dunes, between Furnes
and the Sea, and in the Road which the Enemy were to take in their march toward
the French Camp. Presently the Besiegers ^ad some thoughts that they might
attack their Lines, they giving out the report themselves, on purpose to
dissemble their design^ and to show as if they really intended to fight the
French Army. Now while the Soldiers were preparing themselves, and that in the
midst of their fears of so furious an Assault, the greatest part co^ceald their
sadness under an affectation of falsejoy, they sent out a party to view Furnes.
But by accident, they who were sent thither, whether it were that they could
not ride round the Pl^ce, or whither they satisfied themselves with seeing
where it might be most easily attacked, only took a view of those parts, that
had been fortifid with gratest care. So that after they had considerd the
Defenses, being surprizd to see 'em so strong^ they carrid back word that not
only Furnes co^ld not be taken by Assault, but that although they should Besiege
it regularly, they found it in such a condition, that they would not warrant
the Success of the Seige. Upon this news they lost all their hopes of doing any
good; and Beck, never staying an^ longer, marched away with seven Regiments of
Foot and three of Horse, toward Demer and Neth^, to oppose the Hollanders. The
rest returned to encamp near N^wport, and Dixmude, contenting themselves to
save those Towns after the loss of Dunkirk. And thus all their great
Preparations, and vain Ostentations vanish d into Sm^ake^ On the other side,
the Prince, who upon the General belief of their coming to attack him^ was
salli'd out of his Trenches with some Cavalry to observe their Motion, finding
only the footste^^ of their abandoned Lodgments, return^d to the Camp, and sent
back La Ferte Seneterre to the Banks of the Lis, who was come as far as
Berg^^^^ to be at the Battle.

While things were in this Posture, the Besieged spurred on by their Valor,
under the leading of a most excellent Captain, and in hopes of being Succored,
every where intermixd Stratagems of War with courageous Actions, omitting
nothing that might be serviceable for their Defense: they were always either in
Fight, or hard at Work. They disputed their Trenches with an incredible
Obstinacy. When the Besieged had carrid 'em, they presently threw up others,
and still opposed new Obstacles to the Besiegers Arms, and stoppd their
Victory at every step they made. They surmounted the Toils of perpetual Labor
and Watching, and contemnd the Pain and Torments of Wounds. On the Besigers
side, a Defense so Resolute, infusing despite and shame into, the Soldiers, and
Emulation and Ambition into the Officers, the French in stead of being repulsd
were more incensed and encouragd by difficulty and danger. The Prince also
looked upon it as an Honor, that the Siege should be signalizd with numerous
and famous At^heivements; and knowing how much it would redou^d to his Renown,
with a small Army and in a few days to subdue a Town sufficiently able to stop
the Carreer of great Armies for a long time, employed his utmost vigor to
attack it, and used all his end vo^rs to hasten the taking of it. And thus
Danger and Fury every where equally increased.

After Moussaye and Miossans were relieved, Chabet who succeeded at the Attack
of the Bastion, with the Regiment of Persan, and 300 ^olanders, gaind the Top
of the Counters^a^p. The conflict was very hot; Molan^re, a Captain in Persans
Re^iment fell upon the spot. Malortie and du Fay^, his Companions and five
Lievetenants were wounded and the work as quitted a good while, the Pioneers
having betaken themselves to their Heels: but at length the Prin^^ secured the
Victory by his Presence, and (...) ^odg^men^ to be finishd. The Besieged on the
other side diggd a Traverse on the righthand, which would have very much
annoyed the Besiegers, if Caste^^^^, who reliev^d Chab^t, had not carryd it of
a sudden.

On the the other side at the Attack of the Hornworks, (...) with the Regiment of
Orleance, Noirmonstier's, and three hundred Polanders gained those Traverses,
from whence he drove the Enemy. Among the Dead, wa^ found Bi^e, Major of the
Regiments of Orleance^ and three Lieutenants wounded. Now in regard the (...)
was weaker on that side, and for that the Besieged broke ground with more
diligence, they speedily^ (...) themselves behind three Redoubts which they
environed with Palisado's: But Roan^^te, (...) the Guard, carri^d on three
Sappings, and we^^ on so brikly with that d^fficult labor, that the Besieged
could not have time to fortify th^mselves in their new Enterprise.

U^^n the 1 st. of October. at night, Noirmonstier and Lava^ mounted the two
Trenches, and resolvd together whatever it cost 'em, to make themselves Master
of the Counterscarp. To which purpose Laval Commanded the Regiments of Eng. and
Conty with some Polanders. He divided to the Right and Left the Officers and
Soldiers which he resolved should begin the attack, and taking the m^ddle, with
those which he had had ma^e choice of for himself, and fell on pell mell upon
three Places at once. Presently there was nothing to be seen but Fire and
Smoke, and the Counterscarp of the Bastion was gain'd^ but when they began to
cover themselves, Laval himself working hard among the Soldiers, as he was
placing a Barrel, he was laid upon the Ground with a Musket Bullet that took
him in the Head, and died some few days after of his Wound. His loss was
generally lamented by the whole Army; and the Prince in particular was deeply
sorrowful for his Death. He was a Young Gentleman of an Illustrious Family,
ambitious of Honor, and capable to have advanced (...) (...) and vexed to the
Soul to see Dunkirk lost before their Eyes, that they might omi^ nothing which
was to be done, resolved notwithstanding the Wind was still against ^em, to try
what they could do by Sea, and by the me^ns of several small Boats which they
had got ready, knowing that the Seamen were perfectly acquainted with the
Coast, to put in a considerable Succor by Water; which design, if it
succeeded, they were in hopes, that the bad weather, and the Inconveniences of
the Encampment would constrain the French to raise the Siege; or at least, that
by ruining their Men, the taking of the City would cost 'em their Army. To this
purpose, they hired 30 Beelands at Newport, which they filled with their
bravest Command^rs and stoutest Soldiers, and which they set to Sea under the
Conduct of their most experie^c'd Pilots. This Fleet put to Sea in stormy
weather, every Body being resolved to surmount all difficulties, partly
ambitions of Honor, partly covetuous of Reward, and spurred on by all those
other Incitements, that usually inspire Men with Contempt of Danger. However,
the Success no way answered their fruitless promises, and the joy of the
Dunkirker^, tha^ from the top of their Walls beheld^ the Beelanders coming,
soon turned to sorrow. For so soon as the Spaniard^ saw that they were
discovered by the Hollanders, and that the Seamen perceived that Trump was
preparing t^ make up to 'em, whither it were that fear deprived 'em of their
Judgment; or that they could not withstand the Wind and the Sea, as afterward
they said, they betook themselves to flight, and without making the least
Effort to weather the Storm, they made all the speed they could to Newport,
whither A^donville chasd 'em with the French Frigates.

All Men, well skilled in Sea Affairs, unanimously agreed, that tho many of the
Beelands might have been taken or sunk, yet had they ventured, some might have
escaped and got into the Place; but it had been to little purpose. For the Town
was then so sorely pressed, tha^ it m^st have been a very considerable Succor
that could have preservd it. The Mine that had been a delving under the
Horn-work a^l Night, and all the next Morning was found to be 15 F^ot deep, and
there was no dou^t but the effect of it would be very great, in a place so
proper as that was. By consequence the Horn-work could hold out no longer, and
after the loss of t^a^ Forti^ication, the Dunkirkers, securd only by the Walls
of their old City, and being incapable of defending themselves, would be
constrained to Surrender.

And Fort^n^ in this seconded the common Opinion, and soon reduced the B^sieg'd
to the utmost Extremity. For ab^ut two of the Clock in the Afternoon the Mine
was spr^ng; and such was the violence of the Powder, that of a sudden it
carryd away the Earth, and the Wall that were next the Mine, and le^t a great
breach in one of the sides of the Hornwork. Some lazy Soldiers, surpised by
the Fury of it, were blown up into the Air, and fell down half dismembered,
overwhelmed with Stones, and wrapped up in Dust and Smoke. Pre^ently Clanleu
orderd Molondine's Swisses to the Breach, who finding it without any defen^e
began a Lodgement. And they had already placed 40 Barrels, when the Besieged
pouring out from behind two Traver^es, where they had retired till the Mine was
sprung, ^inding there was nothing more to be afraid of then the ordinary
Risco's of War, fell on desperately, and mangre all the Resistance of the
Besiegers, drove 'em from the top of the Hornwork where they had ent^ench'd
themselves. The Switzers full of Indignation retu^n^d to the Charge, and
continud fighting a long time with dubious Fortune^ At length they fell to
Handy-strokes, which proved a cruel and desperate Confl^ct, the Besieged having
been accustomed to Victory, and (...) knowing themselves lost, if they lost
(...). All the while, the Smoke of the (...) from the Trenches and the Town,
(...) and noise, occasioned by the Conflict, having darkend the day, and
deprived the Combata^^s of the knowledge of one another; all of a sudden both
Parties, that believ^d, being each in the same Confusion, that their Enemy had
the Advantage, retreated on both sides, and left the Lodgement in the middle
between 'em quite abandon'd^ and this great Disorder lasted for two hours. But
at length, the Sky being clear, and all things in a Calm, the Besiegers first
began to recover themselves. Clanleu, then led 'em on again to the Breach,
where that he might act with more security, and have his Orders e^ecuted
without Confusion, he was willing they should rega^n the top of the Lodgement
Barrel after Barrel^ and step by step. And thus he spent the rest of the day,
the Enemy not daring to disturb him, till Miossans relieved him, and found the
Lodgement almost brought to Perfection^ In this Encounter the Besiegers lost a
Captain; two Lieutenants were wounded, and fifty^ Soldiers either slain or
disabl'd; the loss of the besieged being equal^

Nor must we omit the Death of Semur, the more to be pity^d for the oddness of
the accident, and for that his Generosity proved fatal to him, while he lost
his own to preserve the Life of his Friend. Belloy and he did the Duty of
Sergeants of Battle, and with their Pikes in their hands sustain^d the fury of
the Enemies Sally. They had both an Esteem for each other, and there was no
less Emulation between 'em. Neither of ^em would be first that fled from
danger, nor be the first that ^orsook his Companion; Honor and Courage stopped
^em in the midst of Peril. In this Noble Contest, Belloy was struck down with a
Stone. Semur^ never minding his own Preservation, but running to help him up
again receivd a Musket shot in his Thig^^ of which ^e died sometime after. But
Belloy returned to the Fight, and the next day was in a Condition to do Service.

At the same time that they so warmly engaged at this Attack, Arnauld having
mounted the Guard in the New (...) length, by a Line of Communication, joynd
the two Attacks to the side of the Moat. To that purpose he began after one
Sapping, to pierce it; he orderd Bavins to be brought to fill up ^he Moat, he
planted one piece of Canon convenient for Battery, with a Design to preserve
the Trenches, which running on with less room, as they approached the Place,
were the more easily shot thorough by the Canon of the Enemies Defenses, and
therefore it was the more necessary to play from the Trenches to ruin em.

Marsin relieved him, with the Regiment of Persan, and a Battallion of English,
and all that Night continued throwing Faggots to fill up the Moat. But in
regard he found it to be very broad and deep, and that the Enemy annoyed his
approaches, the Mines could not yet be set to the Bastion; which forced him to
facilitate the building of the Bridge which led thither, to raise a new Battery.

The same Night Miossans, with the French Guards of Gassions Brigade, made an
end of Lodging himself upon the Hornwork, and carried on the Sapping to the
Entrenchment, which the Enemy had already opposd against him.

Some Hours before day Picolominy advancd along the Shore to the Besiegers
Fortification of Piles and Stakes, and alarum^d Gassion's Quarter. For he had
been told that he might that way put men into Dunkirk, and retreat without any
danger, provided he kept his design Secret, and that he took the Advantage of
the Night, and the fall of the Tide. Now tho he knew that this Enterprise would
not save the Place, yet he was obliged to attempt it, by reason of the Honor
which, would redound to himself, either to have reinforced Dunkirk with Relief,
or to have been the only Person of all the Generals in Flanders, that durst
approach the Enemies Entrenchments. To this purpose therefore, setting forward
from Newport with 500 of the best Troopers in his Army, he marched all Night in
^o good Order, and with such a profound silence, and his Guides had led him so
directly, that he had eluded the watchfulness of the French Scouts, and was got
to the S^o^^a^e without being discoverd. There was then some hopes that he
might get forward with his Men^ But the Besiegers Foot Guard, that kept a
diligent watch, with their Arms in their hands, fired with that fury upon him,
that h^ was forced to retreat.

S^ soon as the Prince had notice of the Enemies approach, he presently
mounted, and Sallying out of the Lines, with two Regiments of Horse, marched
with all the speed he could above two Leagues, but could not overtake 'em.
Picolominy galloping away full speed, as judging that he should be followed,
and that he could not avoid being defeated, if he gave the Prince never so
little time to join him.

The Prince, from this time forward, assured of the taking of Dunkirk, which
only was a work of a little time, and finding he should have enough left him
either to reduce Dixmuyde, or to fortify Courtray, for his Winter Quarters, if
he could but oblige Leda to surrender, without prolonging his Defense to the
last extremity; and being desirous to spare some few days for the refreshment
of his Men, resolv^d to join Negotiation with force, and to try if he could
hasten the end of the Siege by a Conference. For which purpose, he wrote to the
Governor of Dunkirk, That having something to impant to him, in reference to
an Affair that concern^d hi^s^lf, and which was of great Importance, he dis^^d
leave to send a Person of Quality to him, who should farther unfold his Mind. A
Drummer was sent with this Letter, and Leda at the same time returned for
Answer, That he should look upon such a Conference as a very great Honor; but
that being oblig`d to give an Account of his Actions to the Council of Spain,
and the Gener^ls of the Low Countries, he did not judge it proper, according to
the Rules of Decency, to admit a Person of Quali^y in^^ hi^ Garrison, without
Permission first obtain`d. That it would be much better for him (...) send ^o
the Camp, and that if his Highness though^ it c^^ve^ient^ th^re should a Person
attend him the next day to receive his Commands.

The Prince having consented to this Pro^osal, (...) de Veere Maj. Genesis of
(...)^s Army, came the next da^ to the Camp, about ten a Clock in the Morning.
After the usual Complements, the Prince coming close to the Matter, told him,
That ^^ving always had a high Esteem for Courage whereev^^ he met it, he had
never omitted any opportunity to indulge it. That ^^was hi^ opinion that V^r^^
was to be cherish`d in an Enemy; and that i^ wa^ but ^ust for a Victor to be
favorable to the vanquish`d, when their Act^^s deserv`d it. Therefore that the
Governou^ and Officers who had defended Dunkirk, both deserv`d and m^^ht ex^^ct
from him all manner of civil and fair Usage, provided they did not deba^
themselves of the means to receive it. Tha^ it was sufficient for them to have
stopped him so long before a Place, which he might much ^^oner have subdu`d, had
any others th^n themselves defended it. That they had already acquir`d all the
Honor they could expect by the Siege^ that they had given absolute
Satisfaction to their Reputation; and therefore, that it was now high time for
^em to think of their security, and speedily to think of Capitulating, unless
they had a mind to ruin themselves. That it behov`d `em to consider that the
Armies of Flanders not willing to hazrrd a Rattel we es^parated; that the
Frigates of Newport, were sled after a vain attempt; and that the most vigorou^
defense they could make hence forward would only delay their Destruction for
some few days. However that tho in this Condition they were quite out of Hopes
of any Succor, yet he would be so favorable to their Prowess, as to suffer
`em to ^^rch out of Dunkirk with Honor. But if they stay`d to the last
extremity they would constrain him, in despite of his own good Nature, to make
use of all the severity of War.

Veere seem`d to be surpriz^d at the Prince`s Speech, and excusing himself for
not returning a Reply, in regard he had no power to treat, return`d to the
Town, with a promise to inform Leda, and to bring back his Answer before Night.

(...) there were two Conjunctures 164^.
(...) to (...) the Surrender of the (...) it was that Expe^ience showed them,
(...) to be in^^us^ed with the Nego(...) from fea^ and (...) ha^ (...) formerly
a (...) (...) taken at the Battle where (...)y Ma^^^al Gu^breant, and had (...)
of his Parole. For (...) afra^d of falling again into their (...) would have
done any thing, rather (...) second time Prisoner to Fr^nce. (...) he was in
Dunkirk with five Re(...) Artillery of L^mboy's Army, and (...) that i^ he lost
those Men, and his (...) and Fortune of his General, upon (...) depended, would
very much decay^ (...) means agree to such a loss. Nor was (...) to sacrifice
his particular Inter^st to the (...). So that he return^d with a resolu(...)
utmost endeavors in persuading the (...) a Surrender.

(...) were not concealed from the Prince; (...) he had discovered the Trouble
and (...) that Ve^re was in, and penetrated the (...) to augment his Fears, to
the end (...) the more confirm him in his thoughts of a (...) To this purpose
he made choice of (...) under color of waiting upon Veere (...) ordered him to
accompany him to the (...) e^trance into the City. Pall^au had natural (...);
and being a Person of a jocund (...) Conversation, he gets ground upon all
(...)hom he converses, his Tongue being no les^ persuasive, then voluble.
Therefore having discour(...) b^ the way, of the extremity to which the (...)
was reduced, the weakness of their Party, the Cl^m^ncy o^ the Prince, and ^he
stedfastness of his Resolution, as also of the Misfortune into which the
Governor of Dunkirk might precipitate himself; so soon as he began to find him
wavering, he fell insensibly to talk of Lamboy's men, and the hardships of
Imprisonment; and feigning to be concerned out of a Principle of Honor and
Generosity, in the Misfortunes that threatened him, he managed his discourse so
dexterously, that he never left him, till he judged him absolutely resolved to
solicit a Surrender. With such a rapidness is the mind of man transported with
the impressions of fear; and so true it is, that Reason serves only to augment
the belief of Danger, when a man is once dismayed with the terror of it.

Being entered the Place, he found Leda perusing Letters which the Spanish
Generals had sent him by a Frigate from Newport, which had stole into the
Harbor in the night time, the Wind and Tide favoring him. Those Letters were
stuffed with high Encomiums of his Prowess, and with great Promises encouraged
him to hold out some few days longer. And he seemed willing to prepare himself
for it; flattering himself with an Opinion, that he should do the King of Spain
a great piece of service; and with hopes, that the Generals would not fail of
their Promises. But after Veere had made it out to him, That they did but
delude him, That there was nothing to be expected from the inability of Spain;
That all the Defense he could make, would be to little purpose; That it would
but exasperate the Prince; and that it behooved him to prepare for a long
Imprisonment in an Enemy's Country, if he refused to capitulate. These
Considerations, together with one more, which was the chiefest; and that was,
that he might preserve an Army for the defense of his Partyy, by preserving his
Garrison composed of a great number of Officers, the loss of which would not be
easily repaired, in the miserable condition to which Poverty and long Wars had
reduced Military Discipline; all these Reasons, I say, bowed his haughty mind,
and made him resolve upon a Capitulation.

And being thus determined, he sent back Veere to capitulate, with express
Orders to gain as much time as he could, in expectation of being succored by
the Spaniards: Being desirous to do that honor to the Arms of the King his
Master, though he expected nothing from them; and the better to justify his
surrendering the place, by the more sufficient Testimony of their Disability. He
also wrote at the same time to the Generals, of his intended Capitulation, and
informed them of the Reasons which obliged him to it. Among other things, That
he was unwilling, when it could not be any advantage or honor to them, for
five or six days holding out longer, to venture his being made a Prisoner of
War in his old Age, and when he was almost worn out in the King's Service;
nevertheless, That if they could be certain to relieve him within ten or twelve
days, he would do his utmost till that time: otherwise that it would be but a
fruitless waste of time and good Soldiers.

But this last point of relieving the Place was more difficult to execute, then
promise. For on the Marshal's side, Sicot, with the Regiments of Orleans and
Noirmonster, had driven the Enemy from their last Intrenchment upon the
Hornwork; so that there remained no more then to carry on their Approaches to
the side of the Moat of the Old Town. In the attack of the Bastion also, where
Vignaut, Sergeant of Battle, was killed, the greatest Difficulties were
surmounted. Moussaye, who led the Regiments of Anguien and Tabert, and a
Battalion of English, had finished the Bridge of Fagots, and was raedy to set
the Miners to work. So that the Promises made to the Governor, had more of
noise then solidity; more of show than truth.

Toward night therefore Veere returned with a power to capitulate; and
immediately the Duke gave order to Balluaw, and Arnaud, men of understanding,
and long experience in War, to treat with him. After some Contests and
Disputes, at length the Articles of Composition were agreed, whereby among
other usual things it was concluded, That all the Marks of Honor should be
allowed the Governor and the Soldiers; That Lamboy's Regiments should march out
with their Artillery; That the Spanish Armies should have three days time to
succor Dunkirk; which if they did not do by that time, the Town should be
surrendered to the Prince.

This Capitulation was forthwith signed by the Prince, and the Governor. At
the same time also Hostages were delivered by the Garrison, by Lamboy's
Regiments, and the Townsmen: and so without any more ado, Veere departed for
Nieuport, where he was in hopes to meet the Governor.

That night the French Officers that were upon the Guard, went on with their
Approaches^ In the Marshal's Attack, Roanette, with the Swiss Guards, and
Bournonvil^es Wall^ons carried on the Approaches even with the superficies of
the Water of the Moat of the Old Town.

In the other Attack, Chabot, with the Regiments of Cont^ and Albret, with a
Battalion of Polanders, retook some Traverses, whither the Enemy were returned.
But Fortune usually crossing Felicity, at the very instant that the assurance
of the Capitulation seemed to warrant that all the danger was over, and that
the Besiegers were ready to reap the Fruit of their Victory; and that Chabot,
having given his last Directions, was re-passing the Bridge in order to retire,
he was struck in the Head with some pieces of a Granado, and died of his Wound
in a few days after. This Accident was the occasion of no small grief to the
Prince, who had always ranked him in the number of his most familiar Friends.
As for his part, he showed a great Resolution at his death; no way daunted at
the expectation of it, and contemning i^ when it came.

In the mean time Truces were made, and all the Approaches were strongly
guarded, till Veere returned, that nothing might be attempted afresh. Two days
after he returned no ways deceived in the success of his Journey, from which
there was nothing to be hoped for, and which he had undertaken only to keep up
the Reputation of his Party, and to admonish his Generals to provide for all
those Places, upon which the Prince is most likely to turn his Victorious Arms
after the Surrender of Dunkirk.

And now the time for relieving the Town being just ready to expire, in the
evening of the third day Veere delivered up into the Prince's hands all the New
Town; and Miossans, who then commanded in his turn, entered the Place with two
Squadrons of Horse, and six hundred Foot taken out of the Battalions of French
Guards, and the Switzers of Gassions Brigade. Which done, he marched to take
possession of Ni^uport Gate of the Old Town. It Is true, that Governor made
some scruple of yielding up the Gate: but at last, being obliged to it by his
Capitulation, the Soldiers became Masters of it, and there stood all the night
under their Arms, within a Pikes length of the Enemy. The next day, being the
11th of October, the Garrison began to march forth about Eight of the Clock in
the Morning. The Prince also, not so much out of ostentation, as to prevent
Disorders, and to see Leda, for whom he had a high esteem, placed himself upon
the way through which they were to pass. A hundred and fifty Horse appeared
first of all, bebeing followed by Lamboy's five Regiments; after which came the
Baggage, and then the Artillery belonging to the Germans, and two Pieces of the
City Cannon, according to the Articles; the Spanish Infan^ry marched after the
Great Guns, and a hundred and fifty Horse brought up the Rear. Leda came last,
mounted upon a good Horse, and accompanied with the Principal Officers.

So soon as he perceived the Prince, he alighted, and accosted Him with a
profound Respect. On the other side, The Prince, who was also alighted from his
Horse, so soon as the Governor came pretty near him, received him very
civilly. After the first Complements, and a great number of Reciprocal
Encomiums, as the Governor was ready to retire, the Prince stopped him, and
invited him to stay and see the Garrison which he intended to put into Dunkirk.
Presently Norssmonstier, who had the leading of 'em, advanced at the head of
the Battalions of French Guards of Ranza^'s Brigade, the Regiments of Piemont
and Orleans, Molonden's Switzers, and Cabree's Polonians. These Bodies marched
one after another, and with the Foot that entered the day before, made two
thousand four hundred men, of the stoutest in the Army.

While they marched along, and that the Prince was discoursing with the
Governor, the latter comparing to himself the Fortune of the Siege of
Maestricht with his present Condition, and the great Qualities of two famous
Captains that had vanquished him, could not choose but admire the Prince.
Puissant Armies, abundance of all things, length of time, had rendered
Frederick Henry of Nassau Victorious. But here the Prince, with a slender Army,
pinched for want of Necessaries, in a short time had by his Prudence and
Courage within thirty days accomplished what the Hollanders were three Months
bringing to pass.

The Garrison being marched by, Leda took his leave of the Prince, who ordered
him the Queen's Gens d' Arms, commanded by Franquerot, to conduct him to
Nieuport, and then made his Entry into Dunkirk. He found in the Magazines a
good quantity of Powder, Match, Bullets, Arms, Corn, Forage, and other sorts of
Provision and Ammunition. Upon the Fortifications several Pieces of Brass
Cannon, and a great number of Iron Pieces; and in the Port, two great Vessels,
three Flutes, and thirteen Frigates, or rather Privateers, which kept the
Western Seas of France in a shameful subjection: it being easy by all this to
see, that the Besieged had store of all things necessary for their Defense, and
that Valor only had tamed them.

Thus ended the Siege of Dunkirk, at a time when all E^rope had their Eyes
fixed upon the Prince. But among so many Nations that beheld with astonishment
the Wonders of his Life, there was none but acknowledged that his Fortune was
beneath his Virtue, and his Prowess.

The End of the Second Book.
Memoirs, etc. The THIRD BOOK.
THE Siege of Dunkirk was no sooner at an end, What the Prince did after the
Siege of Dunkirk.
but the Duke took a Resolution to besiege Menene. Nevertheless, considering
that the Season was too far spent to undertake that Conquest, he only sent
Gassion with his Army toward the Abbey of Lenzi, to see whether some Attempt
might not be made upon Dixmude, of which he had a Design to make himself
Master, to the end he might in those Quarters refresh some part of his men: But
that Enterprise not appearing feasible, he set forward and encamped at
Hondescott, by reason of the abundance of Forage, after he had set his men at
work, to repair as well as they could the Breaches of Dunkirk, and strengthened
that Place with Men and Ammunition sufficient, and put in two Convoys into
Courtray; one of which he conducted himself through a Thousand Dangers. After
which, having received Orders to lay up his Men in their Winter Quarters, he
distributed his Forces according to his Orders; leading himself into Champaign
that part of the Army which he commanded in Person, before he joined the Duke
of Orleans. The Government of Dunkirk was joined to that of Berguen, as well
for that Dunkirk belongs to the Castellame of Berguen, as because that time out
of mind, they who commanded in the las^ place, were always Masters of the Sluice
that lies at the Gates of Dunkirk, and is that through which they let in the
Sea, to drown all the Country when they please. And these two Governments were
conferred upon Marshal Ranzau, which equally surpised all people; in regard
that no body questioned but that the Court would have cast their eyes upon
Marshall de Gassion, who had so highly signalized himself in the Siege of that
place, and who had moreover those Personal Qualities which Ranzau wanted. But
this was not the only vexation that mortified Gassion after the Siege of
Dunkirk; for out of a Capricio of his unlucky star, he would needs embroil
himself with the Duke of Enguien, who had a great value for him, and had
procured him a Marshal's Battoon, in despite of Cardinal Mazarine, who had no
kindness for him. This happened a little before the Armies separated, and upon
this occasion.

Gassion had taken with his own hand, during the Siege, Gassion quarrels with
the Prince.
an Officer, one of Lamboy's Battel-Marshals, whom the Duke had promised to
restore to his Colonel; and the thing had been done as the Duke desired; but
it was Gassion's Fate to embroil himself at that very instant, with a Prince
who till then had been his Protector, and upon whose Affection depended his
Good or Bad Fortune. For in regard the Prisoner had his Liberty upon his
Parole, the Captain of the Guards could not meet with him time enough to
present him to his Colonel so soon as he desi^'d. Upon which, the Colonel
meeting Gassion presently after, gave him some hard words, and Gassion, without
question, gave him as good as he brought. But however it were, the Officer
complained to the Duke, That Gassion took no notice of his Orders, and ^e^used
to release his Prisoner. It may be easily imagined, how this wrought with the
Duke of Engnien, who was naturally proud and haughty; nor could he therefore
^estrain his Choler; so that the Marshal coming presently after to wait upon
him at his Lodgi^g, he ^iercely told him, That he would make him obey his
Orders as well as the meanest Soldier in the Army.

The Marshal, who expected nothing less, was strangely surpised: However, he
did not appear to be much concerned, in hopes he might have been permitted
immediately to have justified himself, as it had been easy for him to do. But
the Duke would no^ suffer him to clear his Innocence: He turned his back upon
him with an ^^gry scorn, and would not hearken to any of his Ex^^ses: So that
the Marshal was fain to depart the Chamber, after a profound Reverence, not
being able to obtain leave to speak so much ^s one word for himself.

No question but the Duke was afterward better informed of what had passed
between the Marshal and the Colonel. But however it were, the Prince found
that he had treated too imperiously a Marshal of France, and a Person signally
accomplished; and ou^ of a Generosity, the more worthy of praise, because it
was voluntary, he would needs give the Marshal a Visit some days after, to make
amends for the Heats of his Passion. He talked to him at first conc^^ning ^
Convoy, and some other Affairs, yet all the while affected an obliging
Discourse, wherein he inte^nix'd some hints which were in a manner some sort of
Excuses. But the Marshal vexed to the Soul, and therefore making no Answer to
the Dukes familiar Civilities but with some certain cold Complements, the Duke
resuming his former Haughtiness, told him, That he in vain pretended to set up
for a great Captain, and one that the Kingdom stood in need of^ and that he
would have him to know, that he looked upon him to be no better than a
hairbrain'd Corporal, and one whose Service he could easily be without. After
which, he flung out of door, not without letting fall some Threatening
Expressions as he went. From which time forward, the Duke ceased to be his
Friend, and sat heavy upon his skirts.

The D. of Breze slain.
In the Month of May, the Duke of Breze, Admiral of France, and Governor of
Brouage, and other places, had laid Siege to Orbitello, which he attacked by
Sea and Land: But a Month after the Siege was laid, the Spanish Fleet,
commanded by Pementel, much stronger then the French, appeared with a design to
succor the Besieged; at what time both Fleets met, and there happened an
Engagement which lasted three days; wherein, to say truth, the French had the
Advantage, but the Admiral was slain with a Cannon Shot.

Great Solicitations for the D. of Breze's Employments for the D. of Enguien.
The Prince of Conde used all his endeavous to obtain the Duke of Breze's
Employments for his Son the Duke of Enguien; and his Demand was but reasonable;
for the Duke of Enguien being Brother-in-Law to the Duke of Breze, pretended to
them of course: But his Merit did an injury to his Claim; so many famous
Achievements, and the Reputation he had acquired, to be one of the greatest
Captains of his Time, rendered him suspected to the Court, or rather to
Cardinal Mazarine. The Prince of Conde, his Father, the most Politic Courtier
in the Kingdom, le^t nothing omitted either with the Queen or his Eminency, to
bring about his Design.

However, Cardinal Mazarine having some reason to dread the Consequences that
might attend this Refusal, he thought it requisite to assure himself of some
Persons in the Army that had both Wit and Courage, who in case of necessity
might be able to sustain the King's Authority among the Soldiers, against the
Credit of the Incensed Prince. To which purpose he cast his eye upon Marshal de
Gassion, whom he caused to be buzzed in the ear with a thousand false stories
to engage him to his Party. Nor was this all; he caused the Abbot de la
Riviere, one of the Duke of Orleans's Favorites, a man fit for any mischief,
to act his part; who to augment the Duke^s Hatred of Gassion, protested to him
with an Oath, that Gassion had taken upon him, without any scruple, the
Execution of an Order against his Person; and that he had boasted how
sedulously he would see it performed.

Now tho the Duke of Enguien very much contemned the Abbot de la Raviera, The
Prince leagues himself with the D. of Or^leance.
yet he gave credit to his words; and finding himself in such a conjuncture
wherein he was absolutely necessary for his purpose, because he had an
ascendant over his Master, and knew all the Secrets of the Court, he made a
show of having so great a veneration for his Counsels, that the Abbot promised
him to be entirely devoted to his Interests. Now the Duke of Enguien at that
time had fastened a most strict Tie of Friendship with the Duke of Orleance.
But such a Union could never last long, without the Cement and Communication of
a Favorite; so that 'twas necessary for the Duke, notwithstanding his scorn of
the Abbot, to enter into a Correspondency with him, and to show him some
outward Marks of his Good Will and Esteem, of which he thought him otherwise
altogether unworthy. However, the Abbot betrayed him, for that Cardina^
Mazarine soothed him up with the hopes of a Cardinal's Cap. Thus the Prince was
^ain to be treacherous to his own sentiments, and to set all Engines imaginable
at work, but all in vain; for it was impossible for him to obtain the Duke of
Breze's Employments. About the same time also his Father the Prince of Conde
died; The Pr. of Conde, the Father, dies.
that is to say, upon the 26 th. of December.

But the Cardinal, The Pr. of Conde has the Command of the Army.
who mistrusted the Union of the Duke o^ Orleance and the Duke of Enguien,
found the way quickly to part them asunder again: He caused the Duke of
Orleance to be called home, and left the Prince of Conde with the Army (for now
we must no longer call him the Duke of Enguien); and because the Prince should
have no reason to complain of him, he caused the sole Command of the Army to be
conferred upon him.

The Prince saw well enough, that the Cardinal played him soul play; but in
regard there was no remedy, and for that he preferred Honor before Riches, he
forgot the refusal of the Employments he desired, and gladly accepted the
Command of the Army. Nevertheless, after the Death of the Prince his Father,
The Pr^ succeeds in his Father's Employments.
he took possession of the High Stewardship of the King's Household, as also of
the Governments of Burgundy, Bresse, Berry, and some other places; which he
gave the Court to understand that he desired.

How much disgusted soever the Prince of Conde was against the Cardinal and the
Court, yet certain it was, that his Generosity, and the Respect which he bare
to the Queen, had obliged him to dissemble it; but his presence still alarmed
both the Queen and the Cardinal: 'Twas concluded therefore, that he should be
removed from the Court; who taking advantage of the conjuncture of Affairs in
Catalonia, which were in some disorder, by reason that the Valor of the Count
of Harcour^ had met with a Rub, he was sent into that Country under the
Character of a Viceroy, and departed in April, 1647. 1647.


The Pr. of Conde goes to command the Army in Catalonia.
The City of Bar^elona was so overjoyed that the Prince of Conde was come to
Command the King's Army in that Province, that the Magistrates made a Present
of a Chain of Gold to the person that brought them the News. As for the Prince
himself, he was no sooner arrived in Catalonia, but he laid Siege to Lerida^ He
besieges Lerida, and raises the Siege.
but he could not carry the place, which the year before had stopped the Count of
Harcourt: He gave Assault upon Assault; but foreseeing that Enterprise would
cost him too much^ Time, and too many Men, he quitted it. In short, the Garrison
of L^rida was extremely strong; and the Spaniards had an Army of Twelve
thousand men not far from the place; and the Forces which he commanded were
nothing near so numerous. Moreover Lerida had for some time put a stop to that
Rapidness with which he was wont to carry all that stood before him. But this
was only a disadvantage in appearance, and the raising of the Siege was not
only honorable but beneficial to France. He made it manifest at that time,
that his Head and his Heart acted by Concert; for by that means he preserved an
Army, with which he made considerable Expeditions the same year; for the 6th.
of October he laid Siege to the City and Castle of Ager, He besieges and takes
the City and Castle of Ager.
upon the Frontiers of Aragon; immediately he caused the Trench to be carried
on, and ad^anc'd his Approaches so far in three nights, that a part of his men
lodged themselves upon the side of the Moat of the Castle, where he raised two
Batteries, in the mean time he fortified all the Fords of the Rivers, and
Passages of the Mountains, to hinder the Spanish Army from relieving the place.
The 9 th. the Cannon having made a convenient Breach, he gave so vigorous, an
Assault, that the City and Castle were both taken. This Conquest was very
considerable; for besides that the Situation of the City and Castle were very
advantageous, it secured Ballaguier, and facilitated an Entrance into Aragon.
But this was not all^ while the French were busied in this Siege, the Spaniards
attacked Constantia; but they could not make themselves Masters of it,
notwithstanding the vigorous Onsets which they made: The Prince enforced them
twice to raise the Siege of that place, and constrained their Army to shelter
themselves under the Walls of Lerida, after he had defeated above Fifteen
hundred of their Men, and taken a good part of their Baggage and Cannon.

At this time France made a Peace with the Empire; but it was absolutely
impossible to agree with Spain, notwithstanding all the endeavors of the Duke
of Longuevill^, and the rest of the Plenipotentiaries which the Court sent to
Munster; and the Continuation of the War^ exposed the Kingdom to excessive
Expenses; so that for supplying the Charges, the Court was constrained to set
forth several Edicts for the raising of Money. The Original of the Troubles in
France.
And those were the Edicts which were carried to the Parliament, who opposed
their Verification, and which were the first occasion of the people^s
Discontents, the cause of the Alienation of their Affections; and were the
grounds of the first Motions of that Civil War which all the world has heard
of^ and which had like to have ruined France, during the Minority of Lewis XIV.

1648.
We shall not here give a particular Account of it; we shall only tell you, That
those Edicts which were suggested by Mazarine, being laid to heart by the
Sovereign Courts, the Third Estate, and the people, the Chamber of Accounts of
the Court of Aids, united together, to try whether they could by their
Unanimity prevent Cardinal Mazarine from overwhelming the Kingdom. This Union,
by which the Sovereign Courts went about to enable themselves to balance the
Royal Authority, or rather the Power of the Cardinal, could not but be
ungrateful to the Court, which was governed by that Minister; and therefore by
a Declaration of the King's, those Societies were ^orbid to assemble, but apart
by themselves; and the King himself delivered the Declaration; and the Awe
which the King's Presence imprinted in the Parliament, procured the
Verification of the Declaration. But this did no way hinder the Parliament from
reserving to themselves the Power of Examining it. In short, the next day there
happened a great Dispute among the Members of the Parliament^ Some there were who
maintained, That in regard the Declaration prohibited their Meetings, they were
blindly to obey it, because it was the King (...) Others upheld the contrary,
That the (...) not hinder their meeting in such a (...)ey had done, in regard
they only met (...) good of the State. To which they added, (...)ook his
advantage of the King's Mi^o^i^^, and made it his business, while the Sun (...)
to enrich himself at the Expense of the Kingd^^^^ This division of Opinions
exasperated their (...) and every one supported his Party with so (...) heat,
that from that dispute it was, that the Ni^^ n^^es of Mazarinians and Frondeurs
or Slingers, (...) their O^iginal. They that would have the D^cla^ation
l^terally obeyed, were called Mazarinians; and they that were of a contrary
judgment, were called Fro^deu^s.

In the midst of these Transactions, the Spaniards, who were not ignorant of
what passed in France, were willing to make the best advantage of these
Disorders. (...) duke Leopold, Governor of the Low Countries, and
Generalissimo of the Spanish Armies in those Quar^ers, waited only for the
Spring to take the Field; and knowing that the French had taken up their
Winter Quarters far from Cou^tray, he laid a design to besiege that place.
Beck, and the Governor of Oudenard, undertook that Expedition^ But Pal^^^
having forced their Lines, obliged 'em to (...), tho they had already gained
one of the Half-Moon^.

But the Court desirous to oppose a good General against the Archduke, cast
their eyes upon the Prince of Conde. Upon which he set forward for Flanders^
and so soon as the season would permit him to take the Field, he resolved to
^ay Siege to Ypres. The Pr. of Conde besieges Ypres.
It was a hold Attempt, in regard that Town being in the midst of Flanders,
might easily be relieved; besides, that the Spanish Army was very numerous. But
^ll these Considerations could not stop him: His (...) and his good^ Fortune
made him look upon all Enterprises to be easy. The Forces also that lay toward
the Sea, had Orders to join him, under the Command of Marshal Ranzau. Moreover,
he detached Four Regiments of Infantry, who laid a Bridge over the River of
Ypres; and the 17 th. of May the Place was invested.

Now in regard the City of Ypre is of a large Extent, he resolved that it
should be attacked in four parts. Grammont posted himself next to Armentiers
and Varnetin; the Roads and Avenues from Air and St. Omers, were stopped up by
Ranzau; those from Dixmude and Bruges by Palluau; and the Prince of Conde took
his Post upon the Avenues from Menene. The Circumvallation was three large
Leagues in compass.

Now while the French were busied in making their Entrenchments, the Archduke
attempted to force their Lines: But in regard the Circumvallation was finished,
and for that the Besiegers had almost made three Lodgments, he was forced to
retire.

The Spaniards take Courtray, while Ypre is besieging.
The Spanish General therefore, vex^d that he had failed of his Enterprise with
an Army so considerable, and being desirous besides to repair the Loss which
they were like to make, immediately laid siege to Courtray, and took it by
Assault. After that, he besieged the Castle, where there was a Dam or Waterstop
made of Piles, which joined to the Ramparts of the City; and having drained the
Moat, they presently fell on; and the Soldiers that kept the Citadel being only
raw Recruits, refusing to make any great Resistance, were all made Prisoners of
War, together with all the Officers. Ypre surrendered presently after, Ypre
taken.
not having held out above thirteen days.

The Queen had promised to give the Government of Ypre to Chatillon; and a
King's Lieutenant was already made choice of, to Command in the absence of the
Governor. But when the Prince least expected any such thing, a Courrier brought
him a Letter from the Queen, wherein she signified her trouble that she could
not g^ant the Government of the place to the person for whom he had solicited,
and to whom she had promised it; because she was obliged to give it to Pal^uau,
in regard that Courtray had not been lost by his fault. This News surpised the
Prince; so that there being no body in the room when he received the Letter,
but Grammont and another Officer, he fell into a most terrible Fury, and
inveighed with an extraordinary Passion against Mazarine; but Prudence made him
conceal some part of his Resentment.

The Archduke not satisfied with the taking of Courtray, The Spaniards take
Furnes.
resolved to attack Le Catelet, and to invest Peronne; but these two
Enterprises failed; however having laid siege to Furnes, he carried the Town,
and also the Castle of Eterre.

Three weeks after the Spaniards had taken Furnes, The Pr. retakes it.
and that the Forces which lay round that place were drawn off, the Prince of
Conde resolved to retake it; and to that purpose he ordered Marshal Ranza^ to
besiege it. The season was so far spent, that he made some scruple to undertake
it; but receiving a second Order, he obeyed it; upon which, the Place was
immediately Invested. Thither also the Prince advanced from Le Catelet; and
going to the Trenches so soon as he arrived, he received a Musket Shot in his
Thigh, and had it not been for the folding of his Buff-Coat, which was made at
the end of the slit behind, his Thigh had been broken, and he had been in great
danger. The same day the Town surrendered, and all the Officers and Soldiers
were made Hostages of War, to be exchanged for the Prisoners which the
Spaniards had taken during the last Campaign. The Prince, whose Wound was not
very con^iderable, returned, and carried back the men which he brought along
with him; and some time after was fought the Battle of Lens, famous for every
thing for which a Victory could be valued.

Lens is a City in Antois, which Gassion had taken in the last Campaign, and
was the last Expedition which that great Captain made; for that having been
wounded at that Siege with a Musket-Bullet in the Head^ he died of his Wound
the next day. The Battle of Lens.
The Spaniards lay before that Place, and pusht on the Siege with extraordinary
Vigor. On the other side, the Prince of Conde, to whom nothing appeared
difficult, resolved to force their Lines, and venture a Battle to relieve the
Place; however, he would not rashly engage himself. He stayed therefore till
General Herlack joined him with the Forces under his Command; but so soon as
that Reinforcement arrived, he was forthwith for fighting the Enemy. Now in
regard the Place was able to have held out for some time, he flattered himself
that he should come time enough to succor it; but the day before he set
forward, the Town surrendered. This unexpected News caused him to alter his
Measures; so that he took some time to consider what Enterprise to undertake.
But at length perceiving that the Spaniards were posted much more
advantageously then he himself by his own observation had thougt 'em to be; and
besides, that there was no Water where he lay with his Men, nor any Forage but
in the parts that lay next the Enemy, he resolved to quit his Statio^.
Therefore, that he might retreat in good order, and in a condition to defend
himself, if the Enemy should attack him, he had a Body of a Reserve which he
made his Vanguard, and immediately commanded to march. He drew up all his
Cavalry in two Lines, and ordered the second to follow the Reserve. The
Infantry was placed behind this second Line, having all the Artillery of the
Army before it.

The Spaniards perceived this Retreat; but at first they never stirred to
attack either the Reserve, or the second Line, or the Artilery; which made the
Prince believe they would not stir at all. However, after these Forces were
advanced at a good distance off, some Regiments of Croa^es and Lorrainers, that
comp^^'d the Left-Wing of the Arch-Duke's A^my, began to fall upon the first
Line of the French with an extraordinary Fury; and the Troops of that Line
sustained the first shocks of the Enem^ with much Bravery; but at length the
Spaniards briskly broke into their Body; so that finding themselves unable to
fight with any Order, they had been entirely defeated, i^ Cha^ellon with the
Gendarmerie which he commanded, had not hastened to their Succor. He presently
and all of a sudden thundered in among those great Squadrons of Croates and
Lorrainers; and without giving them time to recollect themselves, drove 'em so
vigorously before him, that if those Troops, as victorious as they thought
themselves, had not been seconded by all the Arch-Duke's Cavalry, they had been
cut in pieces; so that it may be said, That the French G^ndarmerie wrested the
Victory out of the Spaniards hands. But it being impossible that they should
withstand all the Enemies Cavalry, they were at length forced to give way. And
they were no soon^^ broken, but eight Squadrons, which were advantageously
posted to second 'em, forsook their Ground, and betook themselves to a shameful
Flight.

The Prince, who was not accustomed to see the me^ that fought under him recoil
before the Enemy, was extremely surpised at the Cowardice of his Horse. But in
regard there was no remedy, and that there were now but two things to be done,
either to rou^ the Spanish Army, or make an Honorable ^etreat, he advanced,
without losing time, to the Body which Grammont commanded; and calling the
principal Officers of the Army together, to consult what course to take, it was
resolved that they would fight the Enemy, and whatever hazard they ran, not to
quit their Resolution.

This being concluded, the Prince told 'em, with a sedate Co^ntenance. That
there was no way but either to Vanquish, or Dye, and then began to encourage
his men. Never General showed so great a Resolution as did the Prince at that
time; yet through the midst of this Heroic Resolution, and Undaunted Bravery,
you might discern a Sedateness of Mind, and a Contempt of Danger, which is the
Character of a Hero. He never appeared less concerned, tho perhaps he had never
been more provoked. He gave out all his Orders, and had so well ranged his men
for the Combat, that he openly declared, He would get the day, were he but
never so little seconded.

This Great Prince, who never appeared so great, as when the Greatest Dangers
threatened him, took upon himself the Command of the Right Wing^ The First Line
of which Wing, consisting of Nine Squadrons, was commanded by Villequier,
Lieutenant General. The Second, composed of Eight, by Normoutier; and Beaujeu
had Orders to lead on the Cavalry. The Left Wing was led by Grammont^ and the
First Line of that Wing, consisting of Nine Squadrons, was commanded by
Seneterre, Lieutenant General; the Second, composed only of Seven, was led on
by du Plessis Belliere; and St. Maigrin performed the Duty of Camp Marshal to
the First of these Lines. As for the Main Battle, which consisted of Ten
Battalions, it was commanded by Chatillon; and Five Squadrons, which made the
Body of the Reserve, were under Herlack's Orders; and Coss^ had the Charge of
the Artillery.

All things being thus disposed, the Prince rode through all the Lines,
encouraging the Soldiers to Fight; he put 'em in mind of their Victories at
Rocr^y and Norlinguen. He told 'em, He would be the first that would engage in
the greatest Dangers; and that they needed no more then follow his Example: And
after he had laid before 'em the Honor which the French Nation would acquire
if they won the day, he prepared to give the Signal of Battle; but a certain
Movement of the Spaniards stopped him. For he perceived that the Spanish Cavalry
opened, instead of Advancing; and believing there was some Mystery in it, he
kept his Ground, that he might discover the meaning of that Movement; of which
he was soon informed by his sight; for he saw the void spaces between the Horse
filled up with Foot^ which made him easily conjecture, that it was the Main
Battle, which he understood the Duke had designed to Command, believing the
Victory sure.

The Design of the Spanish Army was no sooner known, but the Prince took his
Measures accordingly: He ordered Cosse to march with the Cannon, and play upon
the Enemy; and at the same time that the Artillery played, the Squadrons and
Battalions advanced with such an undaunted Courage as astonished the Enemy. The
Count de la Sala, who was at the Head of the First Line of the Spanish Left
Wing, advanced with a singular Bravery, and gave the Enemy a dreadful Volley of
Pistol Shot. The French never fired at all, but so soon as de la Sala had made
his last discharge, they fell on with their Swords upon the Squadron which was
before 'em, with so much Resolution, being seconded by some other Troops of the
same Wing^ that they quite disordered the first Line of the Enemies Army. Which
the Archduke beholding, ordered the second Line to advance, and then both
Lines being joined, the Combat began to be very bloody. But the Spanish Troops
being superior to the Prince's, Villequier and Moussay were beaten and taken
Prisoners. But then Noirmoutier advancing in the nick of time, drove the two
Spanish Lines before him with such an undaunted Force, that he soon deprived
'em of the Honor which they had like to have got, and which seemed to portend
'em the Victory. On the other side, the Prince, who was every where, having
rallied the Troops that gave way, sent 'em again to fight afresh. And those
Troops, tho half terrified, flew upon the Enemies Lines with so much Fury and
Courage, that the Spanish Cavalry began to totter. But being vigorously
seconded by their Reserve, the two Lines that were almost broken, took Courage,
and re^urn'd once more to the Charge. At what time Herlack appeared at the Head
of the Dutch Squadrons, and fell upon the Lorainers with such an impetuous
Violence, that not being able to withstand the shock, they betook themselves to
their Heels, and carried all the rest along with them.

Grammont, who commanded the Left Wing of the French, and Bucquoy who led the
Right Wing of ^he Spaniards, had not yet struck a Blow. But then they began to
engage, and fought with equal advantage for some time; but at length Fortune
declared in favor of Grammont. At the same time Beck and Chatillon led the two
Main Bodies of the Foot; and tho the Victory was a great while very dubious,
yet the Prince relying upon the Measures he had taken, and the Stoutness of his
Men, made no question of winning the Battle. However, in regard Beck's
Regiments were supported by a strong Body of Horse, they made the French give
ground. But the Gendarmerie, no less active at the end then at the beginning,
seconded the Foot so well, that they rallied again, resumed fresh Courage, and
then both sides fought with more obstinacy then before, for three hours
together, at what time the Prince obtained the Victory. The Spanish Army was so
numerous, and had so advantageo^sly posted themselves, that the French were
somewhat out of heart at the beginning of the Battle; but being encouraged by
the Presence of their General, there was no Obstacle, no Hardship which they
did not surmount, no Danger which they did not willingly meet to purchase the
Honor of the D^y^ The Prince himself outbrav'd the Enemies fi^in^ like the
meanest Soldier, and exposed himself so frequently, The Pr. wounded.
that he was at length hit with a Musket ^^^let upon the Reins; but the
Bullet meeting with the resistance of his Buff^coat, he was discharged (...)
small Contusion only. Of the French Army not ^bo^e si^ hundred were slain, and
twelve hundred taken Prisoners, and wounded: whereas the Spa^i^rd^, besides the
loss of their Cannon and Baggage, had above eight thousand killed, and above
fifteen hund^ed taken Prisoners, among whom was General Beck, the Prince of
Ligny, and the Count of St. Amor, General of the Artillery.

The Duke of Chatillon, who had signalized himself in the Battle, was made
choice of by the Prince to carry the Tidings of so great a Victory to Court;
where so considerable a Success was looked upon as a Testimony of Celestial
Favor, for which all the People showed a more then ordinary Joy: And for which
Te D^^m was sung in the Church of Nostre Dame in Paris^ where their Majesty's
were present, as well as (...) Sovereign Societies, and the Corporations of the
City. And to the end, that from this Success they might not only reap
considerable Advantages over the Enemy without, but over those whom the King's
Council looked upon as Enemies within the Kingdom; the C^uncil^ were of
Opinion, That it behooved 'em to mak^ use of this favorable Opportunity, which
(...) C^r^mony of Te Deum presented them, to seize upon some of the Principal
Members of the Parliament, who had started those Paradoxes which no way pleased
the Court, and were followed by the whole Cabal of ^he Slingers. So that upon
the very day that Te Deum was sung, several Companies of the Regiment of Guards
being posted in several Quarters of the City. M. de Broussel was seized,
Monsieur de Broussel seized.
against whom the Court had a particular Peek, as being the Head of the
Slingers. He was a Councellor of the Great Chamber; a Person of ancient
Integrity, but of no great Capacity. He had been all along a great hater of
Favorites, and was much reverenced by the People, who called him their Father.
Now although he run a great hazard that seized him, by reason of the singular
affection which the People bore him^ yet M. de Cominges undertook to do it, and
performed what he undertook. He seized him while the Companies of Guards were
drawn up in a row in the Streets; so that M. de Broussel, together with M. de
Blancmesvi^, Nephew to the Bishop of Beauvaise, was carried with a good Guard
to Bois de Vincennes. Orders were also left with Mr. Laisne, Councellor also of
the Great Chamber, to retire into Province, and M. Loizel was banished into
Montes.

The noise of the seizing of de Broussel was no sooner noised about Paris, but
the People betook themselves to their Arms, the Chains were drawn cross the
Streets, the Barricado's were set up in all the Corners of the public Places,
and the Shops were shut up. The Queen thereupon gave orders to reduce the
People, and suppress the Sedition; but 'twas impossible to be done, so that the
Court was constrained to give the Prisoners their liberty. So soon as de
Broussel appeared among the People, he was saluted with Volleys of small Shot,
and accompanied with loud Acclamations to the Palace, where he, and M.
Blancmesvil, received the Complements of the Parliament^ and from thence he was
conducted, as it were in triumph, by the same people to his Lodging.

Now in regard the Antipathy which the Slingers, and the People had against the
Cardinal, were the cause of this Uproar, and for that they believed, that the
good of the Kingdom required, that Mazarin should no longer continue in the
weighty Employment of Chief Minister, but rather that he should be banished;
the Parliament who found themselves encouraged by what had happened, persisted
with redoubled vigor in their first Sentiments, and renew^d their strength
against the Court. And several Persons of Quality, some out of Interest^ some
desirous of Change, most violently engaged to ruin the Cardinal.

The principal Reasons which that Party alleged were, Reasons for the
Cardinal's Ruin.
That it was a thing unheard of, and ignominio^s to a flourishing Kingdom, That
a Foreigner, and a born Subject to the King of Spain, should be the prime
Minister of France; and that this Minister should also have so absolute a
Power, as to be the Umoire of War and Peace^ That the conferring of Honors,
Employments, and all Favors, should be at the sole disposal of his will and
pleasure; not to be bestowed as the Rewards of Merit, good Service, high
Quality, but but to gratify particular devotion to his Interest: That his
Ambition had carried the Arms of France into Tuscany, at a vast Expense, and
without any Advantage to the Nation^ only to make himself formidable in Italy,
and to purchase Principalities for his Kindred: That for his own Interests he
had refused to admit of the Trea^y of Peace concluded at Munster, which he had
eluded by the Sedulity of Servien^ his Creature: That out of Jealousy he
designed the Ruin of Marshal Gassion a little before his death: That he only
understood Foreign Affairs; and that by his Italian Politics he had effaced
that Confidence and good Opinion which the Consederates of France had of the
Confidence and Sincerity of the French Nation, which Cardinal Richlieu had
established, during his Ministry. That as for the Domestic Affairs of the
Kingdom, he was incapable of managing 'em, in regard^ the State was become full
of Division and Upro^r^ during his Government: That he ruled the Kingdom by
Foreign Maxims, no way agreeable to the French Nation: That he had introduced
such palpable Juggling, and Tricking Quirks of State, that he had exposed an
Illustrious Court to the Contempt and Railleries of all other Nations. In a
word, That he was unable to bear so great a Burden, and that ^e had lost his
Credit among the People.

The Answer of Cardinal Mazarin's Party.
To this Mazarin's Party made answer, That 'twas no such strange thing for
Foreigners to have the Government of the State; witness the Cardinal of
Lorrain, and the Cardinal of Brague, the Duke of Neve^s^ Marshal de ^ets, and
Marshal de Ancre: that Mazarin had been nominated to the Cardinalship by
France, after he had done her considerable Services. That Cardinal Richlieu,
who understood Men, had appointed him his successor in the Ministry: That the
deceased King, who had a perfect knowledge of the good Qualities of all that
were about him, made him President of his Council after the death of Richlieu;
That the Queen Regent had suffered him to continue in the same Dignity, merely
through the necessity of Affairs, and in obedience to the King's last Will and
Testament: That all these things were approved by all the Wise men of the
Realm, and by all the Princes in league with France: That having by his
Services answered her Majesty's Expectations, she could not lay him aside
without doing the Kingdom an Injustice; and without being ungrateful to a
Servant so beneficial, and so faithful. That he was so far from favoring only
those who were devoted to the Interests of the Court; That the common Complaint
was^ That in conferring of Honors and Employments, he had too particular a
regard to the Servants of the Duke o^ Orleans, and Monsieur the Prince. That
all Affairs were proposed to the Council, who took such Resolutions as they
thought most convenient. That the Accusation against him for opposing the
Conclusion of the Peace, was without any ground; neither was it a thing
probable, in regard, that besides the general Interest^ his Eminency's
particular Interest obliged him to Crown his Ministry, which so many Successes
had rendered glorious, with a Treaty that would have eternized him in the
Affection of the People: That it was certain, the Spaniards had always crossed
that Treaty, as the Duke of Longueville, and the Princes themselves could
testify. That the Expedition against Orbitello, and Porto Longone, were the
most advantageous that France could have undertak'n, and most proper to bring
the Enemy to a speedy Peace; in regard those Places would have kept in
subjection those Territories which the Spaniards possessed in Italy^ That the
Independency which the Duke of Guise affected at Naples, was not the Reason
that the Cardinal afforded him powerful Assistance. That Gassion would have set
himself up in Flanders, with little dependence upon the Court. That the Prince
never complained of his not assisting him either at Catologna, or any other of
his Campaigns, as much as lay in his power. That he was constrained to have
recourse to those Edicts to raise Mo^ey for the Expenses of the War;
nevertheless that the Taxes were abated. That Time had sufficiently evinced,
That his transporting Money into ^taly was a mere Fabulous Story, invented on
purpose to disgrace him. To this they added, That for twenty years together he
had managed with honor the Interests of the Princes of Europe. That if the
good Intelligence between France and the United Provinces began to flag^ 'twas
because some particular Persons had been suborned and corrupted by the Gold of
Spain. That in the Administration of State, he had followed all the Maxims of
Cardinal Richlieu, only that he had ^onish'd the Cruelty of Punishments. That
if he had been obliged to promise more then he had performed, 'twas because the
number of those that served in France was very great, and the number of
Pretenders much greater. That the State had never kn^wn more Prosperity, then
during his Ministry; and that i^ in great Executions the honor of the
Performance were due to the Generals, the Contri^ance and Forecast belonged to
him. That France had been still in quiet, if every body had been unanimous in
their Duty; if the People had not been drawn from their Obedience by the
Suggestions of Persons disaffected; or rather, if the Parliament, who ought to
be the true Model of Allegiance, had not paved 'em a way to revolt. That the
Station wherein the Cardinal was, had always been exposed to the Assaults of
the Hatred and Envy of all the States; and by consequence 'twas no wonder, if
sometimes an Inordinate Ambition were laid to his charge, or if sometimes he
were accused of Insufficiency. However, that he was happy in this, That Calumny
in her most Venomous Assaults had spared his Fidelity, and never attacked him
with the least suspicion of Treachery.

But this Answer and Apology of Cardinal Mazarine could not hinder his Enemies
from persevering in their Design to remove him from the Administration of the
Government, and then to Ruin him. And this Design was afterward so well
confirmed, that it was decreed in the Assembly of the Chambers of the
Parliament, That a Solemn Deputation should be sent to the Duke of Orleans, and
the Prince of Conde, and Conty, to beseech them to join with the Parliament for
the effectual Remedy of the Grievances that threatened the Kingdom.

The Court was at Ruel, when the Cardinal was informed of what had passed; and
he was deeply afflicted to see that he must be constrained to throw himself
into the Prince's Arms, and to secure his Tottering Fortune by his Support.

The taking of Lens.
The Disorders at Paris not permitting the Prince to reap all those Advantages
from the Victory of Lens, which he might have done, he was constrained to bound
his Conquests with the taking of Lens. And so soon as that Place was taken, he
returned to Court; The Pr. returns to Court.
at what time all People beheld him with admiration. For besides that, he was
endowed with so many noble, so many excellent and rare Qualities, besides the
many Signal Victories he had won, he had had no share in the Troubles; insomuch
that both Parties looked upon him as their Defender, and bel^ev'd they might
shelter themselves under his Laurels from all manner of troublesome Accidents.
And indeed, had he harbored at that time those Thoughts in his Breast, which
his Enemies afterward imputed to him, questionless he would have made the best
of Opportunities so favorable. For in truth the low condition of the Court,
and Public Admiration equally concurred to his Exaltation, and to the
Execution of the most Ambitious Designs, which he could have had in his Head.
So that in regard he studied then so little to court the People, and to manage
the Exasperations of those whose Sentiments and Conduct were most opposite to
the Regency and the Cardinal, it is manifest he had no such design as he was
accused to have at that time.

The Prince had admitted two great Men to be his Confidents, Chatillon and
Grammont the Princes Confidents:
both Persons of Signal Merit, but opposite in their Judgments as to the
Affairs that made so great a noise: These were the Duke of Chatillon, and
Marshall Grammont. The first, whose Person and Family were bound in the
strictest Ties of Alliance with the Prince, labored to persuade him to declare
for the Parliament, or at least to make himself Umpire of the Differences with
all the Neutrali^y imaginable: The other Engaged by all manner of Interests
with the Court, spent a large stock of pleasing Eloquence to oblige him to side
with the Court. But the Prince upon this occasion laid a Comtraint upon his own
Temper, r^mote from moderate ways, and wrote, together with the Duke of
Orleance, to the Parliament, exhorting 'em to fend Commissioners to St.
Germains^ and to put an end to their Differences in a Conference. Declaration
of the 28 th. of October.
Which Conference terminated in an Authentic Declaration of the King^s, which
g^ve some Respi^ to the Publi^k Differences and for that the Stra^agems of the
Enemies of the Court prevailed so far, that they openly d^manded the Ruin of
the Cardinal, the Cou^^ thought it their best way to have recourse ^o ^he Duke
of Orleans and the Prince. The Court has recourse to the Duke of Orleans and
the Prince.
And in regard the Mischief had penetrated so far that it was not t^ b^
Eradicated but by strong Medicaments, they were of Opinion at the same time,
that the Natural Mod^ration of the Duke of Orle^n^, and his peaceable Te^per,
would not be so proper, as the Prince's more Vigorous Heat; besides, that the
Reputation of so great a Captain, the Splendor of his Victories, and ^he
Assistance of his Army, would strike a Terror into the Male-content^^, so that
the Court labored might and main to gain him.

The Queen made use of all the most powerful and persuasive Motives, descending
even to Tears, and the most melting Expressions^ telling him, She looked upon
him as her third Son: The Cardinal also protested that he should be all his
Life time devoted to his Will and Pleasure with an Absolute Submi^sion: The
King likewise tenderly embracing him, recommends to him the welfare of the
Kingdom, and the safety of his Person. But notwithstanding all these Caresses,
Marshall Grammont and Le Fellier were the Persons who fully determined him to
take the Court Party. Grammont and Le Tellior persuade the Prince to take the
Court Party.
They laid before him that by degrees, the Parliament would invade all
Authority: That without confining their Ambition within the Bounds of the
Declaration of the Conference at St. Ger^ans, they would not only take
^ognizance of the Affairs of War, but also dispose of the Fortune of Ministers
of State, change 'em, remove 'em, and settle others in their rooms a^ their
pleasure^ that there was reason enough to fea^ that a^ length they would
Attacque the most priviledg'd Persons in the Kingdom; that the Condi^ion o^
(...)liament would be a Dignity to be (...), if they come once to impose Laws
upon (...), and the Condition of the Princes (...) be more miserable should
they (...) to creep to 'em. That this new sort (...) wo^nded the Constitution
of the Monar(...), which was Absolute and Indepen^^^^^ (...) it was
particularly contrary to the Con(...), and the Institution of French Par(...),
That if any Abuses were crept into the (...), ^hey ought to be reformed by the
Assem(...) General, and not by the Decrees (...) whose Suffrages carry things
rather b^ (...) then consideration: That every time the (...) h^d exceeded the
Bounds of their Duty, they had been always severely checked, sometimes by (...)
King, sometimes by Henry IV. somet^^^s by Charl^s IX and other Kings their
Predec^^^ors, upon less dangerous Occasions then what (...) no^ in Dispute:
That Great Empires were never supported by Cowardly Counsels: That he (...)
Trial of his Co^rage and his Forces in (...) ^ Weighty Conjuncture; and that
the Just^^^ of Sove^aigns consisted in their Power: That he^ (...) of Conde,
was concerned to support the Card^^^l^ because the Resolutions which had been
taken (...) ^he Person of his Eminency, tended to the D^^^ruc^ion of the Royal
Family; and that if the (...) of Orleans and himself did not stand firm, and
(...) oppose an Enterprise of this Nature, the (...) with her Children would be
constrained to implo^^ the Aid of the Princes in League with the (...).

Now besides that the Prince believed that the lit(...) the Parliament had
taken to conform to the (...), wounded the Honor of those that were (...) the
Conference, and undermined the Foun(...) the Pe^ce that had been Established;
these Discourses made so deep an Impression in his Mind, that he would no
longer hear of a Neutrality; so that abandoning all his Care of losing the
Affection of the Public, he had recourse to those Thoughts which inclined him
to the most violent Extremities. In short, The P's. heat in the Parliament.
going along with the Duke of Orleans to the Palace, he carried himself with so
much Heat and Passion, as did him a great deal of Injury in the Hearts of the
People. He had no sooner taken his Place, but the President Viole, who had
great Credit in the Company, rose up, and took upon him to say, That the
occasion of their meeting was of that great Importance, that they could not
make one step which did not lead 'em either to Honor or Infamy; nor was there
any probability that they could enter into a good Beginning till they had first
implored the Assistance of the Holy Ghost, and he was preparing for the
Solemnity of the Duty. However in regard that while the President was talking,
he let fall some disobliging Expressions against the Cardinal, the Prince of
Conde, threatening him at the same time with his Looks and Hand, could not
forbear to bid him hold his Tongue; and then addressing himself to the First
President, in a great Passion told him, That he wondered, that he who was the
Head of so Famous an Assembly, did not endeavor to suppress the Liberty which
some People gave themselves, who under the pretense of the Public Good, went
about to excite the People to Sedition. Adding withal, That if the King's
Youth, and his want of Experience, were the cause of the Disorders which had
happened in the Kingdom, he would have him to know, That the Duke of Orleans,
who was there present, and himself, were able to supply both the one and the
other; and that the King would not want good Subjects, to reduce the
Male-contented to their Duty.

These words offended the whole Assembly: But in regard they ^ell from the Lips
of a Prince of whom they stood in awe, every body was profoundly silent,
contenting themselves to utter their disgusts in pri^ate. As for the first
President, he was extr^amly zealous for the Honor of the Assembly, which the
Prince had affronted, in threatening one of the Members of it. However, he was
not much troubled at what had happened, because he thought, that when so great
a Prince had declared himself, those of the Parliament, whose heat and violence
he did not approve, would bethink themselves, and become more moderate.
Nevertheless he told the Prince, That he could not forbear complaining of his
reprimanding so severely a Member of an Assembly that were only met to remedy
the Distractions of the State, and not to kindle new Flames. That he was
confident, that what he had done, was out of a good Intention; but in regard
that Suffrages were to be permitted, he took the liberty to tell him, That if
he had taken another course, he would have done better. Lastly, That he read in
the Countenances of those who composed the Assembly, a great Emotion, and great
Discontent: That if he saw some that made no outward show of any thing, yet
they were never a w^^t the less sad in their hearts, and never the less
afflicted. That they were in hopes a Prince, whose (...) Achievements had
equaled him to the Greatest Captains in the World, would have joined with 'em
to re-establish the Tranquillity of a Kingdom, whose Frontiers he had so well
secured by his Illustrious Victories.

This same Speech did not equally satisfy all people. The more ancient and
prudent sort found that he had spoken much in a few words; and that considering
the Conjuncture of Affairs, the first President could not have done much better
then he did. But the younger sort were not so reserved; for they began to
murmur one among another. So that the Prince, who was not well pleased with the
plaints that were made of his proceeding, as not being accustomed to hear
Truths told him, nor to receive any opposition to his Will, was so little
master of his own Inclinations, that instead of making amends for what he had
done amiss, he turned toward the younger sort, and threatened them, as he had
the President Viole, that is to say, with his looks and hand.

They resolve to besiege Paris.
The Court was overjoyed that the Prince had so openly declared in their favor:
And in regard that after what had passed, he found him self-interested by his
own Quarrel, in the Differences of the Court, he greedily listened to all
Proposals that were made him for reducing the Parliament. Thereupon, it was no
hard matter to persuade him, that the best way would be to besiege Paris^ and
that a Siege would not fail to make the People cry out, and mutiny against the
Assembly: Or whatever happened, that the Parisians wanting Leaders and Men, and
being accustomed to Plenty and Ease, would make little or no Resistance. His
Passion caused him to approve these Reasons for strong and undeniable; so that
he undertook to be Captain of the Enterprise under the Orders of the Duke of
Orleans. But the Duke at first opposed the Design, till the Importunities, and
the Persuasions of the Abbot de la R^v^^re, overruled his Judgment, and got
the upper hand of his Calmer Sentiments.

1649.
Immediately the Prince, and Marshal de la Milleray, proposed the seizing of St.
Louis's Island, The King leaves Paris privately.
St. Antony's Gate, the Arsenal, and the Bastille, and to lodge their Majesty's
in the Bastille. But whether this Proposal were not sufficiently supported, or
whether they were afraid of exposing the person of the King the Court resolved
to quit Paris, and really to besiege the City. So that in the Evening before
Twelf-day, the King retired from Marshal Grammont's House to the Cardinal's
Palace; and the next Morning, about Three of the Clock, ^e departed without any
noise or bustle for St. Germans (...) ^^ye. The same day the King sent a Letter
sealed with his Privy Signet to the Provost of Merchants, and the Sheriffs of
Paris, wherein his Majesty declared, that he was forced to leave the City, to
the and ^e might not be exposed to the pernicious Designs of some Officers of
Parliament, who held secret Intelligence with the Enemies of the State: Adding
withal, That he hoped the Citizens would continue faithful ^o his Service, and
prove steadfast in their Du^^^^ and that in a few days they should farther
understand his pleasure.

How^ver^ The Citizens no sooner understood that the King was gone, but the
Tumult began to wax very great in Paris. They exclaimed, after a most dreadful
manner, against the Cardinal, against the Prince, against the Queen, and
against all that carried away the King. For the Paris^ans took his going away
for a Force that had been put upon him. But they were so enraged, when they
heard that the same day the King was carried to St. Germains, that it had been
resolved in Council to block up Paris; that far from being consternated, they
showed an extraordinary Resolution, and declared themselves prepared for all
manner of Events.

But the Parliament, who more readily foresaw the dismal Consequences of a
Civil War, were not so resolute as the People. And therefore the first time
they met, which was upon the 7th of January, they sent the King's immediate
Servants with their Submissions^ and very Advantageous Offers. But those
Commissioners were sent back without being heard; which extremely exasperated
their Minds. So that the Parliament meeting again upon the 18 th, declared
Maz^^i^ an Enemy to the State, and ordered him to depart the Kingdom in Eight
days, with full liberty after that for all the King's Subjects to fall upon him
wherever they met him. And at the same time they delivered out Commissions for
the raising of Soldiers^ and took all the Precautions needful upon such
Occasions.

In the mean time, the Prince, with about six or seven thousand men, which were
the Remains of the Army last Summer, blocked up Paris, seizing upon Lagni,
Corbect, St. Cloud, St. Denis, and Charenton. On the other side, the Duke d'
Elbocut, his Three Sons, the Duke of Brissack^ and the Marquis de la Boulays
went and offered their Services to the Parliament; and after that^ the Prince
of Con^i, the Duke of Longueville, the Prince of Marsellac, and Monsieur de
Noimouster did the same. The Parliament nominated the Prince of Con^i for
Generalissimo, and the Duke d' Elbocut for General; and afterward joined the
Duke of Bouillon, and Marshal de la Mothe, in equal Commission with 'em. As for
the Duke of Longueville, he would not accept of any Employment, because he
could have none that was conformable to his Rank, or none but such as equaled
him with his Inferiors^ so that he was only present at the Prince of Con^i's
Councils to give his Advice. When the Prince understood that Conti and
Longueville had privately left St. Germans in the night, and were got into
Paris, he went from Charenton to the Court, where he thundered most terribly
against 'em. But that was no impediment, but that the Parisian Party b^ga^ to
grow numerous, having now got among 'em a Prince of the Blood, and another
Prince almost absolute in his Government of Normandy. De la Mothe also was
become considerable in the Armies; but the Duke of Bouillon much more. For
besides that he was deeply known in the Affairs of the World, that he was
stout, and understood the Art of War to perfection, he was endowed with an
easy, fluent, natural, and insinuating Eloquence; he had a neat Wit, fertile
in Expedients, and proper to maintain the most difficult Affairs, a cl^^r
S^nse, and a discerning Judgment. And besides^ ^e was engaged in a strict Tie
with Marshal T^^e^ne, his Brother, who at that time commanded the Army in
Germany. Thereupon the Prince, who looked upon these two Brothers to be his
Friends, and Persons of great weight, wrote to the Duke of (...)^ that he was
afraid, he took it for granted, that the Prince believed he had a hand in Conti
and Long^evill's with drawing from the Court; for which reason he was desirous
to disabuse him; and then conj^r'd him to return to St. Germains, where he
would procure him all manner of satisfaction touching his particular Interests.
But the Duke of Bouillon caused the Letter to be read in Parliament. So that
the Court finding they could not depend upon him, and being moreover informed
of Turenne's disaffection to their Cause, the King and the Prince, who was in
great Reputation among the German Troops, wrote to the several Colonels, not
to acknowledge him any long^r for General, but to quit him; which they did.

The Duke of Beaufort also, who had been wandering about in the Provin^es upon
the Loire ever since his Es^ape from Vincennes, got to Paris in the time of the
Troubles, and offered his Service to the Parliament, wh^ ^lear'd him of the
Accusation of having conspired against Mazarin's Life, received him as a Peer
of France, and made him one of their Generals.

In the mean time, the King's Forces possessed all ^he Posts round about Paris;
and though the Parliament's ^^my was more numerous, their Generals ^^ver
stirred to open any Passage, so that Provisions could no^ get into the City,
but with great difficulty, from (...), in regard that the Prince could not put
a Garrison in B^^ys Conte-Robert, for fear of dividing his Forces^ and for that
he had quitted Charenton, which C^n^^ had made himself master of.

^ut the Prince, cons^^e^ing the Importance of th^^ Post, which secur^d the
P^^isia^ (...) and ^or that he longed to begin wi^^ some Action that might
render his Forces formidable^ He resol^'d to attack it^ though the Parisi^n had
put t^ree thousand Men into it. The Pr. attacks Charenton.
Advancing therefor with the Duke of O^le^n^, and all the Princes and Lords of
the Court^ upon the 18th of February he committed the A^tacking of the Post to
the Duke of Chatillon^ and advan^'d with the Cavalry upon a rising ground (...)
hinder the Parisians from succouring the Place. Ch^tillon performed the
Prince^s Orders with all the Conduct and Valor imaginab^e^ but when he had
driven the Enemy to the last ^arricado, he received a Musqu^^ shot quite
through his Body, of which he died the next day in ^he flower of his Age,
lamented by both Parties for his Noble Qualities, and for being slai^ just at
the time when he was ready to have obtained those Dignities which his great
Servic^s had perfo^m'd. The taking of Charenton was much to the dishonor of
the Parliament's Generals^ and Forces, and no less to the honor of the Prince
of Conde. For in short, The Prince carried that P^^^ in view of the Enemy's
Army, and at the Gates of Paris, out of which he had marched in the sight o^
Ten thousand men, who seemed to have taken the Field merely ^o be Witnesses and
Spectators of so great an Action. This Conflict, and these of Bois de Vin^nnes,
Lag^y, and B^^y-Con^e^ Robert, all to the disadvantage of the Pa^isians, and in
one of which the Young Duke of Roba^^ approving himself the worthy Inheritor of
his Father's Virtue, lost his Life, made 'em begn to think of Peace. But the
diversity of Interests was an Obstacle difficult on surmount. On the other side
the Court, who were pu^t up with their Success, and who were in greater hopes
by reason of the Princes successful Achievements, would needs imp^se too
Rigorous Conditions upon the Contrary Par^y^. So that if both Parties were so
(...) was because that a Civil War (...)qually displeasing to both.

For this Reason, upon the 20th of F^b^^a^y, the King sent a Herald of (...)
accompanied wi^h two (...) who coming to the Gate of St. H^nore, (...) he had
three Pacquets of Letters, one ^or the Prin^^ of Con^^, the other for the
Parliament, and a third for the City. Of which the Parliament (...) ^^f^^m'd,
took the matter into consideration, (...) a Decree^ That they should neither
admit, (...) ^^ceive the Herald; but send the King's Serv^^^^^ that is to say,
^alon, Meliand and Bignon, to (...) Queen, to let her know, That if they had
refused (...) the Herald, it was not for want of duty, (...) because Heralds
were never sent but to Sove^^ign Princes, or States, that were in hostility
with the Kingdom^ but that neither the Prince of Conti, (...) Parliament, nor
the City, were either Sover^igns, (...) Enemies, and therefore they besought
her Maje^^y, that they might understand her pleasure from (...) own Lips. Those
Commissioners were well (...) ^y the Queen, who told ^em she was satisfied with
^^^ir Excuse, and their Submissions; that when ^he Parliament should return to
their duty^ they should^ find the effects of her Favor, and Good^will^ and
that a^ ^or private Persons, they should all of 'em, (...) o^e, find all manner
of security, both for th^i^ Persons and estates, in their submission; and the
D^^e, of Orlean^ also, and the Prince, gave 'em the (...).

Now the b^^h Parties most ardently desired Peace, (...) concluded without a
great deal of dif(...) several Deputations and various Con^e^^^ces^ where it
was a hard matter to content so (...) whose Interests were so nice and so
differen^^ But at length it was concluded at St. German^^ (...) March; and
afterwa^^^ the King's De(...) for this so necessary Peace, was verified in ^ool
Parliament, who ordered that Thanks should be returned to their Majesty's for
the Peace which they had restored to their Subjects.

The Causes of the Civil War that ensued upon the Imprisonment of the Princes.
No sooner were the Flames of Civil War extinguished by this Peace, but they
were re-kindl'd in a short time after, and spread it self with more Violence
into the principal Provinces of the Kingdom, for the Reasons which I am going
to tell ye.

Considering what the Prince had done in the preceding War, in favor of the
Court and the Cardinal, it was a difficult thing for them to make him those
acknowledgments which his great Services deserved; or that the Prince should
contain himself within the bounds of Mod^sty, out of a desire of Domination and
Superiority, in demanding the most considerable Employments, whether for
himself or for those whom he had a mind to favo^r. And in regard the Cardinal
had chiefly reaped the benefit of the Prince's Assistance, he was the most
exposed to his Demands, his Complaints, his Threatenings, and his Bad Humor.

And indeed, during the Parisian War, there had been some Misunderstandings
between the Prince and the Cardinal. For as there was at that time a strict and
diligent Correspondence between 'em, and for that for the most part Familiarity
lessens Esteem, the Respect which the Prince had for the Cardinal was very much
abated; and the Cardinal who perc^iv'd it, had looked upon those great Virtues
which the Prince had made so gloriously appear in the time of the Civil
Troubles, as no other then the Effects of Fear and Aversion. Moreover, during
that time, the Cardinal plotted to bring the Odium of the People upon the
Prince, by endeavoring to make him the Author of all the Mischiefs to which
they were exposed. The Prince also after the Peace, thought it behooved him to
thwart the Cardinal, and to show the Alienation of his Kindness for him, that
he might regain the Affection of the people, and of a great (...) o^
considerable persons which he had lost, for protecting a person so generally
hated. Calling to mind al^o the submissiveness of the Cardinal during the last
Disorders, he was persuaded^ That if he should put him in fear, and scorn him,
it would be s^^^^cient to draw upon him new Troubles, and to oblige him to
sneak a second time to him, and to have ^he ^ame dependence upon him as before.
He might also perhaps imagine, by reason of the Kindness which the Queen showed
him at St. Germains, that i^ wo^ld not be impossible for him to make that
Princess sensible of the Cardinal's Defects, and to have all the Authority next
her, himself, after he had laid the Cardinal aside.

On the other hand, the Cardinal had found, that he could build no solid
Foundation upon the Prince's ^^iendship, who was swayed rather by Capricio,
then by Reason or his own Interests, and that time did bu^ augment his scornful
humour^ so that he began to meditate his Ruin. To which we may add, that
Concord and Reputation being incompatible between two persons in the same
place, the Cardinal could no more brook a Superior at Court, then the Prince
could endure an Equal.

And that which contributed considerably to dissolve the Knot was this, That
the Cardinal was ^^rongly convinced, that he could not engage the ^^ince to
persevere in his Interests, but by the probabil^^y of new Establishments, which
either he propos^d Himself to him, or by his Crea^ures, only to (...) him, and
with a ^ull rotent afterward to evade (...) ^is Offers and his Promises. All
which the (...) pe^ceiv'd, and was extremely incensed.

Las^ly, one of the principal Causes of the Cardinal^s Disg^st against the
Prince, and which inspired him wi^h a Design to ruin him, was the constant
oppo^^^ion of the Prince to the raising of the Cardinal's Fi^^ly; which I shall
thus make out.

Some time before the Troubles, Mazarine, desirous to support his Fortune in
France by considerable Alliances, had cast his eyes upon the Duke of Mer^eur,
as a ^it person to Marry his Niece Mancini, and to confer upon him at the same
time the Employment of Lord High Admiral. This Project was interrupted by the
War, and reass^m'd some time after the Peace, when the Court was at Compiegne,
and where there was nothing talked of but Festivals and Rejoicings. The Queen
spoke of it to the Prince, who durst not oppose it^ whether he slighted the
business, or did not foresee the Consequences of it, or rather because he was
afraid of the Noise it would make, should he gainsay it. However it were,
notwithstanding his silence at that time, he afterward most vehemently opposed
it, and never minded observing any Decorum with the Cardinal. For he spared no
manner of Raillery or nipping In^ectives against his Person. This cut the
Cardinal to the heart, and did not a little trouble the Queen. But that which
absolutely rendered the Prince suspected at Court^ was his obstructing another
Match which the Cardinal was eager to make between one of his Nieces and the
Duke of Candale, at what time Guienne was in Arms, through the Misunderstanding
between the D. of Es^ernon his Father, and the Parliament of Bourdeaux, which
had joined, as also had that of Prov^nce, with the Parliament of Paris, against
Mazarine. For the Prince foreseeing that the Ma^ch could not be made without
assuring the Government of Guyen to Candale, whom the Parliament and People
would be sure to expel, he made use of the Affection of the Bourdelois to
hinder the Marriage, and openly declared for 'em in the Council, that he might
encourage 'em the more to demand another Governor.

The Prince's so openly declaring for the Parliament and Revolters of Guyenne
put it positively beyond all doubt, that he held a Correspondence with 'em and
consequently that he was in Confederacy with all the Factions. And that which
augmented the Confusion and Jealousy of the Court, was the Demand which
Guyenne made to have the Prince to be Governor of that Province instead of the
Duke of Espernon. But new Troubles arose at Paris, occasioned by the ^^^ts of
the Townhouse, which caused the Prince to show his Zeal in a more violent
manner then ever, for the Support of the King's Authority, and a second time to
contemn all the Solicitations and Applications of the Slingers; which somewhat
re^^x'd him at Court, and caused 'em to alter, or at least suspend the
Resolutions they had taken against his Person.

But while he thus became serviceable to the Crown, he was always careful not
to suffer the Cardinal to have any Command over him. To which purpose he
diligently set himself to destroy whatever might be (...) to his Elevation. So
that understanding that the Cardinal had a design to marry one of his Nieces
with the Duke of Richlieu, he continually (...) that Match, as he had
disappointed the rest, and engaged the young Lord to marry the Marquess (...)'s
Widow, and carried 'em in his own Coach to (...), a House belonging to the Duke
of Longue^^^^, where they were married.

This Action rendered him more suspected at Court then if he had attempted any
thing against the King's Authority. And the Cardinal and his Adherents (...)
insinuated, that he had procured that Match only to magnify his own
Reputation, and to draw the D. of Richlieu to his Party, because he was (...)
of Havre, and they took an occasion from thence to hast'n his Imprisonment.

But before we come to the Prince's being imprisoned, (...) will be material to
give an account of certain important Passages which happened after the Peace.

This Peace not having been published, the Court did not deem it convenient for
the Welfare of the State, as well in reference to Affairs at Home as Abroad,
that the King should return immediately to his Capital City. For the Ministers
did not think it safe to envelop themselves among an enraged Populacy, whom
they had so lately besieged; and in regard the Campaign drew near, 'twas a
plausible pretense for taking a Progress toward the Frontiers, upon some
considerable Employment. Moreover, they were in hopes that time would calm
their minds, and bury the Remembrance of things past. As for the Prince, he
thought it was for his Interest and his Honor to show himself to a people that
had so often loaded him with Imprecations. For which reason he went to Paris,
and showed himself alone in his Coach, which drew upon him the Respect and Fear
of the people, but abated their Resentments. The greatest part of the
Parliament, and the principal of the Frondeurs Party, made him Visits for five
or six days together; after which he returned to Court; where the Cardinal's
great Joy that he had opened the way to Paris, was allayed by his Jealousy of
the smallest Actions of that great Prince, whose Valor had drawn upon him the
Awe and Veneration of those very persons whom his Courage had offended. Upon
his arrival, the Cardinal desirous to remove so dangerous a Competitor,
proposed to him the Command of the Army in Flanders. But the Prince refused to
accept it; whether it were that he saw the Cardinal's Aim and Intention through
the Proposal, and that he took delight to mortify him; or that it was more
grateful to him to rule the Cabinet. It Is true that he had a design to have
gone to his Government of Burgundy, with an intention to pacify the Troubles
of Guyen and Provence, that were in Arms through the Misunderstandings between
the Governors and the Parliaments. But the Cardinal, and the Abbot de l^
B^viere, had frustrated his Intermediation, to whose Authority the persons
concerned had referred (...) differences; for they were afraid lest his
Um^^^^ge should augment his Reputation and his Power. However, he would not
give over the Journey; and when he departed from Compeigne, the Cardinal took
his Le^ve of him with a strong Guard, as if he durst not trust his Life with
the person who had so often ventured his own Life for his preservation. At
parting, the Prince desired the Commander de Souvie, Le Tell^^, and other the
Cardinal's Confidents, and charged Marhille, his Domestic Servant, to tell
him, That he could be none of his Friends if he thought of marrying his Niece
to the Duke of Mercoeur.

All this while the Court had a powerful Army on Foot, commanded by Count d'
Hareourt, who had Orders to sit down before Cambray. For the Cardinal was in
hope to refix himself in his Ancient Splendour, by such a glorious Conquest as
that, with which he ^^ckl'd his Fancy so much the more, because the Duke had no
share in the Design, nor was he to have any in the Execution of it. And that he
might have the whole Honor of it, he went from Amiens wh^re the King was, to
the Siege. But Fortune proved no way favorable to him, his Enterprise (...) to
his Confusion; for Cambray being relieved, (...), was forced to raise his Siege.

During the Prince's Absence, the Cardinal had held no other then a
Correspondence of Decency and Civility with him; and the Prince, who began to
be sensible of the Prosperity of the Court with some regret, and who was not a
little disturbed about the Siege of Cambray, was no less glad to hear it was
raised. The Troubles in Guyenne and Provence, and the Difficulties which
obstructed the King's Return to P^ri^ pleased him as much; because he believed
that the Cardinal minded nothing else, but which way to surmount all those
Obstacles and present Impediments that obstructed his recovering an Absolute
and Independent Authority. And therefore he forbore to ^oment his Discontents
either in private or in public, as if he were willing to lay his Resentments
asleep, to the end he might afterward let 'em loose with more Violence. Also
at his return from Burgundy to P^ris, before he had seen the Court, he most
earnestly solicited all his Friends to take care that the King and the Cardinal
might have a Reception into the Metropolis of the Kingdom suitable to their
Dignity. Perhaps he strove to complete a work so glorious as that of restoring
the Cardinal, or that he flattered himself that such a piece of Service would
never be forgot by the Queen.

He ^tay'd till the Court was returned to Compeigne, where he was received with
more demonstrations of Friendship, then when he parted from thence. After
which, his Majesty returned to Paris; and in that Entry, the King, the Queen,
and all the Royal Family, rode in the same Coach, and the Cardinal in one of
the Boots with the Prince, who put a confidence into him by his presence. And
the incredible Throng of people who appeared at that same Entrance, and who
abhorred the very sight of the Cardinal, did only then let loose their Joy for
the King's Return, who at that time took up all their thoughts, and defaced the
remembrance of all their Animosities and past Misfortunes. When their Majesty's
arrived at the Palace-Royal, they received the Submissions of the D. of
Beaufort, the Coadjutor, and the rest of the Heads of the Frondeurs; and the
Prince completed so Noble a day's work, by telling the Queen, That he looked
upon himself to be very happy in having fulfilled the Promise that he made her,
to bring back the King. To which her Maje^ty replied, Sir, This Service which
you have done the Kingdom is so great, that the King and my self should be
very ungrateful, should we ever forget it. One of the Prince's Servants who
(...) this Discourse, told him, That his great (...) him tremble, and that he
was afraid (...) was no more than a Reproach. I (...) replied the Prince:
however I have per(...) what I promised. When good Services are (...)atred
takes place of Acknowledgment. (...) the Prince found to be true: For all that
(...) in favor of the Cardinal, was one of (...) which his Mortifications had
in(...) that spurred him on to ruin him.

(...) purpose all things were to be so ordered, (...) the Fro^deurs, nor the
D. of Orleans should (...) the Prince. And to that effect (...) the Hatred and
Aversion which they (...) had for him, and which was renewed (...) to time, in
regard the Prince sometimes (...) to ^e reconciled to 'em, and embrace their
(...) had showed himself to be their (...) Enemy^

(...) all the Artifices which the Cardinal (...) to incline the Frondeurs to
rejoice at the (...) this was the chiefest.

(...) had received a Note, which gave him (...) That the Frondeurs had a
Design upon (...) and that they had resolved to Assassinate (...) over
Pon^neuf. This Note he showed (...) the Duke of Orleans, and the Cardin^^ (...)
seemed to be as much surpised as the rest. (...) some Consultation what course
to take (...) the truth, 'twas resolved, to the end they (...) themselves
without exposing the Person (...) Duke. That his Coachman should drive (...)
over Pontneuf with the Curtains drawn, (...) were in it; which was done, while
(...) the mean time stayed at a Bathing-House (...) Event. So soon as the Coach
was (...) before the Brazen-Horse, the Coach was (...) certain persons unknown,
who fired their Blunderbusses into it, and wounded a Lacquey belonging to the
Count of Duras, who rode at the Tail of the Coach. Of which the Prince having
immediate notice, demanded Justice of the King and the Queen against the
Frondeurs. The Cardinal also seemed to outdo himself upon this occasion; for
his Diligence and his Zeal exceeded the Care and Sedulity of the Prince's
nearest Relations, and most Cordial Friends.

In the mean time the Frondeurs seeing such a quick and dangerous Accusation
taking root against 'em, believed it at first to be an Artifice of the Prince's
to ruin 'em. However, they were nothing daunted; and tho the report ran, that
the Prince would prosecute his Revenge with all manner of Violence, the Duke of
Beaufort made no s^^uple to visit Marshal Grammon^ at a time that the Prince
supped with him, and there spent the remainder of the Evening without the least
show of being concerned. The Coadjutor and he made use of all the ways
imaginable to justify their Innocence to the Prince; and the Marquess of
Noirmoustier offered on their behalf to join with the whole house of Conde
against the Cardinal. But the Prince, who was no less exasperated for the
little respect they had showed him upon other occasi^ons, as out of a
persuasion not to be vanquished, that they had a design to Assassinate him,
stopped his ears against all their Justifications, and laid aside all other
thoughts, but of doing himself Justice with the Consent of the Court, or else
of demanding Justice from the Parliament. The first Resolution was too violent;
neither did it agree with the Cardinal's concealed Design; and the effect of
the other was too tedious and dubious. Nevertheless, because it was the
intention of the Court to refer this business to the Parliament, on purpose to
mortify the Prince with delays, and the vexation to see himself as it were a
Suppliant at the Feet of the Judges, the Cardinal w^nted not specious pretenses
to persuade the Prince to take that course. Thereupon he made his complaint to
the Palace in the usual forms; and during the whole course of that Affair, the
Cardinal (...) ^he pleasure to draw him into all those Snares (...) he had laid
for him. In the mean time the Duke of Beaufort and the Coadjutor demanded that
they might be admitted to justify themselves; which being granted, both
Parties quitted all other ways, and adhered only to the practice of the Palace.
But ^he Prince soon understood by the manner of the F^^nde^rs justifying
themselves, that their Credit wou^d balance his; nevertheless he did not
penetrate the Cardinal's Dissimulation; and maugre the Opin^o^s and Advice of
his Friends, he still believed that (...) acted sincerely. In this posture
things re^^^^'d for some days, while exasperation and im^^^e^ment augmented on
both sides. The Prince's F^^ends and the Frondeurs Friends accompanied their
Chi^^tains every day to the Palace; and all things were carried with more
Moderation then could be expected between two Parties, whose Leaders were so
unequal. Moreover, the Cardinal, in hopes to recover his full Liberty by
depriving the Prince of his Freedom, thought it high time to agree with the
^rondeurs, and that he might securely offer 'em the protection of the Court,
without any fear of afford^ng 'em an opportunity to reconcile themselves to the
Prince. So that things could never be better disposed of, to incline the
Frondeurs to be so far from opposing ^^e Prince's Ruin, as rather to be glad
and rejoice at ^^s Imprisonment.

There remained now nothing more but to set the Duke of Orleans at variance
with the Prince; which the Cardinal found a means to do, upon the Marriage of
the Duke of Richlieu with Madam du Pons. He aggravated to the Duke, that the
Prince had said nothing to him of the Marri^ge; and after he had sowed the
seeds of Exasperation in his mind, he consulted with Madam de Chevreuse against
the Prince's Liberty. And to the end the Abbot de ^a Riviere, who was so much
concerned to oppose the Ruin of the Prince, as being in hopes of a Cardinal's
Cap, by the means of his Reputation, and the Rennnciation of the Prince of
Conty, might not break the Measures they had taken, Madam de Chevreuse
cunningly complained to the Duke of Orleans how little security there would be
for the future in taking particular Measures with him; that whatever he said,
was told again to the Prince and Madam Longueville, by the Abbot de la Riviere,
who being by them secured from meeting any opposition at Rome in his
pretensions to a Cardinal's Cap, makes them acquainted with all his Master's
Conduct and Privacies. She persuaded him also, That the Abbot, in whose
Councils he had had a blind Confidence, was privy to the whole Negotiation of
the Duke of Richlieu, and Madam du Pons; and that all things were carried on
between them so exactly by Concert, that the Princess her Mother had never so
zealously assisted Mademoiselle de Saugeon in her design to turn Carmelite, but
to remove her from the Presence and Confidence of the Duke of Orleans, and to
hinder her from observing the Abbot de la Riviere's Carriage, and his blind
dependence upon the House of Conde. In short^ Madam de Chevreuse understood so
well how to incense the Duke both against the Prince and the Abbot^ that she
softened him for all the impressions that she had a desire to imprint in his
mind.

One Project also of Madam de Chevreuse's which contributed very much to bring
their Design about, was an act of Passion which the Prince committed. For a
little before, he went to visit the Duchess of Orleans with a Lady which he
would needs carry into the Presence along with him, notwithstanding that the
Officer of the Duke's Guards told him, He had Orders that no body should enter
but himself. Which the Prince never regarded, but went forward; upon which the
Officer stepping before the Lady, to prevent he^ Entrance, the Prince took his
Ba^^oon of Co^^^nd, and broke it abo^t the Officer's Sh^ulders.

Moreover, the Cardinal renewed an old Proposal to (...) Duke of Roan, to
engage the Prince to lay claim to the Dignity of Constable, which he would
never li^^^^ to, for fear of creating a Jealousy in the Duke of Orleance. And
tho the Prince rejected the Propo^^tion a second time, out of the same
consideration, ^^t the Cardinal made that dextrous use of the pri^a^e
Co^ferences which the Prince had with the Duke of Roban upon that subject, that
they afforded all (...) probabilities of a private Negotiation between the Duke
of Roan, and the Prince, without imparting it ^o the Duke of Orleans, and
contrary to his opini^^ and pretensions to the Constable's Sword. So that the
Duke having received all these Impressions, and pe^ceiving both want of
Sincerity and Respect in the Pri^ce's proceedings, without any more to do
consent^d to his being Arrested.

The Prince's Friends had several times given him wanting of a Design which
they suspected to be (...), to lay him up in Prison; and from that t^^e he had
always some one or other with him of the Royal Palace; tho he gave no credit to
their Ad^ice, and sometimes laughed and flouted at those that gave it him^

In the mean time the Cardinal procu^'d the thing to be resolved on in Council,
1650.
and a day to be appointed for the Execution of the Order, which was the (...)
of January. The Deten^^on of the Princes.
Several persons gave the Prince advice of it the same day; but he took no
notice of (...). And that which is more to be wondered at is this, th^^ whereas
for about Two Months together he had accustomed himself to be attended by some
of his most faithful Friends when he went to the Palace Royal, he never went
alone but that day he was arrested.

The Duke of Longueville was at Chaillo^, apart from the Duchess his Wife. To
draw him therefore into the snare, the Cardinal sent ^im word, that the Council
was consulting about the apprehending of Couturier, and some others, who were
accused for having attempted the Prince's Life; and that his presence was
necessary to prevent Sedition and Tumult. Immediately the D. of Longueville
made haste to Paris, and went to the Palace-Royal upon the 19 th of Iunuary in
the Evening. The Prince also, according to his custom, came that Evening to
attend upon the Queen; at what time the Abbot de la Riviere told him, That the
Duke of Orleans would not be at the Council. Upon which the Prince thought at
first; that they would abandon his Cause; which made him leave the Queen sooner
than he would h^ve done, and go to the Council Chamger, whither at the same
time came the Prince of Conty and the Duke of Longueville. As for the Cardinal,
he was retired into his Chamber, and had carried the Abbot alo^g with him, lest
he should perceive something, and spoil a Design that was just upon the point
of Execution. So that there was only the Chancellor, the Count of Servien, Le
Tellier, and some others with the Princes, when de Guitault, Captain of the
Queen's Guards, with great respect approached the Prince of Conde, and in the
Queen's Name whispe^'d him in the ear, That he must go to Prison. De Coming,
Captain of the same Guards, told the Prince of Conty as much; and de Croissy,
one of the Ensigns of the same Body, put the same Compliment upon the Duke of
Longueville. The Prince a^ first took it for a piece of Sport, and thought the
Queen had done it in a kind of Frolic. But understanding all was in good
earnest, Is this then the Recompense (said he) of (...) Fidelity and Services?
And then addressing himself to the Chancellor, he desired him to go in his Name
to the Queen, and beg of her to hear him but for one Minute; and he prayed the
Count de Servien to ^^sire the same Favor of the Cardinal. As for the
Cha^c^llor, he returned, without being able to ob^^in hi^ ^equest; and as for
the Count of Servien, ^e brought no answer back, believing it enough to have
given the Cardinal notice that the business was done^ And then it was that
Mazarine imparted the business to the Abbot de la Riviere, who was strangely
surpised at it, and could not forbear telling him, That certainly the Duke of
Orleans would never suf^er such an Injury to be done the Princes. To which the
Cardinal answered, That there had been nothing done without his Consent.
Thereupon the Abbot retired to spea^ with his Highness; but he was repulsed in
such a manner, that he looked upon his For^u^^ to ^e at an end.

(...), who was gone to fetch his Guard, retur^'d with Twenty Soldiers well
Armed, who looking a squint upon the Princes, seemed to threaten 'em with
something else more fatal then Imprisonments, and carr^'d away the Prisoners
down a back-pair of Stairs into the Garden, where Guitalt putting 'em all thre^
into one Coach, conducted 'em to Richlieu^s Gate, where the Count o^ Miossans,
afterward for this piece of good service made a Marshal, by the name of
Marshal d' Albret, waited with the Gendarmes to carry 'em to Vincennes. And
that which is here to be observed, is this, That Mazarine orde^'d this business
so cunningly, that the Prince believed that all the Preparations which were
made to seize his Person, concerned only the Frondeurs, and out of that
persuasion gave himself the Orders for his being more safely conducted to
Prison. For the same day the Prince was arrested, the Cardinal sent him word in
the Morning, That he had something to impart to him of great Consequence.
Thereupon the Prince went to the Palace-Royal, where the Cardinal told him,
That he had been informed in good part, that Decoutures had been in Paris about
Four and twenty hours, concealed in ^ House near Mo^matre Gate; and that the
Conviction of the Murder intended being infallible, if they could but light
upon him^ he would do well to give an Order to apprehend him; but that in the
executing of this Design two things were to be feared; that is to say, lest the
People and the Coadjutor's Friends should make a Tumult; for that the Coadjutor
well knowing his Ruin to be unavoidable if Decoutures were taken, would be
certain to procure his escape. And therefore to avoid both the one and the
other of these Inconveniences, he tho^ght it convenient that he should be sent
away out of Paris, till the Parliament should order him to be remanded to the
common Goal of the City: That the best way was to carry him through Richlieu
Gate; and therefor that he would command the Gensdarms to stay behind l'
Hostel de Vendosme, in a readiness to march when they should be commanded. The
Prince approved these Proposals; and blinded by his desire of Revenge, suffered
himself to be surpised by the Artifices of the Cardinal, and took care for his
own being safely carried to Prison, which he had like to have discovered the
day before, entering into the Cardinal's Chamber, where Lyonne, Mazarine's
Secretary, was writing out the Orders beforehand.

Upon the Road to Vineennes the Coach broke, so that the Prisoners were forced
to stay three or four hours by the way, with only a Guard of Four^een
Gensdarmes, yet no body dur^t adventure to rescue them. The Parisians rejoice
at the Imprisonment of the Pr.


The remembrance of the War, and the present disorders of Paris, were the
reason that the blow was easily born with. The People approved what had been
done against the Prince, and showed themselves extremely joyful at the News: So
that the (...) of Longueville, who was retired to a private house in ^aris, in
expectation of things necessary for her (...) into Normandy, to which she had
been ad^^^^ by her Friends, beheld the Bonfires and other marks of public
rejoicing for the Imprisonments of her Brothers, and her Husband. And what was
more singular was this, That Persons of the highest Quality and Degree, who
afterward demanded, and with an unshak'n Zeal and Constancy prosec^ted their
Releasment, then publicly declared that their Imprisonment was Legal.

But that which soon after made it appear to be (...), wa^ a letter sent to the
Parliament, The Princes Innocence.
three days after the Princes were seized, wherein such ^light and (...) ^rimes
were laid to their charge, that the greatest of those, who by reason of some
remaining (...) of the year preceding, thought 'em guilty^ were convinced of
their Innocence.

The first days of their Imprisonment the Princes in^rig^'d against the Cruelty
of their Enemies. The King^s B^^ad which was granted to the most wretch^d was
denied to Princes of the Blood. Their Employments^ and their Governments, were
disposed o^^ their Pensions were stopped; nay, they laid their Hands upon ^he
Assignations given the Prince for the ^^imbursement of fifty thousand Crowns
lent to the Queen but six months before. Perraut also being imprisoned the same
day as his Master, they seized upon all his Papers, turned his Servants out of
three Houses; and commanded the Princess Dowager, and the P^incess her
Daughter-in-law, to retire out of Paris^ They ordered also President Ferrand,
who was nominated by the Prince for the Administration of his Affairs^ and the
Intendants employed by the two others, (...) defray their Expenses.

Upon refusal of the first Decree of Council, the President Ferrand, who
resolutely resisted, was threatened with imprisonment. His Movables were put
to sale. No less then eight Silver Candlesticks marked with the Prince's Arms,
were sold by an Outcry. And his Sword, the support of the State, the glory of
the Regency, the Terror of all Europe, was within a hairs breadth of being
cried in the public Marketplace by a pitiful Catchpole; that Sword which had
defeated the most considerable Forces of Spain, and had sacrificed to the
Security and Welfare of the King, three famous Generals, gained whole Provinces
to the Crown; that had vanquished the Bavarians; the Support and Hopes on which
the Empire relied, and which had defended the Cardinal himself from the Fury
and Animosity of the French.

These three Princes suffered their Misfortunes with variety of Humors. The
Duke of Longuevil^e was sad and pensive, and spoke not a word. The Prince of
Conti wept, and never stirred out of his Bed; while the Prince sung, swore,
went to Mass a Mornings, read and played to pass away his time. It Is said, that
the Prince, hearing the Prince of Conti desire somebody to bring him a Book,
entitled, The Imitation of Christ, should presently use this Expression to the
Prince of Conti's Friend, And I, Sir, said he, desire you to bring me the
Imitation of Monsieur Beaufort; that I may make my escape out of this place, as
he did about two years ago^ and see my heels well at liberty.

These Rigorous Proceedings against the Princes were attended with several
others. The guard of 'em was committed to the care of De Bar, a Man of great
Severity, and whose hard Usage much augmented the Discontents of the Prisoners.
Now in regard this man was made choice of by the Cardinal to be the Minister of
his Passions, neither the Respect due to the Birth of the Princes, their
Services done the Kingdom, nor the honor to be entrusted with those
Illustrious Sufferers, made any impression upon his crabbed Disposition. And
not contented with four Bodies of Guards, and five strong Gates, he crowded
their Antichambers with Soldiers: He also placed Sold^^^s in their very
Chambers to observe their Coun^^^^^ces; and many times they were observed in
their Beds: And that which was most irksome of all, we the Clownishness of
their Jaylor's Discoourses. He had not common Civility for 'em, as Princes, but
(...) be always prating in their ears that which was offensive. They were
refused the Attendance of their own Servants. Only the Complaints of the
Princess of Conde causing 'em to fear the effects of some pity, they were
forced to grant 'em what the King was pleased to extend toward 'em. This put
their Friends in hope, that they might be able to settle a Correspondence with
'em. Thereupon, they ventured a Letter, which was delivered 'em: And at length
they made use of such dextrous means to hear from 'em, and to send 'em News of
what concerned 'em, that D^ Bar himself, perceiving, perhaps, some turn of the
Tide, lent them his Assistance, when he was sure no notice could be taken of
him.

For five months that this lucky Stratagem lasted, neither they, nor those that
adhered to their Interests, had any reason to conceive any great hopes of their
Releasement. The Success of Normandy and Burgundy, that swelled the Pride of
their Enemies, abated the Courage of their Friends and Servants. Besides that,
their Meetings always proved fruitless, by reason of the Union and Vigilance of
the Cardinal, and Coadju^or of Paris.

In May the Coadjutor disappointed the Petition of the Princess Dowager of
Conde, that she might have liberty to prosecute the Releasement of her Sons.
She was in hopes that the Cardinal's absence would afford her favorable
Opportunities; and that the good Nature of the Duke of Orleans, which had so
long with f^ood the Imprisonment of the Princes, would at length produce a
Union powerful to vanquish the Obstinacy of the Court, and the Malice of those
that persecuted her House.

But all her Attendance proved in vain. They were so far from doing her right
upon her Petition, that they would not so much as lend an ear to her
Complaints; they rejected her Supplications, and had no regard to her Tears.
She might humble her self, if she pleased, even to the conjuring her Enemies by
all the considerations of Mercy and Compassion; her Requests were still evaded^
and upon the return of the Court, which removed a great way off on purpose, she
obtained no more then the liberty to abide at Vallery, which she chose of her
own accord before Chatillon upon Loin. All this bad Usage cast the Princess
into a melancholy Discontent, and Languishment, of which she died the 2d of
December.

The Cardinal, on the other side, was fully satisfied. All things went well in
Burgundy and Normandy, and the hopes that he had of the like success in
Guyenne; and particularly at Bourdeaux, puffed up his Heart, and rendered him
inexorable. Now for the right understanding of all these particulars, it will
be requisite to give a brief Relation of what passed in those Provinces during
the imprisonment of the Princes.

The Count of Tavanes, who was one of those who laid most to heart the
Interests of the Prince of Conde, The Count of Tavane's zeal for the Prince of
Conde.
understanding that he was arrested, together with the Prince of Conti, and the
D. of Longuevil^e, and that they were carried to Vincennes, hastened to the
Marquess of Moussaye Goyon, Governor of Stenay, and informed him of what he
had heard. Now in regard the Marquess was none of the most resolute men in the
world, he appeared to be strangely alarmed and surpised, and with a world of
confusion, asked the Count what was to be done. It behooves ye, briskly replied
the Count of Tavanes, to repair with all speed to your Government; and if you
have nothing to do any where else, you will find business enough there, and you
will see me there (...) very speedily.

Afterward the Count went to Conde House, where he found the Princess Dowager
all in Tears, with a great number of people, all in consternation, not knowing
what Resolution to take. There was also in the Garden a good number of the
Prince's Officers^ who had resolved among themselves to go forthwith to Val de
Grace, there to seize upon the Ca^dinal's Neices, and bring 'em away to some
one of the Princes Houses, as a gage for the Prince's Life, which they believed
in danger, by reason of his great Merit, and high Birth. But at the very
instant, news came that the Cardinal, apprehensive of some such Designs, had
sent for ^em away from thence before the Princes were arrested. So that all the
Officers were forced to return to their several Homes, not being ^ble to
resolve upon any considerable Service which they could do the Prince: only the
next day they reti^^d, some to Bellegard, and some to Stonay.

Tavanes, What happened in Burgundy after the Imprisonment of the Princes.
seeing this, departed, and rode all night to get to Milly in Gastinois, which
was his own Estate. From thence he retired into Burgundy, in hopes that many
things might there be done for the Prince. But there was no body willing to
stir in those parts, and they that were the Prince's Friends, were rather
against him, then for him. Howeve^, he spared not to visit 'em all a^ (...),
and to whisper 'em in the ear, but all to no purpos^^^ then going to the Castle
of the City which belonged to the Prince, the Commanders which the Prince had
placed there, of which two were his Domestic Servants, coldly excused
themselves for ^ut being able to do any thing for want of men. Upon which
Tavanes offered to bring 'em sixty Musquet^ers, which they promised to admit.
But two days after, when the Musketeers were come, and the Count sent word to
the Governor to open the Back(...) the Garrison made answer, That they could
not receive 'em, in regard they had promised the City to let no body in. This
piece of Infidelity, together with the Advice which the Count had given him,
that there was a Design to arrest him a^ Dijon, for^'d him to retire in haste
to Bellogarde, which he found in such a forelorn Condition, as ea^ily might
satisfy the Judgment of any man, that the Prince, to whom it belonged, was no
way guilty of the Crimes which were laid to his charge, for acting against the
Service and Authority of the King. There was very little Ammunition, very few
Cannon, and those dismounted; and without Carriages; insomuch, that Tavanes,
seeing the bad condition of the Place, resolved to go to Stenay, where Marshal
Turenne was already retired for the Service of the Prince. And in regard he had
sent two single Companies, that belonged to the Prince, and two other Companies
of the Regiment of Meille, to quarter near his House, du Palli^, two little
Leagues from Langres, he went thither to join 'em. He was no sooner arrived at
that House, but he had advice from Bellegard, that the Horse Regiments of Conde
and Enguien were marching thither with the Prince's Guards; and that the Chief
Commander had written to him, that he might receive his Orders. Whereupon, he
sent away Guitault de Pechepeirou, to press 'em to meet him at Pallie, from
whence they might march directly for S^ena^, and join Turenne. Guitant being
arrived at Bellegard, wrote back word to the Count, that all the Officers told
him, 'Twas requisite to let their Horses rest for some few days, and that many
of the Troops had deserted.

But the Count was in have to carry these Troops to Turenne, and therefore he
sent with all speed for those Regiments to come up to him, and to let 'em
understand, That the greatest Service they could do the Prince, was to quicken
their March that they might the sooner be at Stonay. So soon as he had put
himself at the head of these Troops, he set forward. But in his March he met,
soon after his Uncle, the Mar^^es^ of Tav^nes, who was the King's Lieutenant of
(...) ^^ovince; who having drawn together the Gen^^y, the Archers with their
Provost, some well (...) Troops of Horse, and a Regiment of Foo^^ adventured to
oppose his Nephew's Passage, and to prevent his joining Turenne.

The Count resolved forthwith to Charge this ^ody^ that made a show of
Disputing the Passage ^ith him; and falling upon 'em, cut all the Cavalry (...)
pi^ces, and having taken all the Regiment of ^oo^ ^risoners, made them take an
Oath to serve the (...) and the Prince of Conde against Mazarin.

This Defeat of the King's Lieutenant of Burgundy, (...) a terror into the
whole Province, and particular^^ into Dijon, where they were so hotly alarmed,
that they forcd the very Capuchius to take Arms. Which caused Tavanes to alter
his design, and engaged h^^ to turn all his Horse and Foot against that City,
which he was in hopes to take, and make the Inhabita^^s declare themselves, if
they that were in the C^stl^ which belonged to the Prince, would but (...)
their Gates to Him. But the Commander of (...) Castle refused to hearken to his
Proposals, so that the Count after he had Encamped two Days before ^he C^ty,
was constrained to retreat to Bellegard, in h^pes that the Countries would not
fail to assist with (...) Arms, and whatever else he stood in need of^

Th^se movements of the Count of Tavanes, otherwise unsuccessful, produced good
Effects: For they constrained the King, the Queen, the Cardinal, and all the
Court, to take a Journey into Burgundy, and that Progress gave an opportunity to
Bourdeaux, Montr^^d, and Normandy, to declare for the Prince, more especially
while the King's Forces were bu^ied in the (...) of B^llegarde.

Tha^ Place, Bellegarde taken.
as has been said already, was in the most pitiful condition in the world to
hold out, and therefore made little Resistance. The Soldiers also that were in
it revolted upon sight of the King's Army; so that nothing could be expected
from 'em. And Tavanes was constrained to surrender the Place much sooner then
he would have done^ to the end he might preserve for the Prince's service a
good Number of Stout men, who were retired thither.

Tavanes's Soldiers, after the surrender of Bellegarde, were discharged, and
the O^^^cers, with all the men of Courage that were there, gave their Paroles
before they Marched out, to meet some at Montrond, some at Bourdeaux, and
others at Stenay, for the service of the Prince; which they did with all
Fidelity and Exactness. As for Tavanes, he chose to go to Paris, and join the
Duke of Nemours, there to try all manner of ways to get the Prince's out of
Prison. Now while the Court was busily employed in Burgundy, the Duchess of
Long^eville left no stone unturned in Normandy to engage the Parliament of that
Province, What passed in Normandy during the Imprisonment of the Princes.
together with the Friends and Places that belonged to the Du^e her Husband, to
take the Princes side, and to assure her self also of H^^re de Grace. But all
the benefit of her Intreagues, and her active stirring in those parts, was only
this, that she constrained the Court to quit Burgundy sooner then they would
have done, and to march with all their Forces into Normandy. In short^ they^
were no sooner arrived there, but the Princess was obliged to take Shipping and
fly into Holland, and from thence to come to Stenay^ where she treated with
the Spaniards about setting the Princes at Liberty^ Turenne, who was retired
upon their being first Imprisoned, and who was vehemently incensed against the
Cou^^, by reason of the Principality of Sedan, which they had taken from his
Family some Years before, by constraining the Duke of Bouillon his Brother,
then a Prisoner in the Bastille, to throw himself at the King^s Mercy: This
Turenne, I say, commanded all the (...) the Spaniards lent in this conjuncture.
(...) we relate what Turenne did at the head of (...), le^ us see what passed
in Guyenne.

(...) ^^kes of Bouillon, and Rochefo^cault, the (...) St. Simon, and the Duke
de la Force, were (...) Persons that Acted in G^yenne; and (...) highly
signalized himself in the War (...) kindl^d in that Province; and he is to be
(...) as the chief of all those who there (...) themselves, and took Arms in
favor of the (...). He it was, that so judicially advised the (...) of Conde
to retire with her young Son, the (...), into the Province of Guyenne. For
(...) that the Person of the Duke was exposed to (...) of the Court, he might
happ'n to be (...) Instrument in obtaining his Father's Liberty. and therefore,
after some delay, the Princess (...), and got through the Mountains of Au^^^^,
to T^renne; notwithstanding the dreadful (...) that Persons of her Sex, and the
young (...) Age, were forced to undergo. The Prince^ an^ ^he young Duke stayed
with T^renne eight (...) during which time Brive-la-G^^llande was ta^^^ and the
Troop of Gen^darmes of Prince Thomas, (...) of a Hundred men. This stop at
Turenne, (...) was necessary to settle the tottering and (...) Minds of the
Bourdelois, to the end she (...) be there in safety, gave time to General de la
(...), natural Brother to the Duke of Espernoon, and (...) commanded the King's
Forces in that Province, (...) in the Princesses way, on purpose to (...) her
passage. But She stopping at a House of (...) of Bouillon's, called Rochfort,
the Duke of (...) and he marched against de la Vale^^e (...) the Forces they
had raised, and six hundred (...) men, their Friends. They overtook him a^
(...) in Per^gord. But he gave ground, not dar^^g to fight, and retreated
through the Woods to Bergerac, with the loss of all his Baggage. After which,
the Princess set forward for Bourdeaux, without meeting any opposition in her
passage. There remained nothing more behind, but to surmount the Difficulties
which they met with in the City, which was divided into several Cabals. The
Duke of Espernon's Creatures, and they that followed the new Sentiments, of
which the D. of St. Simon had also gotten a smack, after he had receiv^d some
Letters from the Court, and had heard of the taking of B^llegarde, joined
themselves with those that served the Court, and among the rest with de la Vie,
Advocate-General in the Parliament of Bourdeaux, a Man both subtle and
Ambitious. They used all their Endeavors to cause the Gates to be shut against
the Princess. Nevertheless, so soon as it was known that she was arrived at
Lormond, near the City, with the Young Duke her Son, all people gave public
Testimonies of their Joy. They thronged out of the City in heaps; they strewn
the Highway with Flowers; and the Barge that carried 'em, was attended by all
the Boats in the River; the Ships in the Port discharged all their Guns, and
they entered into Bourdeaux, notwithstanding all the underhand Efforts of their
Enemies to have hindered 'em. It Is true, that neither the Parliament, nor the
Jurats went to visit 'em in a Body; but there was hardly any, who in private
did not give 'em assurances of their faithful Service.

In the mean while, the Court's Cabal, and Espernon's together, hindered the
Duke of B^^illon, and the Duke of Rochefoucault, from being let into the City
for the first three or four days; so that they were forced to lie in the
Suburbs of the Cha^^reu^; where all people went to see 'em, and offered to
bring 'em in by force. But they refused their Civility, contenting themselves
to be admitted two days after the Princess, and that in the Evening too, to
prevent any Tumult. The King at that time had no other Forces (...), but those
under La Valette, which (...) The Dukes of Bouillon and Rouche(...) (...)
consisted in five or six hundred Gen(...) friends, and some Foot, which they
(...)pon their own Lands. Now in regard (...) disciplined Soldiers, 'twas
impossible to (...)oge^her, so that they all began to think of (...) home. For
this Reason, 'twas thought (...)^ That they should try, before the Gentle^^^
(...), whether they could meet Valette, and (...) that Resolution away the
Dukes marched di^^^^^^ for Liburne. But he having intelligence of it, (...),
and avoided f^ghting a second time, in (...) the ^^^ntry would be speedily
retu^ning home; (...) if he forbore fighting^ he should be certainly (...) o^
^he Field.

At the same time Marshal de la Meilleray had Orders ^o ma^ch toward Bourdeaux,
through the Country between the two Seas, and the King advanced to^^^d
L^b^u^ne. Of which, when Bouillon and Rochefo^caul^ had notice^ they hastened
their Levies, notwithst^nding the Obstacles they met with, both for w^nt of
Money, and the great number of persons (...) in the Parliament and City, that
under^and cros^d their Designs. And things were come to that (...), which had
like to have caused great Disor^^^^. F^^ a Spanish Officer being come to wait
upon the Princess of Conde from the King of Spain, and having brought along
with him 20000 Crowns for the ^eli^f of her present Necessities, the
Parliament, who ^ill then had suffered her to reside in the City with her S^n,
the Duke of Eng^ien, and had never openly decl^^'d for her, as the people had
done, believd that (...) opposing the Spanish Envoy's being received into
Bo^^de^^x^ would suffice, by that single Act, to justi^y all their past
Conduct; seeing that by depriving the Prince's Party of that Relief which they
expected from Spain, his Friends would be reduced to a necessity of receiving
such Laws as the Court would impose upon 'em. The Parliament therefore being
assembled, ordered that the Spaniard should depart Bourdeaux forthwith; but the
people understandi^g what would be the Consequences of that Decree, betook
themselves to their Arms^ invested the Palace, and threatened to fire it, if
they did not repeal their Order.

At first they thought to have easily dispersed the Tumult, upon the appearance
of the Jurats that were sent for; but the Disorder increasing upon the delay of
the Repeal, the Parliament sent notice to the Dukes of Bouillon and
Rochefoucau^^ of the Mutiny, and desi^'d them to appease it; nor were they
sorry that the Parliament stood in need of 'em upon this Occasion. But in
regard it was of great importance toward laying the foundations of their Party,
that the people should get the Decree recalled, before they left the Palace;
and afraid besides, lest if they should go about to regulate the Disorder, they
should be taken for the Ringleaders of it, they forbore for some time to answer
the Expectations of the Parliament. But perceiving at length that things began
to grow to that degree of heat, that without losing any more time, they flew to
the Palace with their Guards, and thrusting themselves in among the Enraged
Multitude, to the great danger of their persons, they stopped their Fury, and
undertook to mediate between Them and the Parliament.

Thus the Spanish Envoy had all the liberty he could desire. Afterward the
Generals thought it requisite to make a general M^ster of the Inhabitants, that
they might be able to know their strength^ and prepare 'em by degrees to
sustain a Siege. They drew 'em up themselves in order of Battle, tho they had
received Advices from several hands, that there was a design on foo^ to
Assassinate 'em. Nevertheless among the continual Volleys that were discharged,
by no less then Twelve thousand men, no unlucky Accident happened. After this
they began to raise some Outworks about the City; but in regard that Money came
but slowly from Spain, they could not bring any of their Works to perfection.
And certain it is, that during all this War, they never received of the
Spaniards above Two hundred and twenty thousand livres; the rest having been
taken up upon the Credit of the Princess, the Dukes, or M. Laisne.

However, in a little time they made a shift to raise Three thousand Foot, and
Seven or eight hundred Horse; with which they took Castellan, within four
Leagues of Bourdeaux, and would have extended themselves farther, but that they
heard of Meilleray's approach, and that Espernoon was joined with Vale^^^.

Upon this advice, Bouillon and Rochefoucault dispatched away Sillery into
Spain to hasten away the promised Relief: However, they left a Garrison in
Castelnau, and retreated with the rest of their Forces to Blanquefort, within
two Leagues of Bourdeaux. And there it was that the Duke of Espernon came to
fall upon 'em in their Quarters, at what time Bouillon and Rochefoucault were
returned to Bourdeaux, leaving Chambon to Command the Forces in their Absence,
which were much inferior to Espernon's. Nevertheless, though they could not
defend the Entrance into their Quarters, the Marshes and Canals which environed
one part of 'em, gave 'em the opportunity, without being broken, to save both
their Men and their Baggage. Upon the noise of this Combat, Bouillon and
Rochefoucault, set forward out of Bourdeaux with a good number of the Citizens,
and having joined their own men, advanced toward Espernon with a resolution to
Fight him, but the same Canal, already mentioned, prevented their coming to
blows: Only some skirmishes happened, wherein Espernon lost a great many
Officers and Soldiers; of the Bourdelois very few were killed, and Mr.
Guitault, the Prince of Conde's Chamberlain was Wounded. After which time
Meilleray and Espernon being joined kept Bourdeaux blocked up, tho at some
distance; and they retook the Island of St. George, about four Leagues above
the City in the Garon, where the two Dukes had begun some Fortifications. It
had been defended for two or three Days with vigor enough, because they got in
a fresh Regiment every day, and Valette being there Wounded, died of his Wounds
within a few days. But at length the Boat that brought 'em Reliefs and carried
back those that were relieved, being sunk by a Battery which Meilleray had
raised upon the Rivers side; it struck such a Terror as well into the Officers
as Soldiers, that they surrendered all Prisoners of War. So that the Bourdelois
lost the Island and Twelve hundred of their best men at one time. This ill
success, and the Arrival of the King at Liburn, who also caused the Castle of
Vaire to be attacked, lying about two Leagues from Paris, caused a great
consternation in the City. Upon this the Parliament and the Citizens perceiving
the City ready to be Besieged by the King, and finding themselves in want of
all things necessary for their Defense, and no Succors coming from Spain made a
Decree to desire a Peace upon what conditions the King pleased to impose upon
'em, at what time News was brought 'em, that Vaire was taken, and that the
Governor, named Richon, who surrendered at discretion was Hanged. This severity
by which the Cardinal thought to have stricken a terror and discord among the
Bourdelois, wrought a quite contrary effect. Bouillon and Rochefoucault
understood so well to make their best advantage of it, that by this means he
resettl'd the minds of those that waver'd and were astonishd before, causing
the Governor of the Island of St. George, who surrendered at Dicretion, to be
Hanged. And to the end that the Parliament and People might be concerned with
the Generals, which was no less requisite then bold and daring; they caused the
Commander to be Tried by a Council of War, where the Princess and the Duke of
Enguien Presided; and which was composed not only of the Military Officers, but
of two Commissioners from the Parliament, and Thirty six Captains of the City.
Who all unanimously Condemned the poor Commander, who was a Gentleman, and
guilty of no other Crime then of being Unfortunate. The People also, who were
enraged above measure, would hardly give him time to be Executed, but would
have torn him Limb from Limb, and cut him to Pieces.

This Action astonishd the Court, gave new vigor to the Bourdelois, and made
such an alteration in the City, that they resolved to abide a Siege, and to
defend themselves Courageously; the Citizens relying upon their own strength,
and the Promises of the Spaniards, who put 'em in hopes of a powerful and
speedy Succor. In the mean while they hastened the Raising of a Fort of Four
Bastions at Bastide, which lies over against Bourdeaux on the other side of the
River. They also carried on with great heat and diligence the other
Fortifications of the City. But in regard that several of the Citizens had
Houses in the Suburbs of St. Surin, they would not permit 'em to be burnt or
pulled down; tho it were made out, That that Suburb would be the first that
would be attacked, and that it was large enough to lodge all the King's
Infantry. All they could obtain was only to intercept the Avenues, and to lay
the Houses open; For it was impossible to defend so large a place as that with
only the Inhabitants and a few men, that did not amount to above Seven or eight
hundred Foot, and three hundred Horse. Nevertheless the Place required a
numerous Guard, the access being open to it on every side, and the City Gate
which was next it in a very bad condition having nothing to defend it, and for
that the Enemy might approach it under Covert. So that they could have wished
they could have ^^cur'd that Gate with a Half Moon; but in regard they wanted
every thing that was necessary, they made ri^e of a small Muckhill that lay
before the Gate, and which being cut sloping like a Half Moon, without Parapet
or Moat, was one of the greatest defenses of ^he City.

The Siege of Bourdeaux.
The King st^ying at Bourg, Mazarin cam^ to the Royal Camp, which consisted of
about 8000 Foot, and Three thousand Horse. And it was resolved that the Suburb
of St. Surin should be attacked, which was a work so much the more easy, for
that having the Avenues only Guarded, the Houses might be gained without any
danger; by which means they might enter into the City, cut off those that
defended the Barricado's and the Church, and prevent their retreat into the
City. Moreover they thought, that because the Half Moon was not tenable, they
might lodge themselves betimes at the Gate of Dijos. Meilleray therefore caused
the Houses and Barricado's to be attacked both at the same time, and Pall^au
had Orders to enter through the Palais Galien, and to slip between the Suburbs
and the City directly to the Half Moon: But Meilleray falling on before Palluau
arrived, he found hotter work then he expected. For the Skirmish began so soon
as the King's Troops approached; and the Citizens had placed their small shot
in the Hedges and Vineyards which covered the Suburbs, which put a stop to the
King's men with great loss of the Assaylants^ Bouillon was in St. Surin's
Church yard, with what Citizens he could get out along with him to relieve the
Posts, and Rochefoucault was at the Barricade, where the King's men made their
Principal Attack and carried it. Both sides fired with extreme fury; so that of
the Citizens about sixscore were slain, and about seven or eight hundred on the
King's side: Nevertheless the Suburb was taken. Af^^^ which they resolved to
open their Trenches, (...) the Half Moon, and to make an Attack through the
W^lks belonging to the Archbishopric; (...) in ^egard the Hal^-Moon had no
Moat, the Citi^^^^ wo^ld not undertake to guard it, but contented th^^sel^es
^ith shooting from behind their Walls. The Besiegers therefore attacked it
three times with t^^ir b^sts men, but were repulsed by Rochefoucault, wh^ had
brought thither the Prince of Conde's Gu^^ds and his own, at the same time that
the Citi^^n^ d^^ert^d it. The Besieged also made three or ^o^r Sallies, in
every one of which they cleared the T^^nches^ and burnt the Enemies Lodgments;
inso^^^h, that in Thirteen days after the Trenches were (...), they were no
f^rther advanced then at first. But i^ ^egard the Bourdelois had not Infantry
enough to believe the Guards of the Gates attacked; and for that those who were
neither killed nor wounded were (...) for service, by reason of their being
weari'd with thir^^en days hard service together, Bouillon and Rochef^^ca^lt
found a way to relieve 'em by causing the ^avalry to serve a foot; and they
stayed there themselves the four or five last days without stirring (...) their
Po^^s to encourage the Soldiers by their E^^mple.

Before I go any farther, The Progress of Turenne's Army.
it is requisite for the keep^^g i^ memory the just and distinct Ideas of so
many (...) Accidents, to let you know, That the Remot^ness of the Court and the
King's Army now bu^^^^ ^^ploy'd in Guyenne, gave Turenne leisure to make great
Progresses. He therefore, taking advantage o^ the op^ortunity, took in Ca^elet,
La Chapelle, Chat^^^, Por^ien, and Rhetel, and made a show of marching toward
Paris, to release the Princes who were at ^incennes. The news of his March
struck a Terror into the Capital City, and made 'em think of a secu^e^ P^ison
wherein to confi^e the Princes.

Thereupon they all agreed, That it was absolutely necessary that they should
be removed from Vincennes: But the difficulty was to agree upon the place,
where they might be more in safety. Madam Chevreuse, and the Keeper of the
Seals, could not determine the point; for there was more in it then only to
remove the Princes from Vincennes^ Tellier, Secretary of State, and others of
the Cardinal's Friends proposed Havre, according as Mazarine had designed. The
Coadjutor thought they were safe enough where they were^ or if they must be
removed, no better place then the Bastile. Beaufort was of the same opinion,
and stiffly maintained, That to put 'em in any other place, would be to deliver
'em up to the Cardinal, and give him an opportunity to make use of 'em when he
pleased, against his Royal Highness himself. That rather then suffer it, he
would expose himself to the greatest dangers. That he made no question but that
he should be upheld by the people; and that with their support he would
undertake any thing.

The Duke of Orl^ance was a long time before he could resolve what to do, but
at length his fears augmenting upon the news of Turenne's March, he began to
think it high time to resolve upon something. However, the diversity of
opinions, and particularly Beaufort's Threatenings, put him to a stand; besides,
that the Castles of Pontoise, and St. Germans en Lay, were proposed to him.
But being beset with difficulties on every side, he bethought himself of
Marcoussy, enclosed between two Rivers, surrounded with Moats full of water,
and strong enough to oppose as well the Enemies of the State, as the Prince's
Friends.

The principal Friends which the Prince had at Paris, were the Duke of Nemours,
and the Count of Tavanes; the first was his Rival; for they both loved Madam de
Chatillon; which made it a wonder at first that the Duke should be so much
concerned for the Prince. In short, after the Princes were ca^ry'd to (...),
the Duchess of Chatillon had linked her se^^ with the Princess Dowager of
Conde, and had so (...) her business, that she had brought over (...) to the
Prince's Interest, for whom in truth she had (...) so great a kindness, as for
the Duke, but loved him however, well knowing he had a great (...) for her.

It Is true, that it might be very probable, that (...) not believe that the
Duchess of Chatillon ac^ed for the Prince out of any principle of Love. And
perhaps it might be likewise true, that the Duchess did not solely act by that
principle, but that the Ob^^gations for which she was indebted to the Prince^
the Community of ^nterests, and the (...) she had to be allied to the first
Prince of the (...), might be stronger Motives to induce her to engage (...) to
take the Prince's side. For the under^^^n^ing of which it is necessary you
should know, That the Duchess of Chatillon, Daughter of (...), who lost his
^ead for fighting a Duel co^tra^y to the Edicts of Lewi^ XIII. was married to
G^spar Duke of Chatillon by the ^ntermediation and C^^dit of the Prince, tho he
were himself in Love with he^ before. But because Gaspar de Coligny, afterward^
Duke of Cha^ill^n, upon the Death of his Father and his eldest Brothe^, was in
Love with Madam de B^uttevi^e, Coligny besought the Duke to quit his
pretension, alleging that he had a Design to (...) her. The Prince, who was
both a Friend and K^nsman of Coligny's, and one who had no other then a ^are
design of Courtship upon the Lady, besides that his Passion was but newly
kindled, made up scruple to resign his Amors, and promised him that he would
not only banish 'em from his thoughts, but (...) him against the Marshal, his
Father, and his Kindred, that opposed the Match. In short, notwithstanding all
the Decrees of Parliament, and all Obstacles that the Marshal laid in his way,
the Prince assisted Coligny so well, that he caused him to carry away Madam de
Boutteville by Force, and lent him Twenty thousand Franks for his Subsistence.
Coligni carried his Mistress to Chesteau-Thierry, where the Marriage being
consummated, the new-marry'd Couple retired to Stenay, a place of Security,
which the Prince to whom it belonged, had lent 'em for their Residence.
Coligni's not being of Age when he married rendering the Marriage void, yet
being of Age upon his return to Paris, there was a Contract of Marriage drawn
up at Conde-House before the Lady's Relations, and then they were married again
at Nostre-Dame by the Coadjutor. Some time after, Madam de Chatillon, not
finding her self well, went to the Waters of Bourbon, where the Duke of Nemours
met her and fell in Love with her. After which they loved each other with an
extraordinary Passion, insomuch tha^ Nemours could refuse nothing that Madam de
Chatillon demanded of him.

But to return to the Series of our History, Nemours whom Love had engaged on
the Prince's side, and ^avanes who was returned incognito to Paris after the
Surrender of Bellegarde, made it their business to make Friends^ and upon the
report of the Prince's being to be removed from Vincennes, had got together all
the Friends that possibly they could, with Instructions to be ready to mount
along with 'em upon the first call. But when the Princes were removed from
Vincennes to Marcoussy, they were attended by such a numerous Guard, that
Nemours and Tavanes did not think it convenient to appear, and so dismissed all
those persons that were come to join 'em.

The Prince during his Imprisonment at Vincennes, had written a long and
elegant Discourse to justify his Innocence to all France, and to all the
world, and to display the Malice of his Grand Enemy. The beginning of this
Discourse was put into the hands of a considerable person by a Soldier, who
being won by (...)^ was wont to bring News how the Duke did; and ^hen the
Princes were carried to Marcoussy, anoth^r Soldier that escaped in the hurry,
brought the Remi^der. The Piece is nervously and eloquently compiled, and
justifies that the Illustrious Author knew more then how to manage his Sword.
Had it not bee^ so long as it is, we would have inserted it in this History,
but it would almost compose a Tome of i^ self. It Is enough to let you know,
That the Prince all along keeps within the Bounds of Respect to their
Majesty's; and that without murmuring at the^^ Orders, he discovers the Malice
of those who had raised so great a Persecution against him, and gives admirable
and home Answers to all their false Accusations.

But tha^ you may the better see both the Accusations ^^d the principal
Answers, we shall here insert the King's Letter to the Parliament of P^ris,
concerning the Prince's Imprisonment; and another from a private person to the
Parliament, which answers the King's Letter very home, without omitting any
thing essential. And this last Letter, which appeared some time before their
Removal, induced the Pa^li^ment to seek all the most proper ways to releas^ the
Princes from such an Unjust Captivity.

The King's Letter to the Parliament of Paris, touching the Imprisonment of the
Princes.
THE Resolution which we have been forced to take by the Advice of the Queen
Regent, our m^s^ Honored Lady and Mother, to sec^re our Persons from our
Cousins the Princes of Conde and Conti, and the Duke of Longueville, is of that
Importance for the Welfare of our Service, that although we owe to God alon^ the
Account of our Actions, and o^ the Administration of our Kingdom, we thought
however, that we could not let both you and the Public know too soon, the
Motives that induced (...) to it; to the end that all our Subjects, being
inform^^ of the absolute Necessity which, through the ill Conduct of those
Princes and the Duke, constrained us to proceed with so much Rigor, to prevent
the irreparable Mischiefs that threatened this Monarchy, may all redouble their
Affection, and concur so far as lies in their power with us, in that aim which
we propose to our selves, to establish a firm Tranquillity within our Kingdom,
as having understood by experience to bring our Enemies to reason, whose
opposition to Peace proceeds from no other cause, but only in hopes that the
Divisions which have for some time vexed this Kingdom, will at length turn all
things Topsie-turvie, which by the Assistance of God we hope to prevent. We
promise our selves, that the Remembrance which all Christendom will resume of
the Moderation and Mildness of our Counsels which we have followed since our
coming to the Crown (which has been such, that often what has proceeded from
our natural Indulgence or Prudence for other stronger Reasons, has been imputed
to the weakness of our Government) will convince every body, That we had not
had recourse to this last Remedy, till after we had found all others were of no
force. And in truth, when we were to deliberate upon the Arresting a Prince of
our Blood, whom we have always tenderly loved, and who is otherwise highly to
be valued for his many Noble Qualities; a Prince so often victorious over his
Enemies, against whom he has so frequently signalized his Courage, Certain it
is, that tho he soon made an ill use of that Honor which we gave him the
opportunity to purchase; and that his proceedings in diverse Enterprises have
given us just occasion from time to time to (...) his De^igns, we could not
without extreme (...) determine his Imprisonment; and we ^^uld have winked at
all the Imprudences of his evil C^^^^ct, but only the imminent danger that the
Ki^gdom was in to be torn in pieces^ and unless we (...) palpably discerned,
that considering the way which the said Prince took, and wherein he made large
steps every day, one of these two mischiefs was inevitable, Either the utter
destruction, or the Di^^olution of this Monarchy by the ruin of our Authority;
upon the preservation of which principally d^pends the Tranquillity and
Happiness of the people which God has submitted to our Obedience. It is so
n^tural to all men to love their own works, and to desire as much as in 'em
lies, the kind acceptance and merit of 'em, that there is no body, wit^out
doubt, but will presume in regard we have affor^^d opportunities to our Cousin,
by means of those Military Employments wherewith we have entrusted him, to
ac^uire a high Reputation, and for that we have ^eap'd upon his Family and his
own Person Favors of all sorts, no body, we dare say, will believe, that
unl^ss Necessity had compelled us, we would h^^e been willing to have lost the
fruits of all our Favours^ and to have deprived our selves of the Services
which our Cousin might have done us, both by his Counsels and Performances in
times of difficulty, such as are those of a long Minority, had he not de^iated
so far as he has done from the Path of his Duty^ or if he could have satisfied
his Ambition with living the Richest Subject this day in Christendom. And
c^^t^inly, upon due consideration of the vast Settlements that belong to his
Family, either in Employments, or Governments of Provinces or great Towns, in
Lands, or Ready-Money, or Church Re^^nues, it must be acknowledged, that so
many Favour^, nor so considerable, as we have conferred upon our said Co^sin,
were never in so short a time bestowed upon any one Family; not to reck'n in
ou^ ^rants to his Relations and Friends at his Reques^, and out of the Respect
we had for him. He cannot deny, but that he holds at this day from our Bounty
solely, all that he enjoys of Places or Governments, in regard all became
vacant upon the Death of our Dear Cousin his Father, and that it was in our
full Power to have disposed of 'em to such other persons as we should have
thought sit to have preferred before him. But to go a little higher, every body
may call to mind, how that so soon as the Queen Regent, our most Honored Lady
and Mother, foresaw the Misfortune wherewith Heaven was about to afflict
France, by the loss of the Deceased King our most Honored Lord and Father; and
that there was no longer any hopes of recovering a Health so precious to the
Kingdom, she applied her self to obtain the good will of our said Cousins,
giving order, so soon as she was designed Regent in the King's ^houghts, to
those in whom that Great Prince put greatest Confidence, to make it their
business to persuade him to confer several Favors upon that House. Her Orders
were happily obeyed, tho the King thought he had already done enough, having
but a little before made the Duke of Anguien General of his principal Army. To
which at first he had so great a reluctance, that he had once resolved to order
his retiring into Burgundy. They also persuaded him to confer an Honor upon
our deceased Cousin the Prince of Conde, which he had long desired, which was
to make him President of his Council; and some few days after, he was made
Grand Master of France, tho the King was resolved to have utterly suppressed it.
The Queen afterward at the very beginning of her Regency, bestowed upon him in
our Name, the Houses of Chantilli and Dampma^tin, which was the Noblest Present
that ever any King made to one person. He was also (...) to purchase the Estate
of our Deceased (...) the Duke of Bellegarde, wherein the Town of (...)
comprehended; which considering the (...) o^ the Place it self, and the
Situation of (...) of our Cousins other Governments, lay (...) ^ost convenient
for him of any of the Kingdom. (...) so many Favors, and those extraordinary,
(...) granted to the Father, were no less advanta^^^^ to the Son, who enjoyed
the benefit of 'em, (...) was still so Gracious as to confer conside^^^^^
F^^our^ on the Person of the D. of Enguien. Our (...) M^rshal de L'Hospital had
the Government of (...) given him in Recompense of his Services, (...) was
rewarded with the Government (...) To^n and Citadel of Stenay; yet both the
(...) day ^^ven to the Duke. Upon the Death of (...), we bestowed in one day
upon his Family (...) ^^ployment of Grand Master of France, the (...) of Three
Provinces, Burgundy, Bresse, (...), besides that of Champaigne which he had
(...), and three strong Towns, the Castle of Dijon, (...), and Bourges, besides
Bellegard and (...) which he had in possession. And we have (...) to believe,
that there never was any Greedi^^^^^ afte^ large Possessions and soaring
Greatness so (...), but would have been fully gorged by (...) an E^fu^ion of
Benefits and Favors of all sorts. (...) our said Cousin then gave us formal
Assurances, That he would never desire any thing more for the (...)^ confessing
and acknowledging, That what^^^^ Se^vices he had done, or whatever he could do
(...) Kingdom, he could not in reason demand any (...) ^^^n what had been done
already for him. Ne^^^^hele^^, in a little time after he set a foot other (...)
Cl^ims under precarious and unjust Pretenses; (...) the be^ter to attain his
Ends, renewing his for^^^^ Discontents, because we had given to our most (...)
Lady and Mother, the Disposal of the place of Lord High Admiral and
Superintendent of the Maritime Affairs, vacant by the Death of our Cousin the
Duke of Breze, his Brother-in-Law; as if he had had a particular Privilege to
make Hereditary in his Family all the Offices which his Kindred had possessed
during their Lives; forgetting that he had positively promised to demand
nothing more of us, after we had gratified him with so many others upon the
Death of his Father, who died presently after the D. of Breze. Nevertheless we
resolved upon one trial more to give him satisfaction, in hopes that Age would
moderate his Excesses, and temper the exorbitant heat of his Ambition; and to
the end we might once for all deprive him of any Necessity and Excuse for
demanding any more, we heaped up the Measure to the top; and upon his renewed
Promises never to make any farther Demands, we granted him a new Favor which
surpassed all the rest, by adding to the Towns of Burgundy which he had
already, and to Stenay, that of Clermont, with a Gift of all the Demeasnes
belonging to it, as also to Stenay and Iamets, which are worth near a Hundred
thousand Livres a year. After that, we admitted the Prince of Conti into our
Councils at Twenty years of Age, tho his Brother and his Brother-in-Law had a
Pension there already, of a Hundred thousand Livres, and Danvilliers's
Employment, for which he was to give a Recompense to the Sieur Danevoux, and
had settled upon him in our Name diverse Bodies of Horse and Foot. We omit
several other Favors which we have conferred upon our Cousin the Prince of
Conde, which alone were sufficient to satisfy any reasonable mind, besides
considerable Sums of Money which we have bestowed upon him every year, and all
the Augmentations of Pensions for him or his Family and Relations, for whom he
desired em. We speak not of the respect which we always had for his Requests
^or Pat^ents for Dukes, for the Promotions of Mares^hals of Fr^nce, and a world
fo Military Employ^e^ts, and others of all sorts, as Abbots, Bishops, and
^over^me^ts of Places bestowed at his Recommenda^^^^ upon persons at his
Devotion. Lastly, we call God to witn^ss. That there is no sort of study or
in^^^try which we have not put in practice as well toward himself, as with his
most familiar Confidents, ^o ^ix his mind, and give him satisfaction. And upon
this account we are obliged to testify, That our m^st de^r and most beloved
Uncle the Duke of Or^^^ce, p^eferring the Tranquillity of the Kingdom, and the
Good of our Service, before any other par^icul^r ^nterest or Consideration, has
all along pers^^ded us to these Sentiments, and by that means highly
contributed to the advantages of the said P^^^ce, and the satisfaction of all
his Demands. But all in vain; no Favor, no Application, no Confi^ence having
hitherto been able to limit his irregular Am^i^ion. The nature of the several
pretensions which he has set on foot from time to time, and from which he has
e^deavour'd to exempt himself with ^ildness and Prudence, may easily evince to
the world, that they were the Sentiments and Transports of such a mind.
Sometimes he has vehemently insisted to have the Command of an Army for the
Conquest of Fr^nche Conte, upon condition that he might have the Sovereign
Possession of it. In the midst of the last Campaign, while our Army was
advanced into Flanders, and that it could not be enfeebled without running the
Risco of some great Blow, laying aside all other thoughts which way to annoy
the Enemy, even to the hazard of exposing our F^ontiers and Strong Holds to the
Assaults of our Enemies, he would needs have a Detatchment of a ^reat Body of
Horse drawn out to go to Liege^ to support the Design which he had to help his
Brothe^ ^he Prince of Conti to the Coadjutorship of that Bi^^oprick, by that
means to render more con^iderable the places which he holds upon the Mense, and
in his Government of Champaigne, besides another great Establishment which he
projected to erect on that side, as we shall afterward make appear. All which
clearly shows by many remarkable Circumstances, to what a degree he was
possessed with a desire of Sovereignty. An Imagination the more dangerous in a
Mind all Fire like his, because we are moreover well informed, That among his
intimate Confidents, he has often let fall that pernicious Maxim, That any
thing may be done to attain Sovereign Dominion, so that although in a Monarchy
settled upon such solid Foundations as ours, chiefly upon that Affection and
unshaken Fidelity which the French have for their Privileges and the Persons of
their Kings, such a Criminal Thought has been generally attended with the Ruin
of those that professed it, yet we should be defective in the Duty which we owe
as well to our selves, as to our faithful Subjects, should we not obviate all
things which in time might facilitate the execution of so unjust a Design. For
tho what he proposes to himself were no mark of what he harbors in his breast,
yet certain it is, that if we nearly examine his Conduct ever since our coming
to the Crown, no body can disown but that he has an Intention to work other
Mischiefs in the Kingdom, which no less require the Remedy we have applied,
since he openly went about to set up a Dominion formidable to us. That his
Design was to weaken and bring down the Royal Authority; that by possessing or
securing to himself the principal Places of the Kingdom, and fixing to himself
all persons that have any Credit, all men of Parts and signal Endowments,
either by Obligation, or out of Fear or Interest, he might be able in time
openly to withstand and slight our Will and Pleasure in all things that should
no^ be conformable to his; to sow War and Troubles unpunished in the Kingdom,
according to his own Interests and Humors; to make use of all opportunities to
agg^andize his Fortune. And lastly, to take things (...), that he might be able
during our Minority, to reduce us to a Condition, that when we came of Age, we
should have no more then the Name and Shadow of a King, while in reality he had
all the Power and Authority in his own hands. This, in truth, is the most
f^vourable Interpretation we can make of his Conduct, especially since the
Command of our Ar^^^s wi^h which we have entrusted him, has furnished hi^ with
opportunities to acquire a great Reputation, and a vast number of Adherents;
and moreover ^^ce he finds himself in the possession of so many considerable
Settlements, which we have bestowed upon him one upon another, to oblige him
out of Gratit^de, to have no other thoughts but those of doing (...) good
service. But so far was he from that acknowledgment which we promised to our
selves, that then i^ was that he began to pull off his Vizor, and to display
the Grandeur of his Credit, to the end that no body should apply themselves to
any other but himself to obtain our Favors, or avoid the Punish^ent of their
Crimes. Then it was, that his con^^^l'd Artifices to get all the Officers of
our Armies a^ his Devotion, especially the Foreigners in our Ser^ice (of which
he took a particular care) were changed into open Contrivances to gain 'em, and
^^nder 'em dependers upon himself: Then it was that ^e made i^ evidently
appear, that the Good of our Ser^ice was never his aim in all his Military
Performances, in regard that in the most pressing Exigenci^s that ever our
Armies were plunged in, for want of a Chieftan of his Quality and Authority to
rectify the Miscarriages and Disorders which our late Troubles had introduced,
he still avoided the Comm^nd of our Armies, which formerly he cove^ed and su'd
for with so much earnestness, to the end ^e might apply himself wholly to the
Court, and to his Cabals, believing the proper time was come to reap the Fruits
which he had proposed to himself, when all the Campaigns were ventured upon a
general Battle, upon this Maxim, often applauded by himself, That the winning a
Battle augmented his Reputation, and gave him new plausible Pretenses to exact
farther Rewards. But that if he lost it, and that our Affairs thereby should
happen to tumble into Disorder, he should be the more valued for the need there
would be of him. Then it was that he became liberal of his Caresses beyond his
usual strain, and that he made continual Searches among all the Governors of
Towns; and all those who had any Employments of Consequence, or that were
assured of 'em by survivance or any other means to attain 'em; That he engaged
himself to importune us for the Interests of all indifferently, without
considering whether they were prejudicial to the State or no: That he cherished
all Malcontents: That he flattered their Complaints, and promised to assist
'em: That he endeavored to debauch all those who out of Gratitude or Affection
adhered to us and their Duty; lessening the value of our Favors, by persuading
'em, that for the future they were to hope for no more but by his means: Then
it was that he exacted from those that offered him their Service, an Oath of
Fidelity to be faithful to him against all men, without exception of Person or
Quality, and that he openly persecuted after various manners, all those that
would not enter into his Dependancy upon him: Then it was that all persons who
surrendered themselves to his will, had Merit and Qualities to pref^r 'em
before any other Competitors; that they who stuck to their Allegiance without
any other aim then to do us good service, were always Cowards, and people of no
worth; that on the other side they became in an instant, great Personag^s,
worthy of all manner of Employments and Rewards, so soon as they devoted
themselves to his Interests; which was one sure way to ascend from (...) to
Wor^^, from Inability to Accomplishment. Then it was that he used innumerable
Artifi^^^ (...) decoy all those that had Employments in our (...), or in the
Guards of our Person; that he ^^enly protected all Delinquents, provided they
had recourse to Him, though they were of contrary Interests ^^fore; That his
House was a Notorious Sanctuary for all sorts of Criminals. Then it was that he
began to demand all Vacancies of what Nature soever; that upon all occasions,
as well petty as considerable, he took the Market into his own hands, and
threatened to quit all things, to set up for himself, and put himself at the
Head of all those that would (...) against us. Lastly, then it was, that to
show his Power and his Stedfastness toward those that ^ell in with his
Interests, he was not content with obtaining Favors, but would have the World
believe that he wre^ted 'em out of our hands by Violence. Witness the
Government of Pont-de l' Arthe, which he would have carried by a strong hand,
and at a day prefixed, threatening if it were not done, that he would kindle a
new Flame in the Kingdom; but in regard he knew full well that the demand which
he made of this Place was highly offensive, and generally disapproved by all
People, he presently gave on^ that he had not been so eager after the Business,
but because he ^ad engaged his word to the Duke of Long^^ville to procure it
for him; declaring moreover, that he must never think to justify himself, if
after so many Benefits of all sorts heaped upon him, and so many vast Revenues
and Offices settled upon him, that never had any Prince in France since the
beginning of the Monarchy, he ever pretended to beg any thing more either for
himself, or for any, of his Friends after a Grant of this Favor. Upon this we
were induced in that Conjuncture to satisfy his Impetuosity, notwithstanding
his manner of Behavior, to the end we might leave him no pretense of raising
disturbance. But though the Accommodation of this Ma^ter has passed through the
hands of our Dear Uncle the Duke of Ori^ance, who would needs be Mediator for
the preservation of the public Tranquillity, he found the next day that he had
made little or no progress, and that he was not the same Man, who the Evening
before had testified such an entire satisfaction in the Umpirage of our said
Dear Uncle, and given his Promise of submission. For the next day he
re-assum'd his ^ormer coldness, and showed an inclination to do worse, on
purpose to extort from us some new Advantages: forgetting the Declaration which
he had solemnly renewed, never to claim any thing more, after the Grant of ^ont
de L' Arche. At length, the Queen wearied with so many Relapses, and desirous
once for all; if it were possible, to tear up the Root of all Misunderstanding;
ordered him to be roundly pressed to explain himself sincerely and truly what
he desired, to live quietly, and within the bounds of his duty. Upon which
having declared, That he was jealous of some Alliances (to which nevertheless,
when they were first mentioned to him, he had not only given his Consent, but
had advised 'em himself for six months together, as believing 'em very
advantageous) and having besides testified his desire, that the Queen would
promise him a sincere and entire affection; as also to have a respect for such
Persons as he should recommend to her upon all occasions; and lastly, to impart
to him generally her Resolutions upon all Ma^ters whatsoever; The Queen was so
gracious, in the first place, that she might leave him no pretense of di^^aste
or mistrust, as to promise him, that she would conclude no Alliance but by
concert with him. And as to the other Points, she engaged so much the more
freely, because she did not remember that she had failed ^n either, but thought
she had rather inclined (...), then omission. But by his proceedings it was
soon after known to what end he had exacted (...) of unnecessary Promises^ and
that his purp^^^ in it was only to have a new pretense to demand more boldly,
and execute with more haughtiness and pri^e whatever should come into his mind,
that might be serviceable to his design of making himself (...) Master of the
Forces of the Kingdom. In short, about four days after that, his manner of
re^^ying the sincere Affection which the Queen had promised him, with all the
Solemnities and Securities (...) desire, was not barely to receive into his
Protection all those that demanded it against her, but to offer it himself to
several Persons who had incurred (...) displeasure, either a long time before,
or by new O^^ences lately committed. Our Cousin Marshal Scom^^rg s^on after was
in danger of of his life. Presently (...) ^h^^ Accident a Council was held in
the House (...) said Prince, the result of which was to demand, (...) obtain,
whatever it cost 'em, the Government of Metz, and Pais Messin, for the Prince
of Co^^i, who was then in treaty also for the Bishopric of (...). The Queen,
our thrice honored Lady and Mother^ is forced, by the idle Conduct of such an
Extravagant, to drive him out of her presence; the P^^nce openly undertakes to
protect him, hinders him from reti^ing, comes himself to the Queen to constrain
her^ (...) him again, and out of an unsufferable want of R^spect, which no true
Frenchman can hear without an extraordinary Indignation, he boldly threatened
to ^^c^ive the Madman into his House, and bring (...) every day into the
Queen's ^^^ht; and had he (...) prudence been put in hopes, that time would
(...) the Affair; or had he not been afraid (...) injure some other greater
Pretensions which he (...) at that time, we had been in danger of seeing ou^
thrice honored Lady and Mother reduced eith^^ to suffer this Affront at his
hands, or to have had recourse to ^he utmost Extremities in her own defense
They who understand not his different Partialities, so prejudicial to the good
of the S^^te, and our S^rvice, may observe 'em in the last Commotions in
Provence and Guyen, where in two Affairs of the same nature, (...) would needs
in the one absolutely advance the Authority of the Governor to the Oppression
of the Parliament^ and in the other act quite the contrary, without any other
reason for acting so oppositely, b^t because one of the Governors was his
Kinsman, and for that he had no kindness ^or the other. To the end that by such
Examples of his Authority that made such a clatte^ in the World, every body
coming to understand the penalty of his Aversion, and the value of his
P^otection, all People might observe that there was no other friendship or
dependecy but his to be sought, and give themselves wholly up to him. What
other Patience but tha^ of the Queen's could have endured to hear the said
Prince, in a Council held in Our Presence, threaten to have the Deputies of
Provence bastinado'd even to the breaking of their Bones, because they had
presumed to complain in behalf of their Body, of the ill usage they had
received from our Cousin the Count d' Allais, contrary to the Conditions of the
Pacification granted by Us to that Province. What way to suffer any longer the
Violence with which he began to stifle the Liberty of Our Councils, by his
impetuous manner of acting toward the Ministers who have the honor to be
Members of our Council, of which there was hardly one who was more exempt then
another from private Threats and public Affronts even in Our Presence, when
their Consciences and their Duty would not suffer 'em to approve such Counsels
as were not conformable to the said Prince's humor? Nor was his moderation
more in the Governments wherewith We had entrusted him. 'Twas not enough that
all the Money which so large a Province as Burgundy, furnished with (...) and
affection toward o^r Treasury (...) s^^llow'd up by him and his; unles^ he had
(...) a Power which made all priv^^e persons (...) under his Oppre^s^on; of
which several have (...) make private Complaints, and laid bef^^^ (...) that
nothing more remained for him to do, (...) to ^^ke upon him the Title of Duke
to advance (...) to be Sovereign of the Province. Nor was (...) Provi^ce of
Champagne more ^^^ourably used by (...); all the Towns and Villages, and mos^
(...) of the C^ties, having been so expo^'d to the plundrin^ of the Soldiers
that bore his Na^^; or to the (...) of thos^ that had wound themselves into hi^
favo^^ to obtain di^^^dgments, that several have been c^^strain'd to qu^^ their
Habitations, and retire into the Countries round about adjoining. With what
wo^ds (...) we se^ forth the Affair of H^^re; and the (...) ways which he made
use of to make himself (...) of that Place, one of the most Impo^^ant in the
K^ngdom for the s^it^ation of it, and without contr^d^^ti^^ the best for the
strength of it? After he (...) use of several Artifice^ to seduce the Youth
(...) Cousin the Duke of Richli^^, on purpose to (...) him mar^y cl^ndestinly a
Woman, who for m^^^ ^^spects is ^ntirely at his devotion, not contented (...)
^ensibly offended us, by promoting, together with the Prince of Conti, and the
Duchess of L^ng^ev^ll^ hi^ Sister, the Match of a Duke and Peer, pref^^^'d
(...) one of the Principal Offices of State, without (...) Knowledge and
Permission, and authorizing (...) presence a Contract prohibited by the Laws o^
^he Kingdom, as if it had not been enough by this u^^^wful means to have made
himself master of the p^^son of a Young Man, he caused him to depart upon his
Wedding-night, gave him for his Counselor and Conductor the person of all his
Creatures that ha^ (...) employed to debaush him, and made him throw ^^mself
with all speed into Ha^re, to the end he might make himself Master of that
Place, which being seated at the Mouth of the Seine, might afford him the means
to master Rouen and Paris, and keep under his subjection all the Trade of those
two Cities; enable him to admit Foreign Assistance, and introduce their Forces
into the Kingdom, whenever for his particular Ends he had a desire to trouble
the States. And for that he judged it convenient at the same time that there
should be a good number of Couriers dispatched toward the said Duke of
Richlieu, to let him understand Our Interest and his own at that Conjuncture,
he dispatched several at the same instant to s^op others upon the Road; thereby
violating to the highest degree imaginable the Respect, Fidelity and Obedience
which he owes us. After which, more desperately daring, the Queen having sent
her self a Person expressly to carry her Orders to St. Maure, the Governor of
Ha^re, upon an Accident of so high Consequence, and to let him understand how
much he was obliged to preserve the Place without suffering any change; the
Prince was no sooner advertised of it, but he dispatched away another Courier,
and commanded, that if any person should come thither with Orders from the
Queen, they should throw him into the Sea, with a stone about his neck; and
this with so much presumption, so much scorn of Our Authority, that he is the
first who could ever boast of i^. Lastly, that he might wholly by diverse ways
deprive us of the disposal of that Place, he sent away in all haste the Lady
her self, who had so lately been beholding to him for her Match; furnished her
with Money to enable her more and more to gain upon the Affection of the Young
Duke, and conveys by other means still more Money for the payment of the
Garrison, thereby to gain the good will of the Officers and Soldiers. And that
he might have moreover other People more at his devotion, and well known to
him, he ordered the Lady to be guarded by a good number (...), who put
themselves into the Place; giving (...) tha^ there was a Design laid to seize
her upon the (...). So many Attempts upon the Royal Power, of which this last
alone of Havre deserves a most rig^^^^^ punishment, has not left us any reason
to ^^ubt of the pernicious Designs of Our said Cousin, (...) then of his
boldness to put 'em in execution, (...) we not in time applied a Remedy
proportionable to ^he violence of the Distemper. However, To the ^^d you may be
likewise informed of the new ways which (...) studied to push on his Design,
and of the wor^ which he had cut out for us, and which we have prevented by his
detention, we shall tell you (...) was under deep Consultation in the last
place. He ^re^ted with the Ambassador of Mantua for the purchase of the Town
and Principality of (...), not only without Our Leave, but c^^^^ary also to
what we had expressly always refused him to meddle with. And because we had
warily (...) some difficulties about the Price, the Sieur (...) ^^clar'd a
little while since to the said Embassado^. Th^^ his Master would within a few
days send away a Person expressly to Mantua, to conclude the ^usine^^ with the
Duke himself. Upon some obstruct^^^ that ^ose about the Enjoyment of Clermon^
and the d^mesnes adjoining (tho easy to have been s^^m^^n^ed, as appears
since) he was already given (...) understand, that if he were disturbed in his
pos^^ssion there, 'twas but just that Sedan should be given him, and all the
Demesnes belonging to it, which we had given our Cousin the Duke of Bouil^on
upon the payment of many Millions; upon which, some of his Creatures presently
set a foot a Negotiation with the Si^ur d' Aiguebere for the purchase of the
Go^e^nment of Mount Olympus, which he made account to pay with his own Money,
that so the Govern^^^^ might fall in the hands of some of his own Friends, to
the end there might be no place in B^rgundy but what should he at his Command
except C^al^ns. He pressed us to purchase of the Sieure d' Pressis Bezanson^ at
our own charges the Governmen^^ of the City and Cit^adel of the City of Autune
for one of his Creatures. He had also redoubled his extraordinary diligence but
a little before^ to marry the Marquess de la Moussaye with the Daughter of the
Sieur d' Erlack, Governor of Brissa^, to the end he might have that important
Place also at his Devotion; although as well in that, as in all other things,
we have reason to commend the Conduct and Fidelity of the said Sieur d' Erlack.
We have been also informed from other parts, that he set a foot some other
matches, by that means to bring under his devotion the Principal Officers of
the Kingdom, and the greatest number of the most considerable strong Holds. He
had sent for up to Court, notwithstanding all his Infirmities, our Cousin the
Marshal of Breze^ to the end they might join together to demand the Employment
of Chief and Superintendent of Metz; to the which, though neither the one not
the other could have the least imaginary shadow of any Claim, yet the said
Prince had been already twice paid, and the said Marshal had been gratified
upon that consideration, after his Son's death with 30000 Livres chargd upon
the Rights of Ancorage, which are the clearest and most ready Money belonging to
that Employment. And moreover, though the Marshal had some Months before, got
by our favor and permission a hundred and ten thousand Crowns for his
Resignation of the Government of Anjou, and ^ha^ all the securities imaginable
had been made over, that the said Sum should after his death fall to the Duke
of Enguien^ the said Prince and Marshal had a design to press us farther to
confer the survivorship of the Government of Saumur to the said Duke of
Enguien. Which being granted we know that the said Prince to make himself more
considerable in his Governments and Employments, h^d resolved to ply us with
his utmost importunit^es, ^^at he might obtain for his Son, not above Six years
of Age, all in general that we had bestowed at seve^^^ (...) upon his Father
and him. Though we had not been moved with the prejudices and dangers
abovement^on'd, to which we might also add many (...), which for certain
Considerations and Circumst^nces, it is not convenient to make public; it so
happened that all our most faithf^l Servants that we then had, both in our
Council and without, laid before us, that a longer Patience would render the
Malady uncurable, and that the only way to preserve our State and our Person,
was to Ar^est our said Cousins^ who holding every day Clandestin Councils in
their Houses for the Establishment of that Power which they intended to set up
against ours, were not ashamed to reckon among other means, besides the great
Offices and Governments which they had in their hands^ that they were already
Masters of all the great Rivers of the Kingdom^ by reason of the several strong
Holds which they have in the Kingdom, or which they thought they had at their
devotion in the Kingdom, upon the Rivers Seine, Meuse, Saonne, Rosne, L^^^e,
Garonne and Dordogne. In a word, that if possible they might renew the Example
of those Ancien^ Potentates, who from private Persons, have advanced themselves
to Sovereign Dignity^ and to the end the Authority which the said Prince had
already Invaded, might be still more conspicuously enlarged and supported by a
Lawful Power derived from our selves; he vigorously contended to have the
Co^stable's Sword bestowed upon him, though that (...) be suppressed; which being
joined to the Batt^on of Grand Maste^, and the Office of High Admiral, which he
would never have surceas'd to demand ha^ he been Created Constable; by the one
he had (...) all ou^ Household and our Domestic Servants under his Power^ by
the other the General Command of all our Fo^^es in the Kingdom; and by the
thi^^ the Absolute Dominion over the Sea and Sea-coas^^^ And when we laid
before him, that as for the Co^s^able's Sword, our most Dear Uncle the Duke of
O^leans would have just reason to be offended, in ^^^gard of his being our
Lieutenant General in all (...) Armies and Provinces, he required of us to
dispatch the Patents forthwith, without our Unkle's Knowledge, and to keep 'em
private till the Duke could be wrought to agree to 'em, or rather till the
Designs which he was medi^ating gave him opportunity to maintain his Demands by
open Force, whatever disorder might happen. In the mean time the better to
enable himself to force us in every thing, at the same time that he made use of
these extraordinary Importunities, he most vehemently demanded under various
pretenses, that the Regiments which hear his Name, or which depend upon him,
and are anow to make a Body of Army, might have leave to advance toward these
Quarters; never considering that the greatest part are employed in our Service,
and for the defense of the Realm, in parts far remote. A Circumstance which we
look upon to be worthy of great Consideration, as also that of the
Fortifications of S^enay and Clermont, where Men were continually at wo^k at
his Charges; besides the Price agreed upon about a month since, to Fortify
Bellegard for Two Hundred Thousand Franks. Since it can never be presumed, that
unless he had Thoughts and Designs altogether Extraordinary, he would ever
Expend his own Trea^ure to Fortify Places that are already in a good ^ondition
of themselves, and not threatened by any Enemy. We have out of a high respect
dissembled our Resentments to that degree, that all people will be soon
convinced that we have run too great a venture through our Patience. It Is true,
we were in hopes that that same Prudence which our Cousin might acquire by Age,
would cool (...) this vio^^nt Hear; that so many Fa(...) Example which we have
heaped upon (...) have kept him, out of Gratitude, within (...) of his Duty.
But quite the contrary, (...) reduced to that Extremity, either to (...) him
all his Demands (and then we should (...) soon despoiled our selves) o^ to
re(...)im every thing (and then we should have (...) him with his Arms in his
Hand against us) (...) moreover that the Profusion of our Favors (...) no
other end but only to encourage him to (...) every day; that a longer
forbear(...) prove the Infallible Loss of the Realm, (...) means were not found
to stop the violent (...)^ which had no more Mounds to withstand (...) prevent
a Total Inundation; And having (...) for some time, that the Intelligence which
we (...) from all parts agrees in this, that the true (...) o^ the Spaniard's
Aversion from Peace proceeds (...) this, that they are willing first to see
whither the Prince of Conde's Designs and Actions tend; who, say they, making
every day such Progresses as (...) does toward getting into his Hands the
Principal (...) Holds of the Realm^ certainly this must in a (...) time either
produce a Civil War in the Kingdom, or cause a Renversement of that Monarchy;
(...) ^hought it would be a defect of our Duty to God, who has entrusted us
with the Government of (...) ^^^gdom; to our selves, and the Welfare and (...)
of our Subjects, if we did not without delay (...) a remedy to the Mischief
become so pressing as ^ ne^lected might give a Fatal Blow to the Real^^

T^^^efore we resolved by Advice of the Queen Re^^^, our thrice Honored Lady
and Mother, to se^^^^ the Person of our said Cousin the Prince of Con^^^, as
also of our Cousin the Prince of Conti, his Bro^^e^'^ Con^ederate in all his
Designs, and who, since (...) to Paris, has been continually concurring and
levelling with his Brother at all and the same Ends. As for the Duke of
Longueville, we promised our selves, that the great number of Favors which we
have Accumulated upon him, either in Places, or in Honors, or in Estates, and
which we have much Augmented since our last Declarations of Peace, would have
obliged him according to his Promises and his Duty, to procure with all his
might, the Tranquillity of the Province which we had entrusted to his Care, and
the Good of our Service in the rest of the Realm. But we have observed for some
time, that he has omitted nothing of Extraordinary or Unjust, to acquire a
formidable Reputation in his Province. That he is not satisfied with possessing
diverse considerable Fortresses, one of which was wrested out of our Hands with
utmost Violence, as has been apparent to every Body; nor with seeing all the
rest, as well as the Principal Employments of the Province, in the Hands of his
Creatures; that he is not contented with the Addition of Bailly of Rouen and
Caen to the Employment of Governor in Chief, apparently, that he may have a
Legal pretense to disturb the Function of our Ordinary Judges, and by that
means to usurp a new Authority as well in the Civil as Military Power. Lastly,
that he is not contented to cause his Emissaries to make it their Business to
corrupt the Minds of our Faithful Subjects, and make all those who have any
Affection for our Service dependent upon himself; not scrup'ling to threaten
'em with utter Ruin, if they refused any longer to Espouse his Ambitious
Passions; unless he were also a Partaker in the Counsels and principal Designs
of our Cousins, the Princes of Conde and Conti; unless he were also every day
present at their Deliberations and Debates in their own Houses for the
Establishment and Augmentation of their Common Grandeur, and of a Power justly
to be suspected by that Authority which God has given us over this Kingdom.
Besides that ^is Creatures have already been heard insolently to v^unt in his
House, that tho the last year he could no^ bring about the Business alone, they
had at last all ^oge^her done the Work. In consequence of which we are to call
him henceforward Duke of Normandy, the^^ being nothing near so much work for
him to do ^o ^ttain the Sovereignty of the Province, as he (...) ^ndergone to
arrive at that excess of Power and S^r^^gth which he had in the Province.
Seeing indeed that he began to Exercise several Acts of that ^^etended
Sovereignty, by a formal Refusal of Obedience to our Orders, witness his denial
not many days ^ince, (...) admit into Pont de l'Arche some Troops of (...)
d'Armes, and Light Horse of our Guard, tho (...) him in possession of the said
Place but a few days before; and tho he had an express Order (...) Hand to
Quarter 'em there. Upon so many Considerations we have been constrained to
secure the Person of our said Cousin the Duke of Longueville. In ^^e mean time,
we are willing to let you under^^and that all these Dangers wherewith our
Kingdom was threatened, were so great and so enforcing, that we may almost be
said to have been wanting in the Duty of a Good King, for delaying till now the
Remedies necessary to prevent 'em. Nevertheless our love of Justice, and our
Fears lest people should imp^te to us a Desire to stop the Course of it for
other ^^de, has made us keep all things in suspense, tho with a great deal of
danger, to give you leisure to fi^^^^ the Impeachment which you have begun by
ou^ Order, and at the Request of our Attorney Ge^^ral against those who shall
be found guilty of the Sedition raised the 11 th. of December last, or of the
Attempt upon the Person of the said Prince, which it is our pleasure shall be
continued by you without any In^^rruption according to the Rigor of our Laws.
Bu^ understanding that the said Prince had sent for ^^^eral Gentlemen, his
Retainers, Officers of his Troops, and that his greatest Confidents were
privately informed that he was brooding some great Design, which could not but
be to the prejudice of our Authority, and the Tranquillity of our Subjects,
since he never acquainted us with it; having also received certain
Intelligence, that he was preparing to retire into his Government, in great
haste, and without taking his leave, so soon as he should perceive that things
were not carried to his liking among you, to ^he E^d he might with more
security hatch those Resolutions which had been so long forming in his
Thoughts; and that in Confederacy with him, the Prince of Conti and Longueville
were to repair also at the same time into their Governments; it was no longer
in our power to be remiss; and we have been forced for the peace of our Realm,
to set aside all other Considerations, and to secure their Persons without any
more delay. And because that their Accomplices, who labor in search of
Opportunities to Embroil the Public, may endeavor to put an ill
Interpretation upon so just a Resolution, and so necessary for the Tranquillity
and Welfare of our Kingdom, which our Duty obliges us to prefer before all
other things, we declare that we have no intention to do any thing contrary to
our Declaration of the 21 st. of October 1648. nor against those of March 1649.
and others which we have since published, since the Pacification of the Late
Troubles in our Good City of Paris, Normandy, Proven^e and Guyenne, which it is
our Will and Pleasure shall remain in their full Force and Virtue in all the
particulars which they contain. Given at Paris, Jan. 19. 1650.

A Letter of a Private Person to the Parliament of Paris in Answer to the
King's.
THE Reason why God is never deceived in his Judgments, and that he never
protects Injustice, is because he is Exempt from Passions, and for that he has
an Understanding which pierces to the bottom of hearts, and discerns the
Innocent from the Guilty. The on^ of these Qualities secures him from Error;
and the other is the reason that he never acts bu^ by a motive of Justice. Men
are subject both to the one, and the other of these Defects, con^^ary to those
Excellent Perfections, either for want of understanding, or because their
Passions are too predominant. So that the^ sometimes believe the Sun to be
dark, because their Eyes are not strong enough to pierce through the Cloud that
hides it. That is to say, Som^times the^ condemn the most perfect Virtue,
because they are not able to discern it through the false Appearances of Crimes
that are imputed to it. We have observed, That hitherto the Judgments of this
August A^^^mbly ha^ been as far remote from these Vices, as the ^^ailty of man
will permit. And w^ have had reason to believe, by recent Examples, that there
are not any dark overcastings of Human Artifice and ^unning which you are not
able to display, nor any Consideration so strong among ye, as that of Justice;
you have given us Testimonies, that the Interests of Great Men are but feeble
Arms to vanquish it; that it is proof against all the Snares that can be laid
to surprise it; and that only Innocence can be justified before y^^ as only
Guilt can draw upon it self the Sentences of your Condemnation. Upon this
Fo^n^^^ion it is that I have established my hopes of justifying the three
Princes whose defense I have undertak'n. I know well it would be greatly to
their advantage, that you were capable of the first impressions that the
suspicion of a Crime, or the Idea of Virtue produce in the Soul of man. I know
it were to be wished on the Princes behalf, that you would not give your
Judgments, till after you had considered all the Actions of their Lives. For in
short^ Who is the^^ among ye, that can persuade himself that Monsieur the
Prince ever had any design to ruin the State, if you will but take the pains
to consider how often he has exposed his Life to preserve it; and how many
Victories he has won in order to that end? And who is there that can endure
that the least suspicion of a Crime should intermix with so much Glory? But I
am willing to despoil 'em of these Advantages, I am willing to deprive 'em of
these Foreign Lights, to make appear the lust^e of their Innocence. I do not
desire you should recall to mind the many Famous Victories which one of these
Princes has obtain'^; or that you should set before your eyes the dangers to
which he has exposed his Person for the safety of the Realm. Forget^ if it be
possible, these Glorious Actions; never mind that it is a Prince who is
accused, that not only has preserved the Kingdom, but extended the Limits of
it. Be mindful only of Justice; establish your Judgment upon the things
themselv^s, and not upon the Persons; and then, I hope^ that without
considering it is a Prince who is accused, you will soon understand, that ^is
an Innocent Person, that is to be made guilty for the Interest of some
particular men. And indeed if you would that we should consider the Crimes that
are imputed to him, we shall find that all these Crimes have no existency, but
in the Fancy of those who have invented 'em in order to his ruin. Are not his
Victories the greatest part of this Malicious Accusation? He ventured, say
they, every Summer, a General Battle upon this Maxim, which he has often
declared, That by gaining the Victory, he should augment his Reputation, and
have new plausible pretenses for the procuring him new Rewards; and if he lost
it, and that thereby our Affairs should happen to fall into confusion, he
should be the more valued through the need which they would have of him. A
pernicious way of reasoning; of which if men should make use, the noblest
Actions would be subject to dangerous Interpretations. What security is there
for brave Men, if such ^ischievous Comments should be endured.

There is no Illustrious Person that shall not be rendered a Guilty Person;
there is no Noble Action that ^^all not be misconster'd into a Crime. How long
is it that men have been the proper Judges of Intentions? That Secret, God
alone has reserved to himself; and they who accuse the Prince to have acted
upon such wicked Maxims, ought to know that Kings cannot punish an Action, how
wicked soever the motive were that inclined the person to do it, when it
becomes profitable to the State, and if it be not contrary to the Law. I will
grant, that desire of Honor caused the Prince to hazard so many Battles: I
grant that he sought every year new Pretenses for new Rewards; Who ever heard
that the desire of Honor which indu^es a Prince to save a Kingdom was ever a
Crime of State? They who enact Human Laws, command the observance of 'em; but
they never prescribe the motives of it. It Is only the Body, and the exterior
Action which is under the Jurisdiction of Kings. The Soul, that is to say, the
Motives, cannot be commanded, but only by him that penetrates the bottom of
Consciences; for what Mortal can be the Judges of 'em ^ But suppose it were a
Crime of State to act by Motives of Interest, which are said to be the Primum
M^bile's of all this Prince's Actions, upon what proofs c^n they ground this
Accusation? He went about, say they^ to make himself the more considerable by
the lo^^ of a Battle. This is an extraordinary way for a man that pretends to
be so covetous of Glory; and who very well knew on the other side, that the
same ^^sfortune had ruined the Reputation of several of our Generals at the
Court, who preserved themselves in good Credit till the Disaster befell 'em.
But because he could never know whether the loss of a Battle could be
advantageous, let us see what marks he gave, that he never sought after
Victory, but only that he might have new Pretenses for new Rewards^ When did he
ever send to Court, that he would not quit the Army, unless they sent a Pattent
for such Places as were become void by the death of the Incumbents, to some one
of his Friends? When did he oblige the Queen to confer the Government of such
Places, as the taking of which had cost him so much hardship, and sometimes the
loss of his Blood, to any other Persons then those which she made choice of?
Rather quite the contrary, after the taking of D^nkirk at the end of the
Campaign, tho a Place of the greatest importance in Flanders, he suffered it to
be disposed of by Cardinal Mazarine to one of his Creatures, who by that means
enjoyed the fruit of all his Watching, and Labor. They say, that they who
adhered to the Person of the Prince, became in a little time Great Personages;
and so soon as Persons devoted themselves to his Interests, they were sure of
being preferred to Great Employments, tho otherwise Persons of no desert. I
might answer, That 'twas a difficult thing to follow this Prince without
hazarding his Life for the King's Service, and without meriting noble
Employments. But upon what foundation can they ground it, that this is the only
way to attain to Preferment and Dignity, since we see several that have been
long fixed to his Person, who nevertheless have made no progresses in their
Fortune; whereas, there is no other assured means to pass from Feneancy to
Merit, from Inability to Sufficiency, then to belong to Cardinal Mazarine.
Which is clearly to be seen in the Persons of de la Fare, de L' Estrade, de
Pall^^^, and several others, who enjoy the fairest Governments of France, for
having done such signal Services to the Government, as having handed the Ruling
Minister sometimes from his own Apartment to the Queen's, or sometimes to his
Coach.

But, my Lords, here is an Accusation that will admit of no Reply, and which
the most strenuous Eloquence would have much ado to justify. He opposed the
Marriage of the Cardinal's Niece with the D. of (...) I must confess that this
is an unheard of C^^me, to hinder the Alliance of the House of Mazarine with
that of Vendesme; to obstruct a Match so necessary to Fr^^^, that no
Employments could be too great for him that would accept it. In a word, Did we
not see that the D. of Mercoeur had a right at that time to make those Demands,
the very thoughts of which has rendered the Prince of Conde guilty? It Is
pretended, that he desired the Office of High Steward, Lord High Admiral; which
Demands were not only unjust, but criminal, to make a Prince of the Blood, who
had won five or six Battles, and taken forty strong Holds of great Importance;
but the same Demand^ being made by a Prince that would marry the Cardinal's
Niece, both the thought of it ceased to be criminal, and the Demands themselves
were looked upon as just: And it was judged, that the man who was able to
perform such an Illustrious Action, had a right to demand the most important
Places in the Kingdom. It has been often seen in corrupt Ages, that not only
Virtue has been often without reward, and Crimes have gone unpunished; but that
the Disorder has been so great, that only they who were unworthy Employments
were permitted to demand 'em without offense, and that Merit only served to
remove men from pretending to Elevated Employments. But this is what we never
saw in our days, till during the Ministry of Cardinal Mazarine; for now all men
must resolve to disown true Worth, and renounce Desert, if he thinks to have
any preferment; and he must be careful of pretending to Employments, for fear
of being suspected for a State-offender.

With what black and sooty Colors do they besmear the Protection which he gave
to the Marriage of the Duke of Richlieu? And yet if you examine all the
Circumstances, you will find, that there was not the least shadow of a Crime in
that Action, and that they would fain make that the Effect of a pernicious
Design, which proceeded only from a real Friendship, which Madam De Longueville
had for the Lady that had her Advantages by it. Persons that know the whole
Story of that Business, can certify that the Match was not carried on by
concert in the whole Family, as is pretended, since the Prince of Conde was not
acquainted with it, till it could no longer be concealed from him; and that the
Duke of Longueville knew nothing of it, till the very instant that Madam de
Longueville, who had undertaken the Business, was ready to depart for Try, to
accomplish the Design which she had been long contriving for the advantage of
Madam de Ponse, and not at all for her own Interest. All the Circumstances of
the Marriage, that could occasion any mistrust at Court, proceeded only from
the Distrusts of the Queen and Cardinal Mazarine, in reference to the Match.
It Is true that the Prince advised the Duke of Richlieu to retire to Havre so
soon as he was married, but he gave him that Council only because he was well
acquainted with the jealous Humor of a Minister, who would not fail to draw
mischievous Conjectures from a Design that was really innocent, but which might
admit of different Interpretations. He rightly judged that Mazarine would make
use of those Pretenses, to wrest that Place from the Duke of Richlieu, and to
gratify the Desire which he had a long time had, to make himself Master of
that Place, there being no other way for him to do it. For, my Lords, if you
will understand the real Crime that the Prince committed upon that occasion,
was this; That the Prince having caused the Duke of Richlieu to marry Madam de
Pone, he disappointed Cardinal Mazarine's Design for one of his Neices, who by
that Alliance was in hopes to make sure of Havre to himself; a Place of great
importance, and a proper place of refuge for him, if he should be forced to
quit his Ministry.

^Twill be no difficult thing for me to justify his design to have been
Constable; for besides that, he had been put upon it by the malice of Cardinal
Mazarine, who had a desire ^o insinuate into his favor, by ^ffering him his
Service to bring about that attempt, and by that means render him suspected to
the Queen and the Duke of Orleans. What could make this Demand so Criminal a
piece of Business? Was he not accomplished with all things necessary to
authorize it? was not his Birth sufficiently illustrious? Had the Dignity been
a Novelty in the Nation? Had it not been enjoyed by James of Bourbon, Charles
of Bourbon, and John of Bourbon? Had it not been also within this litt^e while,
in the House of M^ntmorency, over the Head of his Father, and Great Great
Grandfather? had not the Prince's Arm performed great Actions anow to bea^ that
Sword? They pretend that the Demand was injurious to the Duke of Orleans, and
that it could not consist with the Quality of Lieutenant General of the Armies
and Provinces, which was conferred upon the Duke of Orleans; and yet have we not
seen the Constable's Sword in the hands of Monsieur de Montmorency, at a time
when the King of Navarre, the Father of Henry IV. was Lieutenant General of the
Armies and Provinces of France, and both perform their Duties at the same
Se^ges of Bourges, Rouen, and other places against the Rebels? But not to
trouble my self to justify the whole Scrowl of the Prince's Accusations which
are drawn from his Pretensions, it is sufficient to demonstrate that he did not
desire these Employments to make an ill use of 'em, and that he had no design
to enlarge his Power, to the prejudice of the Royal Authority, though he has
given the Queen cause to have unjust Mistrusts of his Power. We cannot judge of
his Designs but by his Actions, nor can we tell what he meditated as to the
future, but by the Deeds which he performed. When did he make use of his Power
to lessen the Queen's? have we seen the Provinces where he had any Credit in
Uproar and Tumult, like those of Guienne and Provence? when did he ever foment
Divisions? If he had any Authority in the Army, did he not make use of it for
the King's Service? So that if it were for this Princes Honor to have acquired
so much Power in the Kingdom, it was very advantageous to the Queen, since he
made no use of it, but in obedience to her^ and never concerning himself to
make Laws, he only took care to observe 'em, when they were useful to the
State. Kings cannot act themselves through the whole extent of their Dominions^
There is a necessity for 'em to put the Image of their Authority into the hands
of those who have most merit, and whom they see to be best affected toward the
Government. What reason then had the Queen to reproach the Prince with the
Favors she had done him, since she was obliged to bestow 'em upon so me
persons, and no body could receive 'em with more acknowledgment, or more to her
Advantage? It Is no Crime to be powerful, but it is a Crime to employ that Power
to the overturning of the State. Let 'em not then accuse the Prince of such
great Crimes, because he had great Pretensions^ since that not having
misemploy'd his Power, to this very moment, to the d^sservice of this Monarchy,
but rather to the establishment of it, we have no reason to think that he
intended to enlarge it on purpose to destroy it: besides that, the Queen her
self had encouraged him to aspire to the highest Employments; when^ desiring
his protection for the Cardinal, whom a Decree of your August Assembly menaced
with approaching Shipwreck, she assured him that she would put the Crown, the
Kingdom, all things into his hands and that there was nothing too good, or too
great for him, if he performed a Service so important to the Realm, as to save
that Minister, and shelter him from the Thunder which you were ready to dart
forth against him. There are credible Testimonies, who heard this Discourse
between the Queen, and the Prince of Conde, and who are able to justify how
submissively the Prince receiv^d her Promises of Reward, assuring the Queen
that her Interests were so dear to him, that there was no need to encourage him
by any other Motives, to (...) him to undertake the Protection of those who
were so happy as to have hers. Has he not kept his Word? Did he not perform
what he promised? has he not preserved this Minister maugre all France, and
supported him almost against all the Provinces of the Kingdom? Nevertheless,
after he had performed all the ^ignal Services which the Queen desired from his
Courage, and from his Obedience, and for which she confessed her self, that she
had nothing in the Kingdom fi^ to g^^tifie him, she uses him like a Criminal.
While she her ^elf enforces him to make his Demands, she accu^es him of
Traitorous Pretensions: As if she had only gone about to kindle his Ambition by
Promises, to ^he end she might have some Pretense to ruin him; striving to
persuade those that are ignorant of Affairs, that he could not aspire to so
many Employments, but by Instigations not to be justified, and in order to
execute some pernicious De^igns.

Is it not from such a motive as this, that they would fain ^nfuse into him a
desire of Sovereignty, to the end they may have an opportunity to punish his
apparent ambition; and that they give out, his ambition has no limits, and that
the interests of the Kingdom are not Mo^^ds strong enough to stop the impetuous
motion of this torrent? ^tis true, that the Prince demanded leave of the Court
to endeavor the Conquest of Franche Con^e; but I beseech ye to examine with
what circumstances; and what encouraged him to make that demand which seems to
be so Criminal. They were treating at Court with those of N^ples, to cast off
their Allegianc^ to the King of Spain, and the Si^ur de Fontenay Ma^euil^ the
King^s Ambassador at Rome, had orders to manage that Affair. An Army was
promised 'em, provided they would acknowledge France, or receive one of the
Princes of France for their King. They demanded either the King himself, or
Monsieur his Brother, or the Duke of Orleance, or the Prince of Conde; upon
which, the rest being past by, the offer was made to the last, The Prince who
never neglected any thing when it was for the King's service, and enlarging his
Dominions, gladly accepted the Proposal; he openly opposed the desire they had
to confer the Admiralty upon his Enemies, who by means of that Employment, out
of ^ ^articular motive of revenge, might have obstructed the Execution of a
design so important, and of so graet advantage to Aggrandize the Kingdom.
Observe, I beseech ye, that in all this there was nothing done but by the
approbation and impulse of the Court it self. Sometime after this, the Prince,
without any other design then to extend the bounds of this Empire, in pursuance
of an intention which had been made manifest to him, proposed the Conquest of
Franche Conte, as a thing of no less advantage to the State, and wherein there
was not much difficulty. He offered to raise an Army at his own charges, and as
if he had foreseen the unjust pretensions which they might have of his Power,
he promises to resign the Government of Burgundy and all the strong holds that
are in that Province. His courage and his zeal for the King's Service causing
him to prefer the Pains and Hardships to be undergone in the Conquest of a
Country, before the Tranquillity which he enjoyed in the peaceable Possession of
that Province which had been given him for his Services, after the Death of the
Prince his Father. Who could blame so generous a Design, so advantageous for
the Kingdom, and so honorable for the Prince? Thereupon, the Proposal which he
made in Council was joyfully embraced: They declared to him that it was a
Proposal becoming his Courage; and at that time they called it a Heroic, which
is now termed an Ambitious Design. All those thoughts which he had conceived
for the enlarging the Kingdom, were looked upon ^hen without the least
appearance of being conceived ^or his particular Grandeur. So that it is no
difficult thing to find many heads of an Accusation against him, since his mos^
noble Actions are his greatest Crimes; and that all his design to aggrandize
the Kingdom by his Conquests, are so many false proofs of which his Enemies
made use of to destroy him. Who is there but may observe their pernicious
manner of Reasoning to calumniate the Prince upon several pieces of advice
which he gave upon the different Commotions of Guien^e and Provence? They tell
ye, that in these two Affairs of the same nature, he went about in one place
absolutely to uphold the Authority of the Governor, to the oppression of the
Parliament; and that in the other he acted quite contrary, without any other
reason, but only that he had a kindness for one of the Governors, and hated the
other. But they who set these things on foot, are either bad, or very malicious
Politicians. For they say, these two Affairs were both of the same nature,
because they were both Provinces that had taken up Arms against the Authority
of the Parliament. But they are to understand that the least circumstance in
such Affairs as these, quite alters the nature of the thing, and obliges those
that debate upon the remedy of disorders, to vary their Coun^^ls, according to
time and place, and the humor of the People they have to deal with: So that he
who should take the same Counsel in one Affair, as he took on the other, would
do like a Painter that should go about to draw one man's Face, from another
man's Picture, because he had the same Parts. But are these sorts of Politics
to be attributed peculiarly to the Prince of Conde? Do not all Histories
furnish us with examples of different Conducts, in causing Revolted People to
lay down their Arms? Have we not seen some Princes make use of Mildness toward
their Subjects to disarm ^em, and others to use violent means. We have also
observed in Histories the same Princes employ different ways, according to the
various humors of the Subjects which they have to govern. And it were in vain
for Politicians to have found out the two ways of fear and gentleness to reduce
a mutinous People, if the same Conduct were to be observed upon all occasions,
and if both the one and the other were not to be made use of according to the
different circumstances that offer themselves in the Disorders that are to be
remedied. Why then should it be thought strange, that the Prince, after he had
consented to make use of Force of Arms to abate the Power of the Parliament of
Provence, and strike a terror in the People, should for Reasons, no less
considerable, give quite contrary Counsel to remedy the Troubles of Bourdeaux.
He thought at first, with those of the Council, that Force was the most sure
way to Disarm the People, and that only Terror was the means to reduce 'em to
their Duty. But having experimented the contrary in the Affair of Provence, was
it not very proper to alter such a dangerous Method? Is it to be thought
strange, that the Prince who was accused to be the Author of all the violences
that were committed, should be tired out with so many Prosecutions? and that he
should represent it to the Court, that the disorders in Guyenne would be more
easily appeased by ways of mildness and moderation? besides that, he clearly
saw the design which Mazarin drove on to carry things with a violent hand, and
he knew that his aim was to draw the Duke of Espernon into his Alliance, and
bring about the Marriage of one of his Neices, with Monsieur de Caudale. Is the
Prince to be accused for having opposed such pernicious designs by the justice
of his Councels, and for having made use of all his endeavors to stop the
course of a revenge so costly to the State, and so contrary to the zeal which
Subjects ought to have for the repose and tranquillity of the Kingdom? But my
Lords, if Cardinal Mazarin had been well advised, he would for his own Interest
have suppres^ this Crime of which the Prince is accused. For can we speak of
the Insurrections in Gui^^^^, without believing him to be the cause of all
those Disorders? Do we not well know that he has endeavored to ruin that part
of the Kingdom, to gratify the revenge of the Duke of Espernon? And thence
ought we not to infer, that he would make no scruple to overturn the whole
Monarchy, for the satisfaction of his own particular Interest. For in short, if
you would be informed in few words all the Crimes of Monsieur the Prince are to
be reduced to this, That he hindered the Marriage of the Cardinal's Three
Nieces. He openly opposed his design of Matching the Eldest to the Duke of
Mercoeur, he engaged, as they pretend, the Duke of Richlieu to marry Madam de
Pons, for whom the Cardinal had designed the other; and by the Peace of
Bourdeaux, he disappointed the Alliance he would have made with the Duke of
Espernon, which the Duke never promised him, but in case he could bring about
his revenge. And thus we see likewise, that as soon as the Prince was arrested,
the Three Nieces were fetched out of their Convent, the better to conceal his
Designs; how they were brought back in Triumph to the Palace-Royal, and how one
of the Matches was privately accomplished, the Cardinal not thinking it proper
to publish his intentions, and to let all the world know, that he had not
persuaded the Queen and the Duke of Orleans to cause the Prince to be arrested,
but because he obstructed his Designs. Nevertheless, they would fain have it,
that every thing which the Prince has done, tends to the Ruin of the Kingdom,
and that he never had any other aims in the Counsels which he had given, but
his own particular Grandeur.

But my Lords, by one convincing Argument to overthrow all that they have
alleged against him, to make him appear Guilty, and his Imprisonment just, is
it not true that they accuse him of nothing else but an irregular Ambition; and
that all his particular actions which they charge upon him without any proof,
are invented to no other design, then to convince People that he had no other
intention then to set himself up for a Sovereign, and to Aggrandize his own, to
the prejudice of the Royal Authority. But how easy a thing is it to
demonstrate the contrary to all the world by recent Examples? We cannot judge
of Passions but by outward Effects: Nor is there any but God alone who knows
the motions which they produce in the Heart. Now when was it, that the Prince
displayed these marks of an ambition so irregular? Rather what apparent proofs
has he not given of the contrary but very lately? Had he been possessed with such
a vehement desire of Sovereignty, would he not have declared for the Parisian
Party? At what time he was proffered advantages enough to have tempted the most
regular Person in the world? They cry out, he was capable of all Undertakings
to Aggrandize himself, and that he would never mind the overturning of the
State, so soon as he thought himself in a condition to establish his Grandeur
upon the Ruin of it; and yet when every thing favored the pernicious Designs
of which he is accused, when every thing contributed to satisfy that Ambition
which was laid to his charge, when he is to declare himself head of a Party;
and that the more to encourage him to it, they give him to understand that his
Power shall be unlimited; he stands off, he refuses the Propositions made him,
and is so far from putting himself at the head of the Party^ that he undertakes
the Ruin of it. Is this his having a desire of Grandeur deeply engraved in his
heart, never to make use of the Opportunities when they present themselves? Is
this the giving marks of an Ambitious Spirit capable of putting all the
Provinces into an uproar, to refuse the Grandeur that is offered him, provided
he will but consent to be declared head of a Party? Who was ever accused of
passionately desiring a thing, who refused it when 'twas proffered him? What
more favorable Opportunity could the Prince have expected to display his
Ambition? Had he been so violently possessed with this Desire, the Court would
not have been in a condition to have made use of this pretense to Arrest him;
or had his Ambition over-sway'd his Zeal for the King's Service and the Queen's
Interests, she would never have had an oppor^unity to have treated him with so
much Cruelty. But this is not the first time that Ingratitude has been the Vice
of the Court: And that great Services have been repaid with like Rewards when
their Benefactors have gained too much Honor by their Noble Actions. Merit is
a Crime in Princes under the Tyrannick Government of Ministers, who can never
endure the Power of which they are Jealous: So that of necessity they must be
reduced to live in a drowsy slothfulness pernicious to the State, or else
resolve to fall into inevi^able Dangers. These Ministers that strive to exalt
themselves into Sovereigns and Gods as much as lies in their power, never dart
their Thunder but against the most Lofty Heads; so that there is no way to
avoid their Tyranny but by an humble Lowliness, which way has been always so
odious to the Prince of Conde, that he rather chose to venture his Person by
doing Important Services for the Kingdom, and by acqu^ring Honor, then by
Tricks of Pusillanimity to protect himself from the Injustice of those that now
seek to Revenge themselves upon his Power. For my Lords, he is Guilty of no
other Crime, but that a Polite Historian says one thing of Agricola which may
be justly said of the Prince, that Agricola was in perpetual Danger, because he
had acquired too much Honor, and for that his Power gave unjust Suspicions to
the Emperor Domitian, who could not endure that a Subject should bear so Potent
a Sway in the Empire. Is not this the Prince's Crime? Not that he has Attempted
any thing against the State; not that he has done any thing contrary to the
Duty which he owes to the King's Service, but they are afraid least such a
Thought should enter the Mind of a Prince sufficiently powerful to put it in
Execution when ever conceived. Therefore to obviate these pretended Disorders,
to cure the Minds of people of these Imaginary Apprehensions, and which one
would think he had destroyed by all the Actions of his Life, he submits himself
to the Loss of all his Employments, and to abandon all his Places, and to
despoil himself of all his Crimes, by disrobing himself of all his Power. After
all this my Lords, what reason can they have to detain this Prince in Prison?
By what Motives either just, or so appearing? What Disorder can his Liberty
procure to the State? O^ upon what Foundation can they ground their
Apprehensions of his Power?

I shall make no stop at so many other feeble Accusations, of which some are so
weak that they destroy themselves; such are those concerning the Fortifying of
certain Places which they pretend were threatened by no Enemy, and yet lie upon
the Frontiers, nor shall I trouble my self to make the Innocence of the Other
Princes appear, in regard they are only accused of sharing Coun^els with the
Prince of Conde; or if any be particularly laid to their Charge, they are so
vain that they deserve no Answer. But my Lords, so far am I from defending 'em,
that I shall desire to inform you of two Crimes which are not laid to their
Charge, but which alone have rendered 'em guilty. The one is common to both
Princes, and is no more then their having declared themselves Heads of the
Parisian Party. Now would your Lordships know why this Crime was pas^ over in
silence? they were afraid les^ that should make you return to your selves, and
bethink your selves, that being Embarked in the same Party, since those Princes
had not taken Arms but i^ your Defense, you would without question incur the
same Misfortune. In a word, never doubt but that e're it be long they will
study the (...) Revenge, and that they had exercised it before now upon the
whole Party, could they have done it with the same security. The Princes having
lost the A^^^ction of the People, for being reconciled to the C^own; the other
having all along preserved themsel^^^ in their Favor, for their hatred of
M^zari^^.

The other Crime which they take notice of, con^e^n^ the Person of the Duke of
Longueville. It has b^^n no s^cret for a long tim^, that the Cardinal has been
s^udying his Ruin, and that he had been very diligent to bring the Peace to
perfection. I believe, my Lords, you very well know what passed at Munster, the
Duke of Longueville used his utmost Endeavors to bring the Peace to a
Conclusion, and the most to the Advantage of France that could be expected. I
suppose also you are sufficiently infor^'d of the Slights and Artifices that
Mazarine made use of by the Means of one of his Creatures, to disappoint the
Prince's Glorious Design. It Is enough for me to tell you, that that was the
Duke of Lo^^^^ville's Crime, and that the Prince had so wor^^ily Acquitted
himself in that Negotiation, that it seemed as if Heaven had re^erv'd him to
accomplish that Undertaking which he had so happily begun. I know also, that he
openly declared that he might begin that Negotiation again, and that he
promised to him^^^f to make it more succesful then it had been. Whi^^ was
enough to render him guilty with Mazar^^^ who is afraid of nothing more then
the accomplishment of that Design; and therefore 'twas sufficien^ to make him
resolve the Imprisonment of a Prince that ^^^dy'd his Ruin, because he
labored so hard the Welfare of the State, and the Peace of the Kingdom. But my
Lords, I do not mind my justifying the Princes before persons who have not
taken upon '^m as yet to be their Judges, and who ought already to have
pronounced the Sentence of their Liberty. Will you suffer your selves to be
reproached, that after you had designed to preserve the public Security in the
persons of some few of the Rabble, who were illegally detained in Prison^ you
should suffer it to be violated in the persons of three Princes at the same
time? If the Laws which ye have so long since established, and which your
selves have renewed by a solemn Declaration, are unjust, why do you with so
much eagerness desire the execution of 'em? If they are just, why do you not
cause 'em to be exactly observed? For what reason should the Laws be less
favorable to the Princes, then to the King's meaner Subjects? Are they
excepted in the Declaration, that no body shall be arrested, but they shall be
immediately brought to their Trial? Who can rely for the future upon your
Decrees? Moreover, I beseech you consider, that this Affair concerns your
selves. Do you believe that Cardinal Mazarine, so soon as opportunity offers,
will be more favorable to several of your Assembly, then to the Prince? Can
you imagine that he will sooner forget the Decree which you made against him,
then the particular Affronts which he pretends to have received from that
Prince? Never believe his Violence will stop at the Imprisonment of the
Princes, but assure your selves that it will reach your August Assembly, and
make you sensible of it by the lessening of your Authority, and by falling foul
upon the Persons of some in particular. Should it so happen, as I make no doubt
of it, if you do not apply necessary Remedies, and stifle not the Mischief in
the Birth, what privilege will you have to assemble? how can you without some
sort of shame, do that for the freedom of some few persons of your Assembly,
which you are unwilling to undertake for the Liberty of three Princes, though
their Imprisonment be one of the boldest Actions that ever were adventured? I
beseech you to con^ider, that this is but one of the Cardinal's Experiments,
who was willing to begin with the most considerable persons in the Kingdom, to
the end he may pretend to a kind of privilege to use in the same manner all
those whose Virtues have rendered 'em the Objects of his Revenge. They who have
hither escaped his Tyranny, are to thank their good Fortune, and not his
favorable Intentions. So that the Duke of Beaufort, the Coadjutor, and all
their Friends, may say what Caesar said to Ptolomy, who presented him with
Pompey's Head, who fled for refuge into his Kingdom, after the Battle of
Pharsalia; Thanks to my Victory, they make to me those Presents which they
would have made to Pompey had he been victorious. If the Duke of Beaufort, and
the Coadjutor had not preserved the Friendship of the People, who have hitherto
sheltered 'em from the Oppressions of that Minister, there is no question to be
made, but that if he thought he could have done it with the same security in
Paris, he had made the same sacrifice of their Liberty to the Prince, which he
pretends they would have made of his. Let your August Assembly therefore be
careful to preserve that Authority which has saved it hitherto from the
Cardinal's Revenge; let 'em consider, that he will never forego his eager
Desire to ruin it, and by consequence that it behooves them to deprive him of
the power to do it. The only way is, to pr^serve that Vigor which you have
made manifest upon the last Emergencies, and not to release the least Tittle of
that Strictness, which has been so much to your Advantage, and the abatement of
which will be your utter Ruin. This is that, my Lords, which puts us in hopes
that you will not fail to take into your cognizance the Princes Case, and
decide a Question so important to the State. There is nothing but what ought to
encourage you to this Noble Resolution: The Interest of the Kingdom ought to
induce you, not to be ^o long deprived of Persons so necessary for the support
of it. The Honor of your August Assembly engages ye to it: The Laws which you
have so lately renewed, and safety of your own Persons, obliges ye to the same
Resolution. I shall add to these things the Testimonies of these Princes, that
they have no other Confidence but in you; and that if they could act for their
Liberty, their Innocence would not permit 'em to have recourse to any other
Ways then those of Justice. Could they have been permitted time to have spoken
to their Friends, when their persons were secured, I make no question but that
they would have said the same that Germanicus said to his, being ready to die
the Death which was caused by Piso, the most implacable of his Enemies; If
there are any among ye, who are concerned for my Death, and who are desirous to
give me other Marks of it, then some unprofitable Tears; there is room for
complaining to the Senate, and invoking the Vengeance of the Laws. It Is then in
conformity to these Princes Intentions that I address my self to your August
Assembly, to demand Justice, and to conjure ye to employ your utmost care to
procure their Liberty. It Is the only means to strike a Terror into our Enemies,
to destroy the hopes which they build upon the Disorders which this Violent
Attempt is about to bring upon the Kingdom, and to restore Tranquillity, Peace
and Happiness to the whole Realm.

The End of the First Tome.
MEMOIRS OF THE Prince of Conde. BOOK IV.
THE Court was highly incensed at the News of the Princes being removed to
Marcoussy: The Court is incensed at the Princes being removed to Marcoussy, and
the Cardinal complains against the Co^djutor.
The Cardinal acuss'd the Coadjutor of Paris of having advised the Duke of
Orleance to remove them to that Place, and hindered their being conducted to
Havre de Grace, according to his Intention. He believed moreover that this
Chief of the Faction of the Frondeurs, or Slingers, designed to have the
Princes wholly at his disposal, in order to draw great Advantages thereby. The
Queen exclaimed publicly against it; and the Arrival of a Trumpet from the
Archduke, with a Letter filled up with Propositions of Peace, having obliged
Monsieur to send the Baron of Verde^onne to him, and afterward upon his Answer
Monsieur D' Avaux, the Cardinal complained highly that the Coadjutor had
proposed a Peace, without his participation.

These two causes of Complaint were followed by a third, which appeared no less
unjust. Bourdeaux defended it self vigorously; and the News that came from the
Siege, spoke the Success of it so doubtful, that nothing seemed more proper for
the Reputation of the King's Arms than to save that City by a Treaty of
Accommodation. Therefore Monsieur sent for the King's Ministers, and desired
them to propose to the Parliament, in his Name, to send Deputies to Guienne,
about the Treaty. Those Deputies were sent, but not well received: And others
being sent again, the Cardinal gave it out, that the Coadjutor had hindered him
by those Deputies from Chastising the Rebellion of the Bourdelois, and that he
frustrated all his Designs.

The Coadjutor being in^orm'd of these Complaints, was ne^led to find his
Conduct blamed at Court, after having acted with so much sincerity; and
therefore went to Madame de Chevreuse, who, as we have already noted, had
contributed considerably toward the Imprisonment of the Princes, and had ever
since lived in a perfect Intelligence with the Cardinal. He made great
Complaints in his turn, The Coadjutor's Complaints.
and told her, that he could no longer keep any Measures, and that he would
look out for new Friends. Madame de Chevreuse endeavored to make him alter his
Resolution, and to hinder him from breaking with the Court. She represented to
him that he ought not to credit bare Reports, which perhaps were spread on
purpose by the Princes Friends, in order to divide the Party which was against
them; and that before he proceeded any further, it would be proper for him to
acquaint the Cardinal with his Intentions, and to ask some Favors of him,
thereby to discover the real Intentions of his Eminency. The Coadjutor opposd
all this a long while, telling her among other things, that whatever fair
Promises the Cardinal might make to him, he would never resolve to procure him
the Cardinals Cap, which he desired. In fine, he consented at last that Madame
de Chevreuse should request the said Cap of the Cardinal. He considered that in
case the Cardinal should grant her desire, he should only be obliged to her for
it; and that if he should deny her, his Refusal would enable him to draw her
off from the Cardinal's Interest. Madame de Chevreuse accordingly writ to the
Cardinal, Madame de Chevreuse writes to the Cardinal in favor of the
Coadjutor. The Cardinal's Answer.
urging all the Reasons that should oblige him to procure a Cardinal's Cap for
the Coadjutor. The Cardinal made an Answer, which indeed did not import a
direct refusal, but yet contained nothing beyond bare Complements, and some
Words which only afforded very distant hopes.

During these Transactions, all things tended toward an Accommodation in
Guienne. Dispositions toward an Accommodation in Guienne.
The Court desired a Peace, by reason that they feared the Event of the Siege
of Bourdeaux, the Resistance of which was the more obstinate, because they
expected Succors from Spain, and from the Marshal de La Force, who was upon
the point of declaring himself. On the other hand, whereas the Parliament of
Bourdeaux, being tired with the length and danger of the Siege, likewise wished
for a Peace; the Court Cabals, and the Duke d^ Espernon used their utmost
Endeavors to dispose the rest of the City to desire it also. To this end the
Parliament sent Deputies to Bourg, where the Duke of Orleance's Deputies were
arrived before to make Propositions of Peace. He desired the Princess of Conde,
and the Dukes de Bouillon, and de la Rochefoucault likewise to send theirs. But
whereas those Dukes designed nothing but the Liberty of the Princes, and could
not consent to a Peace without that Condition, they barely contented themselves
with not opposing a thing, which it was not in their Power to hinder; and so
refused to send any body in their Name: They only desired the Deputies to be
mindful of their Security, and the Liberty of the Princess, and the Duke d'
Enguien, as well as of all the others who had been engaged in the Interest of
the Princes, together with the re-establishment of every one.

The Treaty of Bourg.
The Deputies went to Bourg, and concluded a Peace, without communicating the
Articles of it either to the Princess, or to the Dukes de Bouillon, and de la
Rochefoucault. The Conditions of the Treaty were, 1. That the King should be
received in Bourdeaux in the same manner as he used to be received in the other
Cities of his Kingdom. 2 ly. That the Forces which had defended the Town should
march out of it, and might safely go to join Monsieur de Turenne's Army. 3 ly.
That all the Privileges belonging to the City and Parliament should be
maintained. 4 ly. That A C^stle so called.
Chateau Trompette should remain demolished.

The Princess of Conde and the Duke d' Enguien were allowed to go to Montrond,
where the King wou^d keep a small Garrison for their Safety, which Garrison the
Princess should choose her self. The Duke de Bouillon retired to Turenne, and
the Duke de la Rochefoucault to his Government of Poitou. The Princess, the
Duke d' Enguien, together with the Dukes de Bouillon, and de la Rochefouc^ult
departed at the same time from Bourdeaux for Contras. The Marshal de la
Meilleraye, who was going to Bourdeaux, met the Princess upon the Water, and
proposed to her to see the King and Queen, putting her in hopes that perhaps
the King would grant to the Prayers and Tears of a Woman, what he had thought
himself obliged to refuse when demanded by Force of Arms. In fine,
notwithstanding this Princess's repugnancy to go to Court, the Dukes of
Bouillon and de la Rochefoucault prevailed with her to follow the Duke de la
Meillerays's Advice, to the end that no body might Reproach her with having
omitted any thing for the Liberty of her Husband. The Dukes themselves in the
sequel used their Endeavors to the same end: The Dukes of Bouillon and de la
Rochefoucault propose powerful Reasons to the Cardinal to engage him to put the
Princes at Liberty.
They had great Conferences with Cardinal Mazarin, in order to persuade him to
put the Princes at Liberty. They told him, that the Princes would be so much
the more obliged to him for it, in that they were sensible that he could not be
constrained to it by War: That it would be very Glorious for him to make all
Europe sensible that it had been in his Power, to Ruin, and to Re-establish
the Prince of Conde at pleasure: That the proceeding of the A Faction so called.
Frondeurs, evidently showed that they intended to make themselves Masters of
the Princes, in order to ruin them, to the end that they might afterward ruin
him the more easily: or else to put them at Liberty, thereby to engage them to
join with them for the Queen's and his Ruin. That the War was at an end in
Guienne, but that the desire of renewing it in the whole Kingdom would never
end without the Princes being put at Liberty: That he ought to credit them the
more, by reason that they made no scruple to tell him so while they were in his
Power, and had no Security but his Word: That the Cabals were renewing on all
parts in the Parliament of Paris, and in all the other Parliaments of the
Kingdom to procure the Liberty of the Princes, and to (...) them out of his
hands: That they declared to him^ that they would favor whatever Designs
tended to get them out of Prison; and that all they could do for him was, to
wish they might be obliged to him fo it, preferrably to any others. This
Discourse shook the Cardinal, and raised some Jealousy in the Duke of Orleance
and the Frondeurs, when they heard of it, the which inclined them to unite
themselves again with the Princes Friends, and to seek new means to ruin the
Cardinal.

In the mean time the King and Court departed for Paris, and the Cardinal
passing through Blois, began to express a great deal of discontent in relation
to Madame de Chevreuse, who seemed to be so ^ar engaged in the Coadjutor's
Interest, that she had desired him to procure a Cardinal's Cap for that
Prelate. Refusal of a Cardinal's Cap for the Coadjutor.
After the Court was arrived at Fontainbleau, Madame de Chevreuse
notwithstanding this, persisted in representing, Viva Voce, to his Eminency,
what she had proposed to him in Writing concerning the Coadjutor; but she could
not avoid a Refusal. However the Cardinal having afterward reflected upon all
the Reasons that had been proposed to him by this Duchess, and moreover
dreading her Active Spirit, her Credit, Cunning, and Revenge, he judged it best
to dissemble for some time, and to give her some kind of hopes, until he had
caused the Princes to be removed in a secure and strong Place, The Cardinal's
Dissimulation.
being at his disposal, where neither the Coadjutor, nor even the Duke of
Orleance himself might be able to procure their Liberty. He therefore caused
some body to tell Madame de Chevreuse, who was gone to Paris by the Queen's
Order, that indeed he foresaw great Inconveniences in granting her Request,
but yet that he was resolved to satisfy her, and that he would content her as
soon as he cam^ to Paris, in case she advised him once more to p^^^u^e a
Cardinal's Cap for the Coadjutor, lest he should change Sides, and join with
those who desired the Liberty of the Princes. In the mean time he disposed all
things for their immediate removal to Havre, in order to be soon in a condition
to declare himself publicly, and openly to refuse what was exacted from him.
To that end the Queen told the Duke of Orleance that the Princes were not in a
safe place, and proposed to him to take them into his Custody, and to put them
in some Place of his own until the King's Minority. Monsieur rejected the
Proposition; and resisting the Queen's Entreaties with all his might, They talk
about removing the Princes into some strong place.
she added, that since he refused to take them in charge himself, she desired
him at least to consent, that the Princes might be removed in some place that
were strong of it self, in order to avoid the extraordinary Expenses that were
necessary to Guard them in so weak a place. The Lord Keeper of the Great Seal,
and Monsieur le Tellier said, that the King's Coffers were so much exhausted,
that all Expenses were to be avoided, and that there were places in the
Kingdom, in which the Princes might be securely Guarded by the Garrison only.
Several were proposed before Havre was mentioned; but some Inconveniences or
other being found in all of them, it was finally proposed. Monsieur opposed it
violently, by reason that he remembered, Monsieur opposes the Princes being
removed to Havre.
that but three Months before, when the Princes were to be removed from
Vincennes elsewhere, the Coadjutor, and the Duke of Beaufort refused to consent
to their being removed to that place, and had protested to oppose it with all
their might, in case it were attempted. The Cardinal seeing that Monsieur
declared that he would not consent to their being carried to that place,
replied, that the Queen, who was to give him notice of her Designs, was not
obliged to follow his Sentiments. Monsieur had much ado not to fly out to some
Extremity against his Eminency. The Queen assumed the Discourse again
immediately, and pressed Monsieur anew either to take the Princes into his own
Custody, or to permit them to be removed to Havre; assuring him that he should
have as much Authority there as in Marcoussy, Monsieur consents to the Princes
being removed to Havre.
and that the Princes should be guarded by the same Person who was engaged not
to deliver them, unless by hers and his Orders, and by a Command Signed by
both. To this the Queen added very earnest entreaties; insomuch that Monsieur
yielded to what she desired.

Within a few hours after this a Man of Quality representing to Monsieur the
Importance, and Consequences of that Removal, and the Prejudice he would
receive by it, he immediately sent to Monsieur Le Tellier to Command him not to
dispatch the said Orders: He alters his mind.
But the Cardinal, who dreaded this change of Mind, had ordered Monsieur Le
Tellier to remove from F^ntainbleau, and not to return till Night; during which
time the Orders were dispatched to De Bar; all things were disposd for the
departure of the Princes, and the Forces destined to Conduct them, being
arrived at Marcoussy, put themselves on their March with them toward Havre.
Monsieur Le Tellier being returned home, was obliged to wait upon Monsieur, who
forbid him sending any Orders to De Bar. Monsieur Le Tellier answe^'d, that the
Princes went away in the Morning, and were upon their March, whereupon the Duke
of Orleance expressed a great deal of Anger. he sent immediately for the
Lord Keeper, and after having expressed his Resentment to him, he told him,
that he could not approve this Removal; and that the Queen, to whom he had not
been able to refuse it, should vanquish him by Reason, and not by P^ayers. The
Queen made him some Reproaches about it at Night, and Monsieur being unwilling
to fall out with her, the Princes were conducted to Havre on the fifteenth of
November, The Princes are removed to Havre.
by Count d' Harcourt, who by that Emyloyment so much below his Birth and
Courage, blasted the Laurels of his most Famous Victories.

The Princes Friends and Servants were sensibly concerned at this Removal, The
measures of the Princes Friends are broken.
especially, because the Measures they had taken for their Rescue, were thereby
absolutely defeated. They had for a considerable while cunningly established a
Correspondence with their Guards, and had omitted nothing to gain them.
Moreover they had gained some of the Inferior Officers, who had made
themselves sure of a certain number of Soldiers, besides four of the seven
Guards, which commonly tarried in the Antichamber. A Corpse de Guard of
Fourteen Men was kept under the Prince of Conde's Window, upon a Terrass
adjoining to a Pond. They had resolved to launch a Boat made of Leather into
it, which the Workman was to conduct close to the said Terrass. The day being
set, the four Guards of the Antichamber, who had been gained, were to seize
the Arms of the others, and to dispatch them, in case of Resistance. Those of
the Chamber were to be stabbed at the same time with Daggers that had been
conveyed to the Prince, who afterward being favored by the Corpse de Guard of
the Terrass, was to get out of his Window into the Boat, and should have been
drawn out of the Ditch by Arnauld, and received by a Body of Horse, commanded
by the Duke of Nemours.

But unfortunately some of those who were most zealous for the Princes, being
heated with Wine, or an inconsiderate Zeal, declared publicly in Paris, that
those Illustrious unfortunate Princes ought to be rescued out of Marcoussy;
which the Duke of Orleance being acquainted with, he immediately dispatched new
Orders to de Bar to double his Guards, because there was some Plot on foot.
This Man executed Monsieur's Orders, and made use of his Advice^ To the seven
former Guards of the Antichamber, he added three new ones; whereby the Prince
judging that the Plot was discovered, he immediately acquainted his Friends
therewith, desiring them at the same time not to put it in Execu^ion. Some days
after it, de Bar, no longer fearing any thing, restored things to their former
state, and removed the three new Guards. The Prince gave his Friends notice of
it; and as they were preparing to execute their Design, the Order came to
Marcoussy to carry the Princes to Havre.

The Cardinal publicly refuses the Cardinal's Cap for the Coadjutor.
After their being carried thither, the Cardinal pulled off his Mask, and
judging himself above any Cabals, he directly refused to procure the Cardinal's
Cap Madame de Chevreuse had so often requested of him for the Coadjutor. This
proceeding of the Cardinal's extremely exasperated both Madame de Chevreuse and
the Coadjutor, and disposed them to side with those who desired the Liberty of
the Princes, nay, moreover to use their utmost Endeavors with Monsieur to
incline him to do the same.

At that time the Garrison of Rhetel committing great Devastations in
Champayne, and those Devastations affording the Cardinal's Enemies an occasion
to complain of his Conduct, he departed on the first of October to besiege that
place, which Monsieur de Turenne had made himself Master of sometime before,
with the Army he commanded, which was composed of the Spanish Forces, those of
Lorrain, and of such of the Princes he had been abl^ to preserve. He was
received in all the Cities of Champayne with such demonstrations of Honor and
Respect, as extremely surpised the Princes Friends. He stayed some days at
Chalons, in order to hasten all necessary Preparations, while the Forces
assembled, which were to form an Army of Twelve Thousand Men, to be Commanded
by the Marshal Du Plessis Praslin. When the said Army was assembled about
Reims, Monsieur de Turenne fatigued it by such frequent Skirmishes, and by such
vigorous Attacks, that he forced it to Encamp within the City it self, where it
remained several days without the lea^^ Action, in expectation of the Cardinal.

As soon as he was arrived, it was resolved to March strait to Rhetel, and to
Besiege it. This succeeded sooner and better than they had believed. The
Treachery and Cowardice of Delli Ponti, Governor of the said Place, broke all
Monsieur de Turenne's Measures; for Delli Ponti having promisd to hold out a
considerable time, that Marshal had taken Measures with the Spaniards to
succor him. His Design was to March strait to Rhetel, and to perform one of
these two things, that is, either to oblige the Marshal Du Plessis to raise the
Siege, or to Attack the separate Quarters of his Army: But while he was
marching at the Head of the Spanish Army to execute that Design, Delli Ponti
surrendered the Place by Composition six days sooner than he had promised;
which having obliged him to advance in haste, he was constrained to Fight with
disadvantage, and lost the Battle, which is called the Battle of Sum Suip,
which was fought on the 15 th. of December near Rhetel.

Monsieur de Bouteville, Brother to Madame de Chatillon, having fought with a
great deal of Gallantry under Monsieur de Turenne's Standards, was taken
Prisoner, from which the Cardinal expected to draw considerable Advantages, as
it appeared by a Letter written by him to Monsieur Le Tellier, upon the Account
of the Battle.

In effect, his being taken, afforded the Cardinal an occasion to Negotiate
with Madame de Chatillon, under pretense of Treating about her Brothe^'s
Liberty; and such a Treaty could not fail of giving his Enemies new disquiets,
by reason that it could not be concluded unless Madame de Chatillon engaged to
abandon the Prince's Interests, which her Love and Relation to him rendered so
dear to her; and to make Monsieur de Nemours forsake them also, she disposing
absolutely of him as his Mistress.

In the mean while the Cardinal, after so considerable a Victory, The Effects
of the Victory of Rhetel.
returned in Triumph to Paris, and appeared so puffed up with it, that it
renewed the disgust and dread of his Domination in all People, and roused the
Public Envy and Hatred against him, in so much that what at first was a cause
of Affliction to the Princes Party, proved very fatal in the sequel to Cardinal
Mazarin; nay more, the principal cause of the Liberty of the Princes; by reason
that the Frondeurs dreading that the gain of the Battle of Rhetel would make
the Cardinal too Powerful, prevailed with Monsieur to quit the Interests of the
Court, and altogether resolved to set the Princes at Liberty, and to turn out
the Cardinal.

They Treat about the Liberty of the Princes.
They had immediately, in order thereunto, several Meetings with the President
Viole, Arnaud, and some others, who had received an absolute Power to Treat
from the Princes. Monsieur referred the care of adjusting the Conditions, upon
which they might consent to put them at Liberty, to the Coadjutor. The
Coadjutor began first by securing his own Interests, and would have Madame de
Longueville to be a Security for them; whereupon Messengers were immediately
dispatched to Stenay. She offered to sign even by the consent of the Spaniards;
1651.
and the Sixteenth of January the Princes having sent their Procurations to the
Princess Palatin, the Treaty of the Coadjutor was concluded. Conditions of the
Treaty.
And whereas it behooved him as well as Madam de Chevreuse to be very cautious
to secure themselves against the remembrance of a most sensible Outrage
committed against a Prince equally endued with Wit and Courage, and that
nothing but the strongest Ties could reunite such divided Interests, it was
farther required, that the Prince of Conty should Marry Mademoiselle de
Chevreuse; and that a sincere Accommodation should be made between the Princes
and the Coadjutor, the Duke of Beaufort and their Friends, together with a
general Oblivion of all that was past, and a Faithful Union for the future.
Monsieur de Beaufort likewise demanded a considerable Sum of Money for Madame
de Montbazon, which the Prince should be obliged to procure her from the Court,
or else to pay it her out of his own Estate: And as to what related to his own
Interests, he did not forget to make him renounce the Admiralty.

By the Duke of Orleance's Treaty it was proposed, That the Duke D' Enguien
should Marry Mademoiselle de Vallois, Monsieur's Third Daughter, That the
Prince should require no Favors for his Servants: That he should be linked to
his Royal Highness's Interests, toward all, and against all; and that he
should require no Employments for himself.

All these Proposals, together with others that were no less vexatious, were
accepted by the Prince, who might say with Justice, that by those different
Treaties he was constrained to consent to, he did not become free; but only
changed his Chains, and was free of the Cardinal's, to receive many others.

All things being thus regulated, Monsieur, Monsieur breaks with the Car^inal.
Madame de Chevreu^e, the Coadjutor, the Duke of Beaufort, all the Frondeurs,
and the Parliament declared openly in several Assemblies for the Liberty of the
Princes; at which time Monsieur resolved to break absolutely with the Cardinal.
He met with a very favorable Occasion to do it on the First of February in the
Council, upon a certain Discourse of his Eminency against the Parliament, which
he accused of having Designs against the King, like unto those of the
Parliament of England.

The dangerous Impressions such Discourses might make upon the King's Youth,
and his Royal Highnesses Affection to the State, together with his Knowledge of
the People and Parliament's Loyalty, obliged him to Answer, That the Parliament
was composed of none but such as were Faithful and Loyal to the King; and that
those he called Frondeurs, were not the less Loyal, tho Enemies to his Person.
The Cardinal continuing to speak upon the same Tone, and to exclaim against the
Duke of Beaufort and the Coadjutor, Monsieur went out of the Council, not to be
dis-respectful in the Queen's Presence, and took a firm Resolution never to
enter into the Council, or Palais Royal, while that Minister should be there,
and afterward acquainted the Queen with his Resolution, in which he always
persisted.

The Cardinal retires to St. Germans.
The Cardinal perceiving, that all things concurred for the Liberty of the
Princes, and that so many Secret Treaties were forming among their Partisans,
between Monsieur and the Faction of the Fronde, and that those very Persons who
desired the Princes Liberty, were at the same time very earnest for his
removal, and his Ruin. The Cardinal, I say, in consideration of all these
Reasons, resolved to retire to St. Germans. He went out of Paris the Night
between the sixth and seventh of February, between Eleven and Twelve, through
the Gate of Richelieu, accompanied only by three Men. It is true, that Count
Harcourt tarried for him with Two Hundred Horse to conduct him to St. Germans.

The Cardinal proposed by his Retreat to oblige the Duke of Orleance to go to
the Palace Royal, and to give the Queen the means to persuade him to alter his
Mind, and change his Party, and perhaps in case of a Refusal, to secure him.
And in case Monsieur should persist in not going to the said Palace, and refuse
to confer with the Queen, and if those who had espoused the Princes Interests,
and were firmly united for their Liberty, should continue to be earnest for
their being taken out of Prison, his Eminency was resolved to go to Havre, in
order to set the Princes at Liberty himself without any Conditions, thereby to
engage the Prince of Conde to afford him his Protection, and to engage him in
his Interests, by those good Offices to prevent the Perils that threatened him,
and to render all the Secret Treaties that had been made, vain and useless, as
well as the Endeavors of those who only pursued his Liberty upon very
disadvantageous Terms on his side, particularly one, which deprived him of his
Governments until the King's Majority.

Monsieur still persisted in not going to the Palace Royal, The Assembly of the
Palace of Orleance.
notwithstanding the Cardinal's being removed from thence, and all the
Promoters of the Princes Liberty redoubled their Cares and Entreaties in order
to obtain it. The last Assembly that was held upon that Subject, was at the
Palace of Orleance: It was composed of Monsieur and Madame de Chevreuse, the
Lord Keeper, the Marshal of Villeroy, Monsieur Le Tellier, the Duke de la
Rochefoucault, the President Viole, Monsieur Arnaud, the Duke of Beaufort, and
the Coadjutor.

After some contestations they finally agreed upon the Conditions of the
Treaty, and at the same time resolved that the Duke de la Rochefoucault, the
President Viole, Monsieur Arnaud, and Monsieur de la Villiere, Secretary of
State, should go to Havre, with a Signet Letter, Signed by the Queen and
Monsieur, to put the Princes at Liberty.

The Cardinal being informed with the Resolution of that Assembly, which was
held immediately after Dinner; he set strait forward toward Havre, The
Cardinal goes to Havre, in order to set the Princes at Liberty.
in order if possible to prevent the Deputies, and traveled all Night, he
arrived there on the 13 th. of February in the Morning. As soon as he entered
the Citadel, he delivered a Letter from the Queen to De Bar, who commanded
there, whereby he was ordered to do whatever his Eminency should desire for the
Liberty of the Princes. After this he waited upon the Prince, whom he saluted^
telling him, Sir, I come from Her Majesty to restore you your Liberty: Forget
your Prison, love the King, and believe me ever your Servant. The Prince
answered, That he thanked the Queen for the Justice she did him; that he would
forget what was past, and that he would still continue to maintain, and
promote, as he had ever done, the Interest of the King and State. After this,
the Cardinal had a Conference with the Princes, which lasted above an hour.

The only Account we have of it, is, That the Cardinal endeavored at first to
Justify himself, telling them the Reasons that had induced him to secure them:
And that in the next place he desired their Friendship, adding haughtily, that
they were free to grant it, or refuse it; and that upon any Terms they might go
out of Havre that very moment, and repair where ever they pleased. Apparently
the Princes promised him whatever he desired. He dined with them about Ten a
Clock, and after a short Repast, he had a private Conference with the Prince,
to whom he said after some other Discourse, that the Duke of Orleance had
contributed much to his Imprisonment, at the Coadjutor's Solicitation; and
that therefore the safest way for his Highness, was to join entirely with the
King and Queen, in order to ruin the Faction of the Frondeurs: That all the
good Places that were in his Friends Possession, should be his, provided he
would be for Their Majesty's; and that as to what related to the Government,
his Highness might Discourse with Monsieur de Lionne about it, to whom he had
imparted all his Secrets. The Cardinal attended him to his Coach, and in
presence of the Princes of Conty and Longueville, who were got into it before,
he humbled himself to embrace his Knees, and to beg his Protection, with Tears
in his Eyes, against his Enemies. After this, the Princes went away accompanied
by the Marshal de Gramont, The Princes go from Havre to Paris.
and lay Three Leagues off, at a House called Grosmenil, in the way from Havre
to Roans, where the Deputies aforementioned arrived a moment after them, with
Orders from the Court: who could not come sooner, by reason of a Difference
between Monsieur de la Urilliere and Monsieur Le Tellier. Monsieur Le Tellier
was desirous to have the Commission of going to Havre, in order to make his
Court to the Prince, and to enter into his Favor again; and the other likewise
pretended to it, because Normandy was within his District. The Difference was
adjudg'd in favor of the last.

The Princes departed next Morning from Grosmenil for Paris, where they arrived
on the 16 th. at Night.

It is impossible to express the general Joy that appeared in that great City
at their Arrival. An universal Joy for the Liberty and Return of the Prince of
Conde.
The best part of the Soldiers and Inhabitants wept for Joy at sight of the
Prince of Conde, and all strove to outdo each other in their different
expressions of i^. He received proofs of that Public Joy even at Pontoise,
where abundance of Persons of the greatest Quality met him. He was met by a
great many more at St. Dennis, all the way was so throngd with Coaches and
People, that one could not sufficiently admire how such a general Joy could be
occasioned by the Liberty of a Man, whose Imprisonment but thirteen or fourteen
Months before had been so agreeable to every body.

The Duke of Orleance met the Princes between La Chapelle and St. Dennis, and
by the precipitation wherewith he ran to embrace the Prince, he discovered the
reality of the Complement he made him, which was, that he had never been so
transported with Joy as he was at that moment, nor had ever done any Action
with so much Satisfaction. The Prince made him an Answer, as to the Autho^ of
his Liberty. Monsieur having in the next place embraced the Prince of Conty,
and the Duke of Longueville, presented the Duke of Beaufort and the Coadjutor,
whom he had brought along with him, to the Prince of Conde, who received them
very kindly; after which the Prince got into the Duke of Orleance's Coach,
together with the Prince of Conty, the Duke of Longueville, the Duke of
Beaufort, the Coadjutor, the Marshal de la Motte, and the Prince of Guimene.
They lighted at the Palais Royal, amidst all the Acclamations of the People.
Monsieur presented the Princes to the King and Queen, whom he had not visited
himself until the day before. There appeared more Complements and Civilities at
that first Interview, than Tenderness and real Reconciliation. They found the
Queen upon her Bed, with whom they tarried but little, after having returned
her Thanks for the Justice she had done them, in ^estoring them to their
Liberty. Monsieur returned to his own Palace of Luxemburg, and the Prince went
to make a Visit to the Duke of Nemours, and that very Evening he waited upon
the Duchess of Orleance, and expressed a great deal of Obligation to her.
Monsieur presented several Counselors of the Parliament to him, who happened
then to be at the Palace of Orleance, whom he received very kindly. His Natural
Inclination giving way to his Joy at that time, all those in whom he observed
any Joy, received that Day some marks of his Acknowledgment. He Supped with
Monsieur, where every body was free in expressing all manner of Invectives and
Railleries against Mazarin, who finding no safe^y in Fr^nce against the
Thundering Impeachments and Decrees of the Parliament, was o^ his way to quit
the Kingdom, and to repair to the Elector of Cologne.

The next day Monsieur accompanied the Prince, The Prince goes to the Parliament
and the Prince of Conty to the Parliament, where being entered, he spoke in
these terms: Gentlemen, I have brought my Cousins to you to consummate your
Work, according to what you had resolved. I have acquainted them with the
Affection wherewith you have all labored for their Liberty, and have made them
sensible of the kindness they ought to have for your House. I hope their
Presence will serve for a Remedy against the Disorders of the Kingdom, and that
jointly with ^s they will contribute toward the good of the State, which I
protest to have been the only aim of all my Actions. Monsieur having made an
end, the Prince assumed the Discourse, as follows: Gentlemen, after having
returned Her Majesty Thanks for the Justice she has done us in putting us at
Liberty, I should think my self wanting to my self, if I did not publicly
acknowledge the extraordinary Obligations we have received from the Duke of
Orleance 's Goodness, and the Generosi^y he has expressed on our behalf. But
though this Favor we have received from him be so great, that to acknowledge it,
I must neither spare my Blood, or Life, yet I should not have thought my self
fully satisfied with it, unless I had come to assure this House that I shall
never want Gratitude for the Affection you have expressed toward me. And
whereas it obliges me never to separ^te from your Interests, I desire you to
believe that I can have no other, and that on all occasions, I will endeavor
to show you, how much I am indebted to you all in ge^eral, and to every one in
particular. The Prince of Conty made a Complement little different from his
Brother's; after which, the Prince assuming the Discourse again, told them,
that the Duke of Longueville should have been glad also to have expressed his
sense of his Obligements to them, but that they could not be ignorant of the
Reasons that hindered him from so doing.

The first President answered: Sir, The House cannot sufficiently express their
Joy at your Return, and think themselves happy to have contributed toward it.
The Duke of Orleance 's Affection, to which you are indebted for your Liberty,
next to the Queen's Goodness, makes us hope that the Confusions which for three
whole Years have been like to occasion the Ruin of this Monarchy, and have so
much diminished the Royal Authority, will be dissipated by the perfect Union
that is to be expected from Princes that are of the same Blood. You are so much
concerned in the preservation of the Glory and Greatness thereof, that in
laboring to revive the said Authority, and to dispel all Clouds of Division,
you will labor for your own Advantage, and render your selves more
considerable, by employing your Persons and Cares to keep the People in the
Obedience they owe their King and Sovereign. Moreover your Prudence will induce
you not to hearken to any Seditious Spirits, who under pretense of specious
Advantages, perhaps may only aim at sowing Divisions among you. Those evil
Counselors must for ever be removed from your Persons. And, Sir, considering
your Obligations to the Duke of Orleance; (in saying this he looked upon the
Prince) nothing should be capable to divide your Affections and Interests. It Is
from that Union the State must expect its Repose, the People the relief of
their Miseries, and the King the Support of his Authority: and it is the only
Recompense this House desires, for the Vows they have made for your Liberty,
and for the Affection wherewith they have always promoted it.

After this, some asked for the Declaration of Innocence they had agreed to
grant for the Princes. But whereas it was not ready yet, and that it required
some time to consult the Princes about it, it was referred to another Day. Then
Monsieur rose; and the Prince having answered all those who did Congratulate
his Return, retired amidst the Acclamations of Joy of an infinite multitude of
People which filled up the Hall, and strove with Emulation to give him signal
proofs of a satisfaction not only capable to make him lose the remembrance of
the Joy they had expressed at his Confinement, but also to render his Prison
more Glorious than his Victories.

The manner of the Prince's Reception at Paris after his being put at Liberty,
Addition of Glory to the Prince of Conde.
gave a new Luster to his Glory, and made that Hero confess, that this
Reception was no less Glorious to him, than the Great and Famous Victories of
Rocroy, Fribourg, Nortlingue, and Lens, in which he had Triumphed over the most
powerful Efforts of the Enemies of France.

And indeed this new kind of Glory was greatly due to him, It was his due.
since after having rendered such great Services to the State, and discovered
such Eminent Virtues in so many Sieges and Battles, he had been seized and
detained long in Prison, with all the Injustice imaginable, and with the utmost
Ingratitude from the Court. For in fine, besides the early marks of Valor he
had given in the Trenches of Arras, and in the Plains of Ipres, is it not
certain that in all probability France would have been overwhelmed in the
beginning of the Regency, but for the Battle the Prince had won at Rocroy? That
Kingdom which had carried the Glory of its Arms so far, by the great Genius of
Cardinal Richelieu, seemed to fall by degrees from its Elevation, since that
Minister's Death. Spain being at that time attentive in the pursuit of its vast
Designs, and perhaps reckoning upon a Queen, to whom it had given Birth, and
who had long been suspected of not being well affected to France: Spain, I say,
which at that time looked upon the King's approaching Minority as a Source of
Divisions, which after the Death of Lewis XIII. whose Distemper was judged
incurable by the Physicians, was going to expose so great a State as a Prey to
their Ambitious Desires. Moreover France wanted Famous Experienced Chiefs, as
well as well disciplined Forces: while the Enemies had a Triumphant Army,
composed of the best Forces of Europe, Commanded by a very Experienced General,
who only tarried for a proper moment to improve a Conjuncture which opened a
large Field to his Hopes; and while the Garrisons of the Kingdom being
unprovided, and without Assistance, trembled at the approach of the uncertain
Storm which threatened the whole Frontier. Lewis XIII dying in that Conjuncture,
the Consternation of his Death, the Weakness of a Minority, a Tumultuous
Regency, a Council expos^d to Intrigues, and Cabals, Seeds of Division, Great
Malcontents, the Agitation of the Court, and the Exhausting of the People,
made Spain conceive approaching hopes of the total Ruin of France. The Valor
of the Prince of Conde, at that time Duke of Enguien, applied a Remedy to all
those Evils, by the gain of a Battle, on which the Safety, or Ruin of the State
depended. By this Victory he effectually saved the Realm, he calmed it, he
encourag^d it, and as it were, gave it new Life; he became the Support of the
Monarchy, and strengthened the dawning Authority of the Young Monarch.

That memorable Day was followed with a Torrent of Prosperity for France, of
Conquests, Battles gained, Cities taken, etc. All the Campains that succeeded
this by the Singularity of the Enterprises that were formed and executed by the
Duke d' Enguien, equaled, or surpassed the most surprising things we meet with
in History. The Battles of Fribourg and Nortlingue, so celebrated through the
obstinate Resistance of the Enemies, and the Invincible Difficulties that
opposed the attacking of them: Those Battles, which may very well be compared
to those of Arbella and Pharsalia, alarmed and terrified the very Heart of the
Empire, and finally, forced Germany to desire a Peace on such Conditions as
France was pleased to allow it. The Battle of Lens yet more Glorious and
Triumphant, placing the Prince of Conde in the just and indisputable possession
of being the Hero of his Age, ^ais'd at the same time the great and signal
Obligations he had laid upon the Court, to the highest degree, which after that
Battle committed a world of Faults without him, and was only saved by him in
the War of Paris. And yet notwithstanding all this, at a time when all his
Designs, all his Virtues, and all his Actions only tended to the King's
Service, and the Grandeur of the Kingdom, of which he was the chief Ornament,
he was Imprisoned, because his Conduct in some Occasions had not appeared
sufficiently Respectful toward the Queen, and that he had not all the
Complaisance for the Cardinal, which that Minister desi^'d, whom he had the
misfo^tune to displease by the impetuosity of his Temper, which he could not
Master; the which, a^ most, could only be looked upon as Court Faults, and not
Crimes of State, capable of obliterating the Important Services rendered by a
first Prince of the Blood. Therefore it is no wonder that after his being put
at Liberty again, and returned to Paris, the People expressed their Joy, and
received him in Triumph, as if he had been newly returned from gaining the
Battles of Rocroy, Fribourg, Nortlingue, and Lens.

But unfortunately his Glory, which had appeared with such a Luster in so many
different manners, was afterward tarnish'd by a very blameable Conduct. For
finally, he excited a Civil War, and took up Arms against his Sovereign.
Moreover be acted with so much Imprudence in that War, and committed so many
Capital Faults, The Prince of Conde 's Glory tarnish'd.
that thereby he fell infinitely short of those Great Men, who by a wise
Conduct, and well-contriv'd Measures archiev'd the highest and most difficult
Ente^prizes. Not but at the same time the Court also committed very
considerable Faults, and that both Parties maintained themselves more through
the Faults of each other, than by any good Conduct on their side^ But that does
not justify the Prince, especially if we consider that thereby he ruined his
own Party, and made the Court Triumph. It is most certain that had the Prince
been endu'd with all Caesar's Qualifications, The Prince of Conde 's
Qualifications different from Caesar 's.
he should have succeeded in all his Enterprises. Caesar had a consuminated
Prudence; all his steps were measured, in so much that he never did any thing
without mature deliberation, managing his Zeal, and being more affected with
the Solid than the Exterior part, being very caut^ous in all difficult Affairs,
and never wanting a Remedy in the most troublesome Conjunctures. Few Persons
have ever been known with so much Equality in their Life, so much Moderation in
their Fortune, and so much Clemency when injured. He gained the Affection of
all People by his Goodness and Mildness: Those who were Familiar with him, and
did espouse his Interests, neither dreaded his Anger or Capricio's. He was
Liberal and Magnificent, toward the People, toward his Friends, and even
toward his very Enemies. He compassed his Ends by Mild, Insinuating, Cunning,
Secret means. The Prince of Conde did not possess those Qualities. He was of an
unequal Temper; he was Rough, Difficult, and Haughty, and an Enemy to
Precaution. He could not moderate himself in his Prosperity or Fortune. He was
Passionate, and Revengeful. He did not acknowledge considerable Services; and
when he did, there was no certainty of the continuation of his Gratitude. He
was not very sincere to his Friends, not even to those tha^ were most
Illustrious, and most necessary to him. He made Treaties without them, he often
neglected their most considerable Interests, and only minded his own. Neither
was he very Liberal, or Magnificent. He did not consult or manage the Temper of
the People, and took no great care to gain their Love. He could not Dissemble,
neither could he Act in great Affairs with Cunning and Secrecy. In short, he
relied too much upon his own Valor, Merit, Reputation, and Quality, and
neglected other things that (...) ^^cessary for the execution of great
Undertaki^^ (...) I shall not mention the Errors he committed in this place;
the Reader will sufficiently observe them in the faithful orderly recital I
shall make of the principal Actions and Events.

But before I proceed any farther, because I am now to treat about the most
considerable Point of this History, and that by reason of the partiality of
those who have left us Memoirs about it, it is very difficult to distinguish
the real Sentiments of the Prince whose Life we are now writing; I will set
down, as a necessary Foundation, that the Prince of Conde came out of Prison
with Sentiments of Vengeance, not only against Cardinal Mazarin, Madame de
Chevreuse, and against the Frondeurs, who had only promoted his Liberty upon
disobliging Considerations, and very hard Conditions, but also against the
Queen, and against the King. I do not think any body can blame me for what I
advance, since the Prince himself, after the Civil War was ended, and he
received into Favor again, condemning his Conduct and former Sentiments,
declared with Candor to some Persons of Honor and Credit, That he was the most
Innocent man alive, when put into Prison, and the most Guilty at his coming out
of it. Alas! pursued he with grief, Before that unhappy Prison, I a^m'd at
nothing but the King's Service, and the Grandeur of the State. In so much that
the Valor, Activity, and Imperious Humor, together with all the extraordinary
Qualifications the Prince was endu'd with, were like unto those matters from
which Exhalations are formed, which matters serve for co^siderable uses, but
being once turned into Exhalations, and enclosed within the Clouds, being
attracted thither by the heat of the Sun, they seldom get out of them again,
unless it be to strike the most elevated Places, and to overthrow the (...)
Sumptuous Buildings, and to cause terrible Diso^^^^^: So likewise the Prince of
Conde's Valor and Courage, before his Imprisonment, were only employed for the
Good of the Kingdom, and the Glory of his Sovereign; but after his being put at
Liberty, all those Heroical Qualities were employed on very different Uses; and
whereas before, he had been the Hope, Support, and Joy of the State, he became
the Terror of it all on a sudden; he attacked the Royal Authority, and kindled
a Civil War, which caused great Disorders, as will appear by the sequel of this
History.

After the return of the Princes to Paris, their Imprisonment was declared
unjust by the Parliament and a new Decree was given against Cardinal Mazarin.
This Decree of the Parliament was terrible; it condemned that Minister to a
perpetual Banishment, and commanded all Frenchmen to fall upon him, if ever he
appeared in the Kingdom, and at the same time confiscated all he had^

The Queen endeavors to dispose the Prince to consent to the Cardinal's return.
During these Transactions, the Queen passionately desired the Cardinal's
return, and tried all means to dispose the Prince to consent to it. To that end
she offered him, by the Princess Palatin, all manner of Advantages for himself,
and for his Friends: But ^e only answered those fine offers with Complements
which engaged him to nothing. But yet in the sequel the Queen being very
pressing to oblige him to express himself, he promised to Treat, whether it
were that he had no mind to break so soon with the Queen, and had a mind to
carry until things were more favorably disposed in his favor, to have a more
plausible pretense of breaking publicly; or whether he were really disposed to
treat, in hopes of obtaining for himself, and for his Friends, the most
considerable Employments and Governments, and thereby put himself in a
condition of doing whatever he pleased. However he desired the Treaty might be
kept secret, and so did the Queen: The Queen feared to augment the Diffidence
of Monsieur, and of the Fro^de^rs, and to swerve too soon, and without the
least pretense, from all the Declarations she had just granted the Parliament
against the Cardinal's return. The Prince on his side was afraid his Friends
would be angry at his Treating without their participation; that the Duke of
Bouillon, and the Marshal of Turenne would quit his Interests, that the
Frondeurs, and the Duchess of Chevreuse would grow his irreconcilable
Enemies, and that the Parliament and the People would on a sudden reflect on
the dreadful Image of the last War of Paris.

Therefore they used all the Cautions imaginable to Treat secretly. The Prince
went to the Princess Palatin, whom the Queen had chosen to manage the Treaty.
She was of the House of Mantua, and Sister to the Queen of Poland. The Count of
Servient and Monsieur de Lionne likewise met there from the Queen. The Prince
would have the Duke de la Rochefoucault present, and did nothing without the
consent of the Prince of Conty his Brother, and the Duchess of Longueville his
Sister.

The first Project of the Treaty which was proposed by the Princess Palatin,
was, That Guienne should be given to the Prince, and that the Lord Lieutenancy
thereof should be given to whatever Friend of his he should be pleased to
choose: That the Prince of Conty should have the Government of Provence; And
that Gratifications should be made to such as had been engaged in the Prince's
Interests: That nothing should be desired of him but barely to retire into his
Government, with whatever Forces of his own he should think fit for his own
Security: That he should remain there without contributing to Cardinal
Mazarin's return, but that he should not oppose the King's Endeavors in order
thereunto, an^ that whatever happened, the Prince should be free to be his
Friend or Enemy, according as his Conduct should give him cause to love or hate
him. Those Conditions were not only confirmed, but augmented by Messieurs de
Servient and de Lionne. For at the Prince's desire that the Government of Blaye
might be added to the Lord Lieutenancy of Guienne for the Duke de la
Rochefoucault, they gave him all the hopes of it he could desire. They only
desired time to treat with the Duke d' Angouleme, about the Government of
Provence, and to dispose the Queen to grant Blaye. But apparently it was only
to give the Cardinal an Account of what past, and to receive his Orders. He was
at that time at Brueil in the Archbishopric of Cologne; and the Queen
consulted him as an Oracle.

Dispositions toward an absolute breach.
This Affair remained some time without being discovered; but he who had been
chosen to conclude it, soon occasioned an entire breach, and drove things to
the utmost Extremities.

Chavigny induces the Prince to break off the Treaty.
Monsieur de Chavigny, who was lately recalled, and placed into the Ministry
again, was a Mortal Enemy to the Cardinal, and being at that time the Prince's
chief Confident, soon disposed him to break off the Treaty with the Queen,
against the Advice of Madame de Longueville, the Princess Palatin, and the
Dukes de Bouillon and de la Roc^efoucault. Messieurs de Servient and de Lionne
at the same time were imbroil'd on both sides about this Negotiation, and
afterward were both turned out. Imbroilures.
The Queen denied her having ever hearkened to the Proposition about Blaye, and
accused Servient of having made it on purpose to raise the Prince's Demands so
high, that it should be impossible for her to grant them. As for the Prince,
his Complaints against the Count of Servient were, That he had treated with him
from the Queen, about Conditions that were unknown to her, or that he had made
so many vain Propositions to him to amuse him under pretense of a sincere
Treaty, which in effect was only a premeditated Design to Ruin him.

Although the Count of Servient was suspected on both sides, it did not lessen
the Animosity which began to arise between the Queen and Prince; it was almost
equally fomented by all those who came near them. Some represented to the Queen
that the Division between the Prince and Madame de Chevreuse about the breach
of the Marriage between the Brother of the one, and the Sister of the other,
would certainly reconcile the Frondeurs to the Cardinal's Interests, and that
all things would be soon reduced to the state they were in when the Prince was
seized. He on the other hand was induced to break with the Court by many
different Interests: He found no longer any Safety with the Queen, who did
nothing without the Cardinal's consent; and he dreaded to be involved into his
former disgraces again. Madame de Longueville was sensible that the Cardinal
had made an irreconcilable Breach between her Husband and her, and that after
the impressions he had given him against her Conduct, she could not go to him
in Normandy, without exposing her Life, or Liberty. The Duke of Longueville on
the other hand used his utmost Endeavors to get her to him; and she had no way
to avoid that perilous Journey, but by inducing her Brother to quit the Court
abruptly, and to prepare for a Civil War. The Prince of Conty had no particular
Aim; he followed his Sister's Sentiments without knowing them, and was for War,
because it freed him from his Ecclesiastical Profession, which he did not love.
The Duke of Nemours was very sollicitous for War; not so much out of Ambition,
as Jealousy which he had conceived against the Prince. He could not endure his
seeing and loving Madame de Chatillon. And whereas he could not hinder his
seeing of her, but by separating them; he imagined that War was the only means
he could employ to that end, and that it would in time quench the Prince's
Passion. The Dukes de Bouillon and de la Rochefoucault did not desire that War,
they had lately found by Experience to what invincible Difficulties they are
exposed who undertake to maintain a Civil War against the Person of their King.
They were sensible of the Disappointments that attend it. They knew the
Weakness of the Spaniards; they were not ignorant how vain and deceitful their
Promises were, and that it was not their Interest to advance the Prince's or
the Cardinal's Affairs, but only to foment Disorders among them, in order to
take an Advantage of the Divisions of France. The Duke of Bouillon moreover
joined his particular Interest to the Publick's, and was in hopes to oblige the
Queen sensibly, and to be altogether in her Favor, by contributing to keep the
Princes within the Bounds of Duty. As for the Duke de la Rochefoucalt, he durst
not so publicly express his repugnancy to that War, by reason that his Love
and Passion for Madame Longue^ille obl^g'd him to follow the Sentiments of that
fair Princess, which tended to the kindling of a Civil War, which the Prince,
exasperated by his Misfortunes, and by ill Treatments, desired perhaps with as
much earnestness.

However the Conduct of the Court, and that of the Prince soon furnished
Subjects of a reciprocal diffidence, the sequel of which proved fatal to the
State, to a great number of Illustrious Families of the Kingdom, and ruined the
greatest and most glorious Fortune that was ever seen upon the Head of a
Subject.

But before we proceed any farther, it will be proper to enlarge upon a thing I
have only hinted by the by, which is, that the Prince hindered the Prince of
Conty his Brother from Marrying Mademoiselle de Chevreuse; Reasons which
induced the Prince of Conde to break the Match between his Brother and
Mademoiselle de Chevreuse.
by reason that in the Conditions of the Treaty that had been made for the
Liberty of the Princes, that Marriage had only been desired by the Coadjutor,
and by Madame de Ch^vreuse to secure them against the remembrance of the
Affront put upon his Highness upon the New Bridge; the care that was taken to
solicit the execution thereof, only served to revive in his Memory the Image
of that Mortal Injury: In so much that the Prince, who was sensible besides
that the Coadjutor and Madame de Chevreuse had taken the Advantage of the
Misfortune of his Prison to impose whatever Conditions they pleased upon him,
could not resolve to dissemble his Resentment, and had rather be forsaken even
by his best Friends, than to stoop to Dissemblings, Caresses, and Flatteries to
conceal it.

He exasperated Madame de Chevreuse and the Frondeurs extremely by that
proceeding, and consequently the People, Several persons abandon the Prince of
Conde 's Party.
and even disobliged Messieurs de Bouillon and Turenne to that degree, that
they sided with the Court; whereupon the Duk^ of Bouillon was placed at the
Head of the Council, and the Vice-count of Turenne at the Head of the Principal
Army. Several other Persons of No^e quitted the Prince's Party by their
Example. Even the Count de Bussy, who had served him so well till then,
abandoned him, by reason that being come on purpose from Burgundy to Paris, to
Congratulate his Highness being put at Liberty; The Prince having thanked him
coldly for the Services he had done him during his Imprisonment, asked him at
the same time whether he would not resign his Place of Lieutenant of his
Chevaux Legers of the Ordnance to Guitault his Cornet, according to the
Agreement made about it three Months before his Imprisonment. The Count of
Bussy was strangely surpised at that Question, which showed but little
Gratitude for his past Services, and yet less Value for him, and less
Consideration for his Quality; but yet he consented to it, on Condition that he
should resign it into his Highnesses own hands. As soon as he had surrendered
it, he quitted him, as the Count de Grand Pre had done before, who, after
having espoused his Party with so much heat, going to Visit the Princes after
their being put at Liberty, was received by them in a very disobliging manner.

All these things gave a great check to the Prince of Conde's Affairs, and in
the sequel weakened his Party considerably. Disadvantageous Reports against the
Prince of Conde.
Moreover it happened that those who had quitted his Interests, after having
embraced them with so much earnestness, spread false Reports against him, and
endeavored to make people suspect his harboring ill Designs, thereby the
better to color their change.

In effect, soon after, it was reported that the Prince treated with the
Enemies of the King and State; in Paris it self by Madame de Longueville, ^t
(...) by the Marquess of Sillery, and at Ste^ay by Monsieur de Croissy. It was
likewise rumored that he would not have desired to exchange his Government of
Burgundy for that of Guienne, but that he de^^gn'd to execute some Criminal
Enterprise. The Reasons alleged for it were, that the Government of Burgundy
was worth Forty Five Thousand Livres more than that of Guienne, and that
consequently he certainly designed to make use of the singular Affection the
People of Guienne had for his Person, in order to execute some extraordinary
Enterprise. That the People of Guienne as well as the Limosins their
Neighbors, were Warlike, Light, and Inconstant. That Poitou, of which the Duke
de la Rochefoucault was Governor, was adjoining to that Province: That the
Prince had other Friends, who were very Powerful in other adjacent Provinces:
That he had only desired Provence for the Prince of C^^ty, and Auvergne for the
Duke of Nemours, in order thereby the better to execute his great Designs.

It is most certain, that at that very time the Prince had sent the Marquess de
Sillery into Flanders, under pretense of dis-engaging Madame de Longueville and
the Marshal of Turenne of the Treaties they had made with the Spaniards to
procure his Liberty, but in reality with Orders to take Measure^ with the Count
of Fuensaldaigne, to sound what Assistance the Prince might receive from the
King of Spain, in case he were obliged to make War. Fuensaldaigne answered
according to the usual Custom of the Spaniards, in promising in general a great
deal more than could reasonably be desired of him, and omitted nothing to
engage the Prince to take up Arms.

On the other hand the Queen had made a new Engagement with the Coadjutor, who
was strangely animated against the Prince, Engagements between the Queen and
the Coadjutor.
by reason that he had persuaded the Prince of Conty not to Marry Mademoiselle
de Chevreuse, and that he had seconded with all his might a Declaration which
excluded all Cardinals, and all Prelates in general from the Ministry. This
Engagement between the Queen and the Coadjutor was kept secret, by reason that
the Queen could expect no Service from the Fr^ndeurs but by their Credit with
the People, the which they could preserve no longer than while they were looked
upon as Enemies to the Cardinal.

Plots against the Prince of Conde.
Both Parties equally found their Security in ruining the Prince: Nay, some
proffered the Queen to kill or seize him. She abhorred the first Proposition,
and willingly consented to the second. The Coadjutor and Monsieur de Lionne met
at the Count of Montresor, to agree about the means to execute that Enterprise.
They concluded that it was fit to attempt it, but resolved nothing as to the
time, or manner of executing it. Monsieur de Lionne discovered this Design to
the Marshal of Gramont, who communicated it to Monsieur de Chavigny, and he
immediately to the Prince.

The Prince for some time imagined that this Report was only spread on purpose
to make him quit Paris; and that it would be a weakness below him to be alarmed
at it, especially since the People took his part to that degree, that he was
continually accompanied by an infinite number of Officers of the Army, by those
of his own Forces, by his Attendants, and by his particular Friends. For these
Reasons he changed nothing as to his Conduct, excepting his ceasing to go to
the Louvre. Moreover he accidentally delivered himself up one day into the
King's Power; he happening to be in his Coach in the Ring at a time when the
King came through (...) returning from Hunting, followed by his Guards (...)
Chev^ux Legers. However this Encounter did (...) produce the Effect the Prince
had reason to (...); for the King continued his way, The King's and the
Prince's Coach meet in the Ring.
and none of ^^ose that were with him bethought themselves to ^dvise him about
it, without doubt because they ^ere surpised, as the French always are. The
King ^bserving the Prince's Coach to pass by hastily, without stopping, as all
Coaches are obliged to do ^hen they meet His Majesty's, only uttered these ^ew
words, with a Tone, and Air, that may be ^magin'd, I will teach that Gentleman
his Duty. The Prince continued his way with speed out of the Ring, not to give
the King time to form any Design against him. The Queen and the Frondeurs
easily comforted themselves at the missing of so fair an Opportunity, in hopes
of seeing their Project soon succeed.

In the mean time the continual Advices the Prince received from all Parts,
began to persuade him, that the Court intended to secure him. However he
continued some time longer to neglect the taking proper measures to avoid it,
al^hough all his Friends were very sollicitous for his so doing. In fine, after
having so long resisted the wholesome Advice of his Friends, he was at last
alarmed without a cause. Talking in his Bed with one Monsieur de Vineuil, he
received a Note from a Gentleman, who acquainted him, that two Companies of the
Guards were under Arms, and going to march toward the Fauxbourg of St.
Germans. This News made him believe they designed to Invest the H^stel of
Conde, which stands in that Suburb: Insomuch that without calling to mind that
those Companies were often employed to Guard the Gates, to cause the Duties of
Entrance to be paid, which was the end for which they were commanded at that
time, he imagined they had a Design against his Person. It is certain that in a
Manifesto which appeared soon after to justify his removal from Paris, he
d^^clar'd, that besides the movement of the Regimen^ of Guards, The Prince
quits Paris to retire to St. Maur.
two or three hundred Persons had been observed moving to and fro that Night in
the said Suburb. All this then being preceded by the Advices of his particular
Friends, he took Horse in a hurry, and left Paris only attended by seven (...)
eight Men. Being accompanied by that inconside^rable number, at his going out
he was encountered by Two Hundred of Mazarin's Friends armed, who
notwithstanding durst not undertake any thing against him, and let him pass by.

He tarried some time in the Road for News from the Prince of Conty, to whom he
had sent Notice of what past. But a second pleasant Alarm obliged him to quit
his Post. A pleasant Alarm.
Hearing the noise of a great number of Horses, which moved toward him on a
Tro^, he fancied it was a Squadron in pursuit of him; and therefore retired
toward Fleuri near Meudon: However it proved that they were only Haglers who
traveled all Night toward Paris.

As soon as the Prince of Conty was informed that his Brother was retired from
Paris, he acquainted the Duke de la Rochefoucault with it, who went to join the
Prince; but the Prince sent him back immediately to Paris, to acquaint the Duke
of Orleance from him with the subject of his removal to St. Maur. The Princess,
the Prince of Conti, and Madame de Longueville arrived there almost as soon as
the Prince: The Prince's Court at St. Maur.
And in the first days that Court was as considerable, and as full of Persons
of Quality as the King's; moreover he provided all manner of Divertisements to
serve his Policy, as Balls, Plays, Gaming, Hunting, and good Cheer, which drew
a world of wavering Persons thither, which always offer themselves at the
forming of Parties, and commonly betray or forsake them, according to their
Fears or Hopes. However it was judged that this great number of People might
break the Mea^ures the Court might have taken for the Besieging of St. Maur,
and that this Crowd, which on any other occasion would have been useless and
troublesome, would be of use in this, and serve to give some Reputation to
their Affairs.

During these Transactions the Marshals of Gramont and of Villeroy continually
moved to and fro from the Queen, to endeavor to accommodate those Affairs. The
Prince was long before he would admit them in private, and told them, that
there was no Safety for him in Paris, The Prince of Conde 's Complaints.
and that he would never find any there while Mazarin governed the Court, as he
did by Le Tellier, Servient, and Lionne. That the Cardinal did not live at
Breuil like an Exile, but as an Oracle that was continually consulted against
him: That having suffered so hard, and so unjust a Prison, he knew by
Experience that his Innocence could not protect him, or establish his Safety,
which he hoped to find in a Retreat, in which he would still preserve the same
Sentiments he had so often evidenced for the benefit of the State, and for the
King's Glory. The Prince had several Conferences with the Duke of Orleance upon
the same Subject, who was as much displea^ed as himself, to find the Spirit and
Maxims of Cardinal Mazarin Reigning at Court. The Parliament likewise made
several Complaints about it, and joined with their Highnesses to exclude Le
Tellier, Servient, and Lionne both from the Council and Ministry of Affairs,
they following the Cardinal's Maxims in all things, and doing nothing without
his Orders: Monsieur Le Tellier upon this retired of his own accord, and the
Queen having soon after consented to the Exclusion of the two others, the
Prince came back to Paris, The Prince returns to Paris.
and waited upon the King and Queen, and no longer thought of any thing but
taking Possession of his New Government of Guienne.

But before his departure from Paris, he was desirous to show the Sumptuous
Equipage he had prepared for his Entry into Bourdeaux. Therefore ^e appeared in
the Streets of Paris in a Magnificen^ Coach, accompanied with the most
Numerous, and most Glorious Attendance that had been seen in France for a long
while; after which he went to the Ring with the same Equipage, where he met the
King and Queen accidentally, and in Circumstances very different from those of
the preceding Meeting I have mentioned. The King and Queen were extremely
surpised and disordered to find themselves, as it were, alone amidst a crowd
of armed Men, composed of the Prince's Friends and Attendance, which filled up
the Ring. The Queen was already very much displeased with the Prince, for his
having ceased to see the King of late, and his being continually with Monsieur,
and such of the Parliament as were most animated against the Cardinal; in so
much that she was under great Apprehensions at that time. Moreover some Persons
of the Court talked of it, as if he had really designed to insult Their
Majesty's, which made an end of exasperating them against the Prince.

The Duke of Orleance having notice of it the next day, endeavored to pacify
all, and engaged the Prince with great difficulty to go to the Louvre. Where
Their Majesty's received him so coldly, and with so much indifference, that he
retired in a Passion, and protested publicly that he would go there no more.
This was done in so high a manner, that from that moment People began to
believe the Report that had been spread, of the Prince of Conde's having an
Intelligence with the Enemies of the State to wage a War against the King.

The first President Mole himself, who was the Prince's Friend, complained of
it in a full House, in so much that he seemed already to have renounced his
Friendship; Complaints of the first President against the Prince of Conde 's
Conduct.
so much he was a lover of Justice, and had an aversion to Disloyalty and
Rebellion against his King. And the Prince of Conty, being at that time in the
Parliament, rising to inform that President how Injurious that Suspicion was to
the Prince his Brother, who, as he said, aimed at nothing but the King's Glory,
and the Tranquillity of the State; he answered him, That he was too Young to
speak in such a manner before so August an Assembly, and told him with some
sharpness, that he ought to know that in Parliament the Princes of the Blood
were no more than the bare Counselors.

The President Mole did not Complain without powerful Reasons against the
Conduct and ill Designs of the Prince. Foundation of those Complaints.
For besides diverse other things that were come to his knowledge, the Prince,
who had only quitted St. Maur to return to Paris, because he believed that this
haughty, bold manner of proceeding would give a Reputation to his Affairs, had
at the same time sent away the Princess, the Duke D' Enguien, and Madame de
Longueville to Montrond, being resolved to follow soon after, and to pass from
thence into Guienne, where they were well disposed to receive him, and to
embrace his Party. He had likewise sent the Count de Tavanes to his Forces
which served in the Army in Champagne, and had ordered that Count, who at the
same time had not much cause to be contented with him, to March those Troops in
a Body to Stenay as soon as he should receive Orders from him. He had provided
for his Garrisons, and had Two Hundred Thousand Crowns ready Money; in a word,
he was preparing for War. He endeavored to engage Persons of Quality in his
Party, and among the rest the Duke of Bouillon, and Marshal Turenne. They were
both intimate Friends to the Duke de la Rochefoucault, who omitted nothing to
engage them in the same Party he was obliged to follow. The Duke of Bouillon at
that time appeared unresolved; he was unwilling to undertake any thing without
consulting his own Safety and Advantage, and he was equally diffident of the
Court and Prince. He was also willing to see how things would go, before he
would declare himself. As for the Marshal of Turenne, Marshal Turenne refuses
to take the Prince's Party.
he remained still firm to the Court Party, and never altered since his return
from Stenay. He told the Duke de la Rochefouca^lt, that he never praised the
Prince, or made Complaints against him, to avoid Eclaircissements he was
unwilling to enter into. That he had omitted nothing to contribute to the
Prince's Liberty; but that at the same time it was his Opinion that his
Engagement to him was to end with his Prison; and that therefore he thought
himself free to make whatever new Engagements he thought fit, according to his
own Inclinations, or Interest. He added, that the Prince had had no
consideration for him since his being put at Liberty, and that far from
consulting, or imparting his Designs to him, he had not only done the contrary,
but besides had suffered those very Troops that had combated for him, which did
belong to Monsieur de Turenne to perish, rather than speak a word to get Winter
Quarters for them.

It appeared by all this that President Mole's Zeal had not been blind, and
that he had a good Foundation for his Complaints. The Queen perceiving the
first President to be in the state, and in the Sentiments she desired, and that
he had spoken vigorously against the Prince, endeavored to improve that
favorable Occasion to animate the Parliament against that Prince. To that end,
she caused the Houses t^ meet on the 17 th. of August, and sent the Co^^^ of
Brienne, Secretary of State, thither, to present them a Paper in His Majesty's
Name, which contained nothing but Complaints against the Prince. Moreover the
Count read it himself in presence of the Duke of Orleance, and the Prince of
Conty, who were in that Assembly.

These Complaints were, That whereas so many Decrees, which deprived that
Cardinal of all manner of Commerce in France, the which had been confirmed in
such a manner by Her Majesty, that there was no hope left for him ever to
pretend to return into the Kingdom, she thought it very hard and strange that
notwithstanding, that Minister's Name should serve for a pretense to
disaffected Persons to continue their Revol^. That she could no longer
dissemble the Prince's Ill Designs, who himself inclined the disaffected to a
Revolt, by his public want of Respect to the King's Person, not having seen
him above once, and as it were only out of Ceremony, in above a Month's time
since his being in Paris. That he continually spread Libels against the
Government, in order to make the People Rise, and to lead them from their
Allegiance. That he had already laid in Stores, and fortified the Garrisons
that were in his Power, raised Forces in the Provinces he had gained, and
disposed all things so well toward a Revolt, that the Factious only expected
his Orders to take Arms. That to that end he had a continual Commerce at
Br^ssels with the Spaniards, and that far from performing the chief Condition
on which he was set at Liberty, which was to remove the Garrison, the Enemies
of the State had placed in Stenay, he kept it still there by their Advice, in
order still to have that Post at his Command during the War he designed to
kindle in the heart of France.

That the Forces he had assembled at Marle, acknowledged no Superior but his
Highness, and had no Discipline besides a cruel License of Pillaging Picardy
and Champagne, as an Enemy's Country, to the dishonor and prejudice of the
King's Army, which was daily observed to diminish considerably by the great
number of Deserters, that License brought over into the Prince's. The Queen
concluded, saying, that those dismal pressing Extremities deserved to be taken
into Consideration by the House, in order to apply proper Remedies thereunto,
by declaring themselves absolutely against the Authors thereof; and that if
they had still the least Affection and Kindness for the King, they could never
approve it better than at that time, now His Majesty was going to enter into
his Majority, at which time, according to Law, they were to give him an Account
of the Government.

After the Reading of this Paper, a general Silence reigned in the House, none
offering to express their thoughts about it, excepting the Prince of Conty, The
Prince of Conty 's Answer.
who declared pretty coldly, That all this was only a vain Artifice of his
Brother's Enemies, and that he would find means to destroy and confound them
However at that time there was a great deal of reason to fear the contrary, by
reason of the then disposition of the Parliament. But an Incident intervened
which soon altered the Dispositions of that August Assembly, which enabled the
Prince happily to execute what the Prince of Conty had so boldly advanced in
his favor against the Complaints of the Court. And thus it happened.

As the Parliament was going to deliberate upon these Complaints, News was
brought that the Duke of Mercoeur was privately retired to Cologne to the
Cardinal, Effects of the Journey and Marriage of the Duke of Mercoeur.
and moreover that he had married his Niece of Manciny, to which the Queen had
secretly given her Consent. Upon which the Parliament, who together with the
Prince had already sufficiently declared their dislike of the said Match,
expressed a great deal of Resentment against it, and judged that his Highness
was not altogether so much to blame as was imagined, in complaining still
against Mazarin after his retreat out of France; and looked upon that Match as
an undeniable Proof of the excessive Power wherewith that Cardinal still ruled
the Court.

Therefore, The Prince looking upon this as a very favorable Conjuncture to
clear himself from the Aspersions that had been cast upon him, Monsieur 's
Declaration.
presented a Declaration to the Parliament, written by the hand of Monsieur the
King's Uncle, wherein he declared, That the Forces the Prince had at Marle,
were kept there by his Royal Highnesses Approbation; That it was by his Order
they tarried there in a Body, and moreover that he had sent le Sieur Valons, to
Command them jointly with his own, in the room of la Ferte Sennetterre, who was
a perfect Mazarin. That as to the Foreign Garrison that was in Stenay, he was
satisfied that the Prince had us^d his utmost Endeavors to remove them from
thence, either by Force, or Composition. That, in a word, he though^ himself
obliged to Testify for his Highness, that he had ever known him to be a Person
of an Upright, Generous Soul, entirely devoted to the King and State. And that
therefore he declared he had not the least hand in the precipitated Resolution
of the Court to have him Impeached of High Treason, for pretended
Correspondencies with the Enemies of the Crown.

The Prince had no need of any further Apology, after this Declaration of the
Duke of Orleance, Lieutenant General of the Kingdom, especially since the
Parliament was sufficiently inclined to believe him Innocent. Nevertheless, the
more to confound his Enemies, and to hinder them from doing of him any
prejudice by their Accusations, he added a kind of Mani^esto to his Royal
Highnesses Declaration, in Answer to all the Heads of their Accusations against
him.

The Prince of Conde 's Manifesto.
He declared in the said Manifesto, that he possessed no other Estate in France
than what his Father the late Prince of Conde had left him. That the Cities of
Stenay and Clermont had been given him in compensation for the Place of Lord
Admiral, which was to be his by Right of Succession, after the Decease of
Marshal de Breze his Father-in-law. That after having undergone an Imprisonment
of Thirteen Months without a Cause, his being put at Liberty should not have
been called an Act of Grace, but a piece of Justice. That a Prince of the
Blood, whose Father had been declared Head of the Council by the late King's
Testament, could not be excluded from it. That it was very well known that he
had no Strong Holds in the Kingdom to Second his pretended Designs of a Revolt;
whereas Mazarin was still in possession of them all by his Creatures. That the
Court was to blame to envy those few Men he had at Marle, since France was
particularly indebted to them for the best part of its last Victories; and that
besides they were only assembled there by his Royal Highnesses Order, who was
the Absolute Master thereof. That the only Reason for which he had desired the
Court to exchange his Government of Burgundy for Guienne, was to Relieve that
poor Province from the Misery it was reduced to under the proud and violent
Domination of the Duke d' Espernon, whose Excesses were but too well known in
the World. That if he had reserved any Places in Burgundy, it was because they
were his, the late Prince his Father having bought them, by His Majesty's Leave
and Approbation; and that for that Reason he had a Right to keep them,
especially since no others had been given him in exchange in Guienne. That it
was true, that he had abstained for some time from seeing the King, and from
assisting at the Council; but that no Man of Sense could blame him for it,
since his most inveterate Foes, being most in Her Majesty's favor, he had
reason to suspect them, and to avoid falling, for the second time, in the same
Snare. That since his coming out of Prison, he had been most sollicitous to
drive the Spanish Garrison out of Stenay^ and that that was the only end of all
that pretended Commerce with the Enemies of the State, which made so much
noise; and that therefore it was a shame to see a Prince of the Blood, under
such a Pretense, pursued as being guilty of High Treason, and that at the
Queen's solicitations. That the Authors of that outrageous Undertaking ought
to be informed against, and constrained either to justify their Calumny, or to
be prosecuted according to Law. That, notwithstanding, he submitted his Estate
and Person to the disposal of the Parliament, and to whatever they should be
pleased to determine.

The Prince finding that this Paper had made strong Impressions in his favor,
The Prince of Conde demands Justice of the Parliament against his Accusers.
and that all things tended to his Justification in the Parliament, went
thither himself, to renew his Complaints Viva Voce, and to demand reparation
for the enormous Calumnies levelled against his Honor, pointing at the same
time at the Author's thereof. He said among several other things whereby he
designed the Coadjutor of Paris, that nothing could be more odious than to see
Persons whose main business should tend toward the maintaining of Peace, apply
themselves unfortunately to the disturbing of it, by outrageous Falsities,
which an implacable Hatred had made them invent. The Coadjutor justly applying
that Discourse to himself, finding himself seconded by the Queen's Authority
and Protection, rising at the same time, answered, That all he had done was
designed for the Public Good, and what could be expected from a Man of Honor,
whose Loyalty was untainted; That his Enemies could not accuse him of having
broken his Promises, and that few Persons, at that time, were free from that
defect. I wonder, replied the Prince, who possessed himself more in that
Occasion than he was wont to do, that any body should be so bold in this place,
as to dare to cope with a Prince of the Blood, and to contest with him. I know,
Sir, replied the Coadjutor, what is owing to a Prince of the Blood like you:
But every body is free in this place; in which, none but the King can expect a
perfect Obedience.

The First President then assuming the Discourse, told them, that the Place in
which they were, was not a place of Quarrel, or Con^estation, but a place of
Majesty: And seeing besides that the whole Palace was filled, on the behalves
of the Prince and Coadjutor, with armed Men, ready to Charge each other, and
that even Swords glittered on all sides, he desired the Prince and the
Coadjutor to cause their Men to retire, in order to allow the Gentlemen of the
House the Liberty of their Opinions. After this, he turned toward the Prince,
and told him, Your Highness is to show by your Example the Honor and Respect
that is due to this Assembly.

The Prince yielding to that Advice, immediately sent the Duke de la
Rochefoucault to Command his People to retire out of the Palace. Disorder in
the great Hall.
The Coadjutor at the same time went out of the great Room to desire his to
retire also. The Duke de la Rochefoucault walked seven or eight steps behind
him, and was still within the Usher's Bar when the Coadjutor appeared in the
great Hall. At sight of this Prelate all those of his Party drew their Swords,
and the Prince's Friends did the same. Every one sided with the Party he
served, and in a moment both Troops joined within reach of their Swords, and
yet among so many brave Men, animated by such different hatreds, none offered
to make a Pass, or shoot off a Pistol. The Coadjutor seeing so great a
Disorder, offered to retire into the great Room again: but coming to the Door
which goes from the Hall to the Usher's Bar, he found that the Duke de la
Rochefoucault had seized it. However he endeavored to open it with force: but
whereas it only opened half, and that the Duke de la Rochefoucault held it,
that Duke at the instant the Coadjutor was entering, pushed it in such a manner,
that he stopped it just as that Prelate's Head was passed on the side of the Bar,
and his Body still in the Hall. That occasion might have tempted the Duke de la
Rochefoucault to kill the greatest Enemy of the Prince's Party, and to Revenge
the Shame and Affront a Prince of the Blood had just received in full
Parliament. He contented himself however with securing him, that his Life might
answer for the Event of the Disorder. Thus the Duke de la Rochefoucault,
unwilling to commit an Act of Cruelty, and the Prince's Attendants, who at that
time were near that Duke, being unresolved in a case of that Consequence, gave
time to Monsieur de Champlatreux, Son to the first President, to arrive, with
Order to dis-engage the Coadjutor, and to draw him out of the greatest peril,
he was ever exposed to.

This proceeding of the Duke de la Rochefoucault toward the Coadjutor, The
Duke of Orleance 's Expedient.
proved a new Subject of Hatred and Envy amongst them and their Friends, which
without doubt would have occasioned great Disorders, had not the Duke of
Orleance composed all by an Expedient he invented, which was, That for the
future the Coadjutor should no longer assist at the Assemblies of the
Parliament; and that the Prince should only be attended there by a small number
of his ordinary Attendance.

During these Transactions the Queen perceiving that the Parliament daily
declared more and more in favor of the Prince, The Prince of Conde justified.
and that she should expose her Authority in vain in pursuing his Condemnation
any further, on a sudden relinquished her pursuit, and declared that she
desired nothing so much as his Justification: And some days after it the Prince
of Conde, at her Majesty's Entreaty, obtained a Decree from the Court, by which
the Accusations, and Complaints exhibited against him, were declared false, and
without ground, as having been contrived on purpose to animate the People, and
to increase Divisions.

After so many Obstacles were happily removed, there was reason to expect that
all things would soon be reduced to a Calm. But the Storm soon rose again about
the The Barbons, or people wearing long Beards.
Barbons: Thus they called Monsieur de Chateauneuf, President Mole, and
Monsieur de la Vieville, by reason of their long Beards. Those three Old Men,
whom the Prince looked upon as the Cardinal's Slaves, had insinuated themselves
so far into the Queen's favor, and had engaged so far into the Intrigues of
the Court, since the removal of Messieurs de Servient, Le Tellier, and Lionne,
that Monsieur de Chateauneuf was publicly designed First Minister, President
Mole Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, in Monsieur Seguier's room, from whom it
was to be taken, and Monsieur de la Vicville Super-Intendant of the Exchequer.
The Prince was so much the more offended therea^, because the first had, as it
were, declared himself an Enemy to his House and Blood, by the Sentence of
Death he had pronounced at Toulouse against the Duke of Montmorancy; and that
it was sufficiently known that the second was not well inclined toward him of
late^

This perhaps was the justest subject of Anger and Indignation the Prince had
yet met with: But whatever Complaints he could make to the Court about it, A
just cause of Complaint of the Prince.
they being persuaded that he had been engaged with the Spaniards to wage a War
against the King, they were only looked upon as affected Complaints, and
Desires, by which he only proposed a fair pretense to retire.

In the mean time the King's Majority was at hand: The King's Majority.
this was the fourth of September, and the Ceremony thereof was to be performed
on the seventh. This troubled and disquieted the Prince of Conde. He was
sensible that this Majority was going to render the King's Authority Absolute,
and that the King being at Age, there would be no longer any Safety for him in
Paris. He also remembered that it was no Novelty to see those kind of Public
Festivals and Solemnities ^ully'd by the most bloody, and most daring Actions.
But at the same ^ime he considered that he could not absent himself from so
Great, and so August a Ceremony, without despising too publicly the Rank he
was to have in it, and without confirming, and augmenting those very Suspicions
that had been conceived against him: Therefore there was a necessity at least
to find out an apparent Pretense to color his Absence.

To that end he made use of one Prioly, a Venetian Gentleman, The Prince of
Conde will not assist at the Ceremony of the King's Majority.
to let the Queen understand that he had Business of great Moment to regulate
with the Duke of Longueville, and that it concerned the Public to have it
terminated as soon as could be. This Gentleman was secretly a Friend to the
Cardinal, and a Pensionary to the Court: He had insinuated himself into the
Queen's Favor by his Wit, and by several Services he had rendered her on sundry
Occasions, as well as to the Cardinal. And therefore it was not difficult for
him to persuade Her Majesty to give her Consent to the Interview the Prince
desired with the Duke of Longueville, who only consented to it upon the secret
assurance he received in Writing from Prioly, that thereby he would render an
acceptable Service to His Majesty. Whereupon the Rendezvous was immediately
appointed at Try.

The Prince of Conde endeavors to engage the Duke of Longueville in his Party.
The Prince of Conde's Design was not only to have an Occasion to absent himself
from the Ceremony of the Majority, but also to endeavor to draw the Duke of
Longueville in his Party, and by his means to make all Normandy rise in his
favor, thereby to give his Party the more Weight and Reputation, especially
among strangers. That Duke, who had only endeavored to avoid that Interview
out of fear of so dangerous an Engagement, was resolved not to hearken to the
Prince's Propositions, and moreover to disuade him from it as much as possible
he could. And whereas Prioly, in whom both did confide, only designed to
fortify the Duke in his Resolution, in order to discover the better by his
resistance, the real Designs, and all the Intrigues of the Prince; the Queen
thereby had the Satisfaction to see that the Prince's Cunning and Industry were
employed to deceive himself.

The Prince of Conde repaired to the Duke of Longueville at Try on the
appointed day. But before his departure, he left a Letter with the Prince of
Conty for the King, wherein he acquainted His Majesty with the Reasons that
hindered him from attending him on the Day of his Majority, and promised him an
inviolable Loyalty. The Day the Ceremony was performed, a little before the
King and Court set ^o^ward toward the The place where the Parliament Assembles.
Palais, the Prince of Conty presented his Brother's Letter to the King. The
King received that Letter with a cold negligent Air, without saying any thing,
and hardly opened it half, without looking upon the Contents.

While the Prince endeavored at Try to engage the Duke of Longueville in his
Party, the Duke de la Rochefoucault labou^'d at Paris to draw the Duke of
Bouillon, The Duke de la Rochefoucault endeavors to engage considerable
Persons in the Prince's Party.
the Marshal of Turenne, the Prince of Tarente, and the Marquess de la Force
into the same Party. In order to conclude with the Duke of Bouillon, who
offered to declare for the Prince, and to prevail with his Brother the Marshal,
and the others above named, to embrace the same Interests. The Duke de la
Rochefoucault in the Prince's Name promised him the following Conditions. The
Duke de la Rochefoucault Treats with the Duke of Bouillon on the Prince's
behalf.
1. To give him Stenay, with the demeans thereof, which he should enjoy with
the same Rights and Privileges the Prince did, until he had caused Sedan to be
restored to him, or else had put him in possession of the Recompense the Court
had promised him in exchange for that place. 2. To yield his Pretensions to him
upon the Duchy of Albret. 3. To cause him to be received into Bellegarde with
the Command of that place, and to make no Treaty without causing the Article
about the Rank of his House to be comprised in it. 4. To furnish him a Sum of
Money they should agree upon, to raise Forces, in order to make War. The Duke
de la Rochefoucault proposed besides to send the Marshal of Turenne to Stenay,
to Clermont, and Danvilliers, there to Command the Prince's Old Troops, which
were to retire there, the which being joined to those the Spaniards were to
send thither from Flanders, Mo^ieur de Turenne should possess the same Post,
which Madame de Longueville and he held while the Princes were in Prison. he
was moreover ordered by the Prince to tell him next, that he designed to leave
the Prince of Conty, Madame de Longueville, and Monsieur de Nemours at Bourges
and Montrond, there to raise Men, and make themselves Masters of Berri, of the
Bourbonnois, and part of Auvergne, while the Prince should go to Bourdeaux,
where he was called by the Parliament, and by the People, and where the
Spaniards wo^ld furnish him with Forces, Money, and Ships, according to the
Treaty the Marquess of Sillery had made with the Count of Fuensaldaigne, to
facilitate the Rising of the Forces he designed to raise in Guienne. That the
Count of Doignon entered into his Party, to which he joined the Cities of
Brouage, R^, Oleron, and Rochel: That the Duke of Richelieu would raise Men in
Saintonge, and in the Country of Aunis; The Marquess de la Force in Guienne;
The Duke de la Rochefoucault in Poitou and Angoumois; The Marquess of Montespan
in Gascony; Monsieur d' Arpagon in Rouergue; and that Monsieur de Marsin, who
commanded the Army in Catalonia, would be grateful. So many fair Prospects
fortified the Duke of Bouillon in his Design of Engaging with the Prince; for
which he engaged his Word to the Duke de la Rochfoucault, on the aforesaid
Conditions.

Monsieur de Longueville refuses to declare himself.
As for Monsieur de Longueville, the Prince could not engage him so far, nor
obtain any positive Promise from him, whether it were that he was unresolved,
or unwilling to enter into a Party, he thought his Wife had formed, or finally,
whether he thought that being engaged with the Prince, he should be carried
farther, than he was used to go.

The Prince of Conde goes from Try to Chantilly.
From Try, the Prince went to Chantilly, without going through Pontoise, though
it was his way, for fear of being watched at the passage; and indeed his fear
was well grounded, since the Count d' Harcourt and the Duchess of Eguillon,
who had an Absolute Power in those Parts, had made Proposals to the Queen to
seize him there, and had disposed every thing in order thereunto.

When he was arrived at Chantilly, he considered that the Dangers which
threatened him daily increased, and that he could not ^arry long there in
safety. Thus, in order to secure his Retreat, The Prince's Retreat.
and to amuse the Court while he retired to Montrond, he caused cunningly some
Propositions or an Accommodation to be made to the Queen. In the mean time he
removed from Chantilly with some Troops of Horse; and having ^arry'd one day at
Angerville at the President Perrault's House, he repaired to Bo^rg^s, where the
Applauses of ^^e People and Nobility raised his Hopes to that degree, that he
imagined the whole Kingdom was going to imitate their Example, and decla^e for
him.

The Duke of Orleance, who till then had omitted noth^^g to put a stop to the
secret Motions of the Prince of Conde, Monsieur dispatches Crois^y to the
Prince of Conde, about an Accommodation.
and to sti^le all his Designs of a Civil War, by an Accommodation he
endeavored to manage for him at the Court, was strangely surpised at his
sudden departure. He dispatched Monsieur de Croissy to him within a few days,
to offer him Just and Reasonable Conditions for an Accommodation, from the
Queen, for the performance of which he promised to be Security. Those
Conditions were, That his Highness should remain in full Liberty in his
Government of Guienne, and that his Forces, for which he expressed so great a
Concern, should have good Winter Quarters, where they should be in safety, and
free from all manner of Injuries, or Violence. Monsieur de Croissy met the
Prince at Bourges, who seeing himself so near Montrond, answered Monsieur de
Croiss^, that he could not handsomely accept Monsieur's offers on the Queen's,
and his own behalf, without first conferring with the Prince of Conty his
Brother, and the Duchess of Longueville his Sister about it, who at that time
were at Montrond, together with the Dukes of Nemours and de la Rochefoucault.
This Conference only produced a Refusal of the offers that had been made, and a
firm Resolution of beginning a Civil War in earnest.

MEMOIRS OF THE Prince of Conde. BOOK V.
CRoissy's Journey thus proving ineffectual, the Prince continued his, and
arrived at Montrond, where he was expected by the Princess, and by Madame de
Longueville. The Civil War, extracted out of the Memoirs of the Duke de la
Rochefoucault.
He remained there a day to examine the place, which he found the finest, and
in the best Condition imaginable: That very day he drew full Instructions to
Treat with the King of Spain, in which his most considerable Friends were
comprised. Monsieur L' Aisne was chosen for that Negotiation. A^terwards the
Prince gave his Brother and Monsieur de Nemour^ Money to raise Men in the
adjacent Provinces, leaving Vineuil, Intendant of Justice, with them to begin
to raise La Taille, a Duty exacted by the King.
Contributions upon Berri and Bourbonnois. He desired them to have a particular
regard for the City of Bourges, and to maintain it in the same disposition he
had ^e^t it. The following day he departed from Montrond with the Duke de la
Rochefoucault, at whose House they called, where they found abundance of
Gentry, who followed him. He repai^'d with speed to Bourdeaux, where the
Princess, and the Duke d' Enguien soon arrived after him. He was received by
all the Companies of the City with a great deal of Joy, and it were difficult
to decide whether t^ose fiery people, accustomed to Revol^s, were more affected
with the Grandeur of his Birth and Reputation, than with their looking upon him
as the most Potent Enemy the Duke d' Espernon had. He found the Parliament in
the same disposition, and they issued out whatever Decrees he desired in his
Favor.

Things being thu^ happily begun, he thought nothing more proper, than to seize
all the King's Revenues in Bourdeaux, and to employ that Money in raising of
Men speedily, supposing that the Court would immediately March toward him,
with whatever Forces they had, in order not to allow him time to draw his in a
Body. For that reason, he distributed his Money to all those who were engaged
with him, and pressed them so much to make their Levies, that his Precipitation
served them for a pretense to make ill ones.

Within a few days after his Arrival, the Count du Doignon came to him, and
openly declared for his Party; The Duke of Richelieu, and the Marquess de la
Force did the same, and the Prince of Tarente, who was come to Taillebourg,
sent him word that he likewise entered into his Party. Monsieur d' Arpajou was
more difficult to be wrought, and he made use of the same Conduct on this
Occasion, for which he had already been rewarded during the Princes
Imprisonment; He demanded Conditions which could not be granted, and treated
with the Court, when he found that the Affairs of the Prince were decaying.

During these Transactions, the Duke de la Rochef^^cault gave the Duke of
Bouillon an Account of ^ha^ had past at the Parliament of Bourdeaux, and told
him at the same time, that the Conditions he ^^d de^^r'd being performed, the
execution of his Promises was expected. This Duke, for a considerable time,
avoided the giving a positive Answer, being desirous, at once, to keep in with
the Court, which made him great Advances, and not to break with the Prince, of
whom he might stand in need. He likewise saw, that Monsieur de Turenne, whose
Interests he once thought inseparable from his, refused to join with the
Prince; That the Prince of Tarente had embraced that Party without him, and
that the Marquess de la Force remained united to Monsie^r de Turenne. He
considered, moreover, that neither being followed by his Brother, nor by the
others I have mentioned, according to his Engagement with the Duke de la
Rochefoucault, there would not be so much safety for him in the Party he was
going to embrace; and that the Prince would express no more Gratitude for what
Monsieur de Turenne and he would do for the future, than for what they had
already done. He likewise found that there would be a necessity of making a new
Treaty with the Prince, less advantageous for him than that they had already
agreed upon. In fine, all these Reasons joined to the Promises he received from
the Court, and seconded by all the Industry of his Duchess, who had a great
Influence over him, hindered him from following his first Design, and from
declaring for the Prince: But then, in order to get off handsomely, he turned
Mediator for an Accommodation between him and the Court. After having had some
particular Confer^nces with the Queen upon that Subject, he sent back
Gourville, who h^d been dispatched to him from the Duke de la Rochefoucault, to
offer the Prince whatever he had demanded for himself, and for his Friends,
together with the disposal of the Government of Bla^e, without requiring any
other Conditions on his side, than those Servient and de Lionne had demanded in
the first Project of the Treaty, which was made at Paris, at his coming out of
Prison.

Moreover, Monsieur de Chateauneuf offered other Propositions of Accommodation
by the said Gourville, but whereas they tended to hinder the Cardinal's Return,
his Offers could not equal those the Queen had made him by the Duke of
Bouillon. He only offered to remain inseparably united to the Prince after the
Cardinal's overthrow, and to allow him whatever share he should desire in the
Government of Affairs. The Court offered besides to consent to an Interview
between him and the Duke of Orleance at Richelieu, there to Examine together
the Conditions of a sincere Peace, whereunto the Court seemed to be sincerely
inclined. But it was the Misfortune of France, and his own, that he refused to
hearken to so many Advantageous Proffers, being vex^d that the Queen's offers
should be made by the Duke of Bouillon's means, by reason that he had expected
that the said Duke and his Brother would be very considerable to his Party,
being sensible that none could maintain the Posts of Bellegarde and Stenay like
them; and that besides the old Troops he had left there to be Commanded by the
Marshal of Turenne, thereby remained useless, and were in danger of being
dissipated or defeated. He considered besides that the Measures he had taken
with the Spaniards toward Champain would be of no effect, and that neither his
own Troops, nor the Spaniards should be able to find out a Chief to fill up
that Post, with that Esteem the World had for Monsieur de Turenne. All these
Reasons touched the Prince sensibly, and though he endeavored to conceal his
Resentments, he could not forbear answering the Duke of Bouillon pretty
smartly; That it was not Honorable to hearken to Propositions one had no mind
to effectuate: That he should declare himself according to his Promise; That
Monsieur de Turenne should repair at the Head of the Forces that were gone to
Stenay, and that then he would be in a condition to hearken to the offers of
the Court, and to make an Honorable Treaty. Gourville was sent back with the
said Answer, and ordered to acquaint the Duke of Orleance with the Reasons for
which he refused an Interview at Richelieu. The chief were, That the aim of the
said Conference was not to make a Peace, but only to hinder him from making
War: That while the whole Kingdom was at the point of Declaring against the
Court, and the Spaniards were preparing considerable Succors of Men, Money,
and Ships, endeavors were used to engage him upon a Public Negotiation, the
very tumor of which would hinder his Levies, and debauch all those from him,
which were going to embrace his Party. Besides these general Reasons, there
were more particular ones, which did not permit him to trust his Interests in
the Duke of Orleance's hands, being jealous of his strict Engagements with the
Coadjutor of Paris, his declared Enemy, as well as that Prelate's with the
Court, which had newly promised him a Cardinal's Cap. This Incident put him
upon a very strange Resolution; for finding that the Coadjutor, either out of
Interest, or Pride, affected to cross him continually, he formed the Design of
seizing him in Paris. Whatever difficulty this Enterprise seemed to be attended
with, Gourville undertook it, after having received the Princes Order for it in
Writing; and the Coadjutor had certainly been taken one Evening he went to the
Hostel of Chevreuse had he come back in his own Coach; but having discharged
it, together with his Attendance, the Coach that carried him home again could
not be distinguished with certainty; in so much that the Business was put off
for some days, and afterward discovered; those that are employed on such
Occasions, having seldom Discretion enough to rest satisfied with the knowledge
one thinks fit to give them, or Fidelity and Secrecy enough to put it safely
in Execution.

Thus all things were disposed for War on all sides. Monsieur de Chateauneuf,
who at that time was Head, or President of the Council, had caused the Count to
repair to Bourges, where the King's Presence instantly restored that City to
its former Obedience: At the Report of those happy beginnings, the Prince of
Conty, Madame de Longueville, and Monsieur de Nemours were obliged to quit
Montrond, with their Forces, to retire into Guienne. They left the Chevalier de
Riviere expiring; he died the same day, regretted by all those who knew him,
for besides his being possessed of all the Qualifications required in a
complete Gentleman, few Persons of his Age have given so many proofs of
Conduct, Fidelity, and Generosity, being free from all Self-Interest, as he had
done in so many hazardous Enterprises in which he had been employed.

The Marquess de Pergan remained Governor of that place, which was blocked up
by a small Body lodged at St. Amand, of which Palluau was Lieutenant General.
The Court was come as far as Poitiers, and Monsieur de Chateauneuf insisted to
remove it to Angoulesme, considering that since the War was only grounded upon
the p^etence of the Cardinal's Return, it was necessary to improve his Absence,
and that it was sufficient for the Interest of the State, and yet more for his
own in particular, to continue his said Absence. He likewise insisted that the
King's Presence was a powerful Motive to keep the people in awe at the Birth of
these Disorders; That in drawing near the Prince, who was neither certain of
Guienne, nor of the Parliament of Bourdeaux, his Designs might easily be
dissipated, whereas on the contrary they would be strengthened by the absence
of the Court. But th^se Counsels of Chateauneuf raised too much Jealousy in
the Cardinal's Friends, to be followed at Poitiers, without having first been
examined at Cologne: And whereas they were forced to tarry for his Orders,
their delays and diversity caused continual Irresolutions, and kept the Court
uncertain at Poitiers until his Return, which followed soon after.

On the other hand the Baron of Batteville was arrived in the River of
Bourdeaux with the Spanish Fleet, composd of Eight Men of War, and some
Fireships. He fortified Talmond, where there was a Body of foot of 1500 Men.
The City of Saints had surrendered it self without Resistance, Taillebourg,
which has a Port upon the Charante, was pretty well fortified, and the Prince
was Master of the River as far as Angoulesme, excepting Coignac. The Count of
Ionsac, the King's Lieutenant in Saintonge, and Governor of Coignac, was there
in Person, to the end that place might serve him to make his Conditions the
better in the Party he should embrace, being as yet unresolved. In this
irresolution he began a Commerce of Letters with the Prince, and writ enough to
him, to make him believe, that he only designed to save Appearances, and that
he wou^d deliver it into his hands at the approach of a Siege. This hope,
rather than the state of the Prince's Forces, which at that time were very
inconsiderable, made him resolve upon Marching toward Coignac. He was sensible
that the success of his Enterprises depended upon the Reputation of his Arms;
but at the same time he likewise knew that wanting Forces, and all things
necessary to form a Siege, this was the only one he could pretend to succeed
in. So that grounding all his hopes upon that Governor, he caused the Duke de
la Rochefoucault to go from Bourdeaux, to Assemble whatever Forces he had on
Foot, which only amounted in all to three Regiments of Foot, and Three Hundred
Horse, and to Invest Coignac, where the Prince of Tarente was to repair with
what Forces he had. The Report of their March being spread in the Country,
whatever could be removed out of the Fields, was carried into Coignac, and
abundance of the Nobility retired there also, to express their Zeal for the
King's Service, and chiefly to Guard themselves what they had caused to be
transported there. This considerable number of Gentlemen easily kept the
Inhabitants in awe, and made them resolve to shut up their Gates, in hopes of
being soon relieved by Count d' Harcourt, General of the King's Forces, who was
advancing toward them. And whereas they had but little Confidence in the Count
of Ionsac, whom they equally suspected of Weakness, and of being gained by the
Prince, they watched him so narrowly, that one may say, that he resolved to
defend the place, because the Power of Surrendering it was taken from him.

This was the only thing in which the Gentry showed any Vigor, for during
Eight days that the Prince's Men tarried before Coignac, without Arms, without
Ammunition, without Officers, and without Discipline, being at the same time
fatigued by continual Rains, which broke the Bridge of Boats they had made over
the Charante, for the Communication of Quarters; those within never made the
least use of those Disorders, and kept close within the Town with the
Inhabitants, only firing from behind the Walls. However the Prince being
informed that the Town was upon the point of Surrendering, departed from
Bourdeaux, and came to the Camp, with the Duke of Nemours. The day after his
Arrival, the Count d' Harcourt receiving Intelligence that the Bridge of Boats
was broken, and that Major General Nort was retrenched in a Suburb on the other
side of the River with 500 Men, without any possibility of being succored,
marched against him with 2000 Foot, composed of the French and Suitz Guards,
and with the King's Gendarmes, Chevanx-Legers, and Guards, and some Gentry. He
forced Nort's Quarter without hardly meeting any resistance, and thus relieved
Coignac to the Prince's Face, who was lodged on the other side of the River.
Count d' Harcourt was satisfied with having Relieved the place, and suffered
the Prince to retire without following of him.

Notwithstanding this Success was not very considerable in it self, yet it
increased Count d' Harcourt's Hopes, and gave a Reputation to his Arms. Nay,
moreover he judged himself in a condition to make some Progresses, and knowing
that the Marquess d' Estissac had reduced Rochel to its former Obedience,
excepting the Towers, which shut the Port, he resolved to march thither,
relying upon the good will of the Inhabitants, and their hatred to Count du
Doignon their Governor. He had caused those Towers to be fortified, and kept a
Gar^ison of Switzers in them, being diffident almost of every body, and
expecting to find more Fidelity among that Nation, than in his own. But the
sequel soon made him sensible that he had taken ^alse Measures; for Fear and
Interest, which are as powerful over those People as over others, gave the
Switz a pretense for doing yet more than he had feared from the French. It is
most certain that this Diffidence of the Count du Doignon proved the Ruin of
the Prince's Party, who otherwise would at first have marched with all his
Forces to Rochel, to re-build its Ancient Fortifications, there to fi^ the Seat
of the War, with all the Convenience that such a Situation could afford him:
Whereas in order to sooth the Jealous uncertain Temper of that Man, he was
forced to remain useless at Tonay-Charante, and to suffer Rochel to be lost,
without so much as daring to propose the Relief thereof. I must confess that
the small Resistance the Garrison of the Towers made, hardly afforded him time
enough to form the Design of it: For Count d' Harcourt being arrived with his
Forces at Rochel, and assisted by the Marquess d' Estissac, lately invested
with the Count du Doignon's Governments, he found ^he Inhabitants disposed to
afford him all the Assistance he could expect from them. However the Towers
might have held out some time, had the Switzers proved as brave and faithful,
as that Count had expected. But instead of answering his Expectation, they
resolved to Redeem themselves by a piece of Treachery, and after a Resistance
of three days, Count d' Harcourt having sent them word, that he would allow
them no Quarter unless they stabbed Basse their Commandant, they made no scruple
of executing this horrid Order: But Basse expecting to meet more Compassion
from Count d' Harcourt, than from his own Men, flung himself wounded as he was
from the top of the Towers into the Port, where that General caused him to be
dispa^ch'd in his presence, without being moved either by the Officers
Entreaties, who begged his Life, nor by so pitiful a Spectacle. The loss of that
place proved very prejudicial to the Reputation of the Prince's Arms, for it
was imputed to his being diffident of his Forces, whereas it only proceeded
from his regard to the Jealousy of the Count du Doignon. He was sensibly
concerned at the News of it, and imagining that all the other Garrisons would
follow that Example, h^ re^i^'d to Bro^age, where he remained altogether (...)
had made his Treaty with the Court, whi^^ apparently he has had cause to repent.

Co^^t d' Harcourt being encouraged by these good Successes, and strengthened
by ^ome Forces, that h^d joined his Army, resolved to march up to the Prince,
who was at Tonay-Charante. But the Prince judging by the Number, and the want
of Discipline of his Forces, that he was much inferior to the King's Army, did
not think it fit to expect it in that place, and therefore crossing the River
in the Night upon a Bridge of Boats, he reti^'d to la Bergerie, which is not
above half a League distant from Tonay-Charante. The Enemies contenting
themselves with having defeated two Squadrons the day before, allowed him all
the time that was necessary to blow up the Tower of Tonay-C^arante, and to
retire to (...) Bergerie without attacking of him. Count d' ^arcourt at that
time lost a fair occasion of falling upon his Rear, when he was half over. The
very same day he met with a faire^ yet, which he had not the wit to improve;
for the Prince confiding absolutely on a Major General, who was commanded by
him to burn, or break the Bridge of Boats, on that assurance, posted his Men in
diverse Quarters, some being a League and a half distant from his own, without
fear of a surprise, the River lying between him and the Enemy. But this Officer
only loosened the Boats, and let them float down the stream of the River; in so
much that Count d' Harcourt's Men having stopped them, the Bridge was rebuilt in
an hours time, and he caused Three Hundred Horse, and some Foot to cross over
it to guard the head of the said Bridge. This News being brought to the Prince
at La Bergerie, he concluded that Count d' Harcourt would march into the middle
of his Quarters, in order to destroy them one after another, as in Prudence he
ought to have done. This obliged him to dispatch Orders to his Fo^ces to quit
their Quarters, and to repair instantly to La Bergerie, and immediately he
marched himself toward Tonay-Charante with the Dukes of Nemours and de la
Rochefoucault, his Guards, and whatever Officers and Volunteers happened to be
about him at that time, to discover the Designs of the Enemies, in order to
amuse them, until those of his Men which were most distant from him, were come
up to him. He found the Advice that had been given him to be true, and the
Three Hundred Horse were in Battalia in the Meadow next to the River: But at
the same time he found the Enemies had not bethought themselves of what he
feared, or had lost the Opportunity of putting it in execution, since that not
being passed while they could do it without hindrance, there was no likelihood
they would attempt it in his Presence. Some Skirmishes past for some time
without any considerable loss on either side; and his Infantry being arrived,
he caused a long Retrenchment to be made over against the Bridge, leaving the
Meadow and the River between Count d' Harcourt and him. The two Armies remained
above three Weeks in the same place, without undertaking any thing, contenting
themselves with living in a Fertile Country, where all things were plenty.

In the mean time, the Duke of Bouillon's delays, and all his Conduct convinced
the Prince, that he was no longer to expect any thing from him, or from
Monsieur de Turenne, and for that Reason he exclaimed and acted against them
with all the Passion imaginable, although their Engagements had been different.
For it is most certain that the Duke of Bouillon had made an Agreement with the
Duke de la Rochefoucault, and afterward with Monsieur Laisne, upon the
Conditions heretofore related. Mon^ie^r de Turenne on the contrary, had
entirely ^^^ndon'd the Prince's Inte^ests from the very moment he came out of
Prison, and as he has decla^'d since, was absolutely ignorant of the Duke of
(...)'s Engagements.

The Prince being under the necessity of sending (...) body without delay to
^ill up the Post he (...) designed for Monsieur de Turenne, cast his Eyes upon
the Duke of Nemours, whose Birth and great ^^^our might in some m^nner stand
instead of Monsi^ur de Turenne's Capacity. He dispatched him ^mmediately for
Flanders, but he not being able to s^pport the Inconveniences of the Sea, was
con^^^^in'd to go by Land, with a great deal of danger, and loss of time, by
reason of the Forces which brought back the Cardinal into France. He likewise
sent the Dake de la Rochefoucault back to Bo^rdeaux, to dispose the Prince of
Conty to go to Ag^n to confirm the Peoples Minds, which began to waver upon the
new Progress of the King's Arms. He likewise engaged him to make a Proposition
to the Parliament of Bourdeaux, to consent to the putting of the Baron of
Batteville and the Spaniards in possession of the City and Castle of Bourg,
which they offered to Fortify.

During these Transactions, Fontrailles was sent from the Duke of Orleance to
the Prince, to see the state of his Affairs, and to inform him, that the
Parl^ament of Paris was ready to join with his Royal Higness to oppose Cardin^l
Mazarin's return; and that his said Highness was desirous to Act joyn^ly with
him in that Affair. Fontrailles likewise proposed to him a Reconciliation with
the ^oadjutor, saying, that the Duke of Orleance de^ir'd it earnestly. The
Prince made no positive Answer to that Article, whether it were that he could
take no certain Measure with the Coadjutor, or whether he thought that those he
should take would not be approved by Madame de Longuevill^ and by the Duke de
la Rochefoucault, to whom (...) had made a Promise never to be reconciled to
the Coadjutor without their Approbation. Howeve^ he told Fontrailles, that he
would do what the Duk^ of Orleance desird when those Affairs should b^ somewhat
riper, and when that Reconcilia^io^ might be of use for the Common Good of the
Party.

At this very time Count Marsin joined the Princ^ at La Bergerie, and brought
along with him a Thou^sand Foot, and Three Hundred Horse of the bes^ Forces he
had in the Army of Catalonia, which h^ commanded. Many have blamed this Action,
and looked upon it as a piece of Treason: For my part, without taking upon me
to condemn, or defend it, I shall barely relate, that Marsin having long been
devoted to the Prince's Service, had received the Government of Bellegarde
(which place belong^d to him) from him, and that afterward he had not only
protected him in the Service, but by his Credit he had obtained the
Vice-Roy-ship of Catal^nia, and the Government of Tortose for him, in which he
served the King with great Loyalty, and good Fortune. And when the Prince was
made a Prisoner, Marsin, who was taken up at the same time, was taxed with no
other Crime than being his Creature. Nay more, his Government of Tortose being
given to Launay Gringelinere, he suffered it to be taken soon after. Marsin's
Confinement lasted as long as the Prince's, and after his being put at Liberty,
he remained some time without any Employment: But the Affairs of Catalonia
being in an ill Posture, and the Court being at a loss to find a Person capable
to redress them, Marsin was proposed for the second time by the Prince, and the
Duke de la Rochefoucault made the overture of it to Monsieur Le Tellier,
without Marsin's soliciting in the least for (...) It was impossible for him
to defer his Journey unto Catalonia, to expect the issue of the doubtful things
that passed at the Court, which were more likely to be decided by an
Accommodation, than by a Civil War. Therefore he set forward toward his new
Employment, for which he was solely obliged to the Prince, who had likewise
lately given him the Government of Stenay, which was vacant by the Death of la
Moussaie. So that this Action of Marsin may bear two very different
Constru^tions: Those who will consider him abandoning ^ Province the King had
entrusted him with, will find him very disloyal; and those who will look upon
him running after most pressing, and almost indispensible Obligations, will
believe him a very worthy Gentleman. Few Persons of sense will dare to say that
he is Guilty, or declare him Innocent. In fine, both those that are against
him, and those that favor him, will agree in pitying of him; the one, for a
Fault he was necessitated to commit; the others, for having acquitted himself
of what he owed, by a fault.

The Court was at that time at Poitiers, as I have said, and Monsieur de
Chateauneuf possessed in appearance the first Place in Affairs, although the
Cardinal still possessed it in Effect. Nevertheless this Old Man's firm,
decisive, familiar way of proceeding directly opposite to the Cardinal's, began
to give a relish to his Ministry, and even began to please the Queen. The
Cardinal was too well informed thereof to suffer him to gain any more ground;
and it is very probable that he judged his return absolutely necessary to
remedy the Evil he dreaded in his own particular, since otherwise he little
consulted the Interest of the State; in so much that thereby he afforded the
Duke of Orleance, and the Parliament of Paris a Pretense to declare against the
Court. The Marshal d' Hoquincourt was ordered to receive Cardinal Mazarin upon
the Frontiers Luxemburg with 2000 Horse, and to attend (...) where the King
should be. He crossed the Kin^^dom without the least molestation, and arrived
Poitiers as much Master of the Court as he had (...) been. They affected to
give Monsieur de Cha^ea^neuf little share in this Return, but still without
altering any thing in the rest as to the ex^e^iou^ o^ giving him the least mark
of disfavour. The Cardinal himself made some advances to him, bu^ he being
unwilling to expose himself, and con^^^dering that it was neither safe, nor
honorable for a Man of his Age and Experience, to continue (...) the
management of Affairs under his Enemy, an^ that he should undoubtedly
continually be expos'^ to whatever Mortifications he should be pleased t^
impose upon him; he took this Pretense to retire that whereas, by his Advice,
it had been resolv'^ that the King should remove to Angouleme, tha^ Design was
altered without having communicated it to him; and at the same time the Siege
of An^gers resolved upon, contrary to his Sentiments: I^ so much that having
taken his Leave of the King he retired to Tours. The Court departed soon after
to go to Angers, where the Duke de la Rochefoucault had made the People rise,
and that Province had declared it self for the Prince, at the very time that
the Duke of Orleance and the Pa^liament of Paris joined with him against the
Court.

All France seemed in suspense, in expectation of the Event of that Siege,
which might have produced great Consequences, had the Defense of it proved long
enough, or vigorous enough to stop the King. For besides that, the Prince
thereby might have secured the best Places, and best Neighboring Provinces, it
is most certain that the Example of the Duke of Orleance, and of the Parliament
of Paris, would have been followed by the most considerable part of the
Kingdom. In effect, had the Court been forced to raise that Siege, it would
have been reduced to great Extremes, and the King's Person had been exposed to
great dangers^ had it happened at the time the Duke of Nemours entered France
with the Army from Flanders and the Prince's Old Troops, without meeting any
Resistance. This Army passed the River Seine at M^nte, where the Duke of
Beaufort, who commanded the Duke of Orleance's Forces, joined the said Duke of
Nemours, and together marched with an Army of 7000 Foot, and 3000 Horse,
toward the River Loire, where they were certain of Blois and Orleance. But
whether Angers were not in a Condition to hold out a Siege, by the Division of
the Inhabitants, or whether the Duke de Rohan was unwilling to venture his Life
and Fortune in confiding in People that seemed wavering and astonished, he
delivered up the place to the King without much Resistance, and was allowed to
retire to the Duke of Orleance at Paris.

Things were in this condition when the Prince removed from La Bergerie, where
he had remained three Weeks, without Count d' Harcourt's, who was on the other
side of the River at Tonay Charante, and Master of the Bridge of Boats, having
undertaken any thing against him. Nevertheless as the Number and Goodness of
his Forces was very much inferior to the King's Army, he avoided the occasions
of being constrained to so unequal a Combat. To that end he marched to la
Bernette, three Leagues distant from the King's Army, in order to have more
time to consider in case they should march up to him. He remained there some
time without any considerable Action on either side: But finding that far from
making any Progress in that Country, he was not able to remain there in sight
of Count d' Harcourt, he turned all his thoughts to the preservation of
Guienne, and to Fortify the Cities that were in his Party. To that end he
resolvd to march thither with his Army, and believed himself capable to
maintain Saintonge for some time, in leaving on the one side the Count du
Doignon in the Garrisons, the Spaniards at Talmont, and the Prince of Tarente
in Saints and Taillebourg, to hasten their Fortifications. Having thus given
his Orders, he caused his Infantry, and his Baggage to march to Talmont, in
order to be Transported by Sea to Bourdeaux, and after a long march with his
Cavalry the first day, he stopped the second at St. Andras, within four Leagues
of Bourdeaux, believing himself without the Enemy's reach. But Count d'
Harcourt, who had followed him close, arrived within sight of his Quarter, when
he least suspected it, and would certainly have forced it, had his foremost
Troops entered it without hesitation; whereas they placed themselves in Battalia
over against St. Andras, whilst the others attacked the Quarter of Baltazar,
who repulsed them with Vigor, and came to join the Prince, who got on Horse
back at the very first noise. They remained some time in sight, but the Night
proving very dark, there was no Combat, and the Prince retired without any
loss, being more obliged to the Enemies overgreat precaution for his Safety,
than to his own. Count d' Harcourt followed him no farther, and the Prince
persisting in the Design of going to Bergerac, in order to Fortify it, passed
at Libourne, of which the Count of Maure was Governor, and left Orders with
him for the continuation of some Outworks. The Marshal de la Force arrived at
Bergerac just as he did, with his Son the Marquess of Castelnau, who commanded
there; and the Duke de la Rochefoucault, who was come back from the Upper
Guienne, with the Prince of Conty, repaired thither also.

At that time those Factions and Partialities began to appear at Bourdeaux,
which ruined the Prince's Party in Guienne, divided his House, and separated
hi^ nearest Relations from his Interests, the which finally reduced him to seek
a Retreat among the Spaniards, for whom he has often saved Flanders. I will
relate the causes of so great a Change as briefly as I can, in its proper
place, when I come to rehearse the Effects thereof. At present I pass to the
recital of what the Prince did during that Interval. His chief care was
speedily to repair the Towns of Guienne, and particularly to put Bergerac in a
condition of Defense: He employed some days about it with great Application, at
which time he received intelligence that his Affairs decayed in Saintonge; That
the Count du Doignon was shut up within his Garrisons, and durst not peep out
of them, through his us^al Jealousies; That the Prince of Tarente, on his side,
had received some disadvantage in a Combat near Pons; That Saints, which he
judged capable of sustaining a long Siege, by the Works that had been made
there, and by reason of the Garrison, which was composed of his best Forces,
had notwitstanding surrendered it self, without any considerable Defense; and
that Taillebourg was besieged, and ready to follow the Example of Saints. He
was moreover informed, that the Marquess of St. Luc assembled a Body in order
to oppose the Prince of Conty, who had taken Caudecote, and some other places
of small Consequence. This last Evil was the only one he could any ways remedy;
but whereas the Marquess was ^^ill at a distance from the Prince of Conty, he
did not think it proper to pass into the Upper Guienne, without being more
particularly informed of what passed at Bourdeaux: To which end, he writ to the
Princess, and to Madame de Longueville to repair to Libourne, where he arrived
at the same time with them. He only tarried there a day, and gave what Orders
he could to prevent the Progress of the Evil, which Division began to create in
his Party, and in his Family. After which, he went away with the Duke de la
Rochefoucault to join the Prince of Conty, who was at Staffort, four Leagues
beyond Again; And being informed by a Courier near Libourne, that St. Luc was
marching toward Staffort, he judged his presence would be very necessary
there, and therefore advanced with all the speed imaginable, and found the
Prince of Conty, who assembled his Quarters, being persuaded that St. Luc would
attack him. This Marquess being at Miradoux with the Regiments of Champayne and
Lorrain, his Cavalry being lodged apart in Villages and Farms, on a sudden the
Prince resolved to march all Night, to surprise the Quarters of his Cavalry,
and set insta^tly forward with the Duke de la Rochefoucault: and though the Way
were long, and the Road bad, he arrived before day at a Bridge, where the Enemy
had a Guard of Twelve or Fifteen Horse. He caused them immediately to be
charged, and those who made their escape, having alarmed all the rest, they got
on Horseback. Some Squadrons faced him near Miradoux, the which he charged,
and easily broke them. Six Regiments were defeated, and he took abundance of
Equipage, and many Prisoners; after which he retired toward Miradoux, a small
City situate on the top of a Hill, of which it contains one half, and has no
other Fortification than an ill Dith, and a single Wall, to which the Houses
are adjoining. At break of Day St. Luc placed all his Forces in Battalia upon a
Level before the Gate of the Town. The Prince tarried at the bottom of the Hill
for those the Prince of Conty was to bring him, which arrived soon after: But
whereas the ascent is pretty steep, and very long, and that the Soil is fat in
Winter time, and (...) with Ditches and Furrows, the Prince judged it was
impossible to march up to the Enemies in Battalia, without disording himself,
nay, without breaking himself before he could come up to them. Therefore he
only caused his Infantry to advance instantly, and forced the Enemy's to retire
from some Posts they had possessed themselves of, by Firing at them. Two or
three Squadrons also engaged, and the whole day past in Skirmishes, St. Lu^ not
quitting the high Ground he was posted upon, and the Prince not thinking it fit
to attack him in so Advantageous a Post without Canon, which he could not have
until the next day. He ordered two Pieces to be sent for, and in the mean time
judging that the Report of his Arrival would surprise his Enemies more than the
Advantage he had gained over them, he set some Prisoners at Liberty, in order
to carry the News of it to St. Luc, which soon produced the Effect he expected;
for the Soldiers were terrified at it, and it caused such a Consternation even
among the Officers, that they had hardly patience to tar^y till Night, to
conceal their Retreat, and fly to Ley^oure. The Prince, who had ^ore-seen this
Retreat, placed Corpse de Guard so near the Enemy's, that Notice was given him
of their Retreat as soon as they moved; but it may be said, that his extreme
Diligence hindered him from defeating them absolutely; for without tarrying
until the Foot was got into the Road, where he might have cut them in pieces
with ease, he charged them upon the edge of the Ditch of Miradoux, and falling
with Sword in Hand upon the Battalion of Champayne and Lorraine, he overthrew
them into the Ditch, where they demanded Quarter, flinging down their Arms. But
whereas it was impossible to get at them on Horseback, they found means to get
into Miradoux again, not with a design to defend the place, but to save their
Lives. The Prince of Conty fought all along next the Prince his Brother, who
followed the Marquess of St. Luc and the Runaways, as far as Leytoure, and then
came back to Invest Miradoux, into which Major General Marins, Cominges,
together with several other Officers were got. The Prince caused them to be
summoned, not imagining that a beaten Party, without Ammunition, o^ Provisions,
would undertake to defend so weak a Place. And indeed they offered immediately
to surrender it; but the Prince, who was unwilling to let such good Infantry
escape, and did not value the place, insisted to have them Prisoners of War, or
to oblige them not to serve in six Months time; which Conditions appeared so
hard to them, that they resolved to Defend the place themselves, and to make
amends for the shame they had suffered the day before, instead of augmenting it
by such a Capitulation. They found moreover that the Inhabitants had
Provisions, and considered that the Prince was not in a condition to make
Lines: They believed that it would be easy to send them Powder, Match, and
Lead, as indeed the Marquess of St. Luc did the following day, and still
continued to refresh them with all Necssaries, as long as the Siege lasted.
During these Transactions the Prince sent back the Prince of Conty to
Bourdeaux, and soon found that it had been better for him to receive Miradoux
on the Conditions that were offered him, than to engage on a Siege, wanting
every thing, as he did, not so much as being certain to get any Canon. However
as we are often necessitated to continue cal^ly what we have begun in a Heat,
he resolved to persist in his Enterprise to the end, hoping thereby to astonish
his Enemies. To that end he got two Pieces of Ordnance from Again, the one a
Ten, and the other a Twelve Pounder, with a small quantity of Balls; he
imagining that number sufficient to make a Breach, and take the Town by Storm,
before Count d' Harcourt who was on his March thither, could come up to him. He
made himself Master of some Houses pr^tty near the Gates, where those two
Pieces of Ordnance were placed in a Battery, and did a great deal of Execution
in the Walls; but the Balls not holding out, he was forced to give Soldiers
Money to gather up the Balls that had been shot, out of the Ditches. The
Enemies made a pretty good Defense, considering their scarcity of Ammunition,
and they made two Sallies with a great deal of Vigor. In fine, the Breach
began to appear reasonable, and the Wall being fallen with Houses that were
adjoining to it, had made a considerable Overture; but this Rubbish served the
Besieged instead of a new Retrenchment, by reason that the top of the House
where the Breach was made being fallen into the Cellar, they set it on fire,
and retrenched themselves on the other side; in so much that this burning
Cellar became a Ditch, impossible to be crossed. This Obstacle stopped the
Prince, who was unwilling to hazard an Attack, which certainly would have
discouraged his Men, and encouraged his Enemies. Therefore he resolved to make
another Breach in a place where the Houses had no Cellars, and had not fired
above a day against it, when he was informed that Count d' Harcourt was
Marching toward him, and would be the next day at Miradoux. Their Forces being
too unequal to hazard a Combat, he was forced to raise the Siege, and to retire
to Staffort, where he arrived without having been pursued. This City is neither
larger, nor stronger than Miradoux, but whereas Count d' Harcourt was on the
other side of the Garonne, and that he could only cross it at Auvilars, the
Prince being Master of the other side of the Country, separated his Quarters,
supposing it was sufficient to place some near Auvilars, and to Order Parties
to be continually detached on that side, to be in^orm'd of whatever the Enemies
should undertake. But he did not consider, that new Forces, and new Officers
generally execute what is commanded them in a very different manner from those
who have more Experience: And this Order, which would have been sufficient to
secure a Camp, was like to ruin the Prince, and to expose him to the shame of
being surpised and defeated; by reason that none of the Parties that were
Commanded followed his Orders, but instead of getting Intelligence of Count d'
Harcourt's Motions, they fell a pillaging the Neighboring Villages, in so much
that he crossed the River, and marched in Battalia in the middle of the
Prince's Quarters, and came within a quarter of a League of the place where he
was, before any Alarm was given, or he received the least Notice of it.
Finally, some Men that had been pursued having brought him this News with the
usual Consternation on such Occasions, he mounted on Horseback, followed b^
Marsin, the Duke de la Rochefoucault, and the Marquess of Montespan, to observe
the Enemies Designs, but before he had gone five hundred Yards, he saw that
their Squadrons detached themselves in order to attack his Quarters. In this
Extremity he immediately sent Orders to his farthest Quarters ^o get on
Horseback, and to join his Infantry which was encamped under Staffort, the
which he caused to March to Boue, there to cross the Garonne in Boats, and to
retire to Again. He sent all his Baggage to St. Mary's, having left a Captain
and Threescore Musketeers at Staffort, with a Piece of Canon, which he could
not carry along with him.

Count d' Harcourt made no better use of this Advantage than he had done before
at Ton^y-Charante, and at St. Andras; for instead of pursuing the Prince, and
of falling upon him in the disorder of a Retreat he made without Horse, being
moreover constrained ^o cross the Garonne to secure himself, he stopped to Invest
that Quarter which was nearest to Staffort, called Le Pergan, where three or
four Hundred Horse of the Prince's and the General's Guards were lodged, and
thus allowed him twelve or thirteen hours, of which he employed the best part
at B^^^, in causing his Men to cross the River in the greatest Disorder
imaginable, in so much that had they been attacked, they had certainly been cut
to pieces^ Sometime after the Prince's Arrival at Again with all his Infant^y,
some Squadrons appeared on the other side of the River, which were advanced in
order to take some Baggage, which was ready to cross the River; but they were
repulsed with vigor by 60 Horse of the Regiment of Mon^^span, which afforded
time enough to some Boats filled with Musketeers to cross over to them, and to
force the Enemies to retire. That very day the Prince received Intelligence
that his Horse was arrived at St. Mary, without having fought, or lost any part
of his Equipage, and that his Guards defended themselves still in Le Pergan,
where it was impossible to succor them. The next day they yielded themselves
Prisoners of War; and that was the only Advantage Count d' Harcourt drew from
an Occasion, in which his Fortune, and the Negligence of the Prince's Men had
offered him an entire Victory. These ill Successes were soon followed by the
Sedition of Again, the which obliged the Prince to turn his greatest hopes
toward Paris, and to make it the Seat of War, as I shall relate in the sequel.

The War was maintained in Guienne much more through the Vigilance and
Reputation of the Prince of Conde, than by the Valor and Number of his Forces;
and Count d' Harcourt by his Conduct and Fortune had already repaired all the
disadvantage which the Marquess of St. Luc's Defeat at Miradoux had occasioned.
The Siege of Miradoux was raised; The Prince of Conde's Guards, and three or
four Hundred Horse had been taken at le Pergan, and the Prince of Conde himself
with the rest of his Forces had been constrained to quit S^affort, and to cross
the River Garonne at Boue, and to retire at Again: But the Divisions of that
City soon made that Prince sensible that it would no longer remain in his
Party, than while constrained to it by his Presence, or a strong Garrison. And
therefore he resolved to throw the Regiment of Foot, of Conty into it, and to
take possession of one of the Gates of the City, in order to oblige the People
to receive a Garrison: But whereas this Design was not kept secret, it was soon
rumored throughout the City. Upon which the Inhabitants immediately betook
themselves to their Arms, and made Barricadoes; The Prince of Conde being
informed therewith, got on Horseback, to stop the Tumult by his Presence, and
to remain Master of the Gate of Grave until the aforesaid Regiment had taken
possession of it: But the arrival of the Soldiers increased the Disorder,
instead of appeasing it: They entered and made a halt in the first Street, and
though the Prince of Conde, the Prince of Conty, and all the Officers endeav'd to
appease the Disorder, they could not hinder the Streets from being barricado'd
in a moment. However the People still preserved their Respect toward the
Prince of Conde, and toward all the General Officers, but at the same time the
Animosity increased in all places where his Presence was wanting. It was
impossible that things should remain long in that condition; the Soldiers, as
I have already related, had taken Possession of the Gate of Grave, and half the
adjoining Street; The People were in Arms, all the Streets were barricado'd,
and Corpse ^e Guards placed every where; Night drew on, which would have
increased the Disorder, and the Prince of Conde found himself necessitated
either to quit the Town shamefully, or cause it to be p^ilag'd and burnt,
either of which apparently would have ruined his Affairs: For if he quitted the
Town, the King's Forces would be receivd into it, and if he burnt it, it would
occasion the Revolt of the whole Province against him. Those Reasons induced
him to endeavor an Accommodation, which in appearance might save his
Authority, and serve for a pretense to Pardon the Inhabitants of Again. The Duke
de la Rochefoucault spoke to some of the most considerable Citizens, and
prevailed with them to go to the Town Hall, there to Depute some among them to
the Prince to beg his Pardon, and to entreat him to come to their Assembly,
there to prescribe the means to preserve Again in the Submission and Loyalty
they had sworn to him. The Prince accordingly went thither, and told them, that
it had always been his Intention to preserve their Freedom entire; and that the
only end for which he had sent Soldiers thither, was to ease them, and help
them to Guard the City; but that since they did not desire it, he was willing
to remove them, provided the City would raise a Regiment of Foot at their own
Charge, and give him the Names of the Officers. These Conditions were easily
agreed to; the Barricado's were removed, the Soldiers marched out again, and
the City remained in appearance as quiet and full of Submission, as it was
before the Sedition. The Prince of Conde, who could not confide in those
Appearances, remained some time in Again, to put the City in its former state
again; at which time he received the News, that the Army from Flanders,
Commanded by the Duke of Nemours, and the Duke of Orleance's Forces, Commanded
by the Duke of Beaufort, were joined, and on their March toward the River
Loire. This Joy was notwithstanding mixed with some Disquiet: On the one hand,
he saw an Army from Spain, he had so long expected, in the middle of the
Kingdom, which might come to the Relief of Montro^d, or to join with him in
Guienne: But at the same time he was also informed that the Dukes of Nemours
and of Beaufort could no ways agree, and that their Division was grown to a
very dangerous pitch. Their Armies being separate, it was impossible for them
to keep the Field before the King's Army, Commanded by the Marshals of Turenne
and Hoquincourt, reinforced by the Troops ^he Cardinal had brought along with
him, besides the Neighborhood of the Court. The Duke of Nemours's Orders were
to cross the River of Loire, in order to relieve Montrond, and to March
immediately toward Guienne; whereas the Orders the Duke of Beaufort daily
received from the Duke of Orleance were directly opposite. Monsieur could not
consent that the Army should march away so far from Paris, fearing lest the
People, or the Parliament should alter their minds, seeing the Duke of
Nemours's Army march into Guienne, while the King's remained in their
Neighborhood. The Coadjutor of Paris, in whom Monsieur confided most at that
time, seconded this Advice, and augmented the fear and Natural I^resolutions of
that Prince. By keeping the Army on this side the River Loire, he made it of no
use to the Prince of Conde, whose Enemy he was, and made himself more
considerable at Court, by showing that being Master of Monsieur's Conduct, it
was in his power to advance or keep back the Progress of the Army; and thus
omitted no means to obtain a Cardinal's Cap. Chavigny on his side harbored as
great Designs; he expected to govern Monsieur, by making him sen^^^le that ^e
governed the Prince; and flattered him^^^^ to become Master of the Prince's
Conduct, by showing him he was Master of Monsieur's. His Projects did not stop
there; from the very beginning of the War he had taken his Measures to become ^
Negotiator of Peace, and had united himself to the Duke of Ro^an, believing
that he might be equally useful to him with Monsieur, and with the Prince: He
likewise thought he had taken all necessary precautions toward the Cardinal by
means of Fabret, Governor of Sedan; and whereas he ^ut no Bounds to his
Ambition and his Hopes, he did not question but in making a particular Peace,
he should be chosen with the Cardinal, to conclude the General Peace. He
fancied moreover that making use of the Credit the Prince of Conde could give
him among the Spaniards, he should have all the Credit of the Good Successes,
and the Cardinal on the contrary all the Shame, and blame of ^he ill Events:
And that thus he should enter into the Ministry of Affairs again, either with
the Glory of having concluded the Peace, or with the Advantage of laying the
blame of it on Mazarin, in case it should not be effected. In order thereunto
he writ several times to the Prince to press him to quit Guienne; he
represented to him, how necessary his Presence was in the Army; that in
suffering it to be destroyed, he would lose his last Stake; but that in making
Progresses in the heart of the Kingdom, and in the King's sight, he would not
only immediately retrieve his Affairs in Guienne, but all the rest of his
Party. The Prince of Conde suffered himself easily to be persuaded by
Chavigny's Reasons; but the principal Motive which induced him to it, was his
desire of quitting Guienne at a time when the weakness of his Army obliged him
continually to fly before Count d' Harcourt. He communicated his Design to the
Duke de la Rochefoucault, and to Marsin; both of them represented to him
equally, what was to be fear^d, and hoped for, in so doing, without giving him
any Advice about it; but at the same time both desired earnestly to follow him.
He chose the Duke de la Rochefoucault to accompany him, and left Marsin with
the Prince of Conty, relying absolutely upon his Care for the maintaining his
Party in Guienne, and the preserving of Bourdeaux, not only among the Divisions
that had been fomented among the People, and in the Parliament, but also to
hinder the separate Interests of the Prince of Conty, and of Madame de
Longueville from augmenting their Mis-understandings, and thereby cause the
loss of that City, in which Affairs were in the state I am going to relate.

The Inhabitants were divided in two Cabals: The Rich Citizens composed the
one, who were resolved to maintain the Authority of their Magistrates, and to
render themselves so considerable, and so necessary in the City, that the
Prince and Parliament might look upon them as those who could most contribute
toward their Preservation. The other Cabal consisted of the meanest, and most
seditious part of the City, who having often assembled themselves without any
Design at a place near the Castle of the Ha, called L' Hormee, at last took the
Name of it themselves. The Parliament was as much divided as the People; the
Members of that Body who were against the Court were divided in two Factions;
The one was called the Great Fronde, and the other the Small one. Although both
of them agreed in being for the Prince, they were very much opposite in all the
rest: In the beginning L' Hormee had been united to both, and had often
separated from it according to the diverse Motives of Interest, which commonly
sway those sor^ of People: But in the end the Prince of Conty and the Duchess
of Longueville being unhappily ^allen out, augmented the Credit and Insolence
of that Faction to that degree, in order to draw them on their side, that
thereby they advanced the loss of the Party, in exasperating the Parliament,
and the rest of the People, and in giving way to several Plots, and other
Contrivances of the Court, which finally brought Bourdeaux back to its former
Allegiance to the King. I shall only speak en pas^ent of the Subjects which
occasioned all these Disorders, without entering upon the particulars of many
things, that cannot be written. The Prince of Conty having suffered himself to
be persuaded by some of his People, who were gained by Cardinal Mazarin, to
fall out publicly with the Duchess of Longueville, upon pretenses, which good
Manners, and Consanguinity should have obliged him to conceal; out of hatred to
one another, they kindled the Fury of the Hormee, and sacrificed, in so many
occasions, the greatest Advantage of the Party to their Passions and private
Animosities; that instead of establishing their Authority, thereby to make
themselves useful to the Prince, as they both designed to do, they contributed
to the Disorders and Seditions of the people, to that degree, that they were
reduced themselves to abandon the Prince, and to submit to whatever Conditions
the Court was pleased to impose upon them. The Duke de la Rochefoucault, being
sensible, by a long Experience, that their mutual Grandeur depended on their
Union, had made it his business to maintain it among them, none being so
cap^ble of doing it as himself, ever since the War of Paris. But at that time
Madame de Longueville imagined that it would be more for her Advantage, to take
new Measures, and it happened that the means she made use of to that end,
caused a Division between her and her Brothers. The Prince of Conty was
inclin^d to a Peace, being weary, and tired with a War in which he had only
engaged himself to oblige the Duchess of Longueville, which he repented of, as
soon as ever he fell out with her. He has alleged since, in order to his
Justification, that the Prince, after having signed a Writing, by which he
obliged himself not to make a Treaty without obtaining the Government of
Provence for him, had notwithstanding, absolutely neglected his Interests. But
the real cause of his falling off, was that Animosity, I have mentioned,
against his Sister, the which transported him to a degree of Passion and
Jealousy against her, that had been much more excusable in a Lover than a
Brother. On the other hand, although the Prince of Conde spoke less than he about
the Duchess of Longueville's Conduct, he was as much dissatisfied about it in
his Heart; he was sensible of her Engagements with the Duke of Nemours, and
what it had been like to produce against his real Interests; and he feared
moreover she might enter into new ones, which might yet prove of worse
Consequence for him. That which augmented the Duchess of Longueville's Trouble
at that time was, that she thought it impossible ever to be reconciled to her
Husband, by reason of the ill impressions he had received about her; and by his
being persuaded that she had too great a share in that War. She had likewise
vainly attempted to be reconciled to the Court by the Princess Palatin's
Intermission. In so much that finding her self equally ruined on all sides, she
imagined the only means to re-establish her self was to fo^m a Party in
Bourdeaux, that might prove so powerful, as to recocer her Credit with the
Prince of Conde, or with the Court. To that end she judged nothing so proper,
as to join with L' Hormee, and to engage the most Considerable persons into the
same Party. On the contrary, the Prince of Conty, to (...) his Vengeance, us^d
all his Endeavors to ^^in his Sister^s Credit among the most considerable of
that Faction, in order to engage them on his ^^^e, choosing rather to permit
them all manner of ^xcesses, than to suffer them to be engaged with a Person he
was so much exasperated against. Therefor the Prince of Conde foreseeing what
this great Opposition of Sentiments was going to produce in his Party, judging
also that this Animosity and Division would increase by his Absence, left
Marsin, as I have said before, in order to remedy as much as in him lay those
great Disorders, and on all Occasions to hinder the Prince of Conty and the
Duchess of Longueville from undertaking any thing which might prove
prejudicial to him during his absence. So that having regulated with Marsin,
and with Laisne what related to the Army in Guienne, the Cabals of Bourdeaux,
and those of his Family, he sent for the Prince of Conty to Again; and leaving
him the management of all things, he desired him to follow the Counsels of
Marsin and Laisne. He also seemed to repose a great deal of Confidence in the
President Viole, though in reality he was persuaded that he left no body in
Bourdeaux, in whom he could truly confide, besides the two first I have named.

Having thus disposed all things, he prepared for his departure from Again, in
order to join the Duke of Nemours's Army. This Journey was long, and
accompanied with Difficulties one could hardly expect to overcome. Count d'
Harcourt was near Again, and there were too many Royalists in the City, not to
give him Notice of the Prince's departure. Even those of his own Party had
suspected this Journey, and it had been rumored about before it was resolved
upon. He was to Travel about Sixscore Leagues upon the same Horses: Count d'
Harcourt might not only cause the Prince to be followed by Parties, but besides
might have given the Court a speedy Account of his March, and ordered all the
Cities and Garrisons thereabouts to oppose his Passage: Moreover the Prince
could not trust many with his Design, and a small Attendance was not capable to
secure him: He was besides obliged to persuade every body, that he was going to
Bourdeaux, and to hinder the Officers of the Army from accompanying him, under
pretense that might not discover his real Intention. To that end he left the
Prince of Conty at Again, and pretending to go to Bourdeaux for two or three
days only, he commanded all the Officers and Voluntie^s to remain at Again with
his Brother. He departed from thence on Palm Sunday at Noon, with the Duke de
la Rochefoucault, the Prince of Marsillac, Guitault, Chavaignac, Gourville, and
a Valet de Chamber. The Marquess of Levy ^arry'd for him with Horses at
Languais, one of the Duke of Bouillon's Houses, where Bercenes, Captain of the
Duke de la R^chefoucault's Guards, likewise met them: And whereas the Marquess
of Levy had a Pasport from Count d' Harcourt, to retire to his House in
Auvergne with his Attendance, the Prince of Conde, and those that accompanied
him, passed with him, as if they had been those very Servants whose Names were
incerted in the said Pasport, though at last he resolved not to make use of it.
The greatest Fatigue of that Journey was the extraordinary speed he was obliged
to make, marching Day and Night, and almost always upon the same Horses, and
without ever staying two hours in one and the same place, either to sleep, or
refresh himself. They baited at two or three Gentlemen's Houses, Friends to the
Marquess of Levy, there to rest some few hours, and to buy Horses; but those
Gentlemen were so far from suspecting the Prince of Conde to be what ^e was,
that at one of their Meals, at which time people speak their Thoughts with most
freedom, he was informed of some things that concerned his nearest Relations,
which pe^haps till then he had been ignorant of. In fine, after having marched
through the Vice-County of Turenne, and through Charlies in Auvergne, he
arrived on the Saturday at Night at Bec-d' Alier, within two Leagues of La
Charity, where he crossed the River Loire without any hindrance, although two
Troops of Horse were quartered in La Charity, commanded by Bussy Rabu^in. From
thence he dispatched Gourville to P^ru to acquaint his Royal Highness and
Chavigny with his coming; he past Easter Day in Cosnes, where there was a Guard
kept; and whereas the Court was at Gien, he told every body, that he and his
Companions were going to the King. However concluding that it would be
impossible for him to follow the Road of the Court long without being
discovered, he resolved to quit it, to take the Road that goes to Chastillon:
He was in danger of Repenting his not having done it sooner; for having met two
Couriers, one of them kn^w Guitault, and though he made no stop to speak to him,
his Countenance altered sufficiently, to persuade him that he suspected the
Prince to be there. He was soon after fully informed about it, for having met
the Prince's Valet de Chambre^ who lag'd behind, he stopped him, and threatening
to kill him, he learnt that his Suspicion was well grounded. This Accident not
only obliged the Prince to quit the Road immedia^ely, but also to leave
Bercenes, Captain of the Duke de la Rochefoucault's Guards, in some ruined
Buildings that stood near a Bridge, in order to kill the Courier, in case he
came that way, which seemed to be his nearest, to inform the Court of the
Prince of Conde's March: But his good Fortune made him take another way,
whereby he soon carried the News of what he had seen to Gien. Whereupon St.
Maure was commanded with Twenty Horse to way-lay the Prince between Chastillon
and the Duke of Nemours's Army, and to take him dead or alive. The Prince of
Conde being sensible that the meeting of the aforesaid Courier would infallibly
discover his passage, marched with all speed toward Chastillon: But whereas we
were necessitated to Travel 35 Leagues that day, without changing our Horses,
the necessity of Baiting made us lose a great deal of time, and afforded St.
Maure time enough to come up to us. Moreover the Prince was like to be taken by
another Accident; for being arrived at the Canal of Briare, he met the
Quarter Masters of two or three Regiments of Horse, who were coming to take up
Quarters there; and whereas the whole Body was coming thither from different
places, it was very difficult to take a safe way. Chavaignac, who was
acquainted with a Gentleman thereabouts, called la Bruslerie, resolved to go to
him, and took Guitault along with ^im, in order to get some Provisions for the
Prince of Conde: But that day being destined for Adventures, just as Chavaignac
was going out of that House in search of the Master thereof, an Officer of the
aforementioned Regiments arrived there, and all that the Mistress of the House
could do, dreading a Disorder in her House, by the Encounter of Persons of
different Parties, was to send her Daughter to Guitault to give him Notice that
an Officer belonging to the King's Forces was arrived there. In the mean while,
the Prince, who expected News from Chavaignac, and from Guitault, had been
obliged to remove from the place where they had left him, by the arrival of
these Forces. He had sent his Val^t de Chamber to Chastillon, to order the
Keeper of the Park to keep the Door open; and thus he was only attended by the
Duke de la Rochefoucault and the Prince of Marsillac. However they continued
their March still toward Chastillon. The Prince of Marsillac went a hundred
Paces before the Prince, and the Duke de la Rochefoucault followed him at the
same distance, to the end that being warned by either of them, he might have
some Advantage to make his Escape. They had not traveled long in this manner,
when they heard the firing of some Pistols on that side where the Valet de
Chamber was gone, and at the same time discovered four Troopers on their left
hand; upon which concluding they were pursued, they resolved to Charge those
four Men, and marched up to them with a Resolution to suffer themselves to be
killed rather than taken. But being come nearer to them, they found it was
Chavaignac, who was in search of them with three Gentlemen; and they arrived
together at Chastillon without any danger. The Prince of Conde received Tidings
there of the Army he was going to join, and was informed that it lay toward
Lory, near the Forest of Orleance, within Eight Leagues of Chastillon; he heard
moreover that Ten or Twelve Chevaux-Legers of the King's Guard, together with
some Officers were at that time at Chastillon; whereupon he resolved to remove
from thence about Midnight with speed, with a Guide for Lory. This Guide had
like to have occasioned his Ruin; for after a long March, he found that he was
but within a short League of Gien, in so much that going about to quit that
Road, to tu^n toward Lory, the Prince passed within Thirty Yards of the place
where St. Maure lay in wait for him: But whether he did not know him, or durst
not Charge him, nothing opposed his Passage, and he arrived at Lory, where he
heard certain News of his Army, which was but two Leagues distant from them.
Altho^ he concealed himself with the same precautions he had used elsewhere,
both he and the Duke de la Rochefoucaul^ were discovered by several Inhabitants
of the place, of which many were the King's and the Duke of Orleance's
Servants. But this proved an Advantage instead of a Prejudice to him, for some
of them got on Horseback, with him, and accompanied him to the Army. He met
the Vanguard at the entrance of the Forest of Orleance; some Troopers coming up
to him, and he having discovered himself to them, the whole Army was surpised
with an excess of Joy that cannot be expressed. His Presence had never been so
necessary as it was at that time, and had never been less expected. The
Animosity between the Dukes of Nemours and Beaufort daily increased, and
thereby the sole Prop of the Party daily perished through the Division of the
Chiefs, at a time when the Presence of the King, and his Army, should have
obliged them most to prefer the Public Good to their particular Quarrels. The
Prince was too much concerned to put an end to those Differences, not to
endeavor it with all the earnestness imaginable, which he effected the more
easily, by reason that his Arrival taking the Command from them, at the same
time it removed the main cause of their Jealousy and Hatred. Affairs standing
in this Condition, the Army marched to Lory, where they rested a day, three or
four days more were employed in going to Montargis, which surrendered without
any Resistance. The Army soon quitted that place, by reason that it was stored
with Corn and Wine, which might be of use, upon occasion; as also to show an
Example of Mildness, which might prove advantageous to his Party in the other
Cities. The Army marched from Montargis, and went to Chateaurenard: Gourville
arrived there at the same time from Paris, to give the Prince an account of his
Friends S^ntiments about his Conduct toward Monsieur, and toward the
Parliament. Their Advices proved very different, for some counseled him to
remain with the Army, by reason that the Reso^^^ions of the Duke of Orleance,
and of the Parliament would always depend on the Event of that War; and that
while he should be at the Head of a Victorious Army, the King^s Power would
reside in his hands: Whereas in going to Paris, he took away from his Forces
the Reputation which his Presence had given them, since he was necessitated to
leave the Command thereof to the same Persons, whose Division and Incapacity
had been like to produce such great Disorders. Chavigny on the contrary assured
the Prince that his Presence was absolutely necessary in Paris; That the Cabals
of ^he Court, and of the Cardinal of Rets, daily increased in the Parliament;
and that finally they would infallibly engage the Duke of Orleance on their
side, unless the Prince came in Person to free him from his dependency on them,
and to put the Duke of Rohan and Chavigny in possession of a place they could
no longer dispute with the Cardinal of R^ts without him. They all in general
agreed, preferably to all other things, to undertake some considerable Action
against the King's Army, all depending on a Successful Event. At that very time
the Prince of Conde received Intelligence that the Marshal of Hoquincourt's
Brigade lay still in separate Quarters, pretty near Chateau^Renard, and that
the next day it was to join again with Marshal de Turenne's. Whereupon he
resolved immediately to March up with all his Army to Marshal d' Hoquincourt's,
before he could have time to assemble his Forces, to retire toward Marshal de
Turenne; and the Success answe^'d his Expectation. He entered first into two
Quarters, which alarmed the rest; b^t that did not hinder him from taking five
of them one after another: The four first hardly made any resistance, but the
M^rshal d' Hoquincourt having placed himself in Battalia with 800 Horse upon
the border of a Brook, which could only be crossed one Man of a Breast upon a
very narrow decayed Bank, seemed resolved to dispu^e that Passage; yet
no^withstanding the Duke of Nemours had no sooner past this Defile with three
or four Men, but the Marshal, who judged that all the Army was there, retired
behind that Quarter, and suffered it to be pillaged, placing himself in Battle
again, in hop^s of an Opportunity to Charge them during the Pl^nder. This
Quarter made no more Resistance than the others, but whereas those Houses were
covered with Thatch, they being set on fire, the Marshal d' Hoquincourt soon
discovered by that Light the Number of the Forces that were past; and finding
that there was not above One Hundred Horse, he advanced to Charge them with
above 800. The Prince of Conde observing this Cavalry that was falling upon
him, strait formed a Squadron of what Men he had about him, and marched up to
his E^emy with so unequal a Number, that i^ seemed, as if Chance had assembled
all the General Officers of his Army in that place, to make him s^nsible, what
a Loss he might have sustained by an ill Event. The first Rank, in which he
fought himself, was composed of the Dukes of Nemours, of Beaufort, and de la
Rochefoucault, the Prince of Marsillac, the Marquess of Clinchant, who
commanded the Spanish Forces, Count Tavannes, Lieutenant General, of Guitault,
Gaucourt, and some other Officers: Both the Squadrons fired at a small
distance, and yet neither of them gave ground; but two others having soon after
charged the Prince's, the Duke of Nemours was shot through the Body with a
Pistol, and his Horse killed under him. The Prince of Conde's Squadron, not
being able to sustain two Charges so close to one another, ^etird an Hundred
steps in disorder toward the Quarter that was on fire; but the Prince, and the
General Oflicers who were with him, riding up to the said Squadron, stopped it.
The Enemies contented themselves with having (...) it give ground, without
breaking it: Some Officers and a few Troopers only advanced, and the Prince of
Marsillac, who chanced to be Twelve or Fifteen Yards behind the Squadron that
gave ground, turned back upon an Officer, whom he ^^^^'d between the two
Squadrons. The Prince of Conde, as I have declared already, stopped his, and
forced it to turn back upon his Enemies, who had not dared to pursue it, for
fear of its being sustained by some Infantry. During this Disorder Thirty Horse
had crossed the Defile: The Prince of Conde placed himself immediately at the
Head of them with the Duke de la Rochefoucault, and attacking Marshal d'
Hoquincourt in the Flank, he caused him to be charged in the Front by the
Squadron where he had lost the Duke of Beaufort. This made an end of
overthrowing the Enemies, of which part threw themselves into Bleneau, and the
rest were pursued three or four Leagues toward Auxere, without their
endeavoring to Rally. They lost all their Baggage, and Three Hundred Horse
were taken. This Overthrow might have been greater, had not the Prince been
informed that Marshal Turenne's Army was in sight.

This News obliged him to retire to his Foot, who had quitted their Post to
Plunder, and having rallied his Forces, he marched toward Marshal Turenne, who
placed his Army in Battle in a very large Plain, within less than Musket Shot
of a very large Wood, through the midst of which the Prince of Conde was
obliged to March to come up to him. This Passage was large enough of it self to
March two Squadrons abreast: But whereas it was very Marshy, and that several
Ditches had been made to drain it, there was no coming to the Plain without
making Defiles. The Prince of Conde finding it possessed by his Enemies, threw
his Infantry to the Right and Left into the Wood which bordered it, in order to
keep the Enemy at a distance from it, and it succeeded according to his
desires: For Marshal Turenne dreading the Inconveniency of the Musquetry,
quitted his Post, to take another at a little more distance, and upon a higher
Ground than the Prince's. This Movement persuaded the Prince that he was
retiring toward Gien, and that it would be easy to beat him in the disorder
of his Retreat, before he could reach it. To this end he caused his Cavalry to
advance, and made have to make six Squadrons pass the Defiles, in order to
enter the Plain; but the Marshal of Turenne being sensible how disadvantageous
it would be for him to Combat the Prince in the Plain, he having a Victorious
Army, that was much stronger than his, resolved to turn back with Sword in
hand, upon those six Squadrons, in order to defeat those that were past, and to
stop the remainder of the Forces, that were still on the other side of the
Defile. The Prince guessing at his Intention, caused his Horse to retire again;
and thus the Defiles hindering them from coming at one another, without great
disadvantage; they only caused their Artillery to advance on both sides, and
fired a very considerable while at one another, but with a very different
success; for besides that the Marshal of Turenne's having more Artillery, and
better Guns than his Enemy's, it had the Advantage of a higher Ground over the
Princes Forces, which being very close in the passage which separated the Wood,
most of the shot did light upon them; and they lost above sixscore Men, and
several Officers, among which was Mare, Brother to the Marshal of Grancey. The
remainder of the day past in this manner. At the (...) of the Sun the Marshal
of Turenne retired (...) Gien; the Marshal of Hoquincourt, who (...) joined him
since his Defeat, remained in the (...) of the Army, and going with some
Officers (...) draw out the Squadron that was nearest to the ^^^ily, he was
discovered by the Prince, who sent him word that he would be glad to see him,
and that he might advance upon his Parole. He did ^ha^, the Prince desired, and
advancing with some Officers, he met the Prince, accompanied by the Dukes de la
Rochefoucault, and of Beaufort, and two or three more. The Conversation passed
in Civili^ies^ and Railleries on the Prince's side, and in Justifications on
the Marshal's for what had happened to him, complaining of Monsieur de Turenne,
(...) in reality and Justice it might be said, that he (...) performed two
brave and very bold Actions that day, the success of which saved both him and
the Court: For as soon as he received Intelligence that the Marshal of
Hoquincourt's Brigade, which wa^ to join him the next day, was attacked, he
marched with a very small number of Men to the place, where he was met in
Battalia, where he ^arry'd all the day for the remainder of his Forces,
exposing himself thereby to an inevitable Defeat, had the Prince marched up
directly toward him, instead of pursuing the Forces he had defeated in the
Night, for two or three Leagues: He also saved that very day the remainders of
the King's Army with great Valor and Conduct, when he turned back upon the six
Squadrons of the Prince, that had past the Defily, and by that Action stopped an
Army, which without doubt would have destroyed h^^ utterly, could it once have
been placed in Order of Battle in the same Plain where he was. The King's Army
being retired, the Prince marched his toward Chatillon, and that Night lodged
in the Quarters upon the Canal of Briare, near La Bruslerie. The next day he
repaired to Chatillon with all his Forces, the which he left two days after
under the Command of Clinchant and Count Tavannes, in order to go to Paris with
the Dukes of Beaufort and de la Rochefoucault. That Journey was of greater
Consequence than it appeared to him at that time; and I am persuaded, that the
only desire of going to Paris, there to receive the general Applause which the
Success of so perilous a Journey, and so great a Victory deserved, made him
approve Chavigny's Reasons, who earnestly desired to be countenanced by the
Prince's presence and Authority, in order to fill up the place which the
Cardinal of Rets held in the Duke of Orleance's favor. He was in hopes, as I
have already declared, to render himself equally considerable to those two
Princes, by persuading each of them, that he was the real promoter of their
Union; besides he fancied that it was the easiest way to succeed in his Project
with Fabert. He therefore pressed the Prince to come to Paris, in order to
oppose the Progress the Cardinal of Rets made upon the Duke of Orleance's Mind,
and to improve the favorable disposition the Parliament was in at that time,
having made a Decree, by which they had proscribed, and put a Price upon
Cardinal Mazarin's Head. Whatever Impressions Chavigny's Counsels made upon the
Prince, it is certain that he followed them; he was received at Paris with so
many Acclamations, and such Testimonies of public Joy, that he did not think
he had any cause to Repent his Journey. All things remained for a while in this
Condition, but whereas the Army wanted Forage about Chatillon and Montargis,
and that they durst neither remove it farther from Paris, nor bring it nearer
to it; it was removed to Estampes, where they imagined it might remain a
considerable while with safety, and abundance of all things. The Duk^ of
Nemours was not yet cured of his Wound, when the Prince received Intelligence
that some of the King's Forces, Commanded by the Count of Musse^s, and the
Marquess of St. Mesgrin, Lieuten^nt Generals, were on their March from St.
Ger^^^s and St. Cloud, with two Pieces of Canon, in (...) to Charge an Hundred
Men of the Regi^ent of Conde, who had retrenched themselves upon a Bridge, and
had broken one of the Arches of i^. Upon this News the Prince got immediately
^n Horseback with such as chanced to be about ^im; but the Report thereof
being spread through the City, all the Persons of Quality that were there went
to meet him at Boulogne, and were followed by 8 or 10000 Citizens in Arms. The
King's Forces only fired some Canon, and retired without en^ea^ouring to make
themselves Masters of the Bridge; but the Prince of Conde being willing to
improve the good Disposition of those Citizens, assigned them Officers, and
made them March towa^ds St. Denis, where he was informed that there was a
Garrison of 200 Switzers; those Forces ar^^^'d there about Night, and those
within being ^larm'd thereat, soon alarmed those without, for the Prince being
surrounded by Three Hundred Horse, selected and composed of the bravest, and
mo^^ undaunted Men of his Party, found himself dese^^ed by them at the very
first Firing of the E^emy, none but six persons remaining about him. The
remainder fled in a disorder, and fell in among the Infantry of the Citizens,
which was daunted thereat, and had certainly followed the Example of the
Gentry, had not the Prince, and those tha^ remained about him stopped them, and
made them ^nter St. Denis through old Breaches, that were unguarded. Whereupon
all those persons of Quality who had abandoned him, came back to him, every one
alleging some particular Reason to excuse his Flight, although the shame of it
was common ^o them all. The Switzers endeavored to defend some Barricado's in
the Town, but being pressed close, they retired into the Abbey, where they
surrendered themselves within two hours Prisoners of War. No Acts of Hostility
were committed against the Inhabitants or Convents, and the Prince of Conde
reti^'d back to Paris, leaving Deslande, a Captain in the Regiment of Conde,
with 200 Men in St. Denis, which was re-taken that very Night by the King's
Forces; but Deslande retired into the Church, where he held out three days.
Though no particular Circumstance rendered that Action considerable in it self,
yet it disposed the Citizens to favor the Prince; and they all praised him so
much the rather, because every one of them quoted him as a Witness of his
Courage, and the Dangers he fancied he had been exposed to in that Action. In
the mean while the Duke of Rohan and Chavigny resolved to prosecute their first
Design, and to take the Advantage of so favorable a Conjuncture, in order to
make some Propositions about an Accommodation: They imagind the Court would
sincerely accomplish whatever Fabert had proposed to them, only with a Design
to engage them with the Cardinal, who was willing to make use of them to draw
in the Duke of Orleance, and the Prince of Conde into that Abyss of
Negotiations, into the bottom of which no body could ever dive, the which all
along proved very favorable to him, and fatal to his Enemies. The first days
of the Prince's Arrival were no sooner past, but all the Intrigues and Cabals
were renewed again on all sides, and whether he were really weary of
maintaining so Penible a War, or that his abode in Paris inspired him with a
desire and hopes of Peace, for a while he quitted all other thoughts, to apply
himself to find out means to make as advantageous a one as ^e had projected.
The Duke of Rohan and Cha^^^^^ gave him great hopes about it, in order to (...)
him to entrust them with the Care of that Negotiation, and to let them go by
themselves ^ith ^^ulas to St. Germans, there to Treat about ^is and the Duke of
Orleance's Concerns. It was li^ewise proposed to send the Duke de la
Rochefou^^^^^ ^hither, and the Prince desired it for several Reasons, but he
declined it, imagining, either that the Peace was already concluded between
Monsieur and the Court underhand by Chavigny, without the Prince's
participation, or that it would not be concluded at that time, not only because
the Prince's Pretensions were too great, but likewise because the Duke of Rohan
and Chavigny would secure their own preferrably to all the rest. Thus the Duke
of Rohan, Chavigny, and Goulas went to St. Germans, with positive Orders not to
see Cardinal Mazarin, or to Treat about any thing with him. The Duke of
Orleance's Demands consisted chiefly in the Removing of the Cardinal; but the
Prince of Conde's had more Latitude, by reason that hav^ng engaged the City and
Parliament of Bordeaux in his Party, together with a great number of Persons of
Quality, he had made particular Treaties with them, by which he was engaged not
to make any with the Cour^, without comprising their Interests in it, in the
manner I shall relate hereafter. No body did in the least question the Success
of those Gentlemen's Journey; there being no likelihood that a Man of
Chavigny's Parts and Understanding, who knew the Court, and Cardinal Mazarin,
by so long an Experience, would have engaged in so great a Negotiation, having
managed it for three Months together, without being certain of the Success. But
every body was soon undeceived by the Return of those Deputies, who had, not
only treated with Cardinal Mazarin, contrary to the express Orders they had
received about it; but moreover, instead of demanding for the Prince, what was
set down in their Instructions, had only insisted chiefly, upon the
establishing of a necessary Council, almost in the form of that which the late
King had ordered upon his Deathbed; Upon which Condition they were to prevail
with the Prince to consent, that Cardinal Mazarin, accompanied by Chavigny,
should go to treat about a General Peace, in^tead of the Prince; and that it
should be Lawful for him to come back into France after the Conclusion thereof.
As those Propositions were contrary to the Prince's Interests and Sentiments,
he received them with great Indignation against Chavigny, and resolved for the
future never to give him the least knowledge of whatever he should Treat of in
Secret with the Court. To that end he gave Gourville Instructions, which were
drawn in presence of the Duchess of Chastillon, the Dukes of Nemours and de la
Rochefoucault, which contained what follows. 1. That they would hearken to no
Negotiation after that Day; and that they expected a positive Answer to all the
Articles, of Yes, or No, since they could not desist from any of them. That
they desired to Act sincerely, and consequently that they would Promise nothing
but what they were willing to perform; and that for that Reason, they would be
certain of what the Court should Promise. 2. That they desi'd Cardinal Mazarin
should immediately quit the Kingdom, and repair to Bouillon. 3. That the Duke
of Orleance, and the Prince of Conde should be empowered forthwith to Treat
about a General Peace. 4. That to that end Just and Reasonable Conditions
should be agreed upon; and that the Prince should be allowed to send into
Spain, in order to agree upon a place for the Conference. 5. That a Council
should be made, composed of unsuspected Persons, which should be agreed upon.
6. That there should be no Superintendent, and that the Revenue, Taxes,
Impositions, etc. should be regulated by a good Council^ 7. That all such who
had served Mons^^^^, or the Prince, should be restored to their Estates, and
Places, Governments, Pensions, and Assignations, which should be assigned upon
good Funds, and the like for Monsieur, and for the Princes. 8. That
Satisfaction should be given to the Duke of Orleance, upon those things he
might desire for himself, and for his Friends. 9. That the Forces and Officers
that had followed the Princes should be treated as they were before, and should
possess the same Ranks they had before. 10. That the Court should grant the
Inhabitants of Bordeaux those things they desired before the War, and for which
they had Deputies at Court. 11. That the Taxes should be diminished in Guienne,
according as it should be agreed upon sincerely. 12. That the Prince of Conty
should have leave to Treat with Monsieur d' Angoulesine about the Government of
Provence, and to give him the Government of Champayne in exchange, or else to
sell it to whoever he should think fit, to give him the Money of it, and that
for the overplus he should be assisted with such a Sum of Money as should be
agreed upon. 13. That the Government of Auvergne should be given to the Duke of
Nemours. 14. That leave should be given to President Viole to Treat about a
place of President a Mortier, or of Secretary of State, upon Promise, that it
should be the first vacant; and a Sum of Money in present to facilitate the
obtaining of it. 15. That the Court should grant the Duke de la Rochefoucault
the O ^atent during Life
Breviate he desired, equal to that of Messieurs de Bouillon, and Guienne, and
the Government of Angoumois and St. Tongue, or the Sum of Sixscore Thousand
Crowns, and leave to Purchase the said Government, or any other he should have
a mind to. 16. That the Prince of Tarente should have a Breviate about his
Rank, equal to the Duke of Bouillon's, and that he should be put in Possession
of it, and that he should be reimburs'd for the Losses he had sustained by the
taking and demolishing of Taillebourg, according to the Account he should
deliver about it. 17. That Messieurs de Marsin and du Doignon should be made
Marshals of France. 18. That Monsieur de Montespan should be made a Duke. 19.
That the Duke of Rohan should be restored to his Governments of Anjou and
Angers, and that the Pont de Ce, together with the Jurisdiction of Saumur
should be granted him 20. That the Government of Bergerac and Saint Foy should
be given to Monsieur de la Force, and the survivance to his Son the Marquess of
Castelnau. That the Marquess of Sillery should be certain of being made Knight
of the Order of the Holy Ghost at the first Promotion, or Instalment; and that
a Breviate should be given him for it, together with the Sum of 50000^ Crowns,
to Purchase a Government. Upon which Conditions they would engage to lay down
their Arms, and to consent f^eely to any Advantages for Cardinal Mazarin, and
to his Return into France within the space of three Months, or at the time when
the Prince having adjusted the Articles of a general Peace with the Spaniards,
should be at the place of Conference with the Ministers of Spain, and have
given an Account of the Peace's being ready to be signed; the which he would
not Sign until the said Cardinal were actually returned: But that the Money
mentioned by the Treaty should be paid before his Return.

The Cardinal hearkened to Gourville's Propositions, and seemed not to dislike
them, whether it ^ere that he really was inclined to grant them, or that he was
willing the Difficulties should arise ^^se where: But the Duke of Bouillon, who
dreaded ^ Peace should be concluded on, without his having the Duchy of
Albret, which the Prince was (...) Possession of, in order to make him a
Recompense in part for Sedan; told the Cardinal, That ^^nce he thought it fit
to favor all the Prince's Friends, who were his sworn Enemies, he thought it
was yet more reasonable to do Justice to his Friends, who had assisted him, and
maintained him against the Prince. That he found no fault with what was
designed for the Dukes of Nemours and de l^ Rochefoucault, Marsin, and the
others; but that at the same time he could not but think, that having so
considerable an Interest as the Duchy of Albret was, nothing should be
concluded on with^^^ obliging the Prince to satisfy him in that Point.

Whatever induced the Duke of Bouillon to use these Arguments, it is most
certain that they hindered the Cardinal from proceeding any farther, and he sent
back Gourville to the Prince, in order to remove that Difficulty. But whereas
in all great Affairs delays are commonly very dangerous, they were much more so
in this, which was not only composed of so many different Interests, and viewed
by so many opposite Cabals, which endeavored to break it; but was moreover
managed by the Prince of Conde on one side, and by Cardinal Mazarin on the
other; who though very opposite in some things, yet were alike in many others,
particularly in Treating about all manner of Affairs without any limited
Pretentions; which is the Reason that when their desires are granted, they
still flatter themselves with obtaining more, persuading themselves to that
degree, that all things are due to their good Fortune, that the Balance can
never be kept sufficiently even between them, nor can ever remain long enough
in that condition, to afford them time to resolve upon a Treaty, and to
conclude it. Other Obstacles were joined to these: It was the Cardinal of
Rets's Interest to prevent the Peace, by reason that if it were made without
his participation, the Duke of Orleance and the Prince being united with the
Court, he would remain exposed, without any Protection. On the other hand,
Chavigny being disgusted with the Court, and with the Prince after the ill
Success of his Negotiation, concluded that it was better to break the Treaty,
than suffer it to be made by any but himself.

I cannot tell whether the Conformity of Interests, that happened to meet at
that time between the Cardinal of Rets and Chavigny, made them join to hinder
the Prince's Treaty; or whether either of them prevailed with the Duke of
Orleance to do it; but I have been informed since by a Person I must Credit,
that while Gourville was at St. Germans, Monsieur sent the Duke d' Anville to
Cardinal Mazarin, to desire him not to conclude any thing with the Prince,
because he designed the Court should be solely obliged to him for a Peace: That
he was ready to go to the King, and thereby to give an Example which should be
followed by the Inhabitants, and by the Parliament of Paris. It was very
probable that such a Proposition should be hearkened unto, preferably to all
others: And in effect, whether by this Reason, or by the other I have alleged
before, about the Prince and Cardinal Mazarin's Minds; or whether, as I always
believed it, the Cardinal was never inclinable to a Peace, and only made use of
Negotiations for a Snare, in which he could surprise his Enemies: In fine, all
things were entangled to that degree, that the Duke de la Rochefoucaul^ no
longer would suffer his People to meddle with Negotiations, which ^^in'd his
Party, and charged Gourville to get a positive Answer from the Cardinal, the
second time he was sent to St. Germans, with Orders never to return thither
again.

In the mean while, besides that the Prince's Inclinations were not constantly
fixed on a Peace, he was continually combated by the diverse Interests of those
who endeavored to dissuade him from it. Cardinal Mazarin's Enemies did not
think themselves revenged, while he remained in France: And the Cardinal of
Rets was sensible that in case the Prince should come to an Accommodation^ it
would ruin his Credit, and expose him to his Enemies: Whereas the War
continuing, it would certainly ruin the Prince, or banish Cardinal Mazarin^ by
which means he remaining alone near the Duke of Orleance, might render himself
considerable at Court, whereby he proposed very considerable Advantages. On the
other hand, the Spaniards offered whatever might tempt the Prince, and used all
their Endeavors, in order to prolong the Civil War; his nearest Relations, his
Friends, nay, even his very Attendants, seconded the same out of Self-Interest:
In fine, all People were divided in Cabals, to make a Peace, or continue the
War.

No Arguments or Politics were omitted to persuade the Prince to embrace
either of these Parties, when the Duchess of Chatillon raised a desire of
Peace in him by more agreeable means: She imagined that so great a good was
only to be promoted by her Beauty, and mixing some Ambition with the desire of
making a new Conquest, she resolved at once to Triumph over the Prince of
Conde's Heart, and to draw from the Court all the Advantages of that
Negotiation.

Those were not the only Reason that inspired those though^s in her; Vanity and
Revenge contributed more toward it than any thing else: The Emulation which
Beauty and Gallantry often produces among Ladies, had occasioned great
Jealousies between the Duchess of Longueville, and Madame de Chatillon: They
had long concealed their Sentiments, but at last they appeared publicly on
both sides. Madame de Chatillon, putting no Bounds to her Victory, not only
obligd the Duke of Nemours to break off all his Engagements with Madame de
Longueville in a very disobliging manner, but at the same time resolved to take
from her all the knowledge of A^fairs, and to be the sole disposer of the
Conduct and Interests of the Prince. The Duke of Nemours, who had great
Engagements with her, approved her Design, and believd that since it was in his
power to Regulate the Duchess of Chatillon's Conduct toward the Prince, she
would inspire him with whatever Sentiments he pleased, and that thus he should
dispose of the Prince's Mind, by the power he had over the Duchess of
Chatillon's. The Duke de la Rochefoucault at that time had the greatest share
of any body in the Prince's favor, and at the same time had very strict
Engagements both with the Duke of Nemours, and with Madame de Chatillon: He was
very sensible of the Prince's Irresolutions toward a Peace; and fearing, as it
happened since, that the Spanish, and the Duchess of Longueville's Cabals
would join, in order to remove the Prince from Paris, where he might daily
Treat without their Participation; he imagined that the Duchess of Chatillon's
Design would be able to remove all the Obstacles that opposed a Peace, and for
that Reason induced the Prince to engage with her, and to give her Merlou for
her self. He likewise prevaild with her to behave her self so prudently toward
the Prince, and the Duke of Nemours, as to preserve them both; and persuaded
the Duke of Nemours to approve of this Engagement, which he ought not to be
Jealous of, since he was acquainted therewith, and that it was only designed to
place him at the Helm of Affairs. This Intrigue being managed and regulated by
the Duke de la Rochefo^cault, gave him almost an absolute Power over all those
that composed it. And thus those four Persons being equally advantaged thereby,
it would certainly have had at last the Success they had proposed, had not
Fortune opposed it by a World of unavoidable Accidents.

In the mean time, the Duchess of Chatillon being desirous to appear at Court
with all the Advantages she derived from her new Credit: She went thither with
so absolute a Power from the Prince, that it was looked upon rather as an
Effect of his Complaisance toward her, and a desire of flattering her Vanity,
than a real Intention of coming to an Accommodation. She came back to Paris
with great hopes, but the Cardinal only reaped solid Advantages by that
Negotiation; he gained Time, he augmented the Suspicions of the opposite Cabal,
and amused the Prince at Paris by the hopes of a Treaty, while they took
Guienne, and his Towns from him, and while the King's Army, commanded by the
Marshals of Turenne and Hoquincourt, held the Field, and his was retired in
Estampes. Moreover it did not remain long there, without receiving a
considerable Loss, which was this; The Marshal of Turenne being informed that
The first Princess of the Blood, se called.
Mademo^s^lle passing through Estampes, had been desirous to see the Army in
Battalia, he caused his Forces to March, and arrived in the Suburb of Estampes,
before those which composed the Army that was lodged there could be in a
condition to defend their Quarter: It was forced and pillaged, and the Marshals
of Turenne and d' Hoquincourt retired to theirs, after having killed 1000 or
1200 Men of the Prince^s best Forces, and carried away abundance of Prisoners.

This Success raised the hopes of the Court to that degree, that they designed
to Besiege Estampes, and all the Army that was in it. Whatever Difficulty
seemed to attend that Enterprise, it was resolved upon, in hopes to meet with
Astonishment in the Men, and Division in the Commanders; a Town open in several
parts, unprovided, and without probability of Succors from any but the Duke of
Lorrain, with whom the Court thought a Treaty had been made. Moreover it is my
Opinion, that the Event of the Siege was not so much considered, as the
Reputation so great an Undertaking would afford the King's Arms: For though at
the same time the Negotiation was continud with great earnestness, and that the
Prince was then very desirous of a Peace, yet it could not reasonably be
expected until the Success of Estampes had regulated the Propositions thereof.

1652.
During these Transactions the Court-Party made use of that Conjuncture to gain
the People, and to form Cabals in the Parliament; and though at that time the
Duke of Orleance seemed closely united with the Prince, he notwithstanding
daily had particular Conferences with the Cardinal of Rets, who made it his
chief business to destroy whatever Resolutions the Prince put him upon. The
Siege of Estampes continued still, and though the Progresses of the King's Army
were inconsiderable, yet nevertheless the Reports that were spread up and down
the Realm, were advantageous to the King. And Paris looked for the Succors
that was expected from the Duke of Lorrain, as the only thing that could sa^e
the Party. It arrived at last after many delays, and no small Suspicions of an
Accommodation between the King and him, however his Presence dissipated that
Opinion for a while, and he was received with extreme Joy; his Forces were
Encamped near Paris, and the Disorders they committed were suffered without
complaining.

At first there happened some Disputes between the Prince and him about their
Rank; but he finding that the Prince would not desist, relinquished his
Pretentions so much the rather, because he had only insisted upon it, in order
to gain time to make a secret Treaty with the Court, to raise the Siege of
Estampes without hazarding a Combat. Nevertheless, as People are never so
easily surprised, as when they are projecting to deceive others, it happ^n'd,
that the Duke of Lorrain, who expected to derive great advantages from, and to
secure himself by his continual Negotiations with the Court, (though very unjust)
was on a sudden ^^rpris'd by the Marshal of Turenne, who marched up to him with
all his Army, and required him forthwith to re^ire and march back for Flanders.
The Duke of Lorrain's Forces were not inferior to the King's, and a Man who
had only valued his Reputa^ion might easily have hazarded a Combat. But
whatever Reasons the Duke of Lorrain had for it, he retired with Shame, and
submitted to what the Marshal of Turenne was pleased to impose upon him^ he
neither acquainted the Duke of Orleance nor the Prince with what passed, and
the first thing they heard was, that their Forces were marched out of Estampes,
that the King's Army was removed from thence, and that the Duke of Lorrain was
marching back for Flanders, pretending to have fully performed the Orders he
had received from the Spaniards, and his Promise to Monsieur. This n^ws
surprised every body, and made the Prince resolve to go to his Army, fearing
the King's might fall upon it in the way. He went out of Paris, accompanied
only by 12 or 15 Horse, whereby he exposed himself to be taken by the Enemies
Parties; however he joined his Army, and led it toward Ville Iuive: Afterward
he marched to St. Cloud, where he made some stay, during which the Ha^vest was
not only quite spoiled, but almost all the Country Houses were burnt. This
began to disgust the Parisians, and the Prince had like to have received fatal
Marks at the Battle of St. Anthony.

During these Transactions, Gaucourt had secret Conferences with the Cardinal,
who s^ill expressed to him an earnest desire for a Peace; he had already agreed
upon the main Conditions, but the more he insisted on the least, the more it
was apparent that he had no design to conclude. Those Uncertainties gave new
Vigor to all the Cabals, and consequently to the diverse Reports that were
dispersed abroad. Paris never was in greater Agitation, and never was the
Prince's mind more divided to resolve upon Peace or War. The Spaniards
endeavored to remove him from Paris to hinder a a Peace, and the Duchess of
Longueville's Friends contributed to that Disign, in order to remove him from
the Duchess of Chastillon. Moreover, Mademoiselle at once designed the same
things with the Spaniards, and with the Duchess of Longueville; for on the one
hand she desired the Continuation of the War, to be revenged on the Queen and
Cardinal, who had hindered her Marriage with the King, and on the other, she was
desirous to get the Prince from the Duchess of Chastillon, and to have a
greater share in his Confidence and Esteem than that Du^chess: And therefore in
order to gain him, by that which was most sensible to him, she raised Forces in
his Name, and promised him Money to raise more.

(...) Promises being joined to those the Spani^^^^ ma^e, and to the A^tifices
that were used by ^he Du^chess of Longueville's Friends, removed from (...)
Prince all the thoughts he had of a Peace. Tha^ which in my Opinion likewise
contributed ^rably to it, was not only the small Confi^^nc^ he thought he could
repose in the Court, but ^ ^^^ng which will hardly be credited from a Person of
his Quality and Merit, it was a violent desire of imitating the Duke of Lorrain
in many things, and particularly in his behavior toward his Soldiers and
Officers; and he persuaded himself, that since the Duke of Lorrain being
dispossessed of his Dominions, his Circumstances not being near so advantageous
as his, had notwithstanding rende^'d himself so considerable by his Army and by
his Money, his own Qualifications being in^^ni^ely superior to his, his
Progresses would pro^e suitable thereunto, and that in the mean time he should
lead a Life altogether conformable to his own Humor.

This has been looked upon as the true Motive that engaged the Prince among the
Spaniards, and for which he renounced whatever his Birth and Ser^ices had
acquired him in the Kingdom. However he concealed his Sentiments as much as
possible he could, and still expressed the same desire for a Peace, the which
was still in vain, in Agitation. The Court at that time was at St. Denis, and
the Marshal de la Ferte had joined the King's Army with the Forces he had
brought from Lorrain. The Prince's Army which was weaker than the least of the
two that were opposed to him, had till then kept its Post at St. Cloud, in
order to make use of the Bridge to avoid an unequal Combat; but the arrival of
Marshal de la Ferte enabled the King's Army to divide into two Bodies, and to
attack St. Cloud on both sides, by making Bridges toward St. Denis; the Prince
resolved to remove from St. Cloud, in order to march to Charenton, and to Post
himself in that nook of Land, which makes the Conjunction between the River
Marne and the Seine. Without doubt he would not have done it had he followed
his own Inclination, and it had been much safer and much easier to leave the
River Seine on the left hand, and to march by Meudon and Vaugirard, to Encamp
under the Fauxbourg St. Germans, where perhaps he should not have been attacked
for fear of Engaging the Parisians in his Defense. But the Duke of Orleance
would by no means consent to it, not only, as was represented to him, out of
fear of a Combat, he might see from the Windows of his Palace of Luxemburg, but
also because some persuaded him that the King's Artillery would make a
continual Fire against it to force him to quit it. Thus the Opinion of an
imaginary Peril, made the Duke of Orleance expose the Prince of Conde^s Life to
the greatest danger he had ever been in. He caused his Army to march at the
beginning of the Night on the first of July, and expecting to reach Charenton
before his Enemies could come up to him, he marched through the A place like
the Ring in Hide-Park.
Course of the Queen Mother, and round about the City, from the Gate of St.
Honor to the Gate of St. Anthony, in order to ^arch from thence to Charenton.

He did not desire leave to March through Paris, for fear of a denial, which at
that time would have discovered the ill Condition of his Affairs: Besides he
was afraid, that having obtained it, his Forces would disperse themselves in
the City, and that it would be difficult to force them out of it, in case of
Necessity. The Court soon received Intelligence of his March, and the Marshal
of Turenne followed him immediately with what Forces he had, in order to stop
him, until Marshal de la Ferte, who ^ollow'd with is Army, could come up to
him. In the mean time the King was sent to Charonne, to behold from that place,
as from a Theater, that Action, which, according to appearances, was like to
prove the absolute Overthrow of the Prince, and the end of the Civil War; but
in Effect that which proved one of the boldest, and most perilous Occasions,
that ever was seen in War, and that in which the Prince of Conde's great
Endowments appeared to the best Advantage. Fortune it self seemed to be
reconciled to him in that Occasion, and would have a share in a Success, of
which both Parties have imputed the Glory to his Valor, and Conduct: For he
was attac'd precisely at a time, in which he could make use of the
Retrenchments the Inhabitants of the Suburb of St. Anthony had made, to secure
themselves from being pillaged by the Duke o^ Lorrain's Forces, and it was the
only place in all the March he designed that had any Retrenchments, and in
which he could avoid being absolutely defea^ed; nay, even some Squadrons of his
Rear were charged in the Suburb of St. Martin, by some Men the Marshal of
Turenne had detached to amuse him; The Battle of the Suburb of St. Anthony.
they retired in disorder in the Retrenchment of the Suburb of St. Anthony, in
which he had placed himself in Battalia.

He had but just so much time as was necessary to that end, and to garnish
those Posts through which he could be attacked, with Foot and Horse: He was
forced to place the Baggage of the Army upon the side of the Ditch of St.
Anthony, because the Parisians had refused to receive it. Moreover some
Carriages had been plundered, and those of the Court-Party had contrived
Affairs so, that the Event of that Business should be seen from thence, as from
a Neuter place.

The Prince of Conde preserved about him such of his Attendants as happened to
be there, and such Persons of Quality as had no Command, the number of which
amounted to about Thirty or Forty. The Marshal of Turenne disposed his Attacks
with all the Diligence and Confidence of a Man who thinks himself certain of
Victory. His detached Men being come within 30 Yards of the Retrenchment, the
Prince came out upon them, with the Squadron I have mentioned, and charging
them with Sword in hand, defeated their Battalion absolutely, took some
Officers Prisoners, carried away their Colors, and retired to his Retrenchment.

On the other hand, the Marquess of St. Mesgrin attacked the Post that was
defended by Count de Tavannes, Lieutenant General, and Languais, Marshall de
Camp; who made so brave a Resistance, that the Marquess of St. Mesgrin finding
that his Infantry flinch'd, being hurried on by Heat and Anger, advanced with
the King's Troop of Chevaux Legers in a Street shut up with Barricado's, where
he was killed, with the Marquess of Nantouillet, Le Fouilloux, and some others,
Mancini, Cardinal Mazarin's Nephew was wounded, and died of his Wounds some
time after.

The Attacks were continued on all sides with great Vigor, and the Prince of
Conde charged the Enemies a second time, with an equal Success to the first; he
appeared every where, in the middle of the Fire and Combat, and gave his Orders
with that calmness of Mind, which is so necessary, and yet so seldom met with
on those Occasions. Finally, the King's Forces having forced the last Barricado
of the Street called du Course, which leads to Vincennes, they entered in Order
of Battle as far as the Marketplace of the Suburb of St. Anthony; whereupon
the Prince ran thither, charged them, and destroying whatever opposed him,
regained that Po^^, and forced the Enemies out of it. Nevertheless they were
Masters of a second Barricado, which was in the Street that goes to C^arenton,
the which was Forty Yards beyond a very large Square adjoining to the said
Street: The Marquess of ^o^illes had made himself Master of it, and in order to
keep it the better, he had caused the Houses to be pierced through, and had
placed Musketeers in all those before which they were obliged to pass to come
up to the said Barricado. The Prince of Conde did design to go with some
Infantry, to cause other Houses to be pierced, to force them to retire by a
greater Fire, which indeed was the best way; but the Duke of Beaufort, who
chanced not to be near the Prince at the beginning of the Attack, being
somewhat Jealous at the Duke of Nemours having been there all along, pressed
the Prince to cause the said Barricado to be attacked by Infantry that was
already tired and discouraged, the which instead of going up to the Enemy, kept
close to the Houses, and would not Advance.

At the same time a Squadron of the Forces from Flanders, that had been posted
in a Street, which butted in one of the corners of the Square on that side
where the Houses were, being no longer able to ^arry there, for fear of being
surrounded as soon as the Houses thereabouts should be taken, came back into
the Square, and the Duke of Beaufort believing that they were Enemies, proposed
to the D^kes de la Rochefoucault and Nemours, who arrived there at that time,
to Charge them, and they being followed by all the Persons of Quality and
Volunteers, they marched up to them, and exposed themselves to no purpose to
all the Shot of the Barricado, and of the Houses of the Square, for in joining
they knew themselves to be all of the same Party: But at the same time
perceiving some astonishment in those who guarded the Barricado, the Dukes of
Nemours, Beaufort, de la Rochefoucault, and the Prince of Marsillac charged
them, and forced them to quit it: After which they alighted, and guarded it
themselves, the Infantry that was Commanded refusing to second them.

The Prince of Conde stood firm in the Street with those that had rallied about
him. In the mean time, the Enemies, who were possessed of all the Houses of the
Street, seeing the Barricado guarded only by four Men, would certainly have
re-taken it, had not the Prince's Squadron hindered them; but there being no
Infantry to hinder their Firing from the Windows, they began to Fire again from
all sides, and saw the four who kept the Barricade side-ways from head to foot.
The Duke of Nemou^s received Thirteen Shot upon his Armor; the Duke de la
Rochefoucault likewise received a Musket Shot in the Face above the Eyes, by
which he losing his sight, the Duke of Beaufort and the Prince of Marsillac
were obliged to retire with these two wounded Lords. The Enemies pursued them,
but the Prince of Conde advanced to dis-engage them, and gave them time to get
on Horse back, in so much that they were again obliged to abandon to the King's
Forces the Post they had just taken from them. Almost all those who had been
with them in the Square were killed or wounded; among others they lost the
Marquesses of Flamarin and de la Rocheguiffard, the Count of Castres, the Count
de Boss^^, Desfour^eaux, La Martiniere, La Motte, Gayonne, Bercenes, Captain of
the Guards to the Duke de la Rochefoucault, de L' Huilliere, who likewise
belonged to him, and many others, whose Names cannot be set down here. In fine,
the Number of the Dead and Wounded was so considerable on both sides, that both
Parties seemed rather intent to repair their Losses, than to attack their
Enemies.

This kind of Truce however was most advantageous to the King's Forces, who
were disgusted by so many Attacks, in which they had still been ^eaten and
repulsed; for during those Transactions, the Marshal de la Ferte marched with
all speed, and was preparing to make a new Effort with his fresh and entire
Army, when the Parisians, who till ^hen had been Spectators of so great an
Action, declared in favor of the Prince of Conde. They had been so much
prejudiced by the Arts of the Court, and of the Cardinal of Rets, and had been
persuaded, to that degree, that the Prince had made a Peace by himself, without
minding their Interests, that they did look upon the beginning of that Action,
as a Play, that was acted between him and Cardinal Mazarin, to blind them. The
Duke of Orleance confirmed them in that thought, by his giving no Orders in the
City to Succor the Prince. The Cardinal of Rets was with him, who still
augmented the Trouble and Irre^olution of his Mind, in proposing Difficulties
to whatever he would undertake.

On the other hand, St. Anthony's Gate was guarded by a Regiment of the
Train-bands, whose Officers being gained by the Court, almost equally hindered
People from going out, or coming into the City. Finally, all things were ill
disposed to receive the Prince and his Forces there, when The Duke o^ Orleance
's Daughter.
Mademoiselle making an Effort upon her Father's Mind, drew him out of the
Lethargy in which he had been kept by the Cardinal of Re^s: She went to the
Townhouse to order the Citizens to take Arms; and at the same time commanded
the Governor of the Bastille to fire his Ordnance upon the King's Forces, and
coming back to St. Anthony's Gate, she not only disposed all the Ci^izens to
receive the Prince and his Army, but moreover to March out, and to make some
Skirmishes, while his Forces were entering. That which made an end of moving the
People in the Prince of Conde's behalf, was to see so many Persons of Quality
carried back, both dead and wounded. The Duke de la Rochefoucault being willing
to improve that favorable Conjuncture for the Advantage of his Party, although
his Wound made both his Eyes almost come out of his Head, went on Horseback
from the place where he was wounded to the Fauxbourg St. German, exhorting the
People to assist the Prince of Conde, and for the future to distinguish better
the Intention of those who had accused him of having treated with the Court.
This for a while had the Effect he desired, and Paris was never better affected
to the Prince, than it was at that time.

In the mean time the noise of the Canon of the Bastille, produced at one and
the same time two very different Sentiments in Cardinal Mazarin's Mind; for at
first he believed that Paris was Declaring against the Prince, and that he was
going to Triumph over that City, and over his Enemy: But finding that instead
thereof, they fired upon the King's Forces, he sent Orders to the Marshals of
France to retire with the Army, and to March back to St. Denis.

That Day proved one of the most Glorious of the Prince of Conde's Life, his
Valor and his Conduct never had a greater share in any of his Victories; and
it may be said with Truth, that so many Persons of Quality never made a smaller
number of Men fight. The Colors were carried to Notre Dame, and all the
Officers were put at Liberty upon their Parole.

Notwithstanding this, the Negotiations were continued, every Cabal was
desirous to make the Peace, or to hinder the others from doing it; and the
Prince and Cardinal were absolutely resolved not to make it. Chavig^y had made
his Pe^ce (...) the Prince in Appearance, but it would be difficult to tell
what his Sentiments had been ^ill then, by reason that his natural Levity daily
inspired him with such as were directly opposite; he was for pushing things to
Extremity when ever he had any Prospect of destroying ^he Cardinal, and of
en^ring into the Ministry of Affairs again; and he was for begging a Peace
whenever he imagined his Lands should be Pillaged and his Houses p^ll'd down.
Nevertheless, at that time he chanced to be of Opinion with the rest, that it
would be proper to profit of the good Disposition the People was in, and to
propose an Assembly ^t the Town^House, in order to resolve, to have the Duke of
Orleance acknowledge'd Lieutenant General of the Crown of France: That they
should enter into an inseparable Union to procure the removal of the Cardinal,
and that the Duke of Beaufort should be invested with the Government of Paris,
in the room of the Marshal de L' Hospital; that Broussel should be made Prevost
des Merchands, or Lord Mayor, in the room of Le Febure. But that Assembly in
which they expected to find the safety of the Party, proved one of the main
Causes of its Ruin, by an Act of Violence, which was like to have destroyed
all those that chanced to be in ^he Townhouse, or Hostel de Ville, and made
the Prince lose all the advantages he had gained by the Battle of St. Anthony.

I cannot tell who was the Author of so pernicious a Design, all having equally
disowned it; but in fine, while the Assembly was held, a Crowd of all manner of
Men in Arms appea^'d at the Townhouse Gates, crying, That they should not only
do all things according to the Prince's Mind, but moreover, that they should
instantly deliver all those that were Cardinal Mazarin's Friends. At first this
Noise was only looked upon as an ordinary effect of the Common People's
Impatience, but seeing that the Crowd and Tumult increased, and that not only
the Soldiers, but even the Officers were concerned in the Riot, the Gates
being set on fire, and the Windows shot at, all the Members of the Assembly
thought themselves equally undone. Many of them to avoid the Fire, exposed
themselves to the Fury of the People, and abundance of Persons of all
Qualities, and of all Parties were killed: It was generally believed that the
Prince had sacrificed his Friends, in order not to be suspected of having
destroyed his Enemies. The Duke of Orleance was not in the least suspected of
having any share in that Business, the Odium and Hatred thereof being wholly
cast upon the Prince of Conde. As for my part, I am of Opinion, that both of
them had employed the Duke of Beaufort in it, to frighten such Members of that
Assembly as were not on their side; though at the same time I am persuaded that
neither of them had the least Intention of hurting any body. However they soon
appeased the Disorder, but they could not race out the Impression it had made
in the Peoples Mind.

Afterward it was proposed to create a Council, composed of the Duke of
Orleance, of the Prince of Conde, the Chancellor of France, the Princes, Dukes,
and Peers, Marshals of France, and General Officers of the Party. Two
Presidents a Mortier were to assist at it from the Parliament, the Lord Mayor,
or Provost des Merchands, from the City, to Judge definitively, and without
Appeal of all Military Causes, and whatever related to the Government of the
City.

This Council augmented the Disorder instead of diminishing it, about the
Pretentions of the Rank that was to be held in it, the sequel of which, as well
as of the Assembly, proved very Fatal; for the Dukes of Nemours and of Beaufort
being already at o^ds about past differences, or about some Ladies, quarreled
about Precedence in the Council, and (...) with Pistols; The Duke of Nemours 's
Death.
the Duke of Nemours was killed by the Duke of Beaufort his Brother-in-law.

All those who knew that Prince, were moved with Grief and Compassion at his
Death; even the Public had cause to lament him; for besides his great and
lovely Qualifications, he contributed as much as in him lay to promote a Peace,
and both he and the Duke de la Rochefoucault h^d relinquished the Advantages
the Prince was obliged to procure them by the Treaty, in order to facilitate
the Conclusion thereof. But the Death of the one, and the Wound of the other,
afforded the Spa^iards, and Madame de Longueville's Friends all the Liberty
they could desire to draw the Prince away. They now supposed it would be easy
^o persuade the Prince to go into Flanders; they dazzled him with hopes, and
Madame de Chatillon seemed to appear less Charming to him, because he no longer
found an Illustrious Rival to Combat in her Heart. However he did not at first
reject the Propositions of a Peace, but taking his measures to continue the
War, he offered the Duke of Nemours's Employment to the Duke de la
Rochefoucault, who co^ld not accept it by reason of his Wound; for which Reason
he gave it afterward to the Prince of Tarente.

Paris was more divided at that time than ever it had been; The Court daily
gained Ground in the Parliament, and among the People, the Murder committed at
the Townhouse having struck every body with Horror: The Army durst not keep
the Field, and their abode in Paris exasperated the People the more against the
Prince. In ^ine, his Affairs were reduced to the greatest Extremity, when the
Spaniards, who were equally desirous of preventing his Ruin and his Elevation,
in order to perpetuate the War, caused the Duke of Lorrain to March to Paris
for the second time, with a sufficient Body, to stop the King's Army. Nay,
moreover he kept it invested at Villeneuve St. George, and sent word to Paris,
that the Enemies would be constrained to come to a Battle, or to starve in
their Camp.

This hope flattered the Prince, and he imagined he should draw great
Advantages from the Event of that Action, although in reality the Marshal of
Turenne never wanted Provisions, nor the Liberty of retiring to Melun, without
hazarding a Combat. He did it accordingly, without meeting any Opposition,
whilst the Duke of Lorrain was gone to Paris, where the Prince lay sick of a
Fever. Palluau's Forces at that time joined the King's Army, after having taken
Montrond: The Marquess of Persan had been blocked up in it from the beginning
of the War, by Count Palluau with an inconsiderable Army: But when the Garrison
was weakened by Hunger and Diseases, he attacked it by Force, and took it with
less Resistance, than could be expected from such brave Men in one of the
strongest Places in the World, had nothing been wanting in it. The loss thereof
proved so much the more sensible to the Prince, by reason that it was
occasioned by his Neglect, since he might easily have succored Montrond,
whilst the King's Army was toward Compiegne; whereas his Forces in ruining the
Country round about Paris increased the Inhabitants Hatred against him.

The Prince was neither happier, nor better served in Guienne, where the
Division between the Prince of Conty and the Duchess of Longueville served for
a Pretense to those who had a mind to quit his Party. Several Cities, following
the Example of Ag^^, had opened their Gates to the King's Forces, and the
Inhabitants of Perigueux had stabbed their Governo^r, and driven out the
Garrison; Villeneuve ^' Agenois, in which the Marquess of Terbon had th^own
himself, was the only place that resolved to defend it self, and it was done
with so much Vigor, (...) Count d' Harcourt was forced to raise the Siege. He
did not tarry long in Guienne, after that small Disgrace, and whether he was
really diffident of the Court, or that he thought that making himself Master of
Brisac, Philipsburg, and Alsatia, he should lay the Foundation of a certain and
independent Establishment; he went away from his Army like a Man who dreaded
his being made a Prisoner in it, and repaired to Philipsburg with all the speed
imaginable.

During these Transactions the Prince of Conde's Ilness increased, yet, though it
was very violent, it proved nevertheless less Fatal to him than to Monsieur de
Chavigny, who having had a very rough Esclaircissement with the Prince, he was
seized with a Fever, of which he dyed few days after. Hi^ Mi^fortune did not
end with his Life, and Death, which should terminate all Hatreds, seemed to
have revived his Enemy's against him. All manner of Crimes were imputed to him,
and the Prince particularly justified himself at his Cost, of the Jealousy the
Spaniards and the Frondeurs conceived of a secret Treaty with the Court: He
complained that Chavigny had hearkened to some Propositions of the Abbot
Fouquet without his participation (although he had ordered him so to do in
Writing) and that he had promised to make him relinquish some Articles, which
he could not do. The Prince likewise caused a Copy to be written of an
intercepted Letter from the aforesaid Abbot, the Original of which I have seen,
whereby he acquainted the Court, that Goulas would incline the Duke of Orleance
to abandon the Prince, unless he accepted the Conditions of Peace that were
offered him: But in the Copies the Prince had written of it, he put the Name of
Chavigny instead of Goulas; whereby he accused him of Treason, without giving
any other Proofs thereof, besides a falsify'd Copy of that Letter written by
the said Abbot Fouquet, with whom the Prince daily treated, and gave an Account
thereof to Chavigny.

I can only impute the cause of so unjust, and so extraordinary a proceeding to
the extreme desire the Prince had of making War, the which being opposed by his
Friends, had made him alter his Conduct toward them, and place all his
Confidence in the Spaniards.

The Duke of Bouillon 's Death.
The Duke of Bouillon died at that very time at Pontoise, whose Death should
have cured Men of Ambition, and disgusted them from making so many different
Projects, in order to Rise. For the Ambition of that Duke was accompanied by
all the extraordinary Qualifications that could render it prosperous: He was
brave, and was a perfect Master in the Orders of War; he had an Easy, Natural,
Insinuating Eloquence: A clear Understanding, abounding in Expedients, and fit
to manage the most difficult Undertakings; a sound Judgment, and an admirable
Talent in distinguishing. He hearkened mildly to the Counsels that were given
him, and he valued other Peoples Reasons so much, that he seemed to draw his
Resolutions from thence. But yet those Advantages proved almost useless to him,
through the obstinacy of his Fortune, which always thwarted his Prudence.

The Spaniards were Revenging the Duke of Guise's Enterprise upon the Kingdom
of Naples by a long and cruel Imprisonment, and had long proved inexorable to
all those who interceded for his Liberty. However they granted it to the
Prince, and on that occasion they renounced one of their principal Maxims, to
link him the closer to their Party, by a concession that is so extraordinary
among them.

Thus the Duke of Guise received his Liberty, when he least expected it, and he
came out of Prison, engaged by so great a Favor, and by his Parole to enter
into the Prince of Conde's Interests. He came to him at Paris, and perhaps
believing he had acquitted himself of what he owed him, by some Complements,
and some Visits, he went soon after to meet the Court, to offer the King what
such great Obligations exacted from him toward the Prince.

As soon as Chavigny was dead, the Prince began to take his Measures to go away
with the Duke of Lorrain; and indeed his Conduct had rendered his departure so
necessary, that it was the only way he had left; for the Peace was too
generally desired at Paris to remain there in safety, with a design to oppose
it. The Duke of Orleance, who had desired it all along, and dreaded the Evil
the Prince of Conde's Presence might draw upon him, contributed so much the
rather toward his Removal, by reason that he found himself thereby free to
make a particular Treaty.

Although Affairs stood on these terms, the ordinary course of the Negotiation
had not been interrupted; for even at that time when Cardinal Mazarin was
quitting the Kingdom for the second time, to put a period to the pretenses of
the Civil War, or to show that the Prince had other Interests besides his
Removal, he sent Langlade, Secretary to the Duke of Bouillon, to the Duke de la
Rochefoucault, either out of a real desire to Treat, thereby to facilitate his
Return, or hoping to draw great Advantages by his showing that he desired a
Peace. In fine, Langlade came, with Conditions that were much fuller than all
the others, and almost conformable to what the Prince had demanded: but they
were equally refused, and his Fate, which drew him into Flanders, did not
permit him to discover the Precipice until it was too late to retreat. Finally,
he departed with the Duke of Lorrain, after having taken vain Measures with the
Duke of Orleance to hinder the King from being received at Paris: But his
Credit was not sufficient at that time to cope with the Court's. He was ordered
to leave Paris the very day the King was to arrive there, and he obeyed
immediately, to avoid being a Spectator of the Triumph of his Enemies, as well
as of the Public Joy.

MEMOIRS OF THE Prince of Conde. BOOK VI.
THE King came back to Paris on the 29 th. of October. 1652.
A vast concourse of People went out to meet His Majesty, The King's Return.
and when he entered in the Evening into his Metropolis, all the People gave
marks of an Extraordinary Joy.

The next day the King caused a General Pardon to be read in the Gallery of the
Louvre, where the Parliament had been Convened by the King's Writ, after which,
the said Declaration was recorded. In the next place, His Majesty ordered the
Duke of Orleance to retire to Limours, Several Persons are ordered to quit
Paris.
and Mademoiselle de Montpensier to Bois le Vicomte. The Duke of Beaufort, the
Duke of Rohan, the Duke de la Rochefoucault, and all the Prince of Conde^s, and
the Duchess of Longueville's Servants, and all the near Relations of those who
were in the Prince's Service, were also ordered to quit Paris, and to retire
elsewhere.

The Prince of Conde, The Prince of Conde 's Motion.
who did not think himself safe by the General Pardon, was gone toward the
Frontiers of Picardy, there to receive some Spanish and Lorrain Forces, in
order to join his Army. After he had received this Reinforcement, the remainder
of the Spanish Forces, and of those of Lorrain, divided themselves to March on
both sides of him, in order to join and succor him in case of Necessity. After
which the Prince marched toward Rhe^^l^ with a design to make himself Master
of it. He pr^sented himself before it on the Thirtieth, and took it the same
day without any Resistance. He left the Marquess of Persan there with some
Infantry, and little Horse; and then he marched directly to St. Menehoult, with
the Forces of Virtemberg, with half those of Fuensaldagne, and with Three
Thousand Horse of the Duke of Lorrain's, Commanded by the Prince de Ligne. He
attacked St. Menehoult on the first of November, and took it after fourteen
days Siege: The Sixteenth of the said Month he received Notice that Marshal de
Turenne had received a Reinforcement of 3000 Men, and that he was at Vitry le
Brusle with near 15000. Whereupon he resolved to make his whole Army cross the
Wood toward Clermont, and to Encamp there, in expectation of the Succors of
Fuensaldagne, which he stood in need of, by reason that after the taking of St.
Menehoult, he had sent back the Regiments of Languedoc, of Valois, and Langeron
to the Duke of Orleance, for the Reasons I am going to relate.

When the Duke of Orleance was retired to Limours, The Duke of Orleance 's
Accommodation.
the King sent the Duke d' Anville, and Monsieur Le Tellier to that exiled
Uncle, to Conclude, and Sign an Accommodation with him. The chief Conditions of
that Accommodation were, That (...) should call back his Forces, which
consisted of Eight Regiments of Horse, and Three of Foot; That he should give
them to the King, but that His Majesty should not employ them against the
Prince of Conde. The Treaty being signed, Monsieur retired to Blois with the
King's leave, there to enjoy the Delights of Solitude, and to lead a (...) Life
with The Duchess of Orleance.
Madame, who had no mind to be concerned with the Cabals of the Court.

The following day he sent Gedouin, Marshall (...) Camp, and second Lieutenant
to his Gendarmes, to give the Prince of Conde an Account of his Accommodation,
and to invite him at the same time to return to his Allegiance, with those that
followed his Fortune, and to take the Advantage of the Act of Grace His Majesty
had granted them. He likewise carried Orders to bring back the three Regiments
I have mentioned, the which the Prince had taken along with him, and were at
that time in his Army.

This Envoy being arrived at the Camp before St. Menehoult, on the third day of
the Siege, and having performed his Commission to the utmost of his Power, the
Prince answered him coldly, That he thanked his Royal Highness for the Advice
he gave him of his Treaty with the Court, that both he and his Friends knew the
Treatment he had received, notwithstanding the Act of Grace, and that they
would make their Profit of his Example; and that as for his Royal Highnesses
Forces, he would send them back after the end of the Siege; which he performed,
as abovesaid.

Whilst the Prince of Conde was taking those Places, the Spaniards assembled
the Forces of their Garrisons, in order to Invest the City of Bouillon, The
Spaniards endeavor to surprise the Cardinal at Bouillon.
and to surprise the Cardinal there, who was raising of Men in the Country of
Liege to pass into Champayne, where the Nobility were likewise making of Levies
he was to join to some Forces of Normandy. But his Eminency got happily out of
Bouillon with a strong Convoy, of which some were killed; which obliged the
Cardinal to retire to Sed^n. Having assembled there the Forces he had raised in
the Country of Liege, and there abouts, he marched from thence with them on the
25 th. of November, in order to join those that were assembling by the Nobility
in Champayne, and arrived at St. Disur at the beginning of December, with Four
Thousand Men.

The Cardinal and Monsieur de Turenne meet.
Monsieur de Turenne, who had Intelligence of every thing, had quitted his Camp
at Baillican, and taken his March by Epernay and Chalons toward Reims, where
he was to tarry for the Cardinal, and to receive his Forces to join them to the
King's Army. However they judged that the King's Army was strong enough of it
self to Attack the Prince of Conde, and therefore his Eminency marched toward
Chalons in Champayne with his Forces, in order to scour the Frontiers, before
his return to Court, where he was impatiently expected by the King, and by the
Queen Mother.

The Prince of Conde is made Generalissimo of the Armies of Spain.
Although the Prince of Conde had received on the 25 th of November the Quality of
Generalissimo of the King of Spain's Armies, by the Hands of Count
Fuensaldagne, he was allowed no greater number of Forces than he had before: It
was a lofty Title which produced no Considerable Succors.

His trouble.
Thus the Conjuncture I have related put the Prince, who was then in a Post near
Clermont, to a great los^. He expected the Succors Fuensaldagne had promised
him; but he was informed that tha^ Count had received Orders from the Archduke
Leopold, to lead back his Forces into Flanders. However it happened happily at
that time that the Prince of Tarente came back from Flanders with 5 or 6000 Men
he had raised there at his own Charge, and brought them to the Prince of Conde,
who in order to acknowledge so great a Service, thought himself obliged to give
him the General Command over his Forces, the which he desired.

But by reason that Count Tavannes had always Commanded them, The Count of
Tavannes refus^s to yield the Command to the Prince of Tarente.
the Prince proposed his Design to him, at which the Earl was both surpised
and vexed. What is it your Highness designs then I should do ^ere? said he.
Does Honor permit me to serve is your Forces under another, after having
Commanded them all for so long a time? The Prince answered, That having no
other way to acknowledge his Obligations to his Cousin the Prince of Tarente,
Tavannes ought to be so much his Friend, as to comply with the present state of
his Affairs; and that if it was a trouble to him to yield to that Prince the
Command he desired, he would prevail with him to be contented to have it
alternately with him. Your Highness may dispose of your Forces as you think
fit, replied Tavannes, and I must thank you for the Medium you are pleased to
propose to me, but having always Commanded your Forces alone, I cannot resolve
to a^mit a Companion. Therefore I beseech you to give me leave to retire, to
leave the sole Command of your Forces to the Prince of Tarente.

The Count of Tavannes had for some time been very much dissatisfied with the
Prince of Conde, Count Tavannes 's Discontents.
whom he had always served with a great deal of Fidelity and Zeal. He could not
forget that this Prince, before his departure from Paris, and while he was sick
there, had held a very considerable Council, without having called him to it;
and that the best Places, and chief Governments of the Kingdom had been
disposed of beforehand in the said Council, without so much as thinking of
him. It is true, that this Count had ever looked upon this destination of
Places and Governments, as a Chymerical thing, by reason that it never entered
into his thoughts that the King's Army should be defeated, at the time the said
Council was held, a^ the Prince of Conde, and all the Grandees of his Party
imagined then. Nevertheless it made him sensible that the Prince had but little
remembrance of his Services, and that he had but little regard to his
Advancement, and his Interest. And therefore he had been very much dissatisfied
ever since. And being moreover very much solicited by his Friends to abandon
the Prince's Party, he was glad to meet the Occasion I have related, and
embraced it with Joy.

The Prince, having heard those words of Tavannes I have mentioned, quitted
that Count abruptly, and told him with some Anger; that he ought to think more
than once on what he was going to do. And when the said Count persisting still
in his Resolution, came to take his leave of his Highness, Well, Monsieur de
Tavannes said the Prince to him, you are then resolvd not to suffer a Companion
to Command my Forces with me, and that Pretense makes you run after the fair
hopes which call you back to the Act of Grace: Go then, and give Mazarin the
Satisfaction of having snatched my Right Arm from me, to employ it against my
self. Count de Tavannes was called at Paris, The Prince's Right Arm. I find by
what your Highness tells me, replied the Count, that you know me ill for the
time I have had the Honor to serve you. Is it possible, that having seen me
abandon all, and sacrifice my Interest to that Honor only, you should think my
Heart base enough at present to suffer my self to be governed by the Passion of
Interest? I find by that, that I am only your Right Arm, because I am not on
the side of your Heart. But to ^ndeceive your Highness, who thinks Interest
capable to make me court the Friendship of that Minister, I Protest, and engage
my Word to you, that I will neither appear at Court, or take any Employment,
until I have the Satisfaction of b^holding your Highness there in possession of
the (...) that is due to you.

Count T^vannes having made this Generous Pro^^^^^tion, took his leave of the
Prince, Count Tavannes, retires.
and retired (...) his Estate of Pailly near Langres, where he ^^^ain'd ever
since without any Employment (...) the Court, and without Gratitude from the
Prince.

Whereas the King had only consented to Cardinal Mazarin's Absence, 1653.
in order to remove all P^^tences of continuing the Civil War, The Cardinal
returns to Court.
and to reestablish Peace in his Kingdom, he recalled him as soon as the state
of his Affairs did permit him. This Minister, who kept at no great distance,
and who did not cease to Act for His Majesty's Interests, had no sooner
delivered Picardy from the Ex^^rsions of the Enemies, but he returned to Court.
He arrived at Paris on the 3 d. of February with as much Pomp, and as many
Acclamations, as if he had never quitted the Kingdom for the Reasons above
mentioned. The remembrance of all that was past seemed to be buried, or that it
was designed to brave the Prince of Conde's Absence. The King went to meet the
Cardinal, and received him in the most obliging manner that could be.

As soon as Cardinal Mazarin found himself absolutely restored, The Prince of
Conty 's Marriage.
he applied his Mind to strengthen his Power by Considerable Alliances: And
being sensible that the Prince of Conty had no inclination to lead a
Church-Life, though he was designed for i^, he proposed one of his Nieces to
him, Daughter to a Gentleman of Rome, Beautiful, and endowed with all manner of
Virtues. The Marriage was concluded, to the Satisfaction of all those that were
concerned.

While Paris and the Court was employed about Marriage and Divertisements,
Burgundy and Guienne persisted in their Revolt; The Rebellion continues in
Burgundy and Guienne.
but that Rebellion did not last long. The City of Bellegarde was the only one
in all Burgundy that persis^^d in the Prince's Party. The Duke d' Espernon, who
was Governor of that Province, besieged it, and made himself Master of it,
after a brave and obstinate Resistance by Count Boutteville, who Commanded
there.

Marshal de la Ferte Senneterre, The Marshal de la Ferte 's Exploits.
Governor of Lorrain, being informed that the Prince of Conde's Forces were
not far from him, attacked them near Varennes, and defeated them absolutely.
After which, that Marshal Invested the Castle of Orne in the Verdunois, the
which surrendered at the approach of Canon. The Reduction of that Castle was^
followed by that of Sorbec. At first the Governor refused to surrender; but
when he saw that the Canon advanced, he offered to Capitulate; but the Marshal
de la Ferte Senneterre refused to give him Quarter, and caused him to be hanged
at the Gate. This Example of Severity terrified the Governors of the other
Places to that degree, that they submitted all without expecting a Siege.

After this, the Marshal de la Ferte went to join Marshal de Turenne, and they
marched together toward, Champayne, in order to quiet that Province, and to
reduce those Towns that held the Prince of Conde's Party. They besieged Rhetel,
which was Commanded by the Marquess de Persan, and having taken the Outworks,
they obliged that Governor to Surrender.

Count de Brinon, who Commanded the King's Forces in Lorrain, besieged
Commercy, Commercy taken.
the taking of which seemed very difficult, by reason of the Fortifications the
Enemies had made there: But the Governor's Absence, and the Vigor wherewith
the Siege was carried on, obliged the besieged to Capitulate.

(...) the Reduction of those Places, there was ^^^son ^o believe that the
Rebels would soon re(...) their Allegiance. And indeed the Revolt (...) no
where considerably but in Guienne. Success of the King's Forces in Guienne.
(...) Du^e of Candal^ was sent to Command the King's A^my there. He
immediately took the Cas^le o^ Poujols, and then made himself Master o^
^guillon and Marmande, after which he defeated the Forces Marsin sent to the
Mount of Marsan, ^here to take their Winter Quarters: Whereby he dissip^^ed the
most considerable part of the Factions that subsisted still. Several Cities of
Limousin, and (...) were at that time powerfully solicited to a R^vol^; but
some of them returned of thems^lv^^ ^o the peaceable Domination of their Law^ul
Sovereign; and the others were constrained to it by force of Arms, and
absolutely to abandon the Prince of Conde's Party.

The City of Bordeaux was the only one that persisted in the Rebellion. L'
Hormee persists in the Rebellion.
That Faction which was called L' Hormes, was still very busy, and was in
hopes of Considerable Succors by Sea from Engl^nd, and from Spain. In order to
hinder them ^^om receiving the Succors they expected, the Duke of Vend^me,
High Admiral, was ordered to approach with his Ships, and to raise a Naval
Army^ The Duke having brought his Ships near, c^us'd two Forts to be built upon
the Garonne, in order to make himself Master of that River. He likewise seized
several Towns that stood upon the Bo^ders thereof, and landed some Forces to
join to those of the Duke of Candale.

The Citizens of Bordeaux who were well affe^ted, looked with Grief upon the
Continuation of the Revolt: But whereas the Number of the Factious exceeded
theirs, they durst nor resist them. Nevertheless when they beheld the King's
Forces, they formed the Design of stifling the Rebellion absolutely. To that
end they assembled at the Townhouse to conclude a General Peace. They wo^e
white Ribbons, and fixed Standards of the same color on the top of their
Steeples, in sign of Peace, The Peace of Bordeaux.
and to distinguish themselves from the Horme^s^s, whose Colors were Red, in
sign of War^ and to show that they were allied to Spain. All this obliged the
Factious to lay down their Arm^. All things being disposed thus to a good
Peace, Notice was given thereof to the Duke of Vendome^ who immediately
dispatched his Secretary to know the real Sentiments of the Bordelois. Monsieur
de Marsin endeavored to create Jealousies about that Envoy, to the end that he
might receive no Audience: But Three Hundred Citizens went out to meet him to
Conduct him to the Exchange, where he delivered his Credentials; and the same
day two Citizens were sent to the Duke of Vendome with A^ticles of ^e^ce. And
whereas those Deputies observed that Marsin likewise sent two Officers to the
Duke, to make Propositions in his Name, which might hinder the Effect of the
Negotiation, they acquainted that Prince in private with the Intent^ons of
those who had sent them; in so much that the Trea^y of Peace was concluded and
sign'd^ After which, the Duke of Vendome, and the Duke of Candale entered into
Bordeaux, where their Presence made an end of dissipating all the Factions. The
Parliament, that had been transferred sometimes to Again, and sometimes to
Reolle, because it favored the Prince of Conde's Party, was reestablished in
Bordeaux: And as soon as the Peace was Proclaimed, Colonel Bal^^zar was ordered
to quit the City with his Forces; the Prince of Conty retired first, to
Cadillac, and from thence to Pezenas. The Princess of Conde went to her Husband
in Flanders; and the Duchess of Longu^ville was ordered to retire to
Montreuil-Bellay.

The Disorders of Bordeaux being thus termina^^^ to the King's Advantage, all
the Province of (...) was soon restored to a perfect Tranquillity. (...) is
reported, that in the beginning of the Troub^^s and Seditions of that Province,
Marsin who Commanded the Forces there under the Prince of C^^ty, sent some very
able Men to Cromwell, Cromwell refuses to espo^se the Prince of Conde 's Party.
to ^^d^^vour to draw that Protector of England into the Prince of Conde's
Party; but he refused to engage in ^t, or to send any Succors, whether he
judged th^^ his Authority was not as yet sufficiently Established, or whether
he were persuaded that that Se^ition would not succeed, and that the King would
soon be able to bring them back to their All^^iance; or lastl^, whether he was
to maintain a considerable War against Holland.

In the mean time the Prince of Conde, who had ^^^^^er'd himself that the
Sedition excited in Guienne would be greatly seconded, and that it would be
very l^sting; and moreover, that it would be an Exampl^ to all the other
Provinces of the Kingdom, prop^^^d to himself to make some Expedition on his
side upon the Frontier of Picardy; and in order to succeed the better, he
implored the Assistance of the King of Spain, who sent him Forces under ^he
Conduct of the Count of Fuensaldagne. The Prince of Conde takes Roye.
The Prince intended to seize the Town of Han: but being doubtful of the
Suc^ess, he turned his Arms ^owards Roye, which he caused to be invested by the
L^^ro^^ers; Commanded by the Chevalier of Guise. The Gentry thereabouts being
reti^'d into that Town, declared when it was Summoned to su^^^^^d, That they
were resolved to defender them^^^ves to the utmost Extremity. But, whereas Roye
is not sufficiently fortified, nor had a sufficient ^^rrison to resist long
against an Army of 15000 Men, it su^render'd upon Articles after having
repulsed the Efforts of the Enemies as long as possible they could.

During these Transactions the French Army besieged Mouson; and took it after
some Resistance. The Generals pressed that Siege with great vigor, in order to
succor Rocroy, Rocroy taken by the French Army.
which was besieged by the Enemies; but Rocroy was taken before the French
Forces arrived.

Mouson taken by the Spanish Army.
The Marshal du Plessis Pralin, to make amends for that Loss besieged St.
Menehoult, in the Month of November, St. Menehoult taken by the Marshal Plissis.
the which did not resist long. The Prince of Conde, though sick at that time of
a Quartan Ague, used his utmost Endeavors to prevent that Conquest. But the
Vigor wherewith the Siege was pressed, and the Attacks given, obliged it to
yield. The King's Presence, who was not far from thence, also contributed much
toward the Reduction of that Place.

1654.
In the mean time the King finding that the Prince of Conde remained still among
the Enemies of France, The Prince of Conde impeached by the Parliament.
ordered the Parliament of Paris, which is the Company or Body of the Peets to
impeach him. That Prince was accordingly informed against, at the request of
the King's Attorney General; and the Parliament summoned the said Prince to
appear within a Fortnight after the Publication of the Decree, in the great
Chamber, there to answer to all the Articles exhibited against him. But the
Prince no-wise designing to appear there, the King disposed of his Governments.
He gave his Place of Lord Steward of the Household to Prince Thomas;
Commissioners were appointed to manage his Estates: and the King being come to
the The place where the Parliament sits.
Palais on the 28 th. of April, the Contents of the Informations given against
the Prince were read and Judgment pronounced against him, whereby he was
declared guilty of High Treason.

The Ceremony of the King's Coronation was performed at Reims in the Month of
June, and there the Court resolved to besiege Stenay. The Siege was formed
about the beginning of July, under the Command of the Marquess of Fabert,
Governor of Sedan, and the King assisted at it in Person. The Spaniards
imagining that all the French Forces were employed at that Siege, The Sieges of
Stenay and of Arras.
resolved to besiege Arras. That Enterprise was no sooner resolved on, but the
Archduke assembled his ^o^ces about la Bassee, feigning to have a Design upon
that place, after which he marched directly to Arras. The Spaniards who
flattered themselves with the taking of that Town, soon ended their
Circonvalation, although it contained above fix Leagues Circumference, and then
they opened their Trenches: but whereas, they opened them on that side which
was strongest, that oversight cost them near 3500 Men in the Attacks: and after
above two Months Siege they found themselves only Masters of a small Half Moon,
and some inconsiderable Works. Count Mondejeu who commanded in Arras was over
joy'd to see himself attacked on that side. He had been surpised, and had but
a weak Garrison, he dreaded two Attacks at once, which would have confounded
him, but the Spaniards soon rid him of that fear, for not being obliged to
divide the small Number of Men he had, he defended himself with Success. In the
mean time Marshal de Turenne approached the S^anish Lines with an Army of 15 or
16000 Men in order to keep them in awe, and to improve all the occasions that
might incommode their Camp, until he had received greater Forces to succor the
Place.

The Count of Ligneville being sensible that the Neighborhood of that Army
would prove of ill consequence to them, in case they allowed the French time to
retrench themselves, declared, That it was his Opinion, to attack them briskly.
The Prince of Conde who Commanded the Spanish Army approved this Advice; but
the Count of Fuensald^gne as Plenipoten^iary persuaded the Archduke not to
abandon the Attacks that had been projected, alleging, That though one should
have the Fortune to beat Monsieur de Turenne, it would be impossible to
continue the Siege, by reason that abundance of Men would certainly be lost in
an occasion of that nature. Those two Chiefs being Master, the Prince was
obliged to acquiesce, and Monsieur de Turenne had time enough allowed him to
retrench himself so well in his Camp, that it was impossible to force him to a
Combat, which distracted the Prince.

Sten^y ^ur^ender'd it self soon after, which enabled the French to send
another Army Commanded by the Marshal de Hoquincourt, who posted himself on the
opposite side to Marshal de Turenne, at the Abbey. of St. Eloy, having forced
some Infantry that was lodged there, to retire, with Canon Sho^. The Armies
were so near one another, that the Centries could speak together; insomuch that
the Spaniards became as much besieged as Besiegers, whereby they soon wanted
Bread, no longer enjoying the Liberty of the Field for Convoys. Yet
notwithstanding the Count of Fuensaldagne remained still obstinate in
contin^ing the Attacks, in which they advanced but little, though they lost
abundance of Men. The Prince of Conde seeing how Affairs went on, was positive
to have the Siege raised, and to have the Honor in their retreat, to force
Marshal de Hoquincourt's Army, which was very easy to do, by reason that the
Spanish Army was two parts in three stronger than his, but he could never
prevail with him to do it: and confiding more in the Spanish Resolution, than
in the Advice of the most Understanding, he chose to look upon the total Ruin
of the Army, rather than save it in so glorious a manner.

O^ the other hand Marshal de Turenne being in^^^^r'd w^^h the Condition of the
Spaniards by his (...), ^he Loss they had sustained in their Attacks, ^^d the
general Murmurings of the Spanish Army, which had an ill opinion of the Siege,
finally resolved ^o ^^^cour the place. The Enterprise was dangero^s and
difficult to be p^t in execution; for the (...) finding themselves in danger of
being att^ck'd, fortified themselves daily, and ha^ dug great holes to hinder
the Horse from passing there, and to destroy the Foot, but those Inconveniences
were provided against. That which Monsieur de T^renne was most troubled at, was
that the Governo^r had not till then been able to give him any ac^ount of his
Condition. At last a Soldier ven^ured out of the Town with a Note, enclosed
^ithin a small Golden Box, which he swallowed. Thi^ Soldier arrived at
Monsieur de la Ferte (...) Quarters, and having remained a Day there without
going to Stool he took Clysters, but though he took three they did not work
upon him; in the next place they gave him a Draught which h^d no effect
neither. The Marshal de la Ferte ^rowing very impatient, was resolved to have
the Soldier's Belly ripped open, saying, That it was better to lose a Man than a
Place of so much Consequence (...) Ar^as. But they gave him another Draught
which proved so strong that he was like to burst ^ith it, the which brought out
the Box. The Go^ernour informed him by the said Note, That he did not fear the
Enemy's Power, although they ^^re upon the Ramparts: and that he only dreaded
one thing, without explaining himself any farther^ This puzzled the Generals
extremely, yet after some consideration every body concluded, that Monsieur de
Mondejeu feared the Archduke would be ruled by the Prince of Conde, and that
the Succors would be cut in pieces, which indeed was to be feared.

Neither this Note, nor all the Precautions the Spaniards took could hinder
Monsieur de Ture^^^ from putting his Resolution in execution. The 19 th. of
August he crossed the River of Scarps at the Head of his Cavalry, and posted
himself between the Spanish Camp, and Mount St. Eloy^ and the Marshal de
Hoquincourt attacked the Abbey so vigorously with his Infantry, that it
surrendered the same day. The next day Monsieur de Turenne went to discover the
Lines which were on the side of Mount St. Eloy, and finding that they were
weakly guarded, and that the Prince was at such a distance from them, that it
would be impossible for him to come up time eno^gh to succor them, he resolved
to attack them in that place. The 22 th. he went to view the Prince of Conde's
Quarters, in order to keep the Spaniards uncertain of the place where he
designed to attack the Lines, and having met that Prince, who was come out at
the Head of Ten Squadrons, their passed a Skirmish between them, in which the
Duke of Ioyeuse was wounded, and died some days after. Finally on the 24 th. in
the Morning the Three French Armies, the first of which was Commanded by
Marshal de Turenne, the second by the Marshal de la Ferte, and the third by
Marshal de Hoquincourt, began the Attack with five Battalions in Front, at the
Head of which at four Yards distance marched detached Men to furnish them with
Fascines or Bavins, and whatever Instruments, or Tools they had occasion for.
The Spaniards suffered the French to pass in several places, without ever
firing at them, because they had dug holes there in order to secure themselves.
But as soon as they perceived them upon the brim of the first Ditch, they made
a dreadful Discharge, which did not however (...) the French from overcoming
whatever ^ppos'd their passage. They began immediately (...) the Pallisadoes,
and to fill up the holes: (...) in a very short space of time all the Spanish
^^^ks, Retrenchments, and Parapets were utterly. (...). The French Forces had
been comman^^^ not to advance any farther, le^t the Besiegers (...) expect
them, and make some extraordinary (...). But no Forces appearing, the French
ad^^^c'd until they met a Barrier, which stopped them. (...) de Bellefons, who
commanded the Forlorn (...), having removed it, and thereby opened the Pa^^age,
all the Battalions that had entered the Line (...) without losing time, the
Spaniards no wise (...) themselves in a posture of defense. At that very time
some Regiments having opened the Lines in another place pushed the Spaniards,
which were behind the Breast-work, at which time all M^rshal de Turrenne's
Horse charged without meeting the least opposition, by reason that the Quarter
of the Lorrainers had given ground, and suffered M^rshal d' Hoquincourt to
enter. But it proved otherwise with Marshal de la Ferte's Forces, they me^ a
resistance they did not expect, the Forces which were coming from the
Arch-Duke's and Count Fuensaldagne^s Quarter, in order to succor that which
Mons. de Turenne attacked, meeting them, and opposing their passage, with an
incredible Bravery. All the Baggage the Spaniards had in the Camp, served as a
Barrier, to hinder the French from advancing as easily as they could have
wished; and that which proved worse than that yet, was a Ravine, or great Flood
of Water, which did cut the Line of Circumvallation. Monsieur de Turenne
endeavoring to cross it, in that place was forced to expose himself to the
Spanish Shot, and to engage with the Prince of Conde, who fought after his
wonted manner, that is, with a Courage that cannot be express'd^ Marshal de
Turenne was wounded in the left Side in that occasion, but h^ had the advantage
of stopping the Prince's Fury^ who happened not to be well seconded.

In the mean time the Marquess of Castelnau having pushed six Squadrons that
opposed him, entered Arras, having forced a Barriere which was very well
defended. He marched immediately out of it again, with the remainder of his
Horse on one side, and the Count of Montdejeu sallying out at another, they
forced the Prince of Conde to retire, after having left some Squadrons behind
him to favor his Retreat; at which time the Combat redoubled. The Prince
performed extraordinary Actions on that occasion; and by that Retreat which has
been admired as much as the Battles he has won; he saved the Spanish Army,
which was never so much exposed, or in so much danger of being totally
defeated, as it was at that time. However, he abandoned his Infantry, his
Canon, The Siege of Arras raised
and his Baggage, but even in that he showed, that he was great in all things,
and that his Prudence equaled his Valor, which his very Enemies acknowledged.
As this Retreat was very glorious for the Prince of Conde, it also afforded a
great deal of Reputation to Monsieur de Turenne, and the other Generals who
relieved Arras, and constrained the Spaniards to raise the Siege. This happened
on the 25th of August.

1655.
The taking of Stenay, and the raising of the Siege of Arras, were followed by
the taking of Quesnoy, Clermont Catelet, Landrecy, Conde, and St. Guillain,
which were taken by the French, by reason that the Prince of Conde was so much
exasperated, that his Advice had not been followed at Arras, and even so
mortified, that he was unwilling to expose himself to receive new
Mortifications in the defense of those places.

But it happened otherwise the following year: 1656.
The French besieged Vallenciennes; The Siege of Vallenciennes.
that City was invested on the 15th of June, and the Prince having omitted
nothing in order to succor it, he s^cceeded in his design. And whereas he
designed (...) recover the Honor of the Spaniards, he took (...) Vanguard of
their Army, and having viewed the French Lines, he seized a high Ground they
had not yet possessed themselves of, upon which he lodged himself, which
incommoded them exceedingly. However, this did not hinder them from opening
their Trenches, and from pushing on the Siege with a great deal of vigor,
until the 16th of July. But the Prince of Conde, who sent Men into the Town
every night, having ordered the Governor to open the Sluices that day, which was
the day he had pitched upon to attack the French Lines, it was accordingly
performed: The Besieged opened their Sluices, which broke at once all the Banks
the French had raised, together with the Bridges they had made upon the Esca^t,
and the Country was overflowed to that degree, that it was impossible for
Marshall de Turenne to succor Marshall de la Ferte, whose Quarter was
attacked by Don John of Austria, then Governor of the Netherlands, and by the
Prince of Conde; and whatever resistance that Marshall could make, he could
not hinder his Lines from being forced, and the Spaniards from entering into
the Town with a considerable Relief; which obliged the French Army to retire,
and raise the Siege. The raising of the Siege of Vallenciennes.
It is reported, that Marshal de Turenne gave Marshal de la Ferte twice notice
to stand upon his Guard, and that the Spaniards designed to relieve the Town
that night. Moreover, it is added, that he sent him Men to fortify his Lines,
giving him to understand, that he could not be too careful, having to deal with
the Prince of Conde; but that some Jealousy between them made that Genera^
despise that Advice and Offer. However, it i^ most certain, that the Prince of
Conde, who wa^ resolved to relieve the place at any rate, attack'^ Marshal de
la Ferte's Quarters with so much Fury^ that he would have accomplished his
Enterprize^ whatever Assistance he had received from Marsha^ de Turenne. That
Prince no sooner appeared, bu^ the French Horse being terrified, wheeled about^
and abandoned Marshal de la Ferte, and instead of marching up to the Spaniards,
ran away and retired. The Disorder was so great among that Cavalry, that
finding no Bridges to cross the Escaut, all of them being overflowed, they
l^apt down from certain Downs, and sell pell-mell upon Monsieur de Bellefond's
Tents. Monsieur de la Ferte was taken, and had been killed, but for the Captain
of his Guards, but it cost that poor Gentleman his Life, who throwing himself
before the Marshal received a shot in the Head^ of which he died some days
after: Monsieur de Moret, Count d' Estrce, the Lieutenant of the Cardinals
Chevaux Legers, the Ensign, and several other Officers belonging to the Gens d'
Arms, and Chevaux Legers were taken^ and above 1500 Men and Horses were
d^owned. The Marshal de la Ferte was carried into the Town, and lodged in Mons
de Bournonville's House, who was Governor, where the Prince of Conde came to
see him; he found him a Bed, where he ran to embrace him, after which he said
these words to him: I could wish your Comrade had been taken in your stead; not
that I fear him in the Field, I should dread you much more than him, but it
would have been a satisfaction to me, to see him undergo a Disgrace, which in
my opinion he deserves much more than you. All I have to say to you, since you
are my Prisoner, is, that you shall be at Liberty as soon as possible I can: I
would send you back to morrow, but that I am obliged to keep Measures (...) the
Spaniards. As for a Ransom, I desire none, (...) any of your Money, but I am
willing to receive that which the King shall give for you. Mons. de la Ferte
^eturn'd him a thousand Thanks, and some days after he was carried to Rocroy.

This Di^grace surpised the Court a little, and ^nimated Marshal de Turenne,
who preserving the Hopes of making other Conquests in the Low Coun^ries,
attacked La Capelle, which he took back from the Spaniards, with so much speed,
that it was impossible for them to relieve it, by reason that the Prince of
Conde could not be every where.

While the French besieged La Capelle, 1657.
the Spaniards had formed the Siege of St. Guillain, The taking of S. Gui^lain
and Conde.
but raised it in o^der to assemble all their Forces: But the raising of that
Siege not having been able to hinder the French from performing their
Enterprise, the Prince of Conde resolved to attack St. Guillain anew the
following year; to which the Governor of the Netherlands, the Marquess of
Ceracene, and the other Generals having consented, they marched straight to
that place, and took it on the 22d of March. Soon after it, they made
themselves Masters of Conde.

Marshal de Turenne being vexed at the Conquests the Spaniards made, resolved
to be revenged upon Cambrai, for the Losses the Fr^nch had sustained. To that
end having placed himself one night at the Head of a small Body of Men, without
imparting his Design to any body, he went to invest that place, in which there
were no Forces besides the Soldiers in ordinary pay, for the guard of F^^n^^er
Towns.
Mortepaye, and fifty Horse, or thereabouts: Nay, moreover, that which happened
worse for the King of Spain, was, that the Governor and his Inhabitants did not
agree.

The Town being invested on all sides, and the remainder of the French Army
being come up, the Bridges of Communication were made, and at the same time all
necessary things to work speedil^ about the Lines, were delivered to the Army.

The Prince of Conde soon received Intelligenc^ of it, and knowing that there
was but a very wea^ Garrison in Cambray, and that the Spanish Army was not
ready to march to the relief of it, he marched thither himself, with all his
Horse, which consisted of 18 Squadrons. Being obliged to pass through
Valenciennes, as soon as he came within two or three leagues of it, he went
before, to enquire from those who commanded in the Town, whether they could
give him any intelligence of the French Army. They answered, That they could
not, but that within 24 hours they had heard abundance of Canon shot toward
Cambray. I am persuaded, answered the Prince, that that Town is besi^ged, but I
will endeavor to relieve it, before the Enemies have made an end of their
Lines. After which he desired the Governor to prepare a passage for his Forces:
Although those of Valenciennes were not used to suffer Forces to pass through
their City, yet they said, that they were ready to grant him a Passage, if he
desired to march through it. The Prince accepted it, and caused his Forces to
march through that City^ He caused those to refresh themselves that passed
first: Those being got a quarter of a league out of Town, he caused the others
to march a little further, and those having refreshed themselves, he took those
who had passed first, and advanced with Five hundred Horse upon a Rising, from
whence he perceived the Camp, and the Lines of the French: Moreover, he saw
that they were at work. Being convinced by his own Eyes, that Mons. de Turenne
had besieged Cambray, he came back to his men, and calling all the Officers, he
told them, That if they tarried three days without relieving the Town, the
Lines the Enemies were making with all the speed imaginable, would be (...) the
being forced: That the Spanish Army was (...) too great a distance to stay for
it; and that ^^nce there was no other Remedy, he was resolved to enter into
that Town; and, that to that end he would march thither between seven and eight
at night.

He had no sooner imparted his Design, but he disposed his Horse in three
Lines, each of them consisting of six Squadrons: He took the command of the
second himself, and the hour appointed to march being come, Monsieur de
Guitaut, who commanded the first, advanced with a design to force whatever
should oppose him, and make the least resistance; but it fell out luckily for
him, that he ^ell into the Guard of the Regiment of Palluau, who coming up to
the Prince's Forces, crying out, Qui vive? suffered them to pass, believing
that they answered Palluau instead of Guitaut, by reason of the termination of
those Names. The Prince of Conde followed with the second Line, and found that
the Enemies had closed again, yet he forced his way, and passed also. The
Prince of Conde enters Cambray, and causes the siege to be raised.
The last Line passed likewise, and entered, with the loss of some Officers,
after which they marched up to the Pallisade, and entered the Counterscarp. The
French Horse were so surprised and frightened, that they did not so much as
offer to pursue them: Insomuch, that Day being come, Monsie^r de Turenne vexed
at what had happened, said, That he would have the Army retire. And accordingly
ordered a Retreat to be sounded; and while the Army was disposing to march, he
dispatched a Coureer to the Court, to inform them, that the Prince of Conde was
entered in Cambray with eighteen Squadrons, and that he was going to raise the
Siege. This place was invested about the end of May.

1658.
The Cardinal finding that the Siege of Cambray had not succeeded, The siege of
Dunkirk.
sent Orders to Monsieur de la Ferte, who had an Army toward the Frontiers of
Champagne, to invest Montmidi, which he did, and took it. While Montmidi was
besieged, the Spaniards made an attempt upon Calis, but were obliged to retire.
Besides Montmidi, they lost St. Venant, and were forced to raise the Siege of
Ardres. The French likewise took Bourbourg, Mardik, La Mothe aux-Bois, and some
other places.

The French had also resolved upon the Siege of Dunkirk the preceding year, and
in order thereunto had seized all the advantageous Posts that could defend the
Avenues thereof, to facilitate the taking of it. Monsieur de Turenne blockt it
up by Land, on the side of the Canal which looks toward Mardyk, and on the
other as far as the Downs. The English Army, composed of eighteen or twenty
Ships, invested it by Sea, and hindered the Entrance: The Circumvallation being
made, they began to open the Trenches on the fifth of June. The first days the
Besieged made vigorous Sallies, but were always repulsed. The Spaniards being
sensible of the importance of that place, put themselves in a posture to
relieve it. The Prince of Conde was already advanced, but Marshal de Turenne,
who omitted nothing for the success of his Enterprise, kept so well upon his
Guard, that it was impossible to surprise him. The Besieged made several other
Sallies, in which abundance of Men and Officers were lost on both sides. In the
mean time Monsieur de Turenne, while the Siege went on, was informed, That Don
John of Austria, the Prince of Conde, and the Marshal de Hoquincou^^, who had
embraced the Spanish Party, were (...) from Ypres to Newport, and were resolved
to hazard all to relieve Dunkirk: And accordingly News was brought the next
day, being the 11th, that they were encamped in the Downs near the Abbey, and
that they were preparing to attack the Bes^egers. Marshal d' Hoquincourt
detached himself, with threescore Horse, to view the French Lines, but being
come too near a Redoubt, where some Soldiers lay concealed, he was wounded
with five or six Musket Shot, of which he died within two hours. The French
perceiving that the Spaniards were resolved to engage them, and that it was
impossible to avoid it, offer^d them Battle on the 14th. The Battle of the
Downs.
Their Right-wing, commanded by Monsieur de Turenne, was opposed by the Prince
of Conde, who signalized himself in that Battle, as he had done in others; he
had a Horse killed under him, whereby he was endangered to fall into his
Enemies Hands, but the Captain of his Guards happening to be there, gave him
his, being better pleased to be a Prisoner himself, than to suffer that great
Prince to be taken. But notwithstanding all the Perils the Prince of Conde
exposed himself to, and the great Actions he did, the Spaniards lost the Day,
and the Battle was no sooner lost, but the Governor of Dunkirk being
discouraged, is desired to capitulate, which he did within 5 or 6 days after
it: It was on the 23d of June. The Town was delivered to the English. The
taking of Dunkirk was followed by that of Bergue, Gravelines, Oudenarde, Ypres,
and several other places.

Although the French had had very considerable Advantages over the Spaniards,
1659.
yet they were desirous of a Peace. The Queen, who desired it earnestly, had
already dispatched Monsieur de Lionne into Spain, to lay the Foundations of it
with Don Lewis de Haro. And though Monsieur de Lionne was incognito at Madrid,
yet that Minister's Negotiations succeeded according to the Queens Wishes. They
had agreed upon the general Articles, and there was a suspension of Arms. But
the King of Spain declaring that he would have the Prince of Conde comprised in
the Treaty of Peace, the French Minister replied, That he had no Orders to
hearken to any such Proposition; That the King his Master would be the sole
disposer of the Favors he thought fit to grant that Prince, without being
imposed upon in that point. Whereupon the Conferences were broke off.

Cardinal Mazarin being sensible that that Difficulty would not easily be
removed, communicated it to the Pope, who was Mediator between the two Crowns,
in order to his persuading the King of Spain, that he ought to desist in what
related to the Interest of the Prince of Conde, but could obtain nothing.
Finally, the Peace was concluded between France and Spain, in the manner every
body knows. Cardinal Mazarin consented readily, that the Prince should be
comprised in the Treaty, but he desired, that whatever related to his being
restored to his Dignity and Estate, should be left entirely to the King's
disposal. Nevertheless, after many Contestations, the Affair was determined in
the manner his Catholic Majesty had desired it, that is to the Prince of
Conde's advantage. These are the Articles that concerned him, as they are
inserted in the Treaty of Peace, made in the Isle of Faisans, in the year 1659.
between Philip the Fourth King of Spain, and Lewis the Fourteenth King of
France.

1. THE Prince of Conde having declared to Cardinal Mazarin Plenipotentiary
from his Most Christian Majesty, his Sovereign Lord, in order to acquaint His
Majesty therewith, that he is extremely troubled to have held, for some years
past, a Conduct which has displeased his Majesty: that he could wish it were in
his power to retrieve, though with the best part of his Blood, all the Acts of
Hostility he has committed both within and out of France, to which he protests
that his Misfortunes had engaged him, rather than any ill Intention against his
Service: And that if his Majesty will be so generous, as to make use of his
Royal Goodness toward him, forgetting all what is past, and receive him into
favor again, he will endeavor to acknowledge it to the last moment of his
life, by an inviolable Fidelity, and to retrieve what is passed, by an absolute
submission to all his Commands. And that in the mean time, in Order to begin,
and to show by such Effects as may be in his power, with how much Passion he
desires to (...) honored again by his Majesty's Favor and Good Will, he
relinquishes whatever may relate to his Interest in the conclusion of the said
Peace, and desires nothing but what may proceed from the Clemency and Free Will
of the said Lord King, his Sovereign Lord, and besides, desires it may please
his Majesty to dispose absolutely, and according to his best liking, and in
what manner he shall think fit, of all the Favors his Catholic Majesty shall
be pleased to bestow upon him, and has already offered him, either in
Territories and Countries, or in Towns and Moneys, the which he lays all at his
Majesty's Feet. Moreover, that he is ready to disband all his Forces, and to
deliver up to his Majesty the Cities of Rocroy, Le Chatelet, and Linchamp, of
which his said Catholic Majesty has been pleased to remit the two first to
him. And likewise, that as soon as he has obtained Leave, he will send a person
on purpose to the said Lord King, to assure him more precisely of the sincerity
of those Sentiments, and the reality of his Submissions, and to give his
Majesty such an Act, or Writing signed by ^im, as his Majesty shall be pleased
to desire, for an Assurance that he renounces all Leagues, Treaties, and
Associations whatever, he may have made formerly, with His Catholic Majesty:
And that for the future he will neither take or receive any Establishment,
Pension, or Favor from any foreign King or Potentate. And finally, that as to
whatever relates to his Interest in any kind whatever, he submits it entirely
to his Majesty's Pleasure and Disposition, without the least Pretensions. His
Majesty being informed of the Premises by his Plenipotentiary, and moved by
the Proceeding and Submission of the said Prince, desires and consents that his
Interests should be determined in this Treaty, in the following manner granted
and agreed on between the two Lord-Kings.

2. First, That the said Prince shall lay down his Arms, at farthest, in the
space of eight weeks, to reckon from the day and date of the signing of this
present Treaty, and shall effectually disband all his Forces, both Horse and
Foot, French or Foreign, the which compose the body of his Army in the
Netherlands, and that in such a manner as his Most Christian Majesty shall
think fit, excepting the Garrisons of Rocroy, of Chatelet, and Linchamp, the
which shall be disbanded at the time of the restitution of the said three
Towns. And the said Disarming and Disbanding shall be performed by the said
Prince, really and sincerely, without Transportation, Loan, or Sale, true or
pretended, to any other Princes or Potentates whatever, Friends or Foes to
France, or their Allys.

3. Secondly, That the said Prince sending a person on purpose to his Majesty,
to confirm more particularly all the things above-mentiou'd, shall deliver an
Act signed by him to his said Majesty, whereby he shall submit to the execution
of what has been agreed upon between the two Lord-Kings, in relation to his
Person and Interest, as well as for the Persons and Interests of those that
have followed him. In consequence of which he shall declare, that he departs
sincerely, and renounces bona fidae, to all Leagues, Intelligences, and
Treaties of Association or Protection he may have made and contracted with his
Catholic Majesty, or any other foreign Kings, Potentates, or Princes, or any
other persons whatever, both within and out of the Kingdom of France; with
promise never to take or receive for the future from the said foreign Kings and
Potentates, any Pensions, Establishments, or Favors obliging him to have a
dependency on them, nor any Engagements to any King or Potentate, besides His
Majesty his Sovereign Lord; on pain, in case of Contravention to the said
Writing, of forfeiting from that moment the Re-habilitation and
Re-establishment that is granted him by the present Treaty, and to return to
the same condition he was in on the 1 st day of March of the present year.

4. Thirdly, That the said Prince, in performance of what has been before
agreed upon between the said Lord-Kings, shall really, and in Fact, deliver
into his Most Christian Majesty's Hands the Cities of Rocroy, Le Cha^elet, and
Linchamp, at the time and day hereafter mentioned in another Article of this
said Treaty.

5. The Premises being performed as abovesaid, his most Christian Majesty, in
contemplation of the Peace, and in consideration of his Catholic Majesty's
Mediation, making use of his Royal Clemency, will sincerely and heartily
receive the said Prince in his Favor, and will with the same Sincerity forget
whatever he has done or undertaken, for the time past, against his Service,
either within or out of the Kingdom; and will allow his Return not only into
France, but even at his Majesty's Court. After which, his Majesty will restore
the said Prince, in Reality and Fact, to the free possession and enjoyment of
all the Estates, Honors, D^gnities, and Privileges belonging to the first
Prince of the Blood. Provided still, that as to what relates to the said
Estates, of whatever Nature they be, the said Prince shall never pretend any
thing for the time past, toward the Restitution of the Income or Use of the
said Estates, whatever persons may have enjoyed them by His Majesty's Orders,
nor to the payment, or restitution of his Pensions, Sallaries, or other Rents
and Revenues he had upon the Demains, Farms, or General Receipts of the said
Lord King; nor yet upon the Account, or pretense of what he might pretend to be
due to him by His Majesty before his going out of the Kingdom, nor for the
Demolitions, Degradations, or Damages done by His Majesty's Orders, or
otherwise, in any manner whatever, in his Estate, Cities, Places, fortified, or
not fortified, Lordships, The Tenure or Honor and Jurisdiction of a
Castle-ship.
Chastellenies, Lands, and Houses of the said Prince.

6. And as to what relates to the Garrisons, Governments of Provinces, or
Places, the said Prince enjoyed and possessed before his going out of France,
his Most Christian Majesty did for a long while constantly refuse to restore
them to him, until his being moved by the proceeding and Submission of the said
Prince abovementioned, when he did fully resign his Interests to his pleasure
and disposition without the least Pretensions, together with whatever was
offered him by his Catholic Majesty to indemnifie him: His said Most Christian
Majesty did at last condescend to grant him what follows, upon certain
Conditions hereafter specified; which the said Lord Kings have agreed upon, and
thus granted, viz. That provided his Catholic Majesty on his part, instead of
what he designed to give the said Prince to Indemnifie him, shall draw out the
Spanish Garrison which lies in the City, Fort, and Citadel of Juliers, to leave
the said place, and Citadel free from the said Garrison to the Duke of Newburg,
on the Conditions, and in the manner that shall be specified hereafter in one
of the Articles of the present Treaty: A^ also provided, that his said
Catholic Majesty besides the removal of the Spanish Garrison out of the City
and Citadel of Juliers, shall deliver to his Most Christian Majesty the City of
Avennes, situate between the Sambre and the Meuse, with the Appurtenances,
Dependencies, Annexations, and Demains thereof in the manner his said Catholic
Majesty has engaged above, by an Article of the said present Treaty (the which
place of Avennes his said Majesty likewise designed among other things to give
to the said Prince.) In Consideration of which, as abovementioned, that is, in
Compensation of the delivery and yielding of one of the said places to the Most
Christian King, to be united, and for ever annexed to the Crown of France; and
the removal of the Spanish Garrison out of the other, in favor of a Prince who
is a Friend and Ally to his Most Christian Majesty, who is desirous to Oblige
him by virtue of the said Treaty of Alliance: His said most Christian Majesty
for all things whatever in general that may relate to the Places, and
Governments the said Prince had possessed, or might reasonably be expected by
those that belonged to him, without excepting any, will give to the said Prince
the Government of the Province of Burgundy and Bresse; under which are
comprised the Countries of Bugey, Gex, and Veromey: As also the particular
Governments of the Castle of Dijon, and of the City of St. John de Laune: And
to the Duke of Enguien his Son the place of Lord High Steward of the Kingdom
and Household, together with Brev^ats of Assurance to the said Prince, to
preserve it in case the said Duke of Enguien should dye before him.

7. His said Majesty shall grant a full Pardon, by his Letters Patent, in d^e
form, for whatever the said Prince, his Relations, Creatures, Friends,
Adherents, and Servants, either Churchmen, or Laymen, have or may have done,
or undertaken for the time past against his Service; in so much that it may
never hurt or prejudice him or them at any time, nor their Heirs, Successors,
Administrators, or Assigns, as if the thing had never been. Neither shall his
said Majesty at any time make any Enquiry in relation to the said Prince, his
Relations, Creatures, Friends, Adherents, and Servants, whether Ecclesiastics,
or Laymen, about the Money he, or they have taken out of the general or
particular Receipts, or out of the Audits of his Farms: And shall not oblige
them to make any Restitution of the said Money or Sums, nor of all the Levies,
or Gatherings, Contributions, Impositions, Exactions imposed upon the people,
or Acts of Hostility committed in France, in any wise whatever. Which shall be
explained more at large in the said Pardon, or Letters Patent, for the entire
Security of the said Prince, and of those that have followed him, in order that
they may never be prosecuted, troubled, or molested about it.

8. That as soon as the said Prince shall have performed on his part, what is
contained in the three Articles, 2.3. and 4. of this present Treaty, all
Dutchies, Counties, Lands, Lordships, and Demains, even those of Clermont,
Stenay, and Dun, as he enjoyed them before his going out of France, and that of
Jamets also, in case he did enjoy it, the which heretofore belonged to the said
Prince: Together with all and every his other Estates, Movables, or
Immoveables, of any kind whatever in the manner abovesaid, shall be really and
truly returned to him, or to those the said Prince, being in France, shall
Commit, and Depute, to take in his Name the Possession of the said Estates,
etc. and to serve him in the administration or management of the same. As also
that Restitution shall be made to him, or his said Deputies, of all the Titles,
Instruments, and other Writings left by him at the time of his going out (...)
Ki^^dom, in the Houses belonging to the said (...) and Lordships, or elsewhere.
And that the said (...) shall ^e r^stor'd to the true and real Possession and
(...) of his said Dutchies, Counti^s, Lands, Lord^^^^ and Demains, with such
Rights, Authorities, (...), Presidial Seats, Royal Cases, Pre(...), and
conferring of Benefices, Nominations of (...) Favors, and Preheminences, or
Prerogatives, ^^ich ^e and his Predecessors did enjoy, as he enjoyed (...)
before his going out of the Kingdom. But that (...) ^^^ll leav^ Bellegarde and
Montrond in the same Condition they are at present. For the performing of
(...), ^ll His Majesty's Letters Patent thereunto necess^^^ shall be granted
him, in as good a form as he shall r^^^ire, or desire, without his being liable
to be disturbed, ^^^^^cuted, or troubled, in the said Possession and En^^^^ent
by the said Lord King, his Heirs, Successors, (...) O^ficers, directly, or
indirectly, any Donations, or Gifts, (...), or I^corporations that may have
been made of the said Dutchies, Counties, Lands, Lordships, and De^ai^s,
Estates, Honors, Dignities, and Prerogatives of first Prince of the Blood
notwithstanding, or what^^er derogatory Clauses, Constitutions, or Ordinances
contrary th^reunto. Neither shall the said Prince, his He^r^, and S^ccessors,
by reason of what he may have (...), either in France before his going from
thence, or (...) of the Kingdom, after his departure from thence; (...) ^or any
Treaties, Correspondencies, by him made and (...) with any Princes, or persons
of any Condition or Quali^y soever, be liable to be molested, troubled, or
(...). But that all Proceedings, Decrees, even that of the Parliament of Paris,
bearing date the 27th. of March, o^ the Year 1654. Judgments, Sentences, and
other Acts, which are already past against the said Prince, either in Civil or
Criminal Cases (unless he has volun^arily contested in a Civil Suit) shall
remain void, and of no Effect, and shall never be prosecuted, as if they had
never been. And as to what relates to the Demain of Albret, which the said
Prince enjoyed before his going out of France, the which His Majesty has since
otherwise disposed of, he will in lieu thereof give the said ^rince the Demain
of Bourbonnois, on the same Conditions the Exchange of the said two Demains had
already been adjusted, before the said Prince's going out of the Kingdom.

9. As to the Relations, Friends, Creatures, Adherents, or Domestics of the
said Prince, either Ecclesiastics, or Laymen, that have followed his Party,
they may by Virtue of the Pardons and Indemnities heretofore mentioned in the
7th. Article, return into France with the said Prince, and fix their abode in
what place they shall think fit. And shall be restored like the other Subjects
of the two Kings to the peaceable possession and enjoyment of their Estates,
Honors, and Dignities (excepting the Places, Offices, and Governments they
possessed before their going out of the Kingdom) the said Estates, Honors, and
Dignities, to be by them enjoyed^ in the same manner they held and did possess
them. But still without pretending to any Restitution of the Enjoyments thereof
for the time past, either from those on whom His Majesty shall have bestowed
them, o^ in any other manner whatever. As also they shall be restored to their
Rights, Names, Dues, Actions, or Pl^as, Successions, Inheritances, fallen to
them, or to the Children, or Widows of the deceased, during their absence out
of the Kingdom; and their Goods shall be returned them if still in Being. And
his Majesty, in Consideration of the Peace, declares all Proceedings and
Decrees Void and of no Effect (excepting what relates to their said Places,
Offices, and Governments) even that of the Parliament of Paris, bearing date
the 27 th. of March, 1654. as well as all Sentences, Judgments, Adjudications,
Donations, Incorporations, and other Acts, that may have been given against
them, or their Heirs, for their having followed the Party of the said Prince;
(...) that as well in Civil as Criminal Cases (unless in (...) Civil matters as
they have voluntarily contested) (...) that neither they, nor their Heirs shall
^ver be (...) to be prosecuted, disturbed, or troubled for the (...). For the
performance of all which Premises His (...) Christian Majesty will cause all
necessary Letters (...) to be expedited, both for the said Prince, his
Rela^ions, Friends, Creatures, Adherents, and Dome(...), whether
Ecclesiastics, or Laymen, containing (...) Premises in secure and due form.
Which Letters (...) shall be delivered to them, as soon as the said Prince on
his part shall have performed the Contents of (...) three Articles, 2, 3, 4 of
this present Treaty.

10. In performance of what is contained in the Sixth Article of this present
Treaty, by which His Most Chri^^^^ Majesty is obliged to give unto the said
Prince of Conde, and to the said Duke of Enguien his Son the Governments, and
the Place therein specified; and his Catholic Majesty promises, and obliges
himself on his (...), upon the Faith and Word of a King, to remove (...) of the
City, Citadel, or Castle of Juliers, the Spa^^sh Garrison which lies in the
said City, Citadel, or (...), and whatever other Forces have lately been put
(...) them, or might again be sent thither, in order to Reinforce the Garrison:
Leaving in the said City, and Citadel, all the Artillery that is marked with
the Arms (...) the House of Cleves, or Juliers, or that has belonged (...)
them: And as for the remainder of the said Artillery, (...), ^unition, and
Instruments of War, his said ^ajesty has in the said City and Castle of
Juliers, it ^^^ll ^e free for him to remove them: Leaving the said (...),
C^tadel, or Castle of Juliers to the possession of (...) said Duke of Newburg,
or such as shall be appointed by him to receive it, in the same Quality as he
possesses the State of Juliers; The said Duke first de^^^^^ing unto his
Catholic Majesty a Writing in due form, signed by his own Hand, to the
Satisfaction of his said Catholic Majesty, whereby he obliges himself not to
Sell, Alienate, or Engage the said City, Citadel, or Castle, to any one, or any
other Princes, or private Persons; And that he shall neither put, or establish
any Garrison there but of his own Forces: As also to grant his said Catholic
Majesty, when ever he shall have occasion for it; a p^ssage for his Forces,
either through the said City, or through the State of Juliers; his said Majesty
paying at his own Cost and Charges the Expense of the passage of the said
Forces, which shall be performed by regulated Days, and reasonable Marches,
without being allowed to sojourn, or remain in the Country, the said Duke on
such Occasions using what^ver precautions may be necessary for the Security of
the said City and Citadel. And in case the said Duke should be wanting in the
performance of those things he obliges himself to, as well not to alienate, as
not to put any Garrison in the said City and Citadel, but of his own Forces, or
should refuse a passage to his Catholic Majesty's Forces, they paying for it:
The said Lord most Christian King promises upon the Faith and Word of a King,
neither to assist the said Duke with Men or Money, nor in any other ways,
either by himself, or others, to defend the said Insruction; but on the
contrary, shall send his own Forces, if necessary, for the Accomplishment of
the Premises.

The Peace being Concluded, the Prince of Conde returned into France; he entered
it by the way of La Capelle, and passed through Soissons, where he refused to
receive any Harangues, or Visits from the Corporations of the City, protesting
that he would receive none until he had first had the Honor of seeing the
King. He went from Soissons the next day, being accompanied with three more in
his Coach, viz. the Duke d' Enguien, Messieurs de Houteville, and Guitant. He
went to Meaux, and from thence to Coulomiers at the Duke of ^^^^^^ville's, from
whence he went to meet the (...) who was at that time in Provence, in
ex^^^^^^ion of the Accomplishment of his Marriage (...) the Infanta of Spain,
which was as it were, (...) first Fruit of the Peace.

The King who had made a Progress to Toulouse, (...) the Queen, Monsieur, and
Mademoiselle, where (...) Cardinal also repaired about the beginning of
^^^^ary, 1660. arrived on the 12 th. of the said M^nth at Arles, 1660.
and the 17 th. at Aix, where the Prince came two Days after. The King receives
the Prince of Conde.
Cardinal Mazarin presented him to the King, who received him with great
Demonstration of Kindness, and reiterated Assurances that he would forget all
that was pa^^. He followed the Court, and assisted at the magnificent Entry
their Majesty's made into Paris on the 26 th. of August of the following Year.

The King had long been desirous to acknowledge the Services of some Persons,
1661.
who were distinguished by their Birth, by honoring them with the Colar of the
Order of the Holy Ghost. The Length of the War had been an Obstacle to it till
then: But the Peace being settled he put that Design in execution, and made
Sixty Knights, and Eight Commanders. The Ceremony was performed in the Church
of the Great Augustin's at Paris, with great Magnificence, on the last of
December, 1661. The Order was con^e^r'd first o^ the Prelates: and after the
Service, the King performed the Ceremony for the Lay-Knights, beginning with
the Prince of Conde, and continuing with the Duke d' Enguien, the Prince of
Conti and the Duke of Verneuil.

Philip the 4 th. King of Spain died on the 17 th. of Sept^mber, 1665. 1667.
When the Negotiations of Peace were begun, and the Marriage of the King of
France with the Infanta first talk of, War in Flanders.
the Spa^iard^ opposed it at first, for fear of being troubled by the French at
some time or other, about the Rights of that Princess: and it fell out
accordingly: The King of France pretending that the Duchy of Brabant and the
Annexions thereof belonged to the Queen, by Right of Devolution after the Death
of Prince Balthazar her Brother, who died on 9 th. of October, 1649. he caused
the said Country to be demanded from the Queen of Spain. Those Pretensions were
laughed at at Madrid: and upon that refusal, which was expected, France waged
War into the Low Countries, having first published a Manifesto, by which that
Crown endeavored to prove, that in taking possession of a Country that
belonged to the Queen, they did not in the least Infringe the last Treaty that
had been made with Spain.

The King departed from St. Germains on the 14 th. of May, and entered the
Fields on the 24 th. he made choice of Marshal de Turenne for his
Lieutenant General; and sent Marshal d' Aumont toward Dunkirk, there to
Command a Body of 7 or 8000 Men. The Marquess of Crequi, who had lived from the
Court for five or six Years last past was recalled, and sent upon the Frontiers
toward Luxemburgh with 3 or 4000 Men. But the Prince of Conde had no
Employment. She Spaniards were constantly beaten during all that Campagn, and
lost Bergue, Furnes, Tournay, Douay, Cou^tra^, and L' Isle.

1668.
The King of France not being satisfied with his Progresses in Flanders resolved
to fall upon the Franche Comte, and to make himself Master of it. He did not
stay for the Spring to undertake that Conquest. The Prince of Conde who had
tarried in his Governments without Action, while Monsieur de Turenne had so
many occasions to distinguish himself in the Low Countries, was sent before
(...) on the 7 th of February of the following (...). The King who had left
Paris to assist at (...) Expedition arriv^d at Dison the following day. The
same day the Prince of Conde Summoned the (...) to surrender. Bezancon
surrenders to the Prince of Conde.
The Inhabitants of that City (...) had been surpised, and were not able to
(...) any resistance resolved immediately to ^ur^^^der, saying, That they were
willing to submit to (...) King of France, and to receive him, but as in (...)
Imperial City. However, the Prince having gi^^^ them to understand that their
City had ceased (...) an Imperial City by the Treaty of Munster, and that in
case they obeyed without delay all (...) Privileges should be preserved, they
surrende^'d innocently without any further Conditions, (...) opened their
Gates. The Duke of Luxemburg entered Salins at the same time, The taking of
Salins, Dole, Gray, and other places.
and Dole was in^^sted on the 9 th. The King and the Prince of C^nde being
agreed about the Measures that were to be taken in order to reduce that City
with as much ease as Bezancon and Salins, Count Chamilly, one of the
Major-Generals of the Army, was orde^'d to summon the Inhabitants to surrender,
and (...) promise them that all their Rights should be preserved, in case they
would submit voluntarily, and to threaten them at the same time, that no
Quarter should be given them if they made the le^st Resistance. Monsieur de
Chamilly received no favorable Answer; whereupon it was resolved to take it by
force; and three Attacks were made (...) the 13 th. in which the Prince exposed
himself extremely. The Besieged defended themselves, and some considerable
Officers were killed in that occasion. The King seeing the Resistance that was
made by those who governed in the place, sent Count Grammont the next day to
represent to the Parliament the Nece^sity they lay under of Surrendering, or of
being exposed to the Fury of an Army, Commanded by a King in Person, and by the
Prince of Conde, who was every where attended with Victory. He showed them not
only that there was a great deal of Rashness in resisting such powerful Forces
commanded by Chiefs, who till then had met with nothing that could ^ppose them,
but also that it was very dangerous, since the King was resolved upon a general
Assault, and to give no Quarter. He added to this that all the Privileges of
the Citizens of Dole should be preserved: That in changing their Government
they should not be the less happy: and finally, that they must determine
instantly. The Parliament was strangely perplexed, but having considered that
it would be better to submit on the Conditions that were proposed to them, than
to run the hazard of seeing a whole City in a Flame, and of being exposed to
the Hostility of the Soldiers, they gave Count Grammont full Satisfaction, and
he carried Hostages along with them for the assurance of the Reduction of that
Place. The Capitulation was Signed on the 14 th. The King also took Grai on the
19 th. The Castles of Iou and St. Anne also surrendered themselves; insomuch
that in less than a Month the whole Franche Comte was reduced.

The Spaniards in order to stop the Torrent of the French Conquests desired a
Cessation of Arms, which was granted them till May; and by the Treaty of Aix la
Chapelle which was made the same Year, the Franche Comte was restored to the
King of Spain.

Nothing considerable passed in relation to the Prince of Conde until the Year
1672. 1672.
when the King of France declared War to the Hollanders. The War of Holland.
We will enter upon no Particulars here; since no body can be ignorant of the
Motives and Pretenses of that War, in which the United Princes were like (...)
have been subdued by a Prince who aimed at the U^^v^^sal Monarchy of Europe,
and could not (...) failed of his Ends had he subdued that flouri^^ing
Republic, of which God has hitherto de^^^^^^ himself the Protector. We will
only say, (...) as the King of France had resolved upon that War, and to that
end assembled an Army of upwards of a Hundred thousand Men, he dirided it into
three Bodies, of which he Command^^ ^he Chief in Person, and gave the two
others ^o the Prince of Conde, and to Count Chamilly. The Forces the King was
to command had their Rendezvous near Charleroy, and the Prince of (...) Army
about Sedan^ consisting of 40000 M^^. The Prince was the first that marched
away, the King was the second, and Count Chamilly followed in order to join
them: after which they (...) all three toward Mastricht, and incampt (...)
five or six Leagues from thence. Some days after a Council of War was held, in
which the Duke of Orleance, the Prince of Conde, and Monsie^r de Turenne
assisted: The first Advices inclined to besiege Mastricht, but upon
considera^ion that it was a dangerous Undertaking, they mar^hed toward the
Rhine. The Body that was commanded by the Prince of Conde marched first, the
King's followed; and the two Armies march^^ for seven or eight Days together
without meeting any Forces, excepting Two hundred Men in a Retrenchment, the
which the Prince took Prisoners^ the Chevalier de la Rochefoucault, Brother to
the Prince of Marsillue, was ^^^ll'd in that occa^^on.

The Prince of Conde having marched on said Siege to Wesel, The Prince of Conde
besieges and takes Wel^el.
while the King besieged Orsoy, and Mo^sieur de Turenne Burik. As soon as the
Prince came before that Town, he caused a Battery to be raised upon the side of
the Rhine to cut off the Communication thereof; and having taken some other
Precautions he made his Lines, and attacked the Fort de la Lip with so much
vigor that he took it. It was a Post of very great Consequence. The taking
thereof cast the Besieged into so great a Consternation, that they desired a
Suspension of Arms, until the next day about Noon: this Suspension being
granted them, they sent two Deputies to the Prince to let him know, that they
were very much surprised that his most Christian Majesty should attack them,
since they were Subjects to the Elector of Brandenburg; and that the States
General were only in possession of the Gates, Rampa^ts, and Fortifications,
without exercising any Jurisdiction in the Town; and that therefore they
desired their City might be declared Neuter: But that Proposition was not
relished. The Prince of Conde continued his Attacks, and ca^sed the Trenches to
be made, Fasci^es to be carried to the side of the Ditch, and finally disposed
all things in order to make way for the Miner. In the mean time the Besieged
having caused some Pieces of Cannon to be placed upon their Ramparts, for the
most pared dismounted, they made so dreadful a Fire that they killed above 4000
French. Tha^ Defense as vigorous as it was did not hinder the Continuation of
that Siege. The Prince of Cond^ attacked the Counterscarp; and as soon as it
was taken, and his Men lodged upon it, the Besieged did capitulate. This place
being of great Consequence, and able to have held out much longer than it did,
the ^^vernour was condemned to lose his Head, but he having given sufficient
Reasons for his Surrendering it at the time he did, the Sentence was not
executed.

The Prince of Conde marched from Wesel to (...) which surrendered immediately,
and from (...) ^o E^^rik which made no resistance neither. (...), which was
besieged by the King, sur^^^dred at that time; for which the Governor (...)
his Head.

The King of France who had not expected those place^ would have been taken so
easily, being de^^^^^s to push on his Conquests, was stopped by the (...) of the
States General, which ran to the defe^^e of Iss^l, which is a River that covers
all that ^^rt of the Country he designed to make himself Master of. He resolved
to pass the said River; b^t whereas it was very deep, and the Banks of a very
difficult ascent, he was willing to have the Prince of Conde's Advice before he
attempted any thing, and accordingly he writ to him about it: Although the
Prince of Conde was used to great E^terprizes he looked upon that to be very
dang^ro^s, and answered the King that it was impr^cticable, but that he advised
him to attempt to cross the Rhine, where the Hollanders were not u^^n their
Guard. The Prince who was desirous (...) facilitate the Conquest of Holland to
the King, ^^ving bribed a Gentleman of that Country, the ^^^d Gen^leman showed
him a Foo^d toward Tol^^^^^, where the Water was so shallow at the En^r^nce,
and at the going out, that there was not ^b^ve Two hundred Foot to swim. Count
de G^iche made a trial of it, in order to be satisfied of the truth, and having
found it wadeable in tha^ place by the trial he made of it himself, with o^e of
his Gentlemen, he acquainted the Prince of Conde therewith, who immediately
gave an account of it to the King. That Monarch was so delighted with that News
that he instantly quitted his Camp with his Household; and having le^t the
Command of the remainder of his Army to Monsieur de Turenne went to join the
Prince. The Dutch receiving some Intelligence of the King of France's Design,
sent some Forces to the place where the French designed to cross the Rhine; but
by reason of some wrong Motions they could not possibly foresee, Passages of
^^e Rhine.
they had not time to retrench themselves. In the mean time as soon as the King
of France was arrived upon the Banks of the Rhine, he caused some Batteries to
be made, and the Army began to cross. Abundance of Volunt^ers and Persons of
very great Quality went over at the same time, viz. The Duke of Vivonne, the
Counts de Saulx, de Lionne, de Chauvigny and the Count of Nogent who was
drowned.

The Prince of Conde who would have a share in that Action crossed immediately
in a Boat with his Son the Duke d' Enguien. The Prince of Conde passes.
His Nephew the Duke of Longueville swam it over.

As soon as those two Lords where got over, they ran full speed toward a
Barrier where some Forces had posted themselves, and began to fire upon them.

Those Forces were surpised and frightened to that degree that they demanded
Quarter, which the Prince of Conde granted them: but the Duke of Longueville
who had been drinking a little leapt over the Barrier: The Duke of Enguien
followed him, and those Men having taken up their Arms again, the Duke of
Longueville was killed. The Prince of Conde immediately ran thither to moderate
the indiscreet heat of those young Lords, but he came too late, and was wounded
in the Left Hand with a Musket Shot. Although his Wound was very painful he
would not move from the Combat until all those Men were killed. The Wound the
Prince received was not dangerous, but whereas it was in that Hand where he had
the Gout commonly, it was so troublesome to him, that not ^^^ng able to sleep
day or night, or to serve any longer, he was obliged to retire to Arnhem which
the French made themselves Masters of, (...) well as of several other places.
Every body knows what passed in the beginnings of that (...).

The City of Utrecht surrendered it self like the ^e^t, 1673.
and the Marquess of Rochefort went to take possession of it. The Prince of
Conde being cured of his Wound repaired thither on the 1 st. of May of the
following Year: Honors done to the Prince of Conde at Utrecht.
He was received there with all the Discharge of the Canon, and the Ringing of
the Bills: Monsieur Stoppa who was Governor there presented him with the Keys
of the Town in a Silver Basin at his arrival there: having held them for
sometime in his Hands he returned them to him, after which he was conducted to
the House that had been prepared for him, by the Garrison, which was all in
Arms.

Sometime after the Prince of Conde's arrival at Utrecht he went to several
places to try whether he could undertake any thing: But he found so good a^
order every where that he was forced to go back without doing any thing, having
only cau^ed two Bridges to be built upon the Leck at ^^llemburg, and at Wick,
in order to have a Comm^nication with the Forces that were in the Betau. He lay
sick a while, and being obliged to keep his Chamber several days, he constantly
had the most learned Men in Utrecht about him, whom he received with all the
Civilities imaginable. It is reported that he was desirous to see Spinoza, and
^old him smiling, That if he would follow him into France, he would put him in
a way to live conformably to the Principles of his Theology; that Paris neither
wanted fine Women, nor Pleasures; although he looked upon him as a Derst, and a
Man who had no Religion, he was charmed with the Conversation he had with him^

The best part of the Roman Catholics of the Country of G^elder were so
pleased to find themselves under the Government of a Catholic King, that their
joy cannot be expressed. Being in great hopes that their Religion would become
the uppermost, they sent Deputies to the Prince of Conde to de^^^e him to give
them those Churches the Protestants possessed in the open Country: The Prince
who was sensible that they knew not what they desired, answered with some
Railleries that put them clear out of countenance: After which he told them,
That he had no orders from his Majesty as to what related to what they desired;
that in case the King should make himself Master of all the Country they should
have as many Churches as they pleased; but that whereas it was not certain yet
he advised them to remain quiet, and not so much as to accept one of the
Protestant Churches, although it were profer'd them; to avoid the
Mortifications of restoring them as soon as the French Army should march away.

1674.
The Prince of Conde was very sensible that it was impossible for the King of
France to preserve all the places he got from the Hollanders with that
surprising swiftness every body has heard of. The States General who expected
nothing less than the War that was declared against them were surpised: But
being recovered out of their fright and surprise, having made a League with the
House of Austria, and placed the present King of England at the Head of it,
France found it self obliged to abondon all at once almost all the Conquests it
had made, and began to fear in its turn: That Crown fearing not to come off
with Honor and Advantage out of a War, they had began with so much
haughtiness, they had recourse to Intreague. To that end in order to divide the
Hollanders from the rest of the Allies, they made them advanta^^^^^
Propositions in case they would hearken to ^^^eace. They offered to restore
them Mastricht and Grave, which were the two only places they (...) preserved;
but the Hollanders refused to hear^^n to it, and chose to venture the Hazards
of a (...), rather than to forsake the Emperor, the King of Spain, and the
other Princes that were in League with them, and from whom they had ^^ceiv'd an
Assistance that had broken all the M^asures of France. The King of France
finding that there was no hopes that way, endeavored to ^^atter the Ambition
of the Prince of Orange by great Promises; but that great Prince rejected them
with scorn, and acquainted the States General with the Propositions that had
been made to (...), assuring them that he would compass the ^^^ing of the
French out of their Country, and that he would give them a considerable Check,
in case his Sentiments were followed, and his Resolutions executed.

The different Interests of the Princes that were (...) League together hindered
things from being car^^^d on in the Manner that great Prince desired it. Some
were for besieging Grave, or Mastricht; and others for the like reason desired
the Siege of C^^rleroy; others did not care any place should be besieged
provided a stop were put to the French (...) and that it should be hindered
from sending any Succors to Marshal de Turenne: France in the mean time
pro^ited by those Irresolutions. The Prince of Orange was enraged that he could
under^ake nothing, although he had an Army of near 60000 Men; he met with
Oppositions every where. In fine, after many Obstacles that Prince carried it
in a Council of War, and the Siege of Grave was resolved upon, and put in
execution by Monsieur de Rabenhaut. But the taking of that place not proving so
easy as it was imagined, about three Months were spent in the taking of it;
the Prince of Orange at that time designed the Siege of Charleroy. Nevertheless
he seemed to have a Design upon some other place. The Prince of Conde who was
not easily deceived, posted himself at Pieton, between Charleroy, and Fontaine
L' Esveque, having the Sambre behind him, and two Woods pretty near the Head of
his Army, between which the Prince of Orange was obliged to pass to come to a
Combat, which rendered the Approaches of the Dutch almost impossible. The Prince
of Orange in order to oblige the Prince of Conde to quit his Post, made a
Detachment of 7 or 8000 Men, which marched toward the Meuse: But the Prince of
Conde suspecting that they only designed to draw him to some Inconveniences^
only sent some of his Forces that way, which broke the Prince of Orange's
Measures. These two Princes esteemed and dreaded each other reciprocally: but
the one was better served than the other. The Prince of Orange daily formed new
Designs, without being able of putting any of them in execution; and the Prince
of Conde proposed nothing but what he did execute at the same time. This last
who took the advantage of the Differences that reigned among the Allies, kept
still on the side of the Prince of Orange's Army, and having observed in one of
the Marches of that Army, that the Ground obliged him to separate from it, he
caused his Cavalry to mount, and before the Van could succor the Rear he
fought with so much Fortune, that we may say that he had the Advantage at
first, but it proved otherwise in the end; as will be seen hereafter. This
Battle we are going to relate, was fought at Senef on the 11 th. of August.

T^^ S^ccess of that Battle has been so variously (...) it is difficult to
decide who had the (...) both Parties have pretended to it, and (...) Reason,
since it passed very equally (...) both sides.

(...) the Armies were about Nivelle, The Battle of Senef.
the Con(...) as earnest and sollicitous to come to ^ Combat, as the French
were careful to avoid it, (...) being resolved not to engage with the Prince
(...) unless the advantage were visible on their (...). The reason thereof was
imputed in the (...) place to the eagerness wherewith the young Pr^nce of
Orange desired to open himself a Passage (...) ^r^nce through Victory, in order
to revenge the I^^u^ies this Country had received from the (...), and at the
same time to make his first trial ^f a pitched Battle against so Famous and so
Expe^^^nc'd a General as the Prince of Conde. In the ^^cond place, it was
reported that the Prince of (...) who was an old General, thought he should
expo^e his Glory too much, by encountering a ^oung Prince of Twenty Three Years
of Age. ^^ere was another reason which curbed the Natural eagerness of the
Prince of Conde, although the Army he Commanded was composed of good O^ficers,
and chosen Soldiers, well disciplined, ^^ready innur'd to Combats, and flushed
by the continual Success that had attended them in two Wars, which could not be
said of that which was Commanded by the Prince of Orange. This Reason was, that
reflecting to himself that he had been very much out of Favor at the Court of
France, during the Reign of Lewis the 14 th. he considered that he should be
called to a stricter account than ^^y other, should any considerable Misfortune
befall his Army, by reason that thereby the Confederates would have had a free
Passage into France, the Frontiers on that side remaining defenseless: And it
is most certain that the loss of a Battle on the side of the French, would have
been attended with terrible Consequences, and would have shook the Grandeur of
that Crown, by reason of the Discontents that reigned in the Kingdom, and in
which the Prince of Conde was suspected to have a share. Those two different
Dispositions obliged the two Generals, the one carefully to seek, and the other
to avoid a Combat. In fine, the Prince of Orange concluding that the only way
to oblige the French to fight, was to undertake the Siege of some considerable
Place, which would engage them to the Relief thereof, decamped and marched
toward Senef: He divides his Army in three Bodies; the German^ under the
Command of Count de Souch^ led the Van; the Spaniards under Prince Vaudemont
were placed in the Rea^, and the Dutch Commanded by Count Waldeck composed the
main Body.

The Prince of Conde who was Retrenched pretty near them, having observed their
March, and seen as we have already observed; that they were of necessity
obliged to pass some Defilies that were very narrow, tarried until the Van, and
the ma^n Body were passed. And as soon as he perceived that the Rear began to
march, he came out of his Retrenchments and charged the Spaniards vigorously,
who made no great resistance; Insomuch that almost in a moment he killed above
1500 Men upon the spot, pillaged, or burnt part of the Equipages, took
Standards, and several Prisoners of Note. The Prince of Orange who was at the
He^d of his Forces, was extremely surpised at what pas'd in the Rear, and
running thither full speed he found all his Men in disorder, and that the
Prince of Conde in order to improve his Advantage, endeavou^'d to cut off one
part of the Army, which was divided from the other by a Wood: That Prince had
only time to possess himself a Rising beyond Senef, where he posted his Horse,
and placed three strong Battalions before them to guard a Defily; but he could
by no means succor the Spaniards, who being broken ^ell upon the Dutch and put
them in a terrible disorder; insomuch, that the Prince of Conde pursuing his
Advantage made an end of breaking them with ease.

Had the Prince of Conde contented himself with that Success, it is most
certain that the Victory could not have been disputed, but being encouraged by
the hopes of obtaining a complete Victory, and believing that the Dutch whom he
looked upon as being the worst Soldiers in the World, would never stand their
Ground after the absolute Defeat of the Spaniards, he caused his whole Army to
advance. This Prince who had p^^form'd one of the bravest and boldest Actions
in Nature, whereby he would have gained an Immortal Glory had he stopped there,
ordered Chevalier de Tourille, Lieutenant General, to attack the Prince of
Orange. Chevaliar de Tourille answered, That he was ready to go wherever be
should Command, but that if he might be allowed to speak his Mind, The Prince
of Orange was posted so advantageously, that he would certainly lose abundance
of Me^ if he came to a Battle: The Prince of Conde who did not love him,
replied in a disdainful manner, That he did not ask his Advice; To which he
added, That he had never been deceived in his Opinion of him, which was, that
he was much fitter to advise and reason than to fight. These Words stung this
Officer to the quick, who certainly was very brave: He marched away that very
moment without a Reply, and passed a Defily in order to charge the Prince of
Orange's Horse, which stood in Battalia, and executed the Prince of Conde's
Orders, but he lost his Life by it, as well as most the Officers that followed
him. He lived but one Hour after it, and a Moment before he died, he declared,
That he did not regret his Life, since he died for the Service of his Prince,
but that he should have been very glad to live a few Hours longer to see what
would become of the Prince of Conde 's Undertaking, or rather to see him perish.

In the mean time the Prince of Orange was marching to the Relief of the
Spaniards, and of the Squadrons he had detached: but he found himself
immediately hemmed in by the Run-aways whom he could never stop, either by
Words, Blows, Promises, or Reproaches. The Germans being informed of what
passed came in time to reinforce the Dutch, at which time the Battle engaged,
and began with great fury on both sides. The Prince of Conde having occasioned
the loss of many brave Men was animated to that degree that he exposed himself
like the meanest S^^ldiers. The Dutch made a very brave resistance; But the
Prince of Orange perceiving that he was in danger of losing his Post made three
Battallions advance to sustain those that were: Before he could post them, his
Men being pressed by the Prince of Conde retired to Fay, a Village that stood
close by them, fortified with a Castle and a Church, and surrounded with
Hedges. The Prince of Conde who had no longer any regard for his Men, without
minding the Losses he had sustained in the two preceding Actions, ordered
Fo^ces to march that way, and having met the three Battalions we have
mentioned, that had not yet joined the others, he put them to flight.

The next thing was to force the Prince of Orange out of Fay; but that did not
prove easie^ that Prince who gave so many proofs of Bravery and Prudence in
that occasion, being covered on o^e side by a Marsh, and on the other by a
Wood, which he had lined with Infantry: But as nothing appeared impossible to
the Prince of Conde, h^ sent the Duke of Luxemburg toward the Wood, while he
undertook to force the Village with his b^st Forces; but he met with a brave
Resistance o^ all sides: The Duke of Luxemburg was forced to retire with the
loss of his best Officers and Soldiers: and the reason why the Prince did not
do the same was, that he was resolved to overcome at any rate, to make
Atonement for the loss of so many brave Men he had exposed without any
necessity. The remainder of the Officers seeing the first Prince of the Blood
exposed to the utmost P^rils resolved to share them with him. Never did People
expose themselves with more fury, no^ ever was a braver Resistance made. The
^^ench being repulsed every where made new Effor^s (...) drove two Battallions
of Infantry into a (...) which they had posted themselves, and charged through
the Squadrons that sustained them, but they lost so many Men in that Action,
that they had no reason to boast of the Advantages they had obtain. This
dreadful Combat lasted eight Hours by Daylight, and two Hours by the Light of
the Moon, which did set to the extreme Grief of the two Generals.

The Prince of Orange (while this Action lasted) gave all necessary Orders with
an admirable Prudence. He neglected no Advantage he could improve, and charged
the French several times at the Head of his Squadrons with that Bravery and
Courage he has demonstrated in so many occasions: He opposed his own Men that
were defeated and fe^^ upon him, as well as his Enemies who pursued their
Victory with great vigor, and remained engaged for above six Hours during the
greatest heat of the Combat, until he was forced away by the Runaways. He
rallied them several times, and charged with them afresh. In fine, he exposed
himself, as well as the Prince of Conde, to more dangers than the meanest
Soldier; insomuch that Count de Souches, in one of his Letters to the
States General upon that Subject, declared, That during all the time of the
Combat, that Prince had shown the Conduct of an old General, and the Valor of
a Caesar^ His Allies and Friends, in giving him the Praises and Glory he
deserved, did no more than his very Enemies allowed. They said, that the Prince
of Conde had multiplied himself during the Combat, and that he had met the
Prince of Orange every where. But the greatest Testimony he received of it, and
that which was most glorious, was that which the Prince of Conde gave himself,
who speaking of that great Monarch, said, That he had behaved himself in every
thing like an old Captain, excepting only his exposin^ himself to too many
dangers, wherein he had (...) like a young man. Nevertheless the Prince of
Conde, as old as he was^ had committed the same fault: For, as we have already
noted, he exposed himself that day as much as the youngest man in the Army,
when he perceived that the Battle grew bloody, and that all was at stake, so
uncertain the Success did appear. The Combat was obstinate on both sides, and
the two Generals exposed themselves to that degree, that it was evident they
had much rather dye than lose the Battle.

The number of the two Armies being pretty equal at the beginning of the
Battle, it was computed, that the number of the Slain proved also partly equal
on both sides, and that about 15 or 16000 men had been killed, but the French
lost more Officers than the Confederates.

Night having parted the two Armies, rather (...) the Weariness or Weakness of
the Combat^^^^^s, the French retired to their Camp, and two ^^urs after the
Prince of Orange repaird to that which he had designed for his Army the day
be^^re^ The Confederates pretended the Victory^ because they remained Masters
of the Field of Battle; and the^ French challenged it, by reason that they took
a greater number of Prisoners and Standards. But without deciding who had the
Honor of the Day, we may say, that the Prince of Orange go^ a great Victory,
in not being vanquished by the Prince of Conde; and the Prince of Conde's Glory
(...) as great^ in not being ove^come by the Prince o^ Or^nge.

After the two Armies had refreshed themselves, and had repaired as much as
they could the Damages they had sustained in that bloody Battle, they ^^arched
into the Field again, and kept the World in exp^^tation of a second Engagement
before the end of the Campaign. The Prince of Orange used his utmost
Endeavors, in order thereunto, but the Prince of Conde chose such advantageous
Posts, and retrenched himself so well, that it was impossible to force him
without disadvantage. He contented himself with observing the motion of the
Enemies, and with preserving the Conquests France had m^de, and to hinder the
Confederate Army from entering into France, which was the Design the
Confederates had projected.

The Prince of Orange finding that it was impossible The Siege of Oudenarde
raised.
to come to any Action with the Prince of Conde, who kept upon the defensive,
laid Siege before Oudenarde, in the Month of September, whereby he obtained his
End, which was to draw the French out of their Retrenchments. Accordingly the
Prince of Conde having received a Supply of Forces, which Marshal ^' Humier^
was to bring him, 16^9.
he set immediately forward to attempt the relief of that place^ As soon as the
French Army appeared, the Prince of Orange assembled a Council of War, in which
he proposed to march out of the Lines, in order to attack the Prince of Conde,
before his Forces could be refreshed; which was very well projected. The
Spaniards were of the same opinion, but Count de Souches refused flatly to
consent to it, whereby that occasion was lost; besides, it created such
Differences among the general Officers, that the Germans quitted the Trenches
the next day, and posted themselves a league from thence, whereby the French
got an opportunity to send whatever supply they pleased into the Town. This
obliged the Prince of Orange to raise the Siege: Whereupon a French Officer
telling the Prince of Conde, that that Prince was unhappy; he replied, That he
was unhappy as he was brave, and that in time that Gene^^l would prove as
formidable to France as his Forefathers had proved to Spain.

The following Campaign the King of France took the Castle of D^nant, and
besieged Huy, which he took about the beginning of June, and the 9th of the
said Month he invested Limbourg; the thirteenth the Lines of Circumvallation
were begun: The Prince of Conde, and the Duke ^' Enguien arrived in the Camp
the same day, with eight Squadrons of Horse, and the following day the Marshal
of Creque repaired thither also with 3000 Horse. The Trenches were opened the
same day. The Prince of Orange prepared for the relief of this place, but it
surrendered, without making any resistance, before that Prince arrived.

The French Army had fatigued too much to ac^^pt any thing else; besides, the
time of the Campaign of Germany approaching, there was a necessity of sending
Forces to Monsieur de Turenne, who was in great want of it. To that end a
Detachment was made, and sent to him; and there b^ing nothing more to be done
in Flanders, the King retired to Versailles, and left the command of (...) Army
to the Prince of Conde. The Detachment that was sent in Germany turned the
Scale; (...) wher^as the Prince of Orange was upon the de^^^sive before, the
Prince of Conde was obliged to do it in his turn, and was put to a great loss.
However, the Confederates attempting nothing, (...) Campaign ended without any
considerable Archievements on either side.

While the Armies were without Action in Flanders, Marshal Turenne 's Death.
all things were dispos^d to fight briskly in Germany, and the Vice-Comte of
Turenne was killed at the Eve of the Battle he designed to fight against ^he
Imperialists, on the 27th of July. The Prince of Conde received an Order to
command in Germany, after the death of that General: He left Flanders on the
10th of August, and left the command of the Army to the Duke of Luxemburg. The
Imperialists had besieged Haguenau on the 20th of the same Month: The Prince of
Conde at that ^ime joined the Fr^nch Army that was encamped near S^edstadt,
with a Supply of 15000 men, and being informed of the Siege Montecuculy had
made, he marched away immediately with the Forces he had brought along with
him, and went toward ^enfeldon and Erstein, in order to go near the River
Prent^^, to encamp on the 22th at Holsheim, reporting, that he designed to
attack the Imperialists, or cut off their Communication with Strasbourg.
Montecuculy having notice of his march, went away the same day from Hague^a^,
in order to offer the Prince Battle, 1675
and left 4000 men before the Place. The next day he arrived at Gartnervelt,
where the Forces he had left before H^guenau came to join him, and he drew so
near the Prince of Conde, that there was nothing but the River between the two
Armies; but there fell so much Rain about that time, that neither of the
Generals durst undertake any thing. The Imperialists only took some Prisoners,
among whom was the Prince of Conde's Steward. They likewise cut over a Bridge
at Howart near Stratsburg, in order to attack the French Army.

Whereas that City had favored the Designs of Montecuculy in the Siege of
Hagu^nau, which he was obliged to raise, the Magistrates were no sooner
informed of the arrival of the Prince of Conde, but they sent Deputies to him,
to excuse what they had done; but they did not receive an Answer suitable to
their Desires. The Prince of Conde made answer to them, That after having
dispatched what was most in haste, he would visit them, if the King would
believe him. That quick haughty Answer alarmed that City, which was not
unacquainted with the Reputation and Humor of that Prince; they had already
made trial of what he was capable of doing, for at the beginning of the War,
Ricousse, one of the Officers of his Household, had made an Attempt upon the
Bridge of Stratsburg, upon less provocation, the which had been contrived in
his Closet.

But let us return to Montecuculy. He was no sooner come near the Post, where
the Prince of Conde was retrenched, but that Prince fired two Pieces of
Ordinance to offer him the Combat. The Armies were very equal in str^ngth: But
the Emperors General dreading the first fire of the ^^ench, and the Reputation
of a Prince^ who passed for the best Captain of the Age he ^ived in would
ha^ard nothing, and retired under the Canon of Str^t^burg. Nevertheless, he
caused all the Equipage to be placed upon the side of the Ditch of that City,
in order not to be incommoded thereby, in case the Prince of Conde should
attack him; but that Prince did not intend to attack him in that Post. He
retired toward the Mountains, and from thence to Chatenois, where there was
abundance of Forage.

Mont^cuculy went to encamp at Obern^eim, where he received a considerable
Supply of Horse and Foot. The Prince of Conde having notice of it, ^earing that
General might come to attack him, ^ortified his Camp with a surprising
diligence, and having soon after received a Reinforcement of 2000 Horse, and
some Foot, he thought himself secure. He had had a mind to quit the Post in
which he was retrenched, but whereas it shut up the Passages into Lorrain, upon
which the Imperialists had some designs, he remained in his Camp, insomuch that
Montecuculi thought of nothing farther, than to fortify himself in Alsatia,
where he made some small Conquests. However, in order ^o raise some Jealousy
in the Prince of Conde, he caused Savern^ to be besieged; but the Prince was no
wise moved at it, knowing that the place was very well fortified, and that the
Governor would make a brave Defense. And indeed, they were obliged to raise the
Siege: The Marquess of Bade Dourlak, who commanded the Siege, after the raising
of it, marched into the Country of Brisgaw, which obliged 4000 Horse the Prince
of Conde had sent thither, to make a Diversion, to re^ire to the main Army.
Thus ended the Campaign of 1675. in Germany, and all those of the Prince of
Conde.

The loss of Monsieur de Turenne was exceeding sensible to the King of France,
for several Reasons: But had it only been for the Good of the Kingdom, he could
never regret that General too much: And indeed there were so few persons
capable of filling up his place, that when the King had examined i^, he could
hardly fix upon one among all the Princes and Marshals of France. The Prince of
Conde was generally the only man whose Valor and Merit was known to every
body; but Mons. de Louvois was not his Friend, and the King did nothing without
the Advice of that Minister. No body can imagine what reason Mons. de Louvoi^
had to complain of the Prince, but yet it is most certain, that he did not love
him, and that he dissuaded the King, as much as in him lay, from giving him the
Command of the Army in Germany. He acknowledged indeed, that the Prince of
Conde was one of the greatest Cap^ains of the Age, and that no body could deny
him a Glory he had acquired by an infinite number of Battles he had won; but at
the same time he said, that he was too fiery, and too undertaking; that it was
evident by the Battle of Senef^, that he preferred his own Glory to the Good of
the Kingdom; that a wiser General would have gained an entire Victory, and
preserved those Forces which he lost by his own Fault, after the first
Advantages he had obtained over the Enemies; and that he durst not answer, that
that Prince was as well affected as he had promised to be^ when he made his
Peace with his Majesty.

Whatever Monsieur de Louvois could say to oblige the King not to give the
Command of his Army to the Prince of Conde, that Monarch was so well persuaded
of his Capacity, Prudence, and Gallantry, as well as of the Fidelity he had
pro^is^d him, that at that time he had no regard to h^^ Ministers
Remonstrances. 1676.
But the Prince de^^red himself of that Command which was offered him, by the
Conditions he would make with the King: He desired the Duke d' Engui^is might
^^^mand the Army jointly with him, promising, ^^at he should do nothing without
his Order; and tha^ it was only to have the satisfaction to see his Son, whom
he loved entirely, in a condition to acquire Glory. But the King, who had no
great ^indness for the Duke d' Enguiris, being moreover of a temper to bestow
his Favors freely, without compulsion, would not hearken to that Proposition:
Insomuch, that the Marquess of Luovois taking the advantage of that
Conjuncture, proposed the Duke of Luxemburg, who was accepted that very moment.

As soon as the Duke of Luxemburg had received his Orders, he went away for
Alsatia, which was the Rendezvous of the Army, which had never been so ^ine nor
so numerous: But all the Officers soon found, that the King had given him an
Employment he was not capable of, and that the Prince of Conde was the only man
fit to discharge that Command with Honor in that conjuncture of Affairs. The
Proof of this soon appeared, when the Du^e of Lorrain besieged Philipsburg:
That Place h^ld out four months, and yet the Duke of L^xemb^rg was not in a
Condition to relieve it, though at the head of an Army of 50000 men. The King was
v^ry much troubled when the news of the taking of that place was brought him,
that he had not sent the Prince of Conde to command in Germany; but there was
no Remedy: However, he asked him what should have been done to save that place;
Sir, answered the Prince, the Duke of Luxemburg should have hindered the Duke
of Lorrain from besieging it; and since ^e ^ad committed that fault, he should
have ventured the Army, and have gone to force the Enemy in his Retrenchments
to the hazard of a thousand lives, if he had had as many. That was the only way.

Although the War continued, and that with all the Vigor imaginable, Conferences
were held at Nimnegen, for a Peace, the which was concluded in the manner every
body knows.

MEMOIRS OF THE Prince of Conde. BOOK VII.
AFter the Peace of Nimwegen, The Prince of Conde retires to Chantilly.
the Prince of Conde resolved to desire the King's Leave to retire to
Chantilly. He told the King in a submissive respectful manner, That his Age and
Indispositions obliged him to entreat his Majesty to consent to that
Retirement. The King having granted it, the Prince quitted the Court, and
repaired to that House, there to lead a private life.

Diverse Reasonings were used upon the Motives 1679.
that had induced so great a Prince to lead a life so contrary to his Rank, in
a Country House. Diverse Reasonings upon that R^treat.
Some imagined that his Indispositions had put him upon that Resolution, and
that it had made him apprehensive, not only that his Health would still be more
impaired in the Agitations of the Court, but also that as it might hinder him
from making his Court to the King regularly, his Majesty mi^ht impute that
sometimes to a want of Consideration and Respect, which only proceeded from
Infirmity. Others conceiving no other Idea's of the motives of that Hero's
Retreat, but such as were noble and sublime said, That after having acquired so
so much Glory in Motion and in Action, he was willing to acquire a new sort of
Glory in Rest and Solitude: That after so many Battles, and the tumult of Arms,
he was desirous to taste those peaceable Virtues, and that q^iet Glory that is
neither ^o be shared with the Soldiers, nor with Fortune, in which all is
charming, and nothing dazzles, which is beheld without being troubled with the
sound of Trumpets, or with the noise of Guns, nor by the Cries of the Wounded,
in which a Hero, reduced to himself, and possessing himself, appears as great,
and is as much respected as when he commands Armies, when all moves at his nod,
when he combats and gains Victories. Others alleged, that the Prince of Conde
received, from time to time, at Court, Malifications from the King^ who
remembering what he had done formerly, gave him sometimes marks of a secret
Resentment, and of an Aversion that had never been absolu^ely removed: That the
Prince of Conde being very sensible of it, had wisely resolved to remove an
Object from his Majesty's Eyes, which was not very agreeable to him, the which
reviving the thoug^ts of former Transactions, might prove prejudicial to the
Fortune of the Duke d' Enguien's his Son.

It is most certain, that after the Peace of Nimwegen, nay, ever since the
Prince retired to Chantilly, his Highness received grievous Mortifications.
When the Prince of Conde was married to Mademoiselle de Blois, the King's
Daughter by Madam de la Velliere, the Prince had the vexation to find (...) in
the Contract of Marriage he was to sign, 1655.
(...) Title of High and Mighty Lord, which had al^ays been given him, was
omitted: And there^^^^ when Monsieur Colbert presented the said Contra^^ to him
to sign it, he refused it, and went to ^^^plain to the King about it, who
having heard (...), answered with a disobliging tone, Sign Co^sin, (...).
Whereupon the Prince making a great bow did sign. He was likewise reduced to
the hardship of do^^ng his Rank, upon all occasions, with the King's natural
Sons; for, in order to please him, and to make his Court, he behaved himself
toward them as if they had been his Equals, though never so young. Moreover,
when the Prince of C^^de was married, the King having made enqui^y, whether the
Prince of Conde had visited Count (...) Vermandois, Brother of Mademoiselle de
Blois, the Prince, who had not made that Visit, being informed therewith,
immediately waited upon him, to congratulate his Sisters Marriage with his
Nephew; and whereas the Count de Vermandois took but a Folding Chair for
himself, and caused an Arm-Chair to be presented to the Prince of Conde, the
Prince durst not accept it, and sat upon a Folding^Chair, like him. The King
was extremely pleased thereat, and yet he told the Prince, as soon as he saw
him, Cousin, you should have taken the Arm-Chair; I expect that Vermandois
should respect you. The Prince of Conde gave several other Instances of his
Care to please the King, by the Esteem and singular Consideration he expressed
toward his Majesty's natural Sons. I say, he gave other Instances of it in the
same Conjuncture, in the manner I am going to relate. He being very earnest in
Discourse with some Courtiers, the Duke d^ Maine, and some other young Lords,
being at Play near them, and making a great deal of noise, which interrupted
their Conversation, which was very serious, and in which the Prince was very
earnest, 1679.
his Highness said angrily, Hinder those Children from making so much noise.
The young Duke ^u Maine, who was but a Child at that time, having heard it, and
addressing himself to the Prince of Conde, spoke these words full of Wit and
Vivacity: Sir, I should esteem my self very happy, to be able to make as much
noise hereafter as you have done by so many great Actions, and so many glorious
Victories as you have achieved. The Prince of Conde had no sooner heard those
words, but he reported them to the King, in order to please him, and to gain
his Favor.

In fine, all these different Motives which were alleged about the Prince of
Conde's Retreat, may be joined, and perhaps might altogether induce the Prince
to resolve upon the passing of the remainder of his Life at Chantilly, wrap^ up
in his own Merit, and in his own Virtue, although at that very time
Deliberations were made in Poland, to raise him to the Throne. And indeed, in
that charming Solitude, in which he only lived upon Milk, by reason of the Gout
he was very much tormented with, he preserved a Life for near Twenty years
long, which perhaps would not have lasted so long in the Tumults of the Court,
he acquired a new kind of Glory, which was very considerable; and whereas he
only went to Court from time to time, about three or four times a year, and
that he omitted nothing at those times to please the King, he gained his Favor
absolutely, and engaged him more and more to conceive Sentiments of Affection
for the Duke of Enguien.

O^^upations of the Prince of Conde at Chan^^^ly.
As soon as the Prince of Conde was retired at Chantilly, he applied himself to
adorn and embelish his Solitude by all possible means, in which he succeeded
admirably. That House of Chantilly was only an old Remainder of the House of
M^ntmorency, and an old Castle that had nothing fine or regular in it; but the
Prince made an enchanted Palace of it. And indeed, it was fit he should have a
House not only sui^able to the greatne^s of his Birth, but also to the Glory he
had acquired in the World: Therefore he imagined a very fine Project, which he
executed very nobly, and brought it to such a degree of perfection, that in the
Order and Cimitry of his abode^ on all sides it was easy to discover the
greatness of his Genius, and Instances of the nobleness of his Heart. Besides
the Cimitry and Beauty of the Building, the Groves, Brooks, Arbors, Fountains,
Canals, Walks, and Waterworks that played night and day, all showed the
elevation or greatness of his Soul, and the politeness of his Mind.

In this charming Abode he employed himself continually in a manner that was
worthy of him: He consulted all manner of good Books, of which he was an
admirable good Judge: He carefully observed all manner of Decencies: He
employed and made those who came to visit him enjoy all manner of innocent.
Pleasures and Divertisements: He made continual Reflections, at his leisure
hours, on all the Events of his Life, and drew considerable Lessons from
thence, for the conduct of Life: And indeed he corrected, in his Retirement,
diverse Defects that had tarnish'd the Luster of his Glory^ He imparted his
Knowledge to some, his Counsels to others, and gave marks of his Affection to
all.

The most ambitious Courtiers, and those that were most fixed to the Court
often, went to study that great man in his Retirement, and always came back
with some Improvement. Chantilly was only frequented by men of Sense, and by
such who had Wit enough to delight in hearing that Prince relate the diverse
Events of his Life, 1680.
and a Thousand other curious things he was wont to say so agreeably upon all
the Subjects he spoke on: Insomuch that whereas Chantilly abounded equally in
things usefu^ and ag^eeable, those who were there, forgot all other places with
Joy.

The Prince of Conde 's passion for War.
The Prince of Conde still preserving a violent Passion for the Glory that is
acquired in War, loved Motion and Action even in his Retirement. Being
possessed with a noble Jealousy, he could hardly hear any Discourse of War, in
the first year of his Solitude, but he took fire immediately: But the Peace not
allowing him to appear at the head of Armies, he applied himself in gathering
and causing those who made their court to him together, the sweetest and most
useful Fruits of his Victories and most surprising Actions.

Visits from the Prince of Conde to the King.
He went out of his Retirement from time to time, to visit the King at St.
Germain, and at Versailles, especially upon all extraordinary occasions. Of all
Courtiers, none approached the Throne with so much Respect, or spoke to His
Majesty with so much Submission as he did. And therefore the wisest and most
skilful followed him in those Occasions, to study his way of making his court
to the King.

1681.
The Report of his Retirement, and of his eminent Qualifications, drew abundance
of the People out of all the Provinces of France, Every body is earnest to
visit the P. of Conde at Chantilly.
and from the most distant Countries, out of curiosity to see the Wonders that
were published about it; and they always found more than had been told them.
The favorable reception he made them, his obliging Behavior toward them, his
Application in giving orders ^o divert them, without sparing any Cost; what
they saw him do, whatever they heard him say, all charmed them, and they
decla^^d afterward every where, that they had found him no less admirable at
Chantilly, than in Sieges and Combats. And therefore whatever care was taken to
show Strangers of consideration the greatest Curiosities in France, they were
uneasie^ until they could pay their Respects to the Prince of Conde, and have
some Conversation with him; and when they returned into their own Country, they
never failed to say, We have seen the Prince of Conde.

But of all the Visits the Prince of Conde received at Chantilly, The King
visits the Prince of Conde at Chantilly.
the most glorious, without doubt, was that which the King honored him with,
for which his Highness expressed all the Gratitude imaginable. He received his
Majesty with all the Respects, all the Joy, and all the Cheerfulness that could
be expressed, and showed on that occasion an extraordinary Magnificence and
Liberality, spending Fifty thousand Crowns to treat the King and Court
splendidly.

This great Prince having passed near Twenty years in his Retirement of
Chantilly, The Prince of Conde 's last Sickness.
in the manner I have related, the Thread of his noble Life was cut, by an
Accident, which showed to what degree the King's Life was dear to him, and how
little he valued his own compared to his.

Being informed that the Duchess of Bourbon, his Granddaughter, natural
Daughter to the King, was seized with the Small Pox at Fontainsbleau, he left
Chantilly, notwithstanding his Indisposition, on the II. of Nov. 1686. to go to
see that Princess. He met the Duke of Bourbon and Mademoiselle upon the Road,
coming back from Fontainsbleau, ^6^6.
by the King's express Command, upon the first Report of the Small Pox: This
young Prince^ and that young Princess endeavored to persuade the Prince of
Conde to turn back, and to expect the News of what should happen at
Fountainebleau at Paris. They omitted no Tenderness, Prayers, or Tears to
persuade him, but they could not prevail, the Prince continued his Journey, and
at his first arrival used all the means and precautions imaginable to avoid an
Accident like unto that which the Small Pox had caused in his Family in 1685.
by the Death of the Prince of Conti. And whereas the King was coming into the
Duchess of Bourbon's Room, the Prince stopped him at the Door, and by a
resistance equally strong and respectful, he hinderd his Majesty from coming
into a place where the illness of the Air might prove fatal to him; after which
he fell into a Swoon within four foot of the place. As ill as he was, he caused
himself to be carried several times in a day into her Chamber: But finally, the
ill Air, joined to the Fatigue of that last Journey, threw him into a condition
which soon put a period to his life.

The Prince of Conde's condition being spread at Court, and at Paris, a world
of Couriers were dispatched to him, from all the considerable persons of the
Kingdom. The King, who was at Versailles at that time, sent two or three, whom
his Highness received with great Respect and Gratitude.

The Prince of Conde being detained at Fontainebleau, by an illness, which made
every body so fearful of his Life, and the Prince of Conty being confind at
Chantilly, that Prince, who was out of favor at Court, wrote a Letter, wherein
he declared, That his Disquiets for his Highness's Illness were so great, that
he could no longer forbear going to enquire about it himself, that he had
suffered an exceeding great Violence for three weeks together, by conforming
himself exactly to his Highness's Pleasure, who had commanded him not to go
more out of Chantilly: That the Air of the Small Pox did not flighten him, and
that his Majesty would not disapprove his quitting his ordinary Abode, in that
occasion to acquit himself of part of his Duty. The person to whom this Letter
was written having given the Prince of Conde an account of it, Make answer,
said his Highness, to the Prince of Conty, that I am very much obliged to him,
for the kindness he expresses toward me; but if he loves me, let him remain
where he is: I shall be at Paris within these two days, and shall see him
there. A Courier arrived at the same time from the Duke of Enguien, who had an
account given him three or four times a day, about the Prince his Father's
Health, according to the Orders he had left every time he had been at
Fontainebleau, since the Court had left it. The Duke begged of hi^ Father, by
the said Courier, to give him leave to repair to him. The Prince had already
sent him back twice or thrice from Fontainebleau to Versailles, to remain near
the King, on whom a great operation had been made; and to observe all the
favorable moments in which he might serve the Prince of Conty. He had obeyed,
but could no longer endure to be absent from his Father. The Prince being
earnestly solicited to give his Son leave to come to see him, he answered, That
he did not question but his Son had a great desire to be near him; that he
should be very joyful to see him also, but that both of them ought to sacrifice
their own Satisfaction to their Duty; that he desired him to remain at Court;
that as soon as there should be any necessity for his being near him, he would
send for him, and that perhaps it should be sooner than either of them should
desire it. He sighed next and squeezed the person he was speaking to by the
hand, whereby it was suspected that he found himself worse, and that he would
not be able to go to Paris within two days, as he had resolved.

From that time his Distemper increased, and soon discovered that he had not
long to live. And whereas Mons. Morin, his Physician, declared freely, in
feeling his Pulse, that he found it very uneven. But is there no danger, said
his Highness, do not dissemble it? Mons. Morin replied, that since he commanded
him to speak his Opinion; he thought it was proper to think on the Sacraments
of the Church. This is speaking, replied his Highness. Whereupon that Prince
ordered a Courier to be dispatched instantly to Father Dechamps a Jesuit, who
was his Confessor, to desire him earnestly to come to him as soon as he co^ld,
to confess him, and to dispose him for death.

After which he called for the Princess, and for Mons. de Gourville, and while
they were gone for, he uttered some words. Mons. de Gourville being come near
him, he told him with a composed Air, Well Gourville, my Friend, we must part,
there is no Remedy. He was going to say more, when he perceived the Princess
drowned in Tears. He conjured her with a serene countenance not to afflict
herself and to send for the Duke d' Enguien, and the Prince of Conty, to come
to him. Some body asked him, Whether the Duke of Bourbon, whom he loved so
tenderly, should not likewise be sent for, since he was so very sollicitous to
pay his Respects to him? I should be very glad to see him, answered he, I love
him with all my Heart, and as much as a Father can love a Son, but he is an
only Son, he must be preserved, and must not be exposed to an ill Air, full of
the Small Pox.

After this he called for Paper and a Pen, and wrote a whole Page with his own
Hand, the which he caused the Duchess of Enguien and Mons. de Gourville, and
ordered it to be sealed, and delivered after his death to the Duke of Enguien.
That Writing related particularly to the Princess his Wife. Moreover, he took
the liberty in the same Writing to conjure the King, to be mindful of that
Princess, and to be pleased to prescribe her the manner in which she was to
live; which the King granted.

The Prince of Conde not only expressed by his Cares how much he was concerned
in whatever rela^ed to the Interests of his Relations; but he likewise
remembered all his Servants: He also remembered the Poor, to whom he left
considerable Legacies, and ordered a Church to be built to serve as a Parish to
Chantilly: Although he had declared his Will above a Year before concerning
50000 Crowns he had dedicated to charitable Uses, he was very careful in
recommending the immediate Execution of his Orders upon that Subject.

It was above Eighteen Months since he had done a very commendable thing, ^n
order to accomplished his earnest desire of paying all the Deb^s of his Family
entirely: He willed and commanded Monsieur de Gourville to examine seriously,
and even with rigor against himself, and with Indulgence for his Creditors,
all that might be demanded of him: He had declared that it was his desire,
without any farther order from him, to have all great and little Sums paid that
should be thought justly due by him; that he only reserved to himself the Debts
of Grace, to dispose of them as he should think fit. I will, said he, wrong no
body, and I had much rather lose part of my Estate, than have a Penny of
another: I have enough upon my Conscience, without burthening it, besides with
so great a load as that of keeping any thing from another.

While the Prince of Conde applied himself in doing good upon his Deathbed,
and in expressing Esteem, Gratitude, and Affection toward diverse Persons, he
desired to write to the King: I will write to the King, said he: But not being
able to do it with his own Hand, by reason that his Strength decayed
continually, he dictated the whole Letter, Word for Word, as follows: The
Prince of Conde's Letter to the King.
I Humbly beseech your Majesty to approve my Writing to you for the last time
of my Life: I am in a Condition, in which apparently, I shall not continue long
without going to give an account of all my Actions to God. I could wish with
all my Heart, that all those that relate to him were as innocent, as all those
that relate toward your Majesty; I have nothing to reproach my self for any
thing I have done, when I first began to appear in the World: I have spared
nothing for your Majesty's Service, and I have endeavored to fulfill with
Pleasure all the Duties to which my Birth, and the sincere Zeal I had for your
Majesty's Glory obliged me. It is true, that about the middle of my Life, I
have held a Conduct, I have blamed my self before any body; the which your
Majesty has been pleased to forgive: I have afterward endeavored to repair my
Fault by an inviolable Tie to your Majesty; and my greatest trouble ever since
has been my not being able to do things great enough to deserve your Majesty's
Goodness toward me. I have at least this Satisfaction, that I have omitted
nothing of all that was most dear, and most precious to me, to show your
Majesty, that I had those Sentiments I ought to have for your Person, and for
your State: And all the Favors your Majesty has heaped upon me, may I yet
presume to beg another, which in the Condition I am reduced to, would afford me
a very sensible Consolation? It is on the Prince of Conty's behalf. I have
Tutored him this Year, and I have the Satisfaction to have inspired him with
such Sentiments, as your Majesty can desire. Father La Chair is sensible of
it, he may satisfy your Majesty about it: That Prince has certainly some
Merit; and had not I discovered all the Submission imaginable in him toward
your Majesty, a very sincere Desire of being ruled and governed in all things
by your Majesty's Will, I should not entreat you most humbly as I do, to
restore him what he values above all things in the World, your Favor; he has
sighed above a Year, and looked upon himself in this Condition as if he were in
Purgatory: I beseech your Majesty to release him from it, and to grant him a
General Pardon. Perhaps I flatter my self a little too much; But why should I
despair of any Favor from the greatest King on Earth, of whom I die, as I
always lived, most Humble, and most Obedient, and most Zealous Servant and
Subject,

Lewis de Bourbon.




The Prince of Conde having signed this Letter, he ordered it should be kept
ready to be sent at the time he should order. After which he applied himself to
his Domestic Affairs again, and to Regulate them well with Monsieur de
Gourville.

His unconcerned, and peaceable Behavior, at a time when the Bravest fall into
Fainting Fits, generally occasioned by the apprehension of an approaching
Death, he appeared at that time, what he had been during all his Life,
infinitely above other Men.

When he had made an end of speaking with Monsieur de Gourville, and had given
all the Orders he judged necessary for the good of his Family, some took the
Liberty to ask him whether he had forgot any thing he desired to declare his
Will about. I believe not, answered he; but if I have forgot any thing, it is
but speaking to my Son; I know his kindness toward me. I know his Heart, it is
good, it is great, he will do whatever I could do my self, and more.

The Night of the 11 th. of December, about Eleven, he put himself in an
Arm-Chair near the Fire, in his Nightgown, and his Legs upon two
Folding-Chairs; and within two hours after it he sent for a Jesuit, who was at
that time at Fontainebleau. He told him, that he found himself ill, and that
since he was going to Travel toward Eternity, it was time to think earnestly
upon it. The Duke of Bourbon was mentioned to him again, but he continued to
answer, that the Satisfaction of seeing him ought not to prevail over the
Danger he should be exposed to in coming to Fontainebleau.

The Duke of Enguien 's Arrival.
The Duke of Enguien arrived about Six in the Morning. He was seized with a
violent Grief seeing his Father so near Death. The first thing he told him was,
That for his sake the King freely pardoned the Prince of Conty for all that was
past; and that he was commanded by His Majesty to assure him therewith. This
News was very agreeable to him, by reason that he had desired it above a Year,
with an earnestness suitable to the Esteem and Tenderness he for that Prince.
He likewise expressed a great deal of Gratitude for His Majesty's Goodness; and
whereas the Letter he had written to him overnight was not gone yet, he
unsealed it, to add Thanks to it, in the following terms.

MY Son, Addition of the Prince of Conde's Letter to the King.
at his Arrival has given me an Account of the Favor Your Majesty has been
pleased to to do me, in forgiving the Prince of Conty. I am very Happy to have
so much Life left, as to return Your Majesty my most Humble Thanks for it. I
dye contented, if you will do me the Justice to believe, that no body ever had
Sentiments so full of Respect and Devotion toward you, and if I may say so, of
Tenderness, as

Lewis de Bourbon.


As soon as the Prince had signed what he had added to his Letter, he thanked
the Duke of Enguien for his having taken his time so well, to restore the
Prince of Conty to the King's Favor again. After which they had a very tender
Conversation together, and gave each other all the marks of the most sincere
and greatest Affection that ever was between Father and Son. When they had
done, the Prince desired the Duchess to draw near. He said the most moving,
and the finest things in the World to them both, about their Conduct, toward
God, toward the King, and toward their Children, whom he named all one after
another. In the next place he spoke to them about the strict Union that had
always been between them, and of their reciprocal Duties, conjuring them to
persevere in living in that perfect Union which had been admired by all the
World. He ended this fine Discourse by directing them how to behave themselves
toward their Friends, toward their Servants, toward Persons of Quality, and
of all Conditions. After which he embraced them, and gave them his Blessing,
for themselves, and for their Children, The Prince of Conde blesses his
Children.
wishing them all the Blessings of Heaven and Earth.

The Duke of Enguien, equally moved with Grief and Gratitude, took his Father's
Hands, and kissed them, returning him a Thousand Thanks for all his kindnesses.
The Prince did not receive those marks of kindness from his Son with
Indifference, ^hey affected him too sensibly: But considering that allowed too
much to Nature, at a time he ought to turn all his thoughts on Death, he told
him, My Son, you have no Father now.

They made a stop there, and for a while only spoke with their Eyes. But they
broke that silence to determine with an equal Satisfaction what Employments
should be given to the Officers of his Highnesses Household, who expressed his
being very well satisfied with them, and desired they might be entertained
still by reason of their Merit and Fidelity.

After this he turned to Monsieur de Gourville, and said, By all the kindness
you have for me, do not conceal from me, how long I have to live. Ask the
Physicians. He often made the same Question all the day long; and he was still
answered according to the Condition in which they found him.

When ever his Eyes met with the Duke or Duchess, he discovered the Sentiments
of his Heart sufficiently, without needing to express them by words. However he
could not forbear telling a Jesuit softly, who was near his Bed, The Tenderness
I observe in my Son, and in his Duchess toward me, to^ches me sensibly. The
Duchess of Bourbon sent every quarter of an hour to enquire how he did: She
would have come her self, had not the Distemper that kept her in Bed hindered
her. For the most part he would see those that came from her, and made very
obliging Answers for that Young Princess, toward whom he expressed to the end an
extreme Tenderness.

About Nine, seeing the Duke in a very great Anguish, he told him, that he was
moved by his kindness, that he was satisfied with him, beyond what could be
expressed by words.

At half an hour after Eleven the Prince of Conty arrived. The Prince of Conty
's Arrival.
The Tendernesses began anew on all sides. After which his Highness embracing
the Duke and the Prince of Conty, told them all that a good Father could say to
his Children, and conjured them to love one another like Brothers. He added,
that they would never be great Men, nor great Princes, nor good Men, but
proportionably as they proved, upright and faithf^l to God, and to the King.

Father Dechamps arrived a quarter after Twelve, Father Dechamps 's Arrival.
his Highness opened his Arms to Embrace him, expressing a great Joy to see
him. Every body withdrew. The Prince discoursed with that Jesuit about all that
he had resolved within two Years about his Duty and Obligations, and made his
Confession to him.

About Two a Clock, the Duke of Enguien, the Duchess, and the Prince of Conty
being come near him again, The Prince of Conde desires his Body may be carried
to Valery, and his Heart into the Jesuits Church.
he spoke to them as he had done before, expressing all the Tenderness in the
World toward them. At that time he ordered some body to tell the Duke, that it
was his desire, that his Body should be carried to In the Diocese of Sens.
Valery; but that nevertheless he left him absolut Master of all, and that he
might do whatever he thought fit about it, either as to the time and place, and
the manner of Transporting him thither: That in that as well as in all other
things he abandoned all to his disposition, submitting to his Will, to which he
gave a full Consent from that moment: But however that he should be glad his
Heart should be carried into the Church of St. Lewis In the Church of the House
of the Jesuits.
at Paris, to be placed there with his Father's.

The Duke received his Orders with the Submission he ought. And whereas his
presence as well as the Dutchesses, and the Prince of Conty's moved him, and
hindered him from applying all his thoughts on God, he desired them to withdraw.
He also told the Physicians after having thanked them, that they might retire,
and that he had no longer any need of their Assistance: And pointing to the
Curate of Fontainebleau, Father Dechamps his Confessor, and the other
Clergymen that were present, These, added he, are at present my real
Physicians, who will put me in a way to dye well.

In the mean time the Duke and Duchess, as well as the Prince of Conty begged
his leave to see him once more, to which he consented, on Condition they should
retire immediately. They withdrew immediately, having seen him; but he was not
long without thinking on them: For within half an hour he desired a Jesuit to
go to them from him, to bid them a last Farewell. After which, Monsieur de
Marege, who belongs to the Prince of Conty, being come into his Chamber, he
received him in that obliging manner he was wont to receive every body,
especially those he loved, and esteemed, as he did that Gentleman. He told him,
You have always served your Master (...) well: Continue so to do, and never do
any^^ing ^erogatory to the Honor you have of belonging to (...). He confides
in you: You may tell him from me, (...) present more sensible of than ever I
was^ Sententi^^^ words of the Prince of Conde.
that ^ man must be Just and Good during his Life, and that there is nothing
else solid. After which, he remained for some time silent. But then resuming
^he Discourse again, and giving some new Orders, a Divine venturing to tell him
that he lived like a Great Man, and that he ought to dye in the same manner,
but especially like a good Christian, he took him by the Hand, and said, You
praise me, and I do now deserve it. From that moment he did nothing singular,
and expired so quietly, that it was hardly observed. Thus dyed that great
Prince on the Eleventh of December, 1686. after having lived Sixty Five Years,
The Prince of Conde 's Death.
Three Months, and Three Days.

While the Prince of Conde lay a Dying at Fontainebleau, The Prince of Conde 's
Letter read at Court.
the King caused that Great Man's Letter to be read at Versailles. Those who
observed the three Tenses of his Letter, how slightly he passed over his
Services at the beginning, and at the end of his Life, and how sincere an
Acknowledgment he made of his Faults about the middle, were extremely moved by
his Modesty, and the King himself could not refrain Tears, saying, That he lost
a great Prince; these were his own words: And when that part of the Letter was
read where the Prince returned his Thanks, and declared that he dyed Contented,
and too Happy, since he had so much Life left, as to express his Gratitude, his
Devotion, and if he might say so, his Tenderness to the King, every body did
him the Justice to say, that he had Written sincerely. That very day the Duke
wrote three Lines to the King, to ^^quaint him with the Prince his Father's
Death.

The Duke went to Versailles on the 15 th. of December, The Duke goes to
Versailles.
to pay his Respects to the King; who received him with all the Kindness
imaginable: And His Majesty expressed to him on the Occasion the Obliging
Sentiments he preserved for him, and for his Father. He had taken the Prince of
Conty along with him, whom he presented to the King, who made him sensible by
his Reception, that he did not repent the Pardon he had granted him three days
before, out of Respect to the Prince, and at the Entreaty of the Duke.

The Duke did not tarry long at Versailles, and returned soon to Paris. He goes
back to Paris.
He received sufficient Testimonies, both at Court and in the City, that the
Prince his Father's Death had made a deep Impression in the Hearts and Minds of
all People.

The Prince of Conde 's Body is carried to Valery, and his Heart to the Church
of St. Lewis at Paris.
In the mean time, the Order that had been given for carrying the Prince's Body
to Valery, were put in execution. All things being ready, the Duke went away
before any body, on the 21 st. of December, and tarried at Fontainebleau for
the Prince of Conty, who came thither from the King. The Princ's Body was
carried to Valery on the 22 th. and his Heart to the Church of the Professed
House of the Jes^its at Paris on the 24 th. being Christmas-Eve. This Ceremony
was performed with great Magnificence: And the Duke, who appeared in every
thing, omitted none of the Duties his Good Nature, and Gratitude exacted from
him.

1687.
After which, the most Eloquent Persons in the Kingdom were employed in making
Funeral Orations, in the Praise and Honor of the Prince of Conde. Funeral
Orations in Honor of the Prince of Conde.
The King having mourned the loss of that great Prince, and often declared in
the middle of the Court sighing, that he had lost the greatest Man of his
Kingdom, assembled the greatest Persons of his Kingdom in Our Lady's Church
Notre Dame of Paris on the ^^ th. of March, there to pay in P^blick what was
^ue to the Memory of that Prince^ and Ordered the Bishop of Meaux to speak the
Funeral Oration. That Oration is very fine, and worthy its Author, and the
Prince in honor of whom it was spoken. The 26th of April, Father Bourdaloue,
who about three Years, and a half before had spoken in the Church of the
Professors House of his Society, in presence of the Prince, the Funeral Elogy
of Henry of Bourbon his Father, spoke a Funeral Ora^ion in the said Church, in
Praise of that great Prince, whose Memoirs I am finishing. That Oration is very
Elegant, and most Magnificent, especially that part of it, where Father
Bourdaloue speaks without Dissimulation, and at large upon the Prince of
Conde's behavior in the Civil War, is incomparable. Never was so skilful, and
so happy a boldness known: And that kind of daring in an Orator, if I may use
the Expression seems to revive in our Minds that Bravery, and Heroic
Fierceness the Prince of Conde used to show in Battles, and in the greatest
Perils, the which was followed with so much Success. The Abbot du Iarry
likewise spoke a Funeral Oration in Honor of the said Prince in the Church of
Maubuisson, before the Princess Palatine (who was Abbess of that Religious
House) whom we have mentioned several times in the^e Memoirs. There are
Master-strokes in this last Funeral Elogy. Several other Orations were made, in
several Provinces of the Kingdom.

But whereas, in those kind of Discourses, i^ is usual to insist upon the
Virtues of those for whom they are spoken; and that commonly, tho nothing it
said in them but what really is, yet many things are omitted; by reason that
those things are suppressed which deserve no Praise; and that those things are
disguised which cannot be concealed; and that by a false Light, in which the
Orator's skill knows how to place his Hero's dress with cunning, he covers, and
pa^^es slightly over those Parts that are defective: It is necessary to have
recourse to History, to be fully instructed of every thing; and that to a
faithful History, like unto this. I am now going to draw the Prince of Cond^'s
Picture, with the same Fidelity I have observed throughout this Work.

The Prince of Conde 's Picture.
Lew of Bourbon, second of the Name, first Prince of the Blood; Duke of
Bourbon, of Chateaurex, of Montmorency, and Bellegarte; Governor of Burgundy
and Bresse; first Peer; Lord High Steward of France; Count of Clermont, Stenay,
Dun, and Iamets; Knight of the Holy Ghost, and General of the King's Armies,
was Tall, and well Shaped, his Hair Curled, lively Eyes, a Roman close Nose,
his Cheeks Hollow and Lean, a long Face, and a very Noble and Haughty
Physiognomy, his Teeth ill set, and uncleanly, a careless Air, taking little
care of his Person. He was of a sanguin Constitution, Choleric, and Strong, he
loved Hunting, Gaming, Joy, Pleasures, and Divertisements: He likewise loved
Women, but without any particular Engagements, having never had any real
Affection but for Madame de Chastillon. In his Youth he abandoned himself
sometimes to small Debauches, and at that time made very pretty diverting
Verses upon any Subject that occurred; they were Extempores no Poet could equal.
He had a great Vivacity, a clear Wit, and very good Judgment, and expressed
himself with a great deal of Ease. He had much Probity and Honor in great
Actions: he was not Liberal, neither was he Covetous; he Laughed much, but
disagreeably; he was very free, and very offensive in Railleries. He kept no
measures with any Body. He was of a Rough, uneasy, Impetuous, Passionate
Temper, and thereby he ruined all the advantages Nature and Fortune, had
bestowed upon him, frustrated the Extraordinary qualifications he was Endowed
with which were such, that he would have obsur'd the Glory of the greatest Men
in past Ages, had mildness and Complaisance been Joined to their lively
Virtues, that shined in him, and to that Supreme Valor, which raised an
Admiration in all the World.

He had an admirable Genius for War, and particularly for Battles. He was Born
for military Expeditions insomuch that he wanted no Prenticeship to form him.
The Superiority of his Genius served him instead of Art and Experience; and he
began by that which the most famous Conquerors would have been proud to end. He
had a Martial heat, which made him dare and undertake all; a Fire, which in the
execution rendered all things possible and easy to him, and a firmness of
Soul, which no Obstacle could stop, or any Peril could frighten, which no
Resistance could tire, or discourage; a Vigilance, which could not be
surpised; a Judgment wherewith, even in the most dangerous Occasions, he
foresaw whatever might obstruct or favor the Event of things; a great
quickness in Resolving, the quickness of his Action not allowing ^ime to cross
it. He knew incomparably well how to improve those Conjunctures and swift
Moments on which Victory depends. Nothing could equal his Activity, which in a
day of Battle made him, dividing himself, as it were, to appear in all places.
Supplying all, Rallying all, and Maintaining all. In so much that he was both
General, and Soldier at once, and by his Presence inspired his Courage and
Valor into a whole Army, even to the vilest Members thereof. And yet he
preserved a great Presence of Mind in the heat of a Combat, and a Calmness he
was never so certain of, as in a Engagement, and in the horror of the Tumult.
In the Fire, in the On^et, in the first Mo^^on, something appeared in him all
on the sudden, so clear, so settled, so lively, so brisk, so mild, and so
agreeable for his own Men, and so ^^erce, and so th^eatning for his Enemies,
that no body could imagine from whence that mixture of such opposite Qualities
could proceed.

How great an^ glorious soever his Actions were, he never applauded them: The
Court that prepared those Applauses for him against his return, which he
deserved, a^mir'd his Modesty in receiving them: Whenever he spoke of his
Victories it was with a Modesty, which neither his Complaisance for those that
heark^n'd to him, no^ their Curiosity could overcome. When he related the gain
of a Battle, People would have thought he had had no share in it: he only spoke
in praise of those who had behaved themselves bravely in it^ to give them the
Glory of it, and to make them known at Court: he never was more Eloquent, or
more officious than when he did them that Justice, and never more wary than
when any body designed to surprise, or force his Modesty, to make him speak of
what related personally to himself: When any presumed to praise him, he took
their Praises for an Offense, and could not endure Flattery, he dreaded even
the very Shadow of it: He held it for a Maxim, that in great Actions one should
have no other end than to do well, and so let Glory follow Virtue.

He was as suc^essful in Sieges as in Battles: He daily invented new means to
advance the taking of Towns: He exposed his Men extremely, but yet no more than
his own Person, and he was really persuaded that he spared his Men, in
abridging the time of danger by the vigor of his Attacks. It is most certain
that as a General he seldo^ followed the common Maxi^^ of War^ his impetuous
Humor, which was E^emy to Measure and Precaution, made him neglect^ Military
Discipline, and inclined him to act Boldly, always to tempt his Fortune, and
even to brave it, and to ^elieve that in Fighting he must be victorious, and
that Victory should not, as it were, dare to ^zeitate, to declare in his
Favor; insomuch that no Man ever was so like Alexander, nor less like Caesar,
excepting only Courage and Valor: And therefore it was a common Saying about
him, That he was a great Prince by his Birth, a great Man by his Fortune, and a
great Captain by his Courage.

He thought he might Command among the Ministers, and behave himself in the
same manner a^ Court, and in the City, as he used to do in War; which
occasioned all his Misfortunes: For want of following the Rules of true Policy,
and of acting with Mildness and Cunning, he did not suc^eed, was guilty of
several capital Faults, and run on to Extremes, which were attended with mortal
Displeasure.

In his Retirement he grew sensible of his Defects and Fau^ts, which made him
sigh, and by his wise Reflections he became a new Man: He became a great
Politician, Prudent, Mild, Civil and Obliging: He made his Court to those that
were in Favor: He consented with all the Signs of Satisfaction and Joy, to all
the Alliances the King seemed to desire: He was a Pattern of Application, of
Devotion, of Submission, and of Obedience to that Monarch: All Courtiers learnt
to make their Court of him. In his private Life he quitted all those quick
Sallies, those harsh Words, stinging Railleries, and ^ree Expressions he had
been used to; he was altogether Mild and Civil, his Expressions modest and
edifying. Nay moreover^ he commanded all his Servants to acquit themselves of
those Duties to which the Profession of Christianity obliged them, and ordered
all such to be turned out with Remission, who by their Debauches, or Discourse
should cause the least Scandal^ His Conversation was free and easy, and no
body was perplexed or constrain^d by the Respect that was due to him, though
every body was very sensible of it^ He took care to temper that Respect in
making himself familiar with some, and descending to others, being free with,
and confiding in these, and entering into the Affairs of those, accommodating
and proportioning himself to all. And whereas, all his Lifetime he had been a
Lover of Sciences, and Reading, and that at Chantilly he read all manner of
good Books, even of Religion and Controversy; his Conversation was very
improving. His great Genius embraced every thing, whether Sacred, Profane,
Ancient, Modern, History, Philosophy, Theology, all manner of Arts and
Sciences, even to the least Secrets of the Mechanics: No Books scapd him, he
was able to Converse with, and Entertain all those that excelled either in
Speculation, or in any Works. And moreover, whereas h^ had an exquisite
Judgment, a nice Taste, a lively Comprehension, a noble and just Faculty of
thinking, and of expressing himself, and was able to judge of all things like a
Master; all People improved by his Conversation, and rectified their Thoughts
either by his penetrating Q^estions, or by his Judicious Reflections: His
Conversation was Charming, by reason that he could speak to every body
according to their own Talents, and not to Soldiers about their Undertakings,
to Courtiers about their Interest, to Politicians about their N^goci^tio^s, but
also to curious Travelers of what they had discovered in Nature, in
Government, or in Commerce; to the Handicraft-man of his Inventions; and
finally to the Learned of all kinds, of all the most wonderful Discoveries they
had made.

He had a very great Affection, and Tenderness for his Family, particularly for
his Son the Duke of Enguien: and it was chiefly his passionate desire of
preserving and advancing his Fortune, that made him behave himself with so much
Prudence in the last Period of his Life, and that he managd the King's and his
Favourite's Temper with so much Care.

He has always had, and ever expressed a great Aversion for Praises, as we have
observed: All Europe was filled with the Fame of his Name, and r^ng with the
Glory of his Exploits; and yet it was hardly mentioned at Chantilly. It was a
kind of a Crime to praise him, especially in his Presence: And indeed none
durst have presumed to praise him, seeing him so much above all Praises by his
Modesty. When any body desired him in this Retirement to relate his fine Action
in his Campagns, they perplexed him. There was a great deal of Pleasure in
hearing him: ^ut it requi^'d a great deal of Art to engage to speak upon that
Subject, and unless it were by surprise, nothing could be got out of him.

Many have been surpised at his not writing the Memoir^ of his Life: a thing
he would have done worthily, and by which he would have laid an eternal
Obligation on Posterity. Whatever Entreaties have been made to him about it,
none ever could prevail: Nay more, his very Son, whom he loved so ^enderly
could never obtain it: That Refusal must be imputed either to his Modesty, or
his Policy. In effect, whenever he was desired to write Memoirs of his Life, he
answer'd^ All I have done is only fit to be forgotten: Let the King's Life be
written, all others hence forward will be superfluous. At other times he said:
I could not do it without speaking advantageously of my self, and perhaps
disadvantageously of others: and that^s a thing I cannot resolve upon, even in
speaking the Truth. We shall now conclude by a Parallel that was made in the
Year 1674. between that great Prince and Marshal de Turenne, a^out the eminent
Qualifications they possessed in War.

A Parallel between the Prince of Conde and Marshal de Turenne.
A Greatness of Genius shines in the Prince of Conde^ a Knowledge ever present,
an impetuous Courage, without trouble or precipitation.

Monsieur de Turenne has the advantage of Calmness, Capacity, Experience, a
firm and secure Valor.

The other resolves in Council, is never at a loss in Disorders, taking his
Resolution better than any Man living.

This forms a Plan of War to himself, disposes all thing to his End, foresees
all Obstacles with more Judgment than Slowness.

The Activity of the first goes beyond what is necessary in order not to omit
any thing that may be of use.

The other is as active as he should be, but does nothing that is superfluous,
in order not to dissipate, and ruin his Forces by unnecessary Fatigues.

The Prince is equally feared and esteemed in point of Command.

Monsieur de Turenne is more agreeable, and not less esteemed, leaving more
Satisfaction, but not preserving his Authority so much.

There can never be too much precaution use^ against the Attacks of the first,
and he meets with weakness in the securest Posts.

The other meets with Safeties every where, and finds out ways to secure
himself against the appearances of his Ruin.

In Combats their ORDERS are almost alike.

The Prince of Conde knows how to improve Advantages, and to repair Disorders;
he makes the most of his Forces: He abandons himself wholly to the Action he is
engaged in, and seems resolved to overcome, or not to outlive his Defeat.

Monsieur de Turenne omits nothing of what may conduce to the gain of a Battle:
when he is happy he improves every thing, preserves what he can; when he is not
so, and ever leaves some resource for a better Fortune; whether thro^gh the
Equality of his Temper, or by a long Experience of good and ill Successes, he
receives all manner of Accidents with an even Temper.

The Prince is more sensible to Misfortunes than Monsieur de Turenne, but his
Haughtiness is more exasperated at it, and his Virtue excited by his
Misfortunes proves strong enough to overcome them.

Finally the Prince of Conde is the greatest Man in the World for a Day's
Action, and Monsieur de Turenne for a Campaign: The one is ^itter to end
Actions gloriously, and the other to end a War advantageously.

The PRINCE makes War with more Glory for his own Reputation, 1686.
and Monsieur de Turenne with more advantage for the Interests of the Party, in
which he is engaged.

FINIS.

