THE Country Gentleman's Notion Concerning GOVERNMENTS. IN A Letter to his
Friend at Leeds in Yorkshire.
SIR,
I Received yours, and am concerned at the continuance of your Dissatisfaction
about the Oaths to King William. I will not say the severity of the Penalties
annexed by the Late Act, to the refusal of them, ought to influence your
Judgment; but for the sake of your Family; you will do well to take the matter
into further Consideration. Be assured, that my Conviction of the Lawfulness of
these Oaths is neither influenced by Fear nor Flattery: I hope you know me to
be too much an Englishman, to believe I have been swayed by either; and I know
you too well, to imagine that my Example should govern or prevail upon you
further, than the Reasons which I learnt while at London (in Conversation with
several Lawyers and others) may have some weight with you, if placed in a due
Light, and Considered with Temper.

You must not expect a Vindication of the King's Title. To endeavor to
Justify it, is to suppose a doubt; which he must do, who goes about to argue
it. Sovereigns Titles are never to be debated, or vindicated, but in the wisest
and most tender manner imaginable, and it should be by Persons of the greatest
Knowledge, Sagacity and Prudence; and I think never without the Direction and
Command, or Express Allowance of Authority. For any Defense of a Title, if not
well managed, is a Libel upon that Title. And we have had too many of them
published already, which instead of allaying scruples, have increased their
number.

It suffices me, and several of my Acquaintance, in order to our satisfaction,
to reason thus: That Man is a sociable Creature; that a single Person could
never be happy without the Conversation and Assistance of Others; nor with it,
if all his Acquaintance were Miserable: That Societies therefore were
instituted by the Creator for the good of Mankind; and that such Good is
intended in respect of the Greater Number; and consequently, that as the Good
of Individuals, so the Opinion of 'em too, is involved in that of the Majority,
as united in one Civil Society. This Majority in all Assemblies, or Numbers of
Men together, upon all Occasions does and must conclude the whole: For the
whole could never otherwise be concluded by any public Act or Determination,
if such Act were not binding to every one, before every one in particular had
actually consented to it. For who ever knew, or can imagine an Exact Agreement
of a great Multitude of men in One Opinion. On which account it seems neither
Wise, Mannerly, nor Lawful, to oppose, or Contradict the Sentiments of the
Community, whereof I am a Member, in things of this nature, wherein the Welfare
of the Whole is concerned.

For as every man is presumed most fond of his own Interest, so the greater
number must be supposed to be equally careful of theirs, and by consequence,
that what is done by the Majority is beft for the Whole. It Is plain that by our
Constitution, in all Courts of Justice, the Majority gives the Rule; and that
Rule obliges the dissenting Judges to Act, as well as Declare contrary to their
own several Private Opinions; and in all Controversies and Disputes among
Scholars, the Opinion of the greater Number, (knowing and interested in the
subject matter of the Question) is a favorable Argument of the Truth. In all
Consultations of Lawyers or Physicians, concerning Health or Property, the
Party concerned in the inquiry takes the Majority as his surest Guide. What
reason can be alleged why this Rule should not hold, in all other Civil
Matters, of an indifferent Nature, wherein God has not interposed by his
express Will?

Now if we consider the principles and the Consequence of the contrary Notion,
I have heard some affirm, that it can hardly proceed but from Presumption, and
too great self-sufficiency, and may bring Mischief and Confusion to the
Public, as well as Damage and Ruin to the particular Person. How can such an
Opinion and Practice in a private Man (in Contradiction to the greatest part of
the Society whereof he is a Member) but savor of Vanity, as if he had more
Wisdom and Honesty than all his Neighbors? And can he reasonably expect to be
safe in such an Opposition to the Majority? And if several be of his Mind, the
public Peace must needs be endangered.

If Men be Humble and Peaceable, there will be in things of this Nature, a
Consideration of the Opinion of the greater part of the Inhabitants of that
Country, in which they are born and live, thereby to settle the Rules and
Measures of their private Conduct. I would feign know, what is the Law and
Consent of Nations, which we all reverence and esteem, as a Confirmation of the
Law of Nature; What is it, but the Opinion and Practice of the Majority? 'Twere
very easy to argue upon this subject, from every Topic, by which the
Ingenious Parker demonstrates his Laws of Nature; as from Reason and
Experience; from the Observations of Nature, and the Necessities of Life; the
Advantages of Justice, and the Comforts of Society. Every one of these would
enforce and illustrate this Thought.

To strengthen it further, it cannot be denied that in case of great Numbers in
distant Places, though of one Community, the meeting of every Particular Person,
in order to consult for the Common Good, is in fact impossible. Which Necessity
does teach and require the use of Representatives: And Englishmen must agree,
that the manner of Electing them, as has been the Custom of our Forefathers
in all Ages, is reasonable and wise, so that we are bound in Law and Reason, by
their Declarations, Acts and Agreements, our Consent being necessarily included
in theirs, in all Points (as I said) of an indifferent Nature, capable of being
Debated and Determined by them, concerning which Almighty God has not Expressly
interposed, and declared his Will; and we think no man in his wits will pretend
that he has, as to the precise manner of Emptying and Filling Thrones, and the
several Methods of Legal Succession.

Nor do any of the particular Laws of this Realm prevent or, weaken the force
of this Notion. The Acts of Recognition of the Right of several of the Kings
and Queens of this Realm do rather confirm, than contradict it, as is very
apparent upon the Reading of 'em. The greatest and most expressive of 'em all,
and which goes the furthest, is the 12 Car. 2. cap. 30. for the Attainder of
the Regicides, but amounts only to this, that the People of England, neither
Collectively, nor Representatively ever had, or ought to have any coercive
Power over the Persons of the Kings of this Realm. Now whether this can be
reckoned sufficient to condemn this Notion of private Men's submitting their
Opinion and Practice to that of the Majority, in respect of Oaths and
Obedience, may be left to any Man's Judgment: if Nature and Reason dictate this
as a proper Measure whereby to Direct and Govern our Actions, no Law whatsoever
can vacate, or annul it. But it is to suppose a Law to be made, which is not
alterable by the Authority that made it; and that contradicts the agreed and
known Maxim, that Laws in Derogation of the Authority, which makes Laws are
Void; this must be admitted.

Now this being laid down, it appears further that a Great Prince of the Royal
Family, here present within the Realm, upon the departure of the former Regent
(whether that Departure were chosen by him, or forced upon him, by the Actions
of his own Ministers, or those of his Enemies, is not material to enquire) was
enacted and declared KING by the Majority of those Representatives: And so
confirmed, and declared again, and again, by the Majority of new
Representatives, peaceably, and freely Elected; (which Election by the way
implies the Assent of every Voter to all the Acts of those Persons so chosen.)
Then Oaths of Fidelity were solemnly taken to this Prince, not only by the
Representatives, but by Particulars; by the Majority of the Nobility, Clergy,
Gentry, and Commonalty of the Realm. Then was he asserted to be RIGHTFUL AND
LAWFUL KING, and this not by those Representatives alone, but Voluntarily
declared such in writing, under the hands of the Majority of the Individuals
too, (as the Fact now stands) Excepting Women, Children and Servants, who are
not properly Sui juris. Now after all this, it seems plain, that private
Persons are concluded not only by the Power of the Majority, but by the Law of
Reason and Nature, as Members of this Community, to pay Allegiance to a
Sovereign thus Constituted by the Consent of their fellow Islanders, even by
their whole Country. And are any now to scruple or doubt such a Title? No
surely, this is enough to command mine, and yours, and every Englishman's True
Allegiance.

And I take it to be a much plainer and firmer Foundation for Obedience, than
all the fine-spun Schemes of Policy and Government; which some pretending
Rakers into the Rubbish of Antiquity, have squeezed and strained, out of old
mysterious unintelligible Records; or which by the changeable distinctions of
some Casuists have been proposed for Convenience sake. This is plain Common
sense which every man feels, and falls into upon the first hearing. But at the
rate, that some men distinguish and refine upon the matter, an honest man
cannot be made to understand whom he ought to Obey, without being obliged to
understand Metaphysics into the bargain. These Thoughts, Sir, have satisfied
me, that I am to consider my self not merely as a single Person, but as related
to the Body of the Nation, as one of Many; and so as involved, in the Interest
and Opinion of the Majority, and upon that Account, as having assented to the
Acts of that Majority; which I esteem and resolve to follow, as my Rule. That
you may likewise do so with a satisfied and easy mind, is the design of this
Paper and the Hearty Prayer of

SIR, Yours to serve you, etc.
Nottingham. May 29. 1696.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Eliz. Whitlock near Stationers' Hall.


